www.ebook3000.com

Obscenity and Film Censorship

Members of the committee
B
Bernard Williams Esq.
B. Hooberman Esq.
His Honour Judge John Leonard QC
Richard Matthews Esq. CBE QPM
David Robinson Esq.
Ms Sheila Rothwell
Professor A. W. B. Simpson
Dr Anthony Storr
Mrs M. J. Taylor
The Right Reverend John Tinsley
Miss Polly Toynbee
Professor J. G. Weightman
V. A. White Esq. MBE
www.ebook3000.com

Obscenity and Film Censorship
An Abridgement of the Williams Report
B
Edited by
bernard williams

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107534407
© Crown Copyright 1979, 1981, 2015
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
This abridged edition ﬁrst published by Cambridge University Press 1981
Re-issued in 2010
Cambridge Philosophy Classics edition 2015
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Great Britain. Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship.
[Report of the Committee on Obscenity & Film Censorship]
Obscenity and ﬁlm censorship : an abridgement of the Williams Report / edited by Bernard
Williams, Provost of King’s College, University of Cambridge. – Cambridge Philosophy
Classics edition 2015
pages
cm. – (Cambridge Philosophy Classics)
Abridgement of: Report of the Committee on Obscenity & Film Censorship, 1979.
“This abridged edition ﬁrst published by Cambridge University Press 1981”–Title page verso.
ISBN 978-1-107-11377-0 (Hardback) – ISBN 978-1-107-53440-7 (Paperback)
1. Obscenity (Law)–Great Britain.
2. Motion pictures–Censorship–Great
Britain.
I. Williams, Bernard, 1929–2003.
II. Title.
KD8075.A8672 2015
344.4205047–dc23
2015017922
ISBN 978-1-107-11377-0 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-107-53440-7 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
www.ebook3000.com

Contents
B
Preface to this edition by onora o’neill
ix
Preface
xi
Part 1 Background
1
1
The Committee’s task
3
Exploring our subject
4
Research
6
Public opinion
7
Foreign experience
10
Previous reviews of our subject
11
2
The present law
14
The “tendency to deprave and corrupt”
14
The “indecent or obscene” test
18
Forfeiture proceedings and the right to trial
20
The public good defence
22
Restrictions on the right to prosecute
24
Seizures by the Customs and Post Ofﬁce
25
Indecent public displays
26
The Protection of Children Act
27
The chaos of the present law
27
Territorial limitations
28
International obligations
29
3
The censorship of ﬁlms
30
The legal basis of the censorship system
30
Cinema licensing conditions
31
Exemptions from censorship
34
The practice of ﬁlm censorship
36
The British Board of Film Censors
37
Trends in recent years
39
The role of the Board
41
Consultative arrangements
44
v

4
The situation
46
The retreat of the law
46
Criticism of the law
50
Police corruption
52
Trends in British publishing
54
Self regulation by the trade
55
Changes in enforcement action
56
The size of the market
58
Controlling public displays
59
Applying the law to the showing of ﬁlms
60
Doubts about ﬁlm censorship
62
Rethinking the control of ﬁlms
63
The end of controversy?
64
Part 2 Principles
67
5
Law, morality and the freedom of expression
69
Law and morality
69
Freedom of expression
73
Harms
78
6
Harms?
83
I: Effects on sex crimes and violence
83
Anecdotal and clinical evidence
84
Research studies
88
Analysis of crime statistics
93
England and Wales
96
Denmark
106
Other countries
112
II: Other effects on human behaviour
113
7
Offensiveness
126
8
Pornography, obscenity and art
136
Pornography
137
“Obscene” and “erotic”
137
Art
139
The public good defence
143
Part 3 Proposals
147
9
The restriction of publications
149
The balance of our evidence
149
The means of preventing offensiveness
152
vi
table of contents
www.ebook3000.com

How to achieve restriction
153
The nature of restriction
156
Mail order trading
157
The deﬁnition of restricted material
158
The formula we propose
162
The age limit for special protection
167
A public good defence?
168
Enforcing restriction
169
The right to prosecute
171
10 The prohibition of publications
173
The need for prohibition
173
The depiction of sexual offences
173
Identifying harmful material
174
Transactions to be prohibited
178
A public good defence?
178
Enforcing prohibition
179
11 Live entertainment
183
How live entertainment differs
183
Restricting live entertainment
185
Live entertainment to be prohibited
185
Enforcing controls on live entertainment
188
12 Films
190
The need for censorship
190
Local authority control
195
A statutory system of control?
198
The nature of a new body
202
The application of “restriction” to ﬁlms
203
Categories of certiﬁcate
207
The enforcement of ﬁlm censorship
209
Conclusion
211
13 Summary of our proposals
212
table of contents
vii

www.ebook3000.com

Preface to this edition
onora o’neill
B
Few ofﬁcial reports on public policy become books, still fewer books of
lasting relevance. The Williams Report on Obscenity and Film Censorship was
produced in 1979 and ﬁrst published as a book in 1981. It makes the case
for a liberal approach to regulating obscene or pornographic printed
material, and for rather more restrictive regulation and prohibition of
obscene and pornographic images, including ﬁlm. Its conclusions have
been widely accepted in Britain and elsewhere, its criticism of what it
dubbed “the chaos of the present law” widely endorsed, and its sparkling
and careful arguments both enjoyed and travestied.
Since the report was published, the technological and social context in
which we communicate has changed. We no longer live in a world in
which publishers and newsagents can control access to obscene content, or
broadcasters and ﬁlm-makers access to pornographic images, or in which
governments (or the Post Ofﬁce, to which the Report often refers!) can use
traditional methods to control, to regulate or to censor. Regulating or
prohibiting material that some see as obscene or pornographic is harder
in the age of the Internet.
However, worries about such material, and particularly about its effects
on children and young people, are as acute as they were thirty-ﬁve years
ago. Even if we agree with the Williams Report that obscene or porno-
graphic content should be available to adults who choose to receive it, but
not more widely, it is now unclear how this is to be achieved. How is
freedom of expression for those adults to be combined with protecting
others from intrusive and unwanted content? How robust are arguments
that certain sorts of publication cause harm?
The Williams Report did not ﬁnd robust evidence of harm caused by
encountering pornographic content, but argued (see Chapter 9) that the
public display or availability of such material was something that people
“reasonably judge offensive” and that providing such material, except to
willing recipients, should therefore be regulated or prohibited. Today we
might wonder whether we can still ﬁnd consensus about which sorts of
display will be “reasonably judged offensive”.
ix

Should rights to freedom of expression be qualiﬁed by prohibitions on
displaying material that is “reasonably judged offensive”? Or have we
concluded that offence is in the eye of the beholder, and so not a matter for
reasonable judgement or public consensus? If we reach that view, we may
no longer be able to offer a generic justiﬁcation for controlling and regulat-
ing content judged obscene or pornographic. Any justiﬁed restriction or
prohibition would have to refer to more speciﬁc failings. Speech acts that
defame or incite hatred, that intimidate or defraud, that deceive or terror-
ise, and many others, are now widely taken as offering robust reasons for
restriction and prohibition, which mere offence does not. Yet it is far from
clear whether we can do without a generic standard in determining how
freedom of expression may be qualiﬁed. The Williams Report challenges
both those who now take the most liberal views of freedom of expression,
and their critics.
x
preface to this edition
www.ebook3000.com

Preface
B
The Committee on Obscenity and Film Censorship, of which I was
Chairman, was appointed in July 1977 by the then Home Secretary, the
Rt Hon. Merlyn Rees, and reported in October 1979. This book is a reprint
of our Report, originally published by HMSO (as Cmnd 7772) in 1979. It is
unchanged except for the omission of eight appendices, on such matters as
the history of the criminal law in these areas and of ﬁlm censorship, the
law in other countries, and bibliographical and statistical issues. We are
grateful to the Home Ofﬁce and to the Stationery Ofﬁce for giving permis-
sion for this reprint.
A Departmental Committee of this kind, like a Royal Commission,
ceases to exist after it has reported. Responsibility for this Preface cannot
therefore be ascribed to the Committee. Still less, of course, can it rest in
any way with the Home Ofﬁce, and it must be simply my own.
There are other and more general effects of the fact that such a Commit-
tee ceases to exist. It cannot do anything collectively to inﬂuence or
comment on its Report’s reception. This is no doubt inevitable, but it can
put the Committee and its Report at some disadvantage against its critics,
who, particularly in the case of organisations and pressure groups, have
(quite legitimately) continuing opportunities to comment on it.
It would be inappropriate for me to comment here on the reception of
our Report or on criticisms which it has received. However, I can perhaps
say something about the kind of Report it is, and what it tries to achieve.
For reasons that we explain in Chapter 1, we did not think that this was a
subject on which we could usefully commission or suggest new research.
There is already a gigantic amount of research material on these subjects;
much of it is admittedly not very helpful, but what would be needed to
improve on it would be inspiration, not simply more labour or Depart-
mental support. What we sought to do was to clarify the issues involved
and to develop some shared understanding of such things as the nature of
pornography, an understanding which we hoped would be at any rate
rather less superﬁcial than that often displayed in controversy. We were
also very determined to direct our discussions towards a workable law,
xi

and to make recommendations that would be practical for this society at
this time.
The people who were members of the Committee are certainly very
various, and we did not start with shared conceptions of the problems, nor
with the same prejudices about where we might come out. After a great
deal of discussion, we arrived at a unanimous report, and I can honestly
say that this was not a unanimity of compromise – in the sense of one
person’s giving way on one point if someone else gives way on another –
but a unanimity of conviction, to the effect that our recommendations
indicated the right way in which to proceed.
It is central to the recommendations of this Report that they identify two
different kinds of objective that can be served by legal action on pornog-
raphy, one of which calls for suppression while the other calls only for
restriction. This second concern, that of the offensiveness of public display,
had already, at the time of our Report, motivated a number of Bills to curb
indecent display, all of which had failed. At the present time, however,
another Bill, introduced by Mr Tim Sainsbury MP, has passed through the
House of Commons and is almost certain to become law during 1981. We
have argued in the Report that the ‘indecent displays’ approach to this
problem is likely not to be very effective, but I am sure that the Committee
would welcome the measure so far as it goes, and wish it success in
curbing offensive public displays. Even if it is successful, the Bill, as Mr
Sainsbury himself has emphasised, addresses only some of the difﬁculties
raised by the present hopeless state of the law on pornographic and
similar publications, and, of course, there remain in addition the various
problems that the Report identiﬁes concerning the cinema.
There is one matter on which this Report has attracted misunderstand-
ing, and it may be useful if I brieﬂy explain in this connection what we
were trying to say. We recommend that neither suppression nor restriction
should be applied to any publication which consists entirely of the written
word (or, to put it rather more precisely, the offensive element in which
consists of the written word). Some have concluded from this that we
must suppose literature to have a less signiﬁcant effect on people than
photographs do. I think that it should have been clear, though evidently it
is not, that no such idea is implied by our recommendation. That recom-
mendation is based on the consideration that merely in the matter of
immediate involuntary offensiveness, which it is the principal aim of restric-
tion to prevent, written material has less effect than photographs do: quite
simply, to be offended by written material requires the activity of reading
it. On the question of suppression, again, the criterion that we recommend
xii
preface
www.ebook3000.com

for that (harm to participants) does not apply to written material at all. The
recommendation about written material may be controversial, but I hope
that the ideas behind it will not, at any rate, be misunderstood.
There is a great tendency for public debate on an issue of this kind to
regress to stale formulae and well-worn patterns of controversy. I hope
that the republication of this Report will encourage fresh discussion
not only of its recommendations, but of the arguments and distinctions
that surround and support them. Discussion of the Report up to now
has tended to concentrate on a few issues, and there are several other
important questions which have been so far largely neglected. The conclu-
sions of Chapter 8, for instance, about artistic merit and the ‘public good
defence’, have been very little discussed, but if they are sound, they are of
some consequence for any future comprehensive legislation about
obscenity.
bernard williams
Cambridge
May 1981
preface
xiii

www.ebook3000.com

PART 1
Background

www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 1
The Committee’s task
B
1.1
We were appointed on 13 July 1977 by the then Home Secretary
“to review the laws concerning obscenity, indecency and violence in
publications, displays and entertainments in England and Wales, except
in the ﬁeld of broadcasting, and to review the arrangements for ﬁlm
censorship in England and Wales; and to make recommendations”. The
Government had already announced its intention to set up a Committee to
examine these matters. On 14 December 1976 the Minister of State at the
Home Ofﬁce explained in the House of Lords (on the Second Reading of
the Criminal Law Bill) why the Government had decided not to legislate
on the basis of Part III of the Law Commission’s Report on Conspiracy,
which concerned public morals and decency. Legislation along such lines,
said Lord Harris, “would be bound to raise more fundamental questions
about the general law of obscenity” than it had been the Law Commis-
sion’s task to examine and it was the Government’s view that a broader
look should be taken at the subject before legislation was brought forward.
1.2
We held our ﬁrst meeting on 2 September 1977 and have met 35 times
in all. Immediately after our ﬁrst meeting we issued a general invitation to
members of the public to write to tell us of their views. We sent letters to
over a hundred organisations who we thought would have a special
interest in the subject, and we placed an advertisement in every national
daily newspaper, seeking the views of their readers. Later on, we recog-
nised a gap in the evidence we had received: there had been a very small
response to our invitation from the women’s movement, despite the
strong views held about pornography by many who are active in
the movement. We took further steps, and it was made known in Spare
Rib and the Women’s Page of The Guardian that we wanted to hear from
women. As a result of all these measures we received written submissions
from something like 150 organisations and groups and from nearly
1400 individuals. We are most grateful to all those who took time and
trouble to help us in this way.
3

1.3
We should like to acknowledge very warmly at this point the invalu-
able help that the Committee has received from its secretariat. Mr Jon
Davey has been the Committee’s Secretary throughout its work, and no-
one could possibly have been more patient, tactful, clear-headed and hard-
working than he has been. To him, to the Assistant Secretary Mr Roger
Creedon, and to the other members of the Home Ofﬁce staff who have
helped us, we express our most sincere thanks.
1.4
One limitation of our terms of reference must be mentioned at this
point; it was one that many of our correspondents found hard to accept.
Broadcasting was speciﬁcally excluded from our remit. The main reason
was that the whole ﬁeld of broadcasting had been the subject of review by
the Annan Committee, which reported only in February 1977,1 and the
Government considered it wrong to submit the control of broadcast pro-
grammes to yet another review so soon. From the point of view of legal
control, broadcasting is easily separated from the matters we were asked
to consider, since the controls imposed on programmes do not rely on the
law of obscenity, for example, but on obligations placed on the Governors
of the BBC and the Independent Broadcasting Authority to ensure that
their programmes do not offend against good taste or decency and are not
offensive to public feeling. However, some of our witnesses argued that it
was wrong for us to be excluded from making proposals affecting radio
and television, which they considered should be subject to the same legal
controls as apply to the other media. Many of those who wrote to us
expressed more concern about what is shown on television than in publi-
cations and ﬁlms. Beyond recording this strength of feeling, we have not
concerned ourselves with the ﬁeld of broadcasting.
Exploring our subject
1.5
One thing that is certainly true about this subject is that people
have differing conceptions, not merely of what should be done about
obscene publications, but of what the material in question is even like.
When we started our enquiries, we ourselves needed to form some clear
and shared idea of what, quite literally, we were talking about.
We arranged to see a range of magazines of this kind which were then
widely on sale, and others, less freely available, which had in many cases
been seized when being smuggled into the country. We also looked at
1
Report of the Committee on the Future of Broadcasting. Cmnd 6753.
4
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

publications which had been in trouble with the law in the past, and saw
how certain magazines had in recent years been extending the range of
what they considered they could show. We saw a number of ﬁlms which
are sold for home viewing or are shown in some of the smaller ﬁlm clubs.
Some of us visited such clubs and shops specialising in pornography and
some of the live entertainment offered to adults in London. As a result of
these experiences, we gained a reliable impression of what is available, and
were able to place this in some kind of perspective in relation to the past.
1.6
We also needed to study how the law operated and what its effect
was, in practice, on the various kinds of material. We took evidence from
those who enforce the law, and from other people with a professional or
practical interest in the law and its effects. We held discussions with a
number of those who made written submissions to us, as well as with other
people to whom we thought it would be helpful to talk on the subject.
1.7
Since we were also concerned with the arrangements for ﬁlm censor-
ship, we needed to ﬁnd out how the present arrangements operated and
how ﬁlm censorship works. Mr James Ferman, the Secretary of the British
Board of Film Censors, readily agreed to explain the Board’s policy and
practice to us and he spent four afternoons with us giving an illustrated
guide to the ways in which the Board censors ﬁlms. In the course of those
four afternoons we saw extracts from 90 different ﬁlms, sometimes in
“before” and “after” versions, which illustrated the attitude taken by the
Board towards the protection of children who go to the cinema, towards
the depiction of violence, the depiction of sex and towards sexual violence
and sadism. We are much indebted to Mr Ferman for the trouble he took
to familiarise us with the operation of ﬁlm censorship: for his four talks,
for meeting us on several occasions, and for receiving us at the Board’s
ofﬁces and letting us see the Board at work. There were several ﬁlms we
thought we should make a special point of seeing in their entirety. Some
had been the objects of concern and controversy after they had been
approved by the Board: ﬁlms such as Straw Dogs, A Clockwork Orange
and The Language of Love (which had been the subject of unsuccessful
proceedings for indecency). Others were ﬁlms to which the censorship
had withheld a certiﬁcate, and had been criticised by some for doing so:
these included The Story of O, Pasolini’s Salò, Oshima’s Empire of the Senses
(Ai No Corrida) and Malle’s Pretty Baby. In addition to these, Mr Ferman
showed us Manson, which had been refused a certiﬁcate in 1972 for
reasons slightly out of the normal run—it had been thought that it could
incite to violence, though it was not itself violent. Last, in view of some
the committee’s task
5

concern expressed to us about some sex education material, we took steps
to see Dr Martin Cole’s Growing Up, which had attracted some contro-
versy. In all, apart from our private cinemagoing, we saw as a Committee
110 ﬁlms, trailers or extracts from ﬁlms.
1.8
Our next aim was to ﬁnd out what people perceived to be the
defects—and the strengths—of the present law and practice, and how they
thought the law and practice could best be amended. As well as studying
the wealth of written material submitted to us and reading many of the
books published on this subject, we invited a number of people to talk
about the subject with us. Some have an ofﬁcial role to play in the adminis-
tration of the criminal law or the ﬁlm censorship system; others have jobs
which inevitably involve them in the operation of those laws; others
possess a wide variety of knowledge, experience and concern for the
welfare of society and the well-being of individuals. Those who helped
us in this way are listed at Appendix 8 and we are extremely grateful to
them. These discussions helped us to an understanding of how the law
works and of the difﬁculties it causes to those it affects; to a greater
knowledge of the way the trade is carried on and of the nature of the
market; to a deeper perception of the nature of the issues involved and of
the factors on which we should base our conclusions; and also to a fuller
awareness of the strength of the feelings which the subject arouses.
Research
1.9
Needless to say, we discussed the effects of pornographic and violent
material with a number of psychiatrists and psychologists, of various
outlooks. At an early stage in our work we considered, very carefully,
whether this was a matter on which it would be useful to commission
fresh research. We were able to take into account two reviews of the
existing literature, one on the effects of pornography which had been
undertaken by Mr Maurice Yaffé in 1972 for Lord Longford’s Committee,2
and which Mr Yaffé brought up to date for our beneﬁt, the other on the
effects of screen violence by Mr Stephen Brody of the Home Ofﬁce
Research Unit.3 Both of these drew attention to the considerable amount
of research which had already been undertaken, and also to the difﬁculties
2
Appendix V to Pornography: the Longford Report, Coronet Books, 1972.
3
Screen Violence and Film Censorship. Home Ofﬁce Research Study No 40, Her Majesty’s
Stationery Ofﬁce, 1977.
6
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

of studying human behaviour and of drawing conclusions about its motiv-
ations. Yaffé, for example, stated that “there is no consensus of opinion by
the general public, or by professional workers in the area of human con-
duct, about the probable effects of sexual material” and Brody said that
“social research has not been able unambiguously to offer any ﬁrm assur-
ance that the mass media in general, and ﬁlms and television in particular,
either exercise a socially harmful effect, or that they do not”.
1.10
Such conclusions as we have been able to draw from the vast amounts
of research that exist we shall set out later in this Report (Chapter 6). It will be
seen that such research tends, over and over again, to be inconclusive. This is
certainly not an accident, but rather reﬂects basic features of this subject, or
perhaps of any social research into subjects of this kind. It would be stupid to
claim that no future research could shed more light on these questions than
past research has done. But we do strongly suspect, in fact, that what these
questions need are not so much new facts, as new ideas; and further, that
enquiries which will be helpful are more likely to be those directed to the
study of human personality as a whole, rather than to speciﬁc questions
about violent or sexual materials and their supposed effects. However that
may be as a general issue, one thing that became clear was that this Com-
mittee, in the brief period of its work, was neither going to invent nor
galvanise others into inventing, the fruitful research ideas which have
eluded so many able, industrious and well-funded researchers over so long
a time. What we did do, besides studying the literature and trying to think
about it, was to discuss the problems with a range of people who have
professional experience in the study of human behaviour.
Public opinion
1.11
A different question was that of research into public opinion.
Obviously the body of people who took the trouble to write to us does
not constitute a cross section of the public. Many of those who did not write
may be indifferent to the whole subject—and this is one of those questions
on which indifference is itself an attitude. There are in any case problems
about the ways in which public attitudes are relevant to our task.
Few people suppose, for instance, that the mere fact that a lot of people
dislike something is, just in itself, a good enough reason for suppressing it
(it is interesting that some people who have very populist sentiments in
other connections do not have them on subjects such as obscene publica-
tions or capital punishment: and conversely). But does it make a difference
the committee’s task
7

if the dislike is not merely dislike but outrage? How much difference would
it make if it were not the material, but displaying it in public, which was to
be suppressed? These issues of principle we shall come to in Chapters 5
and 7. However, without prejudging them, and without supposing that
ﬁndings about public opinion could properly determine our recommenda-
tions, we could agree that it would be interesting and important to know
more about public opinion on the matter, if possible, especially since large
claims are sometimes made about what that opinion is.
1.12
The obvious way to assess public opinion is through an opinion poll,
and we therefore looked at the possibility of commissioning a survey of
public attitudes. It was helpful to us in considering this to study the results
of a poll undertaken by Opinion Research Centre in 1973, summarised in
the Sunday Times of 30 December 1973, and also the report of an explora-
tory study of public attitudes towards ﬁlm censorship conducted by Social
and Community Planning Research in 1974 for the Greater London Coun-
cil. We also looked at the results of an attitudes survey conducted in the
United States of America for the Commission on Obscenity and Pornog-
raphy; and, at a later stage, we had submitted to us the ﬁndings of a Gallup
poll conducted in January 1979 on attitudes towards pornography. We
found it very difﬁcult to gain a clear idea from these polls of what people
thought: contradictions and inconsistencies were evident in all of them. For
example, in the 1973 ORC poll 79 per cent of respondents agreed that all
ﬁlms shown in public cinemas should be passed by a national censorship
board, but 46 per cent agreed that there should be no censorship at all for
ﬁlms shown to adults. Again, still on the subject of ﬁlm censorship, the
1979 Gallup poll found 70 per cent against the abolition of the censorship
on sexual grounds of ﬁlms, and 65 per cent against sex being ﬁlmed, but
48 per cent in favour of allowing ordinary people to decide for themselves
what is ﬁt for them to see. The 1974 pilot study by SCPR found that some
people who said they were opposed to ﬁlm censorship in principle were
quite prepared to suggest that particular scenes should be cut or banned;
while others who pronounced themselves believers in censorship found it
difﬁcult to think of an exercise of censorship powers with which they
agreed. It seemed clear that even if questions were framed with consider-
able care, the answers could not be accepted at their face value.
1.13
This is not to say that previous surveys have been lacking in any
lessons. For example, the 1973 ORC survey found people apparently much
more prepared to take a libertarian line with publications than with ﬁlms,
74 per cent (as against 46 per cent for ﬁlms) saying that they were in favour
8
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

of the freedom of adults to buy whatever literature they wished, and the
same distinction emerged in the United States survey. As regards public
displays, the 1973 survey showed a majority (54 per cent to 34 per cent) in
favour of a new law against indecent displays, despite the fact that the
relevant question was loaded with references to the police being given
wide powers of search and arrest, and despite the fact that 71 per cent of
respondents claimed, in a separate response, never to have been seriously
upset by an indecent public display. The survey also permitted the con-
clusion that men are less likely to take a restrictive attitude than women,
the young less likely than the old and, to a less signiﬁcant extent, middle
class people less likely than working class people. In showing where the
line ought to be drawn in restricting displays the survey was a good deal
less deﬁnite. Questions about what people found to be indecent produced
only confusing results and certainly were of no help to us in deciding what
the law should attempt to restrict.
1.14
It seemed to us in studying these earlier surveys that there were severe
practical difﬁculties in mounting any survey the results of which would be
useful to us. There are a number of reasons for this. One is that it is clear that
many respondents would be answering questions about a subject of which
they had little or no knowledge, both from the point of view of law and
practice, and (as we have already said) with respect to the nature of the
material under discussion. Quite apart from this, the quality of the response
is doubtful because of the potentially embarrassing nature of the subject;
the sex, appearance and demeanour of the interviewer and the nature of the
surroundings will all affect the answers given. The ﬁndings also tend to
be distorted, as the United States survey found, by the fact that those who
prefer not to discuss such a subject exclude themselves; and even by the fact
that interviewers tend to retire from the enquiry rather rapidly, because of
the distasteful nature of the subject, and have to be replaced.
1.15
The major problem, however, seemed to us to lie in obtaining some
kind of shared understanding between interviewer and respondent about
what it is that the questions relate to. This is not merely a matter of
avoiding such general terms as “pornography” and “obscenity”, of which
individuals often have different conceptions. Even if one tries to deﬁne
the subject matter more closely by verbal descriptions—as in “material
depicting sex organs”—one cannot eliminate different interpretations of
the words, so that one person may have a mental picture of putting ﬁg
leaves on statues, another a serious sex education manual and another a
highly explicit pornographic magazine. As SCPR commented in their pilot
the committee’s task
9

study, “survey research cannot adequately convey the context and the
manner of presentation of scenes which is essential to obtaining meaning-
ful responses”. The only way to overcome this kind of misunderstanding
is to present the respondent with speciﬁc examples and ask such questions
as “Is this acceptable to be displayed in public places?” or “Should mater-
ial of this kind be permitted for those adults who wish to buy it?” Leaving
aside any questions of law, however, there are clearly ethical arguments
against thrusting examples of pornography or other extremely distasteful
material before unsuspecting members of the public, and the results of
such a bizarre transaction would have little evidential value; while if such
a study were undertaken with volunteers only, that pre-existing bias
would cast doubt on its ﬁndings.
1.16
The 1973 ORC survey seemed to recognise the problems we have
mentioned, and the need to focus the response on particular examples.
It tried to meet both by showing its respondents three photographs, but of
a comparatively innocuous kind with which the law on indecent displays
was unlikely to be concerned. One was of Rodin’s The Kiss, another a
costume sketch for Scheherazade, of a reclining nude, by Leon Bakst, and
the third a front cover of Men Only. In the event 7 per cent thought The Kiss
indecent, 30 per cent thought the Bakst sketch indecent and 28 per cent
thought the Men Only cover indecent. These comparatively high ﬁgures for
material unlikely to be indecent at law suggest that more outrageous
material might well have aroused overwhelming hostility. It seemed to
us that it was simply not possible, in the words of the Sunday Times report
on the poll, to “ﬁnd out what the nation considers indecent” by showing
pictures of a relatively inoffensive character, let alone to conclude from the
response that, as the headline put it, “it isn’t easy to shock the British”. This
poll tended to conﬁrm us in our view that it would be a mistake to expect
very much assistance from the commissioning of a survey of public atti-
tudes. In view of the various difﬁculties we have mentioned, we decided
against commissioning a fresh survey. We paid attention to the evidence of
ordinary people’s views submitted to us, and took into account some broad
indications which emerged from the surveys already undertaken.
Foreign experience
1.17
It seemed to us that there was something to be learnt from the way
other countries deal with these matters. We were interested in their experi-
ence of trying to suppress pornographic and violent material or,
10
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

alternatively, allowing its circulation; and also in the ways in which they
had tackled such problems as the legal deﬁnition of any material con-
trolled by the law. We therefore put in hand enquiries about the legal
restrictions and the arrangements for ﬁlm censorship in other European
countries, in America and Canada, and in Australia and New Zealand. In
the light of the information we received, we decided that we should ﬁnd
out more about the situation in Denmark, where pornography was legal-
ised in the late nineteen sixties, and in France, where a more recent
liberalisation, particularly in relation to ﬁlm censorship, led to problems
which prompted a Government control of a new kind. Small parties of
members made short visits to Copenhagen and Paris to study those
developments, to discuss them with Government ofﬁcials and others
and see for themselves what the present situation was. We summarise in
Appendices 3 and 4 respectively the results of our foreign enquiries about
obscenity law and about ﬁlm censorship.
Previous reviews of our subject
1.18
Our review is the ﬁrst there has ever been in this country of such a
comprehensive kind. There have, however, been Reports before. The
Obscene Publications Act 1959 had followed the Report of a Select Com-
mittee of the House of Commons, and the Theatres Act 1968 was based on
the recommendations of a Select Committee of both Houses of Parliament.
Most of the other laws we had to consider were older, but we found
waiting for us two reports recommending changes in certain aspects of
the law. One was the Report of the Home Ofﬁce Working Party on
Vagrancy and Street Offences which, since its task was to review the
Vagrancy Acts 1824 and 1838 which contain provisions about indecent
display, had already looked in detail at the control of public displays.
That Working Party had made preliminary recommendations for a mod-
ernised offence of making an indecent public display and had seen
them embodied in Part II of the Cinematograph and Indecent Displays
Bill which was introduced into Parliament by the Government in
the autumn of 1973, but fell because of the General Election of Febru-
ary 1974. The ﬁnal Report of the Working Party4 was published in
4
Report of the Working Party on Vagrancy and Street Offences, Her Majesty’s Stationery
Ofﬁce, 1976.
the committee’s task
11

1976 and recommended certain modiﬁcations to the original Bill, and we
took account of that work.
1.19
The other report of which we had to take account was that of the
Law Commission on Conspiracy and Criminal Law Reform,5 which in
Part III had examined conspiracies relating to public morals and decency,
including various other individual common law offences. The Law
Commission, as part of its long term objective of codifying the criminal
law, recommended that the whole of the common law in this area should
be abolished and replaced by certain new statutory offences and that, to a
large extent, those new offences should be within the context of the
existing statutory law on obscenity. As we have already explained,
the Government’s view was that the obscenity law itself should be more
fundamentally examined before it was extended in this way; we describe
in Appendix 1 how, nevertheless, certain interim amendments to the law
were made. It was a considerable help to us to have the beneﬁt of the Law
Commission’s thorough review of the common law in our ﬁeld.
1.20
The ﬁlm censorship system had never been the subject of a thorough
review since it ﬁrst evolved—a word we use because, as we shall explain
in Chapter 3, it was never formally instituted. The system has come to
receive a substantial degree of acceptance and support, though it has gone
through times of strain, as it had in the three years before we were
appointed. The particular problem of the inﬂuence of the cinema on
children had been examined between 1948 and 1950 by the Wheare
Committee on Children and the Cinema.6
1.21
There have also been, of course, a number of unofﬁcial studies of
our subject of which we have had to take account. One was by what is
commonly referred to as the Arts Council Working Party, more strictly the
Working Party set up by a Conference convened by the Chairman of the
Arts Council, on the obscenity laws, whose report was published in 1969.7
Another was by a Sub-Committee of the Society of Conservative Lawyers
under the chairmanship of Sir Michael Havers in 1971.8 Another was by
the Committee which Lord Longford gathered about him “to see what
means of tackling the problem of pornography would command general
support”, whose report was published in 1972.9 We also could not
5
Law Com No 76. Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, 1976.
6
Cmd 7945.
7
The Obscenity Laws, André Deutsch.
8
The Pollution of the Mind, Society of Conservative Lawyers.
9
Pornography: The Longford Report, Coronet Books.
12
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

ignore the Report of the United States Commission on Obscenity and
Pornography, which caused something of a stir when it was published
in 1970 and instantly rejected by President Nixon; and that on Violence
in the Media by the United States Commission on the Causes and
Prevention of Violence, published in 1969.
1.22
We turn now to the present situation as we found it; and ﬁrst, to the
law as it stands.
the committee’s task
13

CHAPTER 2
The present law
B
2.1
The statute which has been at the centre of our review is the Obscene
Publications Act 1959. There had of course been law about obscenity before
that Act, but it was in fact the ﬁrst statute to lay down the offence of
publishing obscene articles. Before 1959, obscenity offences rested on the
common law, which meant that the law had been established and developed
by the courts. We deal in Appendix 1 with the way in which the body of law
on obscenity came into being and developed, the origins of law on related
matters, and the details of what the present law provides. In this chapter, we
shall bring out the main features of present law and how they came to be as
they are, and shall discuss how they have been interpreted and applied.
The “tendency to deprave and corrupt”
2.2
The common law offence of obscene libel was ﬁrst established in 1727,
but does not appear to have been frequently prosecuted until the nineteenth
century. It was not until 1868 that the deﬁnitive test of obscenity was laid
down in Chief Justice Cockburn’s judgment in R v Hicklin, in which he
deﬁned obscenity, in the now celebrated phrase, as the “tendency to deprave
and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral inﬂuences and
into whose hands a publication of this sort may fall”. That test remained as
the basis of common law prosecutions and was eventually adopted, with
some modiﬁcations, as the statutory deﬁnition of obscenity when the
1959 Act was enacted, and when plays, by the Theatres Act 1968, and ﬁlms
were later brought within the scope of statutory control on obscenity.
2.3
This famous test—the deprave and corrupt test, as we shall call it1—
has, as we shall show, brought a certain confusion into the interpretation
1
Our use, throughout our Report, of this handy abbreviation, does not mean that we have
forgotten that the test refers only to the tendency to deprave and corrupt and contains other
qualiﬁcations on its application, as set out in paragraph 2.4.
14
www.ebook3000.com

of the law. The confusion does not stop there, however, for the deprave and
corrupt test is not the only test which English law applies in deciding what
is obscene. It does not, for example, apply to material which is banned
from importation under the Customs Acts. Those Acts prohibit articles
which are “indecent or obscene”, but that description is not further
deﬁned by the statute. The same phrase appears in the statutes prohibiting
the transmission of certain material through the post and the display of
material in public places. The law therefore operates at two distinct levels,
leaving aside for the moment certain other statutes which also fall within
our terms of reference: one class of articles is banned from being published
or sold, and another rather larger class is banned from being imported,
displayed publicly or sent through the post, and the deprave and corrupt
test is used in the one case and not in the other. We shall look more closely
at each of these classes in turn.
2.4
The Obscene Publications Act 1959 provides that an article shall be
treated as obscene “if its effect or (where the article comprises two or more
distinct items) the effect of any one of its items is, if taken as a whole, such
as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to
all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained
or embodied in it”. In those cases tried at the Crown Court, it is usually
left to the jury whether an article has a tendency to deprave and corrupt,
without a direction from a judge as to what the words mean, though
various glosses have been put on the words in different cases over the
years. In the Hicklin case itself, for example, Chief Justice Cockburn
referred2 to the offending pamphlet as one which would suggest to the
minds of people “thoughts of a most impure and libidinous character”;
something similar, though perhaps a little more demanding, was offered
by the House of Lords in 19723 when it was emphasised that the words
“deprave and corrupt” refer to the effect on the mind, including the
emotions, and that it is not necessary that any physical or overt sexual
activity should result.
2.5
In the famous case involving Lady Chatterley’s Lover in 1961,4 the jury
were at least helped by reference to the dictionary, the judge telling them
that “to ‘deprave’ means to make morally bad, to pervert, to debase or
corrupt morally. To ‘corrupt’ means to render unsound or rotten, to
destroy the moral purity or chastity of, to pervert or ruin a good quality,
2
(1868) L.R. 3 Q.B. at p 371.
3
DPP v Whyte [1972] 2 All E.R. 12.
4
1961 Crim L.R. 177.
the present law
15

to debase, to deﬁle”. A similar summing-up was approved in a subsequent
case, but judges were discouraged from attempting to go any further, the
Court of Appeal holding5 that where a statute lays down a deﬁnition in
plain English, it is rarely necessary and often unwise for a judge to attempt
to improve on it or redeﬁne it.
2.6
The implication of the deprave and corrupt test and of the judicial
comments on it is clearly that for an article to be found obscene a court
should be satisﬁed that it is likely to have some kind of deleterious effect
on an individual, even if the nature of the effect is hard to specify.
Obscenity, deﬁned in this way, is a causal notion: this is an important
point of principle, and we shall come back to it, as such, in Chapter 5. It is
on the basis of claiming those deleterious effects that the law is supposed
to work. It is much less clear, however, that that is how the law works in
practice. We noted the comments of Lord Wilberforce in DPP v Whyte6
that although the words “deprave and corrupt” appeared in Chief Justice
Cockburn’s formula they had in fact been largely disregarded in common
law obscenity cases: the courts simply considered whether the publication
was obscene in some everyday sense and the tendency to deprave and
corrupt was presumed. Lord Wilberforce went on to say that the Obscene
Publications Act 1959 had changed all this. However, we gained the clear
impression from the evidence we received that much of the time the law
has continued to work as Lord Wilberforce said it worked before 1959.
2.7
For instance, it is one thing to claim that a publication tends to
deprave and corrupt, and a different thing to claim that it offends against
current standards of what is acceptable. Yet we heard evidence that it is on
this second basis that the law is sometimes applied, and indeed that that is
how the House of Lords has expected it to be applied. In the Knuller case in
1972,7 Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest said that it was a difﬁcult task to decide
what tends to deprave and corrupt “but Parliament has fairly and
squarely assigned such a task to a jury. Doubtless it has done so with
the knowledge that there is every likelihood that the collective view of a
body of men and women on a jury will reﬂect the current view of society”.
In the same case, Lord Reid said that although the question whether
matter is corrupting is for the jury, “they should keep in mind the current
standards of ordinary decent people.” The indication given by these
statements of the role that the jury is expected to fulﬁl seems to us to
5
R v Calder and Boyars Ltd. [1968] 3 All E.R. 644.
6
[1972] 2 All E.R. 12.
7
Knuller v DPP [1972] 2 All E.R. 898.
16
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

accord with the role that it has in fact been fulﬁlling, as is shown by the
way in which the law has actually worked.
2.8
If the question whether something tends to deprave and corrupt is
taken seriously, as a matter of genuine psychological causation, then there
is no reason at all to suppose that articles which possess this tendency
should rapidly lose it: the presence of that tendency would be a relatively
unchanging matter of fact. Yet experience in recent years has been of an
astonishing contraction in the range of what juries determine to be obscene.
To relate that shift to the words of the statute requires the conclusion that it
is the perception of what is capable of depraving and corrupting that has
changed rather than what is actually capable of such an effect. It may be,
for example, that defence counsel have been able to encourage a general
scepticism in the minds of juries about the ability of publications to affect
an individual in a harmful way, or that juries are in any case applying a
more critical eye to the meaning of the words of the statute and looking in
vain for evidence to support the allegation of a tendency to deprave and
corrupt. But, although what goes on in the jury room rarely comes to wider
notice, it is equally plausible that the words of the statute did not introduce
a radical shift in the way obscenity is decided, in the way Lord Wilberforce
suggested, and that “the tendency to deprave and corrupt”, literally inter-
preted, has still not played a dominant role in decisions about obscenity;
rather, the literal sense of the words has in practice been subordinated to an
assessment of current standards of acceptability, as suggested in the Knuller
judgments we have quoted.
2.9
lt is hardly surprising that this should be so. Lord Wilberforce in the
case of Whyte said that such words “provide a formula which cannot in
practice be applied”, and this criticism is borne out by much of the
evidence we have received. The courts, it was emphasised to us by many
witnesses, need more detailed guidance as to the basis on which they
should decide what contravenes the law; at the moment, they simply do
not know what is meant by “deprave and corrupt” and are at a loss to
know how such a test should be applied. In this connection (as opposed
to the question of the “public good” defence, which we come to later, in
paragraph 2.19), the jury are not allowed to look to expert witnesses for
help, and have to reach a decision on their own. This, itself, is odd enough,
if the test means what it says: the question whether a given publication
possesses this tendency is one to which expert psychological or socio-
logical evidence might be expected to be relevant, and to be helpful to a
jury if the jury is to answer it, and feel sure of their answer. The result of all
the present law
17

this, the Criminal Bar Association told us from their experience, is that
juries “would rather acquit than guess their way to a conviction”.
2.10
So far as the deprave and corrupt test is concerned, then, it seems to us
that there are two different factors at work, probably equally important, in
the way the obscenity laws have in recent years left unchecked an increas-
ingly wider range of material. The ﬁrst is that the literal sense of the statutory
test of obscenity has been ignored, and the courts have applied their own
assessment of what the public at large are prepared to accept and tolerate.
The second is that the courts have been increasingly pressed to consider the
actual words of the statute, and that when they have done so, they have
become increasingly confused about how the statute should be applied, and
increasingly reluctant to convict. As we explain below, the deprave and
corrupt test is applied, in many cases, not by a jury but by a magistrate. It
may be that the second factor we have just mentioned has affected juries
more than magistrates and that this is a reason why, even though magis-
trates’ standards have themselves shifted with changing public attitudes, it
is considerably easier, as many of our witnesses told us, to obtain a ﬁnding of
obscenity in a magistrates’ court than before a jury.
The “indecent or obscene” test
2.11
The separate test of “indecent or obscene” contained in the Customs
Acts, the Post Ofﬁce Act and the Acts relating to public displays ﬁxes the
boundary of the legal at a different point from that imposed by the
Obscene Publications Acts. This is immediately obvious by the inclusion
of the word “indecent”, which is usually taken to be a weaker term than
“obscene”; but in addition the courts have held that the word “obscene”
itself, where coupled with “indecent”, has its dictionary meaning rather
than the meaning of “tending to deprave and corrupt”.
2.12
One consequence of this different placing of the legal boundary is
that it is unlawful to import or to send through the post some material
which may quite lawfully be published or sold within the country. HM
Customs and Excise themselves made the point to us that there were many
British-produced publications on sale in Britain which would have been
seized if they had been imported. They recognised the difﬁculty of sus-
taining a control which involved a discrepancy of this kind, and they
made it clear to us that they tried to apply a commonsense approach so
as to avoid the more ludicrous consequences of the divergence of tests.
18
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Nevertheless, this anomaly was severely criticised and found indefensible
by other witnesses. The general effect of the indecent or obscene test is thus
much wider than the deprave and corrupt test; however, there could also be
a sense in which the Customs and postal prohibition does not cover
everything embraced by the Obscene Publications Acts. This could in
principle arise where an article did not offend against current standards
of propriety reﬂected in the test of indecency, but was nevertheless of a
nature which tended to deprave and corrupt. However, we received no
evidence to suggest that this possibility was of much signiﬁcance; as we
have already made clear, the staple fare of Obscene Publications Act
proceedings is sexual pornography which would just as easily infringe
the indecent or obscene test.
2.13
The other important point which was made to us about the two tests
was that the indecent or obscene test was far simpler to apply than the
deprave and corrupt test. This has been the burden of some judicial pro-
nouncements, and certainly the indecent or obscene test has avoided the
kind of criticisms, of being impractical, that we have quoted in relation to
the deprave and corrupt formula. Representatives of HM Customs and
Excise made it clear to us that they considered their task would become
well-nigh impossible if the import prohibition was based on the test in the
Obscene Publications Acts, with all the doubt and confusion that it
entailed; at present, on the other hand, it was reasonably straightforward,
they claimed, for customs ofﬁcers to decide what was “indecent or
obscene” and for the courts to reach a similar decision in disputed cases.
Lord Denning has observed in pointing to the comparative simplicity of
the Customs and Post Ofﬁce Acts compared with the Obscene Publica-
tions Act, “customs ofﬁcers and the Post Ofﬁce know pornography when
they see it, and they act accordingly”;8 Lord Denning’s remark may be
right, but it does to some degree change the subject: pornography is a notion
different from both “obscenity” and “indecency”, and (we shall suggest in
Chapter 8) clearer than either.
2.14
The indecent or obscene test had some defenders; the deprave and
corrupt test, the basic idea of the most important present law, had virtually
none, and almost all of our witnesses wanted it abolished. Many witnesses
saw that if there is to be a law against the kind of material against which
the present deﬁnitions uncertainly work, then there has to be some other
8
R v Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, ex parte Blackburn [1973] 1 All ER 324.
the present law
19

deﬁnition, and many different formulations were put to us, some invoking
such notions as “contemporary standards of decency or humanity”, others
simply listing certain acts which it would be unlawful to portray. Other
witnesses, again, on grounds either of principle or practicality, thought
that there should be no such law at all.
Forfeiture proceedings and the right to trial
2.15
Among the difﬁculties of the present law, the question of the test of
obscenity was widely agreed to be the most severe. However, other
criticisms of the law were also put to us. Some of these concerned the
choice of the manner of proceeding offered by the Obscene Publications
Act 1959. Under section 2, a person may be charged with the criminal
offence of publishing an obscene article or having it for the purpose of
publication for gain, and this gives an accused person the right, if he so
wishes, to have the issues decided by a jury at the Crown Court. We heard
evidence that this is a right to which importance is attached by many
people, not least by those themselves charged with offences, since the
experience has been that juries are less likely to convict than magistrates.
Under section 3 of the Act, proceedings may be instituted in a magistrates’
court for the forfeiture of obscene articles seized by the police and
although the person from whom they were seized may defend the pro-
ceedings in the usual way, he is not himself at risk of any criminal
penalties. It is section 3 under which most proceedings are brought.
2.16
The main criticism we received about section 3 proceedings was that
since they are triable only in a magistrates’ court their use (increasingly
frequent) by the prosecuting authorities has the effect of denying to
publishers and others the opportunity of taking their case before a jury
where, as we have already pointed out, they have a rather greater chance
of a favourable decision. This is a criticism of long standing. We were told
that it was urged strongly at the time of the passing of the Obscene
Publications Act 1964 (which was intended simply to correct certain deﬁ-
ciencies in the 1959 Act) and that it led to an assurance being given by the
Solicitor General, with the approval of the Attorney General, in the
following terms:
“. . . if an article is seized under a warrant from a retailer or printer and if,
before it is brought before the justices under section 3(3) of the 1959 Act,
the publisher indicates his intention to continue publishing, whatever the
result of any forfeiture proceedings may be, then, in the absence of any
20
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

special circumstances, and subject to satisfactory evidence of an offence
being available, it will ordinarily be the policy of the Director of Public
Prosecutions to proceed against the publisher by way of prosecution
rather than to pursue the forfeiture proceedings.”9
2.17
The Director of Public Prosecutions commented to us that it seemed
certain that both the Solicitor General and the House of Commons at the
time had in mind only literate works consisting entirely of text, such as
Fanny Hill and Lady Chatterley’s Lover. Nevertheless, he adopts the policy
of regarding the undertaking as applying also to the many monthly
magazines now produced by English publishers, which were unknown
in 1964; but at the time of his evidence to us there had been only one case
in which an English publisher had sought to take advantage of the under-
taking, and in that case the request had been turned down because it did
not satisfy the condition of having been made before the magistrates’ court
proceedings had been instituted. The Solicitor General’s assurance does
not satisfy critics of the law, in particular because there are no arrange-
ments for informing publishers that their publications have been seized
from retailers; this means that they often do not know about pending
proceedings until it is too late, under the terms of the undertaking, for
them to intervene.
2.18
A second major criticism of section 3 is that there is a lack of justice
in a procedure which allows the large scale seizure of goods and their
detention for some time pending the outcome of proceedings. Even if the
defendant wins the case he may suffer an effective and substantial penalty.
Mr David Sullivan, a publisher, told us that it was grossly unfair that he
should have been deprived of an entire magazine issue for four months
only to have the copies returned to him after the magistrates had found
they were not in fact obscene; they were then out of date and useless to
him and he had suffered a loss of £19,000 despite a court ﬁnding in his
favour. It was not totally clear to us how a magazine of the kind in
question became out of date, but an issue of justice remains, and
Mr Sullivan’s point was supported by others with a less direct interest,
such as the Law Society, who expressed to us the view that an unjust
means of enforcing the law brought the law into disrepute. On the other
hand, it was put to us that this summary procedure of dealing with bulk
9
House of Commons, Standing Committee F, 16 June 1964. Ofﬁcial Report 1963–64, Vol IV,
Col 77.
the present law
21

pornography provided a far more effective weapon against an illegal trade
than any other and that its increasing use in recent times had been crucial
in deterring publishers from ﬂouting the law. The publication of poten-
tially obscene magazines was now on such a massive scale that seizure
and forfeiture was the only practical remedy, and was both justiﬁed and
successful in protecting the public interest.
The public good defence
2.19
A further feature of the 1959 Act which is problematical is the
“public good defence” that it provides, which has been controversial from
its use in the trial of Lady Chatterley’s Lover onward. The Act lays it down
that even though an article is found to have a tendency to deprave and
corrupt, both criminal proceedings and forfeiture proceedings fail if its
publication is found to be for the public good on account of its literary,
artistic or scientiﬁc merit. The public good defence stemmed from the
recommendation of the House of Commons Select Committee that it
should be a defence to show that the literary or artistic merit of the work
in question was such that the publication of the work should be allowed to
continue without an offence being committed. What most people had in
mind at that time was the book by a serious author offered to the public by
a reputable publisher; experience had shown that such books could be
brought before the courts for alleged obscenity, and the acquittal of Lady
Chatterley was widely regarded at the time as a vindication of the “public
good” provision. We found a widespread sympathy for the idea that
works of literary or artistic merit should not be liable to suppression, but
many witnesses were uneasy about the way in which the Act tries to bring
this about. Needless to say, many pointed out to us the assumption
embodied in the present law, which they found extraordinary, that there
could be a work which tended to deprave and corrupt those who read it,
but that, at the same time, it was for the public good that that work be
published—as though it could be for the public good that readers
be depraved and corrupted, so long as it was by art. Some witnesses told
us that what tends to deprave and corrupt should be suppressed whatever
other merits it might have; others preferred to say that what was of
genuine artistic or literary merit could never be capable of depraving
and corrupting. It seemed to us that this anomaly was another reﬂection
of the point we have already made about the test of obscenity, that the
deprave and corrupt test was not traditionally expected to be taken literally
and has in practice often taken a subsidiary role in determining whether
22
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

an article is obscene. (We shall come to general issues about art and
obscenity in Chapter 8.)
2.20
In any case, the position under the Obscene Publications Act is
indeed that the court considers whether the publication is for the public
good only after it has reached the conclusion that the article is obscene. This
two-stage decision process was afﬁrmed by the House of Lords in DPP
v Jordan.10 However, although the decision is supposed to be dealt with in
two stages, the evidence on both issues is heard before the court comes to
deciding the initial question whether the article is obscene, and it is not
usually clear whether an acquittal of an offence (or a decision not to order
forfeiture) is based on the view that an article is not obscene, or rather on the
view that, although obscene, its publication is nevertheless justiﬁed as
being for the public good. It is hard to resist the conclusion that the expert
evidence which is permitted to support a public good defence has been
allowed to reﬂect on the issue of obscenity, where expert evidence is not
allowed, and that the questions have not been separated as it has been held
they should be. This was speciﬁcally stated to have been the case in the Oz
trial,11 where the Lord Chief Justice said that the expert evidence “bore no
relation to” the public good defence but was “directed to showing that the
article was not obscene”. More recently, the Court of Appeal drew attention
to a judge having erred in not directing the jury that evidence called under
section 4 was not admissible on the issue “obscene or not” under section 1.12
2.21
We have already drawn attention to the judicial view that the
deprave and corrupt test provides the opportunity for a jury to apply the
standards of the community in deciding whether an article is obscene.
A slightly different view was offered in R v Calder and Boyars Ltd13 where
the Court of Appeal suggested that it was in balancing the strength of
the public good against the strength of the obscenity that the jury “must
set the standards of what is acceptable, of what is for the public good in
the age in which we live”. So the public acceptability test here seems to be
attached more to the issue of public good—though it is less clear that this
means the interests of literature or art—than to the issue of obscenity.
We are not convinced that this interpretation is any more in line with the
actual words of the statute than those to which we referred before; rather,
we see it as another example of the courts trying to make sense of a
confused and confusing enactment.
10 [1976] 3 All ER 775.
11 R v Anderson [1971] 3 All ER 1152.
12 Attorney General’s Reference (No 3 of 1977) [1978] 3 All ER 1166.
13 [1968] 3 All ER 644.
the present law
23

2.22
The public good defence has been used to defend material which
has no pretensions to artistic or literary merit. Two comparatively recent
decisions have limited this use of it. The issue in DPP v Jordan was the use
of the words “other objects of general concern” to argue that pornographic
material was psychologically beneﬁcial to persons with certain sexual
tendencies by relieving their sexual tensions and possibly diverting them
from anti-social activities, and that its publication was therefore for the
public good. The House of Lords held that section 4 had been diverted
from its proper purpose, and indeed abused, when it had been used to
enable evidence to be given that pornographic material may be for the
public good as being therapeutic to some of the public, and ruled that
expert evidence to this effect was not admissible. The closing of this
avenue of defence encouraged defendants to ﬁnd another, and this
resulted in the Attorney General referring to the Court of Appeal a point
of law about the true meaning of the word “learning’’ in section 4, in
particular whether evidence was admissible to show that an article had
merit in the ﬁeld of sex education or value in teaching or providing infor-
mation about sexual matters. The Court ruled14 that “learning” meant in
the context of section 4 “a product of scholarship”, and accordingly that
evidence of the educational effect of sexually explicit material was not
admissible. These decisions seem to have stopped the controversial prac-
tice of certain medical practitioners and psychologists being allowed to
give evidence on behalf of the kind of material which the Obscene Publi-
cations Acts must clearly have been aimed at if they were to have any
effect at all. The decisions have done much to mitigate the criticisms of the
public good defence, which had been tending to fall into disrepute. At the
same time, however, some of our witnesses have urged that the beneﬁts
described in that evidence ought to be taken account of in the law—but
that is a question to which we should return later.
Restrictions on the right to prosecute
2.23
Another matter of controversy is that the law lays down certain
restrictions on who may bring proceedings. There is a confusing patch-
work of different restrictions or lack of restrictions, which we summarise
in Appendix 1. The provision which has perhaps aroused most antagonism
among certain of our witnesses is that contained in the Theatres Act 1968,
14 Attorney General’s Reference (No 3 of 1977) [1978] 3 All ER 1166.
24
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

which prevents any prosecution being brought without the consent of the
Attorney General. From the evidence given to us, it seemed likely that had
it not been for this restriction more prosecutions would have been brought
under the Act, not by the Director of Public Prosecutions but by private
prosecutors. As it is, the Act has been used only once. The Director told us
that in the ten years since the Act was passed only 28 cases of alleged
offences under the Act had been referred to him; he thought that this
indicated that there was no great problem in this ﬁeld. The one case under
the Act was heard at Manchester Crown Court in May 1971, when four
defendants pleaded guilty in respect of a play staged at a Manchester
theatre club and were sentenced to varying periods of imprisonment. The
play was described in the Court of Appeal as “ﬁlth for ﬁlth’s sake”, with
the comment that no other plea than guilty was remotely possible. We
have received some complaints that other plays have been allowed to go
unchallenged, but otherwise concern about the theatre formed only a very
small part of the evidence we received.
Seizures by the Customs and Post Ofﬁce
2.24
The procedures involved in the Customs and Post Ofﬁce prohib-
itions received less attention in the evidence we received. The Customs
procedures operate by seizing at the port of entry imports which appear to
infringe the prohibition; the owner is given the opportunity to contest
forfeiture in the courts if he wishes. The Post Ofﬁce Act does not provide
such a formal procedure, but simply empowers the Post Ofﬁce to detain
and dispose of any prohibited articles in postal transmission.
2.25
Representatives of the Post Ofﬁce made it plain to us that this
prohibition was not enforced to any signiﬁcant extent, because it was
simply not possible to do so. A sealed postal packet rarely announces
itself as containing prohibited material, and although the 1953 Act
(in section 8) gives the power to open and dispose of any postal packet
posted in contravention of the prohibition, this power does not extend, in
the Post Ofﬁce view, to the opening of packets on suspicion that they
contain prohibited material. Cases which do come to light, numbering
no more than about 50 a year, are usually those where a packet bursts
open in the post or has to be opened because it is not capable of being
delivered. Material coming from overseas is a special case because there is
a speciﬁc provision allowing for mail to be opened for customs examin-
ation; but the Post Ofﬁce emphasised to us that they felt unable to overstep
the present law
25

their powers where the inland post was concerned and would not even
accede to any police requests to detain and open mail which was the
subject of an investigation into mail-order pornography. (This does not
mean, of course, that the offence is not prosecuted: the police may obtain
evidence of offences under the Act by means other than the opening of
packets in the post.)
2.26
Up to 1978 the Post Ofﬁce had regularly seized indecent or obscene
material coming from overseas, which came to light in the course of customs
examination. However, the Post Ofﬁce told us that they had misgivings
about removing items from the post in this way, on the basis of their own
judgment—which they did not feel competent to make—of the material
concerned, rather than the judgment of a court, and relying on a legal
provision which was less than entirely clear in the way in which it sought
to extend a domestic control to material posted beyond the jurisdiction of
United Kingdom law. Accordingly, since the law gave a power rather than
imposed an obligation, the Post Ofﬁce determined that they would no
longer, on the strength of the Post Ofﬁce Acts, dispose of indecent or obscene
material coming to this country from overseas. This decision meant that the
customs authorities, who had formerly dealt with commercial consignments
under their own powers but left the Post Ofﬁce to deal with prohibited
material in small quantities, were forced into the position of either seizing
more material themselves or allowing into the country what they judged to
be prohibited imports. For the last eighteen months or so, therefore, HM
Customs and Excise have accepted this larger burden.
Indecent public displays
2.27
Provisions about indecent public displays derive from nineteenth-
century legislation and are often in archaic terms. For example, under the
Vagrancy Act 1824 a person making an indecent display is dealt with by
being deemed to be “a rogue and vagabond” and it is not surprising
that one of the points reported by the Vagrancy Working Party was that
the courts in certain areas tend to dislike proceedings brought under such
outdated statutes as the 1824 Act. Certainly the number of prosecutions
brought under these statutes is smaller than one might expect from
the strength of feeling about public displays that was revealed in the
submissions we received. The test applied is that of “indecent or obscene”,
interpreted, as with the customs and postal controls, in terms of offence
against recognised standards of propriety, and in those proceedings that
26
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

have been brought, it seems to have given rise to very little practical
difﬁculty. One needs to bear in mind, however, that for a purely summary
offence, the opportunities for a case to get before the Court of Appeal or
the House of Lords for judicial comment are naturally small. The law on
this subject would of course have been brought up to date if the Bills
introduced by the Government in 1973, or by back-bench Members since
then, had become law. Parliamentary consideration of the Bill introduced
by Mr Hugh Rossi in 1978–79 was cut short by the last General Election;
as we submit our report, another Bill, introduced by Dr Brian Mawhinney,
is awaiting consideration.
The Protection of Children Act
2.28
Of the various statutes we have not so far mentioned we should
perhaps single out the Protection of Children Act 1978, which was enacted
by Parliament while we have been sitting. This was introduced as a Private
Member’s Bill and approved by Parliament to meet a public demand for
action to prevent the use of children in pornography. The need for fresh
legislation for this purpose was always in some doubt. Certainly no evi-
dence was put to us that child pornography was a growing problem—
indeed, the Director of Public Prosecutions told us that he had no evidence
that there was any new problem, or one of any signiﬁcance, and he con-
sidered that the existing law was adequate to deal with it. However,
Parliament was well disposed to the proposed legislation, which made it
an offence to take indecent photographs of children or to distribute or show
such photographs, and the Bill, though with substantial amendments
moved by the Government, became law in July 1978. It was made clear by
Government spokesmen that they regarded the Act as an interim measure
to plug any possible deﬁciency in the law pending our conclusions, and that
it should be reconsidered in the context of our review and in the light of the
way it had worked since it came into force. In fact, the information given to
us is that the Act has been used in only a very few cases.
The chaos of the present law
2.29
The summary of the present law which we give in Appendix 1
makes it clear why one of the courses commonly urged on us was a
rationalisation of the law into a comprehensible and coherent whole.
The law is scattered among so many statutes, and these so often overlap
with each other and with the various common law offences and powers
the present law
27

which still exist in this ﬁeld, that it is a complicated task even to piece
together a statement of what the law is, let alone to attempt to wrestle
with or resolve the inconsistencies and anomalies to which it gives rise.
Even while we have been examining the law, its complication has been
increased by measures amending the law on ﬁlms and providing fresh
powers against child pornography; in addition, two attempts have been
made to amend the law on indecent displays. What we have so far in this
chapter described as the broad effect of the law is a considerable over-
simpliﬁcation: for example, in suggesting that there is one standard of
obscenity, the deprave and corrupt test, applying to what cannot be sold and
another applying to what may not be imported, sent by post and publicly
displayed. In fact, as we describe in Appendix 1, the sale of goods, irre-
spective of their display, is also susceptible to control in certain circum-
stances by the Metropolitan Police Act 1839 and the Town Police Clauses
Act 1847, which apply the indecent or obscene formula, and also by the
common law offences of conspiracy to corrupt public morals and conspir-
acy to outrage public decency, where the tests are different again. The law,
in short, is a mess.
Territorial limitations
2.30
Our remit has obliged us to review the laws concerning obscenity,
indecency and violence in England and Wales. This introduces another
difﬁculty: our terms of reference thus coincide with the application of
the most important statute we have had to consider, the Obscene Publica-
tions Act 1959, but other statutes go wider. Naturally, the Customs Acts
and the Post Ofﬁce Act apply throughout the United Kingdom; and the
same is true of the Vagrancy Acts and the Indecent Advertisements Act
1889. On the other hand, the Judicial Proceedings (Regulation of Reports)
Act 1926, the Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act
1955, the Theatres Act 1968 and the Unsolicited Goods and Services Act
1971 all apply in Scotland but not in Northern Ireland, while the Protection
of Children Act 1978 does not apply in Scotland but has been extended to
Northern Ireland, where English common law also applies.
2.31
The limitation of our terms of reference has avoided the need for us
to study the completely different system of obscenity law and procedure
applying in Scotland or the more familiar law in Northern Ireland, based
as it still is on English common law. We have received some expressions of
view from Scotland and Northern Ireland, but we have conducted our
28
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

review in the context of the law in England and Wales only. We consider,
however, that the validity of our conclusions is not conﬁned to England
and Wales, and we assume that consideration will be given to extending
any implementation of our proposals to Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Certainly, it would be impossible for customs or postal controls to be
amended other than on a United Kingdom basis.
International obligations
2.32
It has also been necessary for us, in reviewing our domestic law, to
bear in mind that the United Kingdom has certain international obliga-
tions which have some relevance. These are of three kinds. One comprises
the various instruments which lay down the basic rights due to the
individual citizen and the limits within which the State may properly
interfere with them: these are contained in the European Convention on
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and (although it has a less formal status) the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. The second embodies international agreement about
measures to be taken against pornography or other obscene or indecent
articles: the International Agreement for the Suppression of Obscene Pub-
lications, the International Convention for the Suppression of the Circula-
tion of and Trafﬁc in Obscene Publications and the Universal Postal
Convention, fall into this category. The third are the obligations we
assumed as a member of the European Economic Community. Fuller
details of these international obligations are set out in Appendix 1.
the present law
29

CHAPTER 3
The censorship of ﬁlms
B
The legal basis of the censorship system
3.1
Parliament has never legislated for the censorship of ﬁlms: it is
purely a matter of accident that the ﬁlm censorship system was able to
ﬁnd some statutory support when it ﬁrst struggled into existence just
before the First World War. Although the system has for many years
been taken for granted, it had very uncertain beginnings and did not
become ﬁrmly established until about ﬁfteen years after the ﬁrst moves
towards censorship had taken place. Its having been taken for granted
for so long obscures the fact, which any closer examination of the
subject brings home, that it is undeniably odd. It is its constitution,
rather than its operation, that is odd: the then Mr Herbert Morrison told
the House of Commons when he was Home Secretary in 1942, “I freely
admit that this is a curious arrangement, but the British have a very
great habit of making curious arrangements work very well, and this
works”.1
3.2
We describe in Appendix 2 how the censorship system as we know it
today developed. It is an interesting story, which makes it clear that the
system we now have was in no way inevitable. Indeed, we came very
close in 1916 to having a Government-established system of ﬁlm censor-
ship, as many other countries have. (Information about the practice of ﬁlm
censorship in other countries is set out in Appendix 4.) We shall deal in
this chapter ﬁrst with the legal powers under which censorship is exer-
cised in England and Wales—though effectively the system applies
throughout the United Kingdom—and secondly with the way in which
it operates in practice.
3.3
The Cinematograph Acts 1909 and 1952 provide a control of the
premises in which cinematograph exhibitions are given. A cinematograph
1
19 November 1942; Ofﬁcial Report, Vol 385, col 504.
30
www.ebook3000.com

exhibition is deﬁned in the 1952 Act as “an exhibition of moving pictures
produced on a screen by means which include the projection of light”, a
deﬁnition which has the result that it is possible to give a cinematograph
exhibition without using a ﬁlm. Subject to certain exemptions, section 1 of
the 1909 Act provides that no cinematograph exhibition shall be given
elsewhere than in premises licensed for the purpose, and section 2 enables
a district council—though under the London Government Act 1963 the
Greater London Council is the licensing authority for the London area—to
grant licences to such persons as they think ﬁt to use the speciﬁed prem-
ises for such purposes, subject to such terms and conditions and under
such restrictions as the council may determine.
Cinema licensing conditions
3.4
It is the invariable practice throughout England and Wales for licens-
ing authorities to use the conditions of the licence as a means of controlling
the ﬁlms which may be exhibited, and this practice is reinforced by the
provision in section 3 of the 1952 Act that it is the duty of licensing
authorities to impose conditions prohibiting the admission of children to
ﬁlms designated, by the authority or another body, as unsuitable for them.
The licence conditions may be in different terms, but the general effect is
similar. Those authorities who adopt the Home Ofﬁce model conditions
will stipulate to their local cinemas that:—
(a) no ﬁlm, other than a current news-reel, shall be exhibited unless it has
received a certiﬁcate of the British Board of Film Censors or is the subject of
the licensing authority’s permission;
(b) no young people shall be admitted to any exhibition of a ﬁlm classiﬁed by
the Board as unsuitable for them, unless with the licensing authority’s
permission;
(c) no ﬁlm shall be exhibited if the licensing authority gives notice in
writing prohibiting its exhibition on the ground that it “would offend
against good taste or decency or would be likely to encourage or incite
to crime or lead to disorder or to be offensive to public feeling”;
(d) the nature of the certiﬁcate given to any ﬁlm shall be indicated in any
advertising for the ﬁlm, at the entrance to the cinema (together with an
explanation of its effect) and on the screen immediately before the ﬁlm
is shown;
(e) displays outside the cinema shall not depict any scene or incident not in the
ﬁlm as approved;
the censorship of films
31

( f ) no advertisement shall be displayed at the premises if the licensing
authority gives notice in writing objecting to it on the same grounds
applying to the prohibition of ﬁlms.
3.5
The general effect of these conditions is that there is a presumption
that a certiﬁcate from the BBFC renders a ﬁlm acceptable; but the local
authority reserves the right to permit a local showing to a ﬁlm refused a
certiﬁcate by the Board, to forbid the showing of a ﬁlm despite the grant of
the Board’s certiﬁcate, or to vary the age restriction attached to a ﬁlm by
the Board’s certiﬁcate. By far the most usual practice is for the local council
to rely entirely on the Board’s judgement of particular ﬁlms. During the
time that we have been reviewing the operation of the system, the most
frequent exception to this has been that certain councils have prohibited
the showing in their area of particular ﬁlms certiﬁcated by the Board: the
Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Association drew our attention to a long list of
ﬁlms which the Metropolitan Borough of Sefton had either banned or
ordered not to be shown without the Council’s express consent. Each of
the other courses, however, has been followed from time to time.
3.6
The Greater London Council is an example of a licensing authority
which adopts licensing conditions in a slightly different form, providing that
“No ﬁlm shall be exhibited at the premises—
(1) which is likely—
(a) to encourage or to incite to crime; or
(b) to lead to disorder; or
(c) to stir up hatred against any section of the public in Great Britain
on grounds of colour, race or ethnic or national origins; or
(2) the effect of which is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave
and corrupt persons who are likely to see it; or
(3) which contains a grossly indecent performance thereby outraging the
standards of public decency”.
The GLC conditions do also provide for the Council to notify the licensee
that it objects to the exhibition of any ﬁlm, but the provisions we have
quoted above are in the form of a prohibition, which is not the case with
the Home Ofﬁce model conditions. The latter merely give the licensing
authority the power to object on certain grounds, and unless such an
objection is made it cannot be said that a cinema breaches the conditions
of its licence—it does not do so merely by showing a ﬁlm which, for
instance, offends against good taste or decency.
32
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

3.7
The Greater London Council’s grounds for objection were originally
more limited than those of the Home Ofﬁce conditions, and this gave rise
to legal proceedings in 1976, in which the Court of Appeal ruled2 that
where a licensing authority decides to exercise its discretion to censor
ﬁlms, its rules must not be so framed as to permit the public showing of
unlawful ﬁlms. That decision arose from proceedings instituted by Mr
Raymond Blackburn after a ﬁlm which had been granted a local certiﬁcate
by the Greater London Council was found by a jury at the Central
Criminal Court to be indecent. The Council had not previously imposed
a condition relating to indecency; a cinema ﬁlm had never before been
proceeded against and it had not been tested whether the common law
offence of indecent exhibition was capable of applying to ﬁlms. The
Blackburn decision was of course before the criminal law relating to
indecent and obscene ﬁlms was amended by the Criminal Law Act
1977 in the way we describe in Appendix 1. As a result of that decision,
the Council altered its licensing conditions to include the new requirement
contained in subparagraph (3) of the condition quoted above, though now
that the Criminal Law Act 1977 has changed the legal test applicable to the
showing of ﬁlms from indecency to obscenity, that is no longer strictly
required under the terms of the Court of Appeal’s judgment.
3.8
Under section 6 of the 1952 Act, a person aggrieved by the refusal of
a licence or by particular conditions imposed in a licence may appeal to
the Crown Court against the licensing authority’s decision. In the recent
past—as the Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Association pointed out to us—
this has most frequently been done by licensees where licensing author-
ities have wanted local cinemas to be required to give advance notice of
the proposed showing of ﬁlms of a certain class, in particular those to
which the BBFC have given an “X” certiﬁcate. Cinema interests have
resisted such conditions as being impracticable in the present circum-
stances of the industry and therefore unreasonable, and we were told that
where appeals on these grounds had been taken to court they had been
successful.
3.9
It is an offence under section 3 of the 1909 Act for the occupier to
allow premises to be used in contravention of the Act or of the Regulations
made under it or of the conditions attached to a licence. This makes it
possible to penalise acts of various kinds, such as the showing of ﬁlms in
2
R v Greater London Council ex parte Blackburn [1976] 3 All ER 184.
the censorship of films
33

unlicensed and non-exempt premises, the showing of uncertiﬁcated or
banned ﬁlms in licensed cinemas, admitting children or young people to
ﬁlms banned to them, as well as breaches of safety requirements and
obstructing the entry of police or local authority ofﬁcers. Despite the wide
scope of the offence, prosecutions are infrequent; in the ﬁve years 1974 to
1978 there were only ﬁfteen. The maximum penalty on conviction of an
offence is £200.
Exemptions from censorship
3.10
Various exemptions from the licensing system are allowed under
the Acts, and some of these have important implications for the censorship
system. Section 7 of the 1909 Act provided that the Act should not apply to
any cinematograph exhibition given in a private dwelling house to which
the public are not admitted, whether on payment or otherwise, and also
removed the necessity to obtain a licence for premises used for cinemato-
graph exhibitions on not more than six days a year, provided that notice
was given to the licensing authority and any conditions imposed by the
authority complied with. The 1952 Act widened the exemptions, to cover
(a) exhibitions to which the public are not admitted;
(b) exhibitions to which the public are admitted without payment; and
(c) exhibitions given by “exempted organisations” (deﬁned as organisations
holding a certiﬁcate from the Commissioners of Customs and Excise
certifying that the Commissioners are satisﬁed that the organisation is not
conducted or established for proﬁt), so long as such exhibitions are not
held on more than three days in a week.
3.11
The exemptions do not apply to an exhibition organised wholly or
mainly as an exhibition for children who are members of a club whose
principal object is attendance at cinematograph exhibitions, unless the
exhibition is given in a private dwelling house or as part of the activities
of an educational or religious institution. There are certain other reserva-
tions about the application of safety requirements but no censorship
requirements apply to exhibitions exempted in any of these various ways.
3.12
We received no evidence that the exemption for free shows is of
much signiﬁcance, at least in the context of ﬁlm censorship, but that for
“exempted organisations” is rather more widely used. We were told that
most exempted organisations are either ﬁlm societies or working men’s
34
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

clubs, which are thus able to disregard the censorship system. Film soci-
eties ﬁnd this of beneﬁt because it means that they are able to show foreign
language ﬁlms of such limited commercial appeal that the censorship fees
might be prohibitive (though the British Board of Film Censors have
recently introduced concessionary rates which could apply in such cases).
However, in the matter of ﬁlm societies, it is not the exemption for
“exempted organisations” that is most important. Such status will be of
beneﬁt to ﬁlm societies which admit members of the public as paying
customers. But those ﬁlm societies which present ﬁlms to members only
are exempt from licensing, and hence from the censorship arrangements,
under the provision applying to exhibitions “to which the public are not
admitted”. This is the exemption that is most signiﬁcant.
3.13
When this exemption was enacted in 1952, it was designed to perpetu-
ate a distinction which had arisen in practice under the 1909 Act. That Act
was framed only in terms of inﬂammable ﬁlm. The commercial cinema was
using 35 mm ﬁlm which was inﬂammable and which therefore rendered the
premises liable to licensing and hence the ﬁlms liable to censorship; but
16 mm ﬁlm had for some time used a non-inﬂammable base, and those using
it were therefore not covered by the censorship arrangements. The introduc-
tion of 35 mm non-inﬂammable ﬁlm made it necessary, certainly if powers of
ﬁlm censorship were to continue, to widen the scope of the 1909 Act, but the
Home Secretary made it clear to Parliament that he did not wish in doing so
to alter the existing exemption for “non-commercial exhibitions organised by
ﬁlm societies and educational and scientiﬁc bodies”.3 What was not then
foreseen was the growth of commercial ﬁlm clubs designed solely for the
exhibition of ﬁlms which would not be passed under the censorship arrange-
ments. Such clubs are able to take advantage of confusion as to the meaning
of “to which the public are not admitted”, and to adopt “membership”
procedures often ﬂimsy in the extreme, to the extent that many clubs will
admit any passing stranger who ﬁlls in a membership form with a false name
and address. The courts have not established what should be the minimum
requirements for a club in this context and it appears that it has not been easy
to take successful proceedings for the offence of using premises for a public
cinematograph exhibition without a licence.
3.14
Cinema clubs have frequently been seen as an abuse, against
which new powers are necessary. This is not only because they exist to
3
House of Commons, 21 October 1952. Ofﬁcial Report, Vol 505, col 870.
the censorship of films
35

circumvent the censorship system, but also because, in escaping censor-
ship, they also escape the safety requirements laid down under the Cine-
matograph Acts. The result, the Greater London Council told us, is that
uncensored ﬁlms are often shown in premises that do not and could not
meet the technical and safety requirements of a licensing authority. This is
not true throughout the country, since some local authorities outside the
London area have taken their own powers through local legislation to
control the premises used for public entertainments of various kinds, even
where the “public” are members of a club. The City of Manchester, for
example, requires the registration of the premises of any entertainment
club and can either refuse to register premises which fail to provide
sufﬁcient standards of safety or impose conditions on registered premises
as to the maintenance of public order and safety, ﬁre precautions and
means of escape, opening hours and the prevention of nuisance to local
residents, but not as regards the content of any ﬁlms to be shown there.
The Association for Cinema Club Standards, formed since we were
appointed, suggested to us in the course of evidence that controls of this
kind have been applied in most of the country outside London and
emphasised that their own code of conduct required cinema club oper-
ators to comply strictly with ﬁre and safety regulations even though they
were not legally binding.
3.15
Steps were taken to place more restrictions on cinema clubs when
the Cinematograph and Indecent Displays Bill was introduced into Parlia-
ment in 1973. That Bill sought to alter the present exemptions from cinema
licensing so that any cinematograph exhibition “promoted for private
gain” would be subject to the control of the licensing authority. In add-
ition, the Bill would have made any ﬁlm exhibition still exempt from local
authority control subject to the Obscene Publications Acts. The Bill failed
to become law and has not been reintroduced, but in the meantime ﬁlm
exhibitions generally, including those in cinema clubs, have been brought
within the scope of the Obscene Publications Acts instead of being subject
to the common law. So far as we have been able to perceive, this has not
had much effect on the activities of cinema clubs.
The practice of ﬁlm censorship
3.16
The law gives to local licensing authorities the only ﬁlm censorship
powers which exist; but in practice, as we have made clear, only a minor-
ity of local authorities take an interest in the exercise of these powers.
36
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

There are theoretically 370 licensing authorities in England and Wales, but
some of these have no cinema within their area, so for practical purposes
the number is rather fewer, probably of the order of 330. The Cinemato-
graph Exhibitors’ Association told us that about 72 authorities take an
interest in ﬁlm censorship with some degree of regularity, actively
reviewing or previewing ﬁlms and from time to time prohibiting a ﬁlm’s
exhibition. But of course even these authorities, along with those who take
no interest of their own, are content to place the primary responsibility for
ﬁlm censorship on the British Board of Film Censors.
The British Board of Film Censors
3.17
Lord Denning, in his judgment in the proceedings brought by Mr
Blackburn against the Greater London Council,4 described the British
Board of Film Censors thus:
“The British Board of Film Censors is not a legal entity. It has no
existence known to the law. It is but a name given to the activities of a
few persons”.
The Board was formed by the ﬁlm trade associations and still operates
under the aegis of the Incorporated Association of Kinematograph Manu-
facturers: this is a trade association representing the manufacturers of
cinema equipment, the providers of laboratory services etc, and therefore
the only trade association whose members have no direct ﬁnancial interest
in the censorship of ﬁlms. The Board is non-proﬁtmaking and its income is
entirely derived from the fees it charges ﬁlm distributors for the censor-
ship of ﬁlms (calculated on the footage of each ﬁlm), supplemented by
the proceeds from the annual subscriptions paid by those licensing author-
ities who receive the Board’s monthly report, which gives details of its
decisions.
3.18
The President of the Board since 1965 has been Lord Harlech, and he
is involved in decision-making on all matters relating to broad public
policy. The day-to-day responsibility for the operation of the Board, for
the formulation of detailed policy and for the supervision of the examiners
rests with the Secretary, a post occupied since 1975 by Mr James Ferman.
One of the examiners works as the Board’s Assistant Secretary, and there
4
[1976] 3 All ER 184.
the censorship of films
37

are four other examiners—three women and one man—who all work part-
time, and a small administrative and technical staff. The whole operation,
in the Board’s modest ofﬁces in Soho Square, struck us with its economy
and its lack of technological sophistication.
3.19
All ﬁlms intended for public exhibition in Britain, including full-
length features, trailers, short ﬁlms and advertisements but excluding
newsreels, are normally submitted in the ﬁrst instance to the Board. The
Board’s practice is for each ﬁlm to be viewed by two examiners, who will
reach an overall view of the category of certiﬁcate appropriate to the ﬁlm
and a view on whether any of the scenes in the ﬁlm would be inappropri-
ate to that certiﬁcate. The certiﬁcates used since 1970 have been the
following:
“U”
—Passed for general exhibition
“A”
—Passed for general exhibition, but parents/guardians are
advised that the ﬁlm contains material they might prefer their
children under fourteen not to see
“AA”
—Passed as suitable only for exhibition to persons of fourteen and
over. When a programme includes an AA ﬁlm, no persons under
fourteen may be admitted
“X”
—Passed as suitable only for exhibition to adults. When a
programme includes an X ﬁlm, no persons under eighteen may be
admitted.
3.20
If a ﬁlm causes problems it may be seen again by different examin-
ers and by the Secretary and, if necessary, by the President. It is not
unusual for difﬁcult ﬁlms to be seen four or ﬁve times. A ﬁlm may fall
naturally into one of the categories set out above, but if there are some
scenes which would move it into a category different from that called for
by the ﬁlm as a whole, the ﬁlm distributor will normally be given a choice:
between, say, an “AA” certiﬁcate for the uncut ﬁlm or an “A” certiﬁcate
subject to certain cuts being made. In this way, the decision to cut a ﬁlm to
secure a less restrictive classiﬁcation is shifted by the Board to the ﬁlm
company and, in any event, any cutting will be done by the company
rather than the Board, with the ﬁlm being re-examined by the Board to
ensure that its ﬁnal form is acceptable. Information about the numbers of
feature ﬁlms seen by the Board, the categories in which they were passed
and the number of ﬁlms refused a certiﬁcate is set out in Table 1. Table 2
gives more information about the numbers of ﬁlms cut before a certiﬁcate
was issued.
38
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Trends in recent years
3.21
The most noteworthy feature of these statistics is probably the
signiﬁcant drop over the last ﬁve years in the number of ﬁlms examined.
Cinemagoing has of course heavily declined as a popular pastime, and the
reduction in the number of ﬁlms released has obvious consequences for
the Board. As we have said, the Board’s only source of income, apart from
subscriptions to its monthly report, lies in the censorship fees it charges for
examining ﬁlms. The Board has not laid stress in its evidence to us on its
ﬁnancial position, but it must be clear that it has difﬁculty in meeting costs
Table 1
British Board of Film Censors: Classiﬁcations Awarded to
Feature Films
Year
Films
Submitted
Certiﬁcate
Rejected
U
A
AA
X
1954
537
347 (65%)
154 (29%)
28 (5%)
8 (1%)
1958
541
261 (48%)
197 (37%)
71 (13%)
12 (2%)
1962
456
171 (38%)
168 (37%)
102 (22%)
15 (3%)
1966
370
132 (36%)
114 (31%)
111 (30%)
13 (3%)
1967
389
130 (33%)
133 (34%)
112 (29%)
14 (4%)
1968
403
99 (24%)
124 (31%)
169 (42%)
11 (3%)
1969
445
91 (20%)
114 (26%)
219 (49%)
21 (5%)
1970
502
104 (21%)
84 (17%)
77 (15%)
212 (42%)
25 (5%)
1971
502
98 (20%)
77 (15%)
77 (15%)
228 (46%)
22 (4%)
1972
488
78 (16%)
81 (17%)
77 (16%)
222 (45%)
30 (6%)
1973
504
62 (12%)
78 (16%)
85 (17%)
249 (49%)
30 (6%)
1974
540
72 (13%)
80 (15%)
93 (17%)
268 (50%)
27 (5%)
1975
424
74 (17%)
96 (23%)
73 (17%)
164 (39%)
17 (4%)
1976
402
53 (13%)
73 (18%)
74 (18%)
187 (47%)
15 (4%)
1977
375
39 (10%)
86 (23%)
78 (21%)
164 (44%)
8 (2%)
1978
324
35 (11%)
81 (25%)
66 (20%)
138 (43%)
4 (1%)
Note: The meaning of the certiﬁcates has not been constant over the period of this table. Until
1970, the “A” certiﬁcate required children under 16 to be excluded unless accompanied by
their parents or bona ﬁde adult guardians; since 1970, it has involved no restriction, being
advisory only. Until 1970, the “X” certiﬁcate excluded anyone under 16; since 1970, it has
excluded persons under 18. The “U” (universal) certiﬁcate has had the same effect
throughout, and the “AA” (no one under 14) has been unchanged since its introduction in
1970. The changes came into force on 1 July 1970.
the censorship of films
39

on the income derived from examining a body of ﬁlms which is over two
hundred fewer in total than ﬁve years ago. The Board has of course
increased its fees, so that a ninety-minute ﬁlm would be charged £276
and a two-hour ﬁlm about £355. But to load the costs of a censorship
system on to a decreasing number of ﬁlms must inevitably introduce
strains of its own.
3.22
Another noteworthy feature of the statistics lies in the distribution
of certiﬁcates and in the proportion of ﬁlms cut before receiving a certiﬁ-
cate. It was the increasing proportion of ﬁlms appropriate to the “X”
category and the increasing proportion of “X” ﬁlms which needed cutting
before being passed which led to the introduction of the “AA’’ certiﬁcate
in 1970, with the age limit for “X” ﬁlms being raised at the same time from
sixteen to eighteen. The idea was that if the “X” certiﬁcate became a more
speciﬁcally adult category more ﬁlms could be passed uncut and greater
freedom could be given to what an adult audience could see if it wanted
to. At the same time, the system was to be much more ﬂexible by introdu-
cing a new category to prevent children seeing material unsuitable for
them, and abolishing a rule which required children seeing an “A” ﬁlm to
be accompanied. Even after these changes, however, a high proportion of
ﬁlms were still assigned to the “adults only” category and an increasing
number of these still had to be cut. In 1974, over half of all the ﬁlms seen
were considered unsuitable for showing to anyone under eighteen and
two-thirds of those were considered unsuitable to be seen in their entirety
even by adults.
Table 2
British Board of Film Censors: Feature Films Certiﬁed After Cuts
Total
U
A
AA
X
1969
176 (42%)
20 (22%)
50 (44%)
—
106 (48%)
1970
166 (35%)
9 (9%)
31 (37%)
29 (38%)
97 (44%)
1971
165 (34%)
7 (7%)
22 (29%)
25 (32%)
111 (49%)
1972
179 (39%)
5 (6%)
25 (21%)
23 (30%)
126 (57%)
1973
201 (42%)
4 (6%)
24 (31%)
25 (29%)
148 (60%)
1974
218 (42%)
5 (7%)
23 (29%)
21 (23%)
169 (63%)
1975
147 (36%)
5 (7%)
32 (33%)
12 (16%)
98 (60%)
1976
135 (35%)
3 (6%)
17 (23%)
10 (14%)
105 (56%)
1977
105 (29%)
1 (3%)
18 (21%)
8 (10%)
78 (48%)
1978
73 (23%)
2 (6%)
15 (19%)
8 (12%)
48 (35%)
40
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

3.23
In the last ﬁve years, however, there has been a noticeable change in
the trend. Fewer ﬁlms are being refused a certiﬁcate; fewer are being
placed in the “X” category; and fewer are being cut before a certiﬁcate is
issued. Some people might leap to certain conclusions about these
changes: that, for example, censorship has been liberalised and that what
was formerly disallowed is now passing without hindrance. Clearly, there
must be some truth in those suggestions, since we were told by the Board
that in the ﬁeld of nudity and sexual activity their practice was governed
not by what they considered ought not to be shown, but by what they
judged was not currently acceptable to the cinemagoing public (or per-
haps more strictly to the majority of local licensing authorities whose
conﬁdence the Board has to retain) or to society generally through the
law of the land. Therefore, as public standards of acceptability have
evolved, so the Board have adapted their practice accordingly. At the
same time, however, the Board made it clear to us that they are now less
tolerant than before of violence and of material which exploits the sexual
degradation of women, and we saw examples of scenes in ﬁlms approved
in the past which would not now be allowed.
3.24
The Board also emphasised that it would be a mistake to view the
statistics simply in terms of the practice of censorship. The Board, after all,
deals only with that part of what the worldwide ﬁlm industry produces
which British distributors consider will be marketable in this country. The
censors examine only what distributors consider it is worthwhile submit-
ting to them. An important factor in what appears as a reduction in
censorship is, in the Board’s view, that the Board’s policy has become
better known and understood in the industry, so that material which it is
known will not be passed is no longer submitted. The Board points out,
too, that many countries now permit hardcore pornography and that this
had produced a genre of ﬁlms which there would be little point in submit-
ting to British censorship, at the same time probably decreasing the
number of titillating, less explicit, ﬁlms.
The role of the Board
3.25
It was put to us by Mr Ferman, Secretary of the Board, that the issue
of a certiﬁcate to a ﬁlm means only two things: that the ﬁlm, in the Board’s
judgement, does not infringe the criminal law, and that it is likely to be
acceptable to the majority of licensing authorities. We thought that this
the censorship of films
41

was an unduly modest view of the Board’s work. Certainly one of the
Board’s guiding principles is that no ﬁlm should be granted a certiﬁcate if
it is believed to contravene the law of the land, whether it be the law of
obscenity, the law relating to the protection of children or animals, or that
on incitement to crime or racial hatred. But the suggestion that the Board’s
role is otherwise simply to judge what most licensing authorities will
accept, while it is no doubt a proper statement of the constitutional
position, seems to us from the study we have made of the Board’s work
to understate seriously the lead that the Board gives to licensing author-
ities. There are strong views within the Board about the social harms
which might ﬂow from certain kinds of material, and these have been
developed on a more sophisticated level than we think would be adopted
by almost any licensing authority. The Board does not hesitate to ask for
psychiatric advice about the effect which some powerful scenes might
have on a minority of disturbed people or about the degree of fear to
which a young child might be subjected; it will refuse a certiﬁcate to a
ﬁlm or ask for cuts in it, if it displays what the Board feel to be an
unhealthy glamorisation of violence or an exploitative degradation of
women. Manson was refused a certiﬁcate because it portrayed the life-
style of the Californian followers of Charles Manson in what the Board felt
to be a dangerously seductive way. Other ﬁlms have been cut because they
illustrated techniques for stealing cars or for defrauding the telephone
service.
3.26
The truth of the matter is that the Board takes on the role of profes-
sional adviser to the licensing authorities on the censorship of ﬁlms, rather
than merely prejudging what the reaction of the authorities to particular
ﬁlms would be. In the examples we have given, the Board is assessing
neither whether the ﬁlm would contravene the law—though it sometimes
relies on a view of the tendency to deprave and corrupt which is rather more
literal than we have suggested is the interpretation normally adopted by the
courts—nor whether it would be unacceptable to licensing authorities. Mr
Ferman said to us that the Board’s role involved a certain “political”
element, in the sense that its activities needed to satisfy licensing author-
ities. It seems to us that this political role involves ensuring more that the
Board’s actions are acceptable to the licensing authorities than that the ﬁlms
themselves are. There is a signiﬁcant difference. It means that the Board has
a much more active function, but is still subject to the restraint that it
operates only on the basis of the delegation of powers by local authorities.
If it loses the conﬁdence of those authorities its role vanishes. It must not
42
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

reject ﬁlms which most authorities, if appealed to, would allow, nor give
certiﬁcates to those which most authorities would wish to ban.
3.27
A recent development in the Board’s efforts to maintain the conﬁ-
dence of local licensing authorities is its monthly report. Between 1913 and
1937 the Board had published an annual report discussing its work in
general terms, without reference to the action taken on individual ﬁlms.
The new series of reports, started on an experimental basis in November
1975 and available on subscription to licensing authorities, describes each
ﬁlm examined by the Board and explains the decision to give it a particu-
lar certiﬁcate and to require cuts, if any. The report is intended to meet
misgivings about the secret operation of censorship by opening the
Board’s operation to informed public debate, and also to encourage in
licensing authorities the conﬁdence that censorship is being properly and
sufﬁciently undertaken by the Board. We heard some criticism of the
reports from within the ﬁlm industry, generally on the ground that they
might stimulate interest among licensing authorities in censoring ﬁlms
rather than the reverse; more particularly, it was complained that the
reports were used as a vehicle for special pleading by the Board, especially
in propagating ideas for changes in the system which the industry did not
favour. The Board told us that concern on the ﬁrst of these grounds had
been misplaced. According to the Board’s information, fewer councils had
banned ﬁlms in 1977 and 1978 than were doing so in the years 1972 to 1975
and more were now content to rely on the Board’s decision. The second
complaint is not baseless—the reports constantly press the idea, for
instance, that changes in the age structure of the certiﬁcation system
would be desirable. We see nothing improper in the Board’s using its
report in this way: it is perfectly clear who issues it.
3.28
However great the conﬁdence in the Board’s work, it is not expected
that all its decisions will be accepted by all licensing authorities. Attitudes
vary in Britain, and what is acceptable in one area may be offensive in
another. The Board has for some time attempted to ﬁnd a middle way,
recognising that some local authorities would want to allow more than the
Board, while some others would allow less. The local option, it was put to
us, enabled the Board to verify that the standards it was adopting were in
fact in tune with most of the country and, on occasion, to shift its ground
to take account of evidence to the contrary. An example of the Board’s
reconsidering its decision was in relation to The Language of Love, which
was rejected by the Board in 1970 because its degree of sexual explicitness
went beyond what the Board judged would be acceptable for screening in
the censorship of films
43

a public cinema. However, when it was submitted to individual licensing
authorities—which is the only avenue of appeal from the Board’s rejection
—the ﬁlm was passed by the Greater London Council and by some
127 other authorities. In the light of this evidence of its local acceptability,
the Board felt able to give the ﬁlm a certiﬁcate when it was resubmitted in
1973. But not all local authorities regard the ﬁlm as acceptable: some still
exercise their right to refuse to allow the ﬁlm to be shown in their areas.
3.29
In recent times fewer local authorities have been prepared to take a
line more liberal than the Board’s. The Greater London Council, which has
traditionally been one of the authorities prepared to allow a showing to
some ﬁlms which the Board regarded as unsuitable for a national certiﬁ-
cate, has since we were appointed granted only one local certiﬁcate (to
The Beast). As a result, the Board has suddenly found itself not occupying
the comfortable middle ground, but out on the liberal wing, with most
of the local variations from the Board’s rule being in the direction of
greater restriction. There is thus less chance of trying out reactions to ﬁlms
refused a certiﬁcate by the Board, and the Board clearly has felt less than
easy in the new situation in which it has found itself.
Consultative arrangements
3.30
In establishing relations with the local licensing authorities, the
Board has not conﬁned itself to issuing its monthly report. Its Secretary
has for many years been expected to meet and speak to authorities in
different parts of the country and there have also been occasional confer-
ences at which the Board has tried to illustrate some of the problems of
censorship, and to obtain the views of members of local councils. Mr John
Trevelyan, when Secretary of the Board, instituted a series of such confer-
ences in November 1961, and Mr James Ferman, the present Secretary,
organised the most recent in December 1976. But there are times when a
more formal relationship is needed—when agreement is needed on new
ﬁlm classiﬁcations, for example—and such arrangements have, rather
ﬁtfully, existed over the years since the Board was established.
3.31
The Board’s annual report for 1922 offered a view of the Board as a
tripartite body consisting of the President, the examining staff and a
Committee elected from the various branches of the ﬁlm industry which
met to discuss the principles and general policy of censorship. Although
the Board was at pains to point out that this Committee did not interfere
with the censorship of ﬁlms, its existence reinforced the impression that
44
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

censorship was being undertaken by the trade itself and that the Board
was not independent (an impression, incidentally, which we found still
existed among some people, although in our view it is totally baseless).
That Committee did not survive. The ﬁrst attempt at establishing a more
formal machinery for bringing together the parties with an interest in ﬁlm
censorship was in 1931 when the Home Secretary set up the Film Censor-
ship Consultative Committee to achieve greater co-operation between the
licensing authorities and the Board. This lasted a few years but appeared
to wither away and was not thought worth reviving until after the recom-
mendations of the Wheare Committee on Children and the Cinema,5
which proposed a new Central Committee on Children and the Cinema.
Many of the Wheare Committee’s proposals were not taken up by the
Government—though some were embodied in the Cinematograph Act
1952—but in the wake of the Committee a new tripartite Cinema Con-
sultative Committee, embracing the Board, the ﬁlm industry and the
licensing authorities, was instituted in 1951. This in turn fell into abeyance,
but was revived to discuss proposals for the reorganisation of the category
system, which took effect on 1 July 1970. It was further resuscitated in
1973 and in 1977, when the Board wanted to propose that the categories be
modiﬁed again, a proposal that was shelved pending our deliberations.
3.32
The lesson seems to be that there are times when consultative
procedures of this kind are necessary, but that there has not been sufﬁcient
continuing need for them to keep them in permanent existence. The
practice of ﬁlm censorship has been undertaken over many years without
reference to formal consultative arrangements and with remarkably little
controversy. The complaints we received about it were few. Although the
system is a tenuous one, it has proved remarkably stable. There have been
strains from time to time, and indeed the period before our appointment
was one in which some stresses had been apparent, even to the point of
raising the question whether the system could survive. These develop-
ments are part of the ground we shall cover in the next chapter.
5
May 1950, Cmd 7945.
the censorship of films
45

CHAPTER 4
The situation
B
4.1
We shall describe in this chapter the recent events and developments
which created the background to our appointment, and also the present
situation which our study revealed. The subject always attracts contro-
versy and an obscenity trial or a censorship decision is likely to be
exploited by the media for its public interest. But this interest undoubtedly
ﬂuctuates over the years and the controversy rages more ﬁercely in some
periods than in others. It may be that our appointment owes something to
the fact that the preceding years had seen more frequent and more heated
discussion of the subject.
The retreat of the law
4.2
For many years the obscenity laws have been in retreat. The Obscene
Publications Act 1959 marked, of course, a conscious decision that the
obscenity laws were affecting material which should be free of legal
restriction and that the boundary should be changed; and the acquittal
of the publishers of Lady Chatterley’s Lover in 1960, after extensive use of
the newly-provided defence of public good, seemed to show that the Act
had brought about the change that its sponsors desired. That decision
represented one stage in the retreat of the law from the written word.
Another was perhaps the controversial prosecution involving Last Exit to
Brooklyn in 1967, where the publishers were convicted by a jury but the
conviction was quashed on appeal. A further, perhaps ﬁnal, stage seems to
have been reached with the prosecution of Inside Linda Lovelace in 1976.
It was the trial, and acquittal, of the publisher of Inside Linda Lovelace
which generated the most publicity for the obscenity laws in the years
immediately before our appointment, and the view was expressed to us by
representatives of the Metropolitan Police that the failure of that prosecu-
tion meant that the law was unlikely to be invoked again against the
written word. Their view (which appeared from his summing-up to
46
www.ebook3000.com

have been shared by the trial judge) was that it was difﬁcult to imagine
what written material would be regarded as obscene if that was not.
4.3
Here it is as well that we emphasise a point we have already made in
Chapter 2, which is that, under the present law, an acquittal or a dismissal
of a summons for forfeiture does not necessarily mean that the court ﬁnds
the material concerned not to be obscene. First, obscenity is a relative
concept. Obscenity proceedings are never against particular material itself
and it is always the case, even when the proceedings are for forfeiture
rather than in relation to a criminal charge against the person accused of
publishing it, that it is the circumstances of publication, particularly in
relation to the likely audience, that govern the ﬁnding of obscenity, not the
content of the material alone. Second, the court’s ﬁnding has to take
account of factors other than obscenity. The decision might be that there
was insufﬁcient evidence that the defendant published it or that he had it
for publication for gain; or the court might think that the material was
obscene but that its publication was nevertheless justiﬁed as being for the
public good. What we say in this chapter about court decisions on obscen-
ity should be read accordingly. It is a useful shorthand to say, as was
usually said to us, that material was found “not obscene” by a court, but it
may not always be literally true.
4.4
So, the situation we found when we were appointed was that the law
was effectively relevant only to pictorial material. There too, however,
juries had been showing that reluctance to convict which we mentioned in
Chapter 2. We were told of a succession of cases which had left the
prosecuting authorities wondering where the boundary of the legal lay
or even, sometimes, whether any boundary would soon be left. In April
and September 1975, for example, juries at the Central Criminal Court
failed to agree whether seized American magazines showing bondage and
sado-masochism were obscene, although similar magazines had certainly
been regarded as obscene up to that time. In October 1975 a jury at
Portsmouth Crown Court was confronted with highly explicit pornog-
raphy from Denmark (of a kind described to us by the defendant in that
case as the “Rolls-Royce” of pornography) and found that only some of it
was obscene and that, in particular, photographs of straightforward sexual
activity between adults, whether heterosexual or homosexual and how-
ever explicit, were not obscene. Before that case, one of the certainties of
life for the prosecuting authorities was that Scandinavian pornography
was obscene; showing us examples of what the jury at Portsmouth
decided was not obscene, the Director of Public Prosecutions commented
the situation
47

that it was now quite impossible to be certain of securing a conviction by a
jury of even what he considered to be a grossly obscene article.
4.5
If juries are reluctant to convict, the prosecuting authorities are likely
to be less keen to institute proceedings. The main function of the Director of
Public Prosecutions in advising on proceedings in this ﬁeld is to decide
whether an article is prima facie obscene, but since obscenity in law is what a
court decides it is, the Director’s decision is actually whether, in his view, a
court is likely to ﬁnd that the article is in breach of the Obscene Publications
Acts. The decision of one court of trial is not binding on any other, so the
fact that one jury has found particular material not to be obscene does not
necessarily rule out future proceedings involving similar material: indeed
the circumstances of publication, including the likely audience, might be
different on another occasion. Nevertheless the results of earlier trials
have an inevitable effect on the number of subsequent prosecutions. We
have already referred to a trial and retrial in 1975 involving American
bondage and sado-masochism magazines; another trial involving similar
material at the Central Criminal Court in November 1975 also resulted in
the jury failing to agree, but this time the Crown, instead of pressing the
case as they had in the earlier instance, offered no evidence at the retrial.
The next time similar material came before the prosecuting authorities, it
would not be surprising if they thought twice about instituting proceedings
at all. The Metropolitan Police told us that after the Portsmouth case the
Director of Public Prosecutions ceased to advise a section 2 prosecution1
when the magazines which had been found not obscene in that case were
seized elsewhere, and they referred to an instance in December 1976 where
prosecuting counsel at the Crown Court had offered no evidence in a case
involving Scandinavian pornography, on the grounds that one of the
magazines had been found not obscene at Portsmouth and that the others
were of a similar nature.
4.6
The examples we have quoted in the last two paragraphs (which are
of course only a few of the cases brought under the Obscene Publications
Acts) concerned a type of magazine which the Director of Public Prosecu-
tions classiﬁes as “Grade 3” material, that is, the most extreme of three
categories of potentially offensive material. Most Grade 3 material is of
foreign origin, and is sold only in shops specialising in pornography, and
often covertly. It is what is often called “hard-core” pornography,
1
That is to say, a prosecution of a person, which gives him or her a right to a trial by jury:
see Chapter 2, paragraph 2.15.
48
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

although the Director ﬁnds, as we have found, that the distinction
between “hard-core” and “soft-core” pornography is unclear and less
than useful, particularly in a rapidly changing market. “Grade 2”, in the
Director’s classiﬁcation, refers to a range of the more explicit British
publications often sold from street bookstalls, by some newsagents, and
elsewhere. “Grade 1” material includes naturist magazines and other
relatively mild publications, which even cautious newsagents might stock,
but which, as our evidence has shown, are sometimes seized by the police
in certain places as obscene.
4.7
It is clear from evidence we have received from the prosecuting
authorities that while they have worked on the assumption that Grade
3 material is illegal (subject to the doubts introduced by the cases we have
referred to), they have suffered persistent uncertainty whether they should
proceed against Grade 2 material, and how best to do so. It is a noticeable
feature of these magazines that their letterpress tends to be “stronger”
than their pictures, sometimes offering the kind of prose characteristic of,
say, Inside Linda Lovelace. Signiﬁcantly, it was not so much this that caused
difﬁculty, as the changing nature of the pictures in these magazines.
4.8
Following some unsuccessful proceedings in 1973, British publica-
tions were largely regarded by the authorities as keeping within permis-
sible limits but, as we shall describe, from the end of 1974 a series of new
magazines was launched which effectively tested the boundaries of the
law. We have already referred in Chapter 2 to one case involving a
magazine of this kind: having reached the conclusion that things were
going too far, the Metropolitan Police seized in November 1975 the com-
plete print of the latest edition of Park Lane, totalling 96,000 copies, but
when forfeiture proceedings were heard at Tottenham magistrates’ court
in March 1976, the magazine was found not to be obscene. This decision
may have discouraged the prosecuting authorities from proceeding
against similar material, but as magazines continued to advance their
limits, the question of enforcement action was constantly kept in mind.
The Metropolitan Police told us that by the end of 1976 they were so
concerned about the explicitness of some British magazines that it was
agreed in conference with the Director of Public Prosecutions that further
action should be taken. As a result, in the ﬁrst six months of 1977 well over
300,000 copies of magazines were seized in the execution of six warrants
alone. Court proceedings in these cases, again brought by way of forfeit-
ure in magistrates’ courts, were largely successful, though an appeal in
one case resulted in 15,000 items out of the 72,000 seized being found not
the situation
49

obscene. By that time, however, the number of highly explicit magazines
in circulation was considerable and there were doubts as to whether the
law could effectively control them.
Criticism of the law
4.9
The situation when we were appointed was therefore that the scope of
the law was very much more limited than it had been a few years previ-
ously, and that this was the object of much criticism. It was suggested by
many people that the law simply was not working as it should and that
there was an urgent need to strengthen it. There was much comment to this
effect following the acquittal of the publisher of Inside Linda Lovelace in
January 1976, and it was still to be heard when we were appointed and
in the evidence we received. There were perhaps three separate strands in
this criticism of the law. The ﬁrst concerned the test of obscenity and the
way in which, as we have described in Chapter 2, the deprave and corrupt
formula caused difﬁculty in deciding whether an article was obscene: these
difﬁculties we have already discussed in Chapter 2 (paragraphs 2.3–10).
4.10
The second subject of criticism has also been mentioned in our
discussion of the Obscene Publications Act in Chapter 2; this is the use
that was being made of the “public good” defence, which sometimes, it
seemed, was being deployed in order to undermine the ﬁnding of obscen-
ity itself. One version of this criticism was that put to us by the Director of
the Nationwide Festival of Light, who said that the defence provision had
given clever lawyers the opportunity to pour scorn on the prosecution case
and to sway the jury from the decision its natural common sense would
dictate. Another way of describing the situation would be to say that the
expert witnesses had had the effect of putting into the jury’s mind a doubt
whether they really had reason to believe, beyond reasonable doubt, that
the matter in question had the tendency to deprave and corrupt, however
“obscene”, in some more everyday sense, they might ﬁnd it. In any case,
there is no doubt about the fact that all the cases we have mentioned
above as having been lost by the prosecution were defended by expert
witnesses seeking to justify the publication as being for the public good.
A rare case in which expert evidence was offered by the prosecution, when
Dr John Court volunteered to give evidence at Snaresbrook Crown
Court in February 1976, resulted in a conviction. The appearance of what
became known as the “travelling circus” of medical and psychological
witnesses to plead the beneﬁts of sexually explicit material began to be
50
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

regarded as an affront by those who wanted to see the Obscene Publica-
tions Acts effectively enforced. By the time we were appointed, however,
some of these misgivings had been met by the House of Lords decision in
DPP v Jordan, described in Chapter 2, which effectively ruled that the
therapeutic beneﬁts of pornography could not be argued as a “public
good”; and the decision of the Court of Appeal on the Attorney General’s
reference about the meaning of the word “learning” (also described in
Chapter 2) seems to have put an end to this line of defence.
4.11
There has been another feature of the operation of the law, not so far
mentioned, which gave rise to criticism. This was the practice of using the
defendant’s right of challenge to prospective jurors so as to secure a jury
which was thought to be more sympathetic to the publications ﬁguring
in the proceedings. The law allowed each defendant seven peremptory
challenges, so that in a case involving more than one defendant the chances
of getting a jury thought to be sympathetic were much increased. In the Oz
trial, for example, in which there were four defendants, twenty-six poten-
tial jurors were challenged before the twelve members of the jury were
ﬁnally chosen; and in the Inside Linda Lovelace trial, in which there were two
defendants, the individual and his company, thirteen jurors were chal-
lenged. The argument against this practice was that if the function of the
jury was, as envisaged by House of Lords judgments we have quoted
in Chapter 2, to reﬂect a current view of society, then the manipulation of
the system to secure, for example, a preponderance of young men and the
exclusion of middle-aged women instead of a representative or random
sample, means that that function cannot properly be fulﬁlled. Again,
however, steps had been taken before we were appointed to meet these
misgivings (which were not conﬁned to obscenity trials), and section
43 of the Criminal Law Act 1977 reduced from seven to three the number
of peremptory challenges allowed to each defendant. As a result, argu-
ments about the composition of juries did not ﬁgure largely in the evidence
we received.
4.12
The concern about the state of the obscenity laws which was widely
expressed after the Inside Linda Lovelace decision led to a Private Member’s
Bill being introduced into Parliament, which was designed to meet par-
ticular criticisms we have mentioned and to reform the law in other ways.
On 23 March 1976 Mr Tim Renton was given leave to introduce a Bill
which would have abolished the deprave and corrupt test, leaving obscenity
undeﬁned; abolished the ability to plead the public good on any grounds
other than the interests of science, literature, art or learning; altered trial
the situation
51

procedure so as to separate the issues of obscenity and public good; set up
an advisory committee to advise whether publication of particular articles
would constitute an offence; restricted the reporting of obscenity proceed-
ings; and brought television and radio within the scope of the law on
obscenity. The Bill made no progress.
4.13
It was not only those who wished to see the law operate in a more
restrictive way who were dissatisﬁed. Many of those engaged in the
business of distributing or selling newspapers and periodicals, for example,
argued that they had a right to be told what it was legal and illegal for them
to handle and that the growing uncertainties of the law needed urgent
correction. Those who saw the law as unnecessary or futile or positively
harmful also joined the debate. The year 1976 saw the formation of the
National Campaign for the Repeal of the Obscene Publications Acts, which
brought together some people with traditional libertarian beliefs about the
right of adults to choose for themselves what they read or saw, and others
with what seemed to be a newer belief—or a belief that it was newly
acceptable to express—about the liberating or therapeutic beneﬁts of porn-
ography, and the need for society to remove the stigma attached to
pornography. The Campaign modiﬁed its name to refer to “Reform” rather
than “Repeal” but made it clear to us that this did not affect its view that
the Obscene Publications Acts 1959 and 1964 should be repealed.
Police corruption
4.14
Those arguing against a law prohibiting obscene publications were
able to draw support from the three major corruption trials in November
1976, March 1977 and June 1977 in which a number of senior and junior
ofﬁcers of the Metropolitan Police, in particular members of the Obscene
Publications Squad, were charged with offences relating to the acceptance
of bribes from those involved in selling pornography in the West End of
London. For many people, the evidence which emerged from those
trials—large sums of money systematically shared out between police
ofﬁcers, pornographers being “licensed to trade” or being given prior
warning of impending raids or being invited to buy back publications
which had been seized—provided a very clear illustration of the undesir-
ability of penalising “victimless crimes” and of trying to impose a ban on a
market which would inevitably continue to exist. Frequent comparisons
were drawn with the futile attempt to ban liquor, as in the American
52
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

period of Prohibition. The evils unleashed by the law were worse, it was
said, than those it was intended to prevent.
4.15
Certain ofﬁcers of the Metropolitan Police were carrying on corrupt
activities in the years up to 1972. In that year Mr Raymond Blackburn
instituted High Court proceedings for an order of mandamus against the
Metropolitan Police Commissioner requiring him to enforce the law relat-
ing to obscene publications. Mr Blackburn pointed to the shops in Soho
selling hard-core pornography quite openly, at £5 or £6 for each small
magazine, and asked the question why the law which prohibited the
sale of obscene publications was not being enforced against such shops.
The full story why was to emerge only four years later. Whatever may
have been the Commissioner’s suspicions at the time—as we describe
below, he was taking steps to reorganise this part of his force—his defence
to the proceedings referred to other, no doubt genuine, difﬁculties.
He referred to trials in which material had been found not to be obscene
and to other cases in which a conviction had been obtained but only a
small ﬁne imposed, and he made the point that with limited resources he
could not properly devote more effort to enforcing an aspect of the law
which neither the public nor the courts appeared to take very seriously.
Mr Blackburn’s motion was dismissed by the Divisional Court and his
appeal to the Court of Appeal was rejected, but much sympathy was
expressed with his case and the judgments in the Court of Appeal in
particular contained strong criticism of the Obscene Publications Acts
and the way in which they had, in Lord Denning’s view, “misﬁred”.
4.16
Already, however, the new Commissioner, Sir Robert Mark,
who was appointed in April 1972, was making reforms which were to
remove the corrupt ofﬁcers and to open the way to more effective enforce-
ment of the law. The Obscene Publications Squad was reorganised with
effect from 20 November 1972, and a glance at the statistics of searches and
seizures which we were given and which are included in Appendix 7
shows the much increased police activity which followed. We were told
that the material seized by the police in Soho in 1973 had a face value of
over £1 million. It was clearly with some pride that representatives of the
Metropolitan Police told us that the trade in foreign hard-ore pornography
had been considerably reduced since 1972 and that no shop in Soho would
now dare to stock such material. Although Mr Blackburn made allegations
to us of continuing and massive police corruption in the West End of
London he gave us no evidence to support these allegations.
the situation
53

4.17
Mr Blackburn drew particular attention to the way in which cinema
clubs still ﬂourished in the West End, and, from our own observations, it
did seem that cinema clubs had become less inhibited about the kind of
ﬁlms they were prepared to show. But this did not appear to us to be so
because the police were inactive against clubs. Indeed, representatives
of the Association for Cinema Club Standards complained to us that clubs
were subject to harrassment by the police. One proprietor told us that his
ﬁve cinema clubs had been raided by the police a total of 110 times in
the course of one week in 1978, but that four cases in which proceedings
resulted had all been dismissed by the court. Mr Blackburn and some
others complained because they saw what they considered to be obscene
material being made available; but if material of that kind has been taken
to court, unsuccessfully, it is difﬁcult to blame the police for failing to
persist in taking action against it. We do not accept that the continued
existence of clubs showing pornographic ﬁlms in Soho is evidence that the
police must have been bribed.
4.18
Metropolitan Police witnesses argued very strongly that their
achievement in dealing with the Soho pornography market since
1972 showed that it was not true that pornography automatically led to
the growth of corruption. Moreover, they do not accept the view, offered
by some witnesses (and encouraged by the analogy to Prohibition), that
the illegality of pornography itself encouraged the involvement of organ-
ised crime, which it was impossible, in such a ﬁeld, to keep out. They
claimed that where the law was relatively certain, as it still was in relation
to imported hard-core pornography, vigorous police action and the
imposition of severer penalties by the courts had meant that it was no
longer worth the risk to deal in such material and individuals with links
with organised crime had abandoned their interest in this ﬁeld.
Trends in British publishing
4.19
This police action against foreign material left something of a
vacuum, which has been ﬁlled by British publications. The growth and
development of this market was remarkable. One of the leading ﬁgures in
it, and perhaps the man with more responsibility than anyone for the
direction taken by this section of the publishing trade, was Mr David
Sullivan. Having started off by selling glamour photographs by mail
order, he ﬁrst instituted a magazine called Private and later, towards the
end of 1974, one which he impudently called Whitehouse. In succeeding
54
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

months, Mr Sullivan launched a series of new magazines which steadily
became more explicit, and his success inspired competing publishers to
produce other new magazines. Mr Sullivan explained to us that he went
into riskier photographs after being visited by the police about the written
matter in one of his magazines: he decided that if he was going to be at risk
of prosecution anyway, there was no point in playing safe with the
pictures. The publishers of these magazines competed throughout
1975 and 1976 to see how far they could go. Mr Sullivan told us that he
had maintained an advantage over his competitors during this period by
keeping one step ahead: part of the appeal of such magazines, he con-
sidered, was that people wanted to see things they had not seen before.
4.20
We have already mentioned the concern which the prosecuting
authorities in London were feeling towards the end of 1976 about the
content of these magazines, and the action which the authorities then took.
But the publishing trade itself felt some concern. Competition in greater
explicitness cannot go on for ever. There were clearly fears that many of
these magazines were beginning to ask for trouble from the authorities
and that any further advancement of the limits would be bound to pro-
voke much harsher enforcement measures. It was suggested to us by one
former publisher that anyway the trade was facing increasing difﬁculties
because the market was becoming saturated and sales were beginning to
decline, and foreign markets for unsold British magazines were disappear-
ing because the abolition of censorship elsewhere meant that there was
less interest in publications which still fell short of being totally explicit.
Self regulation by the trade
4.21
As a result of the alarm felt in the trade, a meeting was held in
London on 29 May 1977, the outcome of which was the formation of a
body called the British Adult Publications Association, which included
nine out of the thirteen main publishers of sex magazines, nearly all the
main distributors of such magazines, and a number of retailers. The main
object of the Association was to regulate the content of magazines and
to keep them within limits which were regarded as within the law as
currently interpreted. The Association adopted guidelines of what they
considered material unacceptable for this type of publication, based on
what had been found in certain previous legal proceedings to be obscene
or not obscene, and members of the Association agreed to observe these in
the magazines they produced and sold from September 1977. The
the situation
55

Association also set up a Publications Control Board to determine in
individual cases whether or not material was in accord with the guide-
lines, and Mr John Trevelyan, the former Secretary of the British Board
of Film Censors, accepted an invitation to be part-time President of this
new Board. Mr Trevelyan told us in evidence in September 1978 that
the sanctions operated by the Association against magazines objected to
by the Board—namely that distributor members of the Association would
not distribute publications which, after an initial determination by the
Board, continued to ﬂout the guidelines—had been implemented in four
cases, and that certain magazines had ceased publication. He thought the
guidelines were proving effective: publishing trends up to early 1977 had
been halted and in some respects reversed.
4.22
Some of our witnesses considered that the institution of this self-
regulation in the trade was a step in the right direction and was much to be
welcomed; it was compared to the establishment of ﬁlm censorship by the
ﬁlm industry, and Mr Trevelyan’s appointment was perhaps intended to
suggest such a comparison. But we also heard considerable cynicism, from
those in the trade and outside it. Some people, including those in some
parts of the distributing trade, dismissed the Association as a vain attempt
to make respectable a part of the trade which could never deserve respect.
Others saw the Association as a highly effective cartel, through which the
interests of the big publishers could effectively squeeze out competition by
denying non-members or small publishers an outlet for their publications.
Others expressed scepticism about the effectiveness of the self-censorship
imposed; the Director of Public Prosecutions was one of those who said to
us that he saw little difference in the magazines published before and after
the guidelines were introduced. Certainly, the fact that the Association’s
guidelines were being complied with was regarded by the prosecuting
authorities as irrelevant for the purposes of deciding whether or not to
proceed against a magazine under the Obscene Publications Acts.
Changes in enforcement action
4.23
Enforcement action against British magazines appeared, if anything,
to become more vigorous. This was particularly so in Greater Manchester,
where Mr James Anderton was appointed Chief Constable in July 1976.
Mr Anderton made no secret of his view that pornography is sinful, and
his force began to take more energetic action to enforce the law against it.
Mr Anderton told us that in the sixteen months from 1 January 1977 his
56
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

ofﬁcers had conducted 355 raids under the Obscene Publications Acts and
had seized nearly 200,000 items, with a value of almost half a million
pounds. These seizures were predominantly from retailers, including
Messrs W H Smith and station bookstalls. Mr Anderton himself made
the point to us that what the Greater Manchester Police had done had
had little effect on the production and publication of such material, par-
ticularly since the publishers themselves were located outside the Greater
Manchester area. But the police action appears to have had a signiﬁcant
effect on the availability in Manchester of publications of this kind:
Mr Anderton told us that some retailers had changed their policy about
which magazines they stocked and that there were now notably fewer
outlets for such material. Because of delays in the judicial process, many of
the proceedings arising from these seizures had not come to trial at the
time Mr Anderton gave evidence to us, but he was able to say that
every case in which proceedings had been brought had been successful.
This was a striking record, and it seemed to contrast with other evidence
we received about the difﬁculties of bringing successful proceedings
under the existing law. It was put to us by other witnesses that the results
were related to the fact that the decisions were those of magistrates’ courts,
usually in determination of a summons under section 3 of the 1959 Act
(though the statistics given to us by Mr Anderton showed that 27 cases
had been taken under section 2).
4.24
Because of the different circumstances in London, where most of the
publishers are based, the policy of the Metropolitan Police had been to
concentrate, where British publications at least were concerned, on pub-
lishers and distributors rather than retailers. This policy was reconsidered
late in 1977, particularly in the wake of another trial at the Central
Criminal Court in which the publishers of the magazines founded by
Mr David Sullivan (Mr Sullivan by that time having sold out to concen-
trate on his ﬁlm interests) were acquitted on most of the obscenity charges
brought in respect of magazines seized in 1976, despite the fact that many
of the same magazines had been found obscene both by magistrates and
on an appeal heard only three weeks before. We have already pointed out
that seizures from publishers and distributors earlier in 1977 were dealt
with by way of forfeiture rather than criminal trial, and we drew attention
in Chapter 2 to the argument put to us that the use of forfeiture proceed-
ings had provided a most effective weapon in dealing with the trade in
obscene publications. It was decided at the end of 1977 to extend police
action in London to the retailers of British magazines, effectively taking a
the situation
57

similar line to that already adopted in Manchester. The outcome was a
very large number of raids on individual retailers throughout London in
1978 and the institution of forfeiture proceedings before local magistrates
which were usually successful. One publisher told us that as a result of this
“massive onslaught” on newsagents, his magazines had lost many outlets
and were now harder to obtain.
The size of the market
4.25
Exactly what the size of the market is is difﬁcult to establish. Some
of the better-established magazines publish audited circulation ﬁgures,
particularly those that take a moderate line which does not discourage
the advertising agencies from using them for consumer advertising; but
most of the magazines in this ﬁeld do not publish ﬁgures. Mr Michael
Brown, an independent marketing and research consultant, surveyed the
available information for us and we reproduce his memorandum, sum-
marising the data on the audience for sexually explicit periodicals, at
Appendix 6. Audited circulation ﬁgures for the three largest men’s maga-
zines, Mayfair, Men Only and Penthouse, show a signiﬁcant drop in circu-
lation over the period 1974 to 1978, which may perhaps be explained by
the increasing competition from the newer magazines. These newer maga-
zines do not have an audited circulation, but most of the publishers gave
us information either about the circulation of their magazines or about the
number of copies that they printed each month. Some caution is necessary
in translating print orders into UK circulation: we gained the impression
that most publishers in this ﬁeld printed many more copies than they
expected to sell during the month concerned, offering them to the whole-
sale and retail trade on a sale-or-return basis and hoping that they would
enjoy a long shelf life. One reason why most of these magazines can have a
long period of sale is that the usual practice is not to date them but simply
to allocate them issue numbers, so that the casual customer cannot readily
tell how old they are; many have nothing of topical interest in them and
some retailers offer for sale at any one time two or three issues of the same
magazine. It seems that in some cases old unsold magazines have been
re-covered, sometimes with a different title, and offered for sale again.
4.26
Putting together the audited circulation ﬁgures of those magazines
which publish them and our own estimate of how much of the print order
ﬁgures we were given by publishers represents a UK circulation, it
appears that the total market for magazines of this kind in this country
58
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

is of the order of 3 million copies every month. This estimate does not take
account of ﬂuctuations that there may have been while we have been
sitting: it is hard enough to obtain any ﬁgure in this shadowy area without
trying to operate a continuous monitoring of the size of the market. But if
it is true, as we were told by sources within the trade, that the market
reached its peak in mid-1976 and then suffered a decline, partly natural
and partly due to increasing police action against retailers, we think it
likely that the monthly market may have been larger than 3 million copies
and could well now be smaller.
4.27
As with circulation, information about the readership of the newer
and less restrained magazines is not available. The better established
magazines are included in the National Readership Survey, the results of
which indicate a growth in readership up to 1973, a decline from then until
1976, followed by an upturn in mid-1977 and a further decline. Extrapo-
lating these results to the whole market would suggest that the gross
audience for magazines of this kind is about 8 million adults in Britain,
but this does not mean that 8 million adults in Britain read these maga-
zines, because some read more than one. However, the indications are that
about 4 million people have read one or more of these magazines during
the preceding month. This is a signiﬁcant section of the population. More-
over, the readership information available suggests that this audience is
fairly broadly based, except that it is predominantly male. It is also
younger than the population at large, with those under 35 much more
likely to be readers of such magazines than those over 45. Readership
spans all social classes, but is strongest among the skilled working class
and weakest among the highest and lowest socio-economic groups. But
interest is clearly not conﬁned to any particular small group in the popu-
lation: the common idea that this material appeals especially to the “dirty
old man” is not supported by the evidence. These results agree with what
our enquiries found about the kind of people who were customers for this
material. One retailer specialising in such material told us that his custom-
ers were of all ages and from all walks of life, and a similar picture
emerges from research studies which were undertaken for the United
States Commission on Obscenity and Pornography.
Controlling public displays
4.28
We have so far concentrated on the way in which the obscenity laws
have affected the publication and sale of magazines. A rather different
the situation
59

aspect of the subject is the way the sale of such magazines impinges on the
attention of the public. As we have explained in Chapter 2, there are
existing laws preventing the public display of indecent material, but these
are prosecuted only rarely. The Government’s attempt in 1973–74 to
modernise these laws, and similar later efforts, came to nothing. There
had not been before our appointment any particular controversy about
public displays, but views had been widely expressed, and formed a
notable part of the evidence we received, that whatever might be allowed
for willing adults to purchase, or to see in the cinema, there were strong
grounds for controlling the exposure of such material to unwilling
members of the public. A large proportion of our correspondents volun-
teered comments of this nature. These views were expressed in general
terms, but they often mentioned the display of magazine covers in news-
agents’ shops and the display of photographs outside cinemas and other
places of entertainment, particularly in the West End of London. In fact, of
course, most magazine covers are already a good deal more restrained
than their contents and there did not appear to be many public displays
being mounted that by contemporary standards would be caught by the
existing law against matter which was “indecent”, or, indeed, by a mod-
ernised version of such a law. It seemed to us that the evidence we
received on this subject was in fact making a more subtle point and that
what people were objecting to, at least in many cases, was the display in
public of matter they believed (for instance, in its inner pages) to be
indecent, rather than a public display which was itself indecent. If so, this
is one reason for thinking that merely to impose controls on what is
displayed, in the sense of what is shown on the outside of things, is not
a sufﬁcient answer to these problems. We shall come back to this question
in our more theoretical discussion in Chapter 7.
Applying the law to the showing of ﬁlms
4.29
In discussing the operation of the obscenity laws we have not
mentioned the showing of ﬁlms. Those who were responsible for the
Obscene Publications Act 1959 would not have been surprised at this.
The Act was passed in a form which expressly excluded the exhibition
of ﬁlms; moreover, the assumption at that time was, as the Lord Chancel-
lor said in the House of Lords on the proceedings of the Bill, that it was
“unthinkable” that there should be prosecutions for obscenity against a
form of entertainment already subject to its own censorship. Not for the
ﬁrst time, the unthinkable came to pass.
60
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

4.30
The assumption that the censorship system was a sufﬁcient control
on cinema ﬁlms lasted for some years. But from the late nineteen-sixties an
increasing number of ﬁlms sought to deal frankly and explicitly with
subjects which were distasteful or disturbing to some people. We noticed
in the last chapter the increasing proportion of ﬁlms given an “X” certiﬁ-
cate, and the growing number needing to be cut before they were
approved. Despite the cuts, some people felt more and more that add-
itional controls should be applied to what was shown in the cinema.
This was pursued in two ways: by invoking the criminal law and by
encouraging the greater use of local authority powers to censor ﬁlms.
4.31
Since the Obscene Publications Acts did not apply to ﬁlms, those
who wanted to place more curbs on them had to ﬁnd other ways to invoke
the law. The ﬁrst course taken by private prosecutors was to invoke the
Vagrancy Act 1824, and its offence of publicly displaying indecent mater-
ial. However, a prosecution involving Last Tango in Paris was dismissed in
Cornwall in February 1974 and another one involving Blow Out, brought
by Mrs. Mary Whitehouse in London, was dismissed in April 1974. Both
cases were rejected on the ground that a ﬁlm shown inside a cinema was
not a display in a public place, though the magistrate in the second case
gave the prosecutors some encouragement by agreeing that the ﬁlm was
indecent. In March 1974 a different attack on Last Tango in Paris was
mounted. Mr. Edward Shackleton of the Nationwide Festival of Light
initiated a prosecution under the Obscene Publications Acts, not in respect
of the showing of the ﬁlm but in respect of its distribution. The case was
committed for trial and an application for the indictment to be quashed on
the ground that the publication of a ﬁlm intended for public exhibition fell
outside the provisions of the Acts was rejected by the Lord Chief Justice in
May 1974. At the trial in November, however, the jury were directed to
acquit on the ground that the only publication involved was by the
distributors to the licensee of the cinema, and that there was no evidence
that the ﬁlm had tended to deprave and corrupt him. Although the
prosecution was a private one, the apparent conﬂict between the views
of the Divisional Court and the court of trial introduced some confusion
into the law and the Attorney General instituted an appeal to resolve the
point, the Court of Appeal conﬁrming in March 1976 that the Obscene
Publications Acts did not apply to cinema ﬁlms.
4.32
In the meantime, however, a more successful means of attack had
been identiﬁed. Mr Raymond Blackburn complained to the Director of
Public Prosecutions about the ﬁlm More About the Language of Love, which
the situation
61

differed from the other ﬁlms proceeded against in that it had been refused
a certiﬁcate by the British Board of Film Censors and was showing in
London by virtue of a local certiﬁcate issued by the Greater London
Council. In the event, the Director of Public Prosecutions decided to
institute proceedings against the exhibitors of the ﬁlm, using the common
law offence of indecent exhibition (which seems last to have been used in
1875 against a showman on Epsom Downs). At the trial in June 1975 legal
arguments for the defence failed and the jury were unanimous in ﬁnding
the ﬁlm to be indecent. The exhibitors were convicted and ﬁned.
Doubts about ﬁlm censorship
4.33
This ﬁnding by a court against a ﬁlm approved for public viewing
by the Greater London Council was a blow to an authority which had
already had severe doubts about its role as a censor of ﬁlms. In 1972 it had
asked the Government for a review of the law and practice relating to ﬁlm
censorship, and in 1973 had followed this with a plea that censorship
should no longer be the responsibility of local authorities. In June 1973,
under the inﬂuence of Mrs Enid Wistrich, the new Chairman of the
Council’s Film Viewing Board, the Council agreed on its own review of
the practice of ﬁlm censorship, the outcome of which was a recommenda-
tion to the Council towards the end of 1974 that since it was under no legal
obligation to censor ﬁlms, it should cease to exercise any powers in rela-
tion to the showing of ﬁlms to persons over the age of eighteen.
4.34
The implications of this step were considerable. As we have made
clear, ﬁlm censorship exists only because there has been common consent
that ﬁlm exhibitions should be regulated, and every local authority in the
country has supported the system. Suddenly, by far the most important
licensing authority in the country, with a large proportion of the country’s
cinemas within its area, was talking about opting out of the system and
effectively abolishing ﬁlm censorship for adults. A lead from London
would have been inﬂuential on other authorities and, without the support
of local authorities, the role of the British Board of Film Censors would
have become doubtful; the Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Association put it
to us that a state of “unprecedented anarchy” would have arisen. More-
over, the prospective abolition of censorship when, as we have indicated,
many people thought censorship was too lax anyway, aroused great
controversy and the debate of the proposal by the Council which took
62
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

place on 28 January 1975 was the focus of much attention and lobbying.
At its conclusion, the proposal was rejected by a majority of 50 votes to 44.
4.35
Since then, the Greater London Council has maintained its support
for the ﬁlm censorship system, but it proposed to us that a new statutory
ﬁlm censorship board should take over the role now given to local author-
ities, subject to there being a local involvement in appeals from the statu-
tory body. In 1975, however, the doubts which had been introduced
about the future of the system were kept alive by the legal action against
More About the Language of Love and by the repercussions of it. Mr Black-
burn followed it up with proceedings against the Greater London Council
in which he sought an order preventing them from exercising their ﬁlm
censorship powers in such a way as to permit the public showing of
unlawful ﬁlms. As a result of this, as we described in Chapter 3, the
Council amended its rules for censoring ﬁlms.
Rethinking the control of ﬁlms
4.36
These legal proceedings seem to have had a profound effect on the
attitude of the ﬁlm industry towards censorship. For the ﬁrst time, the
industry found that the exhibition of a properly certiﬁcated ﬁlm in a
licensed cinema was not immune from successful proceedings under the
criminal law; moreover, the law applicable to the cinema employed a test
of indecency, instead of the test of obscenity which applied to publications
and plays. With the Greater London Council having just demonstrated the
fragility of the censorship system, and the Law Commission indicating in
its working paper on Conspiracies relating to Morals and Decency, pub-
lished in December 1974, its preliminary view that that system might take
the full weight of controls on the cinema once the common law was
abolished, the industry reconsidered its policy. Its conclusion was that it
would be better off if the law of obscenity were applied to the cinema
rather than the law of indecency and that, if this were done, the powers of
local authorities to censor ﬁlms (which the industry had urged the Greater
London Council not to abandon) could be abolished.
4.37
As we make clear in Appendix 1, the Law Commission also
rethought its proposals in the light of the comments received on its
working paper, and in 1976 recommended that the law of obscenity
should be extended to cover the showing of all ﬁlms, whether in licensed
cinemas or not; and we explain how steps were taken to implement that
proposal in the Criminal Law Act 1977, even though the decision had been
the situation
63

taken that a Committee should be appointed to review the obscenity laws.
That change in the law took some of the heat out of the situation, though
there were people who regretted that ﬁlms should be made subject to the
deprave and corrupt test rather than the test of indecency which made it
generally easier to get a conviction. Before the law was changed,
Mr Blackburn, once again, instituted legal action against the ﬁlm
The Language of Love in an effort to prove that More About the Language of
Love was not the only indecent ﬁlm which had been allowed to be shown
publicly, and he attempted to indict the President and Secretary of the
British Board of Film Censors with aiding and abetting, by virtue of
having given the ﬁlm a certiﬁcate (in circumstances to which we referred
in Chapter 3). However, that prosecution failed, a jury ﬁnding that the ﬁlm
was not indecent, and no other ﬁlms shown in licensed cinemas have since
been the subject of proceedings.
4.38
The ﬁlm censorship system has attracted less controversy in the last
few years. It survived the crisis that broke out when it looked as though
the Greater London Council would initiate its disintegration; and the spate
of very controversial ﬁlms which brought the British Board of Film
Censors under attack in 1971 and 1972 has passed. The system underwent
a major change when the Local Government Act 1972 transferred cinema
licensing functions from county councils to district councils, and cinema
interests expressed vexation at the way in which groups like the Nation-
wide Festival of Light had used this opportunity to encourage the new
authorities to take an interest in ﬁlm censorship and to strengthen their
local controls on the showing of ﬁlms. This increased local activity—
although, as we said in the last chapter, it is still conﬁned to a minority
of local authorities—was much criticised in some of the evidence we
received and the weight of the views expressed to us, even on behalf of
many local authorities themselves, was against powers of ﬁlm censorship
continuing to rest with local authorities.
The end of controversy?
4.39
We have suggested reasons why the atmosphere surrounding both
the obscenity laws and the ﬁlm censorship system has become calmer than
it was four or ﬁve years ago. But we believe that another factor has been
the existence of this Committee itself. The fact that formal steps are being
taken to consider how the law and the censorship system should be
reformed has itself reassured many people who believe, from very
64
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

different points of view, that the present law is profoundly unsatisfactory
and that the time has come for a reorganisation of ﬁlm censorship.
We have heard more than enough evidence to convince us that the
controversy has not evaporated or been forgotten. The fact remains that
few people regard the present state of the law as acceptable; the fact
remains that the same groups responsible for instituting ﬁlm censorship
in the form we know it now wish to see it abolished so far as it affects ﬁlms
shown to adults. Our witnesses welcomed our examination of these
matters. We are convinced that that examination requires us not to tinker
with the existing framework, but to go back to ﬁrst principles, and ask
what the purpose of controls of this kind properly is. We turn to these
principles in the part of our report which follows.
the situation
65

www.ebook3000.com

PART 2
Principles

www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 5
Law, morality and the freedom
of expression
B
5.1
What sorts of conduct may the law properly seek to suppress?
An answer to that question which is widely accepted in our society, as
in many other modern societies, is that no conduct should be suppressed
by law unless it can be shown to harm someone. It is one sign of how
many people now accept this answer and the condition which it imposes
on legislation—it may be called the harm condition—that almost without
exception the evidence we received, insofar as it touched on these matters
of principle, stated something like this condition or took it for granted.
Submissions to us differed, very obviously, about what harms, if any,
publications and ﬁlms might cause. They differed also about what might
count as a harm. Those who favoured the abolition or limitation of legal
restraint tended, not surprisingly, to deﬁne “harm” in a narrower and
more determinate way, while those who supported greater legal control
admitted more generalised and less identiﬁable harms. Virtually every-
one, however, whatever their suggestions, used the language of “harm”
and accepted, so it seemed, the harm condition.
5.2
We accept the harm condition. As the variety of views in the submis-
sions to us shows, however, that leaves many basic questions still to be
answered.
Law and morality
5.3
The harm condition has been very much discussed in recent years in
the context of debates on the question whether prevailing morality should
be made into law: that is to say, whether the fact that many people in
society think something morally wrong is a good enough reason for there
being a law against it. If the harm condition for legislation is accepted,
then the answer to this question will be “no”, since there are acts which are
morally disapproved but are not harmful, and it will follow from the harm
condition that there should be no law against these.
69

5.4
Some people hold that if society held correct moral views, this
question should not arise, since even moral judgement should, correctly,
be controlled by the harm condition. They will say that if certain conduct
does no harm, then not only should there not be a law against it, but it
should not be the object of any moral reactions either: if someone’s
behaviour does no harm, then it is nobody’s business but his own, and
no question of morality comes into it. This is clearly a liberal and tolerant
outlook, and can be a beneﬁcent one, but it does involve a very narrow
view of morality. It tends to imply that everything that does not involve
harm is simply a matter of taste or preference, as some people like spinach
or detective stories and others do not. This is simply not true to the depth
and complexity of one’s possible reactions to other people’s behaviour and
to social phenomena. People can be distressed or contemptuous, admiring
or impressed, more variously and more seriously than this model allows,
and in ways which they think it important, for instance, to impart to their
children. They still, following the harm condition, may not think that the
matters which arouse these reactions are matters for the law, but they do
care about them, and properly so, at a level which is not catered for by
making “harm” the only notion relevant to morality.
5.5
In the matter of pornography, there exists real disagreement about
how serious a matter it is, even among those who think that it does little
identiﬁable harm. Some do, after serious consideration, think that it is
entirely a matter of preference: some people like it, some people do not.
Others think that it is, at any rate, a deeper matter than that and whatever
one might think about the case of an individual person, the fact that a
society was extensively given to the consumption of pornography
would tell one something about it, and something discouraging. It would
not be merely like learning, for instance, that a certain society had a
tendency to consume an unusually large amount of pasta. At the individ-
ual level as well, some would take a similar view. There are many of our
witnesses who might not perhaps react to those with a taste for pornog-
raphy with “moral disapproval”, but who nevertheless would regard such
a person’s state as a matter for ethical concern (if one may so put it) and
think that such a person was in respect of his character and personality not
as people desirably should be; and that we all had good reason to hope
that our children would not develop into such a state, and to discourage
them from doing so.
5.6
There is, then, a view that wants to apply the harm condition to both
morality and the law. An opposed view, associated in recent years with
70
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

arguments advanced by Lord Devlin,1 agrees with us that what is of
serious moral concern can range more widely than the harm condition,
but argues from this that even legislation should not be tied by the harm
condition and can properly go wider, to express and afﬁrm morality.
5.7
The shortest argument for the harm condition is simply that there is
a presumption in favour of individual freedom: that the incursions of
government into that freedom have to be justiﬁed; that the proper
sphere of government is the protection of the interests of citizens; and so
what is justiﬁably curbed by government is only what harms the interests
of some citizens. But there is of course more to society than a collection
of individuals under a set of rules which harmonize and collectively
promote their self-interest. Society involves shared history, culture, and
values, and there is more to being “at home” in it than knowing the
language (that is already a lot) and remembering the way to the market.
It is from this truth that Lord Devlin argued that the harm condition was
not correct. Since a society rests on moral consensus, he claimed, what
threatens moral consensus threatens society. But it is the business of the
law to protect society; hence it can properly be used to protect the moral
consensus.
5.8
As Professor Hart2 and other critics have argued, however, the
conclusion that Lord Devlin wanted does not follow. One immediate
point is that his position seems not so much to abandon the harm
condition as to urge another and wider category of harms, those associ-
ated with society’s moral disintegration; and indeed, as we shall explain
in the next chapter, many of our witnesses did urge on us the existence
and importance of harms of this very general type, supposedly associated
with
pornography
and
violent
publications.
Such
witnesses
were
undoubtedly arguing in the terms of the harm condition. With Lord
Devlin’s argument, however, and the issues of principles it raises, there
is an important, if perhaps rather ﬁne, distinction to be made. On his
view, there will be kinds of act which are not necessarily harmful in
themselves, but are morally disapproved by (let us suppose) a majority of
citizens. He argues, roughly, that if these acts are not discouraged by the
law, certain harms will follow, of social and moral disintegration. On
Lord Devlin’s argument, however, those harms follow not simply from
that type of act, but from that type of act when, in addition, it is morally
1
eg in The Enforcement of Morals, Oxford, 1959.
2
H L A Hart, Law, Liberty and Morality, Oxford, 1963.
law, morality and the freedom of expression
71

disapproved by the citizens: in a society with a different moral fabric,
containing no moral opinion against those acts, it is possible that no
harms would follow from there not being laws against them. That kind
of harm would not be admitted (except perhaps in extreme cases) by
those who believe that legislation should be restricted by the harm
condition. They are concerned with the harms that follow from the kind
of act itself, leaving aside the citizens’ moral opinion of those acts. They
would say that to allow citizens’ opinions to determine the matter in this
way, is to sacriﬁce people’s rights to do things that are otherwise harm-
less totally to majority prejudice. So even though Lord Devlin speaks in
terms of harms, the harms of social disintegration, there is a difference
between those who believe in the harm condition, and Lord Devlin or
anyone else who believes, in the celebrated words of Lord Mansﬁeld,
referred to approvingly by a Law Lord in 1962:3
“Whatever is contra bonos mores et decorum the principles of our laws
prohibit, and the King’s Court as the general censor and guardian of the
public morals is bound to restrain and punish.”
5.9
A substantial point against Lord Devlin’s view is that it exaggerates
the identity and extent of the moral consensus required by a society, and
hence overstates the harms that supposedly follow if moral opinion is not
made into law. Certainly society requires some degree of moral consensus,
but moral opinion can, and does, change without the disintegration of
society. One thing that can happen is that the society moves to a new
consensus; another is that it supports, in some particular area, a real
degree of variety and pluralism.
5.10
Of course, there are many people who would prefer, or believe that
they would prefer, a society less pluralistic than modern capitalist soci-
eties, and embodying a stronger moral consensus and a higher level of
moral conviction. This yearning for a morally more homogeneous society
takes many different forms, belonging, in political terms, both to the Right
and to the Left. Some seek the recovery of a consensus which they believe
once existed, others look to a new society yet to emerge.
5.11
We have been impressed by the extent to which submissions that
we have received against pornography and obscene publications have
been very obviously moved by sentiments not just about these phenomena
3
For references, see Hart op. cit. pp 7–9. Lord Mansﬁeld’s dictum dates from 1774.
72
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

themselves, but about certain underlying features of the modern world,
and express in some cases nostalgia, in others an aspiration, for a world
where not just sexuality but human relations more generally were con-
trolled by a ﬁrmer and more effective morality. Some of these views,
naturally enough, ascribe present evils to the decline of Christian belief.
5.12
Many of these submissions are evidently deeply sincere. Some of
them indeed speak more for “the party of humanity” than does a certain
kind of “liberal” evidence which we have received, which complacently
extols the high task of furthering enlightenment and human fulﬁlment
which, it claims, is sustained by the more literate kind of porno magazine.
Any Committee enquiring into this kind of subject is likely to encounter a
certain amount of humbug. Perhaps the most striking example of it that
came our way was the pretence that present day commercial pornography
represents some fulﬁlment of liberal and progressive hopes.
5.13
Leaving aside those with a commercial interest in it, few but the
incurably complacent are likely to be pleased by the present scene in parts
of Soho for instance. The distaste for that scene indeed goes beyond those
who pine for a more extensive moral consensus, and is felt by many who
want a very individualist society containing many different images of life.
5.14
There is indeed a question of how deeply signiﬁcant, as opposed
to distasteful, these phenomena are. But even if such things as obscene
publications are signiﬁcant expressions, as some of our witnesses passion-
ately believe, of things wrong with our society, there would still remain
another question of whether laws directed to suppressing those publications
would be either justiﬁed or effective. To be the identiﬁable cause of harms
is one thing, to be the expression of underlying ills in society is another.
Freedom of expression
5.15
A particularly eloquent and inﬂuential advocate of the harm condi-
tion was John Stuart Mill, and he and his work On Liberty (1859) have been
several times cited in submissions to us. Mill applied the harm condition to
all proposals to coerce people’s actions. He held, however, that where the
actions in question were those of publishing a book or expressing oneself
in speech or writing, there were special reasons against coercion and in
favour of liberty. The freedom of expression is not for him just one more
example of freedom from coercion but is a very special and fundamental
form of freedom. It is clear that many of our witnesses share this view,
law, morality and the freedom of expression
73

some of them for Mill’s own reasons, and we think it important to give
those reasons some attention. Some of Mill’s reasons we believe to be still
very relevant today. Some of his arguments, however, were always ﬂimsy
and are yet more so in modern conditions. His basic thought was that
human beings have no infallible source of knowledge about human nature
or how human affairs may develop, and do not know in advance what
arrangements or forms of life may make people happy or enable them to
be, as Mill passionately wanted them to be, original, tolerant and uncowed
individuals. Since we do not know in advance, we do not know what new
proposals, ideas or forms of expression may contribute to the development
of man and society.
5.16
From this Mill drew the conclusion that we have no basis for
suppressing or censoring any of them. He did so, in particular, because
he thought (and many others have shared this view) that the only way the
truth could emerge was by a form of natural selection in a “free market” of
ideas: if all ideas were allowed expression, good ideas would multiply,
bad ideas would die out. This conception, if sound, would have very
powerful consequences. It is important, for instance, that it would tell
almost as much against restricting a publication as against suppressing
it, since any constraint on a work’s availability will reduce the chance of its
message being heard. However, we do not ﬁnd Mill’s conception entirely
convincing, anyway, and it is also far from clear how it applies (as it has
been applied) to the sort of material which is the subject of our enquiry.
5.17
If the “survival of the true” notion applies to anything, it applies to
publications which indeed contain ideas, which may be true or false. It can
be extended more widely—to works of serious literature, for instance, the
expressive powers of which contribute in their own way to the formation
of images of men and of human possibilities. It is hard to see, however,
how the argument can be extended to everything that is published. In
particular it is hard to see how it applies to such things as standard
photographic pornography, and we ﬁnd it a rather ironical comment on
the survival power of good ideas that some submissions to us have put
forward in defence of the most vacant and inexpressive pornographic
material the formulations which Mill hoped would assist in furthering
“. . . the permanent interests of man as a progressive being”.
5.18
It is interesting in this connection that the Supreme Court of the
United States has for a long time followed a line—though both unclearly
and controversially—of arguing that the First Amendment to the United
74
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

States Constitution, which says that “Congress shall make no law . . ..
abridging the freedom of speech . . .”, does not protect hard-core pornog-
raphy (at least), on the ground that such pornography is not, in a consti-
tutional sense, “speech”: the idea being that it lacks communicative
content.4 This is not an issue which, happily, we are under any obligation
to pursue, but the fact that this argument can be inﬂuentially sustained
does illustrate the point that there is something open to question in calling
on the “market-place of truth” argument in defence of such items as
standard photographic pornography.
5.19
Even in the area of ideas, the notion of a “free market” has to be
regarded with some scepticism, and the faith in laissez-faire shown by the
nineteenth century and earlier does not altogether meet modern condi-
tions. If everyone talks at once, truth will not prevail, since no one can be
heard and nothing will prevail: and falsehood indeed may prevail, if
powerful agencies can gain an undue hold on the market. Even in natural
science, which Mill regarded as the paradigm, he neglected the importance
of scientiﬁc institutions and the ﬁlter against cranks which is operated,
and necessarily operated, by expert opinion, excluding from serious
consideration what it sees as incompetence. Against the principle that
truth is strong and (given the chance) will prevail, must be set Gresham’s
Law, that bad money drives out good, which has some application in
matters of culture and which predicts that it will not necessarily be the
most interesting ideas or the most valuable works of art that survive in
competition—above all, in commercial competition.
5.20
Thus we cannot entirely agree that “the Truth certainly would
do well enough if she were left to fend for herself”;5 she may need more
of a chance than that. This point can surely justify intervention. Interven-
tion, however, need not be and should not be negative intervention: it
can take the form of such things as state subventions for the arts, or
policies of refusing to design television programmes solely on the basis
of ratings, or subsidising institutions of critical enquiry. This is not just
a point about the rights of minorities; it involves Mill’s own basic
idea (though differently applied) that progress involves a belief or a
4
See F Schauer: ‘Speech and “Speech”—Obscenity and “Obscenity”: An Exercise in the
Interpretation of Constitutional Language’: 67 Georgetown Law Journal 899–933 (1979),
which defends the argument. We are grateful to Professor Schauer for discussion and for
information about US law.
5
A remark made, but perhaps not totally endorsed, by John Locke: see his Letter Concerning
Toleration, ed. Gough (1948), p 151.
law, morality and the freedom of expression
75

value being ﬁrst a minority belief or value, which must be preserved
if it is ever to reach further.
5.21
The fact that the market-place model is an inadequate basis for the
value of free expression does not mean that one replaces the market with
monopoly, and institutes a censorship by the State or by worthy citizens.
There is certainly no reason to think that that would do better in the
detection of error or the advance of enlightenment. The more basic idea,
to which Mill attached the market-place model, remains a correct and
profound idea: that we do not know in advance what social, moral or
intellectual developments will tum out to be possible, necessary or desir-
able for human beings and for their future, and free expression, intellectual
and artistic—something which may need to be fostered and protected as
well as merely permitted—is essential to human development, as a pro-
cess which does not merely happen (in some form or another, it will
happen anyway), but so far as possible is rationally understood. It is
essential to it, moreover, not just as a means to it, but as part of it. Since
human beings are not just subject to their history but aspire to be con-
scious of it, the development of human individuals, of society and of
humanity in general, is a process itself properly constituted in part by free
expression and the exchange of human communication.
5.22
We realise that some may disagree with this basic idea because they
think that fundamental human moral truths have been laid down
unchangeably for all time, for instance in religious terms. Mill, certainly,
thought that there was no such revealed truth, and his arguments for
freedom of expression and those of people who think like him are to that
extent an expression of religious scepticism. We would suggest, however,
that even those who believe that there are revealed truths of morality and
religion should attend very anxiously to the argument for freedom of
expression. First, the barest facts of cultural history show that any set of
supposed revealed truths which have survived have received constantly
new applications and interpretations, to which new moral perceptions
have contributed. Second, every believer in some set of moral certainties
has to share the world with other believers in some different set of moral
certainties. If they share the same society, at least, and even if they could
come to do so, they have some common interest in not accepting principles
which would allow someone else’s certainty to persecute their own. Third,
many religious believers in moral certainties also believe that human
beings have been created not just to obey or mirror those certainties, but
freely to live by them, and that institutions of free expression can be in
76
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

fact a more developed representation of the religious consciousness itself
than authoritarian institutions. We have thus not been surprised, though
we have been impressed, by the constructive concern for freedom of
expression which has been shown by many of the submissions we have
received from religious bodies, disturbed though most of them have been
by the present situation.
5.23
Because we believe that the value of the freedom of expression is
connected with the open future of human development, we do ﬁnd a
difﬁculty with certain proposals for obscenity law we have received,
which both admit the fact of changing standards, and also invoke present
standards to justify the actual suppression of certain publications. The
Nationwide Festival of Light and others, following a formulation of Lord
Longford’s Committee, have recommended the suppression of what
grossly affronts “contemporary standards of decency or humanity
accepted by the public at large”. But while some such provision might
ground, as we shall ourselves suggest, a restriction of some material, to
prevent its offending the public at large, the position of trying to justify
suppression—which, if successful, is permanent—on the basis of what are
acknowledged to be contemporary standards, seems to us to make, more
than is justiﬁed, present views the determinant of the future.
5.24
We come back to the total emptiness of almost all the material
we are concerned with. These arguments, it will be said, are all very well
for serious works of art or for writings of intellectual content, but it is
absurd to apply them to everyday, in particular pictorial, pornography.
We do not claim that, directly, they do apply. But here we must stress two
very fundamental points: ﬁrst, that what the argument grounds is a
general presumption in favour of free expression, and second, that censor-
ship is in its nature a blunt and treacherous instrument. The value of free
expression does not lie solely in its consequences, such that it turns out on
the whole to be more efﬁcient to have it rather than not. It is rather that
there is a right to free expression, a presumption in favour of it, and
weighty considerations in terms of harms have to be advanced by those
who seek to curtail it. Methods of control, moreover, bring their own
harms, and can readily involve other violations of rights. Once one has
left on one side the suppression of what produces the most immediate
and obvious and gross harms, it is quite unrealistic to suppose that insti-
tutions of censorship can be guaranteed not to take on a repressive and
distorting character, whether simply in the interests of some powerful or
inﬂuential group or in opposition to new perceptions and ideas. Most of
law, morality and the freedom of expression
77

what is in our ﬁeld of discussion contains no new perception and no idea
at all, old or new, and that cannot seriously be disputed. But even if there
were a case for suppressing that material, it must never be forgotten that
no-one has invented, or in our opinion could invent, an instrument which
would suppress only that, and could not be turned against something
which might reasonably be argued to be of a more creative kind.
The Obscene Publications Acts sought to avoid this danger by the “public
good defence”, to prevent conviction of material which was creatively
valuable. We have already given an account of its sad history; we shall
later argue, in Chapter 8, that such a device is misconceived in principle.
5.25
The “slippery slope” difﬁculty, the vagueness of any test, is inherent
in any proposals for legislation about obscene publications, and indeed for
any censorship at all, and this itself constitutes an argument against
attempts at suppression. We shall argue later that rather different consid-
erations apply to the less drastic course of restricting, without suppressing,
certain publications. In that connection we shall also argue that there are
reasons for treating the printed word differently from pictorial matter, and
considerations drawn from the present area of discussion also support that
conclusion, since (without entering on the troubled waters of the Supreme
Court’s deﬁnition of “speech” to which we have already referred) there is
no doubt that it is to the printed word that the argument about the
survival of new ideas and perceptions applies most directly.
Harms
5.26
The presumption in favour of freedom of expression is strong, but it
is a presumption, and it can be overruled by considerations of harms
which the speech or publication in question may cause. The ﬁrst question
that arises is, harms to whom? (In this chapter, as elsewhere, we will speak
generally of harms to persons, though sometimes it might be more natural
to speak of harms to their interests.) In particular, in the case of publica-
tions, there is the question whether supposed harm to consumers—ie.,
those who voluntarily choose to read the material—is, just in itself, to
count. Mill and many others who advance what we have called the “harm
condition” for coercing behaviour would say that it did not. They say this
because they accept the principle that, if one is dealing with adult persons,
it is best to assume that each person is the best judge of whether he or she
is being harmed. This additional principle makes an important difference.
The harm condition by itself would not necessarily produce very liberal
78
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

results. One might agree that laws should only suppress what does harm
but think that disgusting books should be suppressed by law because
their readers (though those readers would not themselves agree) are in
fact harmed by them. With this other principle added, however, such
paternalist laws would be ruled out.
5.27
Most people would admit some paternalistic principles—with
regard to harmful drugs, for instance. Some would like to apply similar
ideas to people’s reading habits, and regard “harmful” publications in
much the same light as dangerous drugs. It is worth noting that the very
strong resistance from liberal opinion that this kind of analogy meets is not
just due to the uncertainty that surrounds the “effects” in question, and
whether literature produces them. It is also that in this case, but not (for
the most part) in the case of drugs, there is a real question about “who is to
judge” what counts as harm; since it is a question of moral harm, there is
room for disagreement about what such harms are, and there is a danger
that the moral opinions of some group, presumably some rather conserva-
tive group, should be made authoritative for the moral health of readers.
In the proceedings against Lady Chatterley’s Lover in 1960, the prosecuting
counsel in his opening speech invited the jury to ask themselves “Is it a
book that you would even wish your wife or your servants to read?”, and
this ingenuous and unforgotten remark has served for twenty years to
remind people that questions of what one should read cannot be regarded
just as questions of health, on which there are experts as there are experts
on drug addiction, but are closely connected with issues of power and
authority in society.
5.28
An important point connected with the issue of paternalism is
whether there is some independent test of whether a given activity pro-
duces harm. The effects of drug taking are a bad physical and mental
condition, and this condition would be bad even if it were caused by
something other than drugs. But if the bad effects of reading dirty books
were alleged to lie only in the fact that they produced a deplorable state of
mind manifested just in wanting to read dirty books, that would not be
much of an argument; though if the state produced were that of compul-
sively reading dirty books, against one’s will (as one witness has claimed
to us happened to him), that would be more of an argument.
5.29
In fact a lot of the argument about harm supposedly caused by
publications lies in the area of claims that they cause harms not to
consumers, or merely to consumers, but to those affected by consumers.
law, morality and the freedom of expression
79

The harms cited in these arguments are usually the kind of thing that is
indisputably a harm. In evidence put to us it was claimed, for example,
that crimes, particularly sexual crimes, are caused by exposure to porno-
graphic or violent ﬁlms or publications. There were other arguments
about individual behaviour being modiﬁed or conditioned by what
was read or seen in ways that were less speciﬁcally antisocial but which
conﬂicted with perceived standards of morality or with the expectations
of society. Some emphasised the aspects of pornography which degrade
women in that much material is not only offensive, but encourages a
view of women as subservient and as properly the object of, or even
desirous of, sexual subjugation or assault. Others emphasised the
exploitation of those who participate in the production of pornography
and the damaging effects this was believed to have. At a rather more
general level, some people saw certain kinds of material, in presenting a
distorted view of human experience, as damaging to human relation-
ships by hindering the full development of the human personality or
corrupting the imagination. So we heard arguments about pornography
leading to sex crimes, and violence in the media engendering crimes of
violence, about pornography leading to marital breakdown by encour-
aging unusual and sometimes abhorrent sexual demands (usually by
husbands of their wives) and arousing false expectations of sexual fulﬁl-
ment, about the encouragement of promiscuity and sexual deviation,
about the promotion of self-gratiﬁcation and a contempt for discipline,
about the engendering of hate and aggression, about the risk to the
normal sexual development of the young, about people becoming desen-
sitized or callous through a diet of violence.
5.30
These are the kinds of harm that we shall principally consider in the
next chapter. Besides these, however, harms of a less deﬁnite and more
pervasive kind have been alleged, which relate to general effects on society
of pornography and violent publications and ﬁlms, and which can best
be summed up, perhaps, under the phrase, used by several witnesses,
“cultural pollution”. Such phrases certainly refer to something, and we
take seriously what they refer to. In the case of such descriptions, however,
there is often a real difﬁculty in identifying what the harmful effect of
the material is supposed to be, and whether indeed it is really an effect
of the materials circulating that is in question, rather than the circulation
itself which is regarded as intrinsically an objectionable thing; as we have
already mentioned, it may be an expression, rather than a cause, of an
undesirable state of society.
80
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

5.31
In the next chapter we shall try to evaluate some claims that have
been made about these various harms and their association with pornog-
raphy. In evaluating these claims, there are two general principles that we
think it important to bear in mind. One is the requirement, for legal pur-
poses, that the causation of the harm should lie “beyond reasonable doubt”.
5.32
Restrictions on freedom of publication in connections other than
obscenity are, of course, accepted by every legislature: with respect to
libel, for instance, or sedition. It is signiﬁcant, however, that in such cases
liberal states require that the harms in question should be of a clear and
immediate kind. So in the law of the United States in respect of seditious
matter, where Mr Justice Holmes in a Supreme Court decision of 1919 pro-
duced the famous formula
“. . . The question in every case is whether the words used are used in such
circumstances and are of such a nature as to create a clear and present
danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that Congress
has a right to prevent. It is a question of proximity and degree . . .”6
At least one United States Judge did attempt to apply the same test to the
alleged effects of obscene publications. Judge Bok, of Philadelphia, dis-
missing in 1948 a case against a number of books that included Faulkner’s
Sanctuary and Caldwell’s God’s little Acre, stressed the impossibility of
“even reasonable precision” in assessing a reader’s reactions to a book,
and sought to establish the principle that no book should be suppressed
unless it could be shown that there was a clear and present danger of the
commission of a crime as a result of its publication.7 Superior Courts
upheld his judgment of the case, and his reasoning in other respects, but
not this suggested principle.
5.33
The causal concept of obscenity, in terms of doing harm, has in legal
practice proved very resistant to being given the precise application, and
submitting to the canons of proof, required in general by the law; and, as
we have already said in an earlier chapter, the courts seem often in fact to
have been proceeding on a basis altogether different from that of the
publications supposedly causing harm.
5.34
The second principle that should be borne in mind is the require-
ment that if a certain class of publications, say pornographic publications,
6
Schenck v United States, 249 US 47.
7
Commonwealth v Gordon, 66 Pa.D. and C. 101 (Phila. 1949).
law, morality and the freedom of expression
81

is to be legally banned, then harms have to be ascribable to that class of
publications. No-one can reasonably say—though one or two of our
witnesses have incautiously said it—that no pornographic book has ever
harmed anyone. But that is not the point. It may well be that reading the
Bible, for instance, has harmed someone. The question is whether pornog-
raphy constitutes a class of publications to which, as such, there belongs a
tendency to cause harms. That is the question that we shall be concerned
with in the next chapter.
5.35
We must not forget at the same time that arguments about the
effects of pornography have also been advanced in the opposite direction,
suggesting that sexual and violent material has positive beneﬁts in the
opportunity it offers for the release of sexual or aggressive tensions, for
the removal of ignorance, fear, guilt and inhibition, for the relief and
comfort of lonely, handicapped or frustrated people and for members of
society as a whole to gain a more open acceptance of sex as a natural part
of life. It will be appropriate to touch on these suggestions as well in the
next chapter.
82
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 6
Harms?
B
I:
EFFECTS ON SEX CRIMES AND VIOLENCE
6.1
We start our review of the harms possibly caused by pornography
and violent material with the area where the harms alleged are of the most
deﬁnitely identiﬁable kind, and where it is suggested that the effects of the
material are kinds of behaviour which tend to be noticed particularly
because they conﬂict with the law.
6.2
The arguments here are that certain kinds of behaviour, particularly
in the form of criminal offences of violence and of a sexual nature, are
either directly provoked by exposure to particular stimuli—such as the
reading of a sex magazine producing a state of arousal which is mani-
fested in rape or sexual assault, or the viewing of a ﬁlm producing
imitative violence—or are at least more likely to occur in an atmosphere
created by pornography and violent material. The arguments suggest,
therefore, that the proliferation of pornography results in increasing sexual
offences and that violence in the media leads to an increase in offences of
violence.
6.3
Submissions made to us on this subject, where they considered it
necessary to support simple assertions by some kind of evidence, rested on
three different classes of information. One kind may be called (without
disrespect) “anecdotal”, and is drawn from particular instances in which
an association between crime and pornographic material has been
observed, and a causal connection, it is claimed, can plausibly be sup-
posed. We consider in this context also considerations put to us by psych-
iatrists on the basis of clinical experience. A second kind of evidence is
drawn from research, involving experiments or guided observations, into
human responses to particular kinds of material. Such research, obviously
enough, does not itself involve the subjects committing crimes (or at least
none that does has been drawn to our attention). What it rather does is to
enquire whether reactions in the experimental set-up are of a kind—for
83

instance, of an aggressive kind—which would lead one to expect crime or
other anti-social behaviour as a response to that material in ordinary life.
The third kind of evidence—the kind that has commanded a great deal of
attention and aroused a great deal of controversy in this subject—is that
drawn from statistical analysis of trends in known crime relative to the
varying availability of pornography.
6.4
The relations between the last two kinds of evidence we take to be the
following. A positive result in the second, experimental, kind of enquiry
might be expected to show up in the statistical enquiry, if that is reliable,
since if greater availability of pornography in real life is not connected
with more crime, then the experimental results cannot have the signiﬁ-
cance for real life that is ascribed to them. On the other hand, a positive
result from the statistical enquiry would be compatible with negative
results from the experimental enquiry, since it might be that crime and
pornography were linked in real life, but not by any mechanism which
was revealed under those experimental conditions.
6.5
We will consider these kinds of evidence in turn.
Anecdotal and clinical evidence
6.6
A number of cases was drawn to our attention, and our own enquir-
ies brought others to light, in which particular publications or ﬁlms or a
general interest in pornography, had been connected with the commission
of offences. We saw a number of press reports in which the defence had
alleged on behalf of a man charged with sexual offences that the commis-
sion of the crime could be ascribed to the inﬂuence of pornography. To lay
weight simply on what is said by the defence would be rather naive:
offenders or their counsel are not slow to proffer an excuse which miti-
gates the seriousness of the offence or reduces the individual’s responsi-
bility for having committed it, and it was noticeable that there were fewer
cases in which the trial judge offered his own comment on the inﬂuence of
pornography. Two notable cases mentioned to us were those of the Moors
Murderers and the Cambridge Rapist, in both of which it has been alleged
(not by the trial judge in either case) that the corrupting effect of pornog-
raphy played a role.
6.7
In the case of the Cambridge Rapist, the defence tried to emphasise
the inﬂuence of pornographic ﬁlms and magazines and the local Chief
Constable stated at the end of the trial that the case had “proved the real
84
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

danger of pornography”. We do not believe that a study of the case
permits such a simple conclusion. The offender was a man with a long
history of mental disturbance and criminal activity, with psychopathic
tendencies evident from an early age. He had shown an interest in porn-
ography but there was nothing to suggest that the particular methods
which he had chosen to use in committing his offences owed anything to
the pornography he had seen or that he would not have committed the
offences had it not been for the inﬂuence of pornography. Somewhat
similar considerations applied in the case of the Moors Murderers, though
in that case less emphasis was placed on the inﬂuence of the publications
in the possession of the offenders, both during the trial and in subsequent
comment. Both these cases seem to be more consistent with pre-existing
traits being reﬂected both in a choice of reading matter and in the acts
committed against others. It would be extremely unsafe, in our view, to
conclude, even tentatively, that exposure to pornography was a cause of
the offences committed in those particular cases.
6.8
The same point applied to the other cases which came to our attention
(and indeed, the indications from research, as Yaffé has pointed out, are
that sex offenders have had less recent exposure to sexual material than
other groups). Although there was on occasion some evidence of a link
between an offence committed and a previous exposure—in the form of
some common feature, for example—even this is no evidence that the link
is a causal one: as one of our witnesses put it to us, to give a person who is
predisposed to commit crime an idea of a particular way in which to do it is
really very different from instilling the disposition in the ﬁrst place. We
discussed these matters with a number of psychiatrists and psychologists,
including some with special experience of the treatment of offenders, but
we were struck by the fact that none of them was able to tell us of a case of
which they had experience in which there was evidence of a causal link
between pornography and a violent sexual crime. None of our psychiatric
or psychological witnesses in fact saw very great harm in straightforward
sexual pornography, and some, indeed, felt that cases more frequently
occurred in which the effects of pornography were beneﬁcial rather than
harmful. Dr P L G Gallwey of the Portman Clinic was one of these,
stressing the sense of security that was sometimes generated, particularly
through a lessening of the sense of exclusion and by assuaging the violent
feelings associated with exclusion. Professor H J Eysenck of the Institute of
Psychiatry, despite his serious reservations, which we will consider later,
about violent matter, agreed that, depending on how it was portrayed,
harms?
85

sexual material could reduce violent activity. Dr A Hyatt Williams of the
Tavistock Clinic told us that his experience was that the outlet provided by
pornography could prevent the commission of offences and that an offence
could result if a person dependent on that kind of satisfaction were
deprived of it. It was also widely agreed that if published pornography
was not available, some people would simply produce it for themselves:
Dr Gallwey, for example, showed us a highly pornographic and very
disturbing story written by a young offender he had treated and cited to
us another instance of a man using what materials were available to him in
prison—even The Farmers’ Weekly—to construct pornographic pictures.
6.9
This does not mean that no harm was seen in pornography. Dr Hyatt
Williams, for example, was less concerned about the possibility of initial
corruption than about the way in which certain patients might have their
recovery impeded if they were again exposed to pornography and he
made the point that dependence on pornography, even when it had a
cathartic effect on those otherwise disposed to commit offences, masked
the need for the person concerned to seek treatment which might provide
a cure. Dr Gallwey, too, made the point that for some people on the edge
of psychosis pornography served to weaken their grip on reality. Our
witnesses emphasised to us, however, that it was only a very small
minority of people who were likely to be affected in this way and there
was a general reluctance to suggest that the balance of advantage lay in
attempting to place more severe restrictions on pornography in order to
safeguard them.
6.10
Clinical opinion and our impression of the anecdotal evidence
cohere: the cases in which a link between pornography and crime has
even been suggested are remarkably few. Given the amount of explicit
sexual material in circulation and the allegations often made about its
effects, it is striking that one can study case after case of sex crimes and
murder without ﬁnding any hint at all that pornography was present in
the background. What is also striking is that if one tried to eliminate the
stimuli in published material which may have some relation to sexual
deviation or the commission of offences, the net must be cast impossibly
wide. As an illustration of this point, Dr Gallwey mentioned to us a patient
who had killed himself in the course of his masochistic practices which
had started when, as a disturbed child of only 8 or 9 years, he had been
excited by coming across a picture of a woman bound to a stake. The
protection of the young raises special considerations which we shall come
86
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

to later, but even so it is clearly impossible to suppress pictures of Joan of
Arc. A glance at the list of books found in the home of Ian Brady, the
Moors murderer, makes the same point. There are people who will gain a
perverted satisfaction from reading accounts of Nazi atrocities or of other
historical happenings, or even passages in the Bible, but publications
cannot be suppressed on that account. All kinds of literature can have a
destructive effect. The case of Goethe’s Sorrows of Young Werther, which
was said to have made suicide fashionable, is famous, but equally we
heard of a romantic novel linked to the drowning of a teenage girl and of
an Agatha Christie story linked to a real-life poisoning. There can be no
question of suppressing such works. Art galleries cannot be closed to those
who ﬁnd excitement in paintings of barbarous acts or semi-clad women;
nor can such people be kept away from beaches or be prevented from
reading daily newspapers. For those who are susceptible to them, the
stimuli are all around us; but the main point we wish to make from
our study of the anecdotal and clinical evidence is that there is very
little indication that pornography ﬁgures very signiﬁcantly among these
stimuli.
6.11
Our expert witnesses had more reservations about violent mater-
ial, though again we heard no direct evidence of cases in which it was
considered that crime had resulted from a particular stimulus. But both
Professor Sir Martin Roth and Professor Trevor Gibbens told us that it
was pornography with a violent content which concerned them most.
Some cases were brought to our attention by other witnesses in which
such effects were alleged to have occurred, and perhaps the chief object
of such allegations was the ﬁlm A Clockwork Orange which after its
release early in 1972 was cited in a few court cases as the cause of
real-life violence perpetrated by young men. The ﬁlm was undoubtedly
a powerful one and it seems clear that aspects of the ﬁlm were deliber-
ately copied by some youths who engaged in violence. Whether that
violence occurred only because they had seen the ﬁlm is of course more
difﬁcult to say and Mrs Mary Whitehouse, in the evidence submitted to
us by the National Viewers’ and Listeners’ Association, was perhaps
not on the strongest ground when she attacked the ﬁlm principally on
the basis of a case in which a 16 year old youth had brutally murdered a
tramp: the youth concerned, though certainly fascinated by the story,
had not in fact seen the ﬁlm. (Since the ﬁlm was classiﬁed as unsuitable
for persons under 18 years, if he had seen it, he would not have done so
harms?
87

legally.) We came across just three other cases in which A Clockwork
Orange had been mentioned. Another ﬁlm mentioned for its disturbing
and anti-social effects was The Exorcist, and we read about two cases in
which young men took their own Lives (in only one of these was the
link with the ﬁlm very strong), and three other cases in which sexual
offences or murder were associated with the ﬁlm. The case involving
murder, which was brought to our notice by the Nationwide Festival of
Light, illustrates what we said earlier in this chapter about such ﬁlms
being made an excuse. The young man concerned had said that he had
committed the offence while possessed by an evil spirit, after seeing the
ﬁlm The Exorcist; but it seems, from the press reports, that he admitted
on the last day of his trial that he had simply made up this story after
seeing a copy of the book in the police car. In the two other cases the
ﬁlm did not, even superﬁcially, appear to be the dominant inﬂuence in
the offences.
6.12
With respect to violence, the same point arises as before. The net
would have to be cast very wide to prevent actual events from being
inﬂuenced undesirably by what people see. It was, for example, a televised
version of The Brothers Karamazov which was said to have inﬂuenced a
young man to attempt to kill his parents with a meat cleaver in 1976, and it
was the American television series Roots which was alleged to have
prompted a Jamaican in London to rape a white woman, saying that he
was going to treat her as white men had treated black women. While we
have been preparing this report, the IRA have planted a bomb in a manner
modelled on an incident in a television crime series; a 12 year boy has been
reported as shooting himself in Detroit while playing Russian roulette
after seeing The Deer Hunter; and an 8 year old girl has jumped from a
second-ﬂoor landing in Barcelona after telling her playmates she was
Superman.
Research studies
6.13
A great deal of research work—more in the United States than in
this country—has been undertaken into the effects of exposure to porno-
graphic or explicit sexual material or material having a violent content.
Unfortunately, no very clear impression emerges from the results of this
work and, as we shall see, even those who have surveyed it cannot always
agree about the conclusions which can be drawn from it. We had available
to us two reviews of the relevant literature, by Mr Maurice Yaffé on the
88
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

effects of obscene material1 and by Mr Stephen Brody on Screen Violence
and Film Censorship.2 Besides the general evidence which was put to us
on these matters, we also had the advantage of discussing the lessons of
work in this ﬁeld, particularly in relation to violence, with two other
authors who had made a study of it and published the results, Professor
H J Eysenck3 and Dr Guy Cumberbatch.4
6.14
Some serious reservations inevitably attach to research in this ﬁeld.
There is the absolutely general point that correlation experiments in artiﬁ-
cial conditions are regarded by many competent critics as an unillumin-
ating and unreliable way of investigating complex behaviour, even in
many other species, let alone in human beings. But further, more speciﬁc,
criticisms apply in the case of the kinds of behaviour that are in question
here. Since criminal and anti-social behaviour cannot itself, for both prac-
tical and ethical reasons, be experimentally produced or controlled, the
observations must be made on some surrogate or related behaviour, often
expressed on a representational object, in some ﬁctional or “pretend”
context. This feature of the work can come close, in some cases, to simply
begging the question. The fundamental issue in this ﬁeld concerns the
relations that hold between the reactions aroused in a subject by a repre-
sented, artiﬁcial, or fantasy scene, and his behaviour in reality. Fantasy
and reality, and their relations, are the basic categories of the question. We
can only express surprise at the conﬁdence that some investigators have
shown in supposing that they can investigate this problem through experi-
mental set-ups in which reality is necessarily replaced by fantasy. Such
criticisms apply, of course, to the whole investigation, not to a particular
kind of result; they are equally relevant to those whose results, derived
from this kind of experiment, are supposed to deny correlations between
pictorial stimuli and real-life violence, and those whose results tend in the
opposite direction.
6.15
Besides observations of behaviour under experimental conditions,
which particularly apply to questions of violence, the evidence considered
in relation to sexual material is, as Mr Yaffé points out, basically of three
kinds: retrospective personal history studies of exposure to the material,
1
Appendix V to Pornography: The Longford Report, Coronet Books, 1972 as updated by
Mr Yaffé for our beneﬁt.
2
Home Ofﬁce Research Study No 40, Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, 1977.
3
Sex, Violence and the Media, by H J Eysenck and D K B Nias, Temple Smith, 1978.
4
Mass Media Violence and Society, by D Howitt and G Cumberbatch, Elek Science, 1975.
harms?
89

self-reports before and after experimental exposure, and physiological and
biochemical measures of change in response to experimental exposure.
The reliability of studies which depend on retrospective surveys or self-
supporting is notoriously suspect and this is particularly true where they
touch on highly personal and value-laden subjects such as sexual
behaviour.
6.16
Survey studies have included several which have asked varying
samples of people such as young male offenders, sexual offenders and
various other groups in the population about their exposure to pornog-
raphy and their sexual behaviour and other factors. Many of these were
undertaken for the United States Commission on Obscenity and Pornog-
raphy and their interpretation, quite apart from the difﬁculty of deriving
any lessons from them, has given rise to some controversy. We do not
propose to discuss these studies in detail: a summary, and a citation of the
original work, appears in Mr Yaffé’s survey. We noted that the American
Commission, in the light of all the studies undertaken for it, concluded
that “empirical research has found no evidence to date that exposure to
explicit sexual materials plays a signiﬁcant role in the causation of delin-
quent or criminal behaviour among youth or adults”; we noted also that
this conclusion was criticised in a number of quarters as having been
based on a partial examination of the evidence in which ambiguities and
certain contra-indications were ignored. Without ourselves entering into
the controversy about the Commission’s methods, we make the comment
that the effect of re-examining the original studies in the light of a hostile
critique of the Commission’s conclusions, such as that put forward princi-
pally by Professor Victor Cline, is simply to make one adopt rather more
caution in drawing inferences from the studies undertaken. It is still
possible to say, as Mr Yaffé points out in his updated review, that there
does not appear to be any strong evidence that exposure to sexually
explicit material triggers off anti-social sexual behaviour. We would add
only that this is consistent with what we learned from the clinical experi-
ence of those experienced medical witnesses we consulted.
6.17
Studies of the effects of violent material have concentrated on
laboratory experiments, a method which has ﬁgured less in research into
the anti-social effects of sexual material, though laboratory techniques
have of course been used in studying sexual arousal generally. Studies
using adults have concentrated on men but girls as well as boys have been
studied in experiments using children. A considerable amount of work has
90
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

been done in relation particularly to television violence, which was not of
direct relevance to our review, but it was the view of our witnesses that
many of the results of this work could be applied equally to ﬁlms. In the
case of sexual material, we encountered disagreement about the exact
weight of the evidence for different conclusions; with regard to violent
material, we met ﬂatly opposing views.
6.18
In his review of the literature, Brody concluded that “it can be stated
quite simply that social research has not been able unambiguously to offer
any ﬁrm assurance that the mass media in general, and ﬁlms and televi-
sion in particular, either exercise a socially harmful effect, or that they do
not”. He went on:
“The most reasonable interpretation of the considerable quantity of
research results so far available would suggest that some people—par-
ticularly young people—may be inclined both to actual aggressiveness
(however this is manifested, and not necessarily in criminal behaviour)
and to a preference for entertainment dealing with aggressive themes, for
reasons which probably originate with the development of personality
and character; but that watching violent action on the screen is unlikely
in itself to impel ordinary viewers to behave in ways they would other-
wise not have done. Research into the causes of crime has repeatedly
indicated the enormous variety of possible contributing factors, all of
which overlap in complex ways and are quite unpredictable for any one
individual; in all these studies, incidentally, the mass media have war-
ranted scarcely a mention. That potentially violent or anti-social persons
may ﬁnd their own sentiments and dispositions conﬁrmed and perhaps
reinforced by television and ﬁlms is not a consideration to be ignored,
but it is in the ampliﬁcation of existing tendencies that the main inﬂuence
is likely to lie, not in the moulding of social behaviour.”
Howitt and Cumberbatch had fewer doubts as a result of their compre-
hensive survey of research which, they suggested, had “shown effectively
that the mass media—as far as it is possible to tell using social scientiﬁc
methodologies—do not serve to amplify the level of violence in society”.
Eysenck and Nias, on the other hand, though following a less thorough
review of earlier studies, also showed few doubts but in the opposite
sense: “the evidence is fairly unanimous that aggressive acts new to the
subject’s repertoire of responses, as well as acts already well established,
can be evoked by the viewing of violent scenes portrayed on ﬁlm, TV or in
the theatre”.
harms?
91

6.19
Such contradictions between investigators present a problem. We
do not have the space to discuss in detail all the studies from which such
different conclusions can be derived but it may be helpful to examine just
one as an illustration of how conﬂicting views can arise, and of the
limitations which, as we have already suggested, are inherent in these
ways of investigating these questions. A common tool in studying imita-
tive violence is the Bobo doll, an inﬂatable toy with a weighted base which
resumes an upright position after being knocked over, and a number of
studies have observed the reactions of children towards such a doll after
they have seen an adult assaulting it. For example, in the earliest such
study by Bandura and others in 1961, a number of children between 3 and
5 years were split into three groups, one of which was left in the presence
of an adult model punching, kicking or striking with a mallet a Bobo doll,
accompanied by aggressive cries of “Sock him . . . pow” etc, another was
left in the presence of an adult who spent the time quietly assembling toys
and the third group left to play by themselves, though in later experiments
the children saw similar behaviour which had been ﬁlmed. When later
given a chance to play with various toys, including a Bobo doll and a
mallet, the group who had seen the adult assaulting the doll displayed
similar aggressive tendencies to a much greater extent than the other
groups. Eysenck and Nias simply record this result and the fact that
similar studies have invariably found that children do tend to imitate an
aggressive model when given the chance, and presumably notch it up
among the “fairly unanimous” evidence to which they refer.
6.20
Both Brody and Howitt and Cumberbatch, on the hand, discuss the
severe criticisms which have been made of such studies as the basis for
applying notions of imitated violence to the real world outside the labora-
tory. Bobo dolls, it is pointed out, are designed to invite knocking about
and to extrapolate to social behaviour the way in which a child plays with
them is quite unwarranted. This objection relates to the point we have
already made, that in studying this issue, the investigation of violence
towards a fantasy or surrogate object suth as a doll comes close to begging
the question. Various other arguments about the many differences
between the laboratory situation and real life have been put forward,
which in Brody’s view seriously undermine any attempts to apply
research results to the claim that ﬁlms promote aggressive or violent
behaviour by imitation. Howitt and Cumberbatch point out in addition
that Bandura’s studies involve exposing children to fairly novel kinds of
toys and that if the children have prior experience of Bobo dolls the
92
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

amount of imitative violence is reduced. They also draw attention to the
point that the children classiﬁed by their teachers as more aggressive
might have been expected to attack the doll more readily than the others,
if such behaviour was adequate as a predictor of real-life aggression: this
was not so, and that fact, in their view, points away from the conclusion
that the ﬁndings may be generalised to real life. Howitt and Cumberbatch,
therefore, discount such experiments in considering a link between media
violence and violence in society.
6.21
Eysenck and Nias do not so much dismiss these objections, as ignore
them. They leave the unsuspecting reader ignorant that such substantial
reservations have been widely voiced about the implications of these
experimental studies, and this, in our view, diminishes the value of their
work as a contribution to the scientiﬁc literature. Their book is indeed
aimed more at the popular market, drawing partly on press reports to
illustrate the alleged effects of media violence (including the now cele-
brated Clockwork Orange murder, but again omitting the information that
the young murderer had not actually seen the ﬁlm); but we thought it a
pity that the lay reader should be presented so incautiously with only one
side of the story. It seemed to us right to be sceptical about attempts to
apply the lessons of these laboratory experiments to real life and we
therefore preferred the more non-committal view taken, in particular, by
Brody. We consider that the only objective verdict must be one of “not
proven”.
Analysis of crime statistics
6.22
Part of the basis for the conclusion reached by the United States
Commission, which we have already mentioned, was a preliminary
assessment of the trend in reported crime in Denmark following the
liberalisation of the Danish laws on pornography in the late nineteen-
sixties. The controversy surrounding the Commission prompted some
people to question the thesis that the legalisation of pornography reduced
the incidence of sex crimes in Denmark; and in time a contrary thesis
emerged, that there is in fact statistical evidence indicating that the free
availability of pornography can be linked to an increase in sexual offences.
This is an argument which rests heavily on work undertaken by Dr John
Court, Reader in Psychology at the Flinders University of South Australia,
and Dr Court was good enough to submit to us several papers on the
subject. The Nationwide Festival of Light and the National Viewers’ and
harms?
93

Listeners’ Association urged us to pay special attention to Dr Court’s
work; and others with a more specialised interest in the ﬁeld of human
behaviour, such as Professor Sir Martin Roth and Professor H J Eysenck,
made reference to Dr Court’s work in the course of giving evidence to us.
6.23
It was clearly right that we should examine this evidence in some
detail and we also think it right that we should discuss it in some detail
here.5 It has not so far been subjected to close scrutiny and we think it
important that the public should have the opportunity to assess what it
shows. The issue of whether people are more likely to be sexually
assaulted as a result of the circulation of certain kinds of publication or
the showing of certain kinds of ﬁlm is obviously a very important one. But
we would not want to give the impression, by dealing with the issue at
considerable length, that we think that it is the only or the decisive issue.
We shall come in due course to other kinds of consideration, including
other concepts of harm which have been put to us, and these are also
important. A special feature of the argument about pornography and sex
crimes is that the effects that have been suggested here are claimed to be
statistically measurable.
6.24
But are they measurable? Here there are several sets of problems.
The ﬁrst set concerns the number of offences. Certainly we have detailed
information about the number of sexual offences reported to the police over
a long period. However, this is not the same as knowing how many
offences occurred, since there is no means of telling how many victims
decided not to go to the police to report what happened. It is often
suggested that rape and sexual offences are peculiarly prone to non-
reporting because victims often prefer to avoid the prolongation and
reinforcement of the distress they have suffered which may result from
questioning by the police and the giving of evidence and cross-examination
at a trial. We cannot be sure, therefore, how many offences have been
committed or what proportion never come to light. The particular difﬁ-
culty in examining trends in offences is that there is no way of knowing
whether the unreported proportion of offences is remaining constant—in
which case the trend can accurately be assessed even though the incidence
of offences is not fully known—or whether ﬂuctuations are occurring in the
proportion that are not reported: victims may at different times be more or
5
We received assistance in analysing the statistics and the arguments based on them from
the Home Ofﬁce Research Unit, in particular in a paper prepared by Mr Stephen Brody.
94
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

less ready to report offences, because of changing social attitudes, or
because of changes in the law or legal procedure or police practice.
6.25
It follows that even apparently detailed information about the
number of offences reported to the police gives an imperfect picture of
the number of such offences; it may not even reveal whether, or by how
much, the number is increasing or decreasing from year to year. The
problem gets worse if one tries to make international comparisons. Legal
systems vary considerably between countries and differences in what
constitutes a criminal offence—and what name is given to it—often mean
that comparisons which seem straightforward are not in fact comparing
like with like. Moreover, the form and reliability of criminal statistics
varies widely from country to country. Finally, it is all too easy to look
at statistics in isolation from the procedures and social climate in the
country concerned which may affect, for example, the readiness of victims
to report offences.
6.26
The second set of difﬁculties concerns the other side of the correl-
ation: the availability of pornography. The imperfections of the informa-
tion about the incidence of sexual offences are insigniﬁcant compared with
the lack of information about the availability of pornography. There are
two kinds of problems here. One relates simply to the quantity of pornog-
raphy available, about which there is very little reliable information. The
second raises the question of what kind of material we should consider for
these purposes as pornography, and whether the differences between
different kinds or degrees of pornography are likely to produce different
effects, and so should be taken into account in trying to make correlations
with the incidence of sexual offences.
6.27
Much of the evidence we received assumed that pornography had
worse effects, the more extreme it was. Thus, mild pornography consisting
of little more than “pin-up” pictures is often regarded as harmless, while
the strongest and most explicit material is commonly regarded as the most
corrupting. Yet in considering a hypothesis that sexual offences are linked
to the widespread availability of pornography, it is not obvious, on reﬂec-
tion that hard-core pornography should lead to the commission of
offences in a way that soft pornography does not. Indeed, many people
might think that if a potential sex offender were going to be triggered off
by something he saw, that effect would be produced at least as well if not
better by the titillating and erotically arousing than by the clinical close-
up. So how should one set about quantifying pornography? How should
harms?
95

an index of availability reﬂect changes in the type of material over a period
of time? How should one compare one country where soft pornography is
widely available, but hard-core material is banned, with another where
hard-core pornography is available for anyone who wants it but where
pornography generally appears to be less pervasive?
6.28
These difﬁculties seem to us very real, and it is a severe shortcoming
of much of the work which has been put to us that the sometimes detailed
study of criminal statistics is accompanied by only the most generalised
and unsupported statements about the availability of pornography. If no
measures exist for what is supposed to be the causal factor, it is impossible
to make any progress in attempting to relate cause to effect.
6.29
The relation of cause to effect brings in the third, central, and best-
known, problem. Even if it is possible to provide an accurate measure of
two variables, the existence of a correlation between them is certainly no
proof that one is inﬂuenced by the other. The causes of crime are undoubt-
edly complex and elude isolation. Many factors are at work and much
stronger indications than a mere correlation between variables are neces-
sary before the existence of a causal link can even be suggested, let alone
proved. The difﬁculties of proving or even plausibly arguing for, causal
relationships between general or dlffuse social phenomena on a purely
statistical basis are sufﬁciently well-recognised for us not to need to dwell
on them further.
England and Wales
6.30
Having drawn attention to the general considerations which limit
both the available information and the inferences which can be derived
from it, we should nevertheless look at some of the information which
exists and examine what our witnesses said about it. It is natural that we
should start at home.
6.31
First, in relation to the availability of pornography in England and
Wales, it needs to be said that no information exists to provide any kind of
index. In the papers submitted to us, Dr Court did not attempt to provide
such information. He does however treat Britain as an example of a
“liberal” country in which the detrimental effects of pornography are to
be seen, and he identiﬁes two times at which, he suggests, pornography
became increasingly available—ﬁrst with a change in the law introduced
by the Obscene Publications Act of 1964, and subsequently following the
96
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

impetus of the American Commission Report on Pornography in 1970.
Dr Court offers nothing to substantiate his statement and we ﬁnd his
explanation of the signiﬁcance of these two dates less than convincing.
As we have explained earlier, the Obscene Publications Act 1964 was a
minor measure designed to strengthen the existing law by plugging two
loopholes which had been found in the Act of ﬁve years previously. Dr
Court cites as the only authority for his suggestion that pornography
became more available after the enactment of the 1964 Act as an article
by Mr Ronald Butt in The Times on 5 February 1976 which attacked what
Mr Butt then found to be the ineffectiveness of the law in controlling
pornography. Mr Butt argued that the intention of the 1959 and 1964 Acts
had been systematically destroyed over the years by the exploitation of
their letter, but nothing in his article supports the idea that the 1964 Act
opened the way to the greater availability of pornography. Nor do we
know of any authority for the suggestion that pornography became more
freely available here after 1970 as a result of the inﬂuence of the Report of
the US Commission. It seems to us that the choice of the years 1964 and
1970 as crucial in the increasing availability of pornography is purely
arbitrary.
6.32
Our own enquiries have not placed us in a very much better pos-
ition to assess the availability of pornography over a period of time. It is
the experience of all of us that for very many years there has been a steady
trend towards greater frankness in sexual matters and greater tolerance of
the portrayal of nudity and sexual activity. This has been reﬂected in a
wide variety of publications and ﬁlms, including those which many
people would regard as pornographic, but it does not help us to construct
any kind of index with which to compare changes in the numbers of
sexual offences. The Head of the Obscene Publications Squad of the
Metropolitan Police told us that police activity in the last six years or so
had resulted in a considerable reduction in the amount of hard-core
pornography from overseas in circulation, at least in London, though the
police were unable to quantify the amounts concerned. The same period,
however, has seen a considerable increase in the publication of British
magazines with an explicit sexual content which, particularly in the years
1975 to 1977, moved very quickly to adopt a character much less
restrained than had previously been acceptable. These magazines were
distributed throughout the country and clearly reached a much wider
audience than the undercover trade in overseas pornography ever had;
it was suggested to us by some witnesses that if sexual offences were
harms?
97

indeed linked to pornography, a noticeable effect should have occurred
over the last ﬁve years. However, as we have described in Chapter 4,
there are indications that the circulation of these magazines reached a
peak in 1976 and has subsequently suffered a decline, aided by increasing
police action against publishers from early in 1977 and, in London,
against retailers from early in 1978. The managing director of the
largest publisher in this ﬁeld stated in the trade press in June 1978, and
conﬁrmed in correspondence with us, that the effect of this action had
been to reduce the sales of his magazines by 40 per cent in the ﬁrst quarter
of 1978.
6.33
With that patently inadequate basis for assessing the availability of
pornography, let us nevertheless turn to the information available about
the incidence of sexual offences. Figure 1 shows the numbers of indictable
sexual offences reported to the police in every year since 1946. This gives a
longer perspective than Dr Court has offered and enables the point to be
made that sexual offences (or reports of such offences) were signiﬁcantly
increasing long before pornography is alleged to have become more
widely available and well before the “ineffective” Acts of 1959 and 1964
had a chance to exercise their inﬂuence. Indeed, it would appear that the
number of reported offences levelled off between 1959 and 1966; though if
the ﬁgures for 1964 to 1970 are taken in isolation, an increase becomes
noticeable, even if it is less marked than that in the period 1946 to 1959. But
what is perhaps even more signiﬁcant is the trend since 1973: until the
increase last year, there had been a steady fall in the number of sexual
offences known to the police. In the light of the suggestion we reported in
the preceding paragraph, this should be interesting to those who are
impressed by such correlations: a period of apparently rapid increase in
the availability of pornography seems to have been accompanied by a
reduction in the number of sexual offences reported, which was reversed
in the year in which increased police activity reportedly reduced the
availability of sex magazines.
6.34
We have also used Figure 1 to make another point of some sub-
stance, which is that it is futile to seek to examine one class of offence in
isolation from the trend in crime generally. In our society, as in others
throughout the world, rising crime has been a matter of much concern for
many years and it is pointless to seek a special explanation for a rising
trend in sexual offences if that trend merely reﬂects an increase in the
general level of offences. But is that the case? In fact it is not, because
sexual offences seem to have been signiﬁcantly out of step with other
98
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

offences, in that they have not shown anywhere near the same increase in
numbers over the years. This is shown dramatically in Figure 1 by com-
parison with offences against the person, which have continued to rise
steeply when sexual offences have stabilised and actually fallen. The
papers submitted to us by Dr Court do not face up to this point and we
think it a weakness of his work that he has concentrated on sexual offences
to the extent of divorcing them from their context of crime generally.
Number of offences (000)
5
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
Sexual offences
Offences against the person
1975
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
Figure 1
Indictable offences recorded by the police
(England and Wales) 1946–1978
harms?
99

However, we note that in an article published in The Times on 7 August
1976, Dr Court put forward the proposition that the increase in serious
sexual offences is greater than the general rise in crime in countries such as
the USA and Australia, but that in Britain this has been “masked in recent
years by the upsurge of violent offences associated with the Irish prob-
lem”. Given the fact that the trend in violent crime, as Figure 1 shows, goes
back at least a quarter of a century, and given the scale of that increase, we
doubt whether Dr Court would wish to stand by that statement.
6.35
It can fairly be said that offences against the person have not been
representative of crime generally because they have increased proportion-
ately more than other offences. However, indictable offences as a whole
have, in comparison with just after the war, increased in number over ﬁve
times, whereas sexual offences have rather more than doubled in number.
In 1946 sexual offences accounted for 2 per cent of all indictable offences
recorded by the police. This proportion rose to almost 4 per cent in
1955 but has fallen steadily since, until in 1977 and 1978 sexual offences
accounted for less than 1 per cent of all indictable offences recorded by the
police. Whether compared with thirty years ago or twenty years ago or ten
years ago, sexual offences are now relatively less common among crimes
known to the police.
6.36
It can be argued, of course, that to take sexual offences as a whole
produces a misleading result, since the ﬁgures reﬂect changes in the law or
in sexual morality with regard to offences such as those involving homo-
sexual activity or sexual intercourse with under-age girls. Dr Court pays
special attention to rape as an offence which may be potentially
pornography-induced, and it is reasonable to regard indecent assault,
among the other sexual offences, as appropriate to the same category.
Figure 2 shows the numbers of these offences reported in each year since
1946. Offences of rape have increased faster than sexual offences as a
whole, there having been ﬁve times as many reported cases in 1978
(1,243) as in 1946 (251), but this is the same rate of increase as for all
indictable offences and a much smaller increase than for offences against
the person, which increased over twenty-fold. Offences of indecent assault
on a female, although more common, increased less dramatically than
rape, very much in line with the increase already referred to for sexual
offences as a whole. A marked fall since 1973 has been reversed in the last
two years. As with Figure 1, Figure 2 also shows how the trend for another
offence of the same order of frequency, robbery, is in contrast to that for
the sexual offences examined.
100
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

6.37
Dr Court did not devote much attention to the situation in England
and Wales. Yet he conﬁdently observed in a published paper that “highly
signiﬁcant increases are apparent for rape and attempted rape for the
period in question”. The period in question, in Dr Court’s thesis, is pre-
sumably that between 1964 and 1974, then the latest year for which he
quoted ﬁgures, when the number of reported offences of rape and
attempted rape rose by 103 per cent. This period of ten years was clearly
a bad one for offences of rape, but the assertion ignores the fact that
offences of violence against the person rose over the same period by
1950
1
2
3
4
5
6
Number offences (000)
7
8
9
10
11
12
Indecent assault on a female
Robbery
Rape and attempted rape
13
14
15
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
Figure 2
Offences of rape, sexual assault and robbery recorded by
the police (England and Wales) 1946–1978
harms?
101

172 per cent, and it is not helped by the stabilisation of the number of
rapes, despite the unrelenting rise in other violent crime, in the three years
after 1974. The “signiﬁcance”, moreover, in Dr Court’s view, is presum-
ably linked to his own totally unsubstantiated surmise that pornography
began to be widely available after 1964.
6.38
In his papers, Dr Court has paid rather more attention to the ﬁgures
for the Metropolitan Police District, on the ground that a greater concen-
tration of pornographic publications is associated with some parts of
London than with the provinces. It is certainly not true that pornography
has been conﬁned to London but neither we nor Dr Court can offer any
evidence of the relative circulation of pornography in London and in
provincial centres. With that deﬁciency acknowledged, let us examine
the statistics of offences known to the police in London. Dr Court has
concentrated on the ﬁgures for rape, and Figure 3 accordingly does the
same but also shows (on a different scale) the numbers of other sexual
assaults in the years since 1947. The ﬁgures for offences of rape recorded
by the police since 1947 indicate a slightly different picture from that for
the country as a whole. Rapes have increased twice as fast in London as in
the rest of the country and have continued to increase when in the years
1975 to 1977 they came nearer to remaining constant elsewhere. This is
not because crime in London has increased faster than elsewhere—the
contrary is the case—and the effect is that rape has increased much faster
than indictable offences as a whole, though still much more slowly than
offences of violence. The same is not true, however, in respect of other
sexual assaults, which have increased in London only by about the same
extent as in the country as a whole, and they showed a signiﬁcant decline
between 1970 and 1977. Moreover, what Figure 3 also shows in a longer
perspective than Dr Court gives is that the rising trend in rape and sexual
assaults started well before what Dr Court alleges was the ﬁrst date
signiﬁcant for the availability of pornography.
6.39
While we were hearing oral evidence it was reported that sexual
offences known to the police in London had risen substantially in the ﬁrst
six months of 1978 compared with the same period of 1977 (rapes from
75 to 122 and sexual assaults from 550 to 741). These reports prompted
some of our witnesses to draw the conclusion that the rise was linked to
the onset of a more active enforcement policy in the Metropolitan area, in
which, from the beginning of February 1978, scores of raids on retailers by
divisional police ofﬁcers had signiﬁcantly reduced the amount of pornog-
raphy available in London (we have already reported one publisher’s
102
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

statement of the effect on his sales). A reduction in sexual assaults during a
period when pornography is widely available, followed by an increase
when curbs are placed on the trade, hardly bears out the hypothesis that
pornography stimulates sex crimes; but we do not think that the ﬁgures
for one period of six months or for a year (now that the statistics for
1978 as a whole conﬁrm the increase apparent in the half-year ﬁgures)
can be used as the basis for any conclusions. Arguments of a similar kind
were put to us in relation to the rate of sex crime in Manchester, where
there has also been a policy of rigorous enforcement of the law on obscene
1950
50
100
150
200
250
Number
300
600
800
1,000
1,200
Sexual assault on a female
Rape and attempted rape
1,400
1,600
1,800
2000
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
Figure 3
Offences of rape and sexual assault recorded by the police
(Metropolitan Police District) 1947–1978
harms?
103

publications, but we came to the conclusion from a more detailed examin-
ation of the statistics that the arguments were insufﬁciently supported.
6.40
We must at this point refer again to the problem of knowing how
large the “dark area” of sexual crime is. The ﬁgures for rapes known to the
police certainly underestimate the incidence of such offences. However,
there may be grounds for thinking that there has recently been an increase
in the level of reporting of cases of rape, and this could be reﬂected in the
latest ﬁgures. There is a greater consciousness of the problem of rape,
partly associated with the development of organisations such as Rape
Crisis Centres, and greater protection is now afforded to complainants in
rape cases under the Sexual Offences (Amendment) Act 1976 (which
provides for their anonymity and imposes certain restrictions on their
cross-examination); because of these factors, rape victims may be more
willing to go to the police, and this may have increased the ofﬁcial
statistics.
6.41
We now attempt to summarise what has emerged from this study of
the arguments linking pornography and sexual offences in England and
Wales. First, there is no ﬁrm information about the availability of pornog-
raphy over the years, and there is no foundation to suggestions that have
been made about particular times at which pornography became increas-
ingly available. Second, the rising trend in sexual offences generally,
including rape and sexual assaults, started long before it is alleged porn-
ography began to be widely available. Third, the increase in sexual
offences generally, and in rape and sexual assaults, has been signiﬁcantly
slower (though in the case of rape alone the difference is less signiﬁcant) in
the last twenty years than that in crime generally. Fourth, the contrast
between the upward trend in crime generally and the greater stability in
the numbers of rapes and sexual assaults has been most marked in the
years from 1973 to 1977 (except in the case of rapes alone reported to
the police in London where the increase is consistent with that in other
forms of crime), when this period appears to have been the one when
pornography was most available.
6.42
So, what conclusions can be drawn? We have already referred
brieﬂy to the extreme difﬁculty of identifying causal factors in the inci-
dence of crime but, in the light of the ﬁndings we have set out above, we
see no need to develop that argument. The case put to us by Dr Court, and
by other witnesses who have looked to Dr Court’s work for support,
cannot on the basis of the situation in England and Wales, we believe,
104
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

even survive as a plausible hypothesis. Each of the ﬁndings in the preced-
ing paragraph stands opposed to it. Consider Figure 4, which shows the
relative importance of the numbers of rapes and sexual assaults in the
totality of crime. We think it unlikely that any fair-minded person would,
on the basis of the information depicted in that graph, feel the need to
construct a special hypothesis to explain the increase in sex crimes, still
less that the hypothesis constructed would be that an alleged increase in
the availability of pornography ﬁrst after 1964 and secondly since 1970
(increases for which there is no independent evidence) provided a crucial
inﬂuence in the growth in such offences.
6.43
We are not denying the possibility that pornography could be
linked to the commission of sexual offences. Nor are we suggesting, on
the other hand, as the data in Figure 4 encourage some to suggest, that the
availability of pornography is associated actually with a decline (or at any
rate a reduction in the rate of rise) in sexual offences. It might be, for
example, that if only information were available about the amount of
pornography in circulation some kind of correlation might be possible; it
might be that whatever the factors are which have given rise to the
1950
0.5%
1%
1.5%
2%
1955
London
England and Wales
1960
1965
1970
1975
Figure 4
Rape and sexual assault as a proportion of indictable offences
recorded by the police
harms?
105

substantial increases in most other forms of crime, they do not operate in
respect of sexual offences and therefore some other separate explanation of
the more modest growth in sexual crime has to be sought; it might be that
there has been a substantial reduction in the willingness of victims of rape
and sexual assault to complain to the police, so that the true number of
offences, and the trend, is quite different from what appears in the crim-
inal statistics. These are, we say, possible: but we do not think they are
probable. It is not possible, in our view, to reach well-based conclusions
about what in this country has been the inﬂuence of pornography on
sexual crime. But we unhesitatingly reject the suggestion that the available
statistical information for England and Wales lends any support at all to
the argument that pornography acts as a stimulus to the commission of
sexual violence.
Denmark
6.44
The main international interest in a possible link between pornog-
raphy and sex crimes has centred on Denmark and on what was the result
in that country of the abolition of the laws restricting pornography.
A feature of the Danish situation which is thought to make it a helpful
subject for study is that the change was a quick one, with the prohibition
on the obscene written word being abolished in 1967 and that on obscene
pictorial matter being abolished in 1969. Although pornography, particu-
larly of the softer variety, had been increasingly available before the law
was changed, the fairly rapid move from the restricted availability of
pornography to its being widely available, is considered to facilitate a
“before” and “after” study in a way that is impossible with the more
gradual increase in the availability of pornography in countries such as
Britain; and the fact that it has continued to be available would lead one to
expect that any adverse effects there might be would manifest themselves.
Even so, the fact that pornography is freely available does not tell one how
much is in circulation or is being consumed, data which might be the more
appropriate measure with which to compare the incidence of sexual
offences; information suggests that sales of pornography in Denmark
slumped drastically after an initial boom which accompanied the removal
of legal restrictions. Nevertheless, it is reasonable to assume that one is in a
better position in the case of Denmark to provide an index of the avail-
ability of pornography than one is in the case of England and Wales.
6.45
There has grown up something of a folk myth about the effect of the
Danish liberalisation on the incidence of sexual offences. This may have
106
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

resulted from the general way in which studies of the Danish situation
were reported, before the studies themselves became available, in the
Report of the United States Commission on Obscenity and Pornography
in 1970. It is often said, and it was said to us, that the freeing of pornog-
raphy in Denmark resulted in a decline in sexual offences, but this kind
of unguarded statement is very vulnerable to attack. Authoritative
claims about the Danish experience are a good deal more limited. The
most detailed work has been undertaken by Dr Berl Kutchinsky of the
Institute of Criminal Science at the University of Copenhagen, a prelimin-
ary study by him having been commissioned by the United States Com-
mission in 1969. That study permitted only ﬁrst impressions to be given of
the results of the changes made in 1967 and 1969, though we think it right
to make the point that even Dr Court, who has sought to detract from
Dr Kutchinsky’s work, made it clear to us that he regards those reports as
careful, detailed and appropriately cautious about the conclusions which
might be drawn. Dr Kutchinsky has continued his work since 1970, and
we had the opportunity of discussing it with him, but the more detailed
assessment he has been preparing of the effect of Denmark’s legal changes
on the incidence of sexual offences has not yet been published. This means
that most of the debate has so far been based either on a thorough study of
statistics up to 1970 or on a more superﬁcial examination of statistics since
that date.
6.46
It is useful ﬁrst to identify some of the problems involved in making
comparisons. First, various changes were made to the Danish law on
sexual offences at about the same time that pornography was legalised;
this has led Mrs Mary Whitehouse to make the point that of course sex
crimes will diminish very signiﬁcantly if eleven categories of sex crime are
removed from the statute book. Dr Court makes a similar point in a more
discreet way by suggesting that “some of Kutchinsky’s data apparently
were inﬂuenced by legislative changes”, while admitting that “it is true
to say that the reported decline does not arise from legislative change”.
Dr Kutchinsky assured us that he had been most careful in excluding from
his ﬁgures any offence in respect of which any liberalisation had occurred,
in order to avoid the obvious pitfall identiﬁed by Mrs Whitehouse. There
are of course other disadvantages in leaving out of account offences in
respect of which there have been legal changes, since it can be suggested
(as by Dr Court) that this itself may lead to serious effects being masked;
but there is really no alternative, from the methodological point of view, to
omitting ﬁgures for offences where there can be no proper comparability.
harms?
107

6.47
Second, it can be suggested that there has been an alteration in
the rate of reporting of certain offences because of the different atmos-
phere itself partly caused by changes in the law. Dr Kutchinsky has
recognised this possibility and Dr Court has commented that he has made
a commendable attempt to measure changes in the readiness to report
offences. Part of Dr Kutchinsky’s study has been of public attitudes
towards the criminality of certain acts, which, for example, demonstrated
a generation shift in attitude towards physical indecency with women,
but no similar change in attitude towards the molestation of children.
A study was also made of the relative seriousness of reported offences,
the detailed results of which indicated that for such offences as physical
indecency with women the less serious offences were now much less likely
to be considered worth reporting, while there had been no similar change
in the seriousness of the reported offences of molesting children.
Dr. Kutchinsky’s conclusion from this is that a drop in the number of
reported assaults on women is at least partly explained by the fact that
fewer women bother to report them, but that, with regard to sexual offences
against children, the fall in the number reported to the police does in fact
represent a falling-off in the number of such offences actually committed.
6.48
It seemed to us, however, that there was still a need for caution in
interpreting these ﬁndings. Another factor, for example, to affect the rate
of reporting of offences against children might be a growing belief that a
child could be further harmed by the court procedures involved. This
factor might affect the reporting of offences of all degrees of gravity, and
if so, would not be reﬂected in any changes in the seriousness of reported
offences. Dr Kutchinsky’s extensive studies do go some way to meet this
point: they include a survey of attitudes towards readiness to report,
which appears to show that this factor was of some effect, but that the
decrease in readiness to report offences against children was less, rela-
tively, than it was with other offences studied.
6.49
According to Dr Kutchinsky, the incidence of reported sex offences
before the liberalisation of pornography had remained steady for twenty
years, at about 85 cases per annum per 100,000 of the population. In
1967 this dropped to 67 and continued to fall to a level of about 40. This
was very much an urban phenomenon, offences in the capital having
decreased by 75–80 per cent compared with very little change in the already
lower level in rural areas. Ordinary heterosexual crimes unaffected by
changes in the law dropped consistently, most noticeably after 1966, from
just over 100 per 100,000 to fewer than 30 in 1973, and then levelled off.
108
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

6.50
This overall trend, however, conceals a variety of changes in relation
to particular types of offence, and it is more instructive to examine what
happened to different types. Dr Court has, as in respect of other countries,
concentrated on rape. Figure 5 shows offences of rape and attempted rape
reported to the police in Copenhagen, based both on ﬁgures for the years
since 1965 given to us by the Police Commissioner for Copenhagen, and
on ﬁgures published by Dr Kutchinsky in 1973. Even these are not the only
ﬁgures which have been quoted, and Dr Court has commented that the
incidence of rape in Copenhagen over the past 15 years is more difﬁcult to
establish than might be supposed. The variation evident in Figure 5 arises
from reservations which Dr Kutchinsky has had about the recording
practice of the police. His workers have examined police records to
reassess against agreed criteria the nature of every reported case, includ-
ing those where complaints had been withdrawn or where the police had
decided that no offence had been committed. As a result, Dr Kutchinsky
has a statistical record of sexual offences which differs from that issued by
the police, but which he regards as more accurate and reliable. This
explains the discrepancy in the ﬁgures up to 1970 which Dr Kutchinsky
has already published, and which he will be bringing up to date when he
publishes his forthcoming book.
1960
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Rape (Kutchinsky)
Rape and attempted rape (Police)
Rape alone (Police)
1965
1970
1975
Figure 5
Rape and attempted rape reported to the police in Copenhagen
harms?
109

6.51
Whichever set of ﬁgures is regarded as the more reliable, it is
impossible to discern a signiﬁcant trend in rape which could be linked in
any way with the free availability of pornography since the late nineteen-
sixties. Dr Kutchinsky emphasises that he has never suggested that such a
link exists, and said to us that he believed that the availability of pornog-
raphy had not affected the incidence of rape, one way or the other.
Dr Court sees the ﬁgures as evidence that generalised statements about
the “sudden fall-off in sex crimes” are based on an illusion; but he has
gone further, and, lacking the ﬁgures for recent years which we have
included in Figure 5, has stated that by 1974 at least “the trend towards
an increase in reports of rape and attempted rape was clear”—a statement
which he has not supported with ﬁgures. Figures for the years since
1972 show that there is in fact no such trend, and although Figure 5 stands
as a reproof to those who have drawn a conclusion that serious sex crimes
have declined since pornography became widely available in Denmark, it
certainly provides no support at all for the thesis put to us by Dr Court.
6.52
Dr Kutchinsky has made a particular study of four types of offences
which were among those showing the largest decline in numbers since
1965. These are: peeping, exhibitionism, indecent assaults on women and
indecent assaults on young girls. The preliminary conclusions which
Dr Kutchinsky reported to the United States Commission—which he
emphasised to be only tentative—were that changes in the readiness of
women to report sexual assaults were apparently large enough to account
for the decrease in reported offences of that type during the nineteen-
sixties; that the reduction in reported cases of indecent exposure could also
be explained by a decrease in readiness to report, but that this reduction
seemed to parallel more closely the availability of pornography, some-
thing which might possibly be explained by the effect of pornography
having been that fewer women were so shocked by real-life exposure as to
think it worth reporting; and that the reduction in reported cases of
peeping and of indecent assaults on children could not be explained by
lower reporting rates, but reﬂected an actual drop in the number of such
offences committed, and that this could be tentatively explained by the
effect of pornography being available.
6.53
Since peeping does not even constitute an offence in England
and Wales (those indulging in the practice are sometimes bound over to
be of good behaviour), the most signiﬁcant of these tentative ﬁndings for
us is that concerning offences against children. We discussed it with
Dr Kutchinsky who conﬁrmed that his later work has supported his view
110
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

that there has been a real and signiﬁcant reduction in indecent assaults on
female children, and that this very closely correlated with the availability
of pornography. The dramatic reduction of two-thirds in the number of
sex offences against children between 1967 and 1969 was difﬁcult to
explain other than in relation to the availability of pornography, and it
was also notable that 1973 was the last year in which a signiﬁcant increase
occurred in the availability of child pornography, and was also the year
after which the drop in offences levelled off.
6.54
In looking for an explanation of this perceived relationship,
Dr Kutchinsky suggests that the literature concerning this type of offender
indicates that those who interfere with children typically do so not because
they are irresistibly attracted to children, but as a substitute for a preferred
relationship with a woman which they ﬁnd difﬁcult to achieve; but if there
is another substitute available in the form of pornography, then that serves
the purpose just as well. The fact that the reduction was most signiﬁcant in
offences involving younger children and less so in relation to more
“normal” offences against older girls supported the hypothesis.
6.55
We ﬁnd it difﬁcult to draw any ﬁrm conclusions about these more
speciﬁc matters. While we were impressed by the thoroughness with
which Dr Kutchinsky had studied the situation and the restraint with
which he sought to derive lessons from his ﬁndings, the fact remains that
correlation studies are a weak research tool, partly because of the difﬁcul-
ties of measurement—which still exist in relation to both the availability
of pornography and the incidence of offences in Denmark, in spite of
Dr Kutchinsky’s considerable efforts to overcome them—and partly
because of the impossibility of translating a correlation into cause and
effect. A common explanation of a correlation between two sets of social
data is that each is affected by some third, possibly unknown, factor and
no matter how strong a correlation, it can never, bearing in mind all the
other factors and inﬂuences that are also present, “prove” anything. We
recognise, however, that Dr Kutchinsky has identiﬁed a very dramatic
reduction in reported offences against children which coincided with the
sudden upsurge in the availability of pornography and which, in conse-
quence of the careful studies undertaken by Dr Kutchinsky, cannot readily
be explained by any other likely factor. While Dr Kutchinsky’s explanation
cannot be conclusive, we have to admit that it is plausible.
6.56
Dr Court has not commented at all on this ﬁnding of Dr Kutchinsky,
other than in making general criticisms of Dr Kutchinsky’s work, some of
harms?
111

which are patently mistaken and others apparently unjust, and in stressing
that a direct causal relationship, given the nature of the problem, could
never be demonstrated. It seemed to us that because the Danish experience
is in Dr Court’s description “counter-intuitive”, his faith in his intuition
has led him to the view that it “must be assumed to be false”. In these
circumstances he has sought to cast as much doubt as he can on the
ﬁndings, even when that has meant attacking secondary reporting rather
than the original work, persisting in allegations of error which we were
assured he had been told were false, quoting polemicists as if they were
scientiﬁc sources, and resorting to a general broadside on Dr Kutchinsky’s
ﬁgures as being “utterly misleading”. We have examined with some care
the work of both Dr Kutchinsky and Dr Court in relation to the situation in
Denmark and have to say that Dr Kutchinsky’s is in every respect more
impressive: it is comprehensive, detailed and scrupulously careful. Dr
Court has made no pretensions to a study of equal thoroughness and,
having looked at each of the points he has made about Dr Kutchinsky’s
work, we ﬁnd that the one to which most weight attaches concerns just the
absolutely general difﬁculty of trying to draw conclusions from the exam-
ination of statistics of this kind. However, the conclusion which is inevit-
able from reading the voluminous papers by Dr Court and Dr Kutchinsky
is that it is Dr Court who has felt the less inhibited by the argument and
who has based far broader conclusions on a much more rudimentary
framework of information. If Dr Court were to be bound by the restraints
which he urges the reader to apply in judging Dr Kutchinsky’s work, his
case would collapse entirely.
Other countries
6.57
We have discussed the incidence of sexual offences in England and
Wales and in Denmark at greater length than Dr Court has in any of the
papers he submitted to us because we think it important that more light
should be thrown on the subject so that the objective reader may reach his
own conclusions about Dr Court’s case. Dr Court has additionally referred
to a number of other countries, such as Australia, the United States of
America, New Zealand, Sweden, South Africa, Japan and Singapore, but
we do not think it necessary to deal in detail with the situation in all of
these countries. His reference to Sweden, for example, appeared to be
based on nothing more in the way of evidence than one sentence from
an article published in 1962 in The Spectator; and all his other references
were subject to the same severe criticisms that we have already mentioned,
112
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

in that he produces no evidence on which an index of the availability of
pornography may be constructed; his treatment of statistics of criminal
offences is superﬁcial and ﬂuctuations in the ﬁgures for rape are never
viewed in the context of trends in crime as a whole; and he shows an
unscientiﬁc readiness to associate any rise in rape statistics with the inﬂu-
ence of pornography.
6.58
A fellow South Australian writer who has criticised Dr Court6 has
drawn attention to the fact that, although Dr Court picks out Singapore as
illustrating the association between the restriction of pornography and a
stable rate of rape, in order to contrast it with a city such as London where
a permissive attitude towards pornography is coupled with an increasing
incidence of rape, rapes are, on the ﬁgures quoted by Dr Court, actually
more common in Singapore than in London. Dr Court may retort that to
make such a comparison ignores the difﬁculties in assuming a similarity of
legal deﬁnition, cultural attitudes, police strength etc, but it seems to us
that it is equally hazardous to take the statistics of rape for an unfamiliar
country and to attempt to relate them to a vague idea of the extent to
which pornography is and has been available in that country, again in
total isolation from cultural traditions, the state of the law and social
developments. Dr Court has made no attempt to place the developments
he brieﬂy chronicles in their social context.
6.59
We are satisﬁed that Dr Court’s publications about pornography are
more successful in expressing condemnation of pornography than they are
in giving the study of its effects a sound scientiﬁc basis. We discount his
evidence and, to the extent that they rely on his work, the evidence of
those who quote him.
II:
OTHER EFFECTS ON HUMAN BEHAVIOUR
6.60
We have so far considered whether the inﬂuence of material of a
sexual or violent nature might be manifested in behaviour which is illegal.
To consider the possible effects on other forms of behaviour raises prob-
lems of deciding what forms of legal behaviour are nevertheless undesir-
able, bringing to bear certain values. For example, some of our witnesses
were clearly concerned at the effect of pornography on sexual behaviour
generally. But if sexual arousal results, this is hardly to be condemned in
6
P Cochrane, Sex crimes and pornography revisited, International Journal of Criminology and
Penology 1978, 6, 307–317.
harms?
113

itself; if more frequent sexual intercourse follows, there is no obvious need
for concern, while if the result is masturbation, still many will not be
alarmed; if a greater repertoire of sexual activity is learned, many people
would regard this as a beneﬁt. The prospect of encouraging pre-marital or
extra-marital sexual activity raises greater controversy, but the indications
from research results are that sexual patterns of behaviour are ﬁxed before
reading pornography can exercise any inﬂuence. What people do is more
affected by their existing habits and values than by exposure to pornog-
raphy, and the sexual attitudes of groups who have been studied do not
appear to have been much affected by seeing this kind of material. It is
however true that attitudes towards pornography and its restriction are
very much a function of other attitudes towards sex generally (see Appen-
dix 5, paragraph 2).
6.61
Concern is expressed that readers of pornography might be led into
deviant sexual practices, particularly through a progressive seeking after
novelty. We have already referred in Chapter 4 to the successful publish-
er’s philosophy of “keeping one step ahead”, but the context of that
progression was straightforward sexual explicitness, and we are sceptical
of the extent to which the appeal of novelty, as represented in publications,
draws people into sexual deviancy. Indeed, all the evidence points to the
fact that material dealing with bizarre or perverted sexual activity appeals
only to those with a pre-existing interest established by the experiences of
early life, and that such material is of very little interest to others except
perhaps as an occasional or once-for-all object of curiosity. The usual
reaction of those who are not predisposed to the particular form of deviant
behaviour portrayed is disgust and revulsion, and there is no evidence
that exposure to such material inculcates a taste for it among such people.
Even among adolescents, as Yaffé points out in Appendix 5, the reaction of
the individual appears to relate to his previously established sexual iden-
tity rather than inﬂuencing the development of that identity.
6.62
We received some evidence to the effect that although exposure to
deviant pornography might not induce a sexual taste in a person without a
pre-existing bias in that direction, it might nevertheless bring to the sur-
face a deviant ingredient in a person’s character which he or she did not
even know existed, or make it more difﬁcult for people with deviant tastes
to deal with that aspect of their personalities. Dr Hyatt Williams was one
of those who made this point to us; we also heard from a man who said
that he suffered from, and struggled against, sado-masochistic tendencies,
and who made a plea for the suppression of the kind of publications which
114
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

could arouse such feelings. On the other hand, there is the view that
people who possess certain interests and tendencies should not be pre-
vented from having material which meets those interests, when the mater-
ial might in fact provide a cathartic effect, offering some means of relief for
tensions that arise from those tendencies. Where the balance lies as regards
the control of this material is not easy to judge. We discussed with
Dr Hyatt Williams, for example, whether the protection of a small suscep-
tible minority he had identiﬁed justiﬁed restrictions on the availability of
such material more severe than restrictions on other sexually explicit
material: he was inclined to think it did not, and the view of other
psychiatric witnesses tended in the same direction.
6.63
A particular aspect of behaviour to which some of our evidence was
directed was that between partners in marriage and it was put to us that
pornography could be inﬂuential in damaging human relationships and in
leading to marital breakdown. The typical aspect of the argument seemed
to be that pornography sometimes implanted in husbands the desire to
engage in sexual experimentation which their wives found abhorrent, and
which therefore introduced tensions into the marriage. Other ingredients
of the argument were that pornography’s emphasis on sex divorced from
any notion of love, and the wildly exaggerated ideas which it offers of
sexual fulﬁlment and sexual performance create dissatisfaction with
existing partners and the desire to look elsewhere. We have to say, how-
ever, that we received very little concrete evidence to this effect. The
Nationwide Festival of Light expressed the belief that the problem was a
very considerable one. Mrs Mary Whitehouse told us that she had
received a large number of letters about the deleterious effect of pornog-
raphy on marital relationships, some of which she quoted in her book
Whatever Happened to Sex?, but she said that it would not be practicable for
her to produce them for us to see. We received one letter of personal
testimony of how the writer’s interest in pornography had harmed his
relationship with his wife; and a Methodist minister told us of two cases
from his pastoral experience in which pornography had played a part in
marital breakdown. This was, however, the limit of the speciﬁc evidence
we received. If there was a real problem of this kind arising from pornog-
raphy we had expected to hear more of it, and we were interested to hear
from Mrs Angela Willans, who has had long experience of conducting the
problems page of the magazine Woman’s Own, that she received few letters
from wives complaining of the demands of their husbands instilled by a
reading of pornography. Many of her readers were upset to ﬁnd their
harms?
115

husbands taking an interest in pornography, but that is a rather different
point. Indeed, we also received evidence of how pornography had been of
help in enabling married couples to overcome their sexual problems: one
correspondent told us how his marriage had been saved when the phys-
ical relationship between him and his wife was rekindled in their looking
together at sexually explicit magazines. More generally, as paragraph 6 of
Appendix 5 makes clear, such material is also used in the clinical treatment
of sexual dysfunction, to alleviate the problems of those whose relation-
ship is suffering through impotence or frigidity. In short, the evidence in
this area once again tends both ways and we came to the conclusion that
the evidence of detrimental effects was too insubstantial to suggest overall
that pornography was a signiﬁcant cause of harm to marriages or other
personal relationships.
6.64
We received a number of submissions, not only from women, which
stressed the degradation of women which is a feature of much pornog-
raphy. While it is true that if pornography degrades then it degrades also
the men it portrays as well as those who consume it, there is a special sense
in which, as pornography seems to be almost exclusively designed for
male consumption, it uses women as simply the objects of men’s sexual
needs. Many organisations considered that this was not merely offensive
to women but was demeaning in a way that could be regarded as a social
harm. Some of these were those with a religious view of human dignity
who saw pornography as an assault on women, and we received both
Christian and Jewish views of this. But much evidence also had a speciﬁc-
ally feminist viewpoint, which tended to see pornography as but one form
of sexism, perhaps a particularly blatant and vicious form but essentially
reﬂecting the same view of women commonly encountered in advertising,
entertainment and other aspects of our social existence. Much of what we
received from Women’s Liberation groups was indeed directed as much at
the world of advertising and at the general reinforcement of women’s
subservient role which society was seen as pursuing than at pornography
itself, which was seen as only one of the instruments of women’s repres-
sion; and some radical groups speciﬁcally distinguished their views on
pornography from those more traditional groups by emphasising that,
quite apart from other differences, their approach was based on a different
attitude to the nature of women’s sexuality. It follows from this view, of
course, that pornography (at least on these grounds) should not be singled
out for special treatment under the law, since the desire is to alter funda-
mentally society’s attitudes towards the role of women rather than to
116
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

legislate against one symptom of those attitudes. Many of our women
correspondents wanted the law to be invoked against the degradation of
women in pornography; but the consensus of those parts of the Women’s
movement from which we heard tended to attach greater importance to
freedom of expression than to the need to suppress pornography.
6.65
The effects of pornography and violent material were widely seen as
particularly dangerous to the young, and most of our witnesses wished to
see children and young persons protected. We did hear from some of our
expert witnesses a certain caution about just how susceptible children
were to such inﬂuences, for this is not a ﬁeld where much is known: for
obvious reasons children have not been used in experimental work on
exposure to pornography, and we heard no evidence of actual harm being
caused to children. Some witnesses suspected that children would not take
very much notice of pornography and that they might be more robust than
was commonly assumed, but there was nevertheless a reluctance to take
any risks where the young were concerned. Dr Hanna Segal saw in
particular two ways in which such inﬂuences might be harmful to chil-
dren. First, children learn to overcome their own sexual fantasies by
looking at behaviour in the real world, but if their view of the adult world
conﬁrmed those fantasies, they were likely to become ﬁxated by them;
secondly, she felt that an essential element of all pornography was cruelty
and that this could establish a link between sexual activity and violence.
Dr Gallwey of the Portman Clinic thought that a particular experience of
exposure to pornography at a time of stress in the child’s process of
growing up, particularly when trying to evolve an understanding of
aspects of life, could be very confusing to a child and, if in constellation
with other disturbing factors, could tip the balance towards psychological
damage. Dr Gallwey also offered the comment that it was better to avoid
exposing children to the infantile conﬂicts of adults. The greatest harm, in
the view of Dr Hyatt Williams, might be to those on the verge of puberty,
but he saw the danger more in terms of pornography being used by an
adult with a view, for example, to homosexual seduction than in relation
to pornography being passed around among children.
6.66
It was clear from our discussions with witnesses that no very
deﬁnite answer can be given about the age at which the special protection
of children is no longer necessary. Individual sexual maturation is so
variable that, as Dr Segal put it to us, some 15 year olds could quite well
cope with exposure to pornography while others even in their early
twenties could still be susceptible to outside inﬂuences of this kind, while
harms?
117

Professor Sir Martin Roth also felt that a person’s sexual development
might sometimes be in the balance until after the age of 20: his concern
was primarily with children being subjected to propaganda for homosexu-
ality. Because of this lengthy period of varying maturity, some of our
witnesses declined to offer any view as to the age at which special protec-
tion should cease; the choice of others tended to hover between the ages of
16 and 18.
6.67
Rather similar considerations applied to the exposure of the young
to violent material. Children have to learn what violence is and it is clearly
better if they do so, and are introduced to certain potentially disturbing
material, within a secure and loving framework. There is of course
no shortage of unpleasant and horriﬁc subjects in traditional children’s
literature, but some of our witnesses thought that there was no reason
for parents to be concerned about fairytale violence on the one hand—
including that in westerns, for example—or, on the other, the real-life
violence of news stories. But there is concern in particular about the effects
on those young people who have been deprived of a secure background
and the normal socialising inﬂuences which enable them to develop their
own healthy personality. It was, Dr Gallwey told us, the more disturbed
children who were both more frightened and more fascinated by violent
material, and also the most vulnerable who were the very people likely to
be exposed to violent inﬂuences. Brody makes the point from research
evidence that it is those who lack ﬁrm contact with ordinary life, with
severe neurotic problems or of frankly disordered states of mind, who are
likely to be most susceptible to adverse effects from ﬁlms. Ordinarily,
although children may be upset or disturbed by watching ﬁlms, the solid
base which they have to fall back on means that the effects are only
temporary; but those whose development has already been impaired,
and who have to ﬁnd a substitute for reality in a fantasy world, are the
minority likely to be at risk. We found a wide feeling that it was right that
those still in the process of emotional development should be shielded
from some of the very powerful images of violence, particularly material
which appeared to exploit and glorify violent behaviour.
6.68
The protection of children also ﬁgured largely in the evidence we
received about the harm done to those who were exploited in the produc-
tion of pornography; in this connection we turn now to the question of
harmful effects on participants rather than on the consumers of published
material. Even in relation to children, the evidence we received did not all
point in the same direction: Professor Trevor Gibbens, for example, told us
118
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

that he thought that young girls often had the ability to exploit what they
saw as a “good racket” and were quite capable of still growing up into
well-adjusted women. This did not mean that Professor Gibbens was
arguing that the use of children in pornography was anything but undesir-
able, but he was suggesting that long-term damage to those involved was
more doubtful than is widely assumed. Few people would be prepared to
take the risk where children are concerned and just as the law recognises
that children should be protected against sexual behaviour which they are
too young to properly consent to, it is almost universally agreed that this
should apply to participation in pornography. Participating in pornog-
raphy, it ought to be said, will often involve the commission of what are
anyway offences, such as unlawful sexual intercourse with girls under
sixteen, indecent assault and indecency with children, and there is only a
small area of pornographic activity which is not covered by the law on
sexual offences; on the evidence we received, this area is even smaller in
practice than it may appear on paper. But there are strong arguments that
the prevention of this harm also requires the power to suppress the
pornographic product as well as the original act, so as not to provide the
incentive to pornographers to ﬂout the sexual offence law, or to deal
without inhibition in products which are imported from other legal juris-
dictions. We should not be parochial about the prevention of harm to
children: if English law is to protect children against offences in this
country, it is hypocritical to permit the trade in photographs and ﬁlms of
the same activities taken overseas. These considerations reinforce the view
that the law on sexual offences is not enough: a law dealing with the
published product is required in addition.
6.69
Children are the most obvious example of a group who are capable
of exploitation because they do not enjoy a fully developed right to choose.
But our evidence on participants went a good deal wider, and it was
submitted to us that adults were also exploited and harmed in the pro-
duction of pornography. The question of consenting adults being
exploited raises broader issues and merges with the kind of argument
which suggests that much employment is exploitation because people are
obliged to do what they have no desire to do in order to earn their living.
A more limited view of exploitation would be that people are taken
advantage of in ways that are against their best interests, and are forced
to suffer harms which they themselves are capable of recognising as
harms. If there are people who willingly and even cheerfully or enthusias-
tically take part in pornographic ﬁlms or photographic sessions and are
harms?
119

able lucidly to square that activity with their own values and consciences
and to decide that it is advantageous to them to do it, then it is very
difﬁcult for other members of society to impose on them a view that they
are demeaning themselves or allowing themselves to be exploited in
undesirable ways.
6.70
At the very least, we would suggest that a particular kind of moral-
ism is involved in pressing the charge of exploitation with respect to
participation particularly in pornography, when that participation is by
ordinary criteria voluntary. It may be that much employment which by
those standards is voluntary can justly be seen as exploitation, but there is
no particular reason to pick out employment in the production of pornog-
raphy. Some who do specially pick out pornography in this connection
perhaps believe that no-one, knowing what was involved, and not under
the direst pressure of economic or other necessity, would want to engage
in it. If that is their thought, we can only report that our enquiries do not
suggest that it is true.
6.71
We were not able to conclude that participation in these activities
was a cause of harm. Allegations to this effect were sometimes made to us,
but these were usually in the context of evidence that assumed pornog-
raphy to be evil and any association with it to be contaminating. We
received little evidence of a more objective kind. One of our psychiatric
witnesses, Dr Gallwey, suggested to us that there was much misery in the
trade and that many of the girls in strip clubs, for example, were disturbed
and mentally ill. Mr. Raymond Blackburn suggested that the most dan-
gerous risk to participants was of their being subjected to blackmail.
However, the other evidence we received contained no substantiation of
these suggestions. Evidence from within the trade denied it. This is hardly
surprising; but, for what it is worth, Mr David Sullivan told us that the
models used by his magazines were a complete cross-section of society
and that, in his view, the work had no effect on them. He saw no reason
to believe that to embark on such work was to step on a slippery slope to
corruption or prostitution or, for that matter, to step on a stairway to
stardom. The vast majority of models in this ﬁeld undertook the work
simply because they regarded it as an acceptable way of making money.
6.72
There have been instances in which the alleged harm to participants
has fallen in a very different category. It has been suggested, for example,
that there is a genre of ﬁlm—the so-called “snuff” movie—usually said to
originate in South America, in which sadistic pornography is taken to the
120
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

extreme of having an unsuspecting model actually mutilated and
murdered in front of the camera. There has been much scepticism about
the existence of ﬁlms of this kind and although rumours about their
existence were indeed followed in America by the appearance of a ﬁlm
called Snuff (“the ﬁlm that could only be made in South America . . . where
life is cheap!”) there appeared to be general agreement that the violence in
the ﬁlm was simulated rather than real; it is possible that the rumours
themselves had been engineered for the purposes of advance publicity for
this ﬁlm. Another ﬁlm, which we saw, which purported to include actual
documentary sequences of mutilation and death, was subsequently
reported to have been, at least in part, faked. Clearly the danger of
physical injury does represent an undeniable harm, even if it is potential
rather than actual. As with offences against children, however, this is an
area where the criminal law already operates for the protection of the
individual and the inﬂiction of physical injury may be punishable in the
courts even where the injured person consented to be so treated. Neverthe-
less, again as with children, we do not think that the authorities in this
country will have discharged their responsibility for discouraging such
behaviour just by legislating to punish such acts which are committed in
this country. There is a strong case for taking measures against the circu-
lation of material which involves real cruelty or physical injury, even
when it originates overseas.
6.73
The broadest arguments put to us concerned the social harms
ﬂowing from the widespread availability of pornography, in terms of
cultural pollution, moral deterioration and the undermining of human
compassion, social values and basic institutions. Arguments of this kind
were less concerned with the possibility of speciﬁc effects on individual
behaviour than with the gradual infecting of society with a disregard for
decency, a lack of respect for others, a taste for the base, a contempt for
restraint and responsibility: in short, with the weakening of our civilisa-
tion and the demoralisation of society.
6.74
A leading exponent of the view associating pornography with a
cultural sickness is Mr David Holbrook and we discussed his concern with
him. Mr Holbrook sees pornography and sadism as having been allowed
to increase in our culture in recent years, with the result that a stream of
hate—which he sees as an essential element in pornography—and debased
sexuality has been thrust into our consciousness through powerful mass
media. In consequence, in his view, there is now a widespread mental
obsession with sexuality, a considerable degree of commercialisation of
harms?
121

sex, a growing egotistical nihilism, a preoccupation with satiation and a
corruption of culture. Culture had been debased to the extent that it is now
difﬁcult to write about sexual matters in an adult way because the expect-
ations of the audience had been so corrupted. Writers wishing to appear
trendy had committed intellectual treachery by praising the latest work of
sex and violence, while those who attempted to raise a debate on the
serious issues involved in the spread of pornography and its effect on
culture were ignored and isolated. Mr Holbrook complained that his books
were no longer being reviewed because editors disagreed with the stand he
had taken.
6.75
The emphasis given to the nature of the social harms naturally
varied from witness to witness. Some witnesses, for example, saw violence
in the media as contributing to public attitudes which regard violence as a
legitimate means of achieving desired ends or of expressing feelings; or as
encouraging a callous disregard of the effects of violence. The particular
question of psychological desensitisation to violence was one which we
discussed with a number of witnesses, and Dr Guy Cumberbatch sought
to reassure us from the results of research on the subject. As he told us, and
as Brody has also pointed out, experiments have certainly shown that the
viewer may become desensitised by exposure to violent material, but this
appears to occur in a speciﬁc rather than a general way. For example,
volunteers had repeatedly been shown an extract from a violent ﬁlm, with
the effect that their measured response to it declined with each showing;
but when they were afterwards shown the complete ﬁlm, their reaction to
other scenes of violence had been normal and it was only the familiar
scene to which responses had been dulled. In any case, Dr Cumberbatch
argued, responses to ﬁctional and dramatic material were quite different
from those of real life, and there were no indications that a person’s ability
to feel pity and willingness to help the victim of an act of aggression was
lessened by watching representations of similar acts of violence.
6.76
However, the arguments range more widely than such delimited
psychological effects. As we have said, many of our witnesses claimed that
there were more generalised damaging effects of pornography, violent
publications, and ﬁlms, effects which were necessarily of a less identiﬁable
kind. These arguments should not be discounted or ignored simply
because they are not based on direct tangible effects. Long-term effects
on civilisation and culture are self-evidently important and should be
considered as carefully as one can, even if they cannot be quantiﬁed and
demonstrated. The arguments here do, however, involve the danger, as
122
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

we have already said and is very obvious, of citing as a cause something
that is itself only an effect or part of a cultural and historical process. There
is also the danger that the cultural process is itself disliked because it is
new, unfamiliar, and perhaps threatening, and things that are indeed
extreme and ugly cultural phenomena, but perhaps not deeply signiﬁcant
ones, are seized on in order to attack social and moral developments
which are indeed more signiﬁcant, but less obviously to be rejected. In
these reactions, an idealised image of the past often plays a part. In
considering the dangers that are sometimes seen as threatening our social
fabric in the area of sexual conduct and of pornography, one needs a sense
of historical perspective.
6.77
There were almost certainly more child prostitutes in London a
hundred years ago than there are today. Pornography, in any case an
age-old phenomenon,7 ﬂourished then and is by no means a modern
development. Of course, technological innovations have offered new
scope to the producer of pornography, but it would be a mistake to
minimise the circulation of pornography in earlier years, even in Victorian
times. Needless to say, we are no more able to quantify the availability of
pornography a hundred years ago than we are to chart its progress in
recent years, but the comments which we quote in Appendix 1 from those
who were trying to combat pornography in nineteenth century England
have a familiar ring today. H Montgomery Hyde has written that the
output of purely erotic pornography in England during the nineteenth
century was prodigious. This was not merely the production of leather-
bound limited editions for a minority of specialist collectors, as can be seen
from the results of some of the police activity against such material. In
1874, for example, one raid on a dealer led to the seizure of about 135,000
obscene photographs and slides. A raid in 1895 netted about two tons of
obscene literature. The trade must have been considerable.
6.78
What became clear to us in the course of our discussions about the
social harms of pornography and violent material was that many of our
witnesses had in mind a class of material which included much that could
not remotely be dealt with under the kind of laws we were appointed to
7
At least in pictorial forms. Pornographic prose ﬁction seems, at any rate in Europe, to have
ﬁrst appeared in the middle of the 17th Century. The ﬁrst original English prose pornog-
raphy (as opposed to translations), and also the ﬁrst to take the form of a novel rather than
a dialogue, was John Cleland’s Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure (“Fanny Hill”), 1748. See
David Foxon, “Libertine Literature in England, 1660–1745 (The Book Collector, 1964).
harms?
123

review, or were considering the type of harm which certainly could not be
ascribed to such material alone or even predominantly to such material.
Often, the arguments that were put to us about damage to culture, moral-
ity and social values were not primarily directed to the effects of pornog-
raphy at all. Some of our witnesses recognised this: the Catholic Social
Welfare Commission, for example, admitted that pornography and repre-
sentations of violence may be symptoms of a more general malaise and
may be considered effects, or at most partial causes in particular contexts,
rather than sufﬁcient explanations; their case rested on the belief, however,
that pornography and the representation of violence in certain forms and
circumstances is one of the elements which threaten some basic institu-
tions and values. Mrs Mary Whitehouse too is well-known for her pas-
sionately held views on the erosion of standards over a wide area. The
degradation of sex ﬁgures strongly in her thinking. She did express to us
very strongly the view that pornography is corrupting our society, and
indeed that it is being used by the extreme Left for this purpose, in much
the same way as the Nazis used pornography as part of their assault on
the cultural life of the Poles or, she alleged, Communists, while clamping
down on sex shows and prostitution in Mozambique, have been pouring
pornography into South Africa. But Mrs Whitehouse has in general con-
centrated her attention on television programme content—which in this
country is hardly ever pornographic—and this fact illustrates her concern
with the far wider aspects of media inﬂuences on the quality of life.
6.79
There was a sense, we felt, in which pornography was being used
by many of our witnesses as a scapegoat. The tastelessness and depressing
awfulness of pornography generally makes it easy for its detractors to
attack it without fear of contradiction and to gain a sympathetic hearing
for their description of its anti-social effects. Mr David Holbrook was one
of our witnesses who made it clear that his attack was directed at a
broader target. In deploring the commercialisation of sex, he referred to
the use of sexuality in advertising in order to give a wide range of
products a greater appeal to a consumer society: in deploring the glamor-
isation of sexual aggression, he referred to what he regarded as the social
evil of the James Bond image, in which, as with Don Juan, he perceived a
degree of latent fascism; in deploring an obsession with perversion and
hate, he was in fact speaking in the context of the intellectual debate rather
than on the effects of pornographic magazines.
6.80
While there are some serious and interesting questions about the
character of pornography, what the experience of pornographic work is
124
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

like, and how that relates, for instance, to the experience of art, little of this,
it seems to us, is very directly connected with the causation of social
harms. Conversely, Mr Holbrook’s diagnosis of a cultural sickness and
collapse is not very closely connected, in our view (which we put to him in
discussion), with pornography and still less with the laws on obscenity.
The point goes more generally. One factor that we have not so far men-
tioned is that sexual matters in general are more openly discussed now
than before, and the fact that pornography is less concealed is one aspect
of this development. Our witnesses recognise this development; some
seemed to regret it, preferring the subject to remain a private one to be
treated in public with more reticence than is often the case, even in serious
discussion. Others welcomed it, regarding the denial of an interest in this
basic and integral part of the nature of all of us as something that can only
obstruct understanding of ourselves and others and impede the develop-
ment of true maturity. Whichever of these views is taken, we have no
doubt that this new openness is among the things that have inﬂuenced the
availability of pornography, rather than the reverse. Cultural artefacts
themselves play a role in not merely reﬂecting but in inﬂuencing social
development, but given the multitude of factors, and from everything we
know of social attitudes and have learnt in the course of our enquiries, our
belief can only be that the role of pornography in inﬂuencing the state of
society is a minor one. To think anything else, and in particular to regard
pornography as having a crucial or even a signiﬁcant effect on essential
social values, is to get the problem of pornography out of proportion with
the many other problems that face our society today.
harms?
125

CHAPTER 7
Offensiveness
B
7.1
The deprave and corrupt test of obscenity, the history of which we have
already referred to, deﬁnes a concept of obscenity which is of course
exactly suited to ﬁt in with the harm condition: it is a causal notion of
obscenity, based on the idea that the rationale of suppressing obscenity is
the harm that it causes. But, as we noted, the actual use of the test in the
past seems often to have had little to do with proving that there had been
any harms at all. It has almost been as if people, accepting the harm
condition, agreed that pornography should be suppressed only if it did
harm; were quite clear that it should be suppressed; and concluded that
somehow it must do harm.
7.2
One idea that may confuse the issue here is the assumption, which
we touched on in discussing law and morality, that if something does no
identiﬁable harm, then any objection to it must be (merely) a matter of
taste. As we have said, some of those who have written to us do regard
reactions to pornography as a matter of taste. Others go a little further, in
saying that it is a matter of taste not just in the sense that some people have
a taste for it and others do not, but that a taste for it is bad taste. This
would make it, at any rate, a matter of aesthetic judgement.
7.3
Certainly most pornography is also trash: ugly, shallow, and obvi-
ous. (We will consider in Chapter 8 why this is so, and whether it is
necessarily so—whether, that is to say, there could be a pornographic, or
again obscene, work of art, a question which has constantly recurred to
plague the Obscene Publications Act.) But this fact is not enough to
explain its offensiveness; we are surrounded by shallow trash of all kinds
but few people, however sensitive their taste, ﬁnd it as upsetting and
disagreeable as many people certainly ﬁnd pornography. For many
people, pornography is not only offensive, but deeply offensive.
7.4
Pornography essentially involves making public in words, pictures
or theatrical performance, the fulﬁlment of fantasy images of sex or
126
www.ebook3000.com

violence. In some cases the images are of forbidden acts: so it is with
images of violence. In other cases, the line that is transgressed is only
that between private and public; the acts represented in the images would
be all right in private, but the same acts would be objectionable in public.
There will of course be disagreement about how many acts are of
this second sort rather than the ﬁrst. Even the most puritanical will agree
that there are some, if only straightforward sexual relations between
husband and wife. Others may take more liberal views about what is
legitimate sexual activity, but retain the view that the proper place for it
is in private. People have strong sentiments attached to these notions of
public and private, of what it is “unsuitable”—in its original sense,
indecent—to show.
7.5
Obviously, as with the display of parts of the body, these perceptions
vary over time. Some predict, indeed hope, that the time may come when
such restrictions will have ﬁnally disappeared. One witness whom we saw
made it clear that she looked forward to a society in which nothing one
saw going on in the park would be more surprising than anything else,
except perhaps in the sense of being more improbable. Most of us doubt
whether this day will come, or that nothing would have been lost if it did.
Still less do we look forward to a world in which sexual activity is not only
freely conducted in public and can be viewed, but is offered to be viewed,
copulating parties soliciting the interest of the passer-by. But this is, in
effect, what publicly displayed pornography does.
7.6
Pornography crosses the line between private and public since it
makes available in the form, for instance, of a photograph, some sexual
act of a private kind and makes it available for a voyeuristic interest: since
it is itself a public thing, a picture book or a ﬁlm show, it represents
already the projection into public of the private world—private, that is
to say, to its participants—of sexual activity. The represented activity is in
the ﬁrst instance something offered to be seen, and can have the shock
effect of something suddenly revealed. The consumer of the pornography
does not of course necessarily, or perhaps typically, remain conscious of
himself as an external viewer of what is represented. The material rather is
incorporated into his fantasy; it is characteristic, for instance, that photo-
graphs, which must inevitably be records of sexual activity with the usual
human limitations, will be incorporated in fantasies of the mythical, inex-
haustible, limitless sexual activity which is the typical product of the
pornographic imagination. The exact relation of pornographic material
to the consumer and to his fantasies is a subtle matter. Even when it is
offensiveness
127

taken up into fantasy, pornography often retains an assaulting quality—
there is a sense in which it can be found offensive even while it is being
enjoyed. In other cases, the sense of offensiveness evaporates for the
consumer who involves himself in the images offered by photographs or
ﬁlms, or develops his own fantasy from the written word.
7.7
The basic point that pornography involves by its nature some viola-
tion of lines between public and private is compounded when the pornog-
raphy not only exists for private consumption, but is publicly displayed.
The original violation is then forced on the attention of those who have
not even volunteered to be voyeurs. They are thus forced or importuned
to see things which they do not think should be seen, and images are
thrust into their mind which they reject. Whatever may be true of the
willing consumer, pornography is straightforwardly offensive to those
who do not want to take it in. There are some differences here between
the visual and the written. Visual material displays its content to anyone
within line of sight; when, moreover, it is photographic, real people
and actual events are on display. Written material is further removed
from any particular reality, and an activity is in any case needed in order
to take in the content. These points help to explain the fact, to which
everyone agrees, that written material, casually encountered, is less
offensive than visual, and in particular photographic, material. It is prob-
ably a result of this that, as we have already explained, almost any printed
book now seems likely to secure acquittal; it is worth recalling, too, that
magazines with rather less explicit pictures, such as the DPP classiﬁes as
“Grade 2” and which are widely accepted at present, are sometimes
prepared to carry written material which is straightforwardly hard-core
pornography.
7.8
For those who are not disposed, as willing consumers are, to make
the scenes of pornography into objects of their own fantasy, those scenes
have a special and saddening ugliness. In people who are particularly
resistant to such fantasy, either in general, or as involving objects such as
these, anger, disturbance and oppression will be the reactions. It is
tempting to speculate—it cannot be more than speculation—that it is such
reactions which are understood by some who experience them as a per-
ception that pornography is intrinsically harmful and destructive. This
perception, taken as a social judgement, we believe may well be incorrect.
But this does not mean that the reactions themselves, or the less violent
reactions of others who ﬁnd the display of such material in various
degrees offensive, are incorrect. It seems to us that they can be entirely
128
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

appropriate, and that the world would not necessarily be a better place if
people ceased to have them.
7.9
When the material is violent, these reactions are typically intensiﬁed.
Here the scenes are such as no person who is not disturbed could want to
happen in reality. The scenes are offered in pornography as objects of
sadomasochistic fantasy (we should repeat that there is no reason to
believe that this usually expresses itself in sadistic behaviour in reality).
For those resistant to that sort of fantasy in general, or on this occasion, or
who reject fantasy on material as crude and explicit as this, these scenes
will be totally revolting. Similar reactions may be felt to ﬁctional or
pictorial violence which, while it is not pornographic, in the sense of
involving or invoking sexual arousal, nevertheless is offered directly as
an object of aggressive fantasy. It is no doubt because aggressive impulses
have to be contained and denied expression in actual life to an even
greater extent than is the case with sexual impulses, that the reactions to
sadistic and other violent material are typically stronger and more
alarming than to sexual material—except in so far as an aggressive pre-
sentation of the sexual material, very characteristic of pictorial pornog-
raphy, is itself expressive of sadism. “I don’t mind the sex, it’s the
violence”,1 as many people said to us.
7.10
In this discussion, we have inevitably been drawn a short distance
into the psychology of the experience of pornography, a subject in which
we would not feel conﬁdent in claiming that there existed any very
deﬁnite knowledge, let alone that we possessed it. But even if this account
is not quite right, something like it must be true. Such an account will
explain how it is that the reactions that many people experience to publicly
displayed pornography are not just a matter of arbitrary taste, but are
deep reactions; and how it is that the offensiveness it displays to them is,
in both a psychological and an ethical sense, a deep offensiveness.
7.11
The fact that one is being forced or importuned to see some
unwanted scene can be signalled without the scene itself being shown to
one. If the context is one in which such scenes are threatened (or, to the
willing, promised) then associated material can take on an appropriate
appearance, and produce a milder version of the same reactions. This
helps to explain the fact which has always caused difﬁculty for legislation
1
A phrase which has also been used by Mrs. Enid Wistrich as the title of her book about her
experiences as Chairman of the Film Viewing Board of the GLC.
offensiveness
129

on these subjects, that it is not an intrinsic degree of undress, for instance,
nor even particular postures of the body (with some obvious unambigu-
ous exceptions) which are found objectionable. It is notable for instance
that a picture of a girl in underwear is perceived differently if it is on the
cover of a woman’s fashion magazine from the way it is seen if it is on the
cover of a “man’s magazine”. This has an important consequence for any
recommendation about the control of such material: it is not solely what is
to be seen on the outside of a publication that governs the reaction
appropriate to it. One and the same photograph in different contexts can
mean something quite different, and become, in experience, effectively
two different things. This means that a control simply on indecent displays,
which has been proposed on various occasions, does not meet the case.
Such proposals are based on a superﬁcial view of what the offensive
element is in publicly offered pornography.
7.12
Public sexual activity, except of the milder kinds, is prohibited, and
this provides a clear and well-known example of legislation which is
directed against the performance in public of acts which (with regard to
many of them, at least) are legitimate in private. (Indeed, if the publicity is
intentional, the acts are not, strictly speaking, the same as sexual acts done
in private—they have a different motive). Laws against public sex would
generally be thought to be consistent with the harm condition, in the sense
that if members of the public are upset, distressed, disgusted, outraged or
put out by witnessing some class of acts, then that constitutes a respect in
which the public performance of those acts harms their interests and gives
them a reason to object.
7.13
If there is an element of soliciting, that is all the more a nuisance
to which citizens can reasonably object. It was in this spirit that the
Wolfenden Committee recommended curbs on the public activities of
prostitutes, recommendations which became law in the Street Offences
Act 1959. In their report they wrote “. . . we feel that the right of the
normal, decent, citizen to go about the streets without affront to his or
her sense of decency should be the prime consideration and should take
precedence over the interests of the prostitute and her customers . . . ”,2
and they made the point that these restrictions should properly apply both
to loitering and to soliciting. The offensiveness of publicly displayed
pornography seems to us to fall clearly within the sorts of considerations
2
Cmnd. 247, paragraph 249.
130
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

advanced by the Wolfenden Committee, and to be in line with tradition-
ally accepted rules protecting the interest in public decency. Restrictions
on the open sale of these publications, and analogous arrangements for
ﬁlms, thus seem to us to be justiﬁed.
7.14
Naturally, any system of restriction must involve some phenomena
which themselves could, indirectly, offend someone. Thus pornography
might be legitimately sold (as we shall propose) in shops which
announced their nature but did not allow their contents to be seen from
the outside. The presence of such shops is something which itself could be
found offensive by someone; we have indeed received complaints about
shops of some such kind (though we cannot be sure how reticent the
particular examples may have been). If there were no such shops, but only
mail-order distributors, then the advertisements for these, even if they
displayed no material, would certainly be found offensive. If one goes
all the way down this line, however, one arrives at the situation in which
people objected to even knowing that pornography was being read in
private; and if one accepted as a basis for coercing one person’s actions, the
fact that others would be upset even by the thought of his performing
those actions, one would be denying any substantive individual liberty at
all.3 Any offence caused by such shops would clearly be much less vivid,
direct and serious than that caused by the display of the publications, and
we do not accept that it could outweigh the rights of those who do wish to
see this material, or more generally the arguments in favour of restricting,
without suppressing, pornography.
7.15
We have suggested that proposals for restricting pornography
would be clearly in line with existing provisions to deal with other kinds
of offensiveness. We have also tried to explain why the offensiveness of
pornography is found a serious matter, and reactions to it represent more
than a mere divergence of taste. However, it seemed to us also that we
should carry the argument further than this, and examine with rather
greater precision what principle might justify legislation of this kind.
For, as several witnesses said to us, to restrict publications “because they
upset people” could be a dangerous precedent. There can be various
public manifestations, publications or other forms of utterance which
may upset people, even deeply upset people, without those people
thereby having a right to have those public manifestations suppressed.
3
This point is very clearly shown by Hart: Law, Liberty and Morality, pp 45 following.
offensiveness
131

We think therefore that we should try to set out some considerations
which would distinguish the kind of matter for which we propose restric-
tions from other cases in which restriction would be unjustiﬁable.
7.16
We suggest that there are two important characteristics of the case
of restrictions on pornographic materials and of restrictions on them
which help to distinguish that case from others where restriction would
not be justiﬁable. An extended treatment of the subject of free expression
would no doubt give an account of how far these considerations go, how
they relate to one another, how they apply to difﬁcult cases, and so on, but
we do not think it either necessary or appropriate to pursue those further
questions here.
(1) The restriction is not directed against the advocacy of any opinion.
7.17
Clearly some publications could have the effect of outraging or
deeply upsetting many people because of the opinions or view of the
world they advocated, which those who were outraged found deeply
offensive to their own beliefs and outlook. However, many people would
think that it would be contrary to basic principles of free expression
even to restrict, let alone suppress, publications on this ground alone (as
opposed, for instance, to controlling them on the ground that they incited
to riot). So it is important to the rationale for restricting pornographic
publications that it is not for advocating any opinion that the restriction is
proposed, and that the upset that they cause to the public is not a reaction
to opinions which are found unacceptable. For the most part, this will be
because the publications do not advocate any opinions at all. But some
may do so; thus some pornographic magazines contain letterpress which
advocates a “swinging” life-style, while there could also be a piece of
pornography which as a whole was designed to advocate some opinion.
But, in the ﬁrst case, it would not be on the grounds of that part of the
content that the magazine would be a candidate for restriction, and in the
second example, it would not be because it had that character, but rather
because the form of its advocacy was offensive, apart from what was
being advocated.
7.18
Because we attach some weight to this principle, we do not entirely
accept the emphasis given in their evidence by the Catholic Social Welfare
Commission, among other witnesses, who particularly associated the
harms of pornography with its encouraging a view of sex as trivial
amusement or gratiﬁcation. Whether or not that view is as distorted and
damaging as the witnesses believe, the view that sex should not be taken
132
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

seriously is at least an opinion, and if the bad character of pornography lay
principally in its advocating such an opinion, then there would be, in our
view, a difﬁculty of principle about one’s right to restrict it.
(2) Restricting the publication to a volunteer audience does not defeat its aims.
7.19
If someone burns an IRA symbol or a photograph of the Ayatol-
lah Khomeini, or sings an offensive political song, it could be that his
purpose will be carried out if he is demonstrating or singing only to the
converted. But it is much more likely that some part of his intention will
be to make his point to people who would not originally have volun-
teered to see or hear him make it. This consideration obviously overlaps
with the point about advocating opinions, but it goes further, since it
applies also to activities which are not themselves the advocacy of
opinions.
7.20
With pornographic publications, the restriction to a volunteer audi-
ence constitutes in general no hardship or defeat of the publications’
intentions. The pornographer is offering a product, to be consumed by
those who want to consume it. We say that there is no defeat of his
publication’s intentions. The pornographer himself may have some aims
which would be impeded by restriction—thus it may be that he will make
less money if his pornography is restricted and if his purpose in publish-
ing it is to make money, that purpose will be impeded by restriction. But
that is not the kind of purpose or intention that is in question.
7.21
There are exceptions among pornographic publications to this gen-
eral point. There are some of a proselytising tendency, no doubt, and
there are also pornographic works of a serious artistic intention, the
writers of which might not necessarily be equally content with an audi-
ence who would volunteer under conditions of restriction. Moreover,
the present point, that if the audience is restricted to volunteers this
does not defeat the aim of the publication, is anyway not so directly
related to a general principle about the restriction of publications as is
the point that restriction is not directed against any opinions which are
being advanced. It is plausible to claim that no publication should ever
be restricted solely on the grounds of the opinions it advocates, but it is
quite implausible that publications should be restricted only if those who
produce them would be content with a volunteer audience. But it is
nevertheless a relevant consideration that the nature of most pornography
is such that there can be no complaint if its audience is conﬁned to
volunteers.
offensiveness
133

7.22
We have already remarked that works which consist only of written
text are in fact found less offensive than pictorial matter, and that there are
basic psychological reasons for this fact. If, as we have suggested, it makes
a difference whether a proposed restriction is directed against opinions or
not, this introduces a further point about the written word as contrasted
with pictorial matter. Besides actual speech, it is the written word that is
the principal medium for the advocacy of opinions, and which is accord-
ingly likely to give rise to the most serious borderline cases in this connec-
tion. The written word, moreover, is the medium which, together with the
ﬁlm (for which we shall propose separate methods of control), has chieﬂy
given rise to the traditional problem of serious artistic intent in supposedly
obscene material. While written works can no doubt be found to some
extent offensive, we believe that these various considerations provide a
very strong case for withholding the possibility of restriction (let alone of
suppression) from the written word, and we shall propose that, with
respect to the area of the law we have been appointed to review, no
publication shall be liable to either suppression or restriction in virtue of
matter that it contains which consists solely of the written word.
7.23
We shall explain the details of our proposals for restriction in
Chapter 9. The operative term that we have chosen for the characteristic
which merits restriction is “offensive”. “Indecent” seems to us too narrow
in some respects (there is grossly offensive material, suitable for restric-
tion, which would not naturally be called “indecent”), too wide in others
(some material conventionally called “indecent” is not really offensive),
and it suffers above all from having too long and disputed a legal history.
The Defence of Literature and the Arts Society, whose carefully argued
and constructive evidence we found helpful, offered us the term “outrage”
in this connection, but we rejected this on the grounds that it seemed
stronger than was appropriate. We also suspect that it may carry a mis-
leading implication. “Outrage” is something chieﬂy felt towards actions,
of an unjust or appalling character, but when it is applied to publications it
seems usually to be on grounds of the opinions they express, which, as we
have just explained, is something that we seek to exclude. “Offensiveness”
is the term that seems to represent most clearly what is in question. To
make clear, however, what kinds of offensiveness are at issue, we have
thought it right to specify the kinds of respect in which material has to be
offensive if it is to be restricted. Since, further, some people will be
offended by almost anything, and others by nothing at all, it is also
necessary to specify whose reactions in ﬁnding something offensive are
134
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

to count, and we have decided in favour of the requirement that matter to
be restricted should be “offensive to reasonable people”. This seems to us
to catch as well as any phrase can the central idea that at any given time
there can be material which sensible people of mature tastes will quite
properly demand, for the kinds of reasons we have discussed, not to have
forced on their attention. We shall return in more detail to the terms of our
formula in paragraph 9.29 and following.
offensiveness
135

CHAPTER 8
Pornography, obscenity and art
B
8.1
In the course of Chapter 7, we have referred almost all our discus-
sion to pornography, rather than to obscenity. This emphasis was deliber-
ate. “Obscene”, we shall suggest in this chapter, is a term which itself
expresses the kinds of reactions we were discussing in Chapter 7, rather
than telling one what kind of thing actually arouses those reactions.
“Pornography”, on the other hand, we take to be a rather more object-
ive expression referring to a certain kind of writing, picture etc. We
have suggested that pornography does tend by its nature to be found
offensive; and most of the publications and pictures which people ﬁnd
offensive are indeed pornographic. But we shall need to consider a little
more precisely what pornography and obscenity are, in order to discuss
an important question, the relations of pornography and obscenity to
art. There is more than one reason why we thought that we should
discuss this question. It has repeatedly surfaced in the history of this
subject; it has constantly recurred, not surprisingly, in our own discus-
sions; and it has been raised in various forms by many witnesses, some
of whom were as certain that there could not possibly be an obscene
work of art as others were that there could. The issues here are, more-
over, deeply involved in both the theory and the practical use of
the “public good defence” under section 4 of the Obscene Publications
Act 1959. The discussion in this chapter directly bears on our recom-
mendations and has, we believe, important consequences for legisla-
tion on these subjects. We have not been convinced that it is impossible
for any pornographic or obscene work to have artistic merit, and we
shall try to explain why we have not. At the same time, we
are convinced, for reasons that we shall give, that a public good
defence with respect to artistic merit is inevitably unworkable. Any
proposals for legislation must, we believe, accommodate both these
conclusions.
136
www.ebook3000.com

Pornography
8.2
The term “pornography” always refers to a book, verse, painting,
photograph, ﬁlm, or some such thing—what in general may be called a
representation. Even if it is associated with sex or cruelty, an object which is
not a representation—exotic underwear, for example—cannot sensibly be
said to be pornographic (though it could possibly be said to be obscene).
We take it that, as almost everyone understands the term, a pornographic
representation is one that combines two features: it has a certain function
or intention, to arouse its audience sexually, and also a certain content,
explicit representations of sexual material (organs, postures, activity, etc.).
A work has to have both this function and this content to be a piece of
pornography.
8.3
It is useful to distinguish works that extend over time (novels, ﬁlms)
from those that do not (paintings, photographs: series of pictures are
obviously an intermediate case). The former offer the possibility that they
may have some sections that are pornographic and others that are not,
leaving room for borderline questions about whether the work as a whole
is pornographic. Some such questions are unanswerable. However, it has
proved to be the case up to now that there has been a demand for works
which maximise pornographic content, so there is, in both the novel and
the ﬁlm, a deﬁnite genre of the pornographic work, which consists almost
exclusively of pornographic representations of sexual activity, often com-
plex. There is virtually no plot, no characters, no motivation except relat-
ing to sexual activity, and only a shadowy background, which may
involve a standard apparatus of a remote and luxurious chateau, numerous
silent servants, and so forth. This is the “ideal type” of a pornographic
work evoked by Steven Marcus.1
“Obscene” and “erotic”
8.4
We suspect that the word “obscene” may now be worn out, and past
any useful employment at all. It is certainly too exhausted to do any more
work in the courts. However, leaving aside the peculiar legal deprave and
corrupt deﬁnition we have considered in earlier chapters, it seems to us
that, insofar as it is not just used as a term of abuse, it principally expresses
1
“Pornotopia”: Encounter 1966. The concept of an “ideal type” is applied to Marcus’s
account by Morse Peckham: Art and Pornography (New York 1969).
pornography, obscenity and art
137

an intense or extreme version of what we have called “offensiveness”. It
may be that it particularly emphasises the most strongly aversive element
in that notion, the idea of an object’s being repulsive or disgusting: that
certainly seems to be the point when a person or animal is said to be, for
instance, “obscenely” ugly or fat.
8.5
The term “erotic” sometimes seems to be used just as an alternative
to “pornographic”, being milder with regard to both the content and the
intention: the content is by this interpretation more allusive and less
explicit, and what is intended is not strong sexual arousal but some lighter
degree of sexual interest. There is another interpretation2 of the term,
however, perhaps more accurate and certainly more interesting, under
which the erotic is what expresses sexual excitement, rather than causes it—
in the same way as a painting or a piece of music may express sadness
without necessarily making its audience sad. Theorists have not found the
notion of expression at all easy to explain, but a work which expresses a
given feeling can at least be said to “ﬁt” the feeling or to “match” it, and, in
virtue of doing that, to put one in mind of the feeling. In this sense an
erotic work will suggest or bring to mind feelings of sexual attraction or
excitement. It may cause some such feelings as well, and put the audience
actually into that state, but if so that is a further effect. This difference
comes out rather clearly in the case of romantic love. Many erotic works—
and of course many works that are not erotic—express the feelings of
romantic love, and invoke images of them in their audience, but the state
they bring about in their audience is very rarely that of being in love. On
this kind of account of the erotic, it will follow that what is represented in
an erotic work of art need not be a mild version of the pornographic at all.
There are countless erotic works of art, many of which have no explicit
sexual content of any kind.
8.6
As we understand these various notions, pornography, obscenity
and eroticism will be related in the following ways. Pornography will
have some tendency to be obscene, but will not necessarily be so. We
claimed in Chapter 7 that a tendency to be offensive is built into it, but it is
not universally even offensive—it may have some other merit which
cancels that effect. Still less must it inevitably be very strongly offensive
or obscene. On the other hand, there will be obscene things which are not
pornographic (e.g. it would be obscene to exhibit deformed people at a
2
Suggested in a paper by Antonia Phillips, commissioned by us, to which the present
chapter is indebted.
138
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

funfair, but that would not be a pornographic exhibition). Some pornog-
raphy is erotic, but it is not altogether easy for it to be so: the explicit
content and the intention of arousal tend to work against the expressive
effect of eroticism rather than with it. Many things, certainly, will be erotic
without being pornographic. The most unlikely combination, on the pre-
sent account, is that of the erotic and the obscene. Since the erotic is
intended to attract and hold the attention by being, in the sexual dimen-
sion, pleasant or delightful, it is hard to see how this could be combined
with the object being found at the same time disgusting and repulsive. The
idea is so difﬁcult, that this combination might be said to be impossible,
except that human reactions in these areas are so complex that we hesitate
to say that anything is impossible.
8.7
Some people may ﬁnd it paradoxical to say that it is hard, if not
impossible, for something to be both erotic and obscene. Several of our
witnesses have certainly found it natural to say of many publications or
ﬁlms that they were both. We do not deny that these words, and the word
“pornography”, are often used with meanings which are more general
and overlapping than those that we have just proposed. We claim only
that there are signiﬁcant and useful distinctions to be made here, and these
words can helpfully be used, in the ways we suggest, to mark those
distinctions. One body which submitted evidence to us, the Board for
Social Responsibility of the Church of England, made some careful sug-
gestions for distinguishing between these terms, and we found these
helpful, even though the account we have given of the matter is not
exactly the same as theirs.
Art
8.8
We have already assumed that there can be an erotic work of art, and
we take it that few would disagree with this. The questions now are: Can
there be a work of art which is pornographic? Can there be one which is
obscene? As we have already explained, these are for us two different
questions. We take ﬁrst the question about pornography.
8.9
As we said in an earlier chapter, it is incontestable that almost all the
pornography sold across (or under) the counter, or seen in the cinema, is
from any artistic point of view totally worthless. However, there is more
than one possible explanation of that fact. The interesting question, which
we shall be concerned with, is whether it just follows from the nature of
pornography that it is bound to be worthless. If it does not just follow,
pornography, obscenity and art
139

then other and more circumstantial explanations may be considered
(though we shall not consider them here): as that it is simply not worth
anyone’s while, at least in the modern world, to make pornography more
artistically interesting than it is.
8.10
Several arguments have been put to us, or have been implicit in
evidence we have received, to the effect that pornography cannot pos-
sibly have any artistic value. The most general argument to this effect is
probably that which has been expressed by Steven Marcus in saying
“literature possesses a multitude of intentions, but pornography pos-
sesses only one.”3 A related consideration is that the “one intention” of
pornography—sexual arousal—is achieved through a blankly explicit,
unmediated, content. Marcus’ point is made with respect to literature,
but if it is valid it can be applied just as well to the visual arts. It will be
claimed that pornography is by its nature purely instrumental, a crude
device for achieving a particular effect, and has nothing to do with the
complex concerns and intentions which properly belong to a work
of art.
8.11
However, it is not clear why it should be impossible to combine
other aims with the “one intention” of pornography. In the case of the
visual arts, there do exist some works which are indisputably porno-
graphic in content and intention, but which are thought to succeed in
realising other, artistic, concerns. There are many pornographic Japanese
prints of the 18th century, works of the admired master Utamaro and
others, which are regarded by critics as brilliant achievements. It can be
reasonably claimed, moreover, that they are not merely of artistic interest
despite being pornographic, but that their sexual intention is integrally
bound up with their merits as expressive designs. Many great Western
artists have of course produced pornographic works “on the side”, to
make money or for diversion, and some of these works no doubt have
merit; the peculiarity of the Japanese case is that there was a tradition of
very considerable artists applying their talents to this genre. Of course—to
repeat ourselves—there is no suggestion that the existence of these exotic
works somehow sheds artistic respectability on the vast range of current
pornographic material. What they do prove, however, if their merits are
agreed, is that it is not the simple fact that it is pornographic that makes all
that material artistically worthless.
3
“Pornotopia”: Encounter 1966. A similar point is made by Norman St. John-Stevas, Obscen-
ity and the Law (London 1957), p 137.
140
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

8.12
In the case of works which are extended in time, such as the novel
and the ﬁlm, more speciﬁc arguments are advanced to suggest that if they
are pornographic, they must be no good. Their participants are not char-
acters, but mere locations of sexual possibilities; there is no plot, no
development, no beginning, middle or end (a point made by the critic
Adorno). Moreover, since there are no characters or genuine human
presence, the whole effect is dehumanizing—destructive of any sense of
personal individuality or life. These descriptions are obviously correct. It is
perhaps worth adding that we do not entirely agree with those who in
evidence to us or elsewhere have expressed this sort of idea by saying that
the effect of pornography is to reduce everything to the physical. Among
the various kinds of human presence which are lacking from literary
pornography is, usually, any real sense of the human body. Because
pornography ministers to fantasies of boundless sexual satisfaction, every-
thing is weightless, untiring, effortlessly restored. The attempt to accom-
modate the same fantasies with photographs of actual people with actual
bodies is partly what makes so many pornographic photographs and ﬁlms
grotesque.
8.13
These descriptions apply more strongly, of course, the closer the
ﬁction in question gets to the schema of the unrelievedly pornographic
work. But obviously they would not apply unqualiﬁedly to a work which
had only some pornographic sections along with other matter, even if
those sections were integral to the work. Moreover, even works which are
totally pornographic can occasionally break away from the “ideal type”,
and one or two writers have experimented with introducing psychological
elements into the genre. Claims have been made by serious critics for the
artistic merits of certain pornographic literary works (we have heard of
none, as yet, with respect to thoroughly pornographic ﬁlms). The argu-
ments from the character of pornography do seem to suggest that concen-
tratedly pornographic novels are going to be interesting pieces of literature
only in rare cases, and then on a minor scale; but it does not seem to be
impossible, even in the extreme case, and it would certainly be rash to
claim on general grounds that any use of pornographic elements even in
the context of other material must make a work worthless.
8.14
The arguments of the last four paragraphs have been concerned
with questions of the intention and the structure of pornographic works.
What has not yet been mentioned in this connection is their tendency to be
offensive or obscene—in our present sense, that is to say, intensely or
repellently offensive. This tendency raises a question about artistic value:
pornography, obscenity and art
141

can a work have any artistic interest and in that way command the
attention of a reader or spectator, if it is at the same time found offensive?
The question gets more pressing, the more insistent the offensiveness of
the work. There may indeed be some pornographic works of artistic merit
which do not even raise the question; these will be works in which the
sexual content should not reasonably be regarded as offensive at all, and
the merits of the work themselves contribute to cancelling the aspects of
intrusion or violation that make other pornographic works offensive. The
Japanese works already mentioned, and some Indian erotic sculptures,
might be examples. Artistic merit can itself, in a case of this kind, contrib-
ute to the judgement whether a work is even offensive. There is another
kind of work which may be experienced as offensive, and also be experi-
enced as having aesthetic interest, but in the case of which these two
experiences do not occur at the same time. These will be works which
are found offensive at ﬁrst, or by a spectator who remains distanced from
them, but which lose that character for someone who is involved in them.
The question of how one can combine at the same time aesthetic interest in
the work and a sense that it is offensive will not then arise, though these
works will still be “offensive works”, in the sense of works which could
prove offensive to a casual viewer or to someone who came across them
and was unwilling or unable to involve himself in them.
8.15
Thus there can be pornographic works of merit which are not
reasonably regarded as offensive; and there can be initially offensive
works which can, once the offensiveness is past, display their merits. But
it would be unwise to deny that, beyond all this, there could be works
which were, and remained, offensive, indeed intensely offensive or
obscene, and yet possessed real merits. Experience of those merits, in such
a case, would surely have to involve the fact of their obscenity, and not just
co-exist with it; the repulsiveness would have to be an integral part of
what was being displayed by the artist. Where the work is itself porno-
graphic, the repulsiveness will not just be forgotten in sexual arousal, but
will be part of it. Some critics have claimed that certain pieces of French
literary pornography, notably by Georges Bataille, are signiﬁcant works of
this extreme kind.
8.16
An extraordinary work which illustrates, in a unique way, some of
the complexities involved here is Pasolini’s last ﬁlm Salò. This ﬁlm came
repeatedly into our discussions, both because of its nature, and also
because it was, during our enquiries, the subject of legal action. Having
been refused a certiﬁcate by the British Board of Film Censors, it was
142
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

shown in a London club but was quickly seized by the police, and those
who had shown it indicted. While they were awaiting trial, the Criminal
Law Act 1977 came into force, which changed the law applying to the
cinema from the test of indecency to the deprave and corrupt test. Because of
this, the Director of Public Prosecutions withdrew the proceedings, but
took the unusual step of announcing that anyone who subsequently
showed the ﬁlm would be prosecuted. It has however recently been
shown, though in a cut version. It has appeared in most other European
countries.
8.17
The ﬁlm displays scenes of extraordinary cruelty and repulsiveness,
supposedly happening under the short-lived Fascist republic set up at Salò
in 1944. It has the ritual form of a pornographic work—indeed, it is
speciﬁcally modelled on Sade’s 120 Days of Sodom. All of us agreed that
it is obscene, in the sense that it is ruthlessly and almost unwatchably
repellent. On its other qualities, and its merits, we found ourselves in great
disagreement. Most of us felt that it was manifestly not designed to
produce sexual excitement, and that it took great care not to do so, even
incidentally; on this view of it, the work, though obscene, is not porno-
graphic, despite its form. Some of us, however, were more suspicious of its
intentions. Those who were most impressed by it thought that it presented
an extraordinary metaphor of political power and was a remarkable work,
perhaps a masterpiece. For anyone with that opinion of it, it is a work that
combines artistic control and seriousness with a deep and sustained
obscenity.
8.18
Our conclusion is that there is no intrinsic reason why pornography
or even obscene works should not be capable of having artistic merit,
though there are undoubtedly reasons in the nature of such works, and
even more in the general conditions of their production, to make that an
unlikely and marginal occurrence, and the works, even when successful,
generally of minor stature.
The public good defence
8.19
The conclusion that a work can be pornographic or even obscene
and still be of artistic merit is one that of course agrees verbally with the
assumptions of the Obscene Publications Acts which, as we have
explained in Chapter 2, allow for the possibility that a work might be
obscene and yet it be for the public good that it be published on account of
its literary or artistic merit. But the agreement is only verbal, since the
pornography, obscenity and art
143

Obscene Publications Acts of course adopt the deﬁnition of obscenity in
terms of the tendency to deprave and corrupt, rather than a notion of
extreme offensiveness. Moreover, the merits of the work which would
allow it to be acquitted of an offence, even though obscene, are themselves
implicitly expressed in causal terms, to match the causal nature of the
deprave and corrupt test. The work’s tendency, as obscene, to produce bad
effects has to be weighed against its tendency, as having artistic merit, to
produce good effects, and the jury is expected to weigh one of these causal
properties against the other. But if there is a difﬁculty, on the side of
“obscenity”, in ascribing harmful effects to a speciﬁc book (we shall take
for the present discussion just the case of books), there is at least as much
difﬁculty in ascribing good effects with respect to literary merit, and the
task of showing why it was “for the public good” that some particular
book, with its particular literary merits, should be published, is one that
might understandably have bafﬂed the expert witnesses who were called
under this section.
8.20
We emphatically reject a view which a few witnesses put to us, that
books have no good or bad effects at all. Quite certainly books have all
sorts of effects, and in particular it is a reasonable assumption of much
education that good books—for instance, masterpieces of imaginative
literature—tend to have a certain kind of good effect, such as deepening
a reader’s understanding of human life: though one should not suppose
that they are the only effects those books can have, nor that their merit is
just to be calculated in terms of such effects. It has been said to us as an
argument for the suppression of pornography: “If good books have good
effects, then bad books must have bad effects”. First, it must be said, this
does not even follow: if good books have good effects it may be that all
that bad books do is fail to have good effects. This is not a purely formal or
verbal point. In the sense in which great works can draw the reader to new
possibilities and extend his grasp, bad works may merely do nothing—
they are inert, acquiescent, leave the reader as he was. Apart from this
point, however, and indeed granting that bad books can have bad effects,
the relevant contrast with good books does not of course lie in “bad
books” in the sense of pornographic or obscene books—it lies rather in
books which are “bad” because they fail to be works of creative literature,
for instance because they are unoriginal and shallow and possibly, one
may add, complacent or evasive as well, projecting some delusive image
of life. There is room for much disagreement about the kinds of harms that
might be ascribed to different kinds of bad literature, but if harm is done
144
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

by bad ﬁction, there is certainly no reason to think that it is peculiarly done
by obscene ﬁction, rather than by books that are bad because they are
deceitfully sentimental, or even (some purist critics would suggest) just
because they are badly written.4
8.21
Critics, writers and other expert witnesses called by the defence
under section 4 have been required to speak of the merits of the work in
question in terms of these causal concepts, supposedly relating some good
effect speciﬁcally to the work, of such a kind as to outweigh any tendency
to deprave or corrupt which the work might also possess. The supposed
causal character of these considerations, and the supposed weighing of
them, constitute the ﬁrst intractable feature of the public good defence.
Moreover—and this point would apply to any such provision, even in less
directly causal terms—the exercise has to be conducted in a court of law,
the witnesses faced by cross-examination—circumstances which cannot
make for the most sensible discussions of literary merit. It is not surprising
that many absurd things have been said in the course of such proceedings,
as by several expert witnesses for Lady Chatterley’s Lover, or by the distin-
guished authority who was trapped into trying to think of otherwise
unknown facts about 18th century London which one might learn from
Fanny Hill. We have considerable sympathy for those who have gallantly
gone to bat for works of art under these rules, but we can only regard the
rules as absurd, as many of them must also have done.
8.22
Besides the causal nature of the concepts of section 4, and besides
the drastic limitations of any court procedure, there is quite another reason
of principle against any such exercise. The procedure involves weighing
merit, but the merit will be possessed only by works which are, to some
appropriate degree, successful works of art. The defence therefore has to
take the form of claiming that the work in question is a good work; but this
cannot be an appropriate requirement. If the law on obscenity is to protect
artistic activity, it has to protect experimentation and the rights of new
writers in particular, to try something out. It follows that it must protect
the right to try and fail, and the experiment which issues in a bad book.
The public good defence in terms of actual merit cannot do this, and it is
entirely to be expected that its most famous victory was in defence of a
work by a writer, D H Lawrence, who was absolutely outstanding, long
dead, and already highly respectable. By contrast, the defence, using
4
For details of the history of the interpretation of section 4 of the Obscene Publications Act
1959, see paragraph 2.19 and following.
pornography, obscenity and art
145

section 4, of Last Exit to Brooklyn, an indifferent book by an unknown
writer, failed before a jury, though an appeal later was successful; in that
case, the expert witnesses tended to exaggerate the book’s merits, and they
could scarcely have done anything else, granted the underlying idea of
section 4.
8.23
Not only the requirement of merit, but the mere idea of the evidence
being given by experts, tends in this same direction. It is as though
informed persons, literary and artistic experts, are supposed to appear from
the world of culture and inform the jury of how things stand there with the
work under trial. Granted this, and the other features of the Act, it is not
surprising that it has been criticised as elitist in conception, and as saying in
effect that corrupting books are to be permitted so long as they are admired
by professors. This criticism is largely unjust, but it hits at a basic fault in the
Act, its absurd model of the role of expert opinion with regard to artistic or
literary merit. The model is not so much elitist, as scholastic: it implies an
informed consensus about merit which, for each work, already exists. In the
real world, new works have to ﬁnd their own way, and see whether they
elicit any appreciation or not. No one may know, for some time, what to
think about them. It is not just a matter of the avant-garde: works in some
despised medium or style may subsequently turn out to have had more
meaning than most experts would have originally supposed. (The recent
history of critical taste with respect to Hollywood movies of the thirties and
forties, compared to “art” ﬁlms of that period, is an object lesson in this.)
The critical reputation of a work can continue to vary. Expert consensus, if it
comes at all, and if it stays the same, must come after the event, and to
assume that expert opinion is available at the event, that is to say at the time
of publication, is merely to make the deathly assumption that all forms of
artistic signiﬁcance have already been recognised.
8.24
For all these reasons, we conclude that the idea of a public good
defence, relating to artistic or literary merit, is basically misconceived, not
merely in the form presented by section 4 of the Obscene Publications Act,
but quite generally. We have argued earlier in this chapter that it is not to
be excluded in advance that pornographic or even obscene works can, to
some degree, possess serious artistic interest. If our argument is correct,
the law will have to accommodate that possibility, but without resting on
the illusory hope of calling in experts to tell it when the possibility has
come about.
146
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

PART 3
Proposals

www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 9
The restriction of publications
B
The balance of our evidence
9.1
The evidence put to us showed a remarkable balance of opinion in
favour of the idea that the principal way of controlling pornography
should be to restrict its availability. A large proportion of the people
who wrote to us emphasised that there is a public nuisance as things are,
and they asked for controls which would ensure that those who did not
want to see pornography were not forced to do so. Many of the organisa-
tions who submitted memoranda to us took the same view, and proposals
of this kind constantly came up in our discussions with witnesses.
9.2
In a sense, there was virtual unanimity among our witnesses that
something should be done about what was seen as a public nuisance.
However, the attitude of witnesses varied enormously, from extreme
libertarians like the National Campaign for the Reform of the Obscene
Publications Acts who were only reluctantly prepared to accept that there
should be restrictions on public displays, to groups who wanted the
strongest possible measures to suppress pornography but who, like the
Nationwide Festival of Light, wanted these supplemented by a rigorous
control of offensive displays in public places. What we found remarkable
was that between these strongly opposed groups there was a very broad
consensus that the main objective of the law should be to protect members
of the public from the nuisance of offensive material in places to which
normal life happens to take them. In many of our discussions with wit-
nesses, from the Law Society to the Catholic Social Welfare Commission
and from the Greater London Council to the Free Church Federal Council,
we were struck by their readiness to agree with one another that the right
way to deal with a lot of explicit sexual material at least, was to conﬁne it
to those who wanted it and prevent its offending everyone else.
9.3
The then Secretary of State for Education and Science expressed
to us her view that what is allowed on open display should be clearly
149

distinguished from other material available to adults who want it.
Sir Geoffrey Howe MP commended to us the idea that if the law were
effectively to meet three areas of legitimate concern, corruption of the
young, affront to public decency and invasion of privacy, then society’s
grievances would be so well satisﬁed that more general restraints
on obscene publications might no longer be needed. Mr Norman St John-
Stevas MP made a similar proposal in an article in The Observer in February
1976, suggesting that the law should be shifted on to a basis of public
nuisance, being conﬁned to protecting people from being impinged on or
annoyed by pornography as they go about their ordinary business, and to
protecting children. Lord Justice Lawton expressed the opinion to us that
the right approach was to regard pornography as a public nuisance and that
the law should therefore concentrate on containing it rather than
prohibiting it.
9.4
It was to be expected that bodies to whom the idea of freedom of
expression is paramount, such as the Society of Authors, the Writers’
Guild and the Defence of Literature and the Arts Society, should regard
a law against public nuisances as more acceptable than one aimed at total
suppression. To emphasise the broad support which we found for this
approach, however, we quote other examples of the evidence we received
from various bodies, often from those not committed in advance to
any particular attitude on such questions. For example, the National
Federation of Women’s Institutes told us that there was a general feeling
among their members that it was impossible to suppress pornography and
that this, coupled with views about individual freedom, meant there
should instead be strict supervision over its sale so that it would be less
easily accessible to children and less likely to offend ordinary people. The
Penal Affairs Committee of the Society of Friends considered that the
control of pornographic material, particularly ensuring that people are
not unwillingly exposed to it, was preferable to attempting to prohibit it.
The Liberal Party believed that the law should be conﬁned to protecting
non-consenting adults and children, with adults otherwise having the
right to see what they wished. That this should be the only form of control
was not generally conceded, but there were other bodies who considered
that there should be some range of material available only under restricted
conditions: the Mothers’ Union, the Magistrates’ Association and the
Police Superintendents’ Association of England and Wales, for example,
all put forward the view that there might be special closely-regulated or
licensed shops to which the sale of certain material should be conﬁned.
150
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

9.5
The idea of protecting the public from a nuisance was also accepted
by those with a commercial interest in the material likely to be so
restricted. The British Adult Publications Association emphasised that
their members had no wish to offend reasonable people and accepted that
society is justiﬁed in regulating public display more severely than private
sale; they wanted to keep within the law and would adapt to whatever
new restrictions might be imposed. The Association for Cinema Club
Standards agreed that considerations of public nuisance were important
and told us that their members had agreed on restrictions on advertising
and front of house displays. We were told by the National Federation of
Retail Newsagents that many ordinary retailers would welcome the estab-
lishment of special shops for the sale of material of this kind if the result
was to make it easier for the newsagent to determine what he could and
could not legally sell. We also found some sympathy among wholesalers
for the idea that this particular aspect of the trade should be segregated in
some way.
9.6
The idea of permitting some kind of restricted trade in a certain class
of material was nevertheless opposed by some witnesses. The Nationwide
Festival of Light saw it as condoning the trafﬁc in pornography, and a
similar argument came from others with strong views about the evils of
pornography, such as Mrs. Mary Whitehouse and Mr. James Anderton,
Chief Constable of Greater Manchester. Mrs. Whitehouse stressed the
problem of “leakage”, that is, that publications of this kind are widely
circulated after their initial sale and that a control on the retail trade cannot
stop them becoming available to children, and obvious to people who ﬁnd
them offensive. Mr. Anderton thought that those who advocated restric-
tions on the trade just because they believed that suppression could not be
satisfactorily and strictly enforced by law were being defeatist. There were
also arguments of a different kind; that there would be physical problems
in ﬁnding separate rooms in which the material could be segregated, for
example; and that shops concentrating on such material would not be
viable or, on the other hand, that they would be excessively proﬁtable and
attract the attention of crime syndicates. There was also an argument from
the British Humanist Association and some others that to separate the
trade in this way would increase the burden of guilt and repression on
those who wanted access to pornography. There was some conﬂict of
psychiatric opinion on this question; the Portman Clinic thought that there
was now a well-established need for certain material and that to put it into
a ghetto carried the danger of making it the prerogative of psychopathic
the restriction of publications
151

and criminal groups; but at the same time value was seen in there being
some kind of social barrier which would help a disturbed patient to tell the
difference between what was and what was not acceptable.
9.7
Despite these reservations about the notion of imposing a control
rather than a prohibition, we were convinced by the evidence we received
that an approach directed primarily at curbing a public nuisance would
command very wide support. The arguments that we have explored in
Part 2 of this Report have convinced us that such an approach would be
appropriate and acceptable in principle, and also that it is neither neces-
sary nor desirable to give the law the task of trying to suppress all
pornography. We conclude, therefore, that the law should primarily aim
to restrict pornography so that it will not be offensive to the public, and to
satisfy the widespread feeling that young people should not be exposed to
material of this kind.
The means of preventing offensiveness
9.8
The proposition that the public should be protected against unwilling
exposure to offensive material is not of course new. It is embodied in the
existing and long-standing law against indecent public displays and has
found recent expression in the various attempts to introduce fresh legisla-
tion to modernise that law. This inevitably gives rise to certain questions.
If we already have such a law, why is there so much dissatisfaction with
the lack of protection it gives? If the situation is such that people are so
frequently offended, why is the law so rarely invoked? If the present law is
inadequate to prevent public offensiveness, why is a new statute enacting
broadly the same provisions considered to be the solution? Our answer
goes back to a point that we have already made in paragraph 7.11. So far
as pornographic materials are concerned, it is not usually the degree of
undress or the nature of the scenes actually visible to the casual public that
are very special: often, considered entirely in themselves, they need not
differ greatly from much material that is accepted elsewhere. It is the fact
that they are obviously associated with pornography that makes them
specially offensive. Magazine covers, for instance, are usually compara-
tively inoffensive compared with what is between the covers. But if legal
control is in terms of indecent displays, it is the cover alone which is at
issue, since the contents are not on display. It seemed to us, however, that
public concern was less about what people actually saw as it was about
what they knew it to be. Attempts to stop indecent displays, aimed as they
152
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

must be just at the intrinsic character of what is shown, are necessarily
misdirected, and doomed to disappoint those who put their hopes in
them. The problem lies not with indecent displays, but with displays of
the indecent, and to control these, one needs to go beyond the content of
the mere display itself to the character of the item being displayed.
9.9
Of course, to an extraordinary degree, nudity, titillation, eroticism
and sexual imagery are generally deployed in present capitalist societies,
above all for purposes of advertisement, and having nothing to do
with pornography or obscene publications at all. These motifs appear on
hoardings, on the sides of buses, on posters in Underground stations, in
magazines and newspapers, outside cinemas and theatres and in enter-
tainments generally. People differ in their reactions to these displays, and
in the degree to which they notice them. Many people, as is clear from
submissions to us, dislike them. But three things seem to us quite clear.
One is that the reactions to such displays (for instance, the kind of gigantic
advertisement for stockings or underwear which can confront one from
the other side of the Underground line), even when the reactions are
hostile, are very rarely anything like the sense of offensiveness many
experience with pornography. Second, it is highly unlikely that our society
is going to take the view that the law should step in to suppress such
displays; and many even of those who dislike them would say that this
should not be a proper task for the law. Third, no law could be effective
unless it were either so oppressive as to require radical changes in many
features of life (publications, advertising, television, ﬁlms and other enter-
tainment) which are now regarded as generally acceptable, or else gave
dictatorial powers to some person or body to enforce good taste. But if a
law against indecent displays is insufﬁcient to banish these advertisements
for rum or tyres, it will touch very little of what is presently seen on the
outside of pornography, either.
How to achieve restriction
9.10
We thus arrived at the conclusion that positive steps should be
taken to restrict the availability of a certain class of material, so that
children and young people, and adults who had no interest in it, were
less likely to come into contact with it. We considered whether measures
to restrict such material within shrink-wrapping or to high shelves or to
plain wrappers or to sale from under the counter would meet this desire,
but we decided that such restrictions would be less than satisfactory in
the restriction of publications
153

removing this material from the consciousness of people making routine
transactions in their local shop, and in some ways it could just make the
situation worse. We also considered whether the idea of a separate part of
the premises, such as a back room in a newsagent’s—as would have been
permitted under the proposals of the Vagrancy Working Party—would
represent an adequate segregation. Here again, we thought that the object
of the control would not adequately be answered by such a scheme. We
had to bear in mind that the Vagrancy Working Party’s proposals repre-
sented in effect a secondary control on offensive material: their recommen-
dations for protecting the public from indecent material assumed that the
existing law against obscene material would operate to ensure that a large
range of offensive material would not be sold even in the back room. Our
proposals, on the other hand, are to make restriction the primary control
(though not the only control) on pornography and if the aim is to avoid
knowledge of the presence of objectionable material offending the day-to-
day customers of ordinary shops, we considered that a stricter demar-
cation was called for.
9.11
We therefore decided that material of this kind should not be
available at all in ordinary shops. We realise that even a separate shop
will not avoid public consciousness of the existence of pornography, but
we have already argued in Chapter 7 (paragraph 7.14) that there must be
some point along the line where the balance has to be found between
public upset and individual liberty. If this material is available only to
those who choose to look for it and if children are automatically excluded,
this seems substantially to satisfy the objective. What is achieved is that
members of the public who go to ordinary retailers in order to buy
publications of general interest, newspapers, sweets and tobacco etc, will
be freed from the offensive presence of pornography, and generally they
will not run into it as they go about their ordinary business.
9.12
As we have made clear already, some of our witnesses wanted the
sale of material of this kind to be specially regulated or even specially
taxed, and suggested licensed premises to sell it, on the model of off-
licences or betting shops. We considered these arguments, but in the end
saw no grounds on which we needed to make a recommendation to this
effect. The main objective, in our view, is merely to restrict the availability
of pornography. We see no reason to dignify pornography with the
trappings of a licensing system or to make provision for those carrying
on businesses in such material to be subject to vetting or for their premises
to be subject to inspection. We do not think that the analogy with
154
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

gambling or alcohol has any validity, since in those ﬁelds there are con-
siderations of protecting the consumer from dishonesty and sharp practice
and of reducing the chances of public disorder, and these have no rele-
vance to the sale of pornography. The need for a licensing system to
ensure that a service is carried out properly scarcely applies to this kind
of business, which in any case is of interest to a relatively small part of the
population and therefore lacks a place in national life that would justify
the establishment of a formal system of control.
9.13
We also received proposals that there should be additional planning
controls on shops selling pornography and similar establishments. This
would involve the amendment of the use classes designated under the
Town and Country Planning Acts, since the present use classes do not,
subject to certain exceptions, distinguish between one shop and another.
A butcher’s shop may become a boutique, and a cycle shop be trans-
formed into a sex shop, without any form of approval being required from
the local planning authority. If, however, an exception to the use class
covering shops were made in respect of shops selling pornography, the
planning authority would be able to control the numbers and location of
such shops. It was emphasised to us, on the other hand, that this change
would not secure the object which our witnesses had in mind, since the
planning authority, in giving permission for a particular use, is not able to
have regard to every factor it believes to affect the public interest, but only
to those strictly related to planning considerations. The potential effect on
local amenities which attaches to the existing exceptions concerning shops
for the sale of such things as hot food, tripe and pets, is, it was said, of a
different and more objective nature than that attaching to sex shops. There
was therefore real doubt as to the extent to which the planning authority
could properly take into account the nature of the goods which such a
shop was to sell. It seemed to us that the pressures which would be placed
on planning authorities when they were considering an application to
open a pornography shop were unlikely to be based strictly on planning
and amenity grounds and that it would be undesirable, by requiring
special permission for such shops, to arouse expectations that other kinds
of objection would be relevant. It is clear in any case that market forces are
likely to restrict the number of such shops. We do recognise the concern
felt by some communities about the way particular localities appear to
attract businesses of this kind, and we noted the steps that many cities in
the United States have taken to secure the zoning of this trade, either by
conﬁning it to a particular locality and preventing it from spreading
the restriction of publications
155

elsewhere, or, conversely, by ensuring its dispersal and avoiding an over-
concentration in certain areas. However, we found it hard to see sufﬁcient
reason why pornography shops out of so many other kinds of retail outlet
should be singled out for special planning control. We concluded that the
balance of the argument was against seeking to amend the Town and
Country Planning Regulations to impose such a control.1
9.14
We are satisﬁed that the restriction of pornography should be in
negative terms only; that is, that it should aim only to place it behind
certain obstacles, so as to protect the public at large, and young people in
particular, from exposure to it. We do not advocate the setting up of
pornography shops nor do we suggest any other positive measures for
regulating the way in which pornography is made available. We sympa-
thise with those who told us that we ought to avoid according to pornog-
raphy any legal or bureaucratic recognition, and we see no need to do so.
The nature of restriction
9.15
The nature of the conditions to be placed on the lawful sale of
offensive material ﬂows fairly naturally from what we have so far said
about the aims of restricting it. We think it should be unlawful to sell or
display this material other than in separate premises, or at least a part of
premises having a separate access from the street, to which no person
under the age of eighteen should be admitted. (The choice of the age of
eighteen will be argued later, in paragraphs 9.39–40.) We consider in
addition that the aim of avoiding public offensiveness arising from the
public presence of this material demands not only that it should not be
displayed publicly but that shops selling it should be required to maintain
a discreet existence and not display in their windows similar but slightly
less offensive material: the best course, we believe, is for any such shop not
to be allowed any window displays at all but to present a blank exterior,
subject only to the display of its name and the nature of its business.
Exterior signs, in our view, need not be subject to any particular control
other than that provided by the existing law on the control of advertise-
ments. To protect the unwary member of the public, we think it right that
any shop wishing to sell restricted publications should exhibit a warning
notice at its entrance in such a way that an unsuspecting customer could
not see any of the goods offered for sale until he had seen the sign; the sign
1
For a further consideration about planning control, see paragraph 9.41.
156
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

would state that what was displayed could be offensive and that persons
under eighteen were not admitted. There might be advantage in the text of
such a notice being prescribed by legislation.
9.16
We considered whether the restrictions should go further than this.
One suggestion we looked at, for example, was that a shop wishing to
meet these conditions in order to be able to sell restricted material should
be further restricted in the goods it was able to sell, so that, for example, a
shop selling pornography would be precluded from selling goods of a
wider appeal, perhaps as loss leaders, in order to entice customers into the
shop. We were conscious that this would involve problems of deﬁnition,
particularly as we consider it unnecessary and undesirable to insist that
these special shops should sell only restricted material. Nothing came to
our notice to suggest that this was a problem which has arisen in relation
to those existing shops specialising in pornography. We decided that it
would be consistent with our approach of applying only a negative control
to the sale of pornography that a shop which accepted the conditions that
we have so far recommended should not be faced with any further
constraints on what it could and could not sell. We concluded that the
obstacles we have already proposed were sufﬁcient. No ordinary shop
would be prepared to exclude persons under eighteen, to operate behind
blank windows and to exhibit warning notices to those contemplating
entering. If a shop is prepared to go to those lengths, we think that the
protection of the young and of the unwilling adult from offence is sufﬁ-
ciently secured.
Mail order trading
9.17
There are other methods of trading besides shops. There already
exists, though in most cases strictly against the law, a mail-order trade in
pornography. From the point of view of avoiding public offensiveness,
this trade has much to be said for it; if a customer wants material which
others would ﬁnd offensive, his ordering it to be sent to him by a dealer
does not impinge at all on the public at large. We were therefore satisﬁed
that any scheme intended to avoid public offence should permit the
supply of restricted material by post. However, this mode of trading
involves two kinds of difﬁculty. First, a shop can fairly easily keep out
people who look as if they are under 18, whereas a mail-order trader does
not know much about those who send in orders. Secondly, only a cus-
tomer who chooses to enter will ﬁnd himself inside a pornography shop,
the restriction of publications
157

whereas it is much easier for the unsuspecting to ﬁnd himself in receipt of
material through the post, even where the dealer conscientiously avoids
indiscriminate mailing, because there will always be hoaxers who arrange
for matter (usually free brochures rather than an article which has to be
paid for) to be sent to others.
9.18
We must make the point that neither of these difﬁculties was men-
tioned to us as signiﬁcant in the way the trade has so far been carried on,
and we do not think that they tell against allowing mail-order trading
altogether. Clearly, however, some safeguards are necessary, particularly
to protect the individual from invasion of privacy. We think it right that it
should be an offence for a dealer to send restricted material to persons
under eighteen or to other persons who have not ordered it. In framing a
criminal offence along these lines, one will have to require some degree of
guilty knowledge on the part of the dealer, though he will be expected to
take reasonable steps to ensure that the law is not broken.
9.19
Where we are considering matter addressed to an individual in his
or her home, there are good reasons for insisting that individual privacy
needs protection against a class of material wider than that which would
be restricted in a more generalised public setting. We noted in this context
that section 4 of the Unsolicited Goods and Services Act 1971 had penal-
ised the unsolicited circulation not only of material of a prohibited class
but of advertisements for such material, and satisfaction was expressed to
us that the Act had effectively stopped many unsolicited circulars which
had caused offence to their recipients. We think this approach is reason-
able and we propose that the unsolicited circulation of advertisements for
restricted material should be prohibited. This has, after all, some parallel
with our proposal that shops selling restricted material should not be
allowed to display publicly even material which falls short of being
restricted, and we think it will make a positive contribution to avoiding
unnecessary offence being caused to members of the public.
The deﬁnition of restricted material
9.20
We have so far left on one side what is perhaps the most crucial
problem, that of deﬁning the material which is to be the subject of restric-
tion. The question of deﬁnition occupied a central position in our review:
as we have emphasised earlier, it is the deﬁnitions of the existing law
which contribute very largely to dissatisfaction with it and it is the prob-
lem of drawing lines for the future with which a good deal of our evidence
158
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

was concerned. It was the aspect of our review which preoccupied us
more than any other: it became clear to us that the success of any new
system would depend very heavily on the effectiveness of any legal
deﬁnition we proposed and also that there were very considerable difﬁ-
culties in formulating a test of the right kind.
9.21
One of the ﬁrst decisions we took was to escape from the words
which have been a part of the law for so long. The “tendency to deprave
and corrupt” and the words “obscene” and “indecent” were, we con-
cluded, now useless. The charges of vagueness and confusion were so
widespread that it was clear to us that we should break with the past
completely. But how should a new law tackle the problem? The alternative
formulations we received were almost as numerous as the people who
offered them. We considered three fundamentally different approaches to
the problem, each resting on a different basis. One was to ﬁnd some catch-
all word or phrase or general formula, such as the law had used hitherto,
but a new and more useful one. The second was to be totally speciﬁc, by
listing or describing in detail what it was that could not be shown. The
third was to abandon formulae or lists in favour of personal judgement,
and to recommend that a tribunal should be established which would
determine exactly where the line should be drawn in particular cases.
9.22
Some witnesses who were chieﬂy concerned for certainty in the
operation of the law favoured the idea of a tribunal. They argued that it
was in effect applying to publications what was already well-accepted in
the case of ﬁlms, and that models for such a system were to be found in
New Zealand and Australia. It would mean that those involved in the
trade in publications would know exactly where they stood in relation to
what they could or could not handle, because the tribunal would tell them
in advance. Such a system avoids the need for a sophisticated legal
deﬁnition because the tribunal itself can contribute all the ﬁner tuning in
the course of its own determinations on particular publications. There are
various ways in which a tribunal system could work and those in the
Australian states and in New Zealand are not identical. However, we
concluded that despite those precedents a system of precensoring publica-
tions would be quite unacceptable in this country and should be ruled out
without detailed consideration of the practicalities. It seemed to us that
there were strong objections to the idea that publications should be subject
to vetting before being put on sale, even if the vetting were conﬁned to a
certain class liable to be at risk of restriction and even granted that the aim
was not to ban publications entirely but only to conﬁne their sale to certain
the restriction of publications
159

outlets. We also found it hard to imagine how such a tribunal would be
recruited, what suitable people would be willing to serve on it, or by what
means it could hope to gain public acceptance. We turned away from the
tribunal back to some legal formula or list to be used in the courts.
9.23
Some of our witnesses considered that certainty in the law would be
best served by an explicit statement of what was not allowed. Words like
“obscene” and “indecent”, it was argued, would always be interpreted in
different ways by different people, but if the law said that photographs
should not show x, y or z, there could be no dispute. Faced as we were
with so much criticism of the vagueness and uncertainty of the existing
law, we could see the attractions in making the law explicit and we
therefore gave this proposal detailed consideration. We did not go far
with our consideration, however, before seeing some difﬁculties and
pitfalls.
9.24
One problem with this approach is that immediately an explicit
statement of what is disallowed is written into the law, the law becomes
ossiﬁed. If we imagine that twenty years ago the legislators had enacted
the Obscene Publications Act on the basis of an explicit description of what
was to be regarded as obscene, how curious their list would now seem.
How many times in the meantime would the list have needed amendment
to keep in step with changing public attitudes? More to the point, perhaps,
how many times, given Parliamentary pressures, would the list have
actually been amended? Where, as we propose, the object of the law is
to prevent offence, it must necessarily apply to what is generally found
offensive and it is therefore essential in our view that the law should be
responsive to ﬂux in public opinion. To specify exactly what we regard as
representing the level of offensiveness against which the law should act
involves ﬁxing a standard relative to our conception of current reactions.
But that standard may no longer be valid even when legislation comes to
be enacted; and once it is enacted it will become an extremely inﬂexible
standard which will tend to attract even more ridicule and odium to
the law.
9.25
Another problem with the explicit statement is that it needs to draw
ﬁne distinctions about precisely where the line is drawn, as opposed to
enabling a judgement to be made as to whether the overall effect is
offensive or not. This misdirects attention from the main concern, and
can produce absurd results. An illustration can be taken from the guide-
lines of the British Adult Publications Association, to which we referred
160
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

earlier. Publications intended to conform with the Association’s guidelines
must not contain photographs showing “actual sexual contact”, and to
draw the line at that point implies that a photograph is permissible so long
as actual contact is avoided; a centimetre of daylight satisﬁes the guide-
lines, though it may not in fact alter the offensiveness of the picture in the
slightest. The Association goes on to muddy the water by explaining that
illustrations showing near contact may also be prohibited “if considered to
be over-explicit”; uncertainties about what is “over-explicit” then begin to
detract from the value of trying to be speciﬁc.
9.26
To take another example from the opposite end of the spectrum,
possibly the most repressive proposals submitted to us were from a group
of people who wanted the meaning of obscenity made explicit through a
list which included “photographic portrayal of the adult female breast”.
Leaving aside the question of whether it could be realistic to set the law
against this target, it was far from clear to us just how the courts would
interpret this test in relation to many of the photographs frequently seen,
for example, in advertisements, taking account of the degree of décolletage,
the transparency of covering, the discreetness of the angle and similar
factors. And even the most repressive would no doubt recognise that this
could not be an absolute prohibition and that some kind of allowance
must be made for legitimate use of such photographs. To be speciﬁc, it
seemed to us, involved being arbitrary and ignoring the contribution
which the context or the manner of presentation would inevitably make:
material on the illegal side of the line might be in fact inoffensive, and
material which managed to fall on the permitted side might nevertheless
be quite offensive.
9.27
Another problem is that to base a law on an explicit statement of
what is prohibited requires that the statement should also be exhaustive.
We found, however, that it was far from easy to be satisﬁed that any
deﬁnition covered all the ground that it should. There is always the danger
that the enterprising pornographer will be able to develop from any
explicit list a blueprint of what he can get away with; using it as a basis
he can employ his ingenuity in identifying forms of activity which had
never occurred to the wholesome minds of Committee members and
legislators. We found that it was not difﬁcult to pick holes in the various
lists presented to us by our witnesses, and concluded that loopholes were
inevitable in any list that it was practicable to produce. But it also seemed
to us that it was peculiarly unattractive to attempt to set out an exhaustive
list of what was forbidden: in trying to forestall the fertile imagination of
the restriction of publications
161

pornographers, the list would become ridiculous, embarrassing and itself
potentially offensive.
9.28
Having considered the list approach in the light of the difﬁculties
we have described, we reached the conclusion that it would not satisfac-
torily form the basis of a legal scheme of restriction. We did not abandon
the hope that a more speciﬁc test would be possible than was to be found
under the existing law, but we decided that it was impractical for the law
simply to embody a description of those types of pictorial matter which at
any particular time Parliament happened to think were those that caused
offence and were therefore to be restricted. We considered that it would be
preferable for the law to be explicit about its objectives rather than about
what the result of pursuing those objectives at one particular time was
thought to be.
The formula we propose
9.29
We accordingly considered with some care what formula might be
appropriate to the aims that the law legitimately should pursue. We have
already explained in Chapter 7 (paragraph 7.23) our reasons for prefer-
ring, among general terms, the word “offensive”. As we also mentioned
there, we were conscious that people do differ in the extent to which they
ﬁnd things offensive, and that therefore something should be incorporated
to refer to what is, at any given time, the norm. After a great deal of
consideration, we decided in favour of the deﬁnition’s referring to what is
offensive to reasonable people. The notion of a reasonable person (usually in
the unduly restricted form of “the reasonable man”) is already known to
the law, in connection with judgements of responsibility, negligence, and
reasonable foresight. While that is a rather different kind of matter, we
thought it was appropriate to apply the term to the notion required here,
which is that of a person who takes a balanced view of the material in
question, and is neither excessively upset by each item nor totally indiffer-
ent to everything. Such judgements will manifestly be affected by contem-
porary taste and expectations, but that is part of the point—as we have
already said, in this kind of ﬁeld any formula must permit its effect to shift
with time. Conclusions that something is “offensive to reasonable people”
are bound to be rather loose or rough, in the sense that it is not a matter of
simple veriﬁable fact, and a magistrate will have to use his or her judge-
ment. But in any question of this kind, this is inevitable, whatever the
formula—that is the kind of question it is. Our proposed formula does not
162
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

try to conceal that fact; moreover, unlike the existing formulae, it does
make it clear what the rough judgement is a judgement about.
9.30
Our discussions up to this point about what should be restricted
have been in terms of there being a certain kind of material which reason-
able people at a given time would ﬁnd offensive material. This is the basic
case, and in a sense the root of the whole question. This naturally suggests
that the deﬁnition of what is to be restricted should be expressed in terms
of material which is offensive to reasonable people. However, the problem is
not as simple as this makes it seem.
9.31
First of all, the notion of offensiveness needs further qualiﬁcation.
There are various kinds of matter which might prove in various ways
offensive to reasonable people but which would not properly be caught by
a law aimed at pornography and similar material. We need a provision to
make it clear what kind of offensiveness is in question. To meet this point
we propose that matter should be restricted only in virtue of offensiveness
which arises by reason of the manner in which it portrays, deals with or
relates to violence, cruelty or horror, or sexual, faecal or urinary functions,
or genital organs. The introduction of this speciﬁcation does not mean a
reversion to the list approach; it does not offer any ground of restriction
independent of the notion of offensiveness. It merely makes clear what
kind or dimension of offensiveness is in question. This clariﬁcation of the
notion of offensiveness should, we propose, be spelled out in the law
governing restriction. In the rest of this Report, when we use the term
“offensive” unqualiﬁedly, it should be taken to mean offensiveness of the
kind speciﬁed in this paragraph.
9.32
Granted that this is what is meant by “offensive”, is it in fact
satisfactory to deﬁne the material to be restricted simply in terms of the
offensiveness of that material, as suggested at the end of paragraph 9.30?
As we have said, that is a very natural proposal, but after extensive
discussion we have come to the conclusion that that provision would
not actually effect what is required. In Chapter 7, we claimed that there
are two different boundaries crossed by publicly displayed pornography.
Its nature involves a violation of lines between private and public, and this
is often in itself found offensive; but, further, its public display forces this
violation on to unwilling spectators, and this is also something offensive.
The formula suggested in paragraph 9.30 relates essentially to the ﬁrst
consideration, the offensive character of the material itself. But this will
cover only material which a reasonable person would ﬁnd offensive
the restriction of publications
163

wherever he encountered it—even if, for instance, he were privately given
it by a friend. This leaves out the possibility that there could be porno-
graphic or similar material which a reasonable person would not ﬁnd
offensive under those circumstances, but would ﬁnd offensive if it were
publicly displayed. Granted the two separate boundaries which, we have
claimed, are crossed by publicly displayed pornography, it seems to us
entirely possible that there should be material, presumably of a milder
kind, which a reasonable person could scarcely ﬁnd offensive if privately
encountered, but which he or she would not want to see openly displayed
and available next to the sweets in the local newsagent’s. It seems to us
that the deﬁnition of restricted material should explicitly involve the
notion of public availability, and we propose that restriction should apply
to matter whose unrestricted availability is offensive to reasonable people. It is to
be understood all the time that the offensiveness in question is the kind
already speciﬁed in paragraph 9.31.
9.33
We must emphasise that, so far as adult persons are concerned, it is
not any paternalist interest that recommends this form of restriction test.
The reason that we have introduced the notion of the public availability of
the material being offensive is not that we are concerned with the case in
which a reasonable person, not ﬁnding the material in itself offensive,
thinks that other people, presumably less reasonable than himself, would
ﬁnd it in itself offensive. We are concerned with the case of material which
in itself a reasonable person does not ﬁnd offensive (in the sense of being
upset or put off by it wherever he might ﬁnd it), but the public display and
availability of which that same person ﬁnds offensive. Paternalistic pro-
tection of other adults is thus not the motivation of the test. However,
paternalistic protection in the literal sense, the protection of children and
young people, is a proper and very important aim of the law in this area,
one which has been put to us by many witnesses, and this provides
another reason for adopting the kind of restriction formula we propose.
There may well be material which reasonable people would not ﬁnd
offensive in itself, but which responsible parents would not want to be
available to children and young people, and this is properly something to
be restricted.
9.34
We considered very carefully the idea that a separate restriction test
should be introduced to cover this area of concern, but we have ﬁnally
decided that this not necessary. Moreover, we believe that to associate the
protection of the young with the same provision as has already been
introduced for other reasons serves to bring out an important point, that
164
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

the concern for the young is focused on just the same features of the
material as makes its display offensive to adults. What moves people
to feel that pornographic and similar material should not be available to
the young is just the same sort of thing that makes them ﬁnd its display
offensive. Someone may of course think that there are other, quite differ-
ent, sorts of reasons why certain publications which are suitable for adults,
and which, granted that there are no young people around, are even
suitable for display to adults, should not be available to young people.
To this we would say that if there are such publications, they will
have to be controlled by methods other than our restriction test, and this
seems to us the correct result. We would not think it right that law
designed to control the availability of pornography and similar material
should be capable of being extended to control the availability of other
matter to the young. If someone thinks, for the kinds of reasons that are our
concern, that a publication should not fall into the hands of the young, then
he will ﬁnd its public availability, not merely undesirable in some general
sense, but indeed offensive. We conclude, therefore, that the interest in
protecting the young is appropriately met by the restriction formula we
propose.
9.35
We have suggested that our restriction formula is to be preferred to
a simpler test, in terms merely of offensive material, because it desirably
goes rather wider. The question then arises, whether it catches everything
that the simpler test would catch. Could there be material which was
offensive to reasonable people but whose public availability would not
be offensive? So far as pornography and similar material is concerned, we
think that the answer is obviously “no”. If anything of that sort is offensive
in itself, so is its availability, and it will be caught by our formula.
However, there might be another kind of material for which this was not
so: for instance, certain kinds of news or historical material. There could be
news photographs of some atrocity which were very shocking, and could
properly be described as offensive by reason of the way they related to
violence and cruelty. Reasonable people would be upset or repelled by
them, and indeed, in that sense, ﬁnd them offensive. However, if the
photographs are circulated or made available genuinely in order to
inform, instruct, warn, and so forth, and not in any exploitative spirit,
then, it seems to us, a reasonable person would not ﬁnd their public
availability offensive.
9.36
We have already argued (paragraph 7.22) that no publication
should be liable to restriction in virtue of matter that it contains which
the restriction of publications
165

consists solely of the written word. What we propose as a restriction test,
then, fully spelled out, is that matter should be restricted
which, not consisting of the written word, is such that its unrestricted
availability is offensive to reasonable people by reason of the manner in
which it portrays, deals with or relates to violence, cruelty or horror, or
sexual, faecal or urinary functions, or genital organs.
9.37
It seems to us that this deﬁnition would clearly apply to the pictorial
sex magazines which have come into circulation in Britain in recent years.
It would also, in our view, apply to horror comics of the kind that the
Children and Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act 1955 was aimed
against, though it will mean that the test of the “tendency to corrupt a
child” will be superseded by what we believe to be the more realistic and
straightforward test of what is, in the respects mentioned in the last
paragraph, offensive to reasonable people. The effect of our proposals is
that nothing to which this deﬁnition applies will be able to be displayed in
public places or be sold in shops to which children and young people have
access. Restriction will not be imposed on naturist magazines or on pin-up
magazines of a more old-fashioned variety, since we do not propose that
simple nudity should bring a publication within the prescribed class.
Restriction will apply not only to publications, but to 8 mm ﬁlms etc; also,
the kind of sex hardware to be found in many sex shops would we think
be equally covered by the deﬁnition. It is certainly not our intention that
contraceptives should be restricted in the same way, and we think it
desirable that the law should make it clear that contraceptive materials
are not included under the deﬁnition.
9.38
It is appropriate at this point that we refer to the subject of blas-
phemy. The offence of blasphemy does not fall within our terms of
reference and indeed it is the subject of separate review, along with other
offences against religion, by the Law Commission. We do not, therefore,
have to deal with it. However, we think that it would be artiﬁcial for us to
leave it out, since the only recent instances in which the offence of blas-
phemy has been used (in the case of the publication by Gay News of a
poem by James Kirkup) or the possibility of its being used has been in
issue (principally as regards the projected ﬁlm of the purported sex life of
Christ) have been in a connection which falls plainly within the ﬁeld we
have been considering. We therefore express the view that the principles
we have set out relating to harm and offensiveness apply equally to matter
of this kind and that the appropriate way for the law to deal with such
166
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

matter is through the scheme we have outlined here. We do not believe
that the law should seek to restrain material of this kind if it does not
offend against the test we have recommended and consequently we con-
sider that in these connections there is no need for a separate offence of
blasphemy. Whether there are other reasons for keeping an offence of
blasphemy is not for us to decide.
The age limit for special protection
9.39
There is no obvious choice for the age below which young people
should be specially protected against exposure to restricted material.
Sixteen is the age of consent in relation to heterosexual activity and the
age at which young people, with their parents’ consent, may marry. Some
witnesses thought that it would be odd—and was already odd in relation
to the present ﬁlm censorship system—that married couples free to engage
in sexual activity should be considered too young to view the portrayal of
sexual activity by others, and this was an argument put to us strongly by
the British Youth Council as reﬂecting the views expressed in the course of
their consultations among young people themselves. This argument did
not prevent the minimum age for admission to “X” ﬁlms being raised from
sixteen to eighteen in 1970, and we noted that eighteen is the age custom-
arily adopted by the owners of existing pornography shops as the min-
imum for entry to such shops. Eighteen is of course the age of majority and
the age at which young people may marry without their parents’ consent.
It seemed to us that the real choice lay between these two ages rather than
between either of them and some other age, higher, lower or in between.
9.40
We thought that the argument that those who could lawfully
engage in sexual activity should be allowed free access to pornography
took an over-simple view of pornography. Much of what we have seen
does not merely portray straightforward sexual activity of the kind that
those who propose such arguments seem to have in mind. Those respon-
sible for the censorship of ﬁlms ﬁrmly believe that there is much ﬁlm
material that is totally unsuitable for adolescents, and the modiﬁcation of
the censorship categories in 1970 reﬂected the concern of those then
responsible that an age limit of sixteen did not sufﬁciently protect those
likely to be at risk from seeing ﬁlms of this nature. Arguably, many
publications fall into the same category. We have already reported in
Chapter 6 that there was no consensus among our expert witnesses about
the age at which young people cease to need special protection, given the
the restriction of publications
167

varying ages at which a certain level of maturity is reached. But the
evidence we received gave some grounds for thinking that many young
people of sixteen might still be vulnerable. Moreover, we felt bound to
take into account, as the ﬁlm censors sometimes do, that there is often a
“slippage” problem in applying age restrictions, and that, for example, the
adoption of eighteen as the age below which protection is given will in
practice mean that far fewer ﬁfteen-year-olds will be put at risk than if the
prescribed age were sixteen. Given these doubts, and the recognition that
the present practice in relation both to the showing of ﬁlms and the sale of
pornography adopts eighteen as the appropriate age to which to continue
restrictions, our conclusion is that it would be wrong for us to recommend
that the age be lowered.
A public good defence?
9.41
We had to consider one other issue relating to the scope of the
deﬁnition. This was whether there were grounds on which some matter
might need to be exempted from restriction. Exemption might be on the
kind of basis which allows the present exemption under the Obscene
Publications Acts—artistic, literary or scientiﬁc merit, for example—or
on the kind of basis urged on us by the Defence of Literature and the Arts
Society that it might be for the public good to display frank posters
illustrating the dangers of venereal disease. So far as artistic merit is
concerned, we have already argued that a public good defence is anyway
unworkable; and since the restrictions are not to apply to the written
word, the question, for literary works, cannot arise (this is indeed one,
but only one, of the reasons for not applying restrictions to the written
word). Bearing in mind the terms that we propose for the deﬁnition, we
doubt that there is a need for any exemptions at all. Medical textbooks
deal with and depict sexual organs, etc, but we do not think that reason-
able people are likely to ﬁnd their availability offensive. There are visual
works of art which, despite the fact that their content falls within the area
described in the speciﬁcation, would also not be reasonably found offen-
sive. However, there could be others, as we have argued in Chapter 8,
which are such that they or their display would reasonably be found
offensive; in that case, there is no objection to their being on restricted
display. Restricted display, after all, does not necessarily mean display in a
sex shop; an art shop or gallery could satisfy the law by making no display
outside the premises, restricting admission to adults, and putting up a
warning notice, for the duration of that particular exhibition. (That one
168
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

should be able to provide for this possibility is another argument against
making restricted premises a special use-class under the planning regula-
tions: see paragraph 9.13 above).
9.42
We also think it highly unlikely that reasonable adults would ﬁnd
that the display of straightforward posters about venereal disease or about
road safety—even if their intention is to horrify and shock the viewer out
of a state of complacency—were offensive, but we think it right that such
posters should even so be subject to the law. Posters need not be offensive
to be effective and we see no reason why posters of that particular kind
should not be subject to restrictions designed to protect the general public
from offensiveness with respect to sex and violence.
Enforcing restriction
9.43
It remains for us to deal with the arrangements for enforcing the
restriction of publications and displays. First, we envisage that the sale or
displays of restricted material other than in the circumstances we have
described above should constitute an offence. This would clearly not be an
offence calling for the heaviest penalties: restricted material is not to be
regarded as inherently objectionable to the law and the mischief lies only
in its being sold in the wrong place. Accordingly, it does not seem to us
that either the nature of the offence or the need for an effective deterrent
against non-compliance requires that it should be triable other than in a
magistrates’ court, though we think that magistrates should be given their
normal maximum sentencing powers, including the ability to send offend-
ers to prison, so that they can effectively deal with a person who might
otherwise consider it worthwhile to break the law in a persistent way. The
same should apply to offences of sending restricted material through the
post to persons under eighteen and to people who had not solicited it. It
seemed to us that in all these proceedings what was offensive to reason-
able people should be a simple matter of judgement for the court: it is not
an issue on which evidence ought to be admissible.
9.44
In considering the creation of offences, the question arises whether
there should be a legal deterrent against a person under eighteen who tries
to gain entry to restricted premises or solicits restricted material to be sent
through mail order. This is similar to the arguments put to us strongly by
cinema interests that there should be a sanction on the young customer as
well as on the cinema licensee in relation to the restriction of entry to ﬁlms
with “X” certiﬁcates, an issue which we shall discuss at greater length in
the restriction of publications
169

Chapter 12. We do not think that the pressures will in any case be the
same, because the evidence we received was that young people were far
less interested in pornography shops than in seeing the latest ﬁlm given an
“X” certiﬁcate. We are not proposing that it should be an offence for a
shopkeeper simply to admit a person who is in fact under eighteen—as
opposed to failing to take reasonable steps to enforce the restriction—and
we simply record our view that it is not necessary for a person under
eighteen to be liable to criminal charges if he or she attempts to gain entry
to a shop closed to persons of that age or orders material by post.
9.45
Although it may often be the case that a restriction offence will be a
blatant one, in the sense that a shopkeeper will be openly selling from his
shelves material which should be restricted, there could well be other
cases where restricted material is being sold more discreetly, from under
the counter for example, and where evidence may be harder to obtain. For
this reason in particular, we propose that the police should have power,
with the authority of a magistrate’s warrant, to enter premises to search
for restricted material being traded in contravention of the restrictions,
and to seize such material as may be necessary for purposes of evidence.
We heard some complaints that the present seizure powers are exercised
in a way that denies the occupier of the premises a receipt or at least some
form of record of what has been taken by the police. We think that this is
wrong and although we consider it preferable, in the light of the practical
difﬁculties which undoubtedly exist in some circumstances, not to lay
down a formal requirement for a receipt to be given at the time of seizure,
we express the view that a person from whom goods are seized should be
given at the earliest practicable opportunity a detailed record of what has
been taken from him. We also heard complaints that the police sometimes
seize irrelevant items along with the publications believed to be obscene;
there is already a civil remedy available in such cases and we do not think
it necessary to make any proposal to deal with the possibility of abuse of
seizure powers. We believe, however, that our proposals will mean that in
future there will be less scope for the seizure of irrelevant material.
9.46
It does not seem to us appropriate, however, that the police should
have a power of arrest for this offence, nor that there should be a proced-
ure similar to that under the Obscene Publications Acts, by which a court
can be invited simply to order the forfeiture of material as an alternative to
considering criminal charges against the person from whom it was seized.
As we have already made clear, it is not the material itself which offends
against the law but only its mode of sale, and we therefore consider that
170
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

the proper way of proceeding is to take action against the person who is
dealing in it illegally. We propose, however, that the court considering
such a charge should have power to order the forfeiture of seized material
if it considers that course to be justiﬁed.
The right to prosecute
9.47
One enforcement matter which created controversy in the evidence
we received, as we have mentioned in Chapter 2, was the right to institute
proceedings in the courts. The arguments in favour of the right of private
prosecution are that it is an important constitutional safeguard that the
citizen should have the power to challenge the refusal of the prosecuting
authorities to enforce the law; that without that safeguard the prosecuting
authorities may feel obliged, to avoid allegations of inactivity or worse, to
undertake more prosecutions than they judge are really justiﬁed; that to
channel all cases of a particular nature through a central authority will
place a burden on that authority which will hinder the effective operation
of the law; that central control involves turning whoever exercises that
control into a censor or an arbiter of taste; and that where an offence
depends on judgement rather than fact, that judgement should properly
be exercised by the courts rather than by a person with the power to
decide what should be put before the courts.
9.48
As Appendix 1 explains, the present law contains no consistency of
approach and existing provisions are of various kinds. The arguments set
out in the preceding paragraph are of varying relevance to the different
solutions. Basically, three choices faced us: allowing offences to be pros-
ecuted by any individual; imposing a centralised control on prosecutions;
or, a middle way, restricting the institution of proceedings to the normal
police prosecuting machinery, without central control but also without
allowing private prosecutions. An argument for central control in this ﬁeld
has been the desirability of consistency in the operation of an imprecise
law, particularly where the national circulation of a particular book,
magazine or ﬁlm may in theory give rise to offences which could lead to
a multitude of prosecutions in different places. However, bearing in mind
also the arguments against a central control we have already referred to,
we took the view that it was hardly appropriate to impose centralised
control with regard to violation of the restriction requirements, especially
as we have proposed that it should be an offence triable only by
magistrates.
the restriction of publications
171

9.49
There are also, however, arguments against allowing individuals to
invoke the law. Where a law embodies a concept of offensiveness, there
will inevitably be varying views of what is offensive. We do not think it
difﬁcult for the law to apply a general standard of what is offensive to
reasonable people but we know from the evidence we received that there
will be a number of individuals who will be much more liable to be
offended than the generality of their fellows. We doubt if it is in the public
interest for people of this kind to be able to use the courts for the purposes
of pursuing their own unrepresentative view of offensiveness, particularly
as the offence of which they are complaining will not be against them in
particular (contrast it, for example, with the case of the individual being
able to ensure that his or her assailant is charged with assault) and they
will have only a self-appointed status to institute proceedings.
9.50
We therefore take the view that restriction offences should normally
be prosecuted by the police and that private individuals should not have
the right to institute proceedings. This does not mean, in our view, that no
safeguards exist against lax or improper exercise of police discretion. An
individual who believed that the law was not being enforced could act in
several ways, for example, by generally making a fuss and writing letters
to the Chief Constable or the newspapers or the local MP, or by bringing a
formal complaint if the circumstances made that appropriate, or by insti-
tuting proceedings by prerogative order of mandamus, as is not unknown
in relation to the enforcement of the obscenity laws. Given these alterna-
tive avenues, we do not believe that the case for the private prosecutor in
this ﬁeld can be sustained.
172
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 10
The prohibition of publications
B
The need for prohibition
10.1
In the previous chapter we explained our decision that the principal
objective of the law should be to prevent offence to the public at large and to
protect young people from exposure to unsuitable material. We described
how some witnesses thought that measures of that kind were the limit of the
law’s concern, how others felt they were no more than a starting point and
how others considered that the appropriate course was to supplement them
by more rigorous measures against certain types of material. We shall
consider in this chapter what the law needs to do once it has secured its
prime object of curbing public offensiveness. Is there anything that one
should prohibit totally, even for adults who want to have it?
10.2
Under the general principles discussed in Chapter 5, any such pro-
posal has to be related to harms. Our proposals in this chapter therefore
have to take account of the detailed study we made of allegations of harm in
Chapter 6. Leaving aside offensiveness, which is dealt with by restriction,
some of our witnesses thought that there were no harms involved in
pornography which were not already outlawed by other penal provisions;
we could either leave protection from those harms to be dealt with by the
schemes of law concerned, or simply provide a prohibition on material
depicting acts which contravened the law. At the very least, this would
have to be a prohibition on pictures which not only depicted an illegal act
but were also offensive; otherwise it would be illegal for there to be a
photograph of someone driving across a double white line. But even with
material within our terms of reference, great anomalies would be involved.
The depiction of sexual offences
10.3
A basic problem is that the present law on sexual offences itself
contains anomalies, so that to use these laws as the basis of prohibitions on
pornography would produce very odd results. What two consenting male
173

adults do in private is not by and large the concern of the law. Heterosex-
ual buggery, on the other hand, even between a married couple, consti-
tutes an offence. It did not seem to us defensible to produce a law which
had the effect of banning photographs of such acts between a man and a
woman but allowing them if the activity involved two men. In fact, we
could not see why it should be necessary to prohibit photographs of acts of
buggery at all and we derived support for this conclusion from various of
our witnesses. The Catholic Social Welfare Commission, for example,
considered that the right treatment of representations of the act of buggery
was what we have called restriction rather than prohibition, and that there
was no reason why such pictures should not be available to those who
chose to have them.
10.4
Another difference in the law relating to sexual offences concerns the
treatment of group sex. Heterosexual or lesbian behaviour is subject to no
sanction dependent upon the number of people involved. Homosexual
activity between men, on the other hand, is legal only if it happens between
two adults in private, and the presence of a third person creates the presump-
tion that the activity was not in private. It seemed to us that the implied
presence of a photographer might serve to make any photograph of a
homosexual act arguably one of an illegal act; but it would certainly show
an illegal act if it depicted more than two persons. Again, this was a distinc-
tion between heterosexual pornography and homosexual pornography
which we thought the law should not introduce. We make no comment on
the law on sexual offences which produces this situation, noting that it is itself
the subject of review by the Criminal Law Revision Committee. For reasons
of which we have given these examples, we considered that it would be
unsatisfactory to introduce any prohibition on pornography which
depended just on whether or not the act depicted was against the law.
Identifying harmful material
10.5
One class of potential harms which seems to us very clear and
deﬁnite, and to call for a prohibition on certain publications, is that of
harms to those involved in the production of pornography. We have
already expressed in paragraphs 6.68 and 6.72 our conclusion that
there were such harms involved in the exploitation of children and also
of others where the inﬂiction of physical harm was involved. We sug-
gested that this harm lay not only in the original act, which might already
be caught by the existing law on sexual offences or on personal violence,
174
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

but in the circulation of depictions of that act, because they both exploited
that act and provided the motive for it. Moreover, we thought that point
applied as strongly, or more so, when the original offences were commit-
ted outside British jurisdiction. We think it right, therefore, that the law
should prohibit both the acts concerned and the circulation of material
depicting them. (In this connection, a “depiction” must be something the
existence of which implies that the event represented happened in actual
fact—that is to say, in effect, a photograph.) In considering how the law
should achieve this, we decided, following the line that we found most
useful in deﬁning material to be restricted, that the law should be speciﬁc
about its objectives, making clear what the particular harms were at which
it was aimed.
10.6
The formula we devised in the light of this decision and of the
nature of the harms we wished to prevent, is in the following terms:
Material whose production appears to the court to have involved the
exploitation for sexual purposes of any person, where either
(a) that person appears from the evidence as a whole to have been at the
relevant time under the age of sixteen years; or
(b) the material gives reason to believe that actual physical harm was
inﬂicted on that person.
In our discussions about exploitation, we recognised arguments that
exploitation might lie in a person’s being used for some purpose without
his or her consent. However, we do not think that consent should constitute
any defence in the context of the material we have described. We consider
that the law should explicitly state that consent by a person under the age of
sixteen years is to be regarded as irrelevant; in relation to adults, such a
provision would not be appropriate but we note that there is already law on
the subject of consent to injury. Although the position is not entirely clear,
consent to the inﬂiction of serious injury does not necessarily make the
inﬂiction of that injury lawful. It may therefore be appropriate to leave the
courts to determine in the context of the formula we propose above what
should be the precise scope of the effect of consent in such cases. We would
not rule out the possibility of speciﬁc legislative provision, but since it
would raise questions of general principle extending beyond our terms of
reference we offer no view on the nature of such a provision.
10.7
Where material comes to light which seems to contravene the
description we have set out, there will clearly be doubts as to the
the prohibition of publications
175

circumstances in which it was produced, and it may well be impossible to
resolve them, particularly if the material comes from abroad. These doubts
are most likely to relate either to the age of a young person who appears in
a photograph, or to the question whether what seems to be physical harm
is actual or simulated. To require the prosecution to prove that a person
was under sixteen, or that someone was actually harmed, seems to us to be
a quite unrealistic burden to impose, and it would probably result in the
prosecuting authorities being unable to act, particularly against child
pornography (as we made clear in Chapter 6, we regard the case of actual
physical harm being inﬂicted as more hypothetical). The only possible
course, in our view, is to leave these issues to be decided by the court by
way of the best assessment it can make of what the material depicts,
coupled with any evidence which can be adduced by either prosecution
or defence. It may be that an appropriate way of securing this result is to
provide that in any case in which it appears to the court that material is
prima facie prohibited, the burden of proof should shift to the defence to
show that it is not. It may be that the effect of such a provision would be to
discourage pornographers from dealing in material which shows young
people who look as if they might be under sixteen even though they are in
fact older, or which displays realistic-looking sado-masochistic violence
which the dealer cannot prove is simulated. If that happens, it would not
disturb us.
10.8
We carefully considered whether there were any other forms of
publication that should be prohibited, rather than merely restricted. We
have provided for the protection of those participants that we think the
law should cover. Is it necessary, further, to invoke prohibition in order to
protect consumers of pornographic and violent material, or society from
those consumers? We have stressed in Chapter 5 the weight of proof that
rests on anyone who proposes this, and have mentioned (in paragraphs
5.30–5.33) two principles, that the alleged harms should be shown to exist
beyond reasonable doubt, and should be traceable speciﬁcally to the kind
of material in question. We believe that Chapter 6 shows fairly clearly that
these requirements have not been met with regard to any kind of material
other than the sort we have speciﬁed in paragraph 10.6 above, and
accordingly we do not think that there is need for a law to prohibit any
other kind of material that falls within our terms of reference.
10.9
There are two areas which perhaps require rather more comment:
pornography depicting bestiality and material of an extremely violent
nature. We found that many of our witnesses thought that pornography
176
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

depicting bestiality should belong to a nucleus of material which was
banned, and we noticed that some foreign countries which retain a tightly
drawn prohibition regard it as properly applying to bestial pornography.
Having spent some time examining the question and discussing it with
witnesses, we are satisﬁed that the feelings we encountered about the
treatment of bestiality are based simply on its ability to arouse extreme
distaste and disgust among most members of the population. The argu-
ments for prohibiting pornography which depicts bestiality reduce to the
proposition that it is too revolting for any civilised society to tolerate. But
this kind of consideration clearly places such material within the class to
be restricted, not in that to be prohibited. Such material seems to be of
appeal and interest only to those with a pre-existing disposition towards
it; the reaction of others is of disgust and aversion, and the idea that
pornography of this kind has a corrupting effect on those who see it
appears to have no basis in fact. We felt unable on any rational judgement,
therefore, to say that publications depicting bestiality should be prohibited
to those who want them. Some people may be concerned about this
material on the rather different ground of the ill-treatment of animals in
its production. It did not seem to us that the production of this material
often caused harm to animals and we considered it sufﬁcient that recourse
could be had in appropriate circumstances to the law protecting animals
from cruelty.
10.10
The subject of extreme violence gave rise to very serious concern;
but we found that there applied very particularly to this area a consider-
ation which has repeatedly impressed us in this enquiry, and which we
have already mentioned more than once, that the various media have a
different impact and demand different treatment. Violence has its
strongest impact on the screen, above all in the cinema; it is of course also
a matter of constant discussion with regard to television. To freeze violent
activity on to the page greatly reduces its impact, and in fact we do not
think that the issue of violence is very relevant to publications. To some
extent, the protection of children from unsuitable violent publications has
been a matter of concern, but this is met by our proposals for restriction.
Otherwise, there is simply no form of publication which gives rise to the
problems raised by violent material. The sorts of ﬁlms, usually 8mm,
which are sold in sex shops, do not raise a serious problem in this
connection; while the cinema, we decided, could be dealt with separately,
in the ways which we shall discuss in Chapter 12. Given that that is so, it
did not seem to us that in the ﬁeld of violence our prohibition law needed
the prohibition of publications
177

to cover anything other than the protection of participants from actual
physical harm, as we have already proposed.
Transactions to be prohibited
10.11
We propose that any form of trade in the material we have
described in paragraph 10.6 should be prohibited. We propose that the
importation of this material and its transmission through the post should
also be prohibited. But we think the law must go further. The taking of
photographs or the making of ﬁlms of that description should be made
unlawful whether the motive was commercial or not, and the private
circulation of the results, whether or not for gain, should be equally
prohibited. This would be consistent with the existing law relating to child
pornography, enacted in the Protection of Children Act 1978, and indeed
with the present law on obscene publications generally. If we are to
narrow the law to the area where positive harms are plainly to be seen,
we believe that it is right for the most rigorous steps to be taken to ensure
that those harms are effectively prevented. When imposing control
through the criminal law, however, we think it valid to recognise some
limits: we consider it neither practicable nor desirable for the law to
penalise the private possession of this material, any more than mere
possession is subject to the law as it now stands.
A public good defence?
10.12
We considered in relation to our proposed scheme of restriction
whether there was material which ought to be allowed to escape control on
the ground that it possessed some quality which overrode the need for it to
be controlled. We must now consider the same question in relation to our
prohibition proposals, bearing in mind that it is a more serious step to
suppress material entirely than merely to restrict its availability. However,
the object of the prohibition we have proposed is to avoid harms of a highly
speciﬁc kind and it seems to us, ﬁrst, that the chance of meritorious material
falling within the categories we have speciﬁed is fairly remote and, sec-
ondly, that the harms we are guarding against are not easily outweighed by
merits of some other kind. We do not think that artistic merit, for example,
will be capable of justifying the sexual exploitation of a child or the inﬂic-
tion of physical injury on anyone. We therefore conclude that the terms
of the prohibition are such that no material should be able to secure
exemption on the grounds of any other merits it may be held to possess.
178
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Enforcing prohibition
10.13
We propose that it should be an offence to produce or distribute
prohibited material, whether or not for gain. So far as the importation of
prohibited material is concerned, however, we think it sufﬁcient that
material within our prohibition class should be added to the list of pro-
hibited imports, so that it will be dealt with by the normal Customs
procedures which apply to all goods prohibited from import including,
hitherto, indecent and obscene articles. This course will be an alternative
to creating a new offence of importing prohibited material and provid-
ing fresh powers to deal with material discovered in the course of import-
ation. The effect will be to apply the provisions of the Customs Acts, which
will enable any such imports to be seized at the port of entry and will
make it an offence to import such material with intent to evade the
prohibition.
10.14
The same material should be prohibited from being sent through
the post. This would largely meet our international obligations under the
Universal Postal Convention, which are described in Appendix 1. How-
ever, Article 33 of the Convention forbids the posting to other countries of
articles of which the importation and circulation is prohibited in the
country of destination and we noted that Denmark at least, despite its
lack of domestic restriction on pornography, embodied in its law a provi-
sion giving effect to this requirement of the Convention. We do not
envisage that the inclusion of a similar provision in our law would be of
much practical effect but we recommend it as a means of securing con-
formity with the Universal Postal Convention.
10.15
As for the new offence we propose, we consider it should be triable
either in the Crown Court or in a magistrates’ court. The offence is more
serious than the offence we have proposed in relation to restriction, and
we think that the issue of a publication’s being totally suppressed should
be capable of being determined by a jury rather than by a stipendiary or a
bench of magistrates. We do not rest the case for trial by jury on the basis,
often urged on us, that questions of public morality should more appro-
priately be decided by the jury as representatives of society as a whole. On
our proposals, general issues of morality or what is publicly acceptable no
longer play a part in what should be prohibited; the test we propose is
now to be determined much more objectively. Nonetheless, the arguments
for jury trial are still compelling. It seems to us that when the offence is
tried at the Crown Court the maximum penalties should be three years’
the prohibition of publications
179

imprisonment and an unlimited ﬁne or both, and that on conviction in a
magistrates’ court the normal maximum powers should be available to
magistrates.
10.16
When the law imposes a total prohibition, such as we propose
here, allowance must be made for the quite proper use of the material
concerned. This obviously arises where it is being handled by the police
and the courts in the course of the prosecution of a person in relation to
the material, but other cases might also arise. The Protection of Children
Act 1978 dealt with the need to exclude such use from the sanctions of
the law by providing a defence of legitimate reason for distributing or
showing prohibited photographs, though the defence was not extended to
the offence of taking the photographs in the ﬁrst place. Although
some misgivings were expressed at the time that it might be possible
for this defence to be exploited in undesirable ways, no problem of this
kind has come to our notice and we think that a similar defence might
appropriately be provided for the equivalent offences we are now
proposing.
10.17
The police will clearly need powers to enter and search premises
and to seize material they believe to be prohibited. These powers should
be similar to those they already possess and to those we have proposed in
relation to restriction offences, to be exercised with the authority of a
warrant issued by a magistrate. In addition, however, we believe that it
is appropriate in these circumstances for the police to be given a power of
arrest. This is not a power they possess at present under the Obscene
Publications Acts and our police witnesses emphasised to us the difﬁcul-
ties they often meet because of this in dealing with the shadowy ﬁgures
they found to be in charge of premises selling pornography, who fre-
quently gave false names and addresses and subsequently disappeared.
The Metropolitan Police told us, for example, that in 1973 they searched
332 premises under the Obscene Publications Acts and questioned the
managers but that in 93 cases the men concerned could not subsequently
be traced. In other cases those responsible simply carried on trading
normally until the case came to court, whereas if they had been arrested
and bailed, the prospect of bail being revoked might have been a more
effective deterrent against their continuing the offence. We have not sug-
gested that a power of this kind is necessary in relation to offences
concerned with the restriction of publications, but the more serious
offences connected with prohibition seem to us to justify giving the police
powers to take more effective action.
180
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

10.18
We considered whether there was any scope for requiring a person
found in possession of prohibited material to give information about
where he got it from, so as to make it easier for the police to trace sources
of supply. We recognised, however, that it was very likely that the
answers would be useless and that, given the penalties for trading in
prohibited material any additional sanctions on refusal to give informa-
tion of this kind were probably futile. In relation to material printed in this
country, the Newspapers, Printers and Reading Rooms Repeal Act 1869,
as amended by the Printers Imprint Act 1961, already requires the printer
to put his imprint on publications; clearly, however, a person prepared to
print material prohibited by law is unlikely to be worried about the
additional penalties attached to breach of such requirements.
10.19
We have also considered the question of allowing separate pro-
ceedings for the forfeiture and destruction of seized publications. We
rejected this idea in relation to restriction offences because it was the
circumstances of sale, not the publications themselves, which offended
against the law. In the case of prohibition, the objection of the law is to
the publications themselves irrespective of the way they are sold, but all
the same we still see good reason for avoiding separate forfeiture proceed-
ings. As we have already emphasised, we regard prohibition offences as
serious; in effect, we regard them as too serious not to be prosecuted. It
seems to us that if the police seize from a dealer a quantity of child
pornography, the appropriate course is to institute criminal charges
against the dealer. To let him get away with his offence by merely asking
a court to order the seized material to be forfeited is, in our view, to
minimise the seriousness of the offence in a way that is wholly undesir-
able. We therefore propose no separate procedure for forfeiture as an
alternative to instituting a prosecution. We propose, however, that the
court convicting a person of these offences should be under an obligation
to order the forfeiture of prohibited material to which the conviction
related.
10.20
We do not think that there will be as much room for varying
opinions as to what material contravenes the prohibition as there may be
about material that violates our proposed test of offensiveness for restric-
tion offences. Nevertheless, we still see ground for restricting the right to
institute prosecutions and, in view of the greater seriousness of prohibition
offences and the fact that they involve the effective suppression of certain
published works, we think it appropriate that any prosecutions should
require the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
the prohibition of publications
181

10.21
We have discussed in this chapter material containing representa-
tions of a certain kind. We envisage that the controls we have proposed
should apply to all kinds of published material, most notably of course to
pictorial magazines and the sorts of ﬁlms that are sold to private custom-
ers. In the next two chapters we shall discuss what we believe to be
considerations which call for additional controls on live entertainment
and the cinema.
182
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

CHAPTER 11
Live entertainment
B
How live entertainment differs
11.1
We have made clear earlier in our Report that little of the controversy
surrounding our subject and only a small part of the evidence we received
has touched on the ﬁeld of live entertainment. For Lord Longford’s Com-
mittee in 1972, the production of Oh! Calcutta! in 1971 represented a new
level of pornographic activity, and some of those who gave evidence to us
referred to that and to certain other theatrical presentations and regretted
the failure, or refusal, of the prosecuting authorities to take action against
them. But for most of our witnesses this area of our review gave rise to no
interest or concern at all. As we submit our Report, Oh! Calcutta! is, perhaps
surprisingly, still running in London but the point which deserves com-
ment is not so much that such a show should have lasted so long as that it
has been running for a number of years with virtually no controversy.
11.2
The reason for the low level of public concern about live entertain-
ment no doubt has much to do with its not being a mass medium.
A pornographic magazine can be printed in quantity and distributed
throughout the country, to come to the notice of innumerable people when
displayed in local shops. A ﬁlm can be made with immense skill and
utilising specialised techniques for producing startling effects and an
extremely powerful impact, and prints of it can be distributed throughout
the world and shown to audiences in most of the principal towns in
Britain. Live entertainment, on the other hand, affects few people. It has
to be created anew for each performance, which is seen only by the people
actually attending at the time. No performance will impinge on more than
a tiny fraction of the population, and even the places where performances
can be given are more rarely encountered than shops or cinemas. Live
entertainment, too, is predominantly an adult interest and the fact that it
does not attract children in the way that the cinema does has meant that
people are less concerned about children being exposed to shows that
might be thought unsuitable for them.
183

11.3
The lack of public concern also has something to do with the real
difference between what is now commonly seen in publications and ﬁlms
and what is presented in live entertainment. By and large, we believe,
there is less to be concerned about. The law has something to do with this:
despite the institution of only one prosecution under the Theatres Act
(which applies only to plays and ballet) there have been instances where
proceedings for common law offences, such as that of keeping a disorderly
house, have been brought in relation to live entertainment. The prospect of
proceedings probably represents a more substantial deterrent to the
person presenting a sexy show than it does to the publisher whose ﬁnan-
cial return from selling a hundred thousand magazines provides a greater
incentive to take the risk. But we think that there is another reason for the
lower threshold which is in practice applied to live entertainment; this
partly comes out in the way the law is likely to be interpreted and partly in
the perceptions of those who present live shows of what is likely to be
acceptable. In quantitative terms, the impact of any given pornographic
live show is less, but qualitatively it has a different effect on its audience,
just because it is live.
11.4
Pornographic publications and ﬁlms standardly depict sexual activ-
ity but we believe that the situation is changed completely when the
spectator is confronted with, where that involves being in the same space
as, people actually engaged in sexual activity. This is the ground of a
relation between performer and audience which is not present with, for
example, a ﬁlm of the same activity. There, the performer’s relations are to
a camera, and the audience’s to an image; in the live show, it is a relation
between people. The ﬁlm is a historical record of past acts which the
audience can merely observe and which remains unchanged irrespective
of their reaction; the live show is a contemporary happening with an
unknown future end, which the audience may be capable of inﬂuencing
or in which they might participate. It is no longer, as it is with all other
pornography, a matter of fantasy. It is also from this relationship between
actual people that arises the peculiar objectionableness that many ﬁnd in
the idea of the live sex show, and the sense that the kind of voyeurism
involved is especially degrading to both audience and performers.
11.5
We believe that the different quality of the live show justiﬁes its
being treated by law in a way that is different from what we have
proposed for publications. It seems right, however, that the principle of
“two level” control, which involves separate standards for restriction and
for prohibition, should apply to live entertainment.
184
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Restricting live entertainment
11.6
Leaving aside the question of performances which are “live shows”
in the more or less technical sense of sexual intercourse on stage, there
clearly can be other shows which are potentially offensive in the sorts of
ways that make it appropriate to restrict them to adults who want to see
them. A theatre performance is already to some extent restricted in that
people have to make a conscious decision to go to see it; and the fact that
we received few complaints no doubt shows that the performances there
do not force themselves on public attention. Nevertheless, we think it right
that a show which infringes the restriction test we have outlined in
Chapter 9 should be closed to persons under eighteen and should be
required not to offend the general public by the manner in which it
advertises itself outside.
11.7
We noted that some theatres already restricted entry to certain
shows to persons over eighteen, presumably to protect themselves against
charges under the present law that the presentation concerned was likely
to deprave and corrupt children. Further, the Greater London Council (at
least) in licensing establishments providing public music and dancing
(such as strip clubs in Soho) makes a point of imposing a condition
prohibiting the entry of persons under eighteen to premises presenting
the kind of show it believes to be unsuitable for children and young
people. There is therefore nothing new in the idea of age restrictions on
live entertainment. The restrictions on exterior displays on premises pre-
senting this type of entertainment will in our view help to avoid offen-
siveness in public places; we do not envisage that these controls will in
practice hamper the legitimate theatre.
11.8
It seems to us that the general formula we set out in paragraph 9.36
in relation to the restriction of publications will apply equally well to the
live entertainment that we think should be restricted. We propose that
broadly the same scheme of restriction should apply to both.
Live entertainment to be prohibited
11.9
It is in relation to prohibition that we think live shows should be
dealt with differently from publications. We have suggested that the need
in relation to published material is to protect only certain participants from
what is clearly harm. In the light of what we have already said about the
different quality of live entertainment, we do not think the same approach
live entertainment
185

is adequate here. It would permit, for example, a wide range of real sexual
activity to be presented to an audience in a way that now happens
extremely rarely, compared with the availability of representations of
similar activity on ﬁlm or on the printed page. We have mentioned
the possibility that the live sex show may invite or precipitate audience
participation and this carries some dangers of public order problems.
We were interested to hear from the Danish authorities that they encoun-
tered such problems in relation to the live sex shows which burgeoned
after restrictions on pornography were lifted in the late nineteen-sixties.
The Danes have had no second thoughts at all in relation to the total
freedom allowed to published pornography, but they found it necessary
to take measures to curb live sex shows. When we visited Copenhagen
in 1978, there were no such shows openly available, despite some
lingering
advertisements
which
suggested
that
some
such
shows
might still exist. The Danish experience reinforced our own view that we
should avoid changing the law in a way that allowed such shows to
proliferate.
11.10
The peculiarity of the live show that attracts these objections is that
it involves actual sex. The theatre involves the representation of human
activity of various kinds and sexual activity may sometimes ﬁgure among
the things represented. We have already proposed that any such repre-
sentation which is offensive should be restricted. What artistic or dramatic
requirements do not involve is the performance of real sexual activity; it
seems to us, in fact, that the presentation of actual sex on the stage
immediately introduces a presumption that the motives no longer have
any artistic pretension.
11.11
Differences between reality and representation are at the centre of
the issue. We therefore think it appropriate that in determining what is to
be prohibited we should take as our starting point whether sexual activity
is real rather than merely represented. But “sexual activity” needs quali-
fying: kissing is a sexual activity. We have discussed at some length in
Chapter 9 the possibility of providing an explicit statement of what is
disallowed by the law and have explained why we reject that approach.
We regard the same objections as applying to any attempt at being totally
speciﬁc as to the meaning of “sexual activity”, though we think there is
value in suggesting in general terms what the scope of the prohibition
should be. But the work of qualifying the term “sexual activity” should be
done by some general term, and we concluded that it was appropriate,
once again, to use the concept of offensiveness.
186
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

11.12
The idea is that insofar as simulated or represented sexual activity
is in question, its offensiveness will justify its merely being restricted; but
as soon as it is a matter of real sexual activity, offensiveness will justify
prohibition. The logic is simple. Under the general laws of public decency,
the law prohibits thorough-going sexual activity in public, and, so far as
our proposals are concerned, will continue to do so. Photographic repre-
sentations of such activity will be permitted under our proposals, but, if
offensive, will be restricted. The analogy to these two provisions, in the
case of live entertainment, lies in the distinction between the actual and the
simulated: the actual, if offensive, is prohibited, and the simulated, if
offensive, is restricted. Thus for any given activity that occurs in the course
of live entertainment there will be two questions: is it real or simulated? Is
it offensive or not? What is real and offensive, is prohibited; what is
simulated and offensive, is restricted; what is real but inoffensive, such
as kissing, gets off. It would be foolish to deny that the business of
applying such distinctions to actual cases could raise problems; we just
do not believe that difﬁcult cases would arise very often.
11.13
The scheme still leaves open the question of “offensive to whom,
and with regard to what circumstances?” It would be silly to suppose that
reasonable people would regard as offensive in a theatre anything that
they would regard as offensive in the park. On the other hand, if one made
into the canon of judgement for these purposes the reactions of an habitué
of live shows, one would have gone too far in the other direction, and the
test would have no effect. The appropriate test, it seems to us, is what a
reasonable person would ﬁnd offensive to see performed in the circum-
stances of a performance, and this is what we propose.
11.14
We started off by saying that our prohibition test for publications
was inadequate for live entertainment. But it is still relevant, and it needs
to be combined with the kind of prohibition we have been discussing in
the preceding paragraphs. The protection of children from exploitation for
sexual purposes would not necessarily be adequately covered by a prohib-
ition on actual sexual activity, and it needs a speciﬁc provision. The
question of protection from physical harm raises slightly different consid-
erations. As we made clear earlier, the inﬂiction of physical harm would
constitute an offence anyway and our point in adding the reference to it in
the prohibition test for publications was to enable the law to deal with the
subsidiary harm of the circulation of published material exploiting the
original acts. In the case of live entertainment, however, it is the acts
themselves which are in point and not any photographic depiction of
live entertainment
187

them, and we think it sufﬁcient to rely on the law relating to personal
violence.
11.15
The considerations we have discussed in the last few paragraphs
bring us to the point of being able to set down a description of what it is we
wish to prohibit. We propose that a performance should be prohibited if
(a) it involves actual sexual activity of a kind which, in the circumstances in
which it is given, would be offensive to reasonable adults; and for the
avoidance of doubt sexual activity should include the act of masturbation
and forms of genital, anal or oral connection between humans and animals
as well as between humans; or
(b) it involves the sexual exploitation of any person under the age of sixteen.
Enforcing controls on live entertainment
11.16
We propose that restriction and prohibition should be enforced by
criminal offences similar to those applying to publications. The restriction
offence will be committed by the person who presents a restricted per-
formance other than in the conditions which constitute restriction. We
consider that the prohibition offence should be cast slightly more widely,
so as to penalise those who present, organise or take part in a performance
which contravenes the prohibition. The mode of trial, penalties and provi-
sions about the institution of proceedings should be the same as for the
offences we have proposed in relation to publications.
11.17
Since we are proposing more stringent controls on live perform-
ances than we consider necessary in relation to published material, it will
follow that a performance should not be deﬁned in such a way that the
production of permitted published material will be prevented. The Theatres
Act 1968 contained a provision of this kind in relation to plays performed
for the purpose of being ﬁlmed or televised and an exemption along similar
lines would be appropriate in the context of our proposals. There should
also be another exemption based on the Theatres Act, for performances
given on a domestic occasion in a private dwelling; but in accordance with
the proposals of the Law Commission in its Report on Conspiracy and
Criminal Law Reform we consider that this should apply only when no
person under eighteen is present and when no charge is made.
11.18
Before we turn to the control of the showing of ﬁlms, we add the
comment that we have not thought it appropriate to suggest that any form
of pre-censorship should apply to live entertainment in the way it now
188
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

applies to ﬁlms. Even in the context of restriction, where the spectre of the
Lord Chamberlain would not loom so large, it seems to us that the old
arguments against pre-censorship could be employed against the idea of
there being a body which is charged with deciding whether or not a
theatrical presentation should be restricted; the arguments relate particu-
larly to the point that it is impossible to categorise a live production in
advance, when by its nature it will not remain constant, and also cannot be
adequately imagined on the basis of an advance script or scenario. It could
be, of course, that theatre interests might see advantage in having such a
board in order to provide the kind of certainty which cinemas enjoy as to
what they can properly show to what kinds of audiences; if so, we see no
reason why they should not argue for it.
live entertainment
189

CHAPTER 12
Films
B
The need for censorship
12.1
In turning to the control of ﬁlms, we come to the only area covered
by our review which is subject to a sophisticated system of pre-censorship.
We have already described how the system works and its rather haphaz-
ard origins. The effect of the system is broadly that what is regarded as
objectionable, for reasons only partly concerned with what the law pro-
hibits, is never allowed to gain a showing in a public cinema, so that those
who are responsible for enforcing the laws on obscenity and indecency on
a “subsequent punishment” basis scarcely have to concern themselves
with investigating whether the law is being broken. The system therefore
combines prior restraint with extra-legal control. The ﬁrst and fundamen-
tal question we had to consider was whether a system of this kind was
necessary or desirable.
12.2
Despite the system’s haphazard origins and despite the fact that this
style of control is in this country peculiar to the cinema, it has many
friends and few enemies. It has operated for a long time with a remarkable
degree of public acceptance. Objections of principle to any idea of pre-
censorship have to a large extent been suspended in favour of ﬁlm censor-
ship. It has undoubtedly been an effective system, both making it fairly
certain what cinemas can legally show and under what conditions, and
providing fairly watertight procedures to ensure that the rules are kept. It
is not surprising that such a system should hold an appeal, as we men-
tioned in Chapter 9, for those struggling with the uncertainties of the law
on obscenity in other areas.
12.3
The acceptance of special controls on the cinema is not conﬁned to
Britain. Almost everywhere in the world there is a system for the prior
vetting of ﬁlms. Sometimes this is only to categorise ﬁlms with regard to
their suitability for children, such as in the United States of America,
where the principles of the “free speech” amendment to the Constitution
190
www.ebook3000.com

are regarded as paramount. Often, however, the system works to prevent
certain material from being shown to adults. France, Germany, Italy,
Sweden, Norway, Australia, New Zealand and Canada all, like us, have
ﬁlm censorship systems which control ﬁlms intended even for adult
viewing. Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark concentrate on protect-
ing children only and take the view that there should be no prior controls
on what adults are able to see. It is also notable that most of these foreign
systems are ofﬁcially instituted by statute and exert formal powers. No
other country, unsurprisingly, has a system with anything like the basis of
ours. Nor has any other country a system quite as relaxed as that of the
United States, which is purely voluntary and aims solely at classifying
ﬁlms in order to provide advance information to help parents to judge
whether their children should be allowed to see particular ﬁlms. It has
been estimated, we were told, that only 80–85 per cent of American
cinemas adhere to the classiﬁcations issued by the Classiﬁcation and
Rating Administration of the Motion Picture Association of America.
12.4
While public acceptance of ﬁlm censorship in this country is wide-
spread, it is not universal. We referred in Chapter 4 to growing doubts
about the future of censorship, and a signiﬁcant proportion of the evidence
we received suggested that there should be no censorship of ﬁlms for
adults. Mrs Enid Wistrich, in a paper submitted to us by the Fabian
Society, placed this proposal in a political context. Modern democratic
society, she argued, is based on the belief that individuals are competent to
take decisions on matters concerning their own lives and on the best
course for the society in which they live: if such a society is to function
properly, barriers to the free communication of both facts and ideas, from
which the arts and entertainment were in her view inseparable, needed to
be removed. Some other witnesses placed greatest emphasis on the
importance of artistic freedom; others simply stressed the right of adults
to freedom of choice and the unacceptability of the notion that certain
people were qualiﬁed to judge what it was right and wrong for everyone
else to see. Views of this kind came from the Defence of Literature and the
Arts Society, the Films Committee of the Writers Guild, the British Feder-
ation of Film Societies, the Independent Film Distributors Association and
the British Humanist Association.
12.5
In addition, as we mentioned in Chapter 4, the attitude of the
mainstream of the British ﬁlm industry towards ﬁlm censorship has
changed. The case urged on us by the Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Associ-
ation, who told us that they were speaking for the ﬁlm industry as a
films
191

whole, was that the cinema should have parallel treatment to the theatre:
there should, in other words, be no prior restraint and ﬁlms which were
challenged should be able to ﬁght for their rights before a jury in open
court. However, enthusiasm for this freedom was not universal in the
industry. The major ﬁlm distributors, as represented by the Kinemato-
graph Renters’ Society (since renamed the Society of Film Distributors)
thought it important that there should be centralised ﬁlm censorship, not
only because of its commercial advantages but because they recognised
the different quality attaching to ﬁlm and to the experience of watching it.
The commercial advantages were related to the enormous capital tied up
in the production of a ﬁlm and to the industry’s need for some assurance
that a ﬁlm would not be vulnerable at law: once a ﬁlm was completed, it
could not readily be varied, whereas a play was capable of modiﬁcation to
meet objections made to it. The sense of certainty that a certiﬁcated ﬁlm
could be shown throughout the country without any legal interference
was a real commercial beneﬁt. But prior censorship was also necessary
because the experience of seeing a ﬁlm was quite different from that of
reading published material, and the cinema, unlike the theatre, catered for
a mass audience, penetrating far deeper into society than the theatre.
Witnesses from the Society made it clear that they would have no sym-
pathy with changes which would allow material to be shown which
would not pass the present censorship controls.
12.6
The exhibition side of the industry recognised and also attached
importance to the commercial arguments for prior censorship, and it was
for this reason that the Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Association proposed
to us that the British Board of Film Censors should continue in existence
not only to assess the suitability of ﬁlms for children but also to certify
ﬁlms as suitable for adults; but, under their proposals, the absence of a
certiﬁcate would not prevent the showing of a ﬁlm. The Association
rejected the argument that pre-censorship of ﬁlms was necessary because
they were different from books and plays. Instead, they argued that the
possibility that a ﬁlm would have a greater impact on the viewer was
already capable of being taken into account by the criminal law: if the
effect on the viewer was more powerful in the case of a ﬁlm than a book or
play, it followed, they claimed, that a ﬁlm was more likely to be found to
be depraving and corrupting. We understand this argument but, as we
suggested to the Association’s witnesses, it presupposes the continuing
existence of the Obscene Publications Acts or legislation having a
similar basis.
192
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

12.7
We claimed in Chapter 11 that there is a difference between the
live show on one hand and publications and ﬁlms on the other, which
justiﬁes the law treating them in a different way. We have mentioned in
Chapter 10 differences between publications and ﬁlms which led us to the
conclusion that extreme violence did not constitute the same problem with
publications as it might with the cinema. We think that the aim of treating
all the media uniformly is misconceived; there is no reason why one
solution should be expected to apply equally to a series of different
problems. That the problems are different we have no doubt at all. No
one can dispute that reading a magazine, watching a live show and
watching a ﬁlm are three very different experiences. We suggest that it is
sensible and reasonable to apply three different standards of control, and
not to hope, unrealistically, that the same control can be stretched to cover
all three.
12.8
This conclusion, in rejecting the argument for parity of treatment,
removes one type of objection to accepting the pre-censorship of ﬁlms. We
are taken further towards accepting it by the facts that the major part of
our evidence supported the continuation of ﬁlm censorship, that the
present system has, in the main, worked effectively and well and that
most other countries appear to regard ﬁlm censorship as acceptable and
desirable. What clinched the argument for some of us at least was the sight
of some of the ﬁlms with which the censorship presently interferes. We
feel it necessary to say to many people who express liberal sentiments
about the principle of adult freedom to choose that we were totally
unprepared for the sadistic material that some ﬁlm makers are prepared
to produce. We are not here referring to the explicit portrayal of sexual
activity or to anything which simply attracts charges of offensiveness.
Films that exploit a taste for torture and sadistic violence do raise further,
and disturbing, questions.
12.9
We made clear in Chapter 6 that research had not demonstrated any
convincing link between media violence and violence in society. That,
however, is due in part at least to the weakness of experimental research
as a means of determining human motivations and we expressed the view
that in this area, where the activity portrayed was, unlike sex, itself
harmful, it was right to exercise caution. Caution was indeed urged even
by those who told us that there was no evidence of harm: Dr Guy
Cumberbatch, for example, whose assessment of the research literature
on media violence we quoted in Chapter 6, told us that his own view was
that there should be restrictions on the portrayal of violence.
films
193

12.10
Concern is always being expressed about the violence shown on
television. This concern is understandable because of the size of the
audiences likely to see television programmes compared with those likely
to see some of the ﬁlms we have alluded to; the lack of control over who
may be in the audience; and the element of intrusion into the home, to
which the Annan Committee referred.1 But we should make the point that
the violence we have seen on ﬁlm (from ﬁlms refused a certiﬁcate, or cut
before the ﬁlm could be certiﬁed) far exceeds in nastiness anything likely
to be seen on television. It is not simply the extremity of the violence which
concerns us: we found it extremely disturbing that highly explicit depic-
tions of mutilation, savagery, menace and humiliation should be pre-
sented for the entertainment of an audience in a way that appeared to
emphasise the pleasures of sadism. Indeed, some of the ﬁlm sequences we
saw seemed to have no purpose or justiﬁcation other than to reinforce or
sell the idea that it can be highly pleasurable to inﬂict injury, pain or
humiliation (often in a sexual context) on others. Film, in our view, is a
uniquely powerful instrument: the close-up, fast cutting, the sophistication
of modern makeup and special effects techniques, the heightening effect of
sound effects and music, all combine on the large screen to produce an
impact which no other medium can create. It may be that this very
graphically presented sadistic material serves only as a vivid object of
fantasy, and does no harm at all. There is certainly no conclusive evidence
to the contrary. But there is no conclusive evidence in favour of that belief,
either, and in this connection it seems entirely sensible to be cautious. If
displacement or abreaction theories could be shown to be true, which hold
that the arousal of aggressive or sadistic reactions by fantasy material
tends to displace those motivations from the real world and to discharge
them, then there would be an argument for showing these ﬁlms (indeed,
for encouraging them). But we have not been convinced by any such
theory, and in fact no expert witness has put such a theory to us, except
in the most qualiﬁed form. This being so, we are more impressed by the
consideration that the extreme vividness and immediacy of ﬁlm may make
it harder rather than easier for some who are attracted to sadistic material
to tell the difference between fantasy and reality.
12.11
Some people told us that if there is material which we were
satisﬁed should not be made available to the public, the proper way to
suppress it is by way of making it the subject of determination by the
1
Cmnd 6753, paragraph 16.3.
194
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

courts, rather than by prior restraint. Prior restraint, it is commonly recog-
nised, is a more effective means for suppressing material than is offered by
the subsequent punishment approach. Its advantages are that it provides
certainty, consistency and speed of decision and the possibility of continu-
ous review by the same group of people; it avoids the delays of criminal
trials and decisions by courts who know nothing of ﬁlms and are not
representative of the ﬁlm-going public; it provides a more reﬁned control,
capable of identifying which elements of a ﬁlm are objectionable and
therefore allowing the distributor the opportunity of reacting; and it
prevents objectionable material from becoming available at all rather than
trying to retrieve it after publication and thereby giving it more publicity.
We freely admit, and have already made clear, that we are in part encour-
aged to favour pre-censorship by the fact that it is what already exists.
What we have to consider is, realistically, not whether we would institute
a system of censorship if it were a novelty but whether we should aban-
don a functioning system; or rather, to put it more exactly, whether we
should continue to use the system for the protection of young audiences
(as almost all our witnesses considered necessary), but at the same time
refuse to use the system to control ﬁlms for adult viewing. We were very
much impressed, moreover, by a different kind of argument. The impact
of a ﬁlm can depend on very subtle factors, which will not at all be caught
by simple statements of what is being shown on the screen, and because of
this the law is too inﬂexible an instrument through which to impose a
control. An ad hoc judgement, grounded on certain guidelines, is a more
efﬁcient and sensitive way of controlling this medium. All these consider-
ations together led us to the conclusion that ﬁlms, even those shown to
adults only, should continue to be censored.
Local authority control
12.12
We have so far concerned ourselves only with the question
whether ﬁlms should be subject to censorship, and not in any way with
the structure of the system or, more particularly, whether the present form
of censorship should continue. In turning to this further question we must
discuss ﬁrst the present legal basis of censorship and the role of local
authorities.
12.13
As Chapter 3 explains, the only legal powers of ﬁlm censorship rest
with cinema licensing authorities, and the fact that most licensing author-
ities are content to leave the censorship of ﬁlms to the British Board of Film
films
195

Censors does not alter the fact that if it were not for the requirements
imposed on cinemas by licensing authorities, there would be no legal
obligation for ﬁlms to be censored at all. So far as we are aware, every
licensing authority in the country enforces the censorship of ﬁlms; some of
them, as we have explained, impose their own control to supplement that
of the British Board of Film Censors.
12.14
We have already reported that the local control of ﬁlms was
overwhelmingly repudiated by our witnesses. It is not surprising that
the ﬁlm industry, from producers to distributors and exhibitors, should
be unanimously against a local system of control: it is commercially
inconvenient, in a national ﬁlm distribution system, that local authorities
should be able to stop particular ﬁlms being shown in their areas. Many
other bodies, however, covering a wide variety of different outlooks, also
rejected local censorship, including the Free Church Federal Council, the
Catholic Social Welfare Commission, the Nationwide Festival of Light, the
Progressive League, the Police Federation, the National Council of
Women, the British Youth Council and the Law Society.
12.15
Not all of these bodies addressed themselves to the arguments for
and against allowing local authorities, rather than someone else, to exer-
cise powers of censorship, but the most frequent arguments were that in
an age of mass media and easy mobility, disparities of taste between
geographical areas were plainly diminishing and were likely to be over-
emphasised; that in a country as small as ours, when the nearest cinema
subject to a different authority’s control was often no more than a few
minutes’ drive away, the idea of a local authority censorship was futile
and nonsensical; and that local councillors were far from being the best
people to perform a censorship role since, granted the realities of local
politics and the very minor role enjoyed by ﬁlm censorship, they were not
in any real sense answerable to local electors for the way in which ﬁlms
were censored and, being often middle-aged and not cinema-goers, they
were liable to be out of touch with the contemporary cinema and the tastes
of its predominantly young audiences. In addition, as the Association of
District Secretaries pointed out to us, reinforcing from a different view-
point the problems put before us by the Cinematograph Exhibitors’ Asso-
ciation, any local authority which wishes to vet ﬁlms shown in its area
faces severe practical difﬁculties in obtaining advance warning of ﬁlms it
might wish to challenge, in being able to arrange to see ﬁlms sufﬁciently
far in advance of a prospective local exhibition etc. District Secretaries, on
the whole, did not favour the retention of local discretion.
196
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

12.16
The representatives of local authorities themselves were divided
on the issue. The Association of Metropolitan Authorities told us that the
mainstream view of their members was that local authorities’ responsi-
bilities for assessing ﬁlms should be brought to an end. They did not
regard this as a proper function of local government and considered that
the ridicule which the exercise of the power had brought on some author-
ities was better avoided. But the Association was reluctant to see local
inﬂuence abandoned entirely and considered that there should be local
authority representation on the new statutory body which they proposed
should be set up, and that appeals should be decided by a panel with
majority local authority membership, though the decisions themselves
should apply on a national basis. The Association of District Councils
and some individual authorities belonging to the Association of Metropol-
itan Authorities preferred to retain greater power in the hands of local
authorities, by continuing the present system or at least by allowing local
authorities the right, even if limited to speciﬁed circumstances, to overrule
the decisions of a national censorship body. The Cities of Bradford, Cov-
entry, Leeds, Liverpool and Newcastle upon Tyne were Metropolitan
authorities who joined the Association of District Councils in stressing to
us the importance of the local option.
12.17
The British Board of Film Censors also strongly supported the local
option, arguing that it represented the assertion of the judgement of
elected representatives of a local community about the standards they
wished to see maintained in that community. The existence of the local
option, they said, enabled the Board to keep in touch with grass-roots
feeling in the country and, so long as variations in local tastes and atti-
tudes continued to exist, it was right that central control should not be
imposed from London. The Board recognised that difﬁculties sometimes
arose because of the local option, but considered from their point of view
that the advantages of local discretion outweighed the disadvantages.
12.18
We easily understood how the Board’s rather peculiar position is
helped by the existence of the powers which local licensing authorities can
exercise:
that
the
possibility
of
losing
local
authority
conﬁdence
strengthens the Board’s hand in dealing with ﬁlm distributors; that the
prospect of review by a local authority takes some weight off the Board’s
decisions; that the Board can be relieved of pressure by being able to
recommend that an approach on a controversial ﬁlm should be made
direct to a licensing authority. We also accept that attitudes do vary in
different parts of the country and that some ﬁlms may be more acceptable
films
197

in some localities than in others. In our view, however, these arguments
fall a long way short of being conclusive.
12.19
The way in which the local option is actually exercised seems to us to
provide very weak support for the argument in favour of local variation. The
British Board of Film Censors, in urging on us the value of the local option,
appended to their written submission full details of censorship exercised in
Leeds and Manchester and its effect in either banning ﬁlms granted a
certiﬁcate by the Board or forbidding a local showing until a ﬁlm has been
seen by the authority, or in some cases (in Manchester at least) allowing a
local showing to a ﬁlm refused a certiﬁcate by the Board. This information
seemed to us to provide arguments against the local option rather than for it.
Coupled with information given to us by the Cinematograph Exhibitors’
Association about the activities of other authorities energetic in this ﬁeld,
such as Sefton, it suggests that the exercise of the local option is not as well
grounded in varying local opinion as its proponents would suggest. We
cannot believe that local attitudes and mores vary to the extent that these
differing decisions imply; dissenting decisions are often conﬁned to the area
of one particular local authority, are not consistent throughout a given
region of the country, and are not shared by neighbouring authorities. We
believe that a situation in which local censorship means that people wishing
to see a particular ﬁlm have to travel a few extra miles to the next town,
simply brings ridicule on the system with no compensating advantages. The
majority of our witnesses seemed to be of the same view and we conclude
that the possession by local authorities of the power to control the ﬁlms
shown locally cannot be justiﬁed by any local variation in taste and opinion.
12.20
It seems to us that the other arguments which inﬂuence the British
Board of Film Censors in favour of the local option are peculiar to the
present system; they arise, for example, from there not being any avenue
of appeal from the Board’s decisions other than to local authorities. These
points could be dealt with by a modiﬁed system, and do not on their own
justify the local option. We therefore have no hesitation in concluding that
the disadvantages of a locally based system of ﬁlm censorship outweigh
any advantages it may have, and we propose that powers to censor ﬁlms
should no longer rest with local authorities.
A statutory system of control?
12.21
Some of our witnesses who rejected the idea of local censorship did
so because they were against censorship generally, an approach we do not
198
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

accept. Others rejected local censorship because they saw a need for a
stronger central control and advocated a statutory body to exercise this
control. Indeed, a number of our witnesses who were in favour of the
retention of some measure of local control wanted to link it to central
control exercised by a new statutory body. We must now consider the
arguments for a body of this kind.
12.22
Support for a statutory ﬁlm censorship board came from many
of our witnesses. Among them were the Association of Metropolitan
Authorities, the Greater London Council, the Cities of Bradford and Cov-
entry, the Cornwall County Branch of the Association of District Councils,
the Women’s National Commission, the National Council of Women, the
Mothers’ Union, the Free Church Federal Council, the Catholic Social
Welfare Commission, the Nationwide Festival of Light, the British Youth
Council, the Association of District Secretaries, the Cornwall Community
Standards Association and the Metropolitan Police. Some others who
accepted ﬁlm classiﬁcation rather than censorship, such as the Law Society
and the National Campaign for the Reform of the Obscene Publications
Acts, thought that this should be the responsibility of a statutory body
rather than an unofﬁcial one. Yet others, like the Association of District
Councils, made it clear to us that although they favoured the existing
system they would have no strong objection to the establishment of a
statutory body.
12.23
Those who called for the replacement of the British Board of Film
Censors were not necessarily dissatisﬁed with its operation. Many wit-
nesses made it clear that they were concerned with the position of the
Board rather than with its actions: in particular with its origin as a creature
of the ﬁlm industry, the implication that it continued in that position, and
its lack of statutory authority and power. Some went out of their way to
stress that they would be happy for the existing personnel to continue in
post with a new ofﬁcial body. Other witnesses, however, were dissatisﬁed
with the Board and wanted a statutory body because they hoped that it
would act more responsibly. The Nationwide Festival of Light, for
example, blamed the present Board for a breakdown in the control of
ﬁlms, suggesting that in the last ten years extreme violence and pornog-
raphy in the cinema had reached “almost inconceivable depths”.
12.24
No body exercising the kind of control undertaken by the Board
will ﬁnd that what it does is acceptable to all the people all the time. We do
not pretend that after studying in some detail how the Board censors ﬁlms
films
199

we agree with all their decisions. But we do not support the criticisms of
the Nationwide Festival of Light. Rather, we found a slight air of unreality
in the Board’s tendency to try to limit, by requiring minute cuts, the
quantity of the potentially disturbing or offensive, as if the third glimpse
of a bloodied face or the third twitch of the buttocks changed the quality of
what had already been allowed twice. We also wondered whether they
might not have spent too much time and energy on such questions as
whether a given swear word should be allowed under an “A” certiﬁcate or
only under an “AA”. But we do not think there is any point in our
discussing in detail where our judgement might have differed from that
exercised by the Board; no two groups of people are likely to reach
complete unanimity about all the decisions which the Board is obliged to
take week after week, and our task was not to decide which ﬁlms might
have been cut more and which less. It is enough for us to say at this stage
that we do not consider that the way the Board has exercised its functions
gives any ground at all for suggesting that it is unﬁt to continue the
practice of ﬁlm censorship.
12.25
We think however that there are more solid reasons for a change.
We agree with those who ﬁnd the position of the Board anomalous. The
public esteem of the Board undoubtedly suffers to some extent because it
was originally set up by the ﬁlm industry and because it is still often
thought to be linked with the industry in some way—though we have
already said (paragraph 3.31) that there are no grounds on which the
public need be concerned that the Board is not truly independent. But
even so the Board is an entirely unofﬁcial body without any authority
given by law and without the power to ensure that its decisions are
recognised and implemented.
12.26
This point assumes crucial importance granted our conclusion that
local authorities should no longer have powers to censor ﬁlms, for at the
moment the authority possessed by the Board derives from the delegation
of the powers which Parliament has given to local authorities. The Board
effectively rules because local authorities use the powers they have to
require cinemas to follow the Board’s certiﬁcates. If local authorities lost
those powers, the Board has none of its own with which to replace them.
But if there is to be ﬁlm censorship, as we propose there should be, it will
need to be legally enforceable. How?
12.27
Two possible solutions can be disposed of fairly brieﬂy. One is
that local authorities should continue to have the legal power but
200
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

should be prevented from exercising it in any way other than by
following the Board. This seems to us to be a highly artiﬁcial solution.
The courts have held under the present law that it is improper for a
local authority to exercise its powers by simply deciding that the Board
should exercise them on its behalf, with the authority reserving no power
to itself. Similar objections would attach to the legislative expedient of
giving local authorities powers which they were not permitted to exercise
themselves, solely in order to give legal power to the British Board of Film
Censors.
12.28
The second solution is the more direct one of attaching enforce-
ment measures to the Board’s certiﬁcates themselves instead of their
having effect at one remove via local authorities. This would give legal
recognition to a body which has so far not had a legal existence, and in fact
the Board itself suggested to us that it might be given legal recognition.
But this solution would involve rather more than recognition, because it
would be necessary to give the Board’s decisions the force of law, in the
sense that a cinema failing to adhere to the restrictions attaching to a
certain certiﬁcate would commit an offence. To go this far seems to incur
grave objections, for what after all is the Board? Instituted by the ﬁlm
industry, now a tiny self-perpetuating private body, answerable to no one
for the way it conducts its affairs: can a body of this nature properly have
legal powers bestowed on it by Parliament? Our view is that the Board in
its present form cannot possibly be given the powers needed to ensure the
enforcement of the ﬁlm censorship system.
12.29
We believe this leaves only one realistic course. This is, as pro-
posed by the bodies we have already mentioned, that Parliament should
institute a new statutory body which will have the necessary powers to
replace those now wielded by local authorities. There will be some people
who have misgivings about giving censorship powers to any arm of
central government and who will advance the kind of arguments we have
ourselves used in turning down suggestions for any pre-censorship of
publications. But ﬁlm censorship is not the radical departure that censor-
ship of publications would be in this country; and we have already argued
that it is appropriate to the medium. If it is to continue, as the broad
consensus appears to wish, and if the anomalies associated with local
discretion are to be removed, again as seems to attract broad support, an
ofﬁcially-instituted national censorship is in our view the only practical
solution. As we have made clear earlier, Britain almost went over to such a
system in 1916; it is the kind of system that most of the other countries of
films
201

the world already have; and it is a system that many of our witnesses
wished to see. We think it would be appropriate, defensible and desirable.
The nature of a new body
12.30
We think that this new statutory body should be called the Film
Examining Board. We envisage that it would be a broadly-based body of
perhaps a dozen men and women chosen to reassure the public that
censorship was to be operated with sense, independence and understand-
ing of relevant expertise and of public feelings. We think that the ﬁlm
industry should be represented on the Board, by perhaps three members,
and that another three members might be nominated by local authorities.
Other members would include persons versed in such disciplines as the
law, child psychology, education etc.
12.31
We do not think a body of this kind is best equipped to undertake
the actual work of examining ﬁlms. Rather, we think it should have the
responsibility for laying down the policy for the censorship of ﬁlms and
for ensuring that the policy is followed by a small staff of professional
examiners which it would employ. We think that the Board itself would be
the appropriate body to hear appeals from the decisions of the examiners.
We think it essential that the censorship system should make provision for
appeals, and rather than institute a separate appellate body, it makes sense
in our view for the professional examiners working under the Board’s
policy directives to make the initial decision on a ﬁlm and for the Board
itself to review that decision if an appeal is made. We think it right that
anyone should be able to appeal against the examiners’ decision: in this
way we believe that public conﬁdence in the Board and in its ability to
take account of public views will be strengthened. This will mean that the
ﬁlm distributor will be able to appeal against a refusal of a certiﬁcate,
against a requirement for cuts or against allocation to a particular
category, as he can do at the moment, though only by taking his ﬁlm to
individual local authorities; but in addition any member of the public
would be able to appeal against, for example, the grant of a certiﬁcate at
all or the grant of a particular certiﬁcate. We think that the Board should
be required to view the ﬁlm if appealed to by the applicant for a certiﬁcate;
but we feel that in relation to an appeal by anyone else, the Board should
have discretion whether or not to view the ﬁlm before reaching a decision.
12.32
We envisage that the Board, like the present British Board of Film
Censors, should get its income by charging fees for the examination of
202
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

ﬁlms, but there may be a need for it to have an additional subvention from
public funds. The ﬁxing of fees and the determination of appropriate cases
in which fees might be reduced or waived would be additional responsi-
bilities of the Board.
The application of “restriction” to ﬁlms
12.33
We concluded earlier in our report that the prime object of the law
with regard to publications should be to prevent pornography and violent
material causing offence to members of the public and that if this were
done there was comparatively little published material which should be
not allowed to those people who wanted it. We think the same principle
should be applied to the showing of ﬁlms. At present, the ﬁlm censorship
system denies a public showing to a large amount of material which is
judged not unlawful or harmful but merely less than acceptable to local
licensing authorities and the public at large. One result is that a number of
ﬁlms of artistic merit and importance have been prevented from being
seen publicly in this country, even by the minority audiences who would
be interested in them (Pasolini’s Salò and Oshima’s Empire of the Senses are
obvious examples). At the same time, the certiﬁcation system does not
entirely control what is seen, since a thriving trade exists in uncensored
material shown to club members; but the notion of a club, as we have
already said (paragraph 3.13), is an absurd ﬁction, since in many cases the
ﬁlms can be seen by any member of the public who turns up at the door
and enrols as a member of the club. This system does to some extent
achieve the sensible aim of allowing a restricted showing of potentially
offensive material to people who want to see it; but it is a totally unsatis-
factory way of doing this and should not be allowed to continue.
12.34
Many ﬁlm clubs merely show the kind of explicit sex ﬁlms which
we have made clear are unlikely to involve any recognisable social harms,
and which we would not wish to be prohibited to those who want to see
them. But since, in order to be able to show these ﬁlms, the clubs con-
cerned have to place themselves beyond the reach of the censorship
system and this means in turn avoiding the cinema licensing system, they
evade at the same time what is the main object of cinema licensing, which
is public safety. In our view, this represents a social harm of a different
kind: it is obviously desirable that this area of ﬁlm exhibition should be
subject to the same safeguards to secure the safety of the public as apply to
cinemas generally.
films
203

12.35
Moreover, the club system means that, leaving aside the present
criminal law, there is a total lack of control on the nature of the ﬁlms
shown and the audiences admitted to see them. Although many clubs
show ﬁlms which we would regard as acceptable for restricted viewing,
this is not always the case. We were told that one sadistic sex ﬁlm which
we saw might have been shown in clubs in this country; our view was that
the ﬁlm would be turned down by any censorship system, however
liberal, and we noted in our talks with the French ﬁlm censor that the
same and similar ﬁlms are banned entirely in France despite the existence
of a special category there for ﬁlms which are pornographic or, indeed,
incite to violence. There are a number of ﬁlm clubs which specialise in
oriental martial arts ﬁlms which can be extremely violent and which are
often required to be cut by the British Board of Film Censors even before
being given an “X” certiﬁcate. The admission of children to these clubs
means that uncensored ﬁlms containing the kind of material which would
not be passed even for adult viewing in a public cinema, is being shown
without any restriction at all on who may see it. We consider it desirable
that the scope of the censorship system should be extended so as to impose
some control on what at present is subject to none. There is a need both to
draw the line at what is acceptable even for restricted audiences and to
ensure that restrictions are properly observed.
12.36
These considerations lead us to the view that there should be an
additional category of certiﬁcate which would permit restricted exhibition
to a class of ﬁlms which the censorship would not presently approve.
This would provide an outlet both for ﬁlms of quality which we consider
ought to be allowed to be shown in this country and for ﬁlms of no merit
which we consider adults should be able to see if they so choose. Most of
the ﬁlms concerned would contain explicit sex of a straightforward char-
acter, of the kind now seen in many cinema clubs and, for example, in the
special “pornographic” cinemas instituted in France in 1975. The French
system for allowing pornographic ﬁlms in restricted conditions seems to
have worked well and with a substantial degree of public acceptance.
Experience from European countries suggests that if ﬁlms of this kind
are made legitimate, the ﬁlms may be rather less squalid than they are at
present.
12.37
We turn now to the restrictions which should attach to the show-
ing of these ﬁlms. Some analogy is appropriate to the kind of restrictions
which we have proposed should apply to the sale of offensive publica-
tions. First, it is clear to us that these ﬁlms should be for adults only and
204
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

that no one under the age of eighteen2 should be admitted to see them. But
we also consider that restrictions over and above those applying to the
existing “X” certiﬁcate are needed. We think that it is undesirable that
every cinema should be capable of showing such ﬁlms: if these ﬁlms are
not to intrude on public consciousness in a way that will be found
offensive by many, we think that some further restriction is needed of
the premises in which they can be shown (and, whatever the arguments
may be about “X” ﬁlms being televised, we are sure that it would not be
appropriate for ﬁlms of this kind to be shown on television).
12.38
We think that local authorities might have a legitimate role to
play here. We propose that ﬁlms of the new category we have suggested
should not lawfully be publicly shown other than in a cinema designated
for the showing of such ﬁlms; and we think it reasonable to allow locally
elected representatives to decide whether they wish to have a cinema
of that kind in their area, and to control the numbers of such cinemas.
One particular question is whether one auditorium out of several in a
multi-screen cinema complex should be eligible for designation in this
way; on balance we think that it should, in particular because so many
cinemas now take this form that if this were forbidden it might be impos-
sible in many areas to designate any cinema at all. Designation should
be the responsibility of the local cinema licensing authority on the appli-
cation of the licensee, and whether or not to agree to designation should be
at the authority’s complete discretion. At the same time, however,
approval or rejection of designated status should be the limit of the local
authority’s power in relation to the ﬁlms shown in such a cinema; we are
not proposing any fresh right to censor ﬁlms or to impose conditions as to
the ﬁlms that may be shown. The local authority should be empowered to
charge a fee for designation in order to recoup the administrative costs it
incurs.
12.39
Designation would give the cinema the right to show ﬁlms of the
proposed new category. We see no advantage, however, in requiring that
a designated cinema should have to specialise in such ﬁlms, as is the case
in France. We see some objection to actually requiring a cinema to show
pornographic ﬁlms when it proposes to show something else, and no
merit in preventing a designated cinema from showing Bambi in the school
holidays if it wishes to do so. A designated cinema should therefore be free
2
See paragraphs 9.39–40.
films
205

to show any ﬁlms passed by the Film Examining Board, including those in
the new restricted category; at times when it is showing ﬁlms in that
category it should be permitted no pictorial displays outside the cinema
and should be required to display in the foyer a notice in terms decided by
the Board giving sufﬁcient information about the ﬁlm to be an adequate
warning to unsuspecting cinema-goers about the nature of what they will
see if they enter. We believe that if the system we propose is adopted, it
will probably result, in practice, in there being two sorts of designated
cinema. One will be a blue movie house, which rarely if ever shows
anything else. The other will be, to some degree, an “art” house, which
shows a variety of ﬁlms with various certiﬁcates, usually of minority
appeal. If this happened, it would avoid a difﬁculty which we felt was
presented by the French system: no-one in France would dream of con-
signing a ﬁlm with any serious intention, or by a well-known director, to
the salles pornographiques, so that such a ﬁlm will always end up in an
ordinary cinema, however offensive or pornographic it may be.
12.40
The legitimisation of sex ﬁlms which are more explicit than those
presently permitted in a public cinema will, we hope, discourage the
expedient of setting up a club in order to get round the censorship
requirements. But, for the reasons we have already given, we think it
desirable actively to discourage clubs of this kind—though we would
not wish to do anything to interfere with the genuine ﬁlm society—and
we therefore propose that steps should be taken to ensure that the new
censorship requirements (and probably cinema licensing as well) should
apply to such clubs. This will mean that certiﬁed ﬁlms only will be
allowed to be shown not only by ordinary cinemas but also by any other
commercially-run establishment, and this will apply to the kind of club
which has hitherto specialised in uncensored sex ﬁlms. But there are
various ﬁlm exhibitions of a non-commercial nature which are at present
outside the scope of the censorship system and in our view should remain
so; we propose, therefore, that there should be an exemption for any
exhibition not promoted for private gain. We think that there might be
value in the law’s stating explicitly that ﬁlm shows promoted by religious,
educational and charitable bodies should be deemed not to be promoted
for private gain. The exemption we propose here is, of course, an exemp-
tion only from the requirements of certiﬁcation; the prohibition on certain
ﬁlms being distributed or shown which arises from our proposals on
prohibited publications (see paragraph 10.11) will apply to any ﬁlm exhib-
ition whatsoever.
206
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Categories of certiﬁcate
12.41
We think that certain modiﬁcations to the existing certiﬁcates
should be made, and that the general criteria for determining the appro-
priate certiﬁcate should be laid down by statute. Parliament would there-
fore give general guidelines to the Board within which the Board would
determine the policy to be adopted in censoring ﬁlms. The new category
we have proposed, for example, is based like the restriction test we have
set out in Chapter 9 on the prevention of offence to reasonable people, and
it would be appropriate, therefore, that guidelines for the issue of that
certiﬁcate should be in terms similar to the statutory test for restricting
publications. We consider that it would be generally helpful if the names
and symbols assigned to the certiﬁcates revealed more of their effect, and
we propose that this category should be designated 18R, which combines
the minimum age with an indication of restriction. We propose that the
symbol for each category should contain the descriptive reference within a
circle, represented in the following paragraphs by brackets.
12.42
The experience of the British Board of Film Censors has suggested
to them an alteration of the present “A” and “AA” certiﬁcates, with which
we sympathise. Fourteen, the Board explained to us, is too young an age
for the sort of ﬁlm which they would happily pass for persons over 16: it is
possibly the age of maximum sexual confusion and embarrassment and
also, they claimed, the age when some boys might be most open to inﬂu-
ence by the depiction of certain kinds of violence. Since “AA” admits those
of 14, the Board often tends to give an “X” certiﬁcate to ﬁlms which it
considers would be quite acceptable for viewing by 16 and 17 year olds. If
the age limit for the present “AA” certiﬁcate were raised to 16, these ﬁlms
could be given that certiﬁcate. We agree with this assessment, and propose
that there should be a new category designated (16). This would inevitably
have some implications for the “A” certiﬁcate. There is at present no actual
age restriction below the age of 14—the “A” certiﬁcate merely suggests
parental guidance. If the “AA” limit were raised to 16, that would mean
that a very wide range of material would fall into categories (presently
“U” and “A”) which allow any child to be in the cinema. Some material
which is quite suitable for young teenagers might well be disturbing to
young children, and we think it right to follow a further suggestion made
to us by the British Board of Film Censors and bring back the requirement
that young children at least should be accompanied by a parent or respon-
sible adult to see ﬁlms in what has so far been the “A” category. We think
the right age below which children should have to be accompanied is 11,
films
207

and we accordingly propose that this category should be designated (11A)
to indicate not that children under that age are not admitted, but that they
must be accompanied.
12.43
We see no need to propose any change in the “U” category, which
is well understood, or in the “X” category, apart from proposing that the
latter should be designated (18). It may be appropriate for us to make the
point, however, that we do not envisage that our proposals for an (18R)
category should signiﬁcantly alter the character of ﬁlms assigned to the
(18) category, at present “X”. It may certainly be appropriate for some
ﬁlms now shown in a cut version with an “X” certiﬁcate to appear uncut in
future as (18R) ﬁlms but we would not otherwise expect that what is now
given an “X” certiﬁcate would in future be classiﬁed (18R).
12.44
One set of guidelines could properly cover all the certiﬁcates which
are concerned with suitability for children, that is, the (U), (11A), (16) and
(18) categories. These guidelines would require the Board to have regard
to the protection of the young from harmful or disturbing inﬂuences, or
from the kind of material which, having regard to the restriction test for
publications, is such that its unrestricted availability to persons under
18 would be unacceptable to responsible parents.
12.45
In addition to the categories we have so far discussed, there is the
case of ﬁlms which are refused a certiﬁcate. We propose that the guide-
lines should simply require refusal if a ﬁlm is considered unﬁt for public
exhibition, being one that contains material prohibited by law or one that
is unacceptable because of the manner in which it depicts violence, sexual
activity or crime. But the Board would not be able to refuse a certiﬁcate to
a ﬁlm not containing unlawful material without having regard to the
importance of allowing the development of artistic expression and of not
suppressing truth or reality. Material prohibited by law would include
that covered by our proposed prohibition test or by other provisions of
law such as incitement to crime, incitement to racial hatred or those of the
Cinematograph Films (Animals) Act 1937.
12.46
We considered arguments to the effect that no ﬁlm which in its
production had involved the commission of offences should be permitted
to be cut to obtain a certiﬁcate, since to require offending sequences simply
to be excised, or to acquiesce in that being done, would condone the
original offence. We concluded that there are overwhelming practical
difﬁculties in enforcing a ban on cutting unlawful ﬁlms, particularly in
relation to ﬁlms which had already been cut before submission to the
208
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

censors, and we also had to bear in mind that the requirements of British
censorship, controlling only a very small part of the world ﬁlm market,
would be unlikely to represent a real deterrent to ﬁlm makers elsewhere in
the world. It will be open to the Board to draw the attention of the
prosecuting authorities to any ﬁlm which appears to give grounds for
believing that offences have been committed in this country, but we
consider it unnecessary to lay down a rule about the Board’s treatment
of apparently unlawful scenes in ﬁlms submitted to it.
12.47
Where the Board grants a certiﬁcate, we believe that this should
carry a presumption that the ﬁlm does not contain any material prohibited
by law and we think it right that the exhibitor should be under no liability
for showing it in conditions appropriate to the certiﬁcate. In other words,
the grant of a certiﬁcate should convey a guarantee of immunity from
prosecution so long as any restrictions implicit in the certiﬁcate are
observed.
12.48
Since we propose in these ways that the Board should be the
principal arbiter of whether or not a ﬁlm can be shown in this country,
we also think it important that the customs authorities should not decide
that a ﬁlm is a prohibited import without referring it to the Board. The
Board should have the power to advise the customs authorities whether or
not the import of a ﬁlm should be allowed and it may be that the Board
would be able to ﬁnd the ﬁlm acceptable subject to certain cuts being
made, a ﬂexibility which would not normally be available under customs
procedures.
The enforcement of ﬁlm censorship
12.49
We have proposed the ending of the powers of cinema licensing
authorities to impose censorship; they would consequently lose their
power to enforce censorship by instituting proceedings in magistrates’
courts for the offence of contravening the conditions attached to a cinema
licence. There therefore has to be a new statute, creating speciﬁc offences
in order to ensure compliance with the proposed system. It should be an
offence to exhibit publicly any ﬁlm which has not received a certiﬁcate
from the Board (and in this context “publicly” is to be taken as including,
in accordance with our proposals, any showing in a club promoted for
private gain). It should also be an offence to exhibit publicly any ﬁlm other
than in accordance with the requirements of the certiﬁcate issued to it. This
offence would cover the admission of children to ﬁlms designated as
films
209

unsuitable to them, the showing of (18R) ﬁlms other than in designated
cinemas and the showing of an (18R) ﬁlm by a designated cinema other
than in accordance with the restrictions laid down. Another offence,
continuing the standard provision now made by local authorities, would
require that the category of the ﬁlm should be shown in all advertising
matter, at the entrance to the cinema and on the screen immediately before
the showing of the ﬁlm. We think that the most serious of these offences—
that of showing uncertiﬁcated ﬁlms—should be prosecuted, tried and
punished in the way that we have already proposed for restriction
offences (paragraphs 9.43 and 50). The other offences arising from
breaches of the censorship controls might be punishable only by a max-
imum ﬁne of £500.
12.50
An issue raised strongly with us by cinema interests concerned the
enforcement of the age limits attaching to ﬁlms, in particular to “X” ﬁlms.
At present, the cinema licensee is under an obligation not to admit persons
under eighteen to performances in which a ﬁlm with an “X” certiﬁcate is
exhibited, and if young people gain admission the licensee may be pros-
ecuted for failing to comply with the conditions of the licence. The Cine-
matograph Exhibitors’ Association, supported by cinema managers,
represented to us that it was quite unfair for the onus to be placed entirely
on cinema staff, who frequently ﬁnd it hard to assess just how old their
customers may be, while the young people themselves, who are the only
ones actually to know whether they are of the permitted age, have nothing
to lose by trying to pass themselves off as over eighteen. The Association
urged us to recommend that it should be an offence for a person under
eighteen to seek to gain admittance to a ﬁlm exhibition designated as
unsuitable for them. In support of their case they drew attention to the
offence already provided by the Licensing Act 1964 which penalises a
person under eighteen who buys or attempts to buy intoxicating liquor
in licensed premises.
12.51
We had some sympathy for the cinema manager trying to enforce
the minimum age limits, particularly in view of the pressures which we
know exist among young people to see “X” ﬁlms before they are eighteen.
Certainly, a large part of the population must have seen an “X” ﬁlm before
they were properly old enough. Nevertheless, it must ultimately be the
responsibility of the cinema licensee to enforce this control, just as it is the
responsibility of the public house licensee not to serve liquor to those
under age. The only question is whether the young person should also
bear some responsibility in the matter. Some observers might make the
210
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

comment that the existence of a sanction on under-age drinkers has not
taken the pressure off publicans in the way cinema interests appear to
hope. But we are not in any case very sympathetic to the general idea of
turning young people into criminals more than is necessary, and we
cannot agree to the creation of a new criminal offence capable of being
committed only by people under the age of eighteen, especially when the
activity concerned is so widespread and so hallowed a teenage tradition.
We afﬁrm that we think it desirable that ﬁlms in the (18) category should
not be seen by those under eighteen and we think it important that
genuine efforts should be devoted to stopping the practice. But we think
that it would be going too far to criminalise the attempt by young people
to see such ﬁlms. The responsibility, in our view, should continue to rest
on those who accept the payments their patrons make.
Conclusion
12.52
The present system for the censorship of ﬁlms has by and large
served us well. We are sure that most people wish a system to continue on
broadly similar lines. But we found a widespread feeling that the time had
come to remove the anomalies inherent in the system and to establish
censorship on a more rational and deliberate footing. This is what our
proposals seek to do. We believe that the system we propose will not only
meet this public demand for reform in the system but will provide the
basis for the efﬁcient, effective and sensitive practice of censorship in the
future in a way that will secure broad public support. We are conﬁdent
that a system on these lines will be capable of serving society well in the
decades to come.
films
211

CHAPTER 13
Summary of our proposals
B
13.1
Since our speciﬁc proposals have been scattered through the discus-
sion contained in the last four chapters, it may be helpful if, ﬁnally, we
summarise in more compact form the reforms that we propose. We take
the opportunity to be slightly more speciﬁc about some aspects of our
proposals, and to ﬁll in details which it seemed unnecessary to spell out in
the course of describing what decisions we had reached.
13.2
We have been conscious that the problems associated with our
subject are such that it is not enough for us simply to describe how we
think they should be dealt with, even if that description is fairly detailed.
What is crucial is that one’s proposals should be capable of being trans-
lated into legislation which will be rational and workable. It is much
harder to settle the concrete form of a law than to say in general terms
what it ought to do. This is evident in the existing law, which is unsatis-
factory because of the vagueness and uncertainty of its deﬁnitions; it must
be said that it was also apparent in the evidence of our witnesses, many of
whom found it easier to make general statements about pornography or
about the scope of the law than to suggest to us how a new law might be
framed.
13.3
We therefore felt a need to assure ourselves that our proposals could
make effective legislation. We have devoted some time to translating our
proposals into the form of a draft Bill, a process which has required us to
consider the practical problems that always arise when broad policy is
turned into legislation, and to look again at certain aspects of our pro-
posals. The content of Part 3 of our Report takes account of this task we
have undertaken, and has in some respects been modiﬁed as a conse-
quence of our consideration of the requirements of legislation. As a result,
we feel able to offer our recommendations with greater conﬁdence in their
practicality. We have not, however, thought it appropriate to publish our
draft Bill with our Report. It was not our aim in drafting legislative
212
www.ebook3000.com

provisions to produce a measure which in all technical respects would be
suitable for enactment in the form in which it stood, and we wished to
avoid giving the impression, by publishing it, that it might be.
13.4
We propose that:
General
1. The existing variety of laws in this ﬁeld should be scrapped and a
comprehensive new statute should start afresh (see paragraph 2.29).
2. Terms such as “obscene”, “indecent” and “deprave and corrupt”
should be abandoned as having outlived their usefulness (paragraph 9.21).
3. The law should rest partly on the basis of harms caused by or involved
in the existence of the material: these alone can justify prohibitions; and
partly on the basis of the public’s legitimate interest in not being
offended by the display and availability of the material: this can
justify no more than the imposition of restrictions designed to
protect the ordinary citizen from unreasonable offence
(paragraphs 9.7 and 10.2).
4. The principal object of the law should be to prevent certain kinds of
material causing offence to reasonable people or being made available to
young people (paragraph 9.7).
5. Only a small class of material should be forbidden to those who want it,
because an objective assessment of likely harm does not support a wider
prohibition (paragraph 10.8).
6. The printed word should be neither restricted nor prohibited since its
nature makes it neither immediately offensive nor capable of involving the
harms we identify, and because of its importance in conveying ideas
(paragraph 7.22).
Restriction
7. Restrictions should apply to matter (other than the printed word) and to a
performance whose unrestricted availability is offensive to reasonable
people by reason of the manner in which it portrays, deals with or relates to
violence, cruelty or horror, or sexual, faecal or urinary functions or genital
organs (paragraphs 9.36 and 11.8).
8. Restriction is to consist in a ban
(i) on the display, sale, hire etc. of restricted material other than by way of
postal or other delivery and
(ii) on the presentation of any restricted performance other than in
premises (or a part of premises having a separate access from the street)
(a) to which persons under the age of eighteen are not admitted, and
summary of our proposals
213

(b) to which access is possible only by passing a prominent warning
notice in speciﬁed terms, and
(c) which make no display visible to persons not passing beyond the
warning notice, other than the name of the business and an
indication of its nature (paragraphs 9.15 and 11.8).
9. No material or performance should be exempt from these restrictions on
the ground of any intrinsic merit it might possess (paragraph 9.41).
10. It should be an offence to display, sell, hire etc. any restricted matter or to
present a restricted performance in contravention of the restrictions laid
down (paragraphs 9.43 and 11.16).
11. This offence should not apply to the showing of ﬁlms, for which we
propose separate controls.
12. It should be an offence to send or deliver restricted material, or
advertisements for such material, to
(a) a person who the sender knew or ought reasonably to have known
was under the age of eighteen, or
(b) a person who the sender knew or ought reasonably to have known
had not solicited the material (paragraphs 9.18–19).
13. It should not be an offence for a person under the age of eighteen to seek to
gain entry to premises in which restricted material is being displayed, sold
or hired or in which a restricted performance is being presented, or to
order restricted material to be sent to him or her (paragraph 9.44).
14. It should not be freely open to any individual to institute proceedings for
the criminal offences proposed above; prosecutions should be brought by
the police or by or with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(paragraphs 9.50 and 11.16).
15. Restriction offences should be triable only by magistrates and punishable
by ﬁnes of up to £1,000 and imprisonment of up to six months (paragraphs
9.43 and 11.16).
16. The police should have power to obtain a magistrate’s warrant to enter
and search premises for material which they believe is being displayed,
sold or hired in contravention of the restrictions, and to seize such material
as may be needed for the purposes of evidence (paragraph 9.45).
17. A magistrates’ court convicting an offender for a restriction offence should
have power to order, if it thinks ﬁt, that seized material should be forfeited
(paragraph 9.46).
18. There should be no separate procedure aimed at the forfeiture of restricted
material divorced from criminal proceedings against an alleged offender
(paragraph 9.46).
214
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

Prohibition
19. Prohibited material should consist of photographs and ﬁlms whose
production appears to the court to have involved the exploitation for
sexual purposes of any person where either
(a) that person appears from the evidence as a whole to have been at the
relevant time under the age of sixteen, or
(b) the material gives reason to believe that actual physical harm was
inﬂicted on that person (paragraph 10.6).
20. It should be an offence to take any prohibited photograph or ﬁlm, to
distribute or show it, to have it with a view to its being distributed or
shown, or to advertise it as being available for distribution or showing
(paragraph 10.13).
21. No proceedings in respect of this offence should lie in relation to any ﬁlm
exhibited under the authority of a ﬁlm censorship certiﬁcate (paragraph
12.47).
22. Prohibited material should be included in the list of goods prohibited from
importation, and imports contravening the prohibition should be dealt
with according to the normal customs procedures for prohibited imports,
save for certain exceptions relating to ﬁlms (paragraphs 10.13 and 12.48).
23. Prohibited material should be included among articles prohibited from
transmission through the post but there should be an additional prohibition
as regards overseas mail on articles of which the importation and
circulation is prohibited in the country of destination (paragraph 10.14).
24. A live performance should be prohibited if
(a) it involves actual sexual activity of a kind which, in the circumstances
in which it was given, would be offensive to reasonable people
(sexual activity including the act of masturbation and forms of genital,
anal or oral connection between humans and animals as well as
between humans), or
(b) it involves the sexual exploitation of any person under the age of
sixteen (paragraph 11.15).
25. It should be an offence to present, organise or take part in a performance
which contravenes the prohibition (paragraph 11.16).
26. The law should not be so framed as to apply to what is performed in a
private house so long as no person under eighteen is present and no
charge is made (paragraph 11.17).
27. The law on live performances should not apply to what is performed
solely for the purposes of being ﬁlmed or photographed where the
resulting material would not be liable to prohibition (paragraph 11.17).
summary of our proposals
215

28. No material or performance should be exempt from the prohibition on the
grounds of any intrinsic merit it might possess (paragraphs 10.12 and 11.10).
29. No proceedings should be instituted in respect of a prohibition offence
other than by or with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions
(paragraph 10.20).
30. Prohibition offences should be triable either in the Crown Court or in a
magistrates’ court, with a maximum term of three years’ imprisonment
and an unlimited ﬁne on conviction in the Crown Court (paragraph 10.15).
31. The police should have power to obtain a magistrate’s warrant to enter
and search premises and seize what they believe to be prohibited material
kept in circumstances in which they believe an offence is being committed
(paragraph 10.17).
32. The court convicting a person of an offence involving prohibited material
shall order that any material seized which is in their view prohibited
material shall be forfeited (paragraph 10.19).
33. There should be no separate procedure aimed at the forfeiture of
prohibited material divorced from criminal proceedings against an alleged
offender (paragraph 10.19).
Film censorship
34. Censorship imposed by local authorities on the basis of their powers to
license cinemas should be ended (paragraph 12.20).
35. A statutory board should be set up to take over the censorship powers of
local authorities and the functions now exercised by the British Board of
Film Censors, but the responsibility for licensing cinemas should continue
to rest with local authorities (paragraph 12.29).
36. The Board should be known as the Film Examining Board and should
comprise about twelve members chosen to represent a range of interests,
including the ﬁlm industry and local government, and relevant expertise
(paragraph 12.30).
37. The Board should be non-proﬁt making and so far as possible self-
supporting from the fees charged for examining ﬁlms; but provision
should be made for some ﬁnancial assistance from public funds
(paragraph 12.32).
38. The functions of the Board members should be
(a) to establish the policy and principles of ﬁlm censorship within the
criteria laid down by statute;
(b) to appoint a Chief Examiner of Films and, on the recommendation of
the Chairman and Chief Examiner, a small staff of ﬁlm examiners to
take decisions on individual ﬁlms;
216
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

(c) to prescribe procedures for the censorship of ﬁlms, the fees to be
charged and to decide on the waiver of fees where appropriate;
(d) to hear appeals against the decisions of the examiners (paragraph 12.31).
39. When the decision of the examiners is the subject of an appeal by the
applicant for a certiﬁcate, the Board should be required to view the ﬁlm
before determining the appeal (paragraph 12.31).
40. It should be open to any person to appeal against a particular decision of
the examiners, but in the case of an appeal by a person other than the
applicant the Board should have power to reach a decision either after
seeing the ﬁlm or after deciding that the written reasons for the appeal do
not justify their taking steps to see it (paragraph 12.31).
41. The Board’s examiners should allocate each ﬁlm examined to one of the
following six categories:
(U)
Suitable for all ages
(llA)
Children under the age of eleven should be accompanied by a
responsible adult
(16)
No person under the age of sixteen to be admitted
(18)
No person under the age of eighteen to be admitted
(18R)
For restricted exhibition only. No person under the age of
eighteen to be admitted.
Certiﬁcate refused
(paragraphs 12.41–43).
42. The category of a ﬁlm, in the form of an encircled symbol, should be
clearly shown in any advertisements for it, at the entrance to the cinema
and on the screen immediately before the ﬁlm is shown (paragraph 12.49).
43. The Board should give to the applicant on request a statement of reasons
why a ﬁlm is refused a certiﬁcate or allocated to a particular category,
giving sufﬁcient indication of any changes that might be required for it to
qualify for a certiﬁcate, or for a less restrictive certiﬁcate (paragraph 12.45).
44. In formulating its policy on the control of ﬁlm content, the Board should
be required to have regard to the following guidelines:
(a) the issue of certiﬁcates indicating a ﬁlm’s suitability or unsuitability for
persons under eighteen should take account of the protection of
children and young persons from inﬂuences which may be disturbing
or harmful to them, or from material whose unrestricted availability to
them would be unacceptable to responsible parents.
(b) a ﬁlm should be classiﬁed for restricted exhibition only if its visual
content and the manner in which it deals with violence, cruelty or
summary of our proposals
217

horror, or sexual, faecal or urinary functions or genital organs is such
that in the judgement of the examiners it is appropriate that the ﬁlm
should be shown only under restricted conditions.
(c) a ﬁlm should be refused a certiﬁcate only if, in the judgement of the
examiners, it is unﬁt for public exhibition. A ﬁlm unﬁt for public
exhibition should be one that either
(i) contains material prohibited by law; or
(ii) having regard to the importance of allowing the development of
artistic expression and of not suppressing truth or reality, is
nevertheless unacceptable because of the manner in which it
depicts violence or sexual activity or crime.
(paragraph 12.45).
45. A ﬁlm classiﬁed for restricted exhibition should not be shown for gain
other than in a cinema designated by the local cinema licensing authority
as suitable for the showing of such ﬁlms. The local authority should have
absolute discretion whether or not to approve an application for
designation and its decision should be ﬁnal (paragraph 12.38).
46. An auditorium in a multi-screen cinema complex should be eligible for
designation as suitable for the showing of restricted ﬁlms (paragraph 12.38).
47. A designated cinema should be free to show any ﬁlm granted a certiﬁcate
by the Film Examining Board (paragraph 12.39).
48. When exhibiting a restricted ﬁlm, a designated cinema should be
required to make no pictorial display outside the cinema and to display
in the foyer a brief synopsis or description of the ﬁlm prepared by the
Film Examining Board (paragraph 12.39).
49. Steps should be taken to bring commercial cinema clubs within the scope
of the censorship system by providing an exemption only for ﬁlm
exhibitions not promoted for private gain (paragraph 12.40).
50. A ﬁlm intended for exhibition in this country should not be seized on
importation as a prohibited import without being referred to the Film
Examining Board for advice and for decision as to whether, in a cut form,
it could qualify for a certiﬁcate (paragraph 12.47).
51. It should be an offence to exhibit for private gain any ﬁlm not possessing a
certiﬁcate issued by the Film Examining Board (paragraph 12.46).
52. It should be an offence to exhibit any ﬁlm for private gain other than in
accordance with the requirements of the certiﬁcate issued to it (paragraph
12.49).
53. It should not be an offence for a person under the age of eighteen to seek to
gain entry to a ﬁlm designated as unsuitable for persons of that age
(paragraph 12.51).
218
obscenity and film censorship
www.ebook3000.com

54. It should be an offence to advertise a ﬁlm or exhibit it without complying
with the requirements to specify the category of certiﬁcate granted to it
(paragraph 12.49).
55. The Board should not have a responsibility for prosecuting offenders nor
should any individual be free to institute proceedings; prosecutions
should be brought by the police or by or with the consent of the Director of
Public Prosecutions (paragraph 12.49).
56. Offences concerned with ﬁlm censorship should be triable only by
magistrates. Showing uncertiﬁcated ﬁlms should be punishable by ﬁnes of
up to £1,000 and imprisonment of up to six months; other offences should
be punishable by ﬁnes of up to £500 (paragraph 12.49).
summary of our proposals
219

