Foundations of Physics, Vol. 26. No. 6. 1966 
On the Role of Hidden Variables in the 
Fundamental Structure of Physics ~ 
David Bohm 2 
Received AtL~ust 4. 1993 
J Editorial note: We are much indebted to Professor Jeffrey Bub for bringing the existence of 
this paper twritten arotmd 1968 or 1969) to our attention. Most of the first part, up to 
Sec. 4.B. has already appeared, in more or less the same fornl and under the same title as 
above, in Quantum Theoo' and Beyond, T. Bastin, ed. (Cambridge University Press, 1971 ). 
It is here reproduced, by kind permission of the original publisher and Mrs. Sarah Bobm, 
as the first part of the present paper, whose second and major part has, to all appearances, 
not been published before. Apropos of the history of Bohm's paper, Professor Basil Hiley, 
a long-time collaborator of David Bohm, has kindly supplied the following information: 
"Section 2 of the manuscript is not in the book, and some minor alterations were also 
made to three or four paragraphs at the end of Sec. 3 and the beginning of Sec. 4. The remain- 
der of the article has not, to nay knowledge, appeared in print. [ have searched Bohm's list 
of publications and can find no titles that suggest the content might have been included." 
"I remember the period that it was written quite well, It predates the development of 
the implicate order and was at the time when we were exploring why Bohr was so confident 
that it would not be possible to introduce new concepts into physics that would allow us to 
discuss the individual quantum processes. As I recall, at that time Jeff Bub was in the States, 
aqd Donald Scbumacher was a postgraduate student at Birbeck. Donald was very interested 
in the "quantum metalanguage" and had many discussions on the role of language in 
physics. This paper predates Bohm's interest in the rheomode. In l;act, I think we started to 
discuss the rheomode shortly after this paper was written. I was probably a factor in the 
development of the rheomode, because my own interests were very much directed towards 
trying to base physics on the general notion of process, an idea that attracted me to 
Boh,n in the first place, as he had similar thoughts. I felt that the rheomode, although an 
extremely interesting exercise, was not the real point, and Bohm eventually came to the same 
conclusion." 
"1 think this manuscript is of historical interest. It shows quite clearly Bohm's deeper 
concern that the use of bidden variables would not provide the answer without radically 
changing the way we think about quantum processes, a feeling that we still shared alter com- 
pleting The Undieided Universe. This point is made quite strongly towards the end of the 
paper, starting a dozen pages after the beginning of Sec. 6. I think there are t~atures in 
the paper that are not clear, but you can begin to see the seeds of what was to appear in 
his later work. Herein lies, I think, the article's lfistorical significance." 
" Department of Physics, Birbeck College (University of London), Malet Street, London 
WCI E 7HX, United Kingdom. Prof. David Bohm died on October 28, 1992. 
719 
0(115-9o18./96/0600.0719509.50/0 ~ 1996 Plenum Publishing Corporation 

720 
Bohm 
Contents 
I. Introduction 
2. Contingency and necessity as a basic fonn of description of lawful behavior 
3. On von Neumann's theorem concerning bidden variables 
4. An illustrative example of a nondynanfical hidden-variables theory 
4.1. Preliminar3, discussion 
4.2. The formal presentation of the theory 
4.3. On the new general language structure of our theory and its relationship 
to experiment 
4.4. On Bohr's views concerning quantum theory 
5. Science as perception-comn3unication-action 
6. The indicator function in quantum theory, in relativity theory, and in 
"'hidden-variables" theory 
7. On the content of the word "'reality" 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Ever since the quantum theory took its modern form, determined to a large 
extent by Bohr's notions on the wholeness of the experimental phenomena 
and on the need for mutually incompatible but complementary descriptions 
of these phenomena, the possible role of a formulation of the laws of 
physics in terms of as yet "hidden" variables has been obscure and, in some 
sense, confused as well. 
On the one hand, Bohr's views on the meaning of the term "quantum" 
appear to imply at the very outset that the term "hidden variables" has no 
conceivable place in the quantum theory at all. That is to say, as Einstein 
ruled out the terms "absolute space" and "the ether" as irrelevant, so 
Bohr's intention was to rule out as irrelevant the whole structure of 
language in which the words "hidden variables" would be able to have the 
kind of dynamical significance that physicists generally attributed to them. 
Thereafter, to try to "disprove" hidden dynamical variables, or "show their 
impossibility," would be a meaningless effort, just as it would be pointless 
as well as conIi~sed in Einstein's language to try to "disprove" the existence 
of absolute space and time. 
On the other hand, a rather different line of approach was adopted by 
a number of other physicists, which culminated in the work of von 
Neumann. In this work, there appeared a well-known theorem which was 
regarded as a prool'that hidden dynamical variables are impossible. At first 
sight, one might be inclined to suppose that such a proof must be in com- 
plete agreement with Bohr's basic aims and, in fact, a kind of additional 
"support," helping to establish the validity of Bohr's point of view. But if 
one thinks more carefully, one sees that this is not the case at all. For if 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
721 
yon Neumann's point of view was such as to allow a theorem aimed at dis- 
proving the existence of hidden dynamical variables to be lbrmulated, this 
implies that 
his language gave meaning to the term, but simply 
demonstrated logically that this meaning was incompatible with certain 
axioms or experimental facts that have been accepted as true. But Bohr 
begins with a language that rules out these terms as meaningless. Thus, the 
two views are not only incompatible; even more, it is a source of confusion 
in Bohr's language merely to try to talk about certain notions regarded as 
basic in von Neumann's theory. One sees thus, on reflection, that Bohr and 
yon Neumann were not even related enough in their points of view to meet 
and to argue the question of which was better. 
It does not seem to have been widely realized that there was such an 
unbridgeable chasm separating the fundamental ideas of the leading 
physicists who had developed the quantum theory and who were con- 
tinuing to work on it. Rather, it was generally believed that all were in 
basic agreement, except for what were thought to be relatively superficially 
different forms of the language in which the theory was expressed. Since 
this difference in language was in fact crucial rather than superficial, it was 
inevitable that there would arise a deep kind of confusion concerning the 
general informal and "philosophical" questions, having to do with the 
meaning and interpretation of the theory as a whole. 
This confusion could escape detection, at least in a large measure. 
because all talked in terms of the same formal algorithm, which was indeed 
very widely taken to be the "essence" of the theory. Since such widely 
different "philosophical" and "linguistic" notions seemed to lead to no 
difference in this "essence," people could easily come to the conclusion that 
the general intbrmal discussion of the basis of the quantum theory was 
itself not very significant. All that seemed really to count was the 
formalism, with its ability to yield a very wide range of predictions that 
were in agreement with experiment. 
But of course such conclusions only served to add to the problem, 
because one's overall thinking about the theory is an indivisible whole, in 
which confusion in one's informal and philosophical premises will in fact 
lead to a corresponding confusion in what one does with the rest of the 
theory (especially when 
one tries to understand 
new domains of 
phenomena where new lines of thought are called for). And because the 
relevance of such considerations was not widely understood, quite con- 
tradictory lines of reasoning continued for many years to enter into most 
discussions of the foundations of the theory. When these contradictions led 
to difficulties, it was possible apparently to remove them, either by saying 
that they had no Jbrmal or practical significance (thus using the tacit 
notion that what is informal and "philosophical" has no basic relevance) or 

722 
Bohm 
else by saying that they were problems that could be solved later (e.g., when 
the task of reconciling Bohr's and yon Neumann's views is called a 
problem, one can cease to be aware that it is still a contradiction and, in 
reality, impossible). 
In the background of this kind of general lack of clarity and thinking 
about the meaning and interpretation of the theory, it was inevitable that 
the reason for entertaining the notion of hidden variables would also not 
be clear. Indeed, the consideration of hidden variables was very generally 
regarded as nothing more than a "reactionary" step, aimed at reintroducing 
the mechanical determinism of classical dynamics into the basis of physics. 
In addition, it was felt to be an effort to overturn Bohr's fundamentally 
new approach that ruled out as irrelevant the old classical ideal of a purely 
dynamical description 
of phenomena. 
In this connection, Einstein's 
criticisms of the quantum theory as an "incomplete description of reality" 
may well have helped to create a climate of thought in which one could 
easily assume that hidden-variable theories must necessarily be intended to 
provide a more nearly "complete" description, which would in some sense 
be an extension of the classical dynamical notions of a detailed analysis of 
the world into mechanical parts, following well-defined laws of notion. 
In this paper, it will be nay purpose to discuss these questions, and to 
show that the consideration of hidden variables need not have "reac- 
tionary" aims of the kind described above. Rather, as will be brought out, 
its deep intention is actually the continuation and extension of what is 
most basic and novel in Bohr's insights. It is only because the term "hidden 
variable" was tacitly restricted to mean "essentially classically dynamical" 
that one could plausibly suppose hidden variables to be incompatible with 
what is new in quantum theory. Indeed, it will be my aim to show in terms 
of a specific illustrative example, involving the use of hidden variables of a 
new nondynamical kind, that this notion can actually help in a significant 
manner to lead our thinking away from classical concepts and modes of 
description toward radically new notions of the form of physical law, and 
even of what is the nature of the activity that constitutes physics itself) 
2. CONTINGENCY AND NECESSITY AS A BASIC FORM OF 
DESCRIPTION OF LAWFUL BEHAVIOR 
A good point of departure for seeing the relevance of hidden variables 
to the fundamental concepts and modes of description of physics is to 
3 In this paper, I shall be freely using many ideas that arose jointly in discussions with 
D. Schumacher, and others that developed jointly in a long correspondence with J. Bub. 
Some of these ideas will be published by Schumacher and by Bub in separate papers. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
723 
consider the way in which the categories of contingency and necessity arise 
as basic forms in the expression of every kind of lawful behavior, 
In any field of discussion there is always a range of total possibilities, 
tacit and explicit. In this range, the the general form of our language and 
thought leads us to assert that certain things are necessary, i.e., they cannot 
be otherwise, while other things are contingent, i.e., they "just happen" to 
be as they are, but they could also in principle be otherwise. For example, 
in classical physics the dynamical laws specifying the orders of movement 
of the various particles are taken to be necessary, while the positions and 
velocities of the various particles at a moment are taken to be con- 
tingencies. 
Similarly, in the field of chemistry, the chemical properties of a given 
substance are regarded as necessary, while the form and shape of a given 
piece of such substance are regarded as contingencies. 
But of course what is contingent in one field is necessary in another. 
Thus, the initial position and velocity of a given object may be determined 
by various factors occuring naturally in the general environment (e,g., 
wind, waves, etc.) or by people (who may set these conditions inten- 
tionally) or by structural requirements (e.g., an atom may be part of a 
larger structure, such as a crystal). However, in turn, these larger fields 
have theh" necessities and contingencies. Thus wind and waves follow 
certain dynamical laws but are contingent, in the sense that the "initial 
conditions" in these laws depend on factors (such as ions from the sun) 
which are outside the context in question. The behavior of people in setting 
the initial conditions of an object is necessary in certain senses, but is also 
contingent in a very large number of other senses (e.g., it depends on what 
happens to be in their minds at a given moment), while the particular 
structure of a crystal is likewise necessary in some ways but also contingent 
in others (it depends on many i~actors such as temperature, pressure, etc.). 
This kind of connection between necessity and contingency reveals 
itself in a particularly significant manner in the meeting of what are called 
fortuitously related chains of events or processes, each of which was initially 
following its own relatively autonomous and necessary order. Consider for 
example an accident, consisting of a collision of two cars at a road intersec- 
tion. Each car moves essentially #utependently (or autonomously) in a 
more or less causally ordered way but it "just happens" that they meet and 
destroy each other at the intersection of their paths. The fact that they 
collide is evidently a contingency in the context in which we consider each 
car by itself without reference to the other. But in a broader context, 
including both roads and both cars, we see that the two cars, each moving 
in the way that it did, necessarily had to collide. And, of course, the details 
of the movement of each car are in turn contingent on many other factors, 

724 
Bohm 
such as the character of its mechanical parts and the ability of the drivers 
to pay attention to their actions. 
Now, insurance companies collecting statistical data in a certain field 
(e.g., the number of accidents occurring under specified conditions) have 
found it to be a./2tct that the relative frequencies of each kind of accident 
tend very nearly to repeat from year to year or else to change (at least in 
some approximate sense) in regular and specifiable ways. Oil the assump- 
tion that this behavior can be counted on they have been able, generally 
speaking, to operate at a profit even though ill their field of data nothing 
can be said about just who will have an accident, or when, or why. This 
operation was facilitated mathematically with the aid of a certain statistical 
language, in which probabilities were brought in as a 
nwasttre 
of a 
collection or ensemble of similar events that are individually taken to be 
fortuitous in the field of data under discussion. 
The general importance of the notion of the fortuitous nature of a 
statistical ensemble of events is clear. Thus, when observations reveal a 
certain statistical measure of automobile accidents, the government need 
not accept this measure as an absolutely inevitable feature of the general 
order of things. Instead, it may institute an inquiry into the causes of some 
of tile individual fortt, itous events. In such all inquiry, it may lbr example 
be discovered that failure of mechanical parts contributed to some 
accidents, lack of attention and alertness to others, while befuddling the 
mind by alcohol played a key part in still others. With the aid of laws 
requiring inspection of mechanical parts, greater attention to road signs 
and signals, and no driving under the influence of drink, the understanding 
of this kind of broader necessity makes it possible for the statistical 
measure of accidents to be significantly reduced. 
So through the notion of the fortuitous, which serves as a kind of 
b,'idge, one sees that what is contingent in one field is revealed as necessary 
in another. Viceversa, the necessary is the fortuitous outcome of a vast set 
of contingencies. (For example, the statistical tendency of the rate of traffic 
accidents to repeat fiom year to year is the result of a tremendously rich 
variety of causes in a vast and immeasurable range of fields each of which 
is itself described through necessity and contingency.) Indeed, this kind of 
emergence of necessity fl'om the fortuitous is not restricted to a numerical 
or statistical measure 
of all the contingencies. For, in addition, the fortu- 
itous coming together of initially relatively independent and autonomous 
orders can give rise creatively to qualitatively new kinds of necessity 
of an entirely novel order (as well as to the ending of older orders). 
As an extreme example, consider Oparin's theory of the origin of life, in 
which he supposes that the fortuitous mixing of organic compounds on 
the surface of the Earth led, in the long run, to a special combination that 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
725 
set in motion a qualitatively new order of process of evolution of living 
beings. 
One sees thus that the necessary and the contingent are interwoven, 
through the fortuitous, in an extremely deep way in all that we know. 
l want to emphasize that this interweaving is not basically a characteristic 
of the content of such knowledge. Rather, it is, in essence, a general./orm 
of language and thought. But, of course, insofar as this form has revealed 
its suitabilio' to the content, then in a way it implies something (not 
precisely statable or analyzable) about the content too. 
Until the development of the quantum theory, the above notions were 
found to be relevant in every field of inquiry that men had ever undertaken. 
But from then on, it seemed, at least at first sight, that something entirely 
new and different had emerged concerning these notions. For, both in the 
point of view of Bohr and in that of von Neumann, it is agreed that there 
is no way to treat individual contingent events as the fortuitous result of 
the interplay of "independent" orders of necessary events, this necessity to 
be revealed in fields outside those that are studied in quantum theory. 
Rather, it was concluded that the "complete randomness" of quantum 
fluctuations was an ironbound and absolute necessity, because (according 
to Bohr), the very language of the subject made it absurd to try to assert 
otherwise, while (according to von Neumann) such an assertion would be 
contrary to the basic mathematical axioms of the theory, as well as to the 
experimental facts. 
It was really because I could not help but question the relevance of 
this notion of absolute contingency that I began to consider the possibility 
of bringing hidden variables into the theory. It was not that I thought it 
necessary or desirable to go back to the mechanical determinism of clas- 
sical dynamics. Rather, this was a side issue. Indeed, even with automobile 
accidents, while the fortuitous factors on which they depend may be 
dynamical, they need not be. (For example, they may depend on attention, 
which is evidently outside the scheme of dynamics.) Likewise, it seemed to 
me that the contingent events that were a part of what is meant by the term 
"quantum" should be understandable as the outcome of fortuitous orders 
of a new kind, not necessarily mechanical or dynamical. 
The field of quantum theory evidently lacks the terms needed for dis- 
cussing the new orders of law which could give rise to fortuitous effects. 
(Just as happens also in the field of data covered in insurance statistics.) 
Normally, in such a case, one seeks to extend the field under discussion in 
order to be able to describe the broader necessity within which the fortu- 
itous can have meaning. However, because of accidental (i.e., fortuitous) 
features of the historical development of the quantum theory (especially the 
discussions between Einstein and Bohr), it came to be generally accepted 

726 
Bohm 
that quantum theory was a "complete" description of all that was in prin- 
ciple describable, even though it could talk only about statistical ensembles 
and not about individual members of such ensembles. 
It seemed to me, however, that the interweaving of the contingent and 
the necessary is not merely an evident fact in all fields other than that of 
the quantum theory. In addition, I felt that the notion of an absolutely 
contingent event is not a consistent one, and that the general structure of 
our language does not allow us even to try to assert such a category 
without confusion of some kind. 
In this regard, our current inability to form a clear (confusion-free) 
notion of what is meant by the term "randomness" seemed significant. 
Thus, if randonmess is equated with disorder, then the attempt to say that 
it is governed by laws of probability implies a contradiction equivalent to 
assuming an "order of disorder." However, in terms of the notion of the 
fortuitous, probability laws refer to events that are contingent only in a 
certain field, in which field they are described statistically, in some 
approximation, by means of a numerical measure. Beyond this, the order 
of things is determined (in general, nondynamically) as the fortuitous out- 
come of what is present in other fields. And this would seem to give rise 
to a consistent meaning of the term "random" as applied in a given field. 
It is, in a way, just another world for "incompleteness" of whatever is to 
be found in that field. 
Indeed, in terms of these views, one sees that the notion of "com- 
pleteness" of any theory has no possible meaning at all. Each field must 
have contingency in it, and this implies other fields where contingency 
reveals itself as necessity. The attempt to bring in the idea of "absolute 
contingency" as the meaning of randomness was evidently closely tied up 
with the belief in "completeness" of the theory. For, if the theory contains 
contingency and is nevertheless "complete," one must somehow make 
discussion "close in on itself" by asserting that these contingencies are com- 
pletely "disordered" and yet "ordered" according to laws of proba- 
bility. In effect, this amounts to ruling out as meaningless and irrelevant 
any attempt to find new kinds of order on which individual events could 
be fortuitously dependent. It seemed to me, however, that what was 
required instead was to rule out as meaningless or irrelevant any language 
which called its content an in principle "complete" description of all that 
there is to be described. In other words, all theories are to be "open-ended" 
at the very outset, otherwise they will lead to confusion. 
The assumption of (in general nondynamical) hidden variables was 
then, in the first instance, an extension of our language, to bring in new 
terms that could describe the contingent and the fortuitous. It was in no 
sense aimed at re-introducing complete determinism or at bringing back 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
727 
dynamical notions into the foundations of physics, nor was it an attempt 
to "complete" the quantum theory. For, since even the hidden variables 
have contingency in them, they can never lead to "completeness" of 
description. 
But of course, since yon Neumann and Bohr had, in very different and 
indeed mutually incompatible ways, come to conclusions that denied such 
an approach, it seemed worthwhile to go into their work in more detail, in 
order to see the assumptions on which these conclusions were based. This 
will be done in the rest of the paper, first for von Neumann and then for 
Bohr. 
3. ON VON NEUMANN'S THEOREM CONCERNING 
HIDDEN 
VARIABLES 
Von Neumann begins the formal part of his treatment of the subjec( ~ 
by enunciating a number of axioms which he regards as basic to the quan- 
tum theory. We need not go into these axioms in detail here because, for 
the purposes of the present discussion, it will suffice to call attention to a 
few key points: 
1. 
He introduced the term "observable" in a role which suggests that 
he takes this Io be primitive, i. e., not definable or analyzable in detail. 
2. 
He assumes that 
for each observable A there is a linear 
operator (A). 
3. 
He introduces the notion of the average value of an observable (,~) 
to be determined in terms of the operator (A) in a suitable away which he 
specifies in detail. 
4. 
He assumes a certain further linearity property for this average, 
(aA +bB) = a,~+ b/~ 
where a and b are arbitrary constants. 
From von Neumann's mode of presentation of these assumptions and 
notions (along with others not mentioned here), we can see that he feels 
that they lead to a theory which is in essence in agreement with what 
physicists have generally been using informally in their actual work in the 
subject that is called "quantum theory." However, because the axioms have 
now been.formalized in a relatively precise way, it is possible to deduce cer- 
tain theorems, and one of these is that there can be no "dispersion-free" 
ensembles (i.e, ensembles that are free of statistical fluctuations for all 
observables). 

728 
Bohm 
To see the relevance of this theorem for hidden variables, it is useful 
to consider the subject of statistical mechanics, which in a certain sense can 
be said to provide an explanation of thermodynamics in terms of atomic 
variables that are "hidden," at least in the context of thermodynamics, as 
well as that of macroscopic dynamics more generally. One introduces 
classical "observables" such as A(p, q) and B(p, q), which are functions of 
the positions q and the momenta p of all the particles constituting a ther- 
modynamic system. Then, in terms of the probability density p(pt, qE ), in 
phase space (with element of volume d,Q) one has for the average of an 
"observable" 
=,'P(Pl,ql A(pl,ql)d-Q 
Evidently from the above definition, one can obtain von Neumann's 
linearity property 
(aA + bB) = a~ + b~ 
One then says that there are certain "normal" distributions, given by 
p = O~e 
E/kT 
which describe the situation in thermodynamic equilibrium. In addition, 
there may be other "non-normal" distributions, of which a special case is 
the "delta-function" distribution, which is "dispersion-free." 
It is clear from the above that if the "hidden variable explanations" of 
quantum theory are to be anything like atomic theoretical explanations of 
thermodynamics, then they must, in principle, be capable of dispersion-free 
ensembles. So in a general sense one sees already that von Neumann's 
axiomatic formalization of the quantum theory is not compatible with any- 
thing so obvious and direct as to make a quantum-mechanical observable 
come out as an average of a corresponding function of"hidden" dynamical 
parameters. 
However, yon Neumann's theorem has aspects that are more subtle 
than this. Indeed, he shows that his axioms imply the existence of a statisti- 
cal matrix (p) which plays a role somewhat analogous to the classical 
probability density p, in the sense that the average of an observable is given 
by the formula 
>~= (pA) 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
729 
The linearity postulate is now replaced by the simple expression 
aA + bB = (p(aA + bB) ) = a(pA ) + b(pB) 
Or, in terms of matrix elements, it becomes 
aA + bB=a ~. p,,.,(A),,,. + b ~ p.,.(B} ..... 
/lilt 
Illll 
So we see that what is common to classical statistical mechanics and 
quantum theoretical averages is that they are composed of products of 
statistical functions [-indicated by the symbol p or (p)] and observational 
functions [indicated by the symbol A or (A)]. 
How can these relationships be considered in terms of hidden 
variables? To do this, let us introduce a general symbol 2, representing as 
yet unknown sets of hidden variables. In addition, there will be further 
"'non hidden" variables, representing what is now observable in the quan- 
tum theory. Since a "complete measurement" is now supposed to determine 
the "quantum state." which is in turn determined (except for an arbitrary 
phase factor) by the wave function, it seems natural to take the "non 
hidden" variables to be the coefficients c~ of the wave function in an 
orthonormal expansion. 
R~b= Z c~r 
r 
In the spirit of classical mechanics and of yon Neumann's formulation 
of the quantum theory, let us define a corresponding statistical function 
/(2, cr) representing the probability distribution as a function of the hidden 
variables 2 and of the "nonhidden" variables c,. We write p,,,. =p..,(2. c~) 
and obtain 
IIlll 
where p ..... is the result of averaging p,.,,(2, c,.) over 2 and over all the (-'r- 
From this. one evidently realizes the linearity postulate 
(aA + bB) = ~ (aA ..... + bB..,) p .... 
lilt! 
We can then suppose that there is some "normal" distribution Jx( 2. Cr} 
(which leads to the usual quantum mechanical averages) as well as a set of 
more general "non-normal" distributions, including "delta functions" as 
~;25 26 6-2 

730 
Bohm 
limiting cases. And if f(2, c,.) is a delta function, then all results are 
evidently determined 
without dispersion. 
Therefore, von Neumann's 
axioms leading to the impossibility of dispersion-free ensembles are incom- 
patible with this kind of explanation of quantum theory in terms of hidden 
variables. 
A little reflection shows, however, that the above class of theories of 
hidden variables, ruled out by von Neuman's theorem, is actually a very 
limited and restricted one. What is essential to this class is that all averages 
are linear functions of the matrix elements A,,,,. 
One can easily consider more general relationships involving nonlinear 
functions of the matrix elements A ..... such that 
,~ = p(2, c,3 w (2, c,., A,,,,,) 
One can then suppose that there is some "normal" distribution, in which 
the above reduces to the relationships applying in the usual quantum 
theory, while for "non-normal" distributions the results will be basically 
different (i.e., what is now called "quantum theory" will no longer be 
relevant). 
Evidently such nonlinear 
structures 
of theory go outside yon 
Neumann's linearity postulate, and are therefore not ruled out by his 
theorem. Indeed, in the next section, we shall discuss a specific example of 
such a theory, based on nonlinear rather than linear relationships. 
Thus far, the significance of yon Neumann's theorem seems to be clear 
enough. But then, there appears to exist a widespread belief perhaps more 
tacit than explicit that somehow yon Neumann's theorem had ruled out all 
possible kinds of hidden variable theories. How could such an impression 
have arisen? 
If one looks into yon Neumann's discussion of the significance of his 
theorem, one sees in it a number of statements which are ambiguous 
enough to allow of this latter interpretation. For example, he says that in 
order for hidden variable theories to be applicable, the quantum theory 
would have to be objectively false. What does this mean? It can be taken 
in two ways: 
1. 
Hidden variables imply that the quantum theory has to be objec- 
tively fals~fiable. 
2. 
Hidden variables imply that the quantum theory would already 
have to be objectiveO, ./hls![?ed. 
The first of these interpretations is evidently a trivially true one. Thus, 
the existence of "hidden" atomic variables implies the potentialfalsifiability 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
731 
of thermodynamics (e.g., the existence of Brownian motion and other fluc- 
tuation phenomena). On the other hand, since there aro no experiments 
that already falsify quantum mechanics, the second interpretation implies 
the actual impossibility of hidden-variable theories. But, of course, this 
interpretation does not necessarily follow from von Neumann's theorem, 
since it could always be supposed that, in experiments done thus far, the 
distribution had not deviated significantly from the "normal" one, which 
leads to the usual quantum theoretical results. 
One may be inclined to wonder what could have led von Neumann to 
state his theorem in this rather unclear and even misleading way. A signifi- 
cant clue is perhaps provided by considering the role of the commonly 
accepted notion that "basic'" physical theories should in principle provide 
complete descriptions of the world. Thus few people regard thermo- 
dynamics as a basic, theory, and therefore there was comparatively little 
resistance to the notion that statistical mechanics could perhaps imply the 
possibility of falsifying it. But the notion of potential falsifiability of a 
theory regarded as basic in the above sense can be both disturbing and 
confusing. Indeed, if the terms of the theory are assumed to provide a com- 
plete description of everything, what can its potential falsifiability possibly 
mean? Logically speaking it would have to be something undescribable. In 
other words, the language of physics would not be capable of expressing 
the potential falsifiability of the quantum theory, so that this possibility has 
to be reflected and in effect ruled out as irrelevant. 
All that the language can admit as relevant are the two extremes. 
Either the general form of the quantum theory is "completely true" or else 
it has no factual validity at all. Since it evidently has a considerable range 
of factual validity, it would follow that the general form of the theory must 
be "completely true," and that hidden variables must be "objectively 
falsified." 
However, when we cease to regard the language of any theory as a 
"complete" description of reality, the potential falsifiability of quantum 
theory is no longer taken to be an "undescribable" thing, and is therefore 
also no longer tacitly ruled out as irrelevant. Thus we see how it can make 
sense to go on to the next stage and formulate a specific example of a 
hidden-variable theory. 
4. AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE OF A NONDYNAMICAL 
HIDDEN-VARIABLES THEORY 
Recently a theory of hidden variables has been proposed, ~2~ which 
implies a nondynamical approach to the conceptual structure of physics 

732 
Bohm 
that is in many ways very different from that of classical mechanics. This 
theory was intended largely as an illustration that could bring out 
relatively clearly in terms of a specific example just how the notions of 
necessity, contingency, and fortuity are relevant for such an approach. 
It was not expected, however, that this particular theory would give 
detailed numerical predictions that could be compared with experiments. 
Rather, the main end in view in its development was to indicate a new 
structure of language, which could in the first instance describe the 
generally accepted facts in a novel way. But of course, merely to describe 
familiar facts in a new language is evidently not all that could properly be 
required of a theory. Indeed, what has actually happened is that this new 
language has begun to indicate new areas in which unexpected kinds of 
facts can be sought, the content of which could not even be described in 
terms of the old language. Such facts may, in turn, help lead to yet newer 
ways of thinking about physics. Thus it can reasonably be hoped that our 
"hidden-variable" theory would serve as a kind of"bridge" toward further 
theories that may ultimately yield a relatively detailed kind of content 
which could perhaps be relevant even for making fairly precise experimen- 
tally testable predictions of a numerical character. 
4.1. Preliminary Discussion 
To bring out the full context in which our proposals are to be under- 
stood, it is useful to go briefly into what has been called the "measurement 
problem" in quantum theory. This problem arises to a large extent because 
of a widespread tendency to regard Schr6dinger's equation as a kind of" 
extension of dynamics, which is supposed to hold while the "system" is not 
being "disturbed" by what could be called an "observation." On the other 
hand, while the "system" is said to be "interacting with a measuring 
apparatus," it is clear that this dynamical language becomes irrelevant, and 
that an entirely different kind of language is needed~ For example, it has 
been said that the wave function "collapses" as soon as a human being has 
"knowledge" of the results of this interaction, or that "potentialities are 
actualized" when "the apparatus interacts with the observed system," or 
that "the intbrmation in the wave function enters the consciousness of an 
observer" or something else of the sort. What is crucial here is that notions 
like "collapse," "knowledge," "actualization of the potentialities," "informa- 
tion," "consciousness," "observer," etc. are inherentO~ nondynamicat in 
nature. That is to say, they simply cannot be expressed at all in the 
language of dynamics with its terms like "field," "particle," "position," 
"momentum," "differential operator," "wave equations," and the like. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
733 
Nevertheless, 
when 
one starts 
with a 
dynamical language for 
Schr6dinger's equation and the wave function, one is tacitly committed to 
extending this language to cover all aspects of the theory including what is 
called the "measurement process." Otherwise, it would appear that essential 
aspects of the total situation are being left out, so that at the very least, the 
theory must seem to be highly "incomplete." The drive for "completeness" 
that is inherent in the older dynamical language and its extension to 
Schr6dinger's equation then leads inevitably to the tbrmulation of the 
problem; i.e., "How is it possible to describe the "measurement process" in 
some kind of extension of the dynamical language?" This problem would, 
oll the lace of it, appear to be insoluble, because the terms of dynamics are 
so far from those having to do with "observation" that it is extremely dif- 
ficult to see how they could even be relevant in this context. This difficulty 
is reflected in the fact that those who have worked on the "measurement 
problem" have been generally not merely unable to agree, but unable even 
to meet sufficiently for one school to appreciate what the other school is 
trying to do. 
In my view, this kind of unclarity in basic premises is not the unique 
responsibility of any individual, or of any particular school. Rather it is the 
necessary result of the tacit commitment of physics to the language of 
dynamics with its implied drive towards "completeness," Therefore, to be 
Iree of this kind of confusion, what is needed is that we begin to develop 
a different language that does not commit us to dynamical notions as 
basic, so that room is left for our thinking to move in qualitative new 
directions. 
In the development of our theory of hidden variables, we shall there- 
fore have to be careful not to "pour new wine into old bottles" by using 
current dynamical terms of description and inference. But, of course, it is 
not possible suddenly to switch from one language to another with a very 
difl'erent general structure. So a transitional "intermediate" treatment is 
needed, in which we introduce new terms gradually, while we relate these, 
whenever possible, to the corresponding older terminology. To facilitate 
this procedure, we shall always put words referring to the older termi- 
nology in quotation marks. 
In this connection it is necessary to point out that the previous 
literature on the subject of "measurement theory" is to a large extent 
expressed in the terms of the older dynamical language, which is still a key 
part of the way in which the current quantum theory is actually used. Such 
a development was perhaps inevitable because the role of language was 
mainly tacit and unrecognized, so that workers in the field could not realize 
how an irrelevant language structure could confuse the basic issues. It is, there- 
fore, necessary, in reading this literature, to take such difficulties into account. 

734 
Bohm 
With all this in mind, we begin our discussion of "hidden variables" by 
emphasizing once again that the basic terms of the theory will not be those 
of dynamics, but will have a very different structure, which will reveal itself 
gradually as the theory is developed. In this structure, there will be no 
sharp distinction between description of the general content of the theory 
and the description of what is currently called a "measurement" or "obser- 
vation." In other words, the concepts, laws, and general language structure 
will, from the very beginning, be suitable for all that one attempts to 
discuss in terms of the theory. Therefore, there will be no special part of the 
theory referring to a "process of measurement," in which the language of 
the rest of the theory would cease to be appropriate, and in which the 
insoluable "problem" of trying to describe what is supposed to be hap- 
pening in terms of an irrelevant language structure would therefore arise. 
To begin to express this kind of "hidden-variable" theory mathemati- 
cally, we first define the "nonhidden" variables which are taken to be the 
coefficients cr in an orthonormal expansion of the wave function with the 
basis Z,., 
crx, 
r 
We then introduce a set of "hidden variables" ~, which are defined in 
another Hilbert space, "dual" to the c,. That is, we write 
(=~b,.~.~ 
x 
where (.+ is a set of orthonormal functions "dual" to the Zr. It is important 
to emphasize that in spite of these obvious similarities, ~b and ~ are different 
in key ways. For example, they do not satisfy the same law, or even similar 
laws. Indeed, as will be seen, in our theory ~b will tend to reflect the aspect 
of necessity while ( will be largely an expression of contingency, so that in 
the context under discussion it does not in general satisfy any well-defined 
laws of motion at all. (Other differences between ~, and ( will emerge as we 
go along.) 
Our proposal for the "nonhidden" variable ~ is that it shall follow an 
equation similar to that of Schr6dinger's in certain ways, but different from 
it in other ways. These differences are crucial, in the sense that (as will be 
seen) they help to bring basically nondynamical notions into the founda- 
tions of the theory. 
In expressing this equation we begin, for the sake of simplicity, by 
choosing an orthonormal basis for ~, such that what is currently called the 
"observable that is being measured" is diagonal. (Remember, however, that 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
735 
we shall gradually cease to use such terms, as our new language steadily 
acquires the capacity to "take over.") Our equation then takes the form 
a-7=7 
? 
." - - -  
.,. 
" 
.. 
K,,} 
where H,.~. is the matrix element of the usual Hamiltonian operator, and 
J~= hc.,.I 2, k,.= Ib,.I-', while 2 is a coefficient whose meaning will be dis- 
cussed below. 
Evidently, the first term on the right-hand side of the above equation 
corresponds to the usual Schr6dinger theory. The second term, however, is 
of a very different nature. First of all, it has nonlinear dependence on the cr. 
Secondly, it depends on the "hidden variables" ~,. (also in a nonlinear way). 
And, finally, it depends on a new kind of quantity represented by the term 2. 
The details of the behavior of 2 will not, however, be significant at the 
present stage of the development of the theory. Only certain general 
features of this behavior will be relevant for this purpose. 
What we are indeed proposing is that 2 is a function that depends on 
the overall environment of what is currently called "the system under 
observation." In a way, such notions are not entirely unknown in physics. 
Thus, Mach has proposed, in effect, that the inertial properties of an object 
might depend on the overall distribution of very distant stars. Similarly, we 
are suggesting that not only the inertial properties, but also, other equally 
"basic" properties (such as those relative to the coefficient 2) may depend 
on the general environment. But this environment is no longer being 
restricted to the distant stars. Rather, it may include any feature of the 
environment, in ways that are open to further specification as the theory is 
developed. 
In particular, we are proposing that when it is said in the older 
language that a "measurement is taking place," so that "the measuring 
instrument interacts for a certain period of time with the observed system," 
the corresponding description in our language is that environmental condi- 
tions are such that ). is large for the period of time in question. 2 will then 
be small again for the period of time in which the "system" was said in the 
old language to be "undisturbed." It will then be large again for the next 
period in which the "system" was said in the old language to be "inter- 
acting with another measuring instrument." For the time in which 2 is 
negligible, Schr6dinger's equation will of course be satisfied and this is all 
that is needed to lead to results that are in agreement with those of the 
usual theory in the context in which the latter is relevant. 
It is important to emphasize to the utmost degree that the language of 
our theory is radically different from that of dynamics. Indeed, in the latter 

736 
Bohm 
it is (as has already been pointed out) assumed that a "system" can be 
analyzed into component parts or elements, obeying dynamical equations 
that do not depend on anything outside the "system." On the contrary, in 
our theory, there can be no such a "system" because each partial aspect of 
the world has to be described in terms of equations that depend 
significantly (through 2 and in other ways that will be discussed later) on 
what is outside the aspect under discussion. Each such aspect is therefore 
inherently #womplete. 
It follows from the above that the notion of a "separately existent 
system" has no meaning in the language that we are using. We are thus led 
to see the need for a further change in the structure of this language, i.e., 
to drop as irrelevant the use of terms like "observed system" and 
"observing apparatus," regarded as "interacting in a process of measure- 
merit" (rather as Einstein similarly dropped "absolute space" and "ether"). 
Our proposal is instead that we adopt as basic the terms description and 
#Tference. 
To indicate, at least in a general way, why we make such a proposal, 
we first note that all that can possibly enter the content of' any discourse 
must evidently have its ultimate root in the totality of perception, present 
and past. (The contents of past perceptions whether our own or those of 
other people are, in some sense that cannot be fully analyzed, included in 
what is called "knowledge.") And when we come to comnumicate about 
anything that we may thus perceive (or know), the first requirement is 
evidently to describe this content, after which we are ready to make #![er- 
ences about it (e.g., we may come upon an initially unknown object, 
describe it as a piece of stone of a certain size, shape, etc., and then infer 
that it was probably a tool used by prehistoric man). Of course, the dif- 
ference between description and inference is not a sharply definable one. 
Indeed, what is inference in one context can become part of a description 
in another context (e.g., we may now say that the tool thus discovered has 
a shape that makes it suitable to be part of an axe). And since any given 
statement usually refers to many contexts at once, each sentence that we use 
generally contains an inseparably interwoven structure of description and 
inference. Nevertheless, the notion of a contingent (i.e., context-dependent) 
distinction between description and inference is clearly necessary if we are to 
understand the general form of our communications. 
For the purpose of our present discussion, what will be mainly signifi- 
cant will be to go into the role of description in physics. The role of 
il!ference will, however, come up later in a natural way. 
Now, if the content of every description has its grounds in the totality 
of all that we perceive (and all that we know), it is evident that this field 
is too vast, varied, and undefinable even to be described. Indeed, what 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
737 
actually happens is that some aspect of the total is singled out as directly 
relevant, so that it stands out in what may be called the Jbreground of the 
discourse. All that is not thus singled out (i.e., all that is ,ot directly 
releeant) then necessarily falls into what may be called the background. This 
is the primitive step behind any act of abstraction (i.e., taking out) of what 
is essential to the content of a discourse. 
Such an act of abstraction is evidently a necessary prelude to every 
discussion, whether in physics or in any other field. However, because of 
certain fortuitous features of its historical development (mentioned in the 
previous sections) physics has come to aim towards "completeness" of 
description as its ideal. In other words, it is commonly believed that the 
language of physics ought to be-universally relevant in every possible field 
of discussion, because physics is supposed to give l\mdamental and 
generally valid knowledge of "what each thing is." But we have seen that 
if the "basic" properties of each thing may depend on the whole of the 
general environment (through the coefficient 2 in our equations), the 
attempt to get such knowledge must lead to confusion. Therelbre, what is 
needed is to admit, at the very outset, that physics has no special role of 
this kind and that it is like every other subject, in that it can deal only in 
terms of the kind of hlherently hwomplete abstractions to which our notions 
concerning "hidden variables" have led. However, we do not base this on 
our particular formal theory, but rather, we see that such a notion is (like 
necessity, contingency, and fortuity) in harmony with the general Jorm of 
our perception and knowledge (whereas the approach through analyzing 
the world into separately existing parts or elements is not). 
Let us now return to the discussion of the kind of description that is 
suitable to our particular "hidden-variables" theory. We say that the terms 
of our equations involving "hidden" and "nonhidden" variables are part of 
the description of the.[~)reground but that these terms may well depend on 
the background through the coefficient 2 (as well as in other ways). That is 
to say, variations of 2 in some sense take into account corresponding varia- 
tions in the background. In order to show how this happens, it will be use- 
ful to use the terms of the older language indicativeh, (i.e., merely to "point 
to" a certain situation that is generally known, without committing us to 
the view that these terms give a correct description of the structure of the 
situation). So we begin with a situation which is indicated in terms of the 
old language by the phrase "a process of interaction between the observed 
system and the observing apparatus is taking place." But, in our language, 
we say instead that for a specified period of time in which 2 is large, an 
operation is taking place, the result of which is revealed in the foreground, 
through a certain change in the "nonhidden" variables ~b. (The word opera- 
tion has the advantage of having a significant but indirect connection with 

738 
Bohm 
the mathematical notion of operator, a connection whose meaning will 
show itself as the discussion proceeds.) But in describing such an operation, 
we shall no longer use the words "measurement" or "observation," because 
these would imply separately existent "observed systems" and "observing 
instruments," which notions have been ruled out as irrelevant and 
meaningless in terms of our new language. 
It will be noted that these views are, in a certain rather significant way, 
very similar to what is most novel in Bohr's notions. For, Bohr also 
emphasized that physics is in the first instance a description, rather than a 
source, of, in principle, complete conceptual images of "what each thing is." 
And in particular he emphasized the mTanalyzable wholeness of the 
description of the experimental phenomena by saying that the results of an 
experiment cannot be separated from the overall conditions of such an 
experiment. (This was indeed the basis of his principle of complementarity.) 
In order to be able to say such a thing, Bohr had to suggest a new way of 
using language in physics, a way that has not in fact been very generally 
understood. For example, he frequently indicated that the quantum theory 
implied that there can be no "atomic object" which could be "observed" by 
a separate "observer," and yet, other physicists (including Heisenberg and 
yon Neumann) thought in terms of two such systems separated by a "cut" 
between them that was, however, "freely moveable" and therefore in a cer- 
tain sense ambiguous. It seems significant that Bohr never referred to such 
a "cut" at all, and indeed it is clear that it would be inconsistent with his 
notion of unanalyzable wholeness to do so (since such a "cut" is intended 
just to the purpose of providing a kind of description that would make 
possible an analysis of the relationship between "observer" and "observed 
system," considered as separately existent). It should therefore be evident 
that there are important similarities between the language of our theory of 
"hidden variables" and that of Bohr (even though, as will emerge further 
on, there are also important differences). 
In view of all that has been said on the subject, the reader will-perhaps 
understand the need for continual emphasis on these questions of language, 
as well as to need to watch the language of his own thinking very carefully, 
to see whether he may not inadvertently be returning to the older dynam- 
ical terms which are so habitually ingrained in all who have studied physics. 
4.2. The Formal Presentation of the Theory 
Before proceeding to a more detailed discussion about how our 
language is related to that of Bohr, it will be useful to develop the formal 
structure of the theory somewhat further. In this way, our discussion will 
have a reasonably concrete content (otherwise it would probably be too 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
739 
vague and abstract properly to communicate the essence of the general and 
informal structure of our new language). 
From the basic equations for the c* (given in Sec. 4.1), it follows that 
_ 
OJ~ot h_2 ~,,. (c*H~,.c,... - CrHr.*~.Cs) "q- 2Jr ~s.. s \ K,. 
and, using the Hermitian character of H~ (i.e., H,..,.= H*.), one obtains 
0,.J=0, 
or 
~Jr=const 
r 
We see then that the "normalization" of the wave function is still preserved, 
independent of time, even though the equation for ~, is nonlinear, and even 
though ~, does not undergo what is usually called a "unitary transforma- 
tion." (Note that for a transformation to be "unitary" in this sense, it is not 
only necessary that scalar products in Hilbert space be invariant, but also 
that the transformation coefficients be independent of ~b, a condition not 
satisfied in our theory.) 
As indicated in Sec. 4.1, we shall take it to be a paradigm case that 2 
is significantly large only for limited periods of time, for which in the old 
language it would be said that "observed system and apparatus are inter- 
acting." We shall further simplify the discussion by assuming 2 to be so 
large for these periods of time that the effects of the Hamiltonian H*. can 
be neglected. In the old language we would be said to be assuming 
"impulsive measurements" but we will now say instead that we are assuming 
hnpulsive operations. 
For the time in which 2 is large, we can therefore write 
0t 
.,. 
For this period of time we shall further assume that the "hidden variables" 
do not change appreciably. Therefore we can treat the Ks as constant. 
Among all the Jr, there is one, J,, which satisfies the condition 
J, >J.,. 
K, Ks 
for all s ~ t. Evidently, Jt will necessarily increase with the passage of time 
(because all the terms (J,/K,-Js/K.~) are positive). And, as a simple 
calculation shows, Jr~K,- Js/K,. will also increase, so that J, must keep on 

740 
Bohm 
Fig. I 
increasing. Since Y~,. J,. is constant, this increase can stop only when all the 
J, are zero (for s4: t). Thereafter J, will remain constant. 
So what has been shown is that whichever of the J,. satisfy the condi- 
tion J,/K,>J.,./K , (o1 whichever yields a maximum J,./K~) will have to 
increase and to yield J, = 0 for all s ~ t, #ulepemte, tly of further details in 
the initial co,ditions. Symbolically, if we were to represent all possible 
initial conditions of the C, by a lull circle (Fig. 1 ), then this full circle is 
divided into subregions (labelled by A, B, C, D, etc.) such that all points 
initially in any given subregion must arrive at the same final result. This 
subregion is determined by the K~ (hence by the "hidden variables" 4) as 
well as by which operator happens to be diagonal in this particular 
enviromnental background (or by what would be called the "experimental 
conditions" in Bohr's language). 
It is clear then that the final result must depend in each case on the 
"hidden variables." As has been indicated, we are going to treat the hidden 
variables as co,tinge, cies, within the context of this particular theory 
(although, as will be seen later, they can be revealed as necessities in 
broader contexts). And therefore we are led (as is done in insurance 
statistics and in statistical mechanics) to assume some kind ofprohabiliO' 
measure for these contingencies, which will be valid within suitably limited 
contexts. Such a probability distribution over the "hidden variables" will of 
course imply a corresponding probability for the results of a measurement. 
The only remaining question is to ask whether there exists a normal 
probability measure that will yield results equivalent to those of the quan- 
tuna theory, as it is now formulated. The answer is that such a measure 
does exist. Indeed, if we assume the "normalization" condition, ~,. J,. = 1, 
~,. K,. = 1, it is easy to show that a uniform distribution of the b,. in their 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
741 
Hilbert space leads to the usual quantum theoretical probabilities for the 
results of measurements. 
It is instructive to illustrate this conclusion in terms of a Hilbert space 
with only two orthonormal axes (representing, for example, a "spin" 
having two possible values in any specified direction). Our equations 
becomes 
ah- 
= 
' 
= 
- 
- 
/ 
with J~+J2=l, 
K~+K_,=I. 
We see that if JI/K]>J2/K2, then JI 
increases to unity and J, drops to zero, while if J2/K2>JI/K I then J, 
increases to unity while J] drops to zero. This covers all possibilities 
(except for a set of measure zero which can be left out of consideration). 
The normal probability measure is uniform on the hypersurface in 
Hilbert space Ib~12+]b,I-'--l. Writing b~=U~+iV~,b2=U,_+iV,, 
we 
have 
u~+ v~+u~+v~=l 
This is a three-dimensional hyperspherical surface in a four-dimensional 
Euclidean space. The element of volume in this space is d/2 = dU~ dV 1 dU~_ 
dV~. If we use the polar definition of complex variables, h~ =r~ei% 
b~_ = r, e ''p'- and with r~ = r cos 0/2. r_, = r sin 0/2, we obtain 
dg? = r 3 dr sin 0 dO d~o] dcp2 
Restricting ourselves to r = 1, we obtain for the relevant element of "area" 
dS = sin 0 dO dq~ ~ d~p ,_ 
All that remains to be done is to integrate up the total area that 
satisfies the relationship Jl/Ki > J2/K2, or [a I [2/cos -~ 0 > [a_~ [-'/sin-" 0. This 
yields Sl=[al[ 2. Likewise, the total area satisfying J2/K2>Jj/KI 
is 
S, = Ib_, [2. Thus, if the distribution of the "hidden" variables is uniform, we 
obtain the usual quantum theoretical probabilities of results P~ = [a~ [2 and 
P2 = [b_, [ 2. (These conclusions are easily extended to the case of a general 
Hilbert space, to yield P,,=[c,,t'- for the probability of a result, corre- 
sponding to the nth unit vector in Hilbert space.) 
All this holds for the normal uniform distribution. For any other non- 
normal (hence non-uniform) distribution, different results will be obtained. 
In particular, for a delta function distribution of the hidden variables, the 
result is completely determined, according to whether J~/K~ >J,_/K,_, or 

742 
Bohm 
J2/K,_>Jt/K~, for the particular values of the hidden variables corre- 
sponding to the "delta function." 
It is evident that, since our basic equations are nonlinear, it is quite 
natural that the conditions of von Neumann's linearity postulate for quan- 
tum theoretical averages need not be valid for general distributions of the 
"hidden variables" (although, of course, they are valid for the normal 
uniform distribution). 
A question that arises naturally at this point is whether it is possible 
actually to obtain non-normal distributions that would give rise to new 
kinds of esperimental results going outside the whole frameworks of the 
quantum theory, in its current general formulation. This possibility 
depends on the behavior of the "hidden variables" b.,.. Of course this 
behavior is necessarily unknown, for the present. But we may find it 
instructive to consider what is implied by various possible assumptions on 
this point. 
The simplest assumption is that after the impulsive operation is over 
(so that, in the language of the current quantum theory, the "measurement 
process" is said to be finished), the hidden variables simply remain 
constant. 
Consider for example the case of what has been called "measuring the 
spin of an atom in the --direction." In our language, we say instead that 
a --spin operation has taken place. Let us suppose that such an operation 
gave a result corresponding to a "spin" of h/2 so that ICl 12= 1, IC, 12= 0, 
and the "hidden variables" were described statistically by a uniform normal 
distribution. We further suppose that a corresponding spin operation for 
some direction other than - then takes place. We now let a circle (Fig. 2) 
symbolically represent all the possibilities for the hidden variables (and not 
for the c,., as it did in the previous diagram). If we denote quantities refer- 
ring to the new direction by primes, this circle will be divided into two 
parts, A and B, representing states of the hidden variables that respectively 
satisfy J'l/K'~ > J~/K" or J'/K" > J'l/K'l. If, in fact, the result corresponds 
to ff'~, then we can deduce that the hidden variables are in the region 
corresponding to A, and not in that corresponding to B. 
It follows then that if a further spin operation takes place in yet 
another direction, the probabilities will be different from those given by the 
quantum theory in its current formulations; this situation is indicated by 
the dotted line MN. It is clear that, for example, the probability of a 
result corresponding to a "spin" of -h/2 in this new direction would be 
proportional to the intersections between the area of A and the corre- 
sponding area on the right-hand side of the line MN, to yield a net result, 
denoted by R, which would have a very different statistical weight from 
that implied in the formulas given by the current quantum theory. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
Fig. 2 
743 
It should be noticed, nevertheless, that if the third spin operation 
corresponds to the same direction as the second, then the condition 
J'l/K'l > J'/K'~ continues to be satisfied (because J~ = 0 after the second 
operation). So, any particular operation will be reproducible (as is also 
assumed in the current quantum theory). Indeed, even if the "hidden 
variables" should change between operations, the condition J't/K't > J'~/K~ 
would still be satisfied. So this feature of reproducibility is essentially inde- 
pendent of detailed assumptions about the behavior of hidden variables. 
More generally, however, one sees that in a series of spin operations, 
corresponding to what has been called "measurements of incompatible 
observables," the "hidden variables" can be progressively limited and 
defined. In this process, they cease to be "hidden" since they can now reveal 
themselves in a new k#Td of statistical distribution or results, not obtainable 
in terms of the current quantum theory. 
It has thus emerged that the distinction between "hidden" and "non- 
hidden" variables is not an absolute and final one, but that it can vary in 
accordance with the context. So this distinction has at most a rather 
limited kind of relevance. Therefore, it would be best to cease to regard this 
distinction as a basic in our description from now on. Indeed, we shall 
introduce the new terms, the conthlgent part oJ" the description (represented 
for short by the contingent L,ariables) and the ,oncontingent part (repre- 
sented by the noncont#~gent variables). One must remember or course that 
what was contingent in one context can become noncontingent in another. 
If the contingent parts of the description (i.e., the "hidden variables") 
can reveal themselves in the way described above through non-normal dis- 
tributions, one may ask why they have not yet done so in experiments that 
have thus far been carried out. A very simple answer is that the contingent 
variables may be subject to some kind of stochastic process. If this process 

744 
Bohm 
defines a certain characteristic relaxation time r, then successive operations 
separated by an interval greater than r would be described by the normal 
uniform distribution of the contingent variables, leading to the usual quan- 
tum theoretical probabilities. But operations following each other in times 
shorter than r would reveal new statistical results. And we may assume that 
r is shorter than any time interval that has been relevant until now in 
physical operations, thus explaining why the contingent variables have not 
yet revealed themselves. 
Naturally, the value of the parameter r is at present almost entirely 
unknown (other than through the limit that it is shorter than present 
"'measurements" allow). One may speculate that it is perhaps related to 
another parameter with the dimensions of time which also has to do with 
the statistical properties of matter in bulk and with the quantum, that is, 
h/kT, where T is the temperature. It is unclear, of course, whether the rele- 
vant temperature is that of the apparatus or of the observed systems (or of 
both, in some combination). Such a speculation may nevertheless be useful 
if it helps to suggest experiments that could test these notionsJ 3~ 
It is important, however, not to commit ourselves prematurely as to 
the properties of the b.,.. Indeed, as we have already seen, they are in the 
first instance mainly a further addition to our language, enabling us to 
describe certain kinds of contingency. To emphasize the full potentialities 
of this notion we may note that the b,. need not represent simple stochastic 
variables, belonging to what has been called the "observed system" in the 
older language. Rather, they may constitute a new kind of description that 
takes into account various features outside the scope of the noncontingent 
variables C,.. In the older language, this would mean roughly that the b.,. 
"reflect" some aspect of what has been called the "observing apparatus" or 
even "the general environment" and not merely what has been called the 
"observed system." 
As an illustration of this kind of "reflection" of contingencies, consider, 
for example, the image charge of an electron facing a metal surface. In a 
rough treatment, this image charge may be assumed to have a well-defined 
position, in relationship to that of the electron. But because of the atomic 
structure of the metal, as well as because of all sorts of irregularities in the 
surface and in the crystal structure, the image is not actually completely 
defined in position by the electron. Rather it is subject to "fluctuations" 
that are contingent on the fortuitous details of the atomic and crystal struc- 
ture. In certain contexts, one might define a statistical measure of these 
contingencies in terms of some kind of probability distribution of image 
positions. Similarly, the b.,. may represent a set of contingencies corre- 
sponding to fortuitous variations in the total context of the description of 
a nature that is as yet unknown. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
745 
To assume in this way that the equation for the noncontingent 
variables G- depends on a statistically distributed set of contingencies b,, is 
evidently in itself a significant step outside the general descriptive language 
of dynamics. In this latter language, it is indeed taken for granted (as has 
already been pointed out several times) that a dynamical system can be 
analyzed into its constituent parts or elements and that the equations 
governing the changes of these elements with time are simple necessities 
independent of all contingencies. To be sure, these elements interact, but 
the laws of interaction are specified entirely in terms of the dynamical 
properties of the elements and do not depend fortuitously in any way at all 
on contingencies. Indeed, in dynamics, all contingency is restricted, as a 
matter of course, to the initial conditions of the constituent elements. Thus, 
to have the laws of change and development themselves depend on a set of 
statistically distributed contingencies is a step outside the whole framework 
of dynamics. This means indeed that each aspect abstracted in the field of 
discussion has a kind of inherent incompleteness (in a sense that is over and 
above that corresponding to the dependence of the coefficient 2 on the 
general background ). 
There is still another kind of incompleteness that is very relevant to 
the language structure of our theory. To see this, let us go back to our 
basic equations (for the special case of an impulsive operation): 
o-7 
. 
E- 
Because J,.= tCrl-' and K,.= IbrI 2, it follows that the form of the equations 
is not invariant to changes of representation of the wave function in Hitbert 
space. This lack of invariance is, however, only a result of the rather special 
lbrm in which the equations were first put for the sake of simplicity of 
expression. Indeed, if we now-drop this restricted form, we will be able to 
see further into the full meaning of these equations. 
To do this we recall that the equations are now in a representation in 
which what has in the older language been called "the operator that is being 
observed" is diagonal. But in principle every such operator can be re- 
expressed in terms of a set of projection operators Pr, each of which projects 
out all eigenvectors ofthe operator in question except the rth. We can then write 
Jr = ~b"P,.O 
and 
Kr = g"~Prg 
With ~p = Z~c,.O~, Z = Y.~GZ~, our equations can be rewritten as 
<25'26~-3 

746 
Bohm 
If we change the representation by writing ~O = Uq/, Pr= UP'rU -~, 
then it is evident that the form of the equation is now invariant to such a 
change of basis in Hilbert space. 
However, what is new is that a certain set of operators Pr now enters 
the basic equation for ~,. In the language of Bohr, this set is determined by 
the "total experimental conditions" (e.g., as to whether "position" or 
"momentum" or some other "observable" is being "measured"). But in our 
language we say that the operators P,. depend on the background, which is 
of course a contingency in the context of our theory. Different kinds of con- 
tingent backgrounds then lead to different (and generally noncommuting) 
sets of such operators. So (as also holds in a way in Bohr's language) we 
say that the mutual incompatibility of different contingent backgrounds 
corresponds to the feature of noncommutativity in certain terms of the 
mathematical algorithm. 
We are not, however, necessarily committed to this particular meaning 
of the operators P,., i.e., that they take into account what Bohr has called 
the "experimental conditions." We can extend the meaning by ceasing to 
regard as basically relevant the difference between a situation called an 
"experiment" and any other situation that might arise, either naturally and 
"of its own accord" or artificially and through the participation of people 
who are called "physicists." In other words, the Pr can now take into 
account all sorts of features of the background. Along with the coefficient 
2, they imply that the very equations that describe the behavior of the 
foreground are crucially dependent on the background, in ways that are 
open to further specification as the theory is developed. 
We see that there is yet another kind of #lherent incompleteness in the 
theory. For, the basic equations depend not only on statistically distributed 
contingencies such as the b.~, but also on nonstatistical conth~gencies, which 
are described by the P,.. Indeed, these latter take into account what are in 
general fortuituous features of the overall environment and background 
that have to be described in terms of new contexts, beyond the one that is 
now under discussion. So we see how, by ruling out the notion of "com- 
pleteness" as irrelevant, our theory is able to exemplify the general notion 
of the necessary, the contingent, and the fortuituous, discussed in an earlier 
section. 
4.3. On the New General Language Structure of Our Theory and 
Its Relationship to Experiment 
It is clear from the previous discussion that our overall approach is 
not committed to any particular mathematical algorithm, or to any par- 
ticular meanings of the terms appearing in such algorithms. Rather, it is 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
747 
more broadly a suggested general language for the description of the con- 
tent of physics, which is basically different in structure from that of 
dynamics. In particular; this new language rules out as irrelevant any 
notion of "completeness"' of description, and instead brings in as basic and 
primitive the notion of an inherently incomplete abstraction which is at the 
foundation of each description. 
The general form of language suggested in the development of our 
theory is that each description contains three different but inseparably 
interwoven aspects: 
1. The immediately manifest and noncontingent aspect (in our 
theory, this corresponds to the "non hidden" variables c~). 
2. The nonimmediately manifest and contingent aspect (corre- 
sponding in our theory to the "hidden" variables b,.). 
3. The immediately manifest and contingent aspect (corresponding to 
the coefficient 2 and the projection operators P,., which in some 
ways take the background into account). 
These three aspects are in fact related by the Jbrmal algorithm (which 
is in our theory the differential equation for the directly manifest and 11011- 
contingent variables c.,.). The formal algorithm links the behavior of the 
immediately manifest and noncontingent aspect to the other two aspects. As 
a result of this linkage, the nonmanifest and contingent aspects do in fact 
reveal themselves indirectly, in relatively subtle features of the overall 
pattern of behavior. 
Consider, for example, the experiment discussed earlier in which suc- 
cessive ~p#1 operations corresponding to different directions took place 
under conditions in which the contingent ("hidden") variables b.,. did not 
change significantly between operations. Although the statistical distribu- 
tion of the contingent variables was initially uniform, this distribution was 
progressively restricted to approach something resembling a delta function. 
Thus, the contingent variables ceased to be "unknown," and this was 
revealed in new non-normal statistical distributions of the manifest 
variables. This shows that the distinction between manifest and non- 
manifest variables (like that between contingency and necessity) is not a 
fixed and final one. Rather, it is a contingent distinction that depends on 
the context, in the sense that what is nonmanifest in one context can reveal 
itself as manifest in another. 
It is therefore clear that the jormal algorithm is' fimctioning as an 
integral part of the language structure. It is not just a set of symbols 
"standing for" something else. Indeed, this latter view is a consequence of 
the notion that the world can be analyzed into separately existent elements, 

748 
Bohm 
and that each element can be "represented" by a symbol, but in the 
language that we are now developing this whole notion has been ruled out 
as irrelevant and meaningless. Thus, when we include a formal algorithm 
in the terms of our discussion, this algorithm now serves to give new kinds 
of meanings to the informal terms, so that the general meaning of the 
whole language structure is thereby basically changed. This is what 
happened, for example, with the algorithm for spin operations, which made 
it possible for the nonmanifest and contingent variables b,. to reveal them- 
selves in the manifest behavior of the c.,. Indeed, without the algorithm, the 
meanings of all the terms of our discussion would not have been 
adequately articulated and developed. 
We see then that formal and informal aspects of our language are now 
two inseparable sides of one whole, such that the distinction between them 
is one of relative and limited significance, i.e., it is a contingency whose 
relevance depends on the context. However, what we have said also 
indicates the need for a rather similar notion of the relationship between 
theory and experiment. One can see this by considering in more detail the 
way in which our theory leads to the suggestion of new kinds of experi- 
mental fact, the content of which cannot even be described in terms of the 
language of the current quantum theory. Indeed (as Bohr and yon 
Neumann both imply, each in terms of his own language), the consistent 
assertion of the current quantum theory requires the statement that in what 
are called "a series of successive measurements" (e.g., of spin in different 
directions), the probability distribution relating the nth to the (n+ 1)st 
"measurement" is independent of the results of all the "measurements" that 
came before. To put it more generally, this means that the order of such 
results is not regarded as relevant to the basic laws of physics (or, in the 
older terminology, that this order is "completely random"l. On the other 
hand, in our theory, the order of the results of successive operations is very 
relevant because, as has been seen, it determines the contingent and non- 
manifest (i,e., "hidden") variables which, in turn, determine new kinds of 
statistical distributions in the noncontingent and manifest variables. So our 
new language of theoretical description leads to a corresponding new 
language for describhTg an experiment. That is to say, the language of the 
theory and the language of the experiment are not really separated by a 
fixed and sharp distinction. Rather, what is a theoretical terminology in 
one context becomes an experimental terminology in another. 
The fact that the distinction between theoretical and experimental 
language is a contingent one, dependent on the context, is extremely rele- 
vant in properly understanding the question of how a general theoretical 
point of view can be subjected to some kind of experimental test and 
criticism. For example, let us consider what is involved in formulating an 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
749 
experiment that could constitute a "crucial test" of the general prhTciples of 
the quantum theory (e.g., as given either by Bohr or by von Neumann). In 
this regard, most physicists seem to believe that all that has to be done is 
to proceed along current lines and wait for some experimental result that 
would contradict the principles of their theory. Until then, they feel that the 
best strategy of research is to use the present theory "for all that it is 
worth," because to "chop and change" by introducing all sorts of new and 
untried ideas in an arbitrary fashion might confuse us with irrelevancies. 
But the simple fact is that, if we go about it in this way, it is almost 
impossible to arrive at such a contradiction. For, it can always be supposed 
that whenever theory and experiment disagree, this merely indicates a 
problem; i.e., to adapt the theory with new detailed modifications of 
secondary features so as to fit the facts while retaining what are regarded 
as the basic principles in an unchanged form. For example, when field 
theories led to the contradiction of what are called "infinities," one was able 
to adapt the mode of calculation to "renormalize" the theory and thus to 
rule out the infinities as not fundamentally relevant. When new kinds of par- 
ticles were discovered with unexpected properties, it was possible to adapt 
the theory with the aid of new quantum numbers and new invariance 
groups. When certain difficulties emerged at high energies, it was possible 
to adapt the mode of calculation once again, replacing wave equations by 
S matrices, and replacing invariance groups by current algebras. In all this 
adaptation, however, certain formal principles, such as unitarity and 
linearity of operators, are either tacitly or explicitly taken to be the basic 
and relevant features, which have to be preserved no matter what else may 
have to be changed. Thus, because of the possibility of making such adap- 
tations, one need never be faced with a clearcut contradiction between 
experiment and what are felt to be the basic principles of the theory. 
Something similar has indeed happened in the past history of science. 
For example, no matter what the astronomical data might have been, it 
was always possible to adapt the Ptolemaic epicycles to fit the data. 
Likewise, it was always possible to adapt the notions of absolute space and 
the ether to fit the observed invariance of the velocity of light (e.g., by 
further development of Lorentz's theory of the atomic and electronic con- 
stitution of all rulers and clocks). But at a certain stage, it began to be 
noticed that such notions were leading to a confused situation in which 
one adaptation soon called for another and so on without limit. On seeing 
this fact, some scientists were led to take the really revolutionary step 
of dropping the basic principles of the previous theory as meaningless 
and h'relevant. And in this way, room was made in their thinking for 
new concepts which had to be described in terms of a new language 
structure. 

750 
Bohm 
This new language structure then led to the suggestion of new kinds 
of experiments. Thus Newton's language made it clear that the differential 
properties of orbits were what is relevant to observe (rather than an 
analysis in terms of epicycles), while Einstein's language showed that 
"spacetime intervals" were what it is relevant to measure (rather than 
space coordinates or time coordinates independently). In this way we see 
how a new theoretical language could quickly become a new language of 
experiment, and how this could completely alter the nature and structure 
of the apparatus and instruments that scientists used in their experimental 
research. In other words, the experimental apparatus has revealed itself to be 
a khld of extension and elaboration of the general language structure of 
physics. 
It was easy to overlook this fact in the early days of research in 
physics because the apparatus was very simple (e.g., "sealing wax and 
string"). Therefore, its design and behavior were describable in terms of 
ordinary everyday language, which was in a certain way relatively distinct 
from the language of the theo~T that was being tested. However, even in 
those days, the distinction was, as we have seen, of rather limited 
significance because sooner or later the instruments of science were adapted 
in form and structure so as to answer the kinds of questions that were 
ruled to be relevant by the language of the theory. 
But in modern terms, even this limited degree of relative independence 
of experimental and theoretical languages no longer holds. Consider, for 
example, a high-energy machine which must be planned, designed, and 
built over a period of years. As a result, enormous sums of money and the 
labors of a very large number of people have to be committed beforehand 
to a set of instruments whose form and structure are dictated by the need 
to answer the kinds of questions that are regarded as relevant in terms of 
current theories. By the time these instruments are built, it may be very dif- 
ficult to change the language structure of physics even if the facts would 
seem to call for such a change, because of the natural reluctance to scrap 
such a huge investment. In any case, as has been seen, there need never be 
a clearcut contradiction, indicating the absolute necessity of such a step. So 
it will be quite possible to go on indefinitely to build bigger and bigger 
machines, without ever getting any well-defined indications as to whether 
the general lines of research are relevant or not. 
Taking all this into account, we may now ask: "What is an appropriate 
overall strategy for research in physics?" First of all, what is needed is to 
recognize that the distinction between theory and experiment is not a 
fundamentally relevant one. Rather, physics is one structure with one 
general language. To call a certain fact "experimental" instead of "theoreti- 
cal" (or vice versa) can have at most a relative and contingent validity 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
751 
dependent on the context. Indeed, to suppose that theorists are simply 
trying to explain or fit certain "facts" that are regarded as given by experi- 
ment is to bring in irrelevant assumptions which are a source of confusion. 
For, the very form and structure of experimental facts is, to a large extent, 
already determined by the way in which theory has contributed to the 
general language of physics. 
If we are not to fall into a vicious circle--i.e., to allow the form of the 
theory to determine certain forms of experimental apparatus, and to say in 
turn that the results of using this kind of apparatus determines the form of 
the theory--we will have to be free at all times to determine new kinds of 
theory with new language structures. Of course there is no way of guaran- 
teeing beforehand that any particular new theory will have a relevant 
language structure. Nevertheless, even if a given kind of new language 
structure should not ultimately prove to be relevant, it can, in general, still 
fulfill an essential function in scientific research. For, as has been seen, it is 
only in terms of different language structures that we can see what it means 
to test the general principles of the older theory (so that when the latter is 
eventually confirmed or refuted, something significant is learned by the 
consideration of such a new kind of theory). 
For example, in terms of the contingent ("hidden") variables proposed 
in this paper, it was possible to suggest that the order of results of suc- 
cessive operations (i. e., "'measurements") could well be relevant, so that it 
might therefore be a fruitful new direction of research to set up experiments 
aimed at studying this order. Although this particular suggestion may 
perhaps eventually show itself to be inadequate, nevertheless it will have 
served at least to make it possible to look critically at the foundations of 
the current quantum theory. Indeed, without some kind of suggestions 
(perhaps quite different from those given here ) going outside already 
known and familiar language structures, it is evidently most unlikely that 
a critical inquiry into these foundations will ever be possible, because the 
language of current quantum theory rules out as irrelevant and meaningless 
any terms that could be used for such a critical discussion of the subject. 
The fact that new theoretical language structures are often needed in 
the way described above, to suggest relevant new kinds of experimental 
inquiries, does not mean, however, that the structure of the language of 
experimental physics is completely determined by that of the theory. 
Rather, at any given stage of development of physics as a whole, each of 
these two languages will have possibilities for relatively autonomous and 
independent content, while at the same time each will have a content that 
is in common with that of the other. 
The relationship between the languages of theory and of experiment is 
like that between two aspects of perceptual experience such as vision and 

752 
Bohm 
hearing. What we see correspond in certain ways to what we hear, and vice 
versa. Yet, each of these two fields of perception has a content of its own 
as well. Indeed, it is just because of this that the common (or corre- 
sponding) aspects of the two fields can indicate or imply a single overall 
content that is now understood as being manifested in different ways in the 
various aspects. This overall content evidently has novel features not 
describable in terms of the separate fields alone. Moreover, there is a con- 
tinual interplay in which the content of one field passes into that of the 
other, and vice versa. Thus, one may hear a sound and this will call atten- 
tion to something visible that is making the sound. Or, vice versa, one may 
see something happening and understand that this is the source of the 
sound that one hears. 
Similarly, in the activity of research in physics, one may suddenly 
understand that certain terms in the language of theory correspond not 
merely to terms that have already been used in the language of experiment, 
but also to new terms that can consistently be introduced into this language 
(e.g., one sees that the initially theoretical notion of the order of results of 
successive operations can also be relevant experimentally). And of course it 
is also possible to see that terms of the experimental language can 
correspond to new terms of the theoretical language (e.g., notions like 
pressure, temperature, etc. have entered the language of theory in this way). 
A similar kind of relative autonomy along with the possibility of 
development of new relationships and correspondences holds within the 
various aspects of the language of the theory itself (and, of course, also 
within such aspects of the language of experiment as well). In other words, 
different parts of the language of theory can be compared with different 
aspects of the field of perception. The language of each aspect (whether of 
theory or of perception) has some degree of correspondence with that of 
the other, while it has some independent content of its own as well. Some- 
thing new is learned whenever one sees a novel relationship between these 
various contents, as well as when one sees the limited relevance of some of 
the older relationships. 
It follows then that we need not commit ourselves to any fixed and 
"final" language structure which would of course be very likely to prove to 
be inadequate in the long run and which would therefore lead to "crises" and 
to the continual need for the "revolutionary" overturning of the structure. 
Rather, because the structure is always changing and always free to change 
in any way that shows itself to be relevant, it is at each moment ah'eady in 
a kind of "peaceful" revolution, in which relevant changes are not resisted, 
so that no "violent" breaking down of the older structure is even called for. 
Such a way of using language is evidently very different from what is 
now generally done. For, it implies the need to give up altogether the search 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
753 
for "completeness" of description. Indeed, the notion of "completeness" 
necessarily entails the view that a "fundamental theory," being "complete," 
must also be unique, with the result that there can be no room for the multi- 
plicity of inter-related aspects of language, which are characteristic of the 
general state of "peaceful revolution" that has just been described. There- 
lore, if the notion of "completeness" is accepted, it inevitably becomes 
necessary from time to time for proponents of different language structures 
to "fight it out" and to let "victory" go to whoever is generally judged to be 
"right." 
However, once we see the irrelevance of the notion of "completeness," 
it becomes clear that there is no reason not to have a very large number 
of different kinds of theories under consideration together, each with its 
own language structure that is capable of correspondence or relationship to 
other language structures. Each theory then gives a kind of insight that the 
other cannot give. Each theory can help us to criticize the others and show 
their limited relevance. Through the mutual criticism, yet newer theories 
are always emerging which have their own relatively autonomous content, 
and yet have also some correspondence with the content of older theories. 
Thus, all the theories together, in their movement and development, are 
able to provide a new kind of insight that is not possible when only one 
theory is entertained at a time. 
In particular, physics can thus have a language structure that does not 
resist continual change and evolution, even in what are regarded as its 
most "fundamental" aspects. (A similar freedom is of course implied for the 
language of experiment.) In this way physics (and indeed science in 
general) need no longer be trapped into trying to hold a certain structure 
of thought and language fixed, and into building only the kinds of 
instruments that raise and answer questions ruled to be relevant in terms 
of these structures. 
4.4. On Bohr's Views Concerning the Quantum Theory 
We are now in a position to inquire into the ways in which our 
notions may be similar to and different from those of Bohr. 
Firstly, with regard to Bohr, it has been said that his writings show an 
unusually strong orientation toward consisteno' of language. What this 
mean is not merely the avoidance of contradictions but in addition the 
realization that irrelevant notions bring in something much more dis- 
turbing, i.e, confusion. In other words, it is confused to assert an irrelevant 
notion and it is equally confused to deny it. It is confused to criticize it and 
equally confused to avoid criticizing it. Indeed, all that can be done with 
the irrelevant is to perceive its mean#~glessness and in this very act of 

754 
Bohm 
perception to drop it never to return to it again in any way at all. Bohr is 
remarkable in that on the whole this is precisely what he did (except in one 
important aspect that we shall discuss presently). However, because it was 
just the totality of the old familiar language of physics that he ruled out as 
irrelevant (at least where the term "quantum" is significant), his writings 
necessarily became very difficult to follow. (Indeed, it is the realization of 
this fact that led to the suggestion of the style of the present paper, i.e., to 
change the structure of the language gradually, but in a way that calls this 
change to our attention explicitly as the change is proceeding.) 
Now, as has been mentioned earlier, Bohr began with the notion of 
description as primitive, c4~ He realized that the overall structure of ideas 
generally called by the name "quantum theory" was not compatible with 
the familiar and indeed traditional description, based on the notion that 
the subject matter of physics is a "system" whose properties are "measured" 
or "observed" by a "separately existent measuring instrument" or "observer." 
Indeed, the deep intention behind Heisenberg's famous "microscope 
experiment" was very probably to indicate just this. However, what has not 
generally been noticed is that the language in which this experiment is 
expressed is inherently inconsistent. For, the very diagram which includes 
an electron, a microscope, and something to "register" the result of the 
experiment (e.g., a photographic plate) can be understood only in terms of 
a language that separates the "observed system" fromthe "apparatus" and 
that therefore tacitly gives meaning and relevance to this separation 
(whereas the intention was to show that it has no meaning or relevance). 
One may believe that this kind of confused relationship between intention 
and language is "harmless," because "surely everyone understands what 
Heisenberg really meant." But actually it is not harmless. For, whenever an 
irrelevant term has been brought a~o, where into our language, there is no 
way to prevent it from entering our reasoning at some unknown and 
unforeseeable point, to introduce a kind of confusion that is almost 
impossible to resolve (because we are not even aware that it is here). In 
familiar areas, we learn to become skilled at "adapting" to this confusion 
so that "it does no harm," but as we come to new domains we no longer 
know to do this, so that such confusion can become a serious block to 
further understanding. 
It is surely significant that Bohr himself never used Heisenberg's 
microscopic experiment (in spite of the fact that at first sight it provides 
such a vivid metaphor for "getting across" the essence of what is new in 
quantum theory). Rather he was careful from the very beginning to adopt 
a consistent language structure (free of irrelevances that lead to confusion). 
What was essential in this structure is the ruling that the description of the 
general conditions of an experiment are not separable from the description 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
755 
of the results of the experiment. This meant that it is meaningless and 
irrelevant to try to give any kind of analysis of the relationship between 
what is usually called "observed system" and the "observing apparatus." 
Rather, what characterizes the description of the experimental phenomena 
is the unanalyzable wholeness that we have already discussed earlier. 
One can perhaps get across a notion of what this means with the aid 
of an analogy drawn from perceptual experience. Suppose one is walking 
on a very dark night through an unfamiliar region. One sees vaguely 
defined variations of light intensity which indicate possible "forms" and 
"shapes." These latter are seen to form and dissolve in the field of vision as 
they are "tested" against the cues of varying light intensity. As the light 
grows more intense, such forms become more stable and thus begin to 
appear as well defined "objects" that show up as distinct and separate from 
the "observing subject." But while the light is weak, one is clearly aware 
that the "flickering variations of light" and the "forms and shapes that are 
indicated" are just the names of two different aspects that interpenetrate 
inseparably in one field of perception. In other words, one does not have 
in mind two "interacting systems"--one called "the flickering field of light 
intensity" and the other "the indicated shapes and forms of objects." 
Nor is it possible to assign one of these to the "observed object" and the 
other to the "observing subject." Rather, it is clear that such a distinction 
is irrelevant and meaningless. Indeed, one can say, in a language analo- 
gous to that of Bohr, that what could be called "the general conditions of 
one's experiencing the situation" are not separable from "the results of 
this experience" and that the total experience forms an "unanalyzable 
whole." 
Actually, all of this continues to hold true even when the light grows 
stronger. However, we have been habituated, through training since 
childhood, to switch over to what may be called a "gestalt" or form of per- 
ception, in which "observing subject" and "observed object" are taken to be 
separately existent entities, in interaction. All perceptual cues and indica- 
tions that are not consistent with this "gestalt" are ruled out as irrelevant 
so that they are not noticed. So one seems to be "living" as a "separately 
existent subject" in a world constituted of "separately existent objects." 
Such a "gestalt" has a certain limited kind of relevance (e.g., in 
carrying out a wide range of practical functions). But what has happened 
is that through the contingencies of historical evolution of our civilization, 
a language structure has developed, in which this "gestalt" was taken as 
universally valid, a paradigm case for the whole of existence. Modern 
science took it over in the form of a commitment to analyze the world as 
a set of separately existent but dynamically interacting objects, one of 
which could be called "the observing subject." This commitment was thus 

756 
Bohm 
first built into the structure of "ordinary everyday language," which was 
then "refined" to become the "language of classical dynamics." 
But (just as happens in visual perception when the light intensity is 
low) Bohr saw that when we consider the "quantum," the "everyday 
language," 
refined 
into 
classical 
dynamics, 
becomes irrelevant 
and 
meaningless. There are not two "objects," one of them being "what is 
observed" while the other would be "the instrument of observation." 
Rather, just as the "visually perceived object" is abstracted from a tremen- 
dous number of indications and cues provided by the variation of light 
intensity, so the "quantum object" is likewise abstracted from a large 
number of individual results of "measurements." Therefore, the description 
of the "quantum object" is in some sense inherently an overall or "mass" 
feature which interpenetrates the description of the total set of experimental 
conditions and of the results of experiments. 
Thus far, it is clear that Bohr's views are in general in harmony with 
those adopted in the present paper. But we now come to an important 
difference between Bohr's views and our own. For, Bohr went on to say 
that the terms of description of an experiment were necessarily those of 
"everyday language," suitably "refined" where necessary, so as to take the 
form of classical dynamics. It was apparently Bohr's belief that this was the 
only possible language for the unambiguous communication of the results of 
an experiment. He saw, moreover, that this kind of communication could 
be consistent with all that is meant by the term "quantum" only if it were 
further ruled that the experimental conditions needed for the precise defini- 
tion of one of a pair of "complementary" variables (e.g., position) are not 
compatible with those needed for the precise definition of the other 
member of the pair (e.g., momentum). Since in classical physics both are 
required for the prediction of the future behavior of a "system," it follows 
that classical theory is no longer valid as a means of making inferences of 
this kind. Rather, it is now only a source of terms of description of the 
eAT~erimental phenomena (i.e., "fields," "particle," "position," "momentum," 
etc. ). 
Because the experimental facts actually did disclose a statistical 
fluctuation of the results of experiments, under conditions where it is 
inferred from classical theory that there should be no such fluctuations, 
Bohr concluded that his language was indeed relevant to the facts that were 
available to him at the time. But he went further than this, for he also 
concluded that since the on O, possible language for the unambiguous com- 
munication of such .~acts was that "eveo,day language" suitab O, reJhwd, if 
necessa13,, to that of classical dynamics, and since the terms of this language 
could no longer all be defined together, it is impossible to find a~o' unam- 
biguous language at all that could treat the order of occurrence of these 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
757 
statistical fluctuations as relevant. Therefore it would necessarily be a 
source of confusion merely to entertain the notion of "hidden variables" in 
terms of which these contingent fluctuations would be revealed unam- 
biguously in a new field of novel orders of necessity. In this way Bohr was 
led to the conclusion that the "quantum" implies absolute contingency, i.e., 
the necessity for "complete randomness" in the results of what are called 
"individual experiments." 
On the other hand, as has been seen, we have given a consistent way 
of doing just what Bohr would have said to be meaningless and irrelevant, 
m a theoretical language that has a considerable similarity to that of Bohr. 
The key difference is in our point of view concerning the language of 
experiment. Bohr .felt that experiment and theory had to have completely 
df/'erent structures o1 languages. Experiment could use only "everyday" 
language (suitably refined, with the aid of the terms of classical dynamics). 
Oil the other hand, the quantum theory used a radically different language 
involving "operators," "eigenvalues," "eigenfunctions," "noncommutation," 
"imaginary numbers," etc. So Bohr thought in terms of a fundamental and 
inherently necessary split between the language of theory and the language 
of experiment. 
In the present paper, however, we have proposed that the difference 
between experimental and theoretical languages is not fundamentally rele- 
vant. Thus, we have seen that our theory is expressed in terms of a 
language that attributes a new kind of significance to the order of suc- 
cessive operations (i.e., "measurements") and that this is just what can be 
looked for in experiment. To look for this order in experiment, however, it 
was first necessary to incorporate a description of it into the terms of the 
experimental language. Such terms of description then fulfill the function of 
calling attention to the results that one must be ready to observe. In this 
way one can take into account the possible relevance of new kinds of order 
suggested originally with the aid of the theory. But to allow this to happen, 
it was first necessary to rule out as irrelevant Bohr's notion that experimen- 
tal and theoretical languages have to be basically different. In this way, we 
are left free to develop the subject in new directions unimpeded by any 
notions that would attempt to assert some kind of final and "completely 
known" limitation on the structures of all possible experimental languages. 
5. SCIENCE AS PERCEPTION-COMMUNICATION-ACTION 
It is clear that from the basic step of ruling out the goal of "complete- 
ness" of description as irrelevant, we have been led through a series of 
changes in the general language structure of physics (which is evidently 

758 
Bohm 
also significant for science more generally). As we look over this whole 
series of changes in a kind of single overall glance, one may be struck by 
the similarity between the mode of description suggested for physics, and 
that which is appropriate for the description of our general perceptions in 
all areas of life. Indeed, the various relatively autonomous and yet 
inseparably related fields of perception (i.e., vision, hearing, touch, etc.) 
were seen to be able, together, to indicate that which is beyond these fields 
and which, in a certain sense, contains them as partial aspects of manifesta- 
tions, along with what is novel and not in the fields by themselves at all. 
Likewise, the language of science was found to have a structure of similar 
relatively autonomous but inseparably related fields, which together can 
indicate what is beyond the separate fields. 
It seems natural now to go on, to suggest that this similarity is not 
accidental, but rather that it points toward the inseparability of scientific 
research and what is generally called "perception." This inseparability 
becomes manifest when one considers the fact (already discussed exten- 
sively) that language helps to determine what is relevant and irrelevant and 
thus, by emphasizing certain things as basic or "essential," while declaring 
others to be of secondary significance and ruling out still others as having 
no significance at all, it helps to give a general order and structure to the 
overall character of what is perceived. Vice versa, some abstraction of the 
general order and structure of what is perceived enters into language 
through description and i~[erence. So perception and language clearly 
together form one yet broader field which can be called perception- 
c'ommunicalion. 
But of course all human actions flow inseparably out of an awareness 
of what is perceived and what has been communicated, while these actions 
in turn give rise to further perception and communication. It follows then 
that, is a certain sense, the whole of human life can be described as 
perception-communication-action. 
Evidently scientific research, being an integral part of human life, is a 
form of perception-communication-action. In particular, what scientific 
research does is continually to extend perception-communication-action 
into new fields and into new forms 
In doing this, it leads of course to the accumulation of a certain kind 
of experimentally tested knowledge. The ideal of accumulating permanently 
valid knowledge of this kind has very generally been taken to be one of the 
principal aims of this research if indeed not the principal theme. However, 
because the relevance of such knowledge can always be questioned when it 
is extended into new areas and into new fields (and indeed has in fact been 
shown to be questionable, time and time again in the actual historical 
development of science), its validity evidently can in fact only be cont#Tgent 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
759 
(rather than permanent and necessary). As happens in everyday life (where 
knowledge is evidently also only contingently valid), scientific knowledge is 
properly to be considered as an integral part of perception-communication- 
action, rather than as the ultimate aim or goal of all that is done in 
scientific research. 
Now it is fairly evident that what is called "experimental science" is of 
the nature of an action which is of an essentially perceptual character. 
Indeed, one can see that in certain ways, the experimental instruments are 
extensions both of the means of motor activity and of the senses of 
mankind. Thus, there are all sorts of devices used in the laboratory or else- 
where for "handling" things mechanically, which extend man's hands, his 
arms, his legs, etc. Then the telescope and the microscope extend and 
develop visual perception, very often in qualitatively new ways. The 
amplifier can similarly extend his hearing, while various mechanical, electri- 
cal, and chemical devices can likewise effectively extend his sense of touch 
and similar senses (e.g., temperature, odour, taste, etc.). And of course it is 
obvious that the source as well as the test of all the knowledge gained in 
science is not separable from human sensory-motor actions and their 
instrumental extensions and modifications. 
But then, how is it possible for the theoretical scientist to engage in a 
corresponding kind of action'? This question seems to be a valid one to 
raise only because of a widespread belief that a theorist engages in what 
could be called "purely intellectual activity" and that this has to do solely 
with knowledge and thought, rather than with perception. But is there such 
a thing as "purely intellectual activity'?" If one considers this question care- 
fully he will see that there can be no such thing. Rather every activity of 
man whatever it may be must have some perception in it. And in every 
such perception there have to be three inseparably interwoven aspects, sen- 
sual, emotional, and intellectual. That is to say, the action of feeling and of 
the intellect are basically a necessary continuation and extension of the 
same kind of general action that is carried out by the senses. All three 
working in harmony are what make possible the overall act in which a 
human being is able to perceive whatever may interest him and hold his 
attention. 
Thus, when we perceive something with our senses, there is always an 
act ofjudgnwnt q/relevance which is an integral feature of this perception. 
Evidently, this judgment cannot be carried out by the senses alone. Indeed, 
as has already been seen, it tends to be structured by our overall language 
in certain ways that would be called "intellectual," and yet it cannot be 
determined by this language structure as nothing more than a result of 
what is already known, for example through the use of prejudged criteria 
of relevance and irrelevance. Of course, such prejudged and more or less 

760 
Bohm 
mechanical criteria may have a certain rather limited and contingent 
domain of contexts in which they can be meaningful. But if these are 
allowed to dominate the primary act of judgment) the result is in reality no 
judgment at all, but rather a prejudgment based on preconceptions that 
impose a more or less defined and predetermined order and structure on 
what is perceived. Evidently a genuine act of judgment cannot be limited 
in this arbitrary way, in which perception takes place, as if through a 
"screen" that puts into it the contingent pattern of past conditioning. 
Rather, such a judgment has to be a direct and immediate act, with a 
quality of unanalyzable wholeness, in which senses, feelings, and intellect 
interpenetrate harmoniously in an inseparable way. Indeed, it is only 
t,erhally that these can be separated. Actually, when one perceives some- 
thing sensually, one also feels its relevance or irrelevance. In the same act, 
there is a judgment based on an awareness of the whole meaning of what 
is perceived, which is in essence an understanding of such relevance and irrele- 
vance. And the latter involves the intellect in an essentially perceptual way (e.g., 
one uses the words "to see" and "to understand' almost interchangeably). 
If one were to ignore the quality of an indivisible wholeness described 
above and to try to carry out an a,alysis of the judgment of relevance and 
irrelevance, for example, by giving a definition of the terms involved, one 
would immediately be led to the question: "Is this definition relevant?" 
Thus the act of analysis itself would reveal that its basic terms were 
necessarily inadequate from the very beginning. If one is not to fall into the 
kind of confusion that inevitably arises from snch irrelevant efforts to 
"define and analyze relevance," what is needed is the realization that the 
word "relevance," can have no fixed or definite content at all. Rather, it is 
like the word "not" (which also can not be defined except in terms that use 
this very word in an inherently unspecifiable meaning). Both are purely 
structural which give order and form to a language, and whose meaning is 
necessarily perceived in each instance in the tbrm of a judgment (such as 
the judgment of relevance of a statement or the judgment that such a 
statement is not relevant). 
The key importance of judgment of relevance and irrelevance in 
scientific research is evident. Thus, to begin with, the total field of percep- 
tion has a vast range of content, most of which is immediately judged to 
be irrelevant to science. Science as a whole has a vast range of content, 
most of which is judged as irrelevant to a particular field of science such 
as physics. Physics has a vast range of content most of which is judged to 
be irrelevant to the fundamentals of the subject. Most of the content of the 
latter is, in turn, judged to be irrelevant to the theoo, of these funda- 
mentals. And so it goes. Everything depends on a towering hierarchy of 
judgment of relevance and irrelevance (indeed mostly of irrelevance). 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
761 
The above shows in a particular instance how judgments of relevance 
and irrelevance are essential for perception and knowledge to come into an 
understandable and meaningful order and structure (not only in science 
but in the whole of life). 
Generally speaking we have, to a very large extent, tended to allow 
judgments of this kind to be made mechanically by habit so that they are 
determined mainly by conditioning coming from memory and from other 
similar reactive residues of past experiences. Evidently, for the most part, 
these judgments are not likely to be relevant to the immediately perceived 
fact (though, as had already been indicated, in a certain limited and con- 
tingent kind of context they may be relevant). Therefore what is called for 
is a kind of higher-order perception that judges (and does not prejudge) 
our notions of what is relevant and what is irrelevant. That is to say, what 
is needed is a keen awareness of the relevance of relevance and irrelevance. 
And, in particular, one has to be especially aware of how relevant a 
judgment of irrelevance can be (e.g., the notion that there is no relevant 
relationship between certain fields is often a tremendous barrier to new 
discoveries, while, on the other hand, the notion of the irrelevance of older 
ideas is often a key step in making such discoveries possible). 
In scientific research, theories play a key role in determining the forms 
of judgments of relevance and irrelevance. To see how this comes about, 
let us first recall that a primary step in communicating the contents of 
perception is an act of abstraction of what is relevant in the field under 
investigation which determines the foreground while all the rest falls into 
the background. Theories are then, in the first instance, structures of 
language that serve both to help describe the foreground and to permit 
#!ferences about it to be made. These inferences imply the possibility of 
further perceptions, of a specifiable kind. If these are, in fact, as inferred, 
#!ferential structure of the theory is confirmed. Otherwise, it is in some way 
shown to be false or inadequate, and therefore in need of change. 
But as has already been indicated earlier, however, it is a much more 
subtle question to become aware of possible inadequacies in the descriptive 
structure of a theory, because of a very widespread habitual tendency to 
rule out as irrelevant any perceptual cues that would suggest inadequacy of 
this structure. One of the reasons why it is so hard to see through this sort 
of difficulty is that the question of the meaning of a theory has become 
entangled in a certain kind of confusion, which is mainly a result of the 
widespread use of the ideal of "completeness" of description. This ideal 
implies, for example, that what is called a "fundamental theory" should in 
principle provide a "complete conceptual image or model of the totality of 
all that exists. If such an image or model were indeed relevant to the 
totalio,, this would imply that any other image or model would have to be 
825/26/6-~ 

762 
Bohm 
ruled out as irrelevant and meaningless. But (as has already been discussed 
extensively) the notion of an in principle "complete" theoretical description 
of the totality is what actually has to be ruled out as irrelevant, if scientific 
research is not to be trapped in a close circle of fixed and limited theo- 
retical and experimental languages. 
One might perhaps tend to suggest instead that theories should 
properly aim to provide generally incomplete conceptual images or models 
of certain kinds of things. In other words, a theory would be related to 
"whatever it was a theory of" as a generalized kind of"map" which could 
have a form, structure, and function that were similar, in certain ways, to 
the form~ structure, and function of something more directly perceptible to 
which it is supposed to refer. We can conveniently describe such a notion 
by the term reflectit,e function.C6 
This notion of the reflective function of a theory does indeed have a 
certain limited kind of validity. But if one assumes that it describes the 
whole function of a theory in scientific research, the result will be that one 
falls back into another kind of confusion. For, in addition, as has been 
seen, a theory serves (largely tacitly) to determine which questions are to 
be regarded as relevant and which are irrelevant, thus functioning as an 
integral part of the total act of perception. 
Indeed, when a given theory is being used in its reflective role, then as 
has already been seen, questions that cannot be framed in the context of 
that theory must inevitably be judged to be irrelevant. And unless one is 
aware that such a judgment is taking place, one will tend to dismiss such 
questions as not worthy of further consideration. But of course what is 
needed instead is generally to keep clearly in mind the fact that when used 
reflectively each theory has its own (largely tacit) rulings or irrelevance, so 
that one is not trapped into believing that irrelevance in terms of a 
particular theoo, necessarily means total irrelevance and meaningless #7 
terms of all possible theories. 
Similar kinds of judgments very often arise in the description of 
ordinary perceptions. For example, one may say "the tree is a useful source 
of timber," thus ruling out as irrelevant the notion "this tree is a beautiful 
thing as well as a source of shade from the sun," which may be very rele- 
vant to someone else. When one wants the tree as "timber," one can no 
longer perceive it in the form or "gestalt" of a "thing of beauty" and a 
"source of shade." Evidently each of these two modes of description gives 
rise to a set of inferences that constitutes primitive theories, and two 
people, each holding to his own relevance rulings, can come into conflict, 
because there is a "failure of communication" about the tree. 
A similar conflict can evidently arise in science, when there are two 
theories taken in their purely reflective roles, so that each theory rules out 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
763 
the mode of perception that leads to the other as irrelevant. Evidently then 
the reflective role of theory does not by itself give an adequate account of 
the whole situation. In particular, it does not make it clear just what is 
involved in seeing the limited relevance of any particular reflective structure 
of ideas, so that one can consider new ideas, also that one can enter into 
communication with another person whose reflective structures of ideas are 
different from one's own. 
What is crucial for the question is to consider in addition the role of 
perceived deviations from the behavior inferred in a given structure of 
theory. As has been seen in a purely reflective view of theory, these devia- 
tions are ruled out as irrelevant, as long as this can be done. When the 
deviations become too noticeable and obvious, one then begins to adapt 
the theory to try to accommodate them and thus "fit the facts." And later, 
when even this process seems to be arbitrary and pointless, one begins to 
call attention to the defects of the theory to say that I may be wrong that 
a new theory is perhaps needed, etc. In other words, there is a kind of crisis, 
~esulting from the fact that the so-called "irrelevant deviations" obtained 
in perception nevertheless keep on coming in to disturb the apparent 
harmony that had hitherto seemed to prevail. 
There is, however, quite a different way of looking at "deviations" 
from a theory. Indeed, in saying that they constitute "errors" or 
"'unsatisfactory features," we emphasise that such deviations can generally 
indicate something new, outside the-field that can be described in terms of 
the theory in question. Consider, for example, a tree whose leaves are 
shaking in the wind. Instead of saying that the leaves are "deviating in a 
random way from their mean positions," one can say that the movement of 
tile leaves indicates the wind. Similarly, the overall problem of change and 
development in "deviations" of the observed fact from a theory can serve 
to indicate an entirely new and as yet unknown field of description and 
inference in which new kinds of theories can be formulated. Thus the 
theory now serves in the role of an #uticator function. And the role is 
clearly essentially perceptual. 
The role of the indicator function of a theory is very similar, in certain 
ways, to that of experimental instruments. For example, consider a 
galvanometer. To be sure, the instrument can fulfill a kind of reflective 
function, when it is used in what may be called a "positive" way to measure 
the current and therefore to provide a set of ordered possible readings that 
correspond reflectively to the orders of intensity of current that may be 
flowing in a circuit of which it is a part. But then, it also has a "negative 
mode of functioning, in which the swing of the needle serves to indicate 
"imbalance" or "asymmetry" in the parameters of another kind of circuit 
Icalled a "Wheatstone Bridge"). When the needle does not move, then this 

764 
Bohm 
is said to indicate "balance" or "symmetry" in the parameters of the circuit 
in question. So the difference between "movement" and "nonmovement" of 
the needle corresponds to the difference between "asymmetry" and "sym- 
metry" on the circuit parameters. Such a correspondence is evidently not 
sufficiently developed and articulated to be termed a reflection. This latter 
would indeed require a fairly detailed structural correspondence of some 
kind (e.g., at least a correspondence such as that of a whole order of 
readings of an instrument to a related order of currents, and more 
generally, the much more extensive correspondence that is present in the 
images provided by telescopes, microscopes, and cameras). 
Evidently then, there is a deep similarity between theory and experi- 
ment, in the way in which both generally allow a given part or aspect to 
be considered either in the role of fulfilling a reflective function or in that 
of fulfilling an indicator function. One can bring out this similarity more 
strongly by altering the structure of our language a bit further. Thus when 
a theory is used reflectively, one may properly still talk about "deviations" 
between the theory and the observed facts. But when a theory is used in its 
#Tdicative role one will say instead that the difference between theory and 
fact is similar in function to the difference of a galvanometer needle from 
a "zero reading." In both fields (experiment and theory) a changing order 
of the overall pattern of differences is able to indicate something beyond 
the field that is manifest in the context under discussion. This comparison 
emphasizes the #ulicator fimction of the theory, i.e., the theory is func- 
tioning as a kind of "galvanometer needle" in the field of language and 
thought. 
When one allows his theoretical thinking to function in this way, then 
by means of a multitude subtle and unanalyzable #ulications a new order 
of relevance and irrelevance slowly forms in awareness. This new order is 
what permits the perception of what is novel and of what is just in the 
movement of comhTg to be known. This perception is needed, not only for 
research into new areas, but also for proper communication. Thus, one can 
consider that the differences between one's own ideas and those of another 
person are also a kind of "galvanometer needle" which serves as an 
indicator function. If two people can both look at matters in this way, then 
they will discover that new orders or relevance and irrelevance are subtly 
being indicated as the communication proceeds. These new orders will 
generally lead to a mutual understanding, in which the older ideas of each 
person will have fallen away as meaningless and irrelevant. 
This notion implies then that neither perception nor communication 
have ultimately or permanently fixed forms. Of course, it is true that largely 
by habit we tend to see the world in terms of certain reflective "Gestalts" 
or general structures of perception. Nevertheless, if there is a suitable 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
765 
awareness of the indicator function of perception, these structures can 
change radically, to be continually replaced by new ones. Thus, it need not 
be accepted that our habitual mode of perception will continue indefinitely. 
The same holds, of course, for communication. This, too, may well develop 
into a continually changing set of forms that are ever fresh and new. And 
if perception and communication change in this radical way, then evidently 
the whole of human action will change with them. 
6. THE INDICATOR FUNCTION IN QUANTUM THEORY, 
IN RELATIVELY THEORY, AND IN 
"'HIDDEN-VARIABLES" THEORY 
It has been seen in the previous section that a theory can be used in 
two distinct ways, either in the role of a reflectiveJ'unction or in that of an 
indicator function (this distinction being however, of course, one that is 
rdative and contingent, i.e., dependent on context). We shall now go on to 
~how that these two functions are relevant not merely in the description of 
how theories are used, but that they can also play a key role in the descrip- 
tion of the content of a theory. 
The possibility that different aspects of the content of a theory may 
~c[lect each other in certain ways has long been familiar. Thus, in geometri- 
cal optics (and of course also in wave optics), the disposition of rays (and 
,~1" wave surfaces) provides a reflection of the total environment, which can 
in principle be present in each region of space, however small (consider, for 
example, the hologram, which works on the principle that in a certain 
rather subtle and indirect way, each part of a wave surface reflects the 
~tructures which influence the characteristics of this surface). Such reflective 
lunctions are evidently very significant, in that they help make possible a 
~onsiderable part of our ordinary perceptions, both in everyday life and in 
,cientific research. 
The notion of reflective function is closely related to that of a 
'measurement." Thus, as has been indicated earlier (in connection with the 
discussion of the reflective and indicative roles of the galvanometer), the set 
o1" possible results of any particular kind of measurements has an order that 
corresponds to the order in the possibilities of that which is said to be 
"'measured" (e.g., electric current). And to provide a set of what are 
regarded as relevant measurements of the size and shape of an object is in 
essence to abstract "information" that makes a certain kind of reflection of 
ihe object in principle possible (either in a diagram, or by a "replication" 
,~f the object in question). This "information" is evidently suitable to be the 
content of what is called a "signal," In other words, before a "signal" can 

766 
Bohm 
operate as such, it is necessary that its meaning be defined beforehand. And 
this meaning is generally some kind of extension of a reflective function 
(e.g., it may serve as a "symbol" that calls up various orders, forms, and 
structures to the one who "receives" it that are similar to those that were 
"meant" by the one who "sent" it). 
The role of reflective function has effectively been given a primary kind 
of emphasis and relevance in the language of physics (and of science quite 
generally). While it is, of course, fairly evident that almost all experimental 
and theoretical work emerges out of an undefinable background of indica- 
tions (in the manner discussed in the previous section), it is generally 
believed that these indications are not relevant to the content of the 
fundan'wntal laws of physics. Rather, it tends to be felt that they are merely 
a sort of adjunct, a kind of "intuitive aid," whose main function is to help 
to lead to theories that yield "well-defined reflections of things as they 
are." 
On the other hand, it is surely significant to note that, with the 
development of the quantum theory, the conditions needed for the 
relevance of the notions of reflective function as basic are no longer 
satisfied. Because neither particle theories nor wave theories can be used for 
drawing well-defined inferences that could give correspondingly definite 
relationships of a theol'), and its reflection, it becomes inherently unclear 
what could be meant by a notion such as: "a set of quantum measurements 
provides a reflection of some kind of object, or at least of something dis- 
tinct from the measurement itself, that could be called a 'quantum state'." 
Indeed, it was just because of the inherent ambiguity of such notions that 
Bohr was led to rule out as irrelevant and meaningless any such analysis, 
which would use a description in which the "object" or "quantum state" 
was regarded as separable from the "overall conditions of observation" or 
"the results of observation." 
If one considers these questions carefully, one sees, in fact, that it is 
very natural to entertain the notion that what is basically relevant in raw 
quantum theory is not the "reflection" (or "measurement") but rather: 
what has in the previous section been called the indicator function. That is 
to say, each result of an operation #1dicates something, whose significance 
is not completely defined. Only when a large number of such indications 
and significances work together can one arrive at a coherent reflection. 
which could be described consistently in terms of the notion of a "measure- 
ment" (e.g., one can try to imagine the vast set of indications needed to 
give meaning to a simple statement' such as: an event, consisting of a flash 
of light, occurred in a given place and at a given time). We are thus led to 
regard the term "measurement" as not basically relevant in the quantum 
theory, though of course it does have a secondary significance of the kind 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
767 
described above. (Note that this goes further than our earlier ruling of the 
irrelevance of the term "separately existent measuring instrument.") 
We may illustrate these notions in terms of spin. thus. when a sp#1 
operation takes place in the z direction, one will now say that the result of 
this operation does not completely determine (or reflect) the result of a 
spin operation in some other direction. Instead, in our new language, we 
will say only that it gives indications about these results. And more 
generally, when there is a linear combination of eigenfunctions of an 
operator, we can see that this is analogous to a corresponding situation in 
verbal communication, in which a given term can have a whole spectrum 
of meaning. The way #1 which the various aspects of the spectrum o/'mean#Ig 
are emphasized and given weight then constitutes a new mean#lg. Similarly, 
we can say that the "weighting" of significances indicated by a linear com- 
bination of wave functions constitutes a new significance. That is, it 
corresponds to a well-defined result for a new operation whose operator 
generally does not commute with that belonging to the first operation. This 
provides a rather natural kind of descriptive language, which is suitable for 
the phenomena treated in the quantum theory. 
One might perhaps say that the suggestion of some such language was 
a tacit intention behind the work of von Neumann and Birkhoff, ~6~ when 
they proposed that the projection operators in terms of which a general 
operator can be expressed may be regarded as equivalent, in some sense, 
to "propositions." However, if one considers this question carefully, he will 
see that the term "proposition" is not really appropriate in this context. 
Rather, because (at least in its ordinary usage) a "proposition" is restricted 
to "true" or "false," it tends, in fact, to be suitable mainly for the descrip- 
tion of statements having to do with in principle completely specifiable 
reflections or measurements (and hence for that area in which classical 
dynamical notions would be generally adequate). To be sure, von 
Neumann and Birkhoff suggested a kind of generalization of the ordinary 
notion of "proposition," so that two noncommuting operators could 
correspond to what were called "incompatible propositions." But it was 
never clear what could be meant by their being "incompatible." Thus in 
ordinary language, to put several incompatible propositions into one dis- 
cussion is necessarily a source of confusion. Perhaps it was the intention of 
yon Neumann and Birkhoff to avoid such confusion by making the 
meaning of the word "proposition" sufficiently indefinite. But if this 
was indeed what they intended, then they were moving in a general direc- 
tion similar to that suggested in this paper, i.e., to replace the idea of a 
"measurement" by that of #1dication of significances. 
In terms of the notion of a "spectrum" of indicated significances, we 
can now discuss these questions in a consistent way, in terms of our 

768 
Bohm 
proposed language structure. Thus, instead of saying that a projection 
operator is a "proposition," we shall say that it corresponds to a statement, 
which is relevant only when certain conditions are satisfied, in the general 
background and environment (e.g., that these are such as to allow the 
operation corresponding to the operator in question to take place). Thus, 
when a z-spin operation has taken place, a relevant statement is that its 
actual result is in one of two possible opposing "directions." 
On the other hand, under these conditions, a well-defined statement 
about the possible results of a spin operation in the x-direction is not rele- 
vant. Therefore, mutually noncommuting operators correspond to mutually 
irrelevant statements. 
So what has emerged from this discussion is that even in the content 
of theory (and not merely in the act of developing and applying it), the 
notion of relevance is relevant. That is to say, before one tries to assess 
the truth or falsity of a statement, one has to state whether it is relevant 
to the conditions under discussion or not. This is true, of course, in every 
field, and not merely in physics. But the algorithm which expresses the 
mutual irrelevance of statements by the noncommutation of corresponding 
operators may well be relevant only in certain aspects of research in 
physics. 
Let us now go on to discuss the significance of these notions for the 
aim of uniting relativity and quantum theory. It. has been commonly 
believed that such a union is mainly a Jbrmal problem, i.e., one of finding 
a logically consistent and factually correct set of equations which, for 
example, makes the laws of quantum theory Lorentz invariant. This 
implies, of course, that in such a union the formal language of these two 
theories need not be changed fundamentally. 
On the other hand, quantum theory implies an informal language that 
is not compatible with the assumption of a basic character for the notion 
of a "measurement" (or for that of a reflective function in general). And as 
has been seen, this implies further that the notion of "signal" cannot be 
fundamentally relevant in a quantum description (because the meaning of 
a signal requires a vast set of indications of significance, which can arise 
only in some large aggregate of what are called "results of measurements"). 
But in relativio, theo O, the notion of a signal is basic. Thus, what is called 
the "light cone" (which plays a fundamental role in all relativistic theories) 
is actually a formal abstraction, defined as that set of spacetime points 
which can be connected with a given point by a "light signal." But if 
the informal term "light signal" is not relevant in a general quantum 
description, then one is led to question the relevance of imposing the 
corresponding formal requirements of Lorentz invariance in the quantum 
theory. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
769 
/ 
/ 
/ 
//I 
i 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
t 
N" 
/ z" t(~//N 
x 
/ 
// 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
"M 
Fig. 3 
To illustrate the difficulties involved in trying to bring terms like "light 
cone" and "signal" into a consistent quantum description, let us try to 
represent what is usually called a "--spin measurement" in the Minkowski 
diagram. Now, as Bohr has emphasized repeatedly, the description of the 
results of such a "measurement" is not separable from that of the overall 
conditions of the experiment. The latter includes a description of the 
"'apparatus" and how it functions (without which the rest of the description 
has no meaning). Of course, the description of' the "apparatus" involves 
some extended region of spacetime, which we depict on the diagram 
I Fig. 3) by A. But now, let us suppose that the "apparatus," A, sends a 
"signal" to another "apparatus," B, as shown in the diagram. The limita- 
tions of the signal velocity to that of light are represented by the lines MN 
and M'N'. 
But, of course, a basic concept in relativity is that of the "point e~,ent," 
which can at least be approximated by an actual event of smaller and 
smaller extension. Nevertheless, according to Bohr, it is irrelevant and 
meaningless to confine the "events" A and B to indefinitely small regions 
of spacetime, because this would not be compatible with the experimental 
conditions that define these "events." So the relevance of the whole notion 
of "point event" is being called into question. 
To do this is, however, also to call into question what is intended to 
be meant by the phrase "the communication of a result of a measurement 
l~om A to B by means of a signal." For, in a consistent quantum descrip- 
tion, the content of such a "signal" must be able to describe, not merely 
what is called the "result of measurement," but also the entire inseparably 
interwoven set of experimental conditions needed for the description of the 

770 
Bohm 
total phenomenon taking place at A. The amount of"information" in such 
a "signal" would have to be fantastically great. And indeed, to specify the 
meaning of this "infornlation," a yet vaster array of indications of 
significance would be needed. Little or nothing of the complexity and 
magnitude of this "problem" is even suggested by formal aspects of the 
current theory as applied to the question. 
The more one considers the "problem" described above, in order to try 
to adapt the current theory so as to permit its "solution," the more one sees 
that there is something inherently confused in the general notion of a well- 
defined and separately existent "result of a measurement," which underlies 
the whole difficulty. (The idea of the separate existence of this "result" is 
what allows us to try to give meaning to the notion of "signalling" this 
"result" to another "apparatus" at B.) Wherever there is persistent confu- 
sion of the general kind, one can look for something irrelevant, which is the 
ultimate source of such confusion. And here we suggest that what is irrele- 
vant is the use of the terms "results of measurements" and "signal" (along 
with "point event," which is an inseparable part of the meaning of the term 
"signal"). Instead, we will introduce the terms #ulicator function and 
sign(/'icances to play a basic role in the subsequent discussion. 
For example, we will say that a --spin operation can serve as an 
indicator function, and that this function indicates sign~/i'cances that may in 
principle be relevant for other such functions, taking place at B, C, D, E, 
etc. The degree and kind of relevance, however, is open to further specifica- 
tion as the theory is developed. For example, one need not assume, a priori, 
that the imlication q/'sign~/i'cances is basically limited by the speed of light. 
Indeed, what we are proposing implies that the speed of light has meaning 
only in a context in which there is a result which is sufficiently well defined 
to constitute the content of a sigm~l. Such a result can arise only in a vast 
array of significance. So the light cone will now have to be abstracted (in 
some "statistical" way) from an underlying order of imlicator functions and 
their mutual sign(/icances. 
All this means, of course, that the language of relativity theory is now 
being ruled to have only limited relevance. In a way, this is just what Einstein 
did with regard to nonrelativistic conceptions of space and time, which he 
ruled to be not basically relevant (i.e., they were relevant only in some limited 
domain, associated with velocities small compared with that of light). 
All of these notions can be incorporated into our suggested new 
language structure for physics, corresponding to "hidden-variable" theories. 
We shall not, however, go here into the formal details needed to do this. 
Rather, we shall only discuss a few general notions that will be relevant for 
the requisite informal language, and leave the more detailed discussion for 
a later paper. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
771 
Firstly, it should be noted that our new theoretical language contains 
possibilities that correspond very closely with the general notion that the 
term "signal" is no longer to be regarded as basically relevant. Thus, in the 
equation for an operation, 
J, 
J, p,.+ 
it is possible for 2 to be so small (for the period in which it is appreciable) 
that such an operation will not actually lead to a definite result, corre- 
sponding to the eigenvectors of one of the projection operators Pr. Rather, 
all that we will have is that ~ will change in a rather complex way, such 
that it only tends to come closer to one of these eigenvectors. This means, 
however, that the operation has what we have called an indicative 
sigl~/i'cance for ~. Such a behavior is evidently new, in the sense that it 
could not even be described in terms of the language of the current quan- 
tum theory. As has been pointed out, however, it corresponds very closely 
to the notion that, generally speaking, the indicator function of operations 
is fundamental to the general features of our description, while the well- 
defined results corresponding to a "measurement" (and possibly a "signal" 
as well) are special cases, of a secondary kind of significance. 
The general notions described above will evidently play a key role in 
the discussion of questions like those raised in the famous hypothetical 
experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen. 
A simple form of this experiment is obtained by considering a 
molecule, initially having a zero "total spin" which then disintegrates into 
two atoms of spin hi2. We illustrate this disintegration as happening in the 
region A in the Minkowski diagram (Fig. 4). The two atoms are repre- 
sented by "world tubes" B and C. We assume that in a given region D a 
spin operation takes place, in some direction represented by the unit vector 
9 (the direction of which is, as far as this experiment is concerned, purely 
contingent I. Suppose, for example, that the result of this operation was to 
reveal a spin oriented "positively" (i.e., along the direction of 17). It can 
immediately be concluded from the current quantum theory that if a spin 
operation takes place in a direction parallel to l? and in a region such as 
E (which is outside the "light cone" of D), the opposite result will be 
obtained (i.e., a "spin" in the direction of -V will be revealed). 
Using the notion that a theory should in principle provide a "complete 
description of reality," Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen showed that this 
result led to inconsistencies. But Bohr answered this criticism in effect by 
pointing out that in the context of the "quantum," the notion of "complete- 
ness" is irrelevant. Without this notion, no such inconsistencies are obtained. 

772 
Bohm 
 
Fig. 4 
If one tacitly assumes (as was very generally done) that all "hidden- 
variable" theories have to be expressed in terms of some extension of the 
language of dynamics, it follows from arguments based on premises similar 
to those used by Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen that such theories imply 
the possibility of transmission of a "signal" from D to E, even when these 
are outside each other's "light cones. ''~'~ In this way, one comes to a con- 
tradiction with relativity theory, which could be significant under condi- 
tions in which it is generally expected that the latter is a relevant theory. 
Such a conclusion might perhaps appear, at first sight, to furnish a decisive 
argument against "hidden variables." 
It should be emphasized, however, that the kind of "problem" 
described above originates in essence in the general language structure of 
physics, both.[brmal amt il!/brmal. This structure has in fact evolved so as 
to be conditioned by various contingent forms of metaphysics, incor- 
porated into the theory in a largely tacit manner. We have in fact already 
seen the irrelevance of certain hlJbrmal metaphysical notions, which are 
based on the assumption that "measurement" and "signal" have to be 
fundamental terms in every possible theory. As has been seen, however, to 
change these informal notions, means that./brmal notions also have to be 
changed. In this regard, not merely are the associated ideas of "light cone" 
and "Lorentz invariance" no longer to be regarded as basically relevant, but 
also, the whole of the quantum algorithm itself evidently may well cease to 
have the kind of relevance. Here, we have in mind not only the introduc- 
tion of nonlinear terms, which make the manifest and noncontingent 
variables depend on the "hidden" contingent variables and on the general 
environment. We are also proposing that even the original I#lear part of 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
773 
the equation (determined by the Hamiltonian matrix Hr.,.) may have to be 
changed equally fundamentally, if this is necessary for the difficulties 
implied in the experiment of Einstein, 
Podolsky, and Rosen to be 
eliminated. (The linear form will then have to be recovered as an abstrac- 
tion, which provides an adequate approximation under suitable limiting 
conditions.) 
This is indeed very similar to what Einstein himself did with regard to 
the metaphysical notions of "absolute space" and "ether." Instead of 
becoming entangled in the "problem" of making these consistent with the 
invariance of the measured speed of light, he simply ruled out the whole 
"problem" as irrelevant. This ruling was then the basis of a heuristic 
enquiry, to try to formulate new formal equations of motion, in which 
such a "problem" would not arise. Similarly, it is our approach to rule out 
as irrelevant all efforts to make current quantum theory consistent with 
current relativity theory. Indeed, we shall guide our enquiry into "hidden- 
variable" theories by the requirement that there are to be no "problems" of 
the general kind described here. 
Consider, for example, the provisional assumption that operations 
taking place in regions said in current language to be "outside each other's 
light cone" have merely an indicative sign(/i'cance./or each other, so that the 
notion of "signalling" between them will never in fact have any meaning. 
But for operations in regions that are said to be "inside each other's light 
cones" it will be possible for deJhfite results of one of the operations to have 
a re/lective sign(l)'cance for the other (which is equivalent in the old 
language to saying that if a "signal" is possible, the results of the usual 
quantum theory are obtained as a good approximation). 
There is a simple experiment that may make possible an inquiry into 
the relevance of such a notion. If suitable spin operations are allowed to 
take place in D and E together, and if the statistical results differ from 
those predicted by current quantum theory, then this will indicate the 
relevance of our proposed notions and irrelevance of those of the current 
"relativistic quantum theory" (though of course a contrary result is not 
necessarily an indication of the irrelevance of our notions). 
As a matter of fact, some observational evidence already exists con- 
cerning the hypothetical experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen/s~ 
This evidence tends to confirm the current quantum theory. But if one 
looks carefully at the conditions of the experiment, he will see that they 
were not such as to permit an adequate test of the points raised here. 
For, the time of sensitiviO, of the "detecting appartus," corresponding to 
the operations at D and E, was not defined with sufficient precision to 
make it certain that a response would clearly demonstrate an effective 
"signal" between regions outside each other's light cones. Indeed, the 

774 
Bohm 
\ 
~///A 
~111A 
I 
I 
~5~5~ 
J 
~N 
Fig. 5 
actual, experimental situation was more or less as indicated in Fig. 5, with 
the sensitive regions of the "detecting apparatus" represented by the "world 
tubes" M and N. Therefore, even in terms of our theory, one would expect 
that there was time for a "signal" to "pass" from one "detector" to another, 
so that the results of the usual theory would be a good approximation. 
What is needed is evidently to allow operations to take place at D and 
E, which are so accurately limited in time that such an ambiguity does not 
arise. This kind of experiment will then be useful for inquiring into the 
relevance or irrelevance of general language structure of the current 
quantum theory. 
7. ON THE CONTENT OF THE WORD "REALITY" 
Throughout this paper we have been very strongly emphasizing the 
role of language in science, especially its functions of description, inference, 
reflection, and indication. One seems, however, to be led inevitably to 
further questions such as: "What is the ultimate reality that is being 
described, inferred, reflected, and indicated?" Such questions appear to be 
contained in the very way in which we talk about things. Thus, when we 
refer to a description, this seems immediately to call for the question: 
"What is being described?" and "Who is the one who is doing the 
describing?" That is to say, it is supposed that each valid description corre- 
sponds to some "object," which is perceived by a distinct and separately 
existent "subject." As a result, one is then led to talk about the "objective 
reality" of a particular thing that appears in perception, meaning by this 
that it is independent of the special points of view and "states of mind" of 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
775 
the various "subjects" who may be able to "observe" it. And of course such 
a way of using language further leads us to ask about the totality of all that 
exists. Is this too an "objective reality'?" If so, what is the role of the 
"subjects" who perceive it'? Presumably, they too must be parts of this 
objective reality. 
Nevertheless, in our immediate and direct perceptual experience, no 
amount of discussion seems to alter the fact that we find it almost 
impossible to act according to the notion that the "observing subject" or 
"sell" is just another part of "objective reality." For example, when the 
"self" is criticized very severely (e.g., as having done something stupid or 
wicked), one almost always reacts extremely energetically without waiting 
to see the fiwts of the case. Such a reaction gives rise to all sorts of defenses, 
aimed at showing that in its deep and "real" being the "self" is intelligent, 
good, right, true, and beautiful (even though it may well have certain 
"superficial" weak points and "blemishes"). In other words, many may say 
that they believe in the primacy of the notion of objective reality lbr the 
totality of all that exists. Nevertheless, few if any have been able to do 
other than to behave generally as if the "self" were believed to be an 
undefinable, ineffable, special sort of entity that totally transcended all 
possible kinds of terms that could be used in the description of "objective 
reality." 
Many such people, each tacitly giving primary relevance to what is felt 
to be the "essentially right, good, true, and beautiful self" (and what is 
identified with it, such as family country, party, leader, etc., which are of 
course felt to be equally "right," "good," "true," and "beautiful"), must 
inevitably be led to rule out as irrelevant and meaningless much of what 
other groups of people are similarly regarding as extremely relevant. In this 
way, people who begin by believing in the primacy of "objective reality" 
can be faced with what is now generally called a "failure of communica- 
tion." Because they are not able to listen to each other, their relationships 
fall into confusion. And this leads step by step to open conflict and 
violence, in which each side without noticing it has forgotten all about the 
supposed primacy of "objective reality" and is instead totally committed to 
the defense and the primacy of its purely subjective judgment of what is 
relevant and what is irrelevant. 
Very probably, because of the confused general situation indicated 
above, there are many people who do not accept the notion of "objective 
reality" as basic. Rather, they would prefer to regard something like "sub- 
ject" or "mind" or an "extended kind of self" as the "fundamental reality." 
Nevertheless, one sees that few, if any, have been able to behave con- 
sistently according to this notion either. Thus no matter how strongly a 
person may believe in such "philosophical idealism," he finds it almost 

776 
Bohm 
impossible in most of the activities of his life not to treat all sorts of things 
as "separate objects." Indeed, even if he does hold such an "idealistic" view 
about "himself," he will almost certainly find that, in a wide variety of con- 
texts, he treats other people's "selves" as "objects". Or what is essentially 
equivalent, he assigns a qualitatively different and lower order of relevance 
and significance to the feelings, goals, ideas, and beliefs of other people and 
other groups than he does to those of his own. So, in effect, he is saying 
"Only what I believe is really relevant" or "Only what we believe is really 
relevant." Thus such views held by various opposing groups lead also to 
confusion and to all the violence and destruction that is inevitably entailed 
by this. 
A similar situation arises with those who put "subject" and "object" on 
equal footings by supposing that they exist separately but in interaction. 
For example, one may say that mind and matter interact (in a kind of 
extension of dynamics similar to the notion of the interaction of "observing 
apparatus" and "observed system"). But, of course, in order to interact in 
this way, mind and matter must have a certain basic similarity of form and 
structure. Nevertheless, even those who hold such views indicate by their 
behavior that the "self" (or whatever is identified with it) is regarded as 
having an entirely different order of being so that it can in no sense be 
judged as one might judge a material object. Such judgments can of course 
be made about other people's "selves" (and what is identified with them). 
But when it comes to the "self" (and what is identified with it), this must 
generally have a primary kind of relevance and significance. Since each 
"self" is "thinking" in this way, the ultimate result must of course once 
again be confusion and all the violence and destruction that this inevitably 
entails. 
One has thus discovered a very interesting situation. It appears to be 
possible to hold a number of different views about the fundamental nature 
of "reality" with regard to its basically "subjective" or "objective" character. 
At first sight, one might be inclined to think the corresponding differences 
in views about the "self' would lead to significant differences in people's 
actions, especially in areas concerning the relationship of "self" and 
"others." Nevertheless, it does not seem actually to matter very much what 
these views are~ because people's behavior generally reveals the same kind 
of confusion in this area, regardless of what they may happen to believe 
about these questions. 
How is one to understand this fact? A very simple suggestion con- 
cerning this point is that it may mean that our general notions concerning 
what is called the "fundamental nature of reality," whether this nature is 
regarded as objective or subjective, have at least thus far been largely irrele- 
vant (so that it is not surprising that human hehavior has seldom if ever 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
777 
been consistent with them even in areas where they would appear at first 
sight to be very significant). 
But then, this leads to the further question of how such irrelevant 
,lotions came to be so generally accepted. It is suggested here that this 
arose because of certain contingent features in the development of 
language, in which the overall structure of the latter was effectively tied up 
with corresponding (largely tacit) metaphysical assumptions about the 
general nature of things. Thus, the notion of the duality of subject and 
object (built into the structure of almost every sentence, in the form "A acts 
oil B in a specified way") corresponds to the assumption that the whole 
world is constituted of separately existent objects, one of which is the 
observing subject (an assumption that we have already discussed in detail 
in connection with the quantum theory). This notion seems to be so 
natural and inevitable that it is very hard to be aware that it is indeed an 
assumption. Rather it is generally experienced by us as a "Gestalt" or form 
of perception, in which all cues and evidence to the contrary are ruled out 
as irrelevant and are therefore not noticed and not regarded as interesting 
and worthy of further attention even when by accident they do happen to 
be noticed. 
It seems evident that, as long as there can be such a lack of clarity 
concerning the very form and "mode of existence" of the "reality" to which 
one wants to refer, it will be a source of confusion to go on with the discus- 
sion of such questions. What is needed first is therefore to come to a clearer 
language structure which will enable us to talk about these questions 
without bringing in irrelevancies that lead to confusion. 
Firstly, it is clear that the word "reality" has a very broad spectrum of 
meanings. Thus it may mean "the opposite of illusion" or "what is a fact." 
But instead it may mean what is actually realized, and not merely potential. 
Oil the other hand, one may also distinguish between "real potentialities" 
and "illusory potentialities." Very often it means the same as relevant (e.g., 
one talks of the "real significance" of an event). One may evidently go 
through a long series of such meanings. All of these are somehow involved 
m the question: "What is the ultimate reality?" But, very probably, the 
deepest intention behind this kind of question is to ask something 
equivalent to: "What is the nature of the totality of all that is?" So, for the 
purposes of the present discussion, we will take "reality" as meaning "the 
totality of all that is." 
But now we come to a ti, rther difficulty. Whatever we may wish to say 
about this totality, the first step is, as has been seen, an act of abstraction 
,!/what is relevant. For, evidently even the totality of what we perceive and 
what we know (rather than the immeasurably greater totality of "all that 
is") is too vast, varied, and undefinable to be described with regard to its 
~,25 26!6-5 

778 
Bohm 
"nature." And as a matter of fact, the historical development of mankind 
over tens of thousands of years already presents us with a vast hierarchical 
structure of "ready-made" and largely tacit judgments of relevance and 
irrelevance, through which we tend to try to perceive the answer to a ques- 
tion such as "What is the nature of reality?" The experience of mankind 
also indicates, however, that it is necessao~ to question the relevance o['most 
of these judgments of relevance and irrelevance. Thus, even if we go back 
only a few thousand years, we see that man's judgments as to what is rele- 
vant in looking at the totality of the world (including sky and ground) 
have changed in a fantastic way. In modern science such judgments have 
been changing at an ever-increasing pace (e.g., consider research into 
cosmology, where the generally accepted relevance judgments of five years 
ago are now seen to be largely irrelevant). Social notions of proper 
behavior, accepted as supremely relevant for thousands of years, are now 
taken to be irrelevant specially by what is called the "younger generation." 
Who can say what mankind will judge to be relevant and irrelevant in a 
century from now? Perhaps almost all our current notions about science, 
society, and the individual human being will have changed beyond 
recognition. 
In view of all this it seems clear that to attempt to say precisely what 
is relevant and irrelevant about the totality of "all that is" must itself be a 
supremely irrelevant act. For any such judgment of relevance and 
irrelevance applied to the totality can only be an arbitrary selection of con- 
tingent aspects determined fortuitously by a person's conditioning that 
leads him to pick on one particular aspect instead of another. 
Is it possible then to say anything at all about the "totality of all that 
is?" Perhaps one might be inclined at this point to conclude that one 
should say nothing about the subject and just keep quiet about it, not even 
thinking about it in any way at all. But even to say this is to say something 
about it that is tacitly assumed to be relevant. And thus it contradicts the 
content of our suggested statement which is that no relevant assertions at 
a// can be made about "the totality." Of course, one may feel that this 
inconsistency is not very important, because "one knows what is meant." 
However (as happened also in the discussion of Heisenberg's microscope 
experiment), to have a contradiction between the content of a statement 
and what is implied by the form in which it is expressed will, in the long 
run, lead to a kind of confusion that cannot be resolved. (For example, to 
say, I mustn't think of an apple is already to be thinking of the apple, along 
with the thought of negation, contained in the word "mustn't.") 
Is there a consistent (i.e., confusion-free) way to discuss the "totality of 
all that is?" Evidently this is a rather subtle question. Perhaps it would be 
best not to confront it directly, but rather to approach it obliquely, by 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
779 
indirection and by subtle "indications" and "cues" which will, in some way, 
reveal new orders of relevance and irrelevance that cannot be asserted 
directly in terms of our present language structure. Firstly, it can be seen 
that because this language structure begins by very heavily emphasizing the 
notion that each thing has a "separate existence," it immediately leads to 
the "problem" of understanding how such "separately existent" things can 
be related so as to form the "totality of all that is." The attempt to solve 
this "problem" evidently leads to the notion of trying to "complete" the 
description, by including each thing as part of a larger framework, and this 
in turn a part of a still larger framework, etc. But at no stage is the descrip- 
tion ever actually "complete." Thus, the "problem" continues indefinitely, 
without the possibility of "a solution." 
The "problem of completeness" is not merely one of language, or of 
philosophy, but rather it tends to spread to all areas of life. In particular, 
it is always coming up in connection with the "self." If the "self" is con- 
sidered to be a "separately existing entity," it must evidently be "highly 
incomplete." Recognition of this "incompleteness" inevitably leads to efforts 
to "complete the self" by identifying it with a larger framework, such as a 
family, job, country, party, etc. Such efforts are of course foredoomed to 
"'failure," because once anyth#Tg has been assumed to have a "separate 
existence," it is, as has been seen, impossible ever to escape the logically 
inevitable consequences of such "separateness" by trying to put it into a 
larger framework. 
What happens is that the "self," simultaneously regarded as the 
"'essence of existence" and "a mere nothing, which is without real content" 
is felt to be urgently in need of something else that would solve the 
"problem" of its "nothingness." Perhaps it could be another "self" that 
could be fulfilled (i.e., "filled full" or "completed") in some kind of function 
at work or in the home. Or perhaps it could be "completed" by extending 
its power, so as to enable it to dominate vast areas through conquest or 
through the realization of the goals of other forms of ambition (or at least 
to participate by identifying with a group or a society that is able to do 
tiffs). 
But since death ultimately brings an end to all such "solutions" (even 
if their futility is not perceived long before this question is taken very 
seriously), the notion sooner or later arises that somehow "completeness" 
has to be achieved./or all time. For example, the pattern of the "self" may 
be imposed on children, on organizations, on literature, art, science, etc., or 
on society as a whole, in the hope of thereby achieving a kind of per- 
manence for this pattern. Or else, it may be supposed that the "self" can 
find a "complete" and perfect state of bliss, if not in this life (through drugs 
or some such means), then in another life that is yet to come. It seems 

780 
Bohm 
clear, then, that a major part of the "problems" that occupy mankind have 
their origin in the impossible goal of "completing the self." This goal has 
indeed conditioned not only most of man's relationships with his fellow- 
man and with the general environment; it has also to a large extent deter- 
mined his overall worldview, whether philosophical, scientific, or otherwise. 
Thus, throughout the ages, vast metaphysical systems of thought have been 
proposed, in which the "self" would appear to have a secure place, where 
it could be known what should be done in order to achieve happiness. In 
earlier days, these systems were largely religious, or philosophical in 
character, but in more modern times, they have tended to be based instead 
on science. Indeed, even today a very widely accepted tacit goal of science 
is the effort to find a "complete" description of all that there is to be described. 
This would perhaps enable mankind to realize its "heart's desire" by the 
ability to control the natural environment and the body and mind of man 
himself, so that whatever the "self" wished for could be realized. In this way, 
perhaps, the age-old sense of "incompleteness" could somehow be assuaged. 
Why is there such a deep and persistent wish for "completeness?" Very 
probably, it is because man's longing for oneness, wholeness, and harmony. 
which is evidently one of his deepest feelings, has become confused with 
what is actually a meaningless drive toward "completing the self," which 
has no relevant content at all. However, while the content of the notion of 
the "self" is irrelevant, its./brm and structure nevertheless do have a certain 
kind of relevance. For, the form and structure are characterized by the fact 
that what is most relevant about the "self" is just that it is an irrelevancy 
that has been mistaken for something else that would have tremendous 
relevance. It follows of course that such a "mistake" can have enormous 
and far reaching consequences in every area of life. 
The nature of the supreme relevance of the "self" (and what is iden- 
tified with it) is maintained, as has been seen, at least in a large measure, 
by our general language structure which tacitly tends to assert the 
"separate existence" of each thing, and therefore of the "self" as well. All 
relationships of things are then comprehended through the subject-verb- 
object structure. Thus, either a "subject" is said to "act" on an "object," or 
a "subject" simply "carries out an action," or else a "subject" is said to 
"possess certain properties, qualities, and attributes." That is to say, the 
basic structure of our language is such as to heavily emphasize the 
form "A acts on B" or "A does B" or "A is B" (the latter meaning that 
"A possesses the attributes B"). In this form, the "subject" (which is always 
ultimately the "self") is of course both tacitly and explicitly accorded the 
supreme role. 
Such a language form implies, of course, the possibility of a complete 
separation between a thing (A) and what it does or what qualities it has 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
781 
(i.e., B). This separation is evidently basically verbal in origin. However (as 
has been indicated earlier), it tends to be incorporated into the "Gestalt" 
or general form of almost all perception, so that we have, for the most part, 
lost sight of its essentially verbal character. 
However, this separation will not stand up under careful scrutiny. If, 
for example, one tried in thought to abstract a human being from all his 
attributes and properties and thus to separate "him" from all the actions in 
which he can participate (including those of perception, communication, 
and understanding), what would be left of "him?" Evidently, nothing at all. 
For a human being is the totality of his actions, his attributes and his 
properties. However (as has already been indicated) our general language 
structure implies that such a human being is' a "self," who somehow 
"possesses" all these attributes and properties, and "carries out" all these 
actions. But "in itself" this "self" has no quality other than what could be 
called "abstract identity," which in some indescribable and unanalyzable 
way, seems to stand outside of and above everything else, as a supremely 
relevant "essence of existence.". 
Such a notion cannot arise out of a description of observed fact, 
because the supposed quality of "abstract identity" evidently cannot be 
observed or perceived in any way at all. And because it has no content, 
nothing can be inferred from it, nor can it be inferred from anything. Thus 
the notion of a "self" is neither descriptive nor inferential in its function in 
our thinking. What then does it do? Is it perhaps a purely "structural" 
word that indicates order and form (like the words "relevance" and 
"not")? Evidently, this cannot be the case either, because the "self" is sup- 
posed to be an "existent entity" (indeed, even to be a supremely precious 
"'essence of existence") while, of course, structural words like "not" or 
"relevance" cannot have meaning in the role of structure for existent 
entities. Thus it seems that the word "self" has no function at all. But 
nevertheless, of course, it does function anyway. And, as has been seen, the 
result of this function is to introduce the irrelevant and the meaningless 
into thinking and into perception, thus spreading unresolvable confusion 
into every area of life. 
Is there then another way to talk that does not lead to such confusion? 
It is our suggestion here that in the earlier discussion of new language 
structures that might be appropriate in physics, a more suitable way was 
already discernible. One found, indeed, that in such language structures, 
there is no "problem" of trying to achieve "completeness," because each 
description is, from the very beginning, recognized to be inherently and 
naturally #womplete. For, its basic terms always include a noncontingent 
and immediately manifest foreground, the behavior of which depends both 
on (at least initially) unknown or nonmanifest cont#Tgencies and on 

782 
Bohm 
immediately manifest but contingent features of the background. In dis- 
cussing a human being, the noncontingent and immediately manifest 
foreground is described in terms of his actual and directly observed 
appearance and behavior. The nonmanifest contingencies are essentially all 
the beliefs, aims, intentions, motives, etc., which are, in effect, parts of his 
largely unknown conditioning accumulated over a lifetime of experience, 
both social and individual. (Some of this conditioning may have been 
passed on from earlier generations in a hereditary way.) Such a person's 
total perceptions then play the role of an immediately manifest but 
contingent background. 
As happened also in the physical description, what unites all these 
aspects and thus characterizes the person under discussion is just the rela- 
tionship between his manifest behavior and the other two aspects, i.e., con- 
ditioning and perception. That is to say, as is well known, what a person 
does in any given situation depends on what he perceives, and on how he 
is conditioned to react to what he perceives. In the first instance, these two 
are regarded as separate. But, of course, in the long run, they are not 
separate. For, as has been seen, conditioning of judgments of relevance and 
irrelevance can shape perception, while direct and immediate perception of 
such conditioned judgments can alter these judgments in a fundamental way. 
It is clear then that both the form of the "world" in which a human 
being perceives himself to be living, and what this' human be#lg is', are 
inseparably intertwined. Indeed, it can be said that in essences a person is 
just the totality of his perceptions, especially of his judgments of relevance 
and irrelevance, provided that one takes into account that such perceptions 
may be either conditioned or unconditioned (i.e., direct and immediate). 
For, it is just this totality that determines what a person regards as worth 
doing, or aiming for, or preserving or destroying, etc., as well as his mode 
and style of doing things. And all these determine what is usually called the 
"basic character" of such a person. 
It follows that in such a description there is no occasion to regard a 
human being as having, in any sense, a "separate existence" (since what he 
is' cannot be separated from the whole "world" that he perceives). Nor is 
he to be regarded as having a "permanent and unchanging basic identity." 
For, his whole mode of response depends in an ever changing way on the 
past, both biologically and socially, through his conditioning. The latter 
can alter in two ways. Firstly, a person is always being subjected to further 
conditioning, which continually modifies what is already there. And 
secondly (as has already been indicated earlier), there can be a direct and 
immediate perception of the irrelevance of conditioned judgments of 
relevance and irrelevance, in which such conditioned judgments fall away 
and become inoperative. 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
783 
Without the notions of "separate existence" and "permanent identity," 
the term "self" becomes essentially inapplicable. Thus, it is no longer 
possible to assert or imply that this "self" is the "subject" who "possesses 
all his attributes" and who "carries out all his actions." Rather, one brings 
in as basic the term "individual human being," which is merely a way of 
indicating or calling attention to the totality of all the attributes and 
actions that arise in the kind of description that has been discussed here. 
The necessary incompleteness of each such description (e.g., of an 
individual human being) shows itself particularly clearly in the considera- 
tion of what happens when two or more people are in genuine communica- 
tion. The previously appropriate terms of discussion (i.e., the "individual" 
conditioned by his past, and perceiving "his" general environment) are now 
no longer relevant. Instead, all those who participate are now regarding the 
content of the communication as the Jbregrotmd, and the combined percep- 
tions and the combined conditioning of all are now being described respec- 
tively as immediately manifest and nonimmediately manifest aspects of a 
s#lgle general background. So there is a new "overall situation," quite 
different from the one which is relevant for a single "individual." 
All who participate in such a communication may, for example, be 
giving attention mainly to the same general features of the sensually per- 
ceived environment. Or all may be giving attention mainly to something 
more abstract (eg., inquiry into a certain set of judgments of relevance and 
irrelevance). The immediately manifest and noncontingent aspect is then 
the commonly perceivable overt behavior, such as speech, gestures, etc. 
Because all are freely allowing this behavior to indicate the conditioning 
(without any one person attempting to confuse the issue by trying to pre- 
sent a special "image" to the others), the conditioning of each is revealed 
in manifest behavior, for all to see. The differences between the different 
notions as to what is relevant and what is irrelevant, on which the condi- 
tioning is based, will then function in the role of an indicator. And if all are 
sensitively aware, this function will give rise to new orders of relevance and 
irrelevance, while the various different older orders that originally divided 
and separated the participants will fall away and become ineffective. The 
perception will then have a new content, in which there is an overcall har- 
mony that is in essence what is meant by "mutual understanding." Such a 
mode of communication is clearly able to make contact with what is 
beyond the mere explicit content of words. This kind of content is possible 
because (as indicated in earlier sections of this paper) language is an 
inseparable aspect of one single total movement, which includes perception 
and action as well. When all aspects of this one field of perception-com- 
munication-action are functioning properly together then perhaps, in some 
sense, human beings can be said to be living in harmony with "the totality 

784 
Bohm 
of all that is." In this kind of interpenetration of all aspects of existence, it 
is evident that language has what may be called a kind of "nonverbal" 
function. However, generally speaking, there has been a tendency to give 
little significance to the nonverbal aspect of the functioning of language. 
Rather, the main emphasis tends to be on the content or meaning of what 
is said (i.e, verbalized). As a result, there is a widespread habit of making 
a sharp and fixed kind of distinction between the verbal and nonverbal 
aspects of life as a whole. For example, it is commonly believed that there 
is a fundamental difference between "talking about something" and "doing 
something about it." Nevertheless, the fact is, of course, that talking is a 
k#1d of action which is, moreover, as has been seen, generally an integral 
part of broader kinds of action. 
A similar distinction between "content" and "action" arises when one 
discusses a "signal" in physics. Such a signal evidently also has a certain 
content (or meaning). But, in addition, it is said to be "carried" in some 
active sense by what is called a "medium" (sound, light, radio waves, etc.), 
which can be described as a "functioning structure." 
The distinction between content and functioning structure is, however. 
contingent and context-dependent. Thus, even the functioning structure of 
the "medium" has to be described, and this description is part of the con- 
tent of another functioning structure (in this case, language and thought). 
But now one may be led to try, in turn, to describe the latter functioning 
structure through yet another content. However, a new difficulty tends to 
arise here without our noticing it. For, if we try to use the content of 
language to describe the totality of the functioning structure of language 
(and not merely some limited aspect of it), then there is bound to be a 
serious kind of confusion. For, the content of a given communication 
evidently cannot adequately describe the totality of the functioning struc- 
ture that "carries" the content. (A similar "problem" would arise if one 
were to try to describe the totalio, of the functioning of an electromagnetic 
field in terms of the content of"signals" that were being "carried" by this field. ) 
Is there then a new kind of"medium" whose content would be able to 
describe what could be called the "functioning structure of language (and 
thought)?" This question is evidently a confused one, because the very 
words "functioning structure" are still part of language (and thought), 
though it is intended that they should refer to what is beyond these. Is 
there a consistent (i.e., confusion-free) way of putting the intent behind this 
question? 
What is relevant here is that we have thus far been ignoring another 
key aspect of communication, i.e., that a medium which is a function#1g 
structure is generally regarded as having its content determined by some- 
thing else, which may be called a structuring function. Thus, the content of 

Role of Hidden Variables in Physics 
785 
a radio signal is ultimately determined by a human being, who, by talking 
into a microphone, effectively functions to modulate the form of structure, 
the radio wave, so that it will have a structure that corresponds to the 
content of his communication. 
Generally speaking, it is tacitly assumed that a separately existent 
entity called the "self" is what "chooses" the content of language and 
thought, and thus plays the role of "carrying out the structuring function" 
in this latter field. But since the "self" was seen to be an irrelevant and 
meaningless notion, such a description cannot of course be used here. What 
is indicated instead is that it is necessary to cease to regard the distinction 
between "functioning structure" and "structuring function" as sharp and 
fixed. Rather, it is a contingent distinction, such that what is "structuring 
function" in one context is "functioning structure" in another. In other 
words, there are two interpenetrating aspects that reflect each other, pass 
into each other, and reveal themselves each in the other. 
In the movement of interpenetrating aspects described above, there is 
a quality of undivided wholeness, because the various aspects are no longer 
regarded as fragmentary and separately existent. One can perhaps get a 
feeling for what is meant here by considering that visual, auditory, and tac- 
tile perception are as much sides or aspects of this undivided wholeness as 
the structuring function and the functioning structure of language. But is 
this wholeness or totality "really" the "world that we can see" or is it "the 
world that we can touch" or is it "the world that we can hear'?" Or is it 
alternatively "the world that is the content of our discourse?" Evidently all 
these are merely verbally indicated manifestations of totality that is beyond 
the word, a totality that is only implicit, and that can never be expressed 
verbally or known in thought. 
To convey the sense of what is thus implicit, one can say that it is "no 
thing in particular," but that in some sense, it is "the source or potentiality 
of all things." We note here that the word "thing" necessarily implies a par- 
ticular judgment of relevance and irrelevance, which is an inseparable 
aspect of the definition of what is meant by the "thing" in question. Hence, 
"no thing" does not have a significance similar to that of "a blank wall of 
nothingness" or "a void." The latter terms indeed still evoke an image of 
something, i.e., a "blank wall" or a "void." However, "no thing" indicates 
an awareness that is the ground of all judgments of relevance and 
irrelevance, and is therefore not committed to any particular judgment of 
this kind. 
We can now make a consistent statement: "No thing is all that is rele- 
vant to totality." What is to be noted here is that none of the terms of this 
statement has any definable or analyzable content. They are all "structural" 
words, which convey form and order, rather than a specifiable content. By 

786 
Bohm 
thus forming a relevant statement out of purely structural words, one (at 
least tacitly) calls attention to the fact that the usual roles of language as 
functioning structure and structuring function can be reversed. That is to 
say, what was initially regarded as the content (i.e., the statement con- 
stituted out of purely structural words) now enters the action of the struc- 
turing function. And this action begins to put new features into what was 
the functioning structure. In this way, the two roles begin to pass into each 
other and each begins to reveal its hitherto unrealized potentialities in and 
through the other. The two roles thus come to merge and their separate- 
ness ceases to be relevant. In this action, the distinction between what is 
verbal and what is nonverbal is directly revealed to be basically verbal (i.e., 
a contingent result of the content of our current general language). 
Such statements formed out of purely structural words can therefore 
be a source of insight into the whole functioning of languages and may 
perhaps give rise to a direct and immediate awareness of an order that goes 
beyond the usual kind of fragmentary awareness, in which the distinction 
of verbal and nonverbal appears to have basic relevance. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. von Neumann, The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, New Jersey. 1955). 
2. D. Bohm and J. Bub, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 453 (1966). 
3. C. Papaliolios, Phys. Ret'. Lett. 18, 622 (1967). 
4. N. Bohr, Atomic Physicw and Human Knowledge (Wiley, New York, 1958). See also D. L. 
Schumacher, in The Nature of Time. T. Gold. ed. (Conlell University Press, Ithaca, 
New York, 1967). 
5. D. Bohm, The Special Theoo, of Relativity (Benjamin, New York, 1965). See Appendix, 
"Physics and Perception." 
6. D. Bohm, Proceedings, hiternational Cot!ference on Elementao' Particles, Kyoto, Japan, 
1965. 
7. G. Birkhoff and J. yon Neuman, Am1. Math. 37, 823 (1936). 
8. Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 108, 1070 (1957). 

