Foundations of Physics, Vol. 5, No. 1, 1975 
On the Intuitive Understanding 
of Nonlocality as Implied by 
Quantum Theory 
D. J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
Birkbeck College, University of London 
London, England 
Received March 29, 1974 
We bring out the fact that the essential new quality implied by the quantum 
theory is nonlocality; i.e., that a system cannot be analyzed into parts whose basic 
properties do not depend on the state of the whole system. This is done in terms 
of the eausal interpretation of the quantum theory, proposed by one of us 
(D.B.) in 2952, involving the introduetion of the "quantum potential." We 
show that this approach implies a new universal type of description, in which 
the standard or canonical form is always supersystem-system-subsystem; 
and this leads to the radically new notion of unbroken wholeness of the entire 
universe. Finally, we discuss some of the implications of extending these notions 
to the relativity domain, and in so doing, we indicate a novel concept of time, 
in terms of which relativity and quantum theory may eventually be brought 
together. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
It is generally acknowledged that quantum theory has many strikingly novel 
features, including discreteness of energy and momentum, discrete jumps 
in quantum processes, wave-particle duality, barrier penetration, etc. 
However, there has been too little emphasis on what is, in our view, the 
93 
© 1975 Plenum Publishing Corporation, 227 West 17th Street, New York, N.Y. I0011. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, record ng, or otherwise, without written permission of 
the publisher. 

94 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
most fundamentally different new feature of all; i.e., the intimate inter- 
connection of different systems that are not in spatial contact. This has been 
especially clearly revealed through the by now well-known experiment of 
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (EPR), (1,2) but it is involved in an essential 
way in every manifestation of a many-body system, as treated by 
Schr6dinger's equation in a 3N-dimensional configuration space. 
Recently, interest in this question has been stimulated by the work of 
Bell, I~) who obtained precise mathematical criteria distinguishing the experi- 
mental consequences of this feature of "quantum interconnectedness of 
distant systems" from what is to be expected in "classical type" hidden 
variable theories, in which each system is supposed to be localizable, i.e., 
to have basic qualities and properties that are not dependent in an essential 
way on its interconnections with distant systems. 
Generally speaking, experiments inspired by this work have tended 
fairly strongly to confirm the existence of quantum interconnectedness, (4) 
in the sense that they do not fit "localizable" hidden variable theories of the 
type considered by Bell and those who follow along his lines. This work 
has been valuable in helping to clarify the whole question of quantum 
interconnectedness. However, it now presents us with the new challenge of 
understanding what is implied about the nature of space, time, matter, 
causal connection, etc. 
If we are completely satisfied with one of the usual interpretations of 
quantum mechanics, then we may miss the full significance of this challenge. 
Thus, we may accept the rather common notion that quantum mechanics 
is nothing more than a calculus or a set of rules for predicting results that 
can be compared with experiment. Or else we may accept Bohr's principle 
of complementarity, (5) implying that there is no way to describe or understand 
any underlying physical process that might connect successive events on 
a quantum jump (e.g., from one stationary state to another). Or we may 
adopt some of the theories involving a new quantum logic. (6) All of these 
approaches, although different in important aspects, have in common the 
conclusion that quantum mechanics can no longer be understood in terms 
of imaginative and intuitive concepts. 1 As a result, we are restricted, in one 
way or another, to dealing with the by now fairly well-established fact of 
quantum interconnectedness in terms of abstract mathematical concepts. 
The special implications of these concepts cannot, however, be fully and 
adequately grasped, because at this level of mathematical abstraction, the 
property of "quantum interconnectedness" does not appear to be very 
1 Finkelstein C. has developed a view of quantum logic which is relatively imaginative in 
its point of departure. However, ultimately, his basic concepts are mathematical rather 
than intuitive, so that he is, for example, unable to bring out the sort of points that we 
emphasize in this article. 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonloeality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
95 
different from that of "classical localizability" (the difference showing up 
mainly in rather complicated inequalities of the type derived by Bell TM for 
certain kinds of experimental results). 
Thus, when experiments confirm that there are no "localizable" hidden 
variables, our first reaction may tend to be one of surprise, perhaps even of 
shock, because the notion of localizability has been so deeply incorporated 
into all our intuitive concepts of physics. However, as soon as we are content 
with nonintuitive and nonimaginative mathematical formulations, it seems 
that the surprise and shock suddenly vanish, because we are back to the 
familiar and reassuring domain of calculating experimental results with the 
aid of mathematical equations. Nevertheless, when one thinks of it, one 
sees that the implications of quantum interconnectedness remain as novel 
and surprising as ever. Thus, we have merely diverted our attention from 
the challenge of understanding what all this means. 
If we had a consistent way of looking at the significance of quantum 
mechanics intuitively and imaginatively, this would help us to avoid allowing 
our attention to be thus diverted from the novel implications of quantum 
interconnectedness. Such a way of looking might also help to indicate new 
directions of theoretical development, involving new concepts and new 
ways of understanding the basic nature of matter, space, time, etc. In this 
connection, it might even be useful to consider theories that we do not regard 
as adequate on general grounds or as definitive in any sense. For such, 
theories may still give imaginative and intuitive insight into a situation for 
which there is at present no other way to obtain this kind of insight. It is 
in such a spirit that we are proceeding in the present paper. That is to say, 
we are not attempting here to make statements about what actually is the 
nature of reality, but rather we are merely looking at certain imaginative and 
intuitive concepts, to see what light they can shed on the new quality of 
quantum interconnectedness. 
In particular, we are going to use as a point of departure the so-called 
causal interpretation of quantum mechanics, developed by Bohm (8,9) in 1951. 
Although what we shall do here was to some extent implicit in the earlier 
work, it was not brought out adequately there. In addition, we feel that we 
have seen some further points, which enable us to pursue new directions of 
development. 
The most important of these points is that our work brings out in an 
intuitive way just how and why a quantum many-body system cannot 
properly be analyzed into independently existent parts, with fixed and 
determinate dynamical relationships between each of the parts. Rather, 
the "parts" are seen to be in an immediate connection, in which their 
dynamical relationships depend, in an irreducible way, on the state of the 
whole system (and indeed on that of broader systems in which they are 

96 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
contained, extending ultimately and in principle to the entire universe). 
Thus, one is led to a new notion of unbroken wholeness which denies the 
classical idea of analyzability of the world into separately and independently 
existent parts. Through this, a novel direction is indicated for our general 
intuitive and imaginative thinking, which takes it beyond the limits imposed 
by classical concepts. And so it becomes possible to understand one and 
the same physical content both intuitively and mathematically, not only for 
classical laws, but also for quantum laws. 
2. BRIEF REVIEW OF CAUSAL INTERPRETATION OF 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The essential feature of the causal interpretation (s) of quantum mechanics 
was the proposal that what are commonly regarded as the fundamental 
constituents of matter (e.g., electrons, protons, neutrons, etc.) are both 
waves and particles, in a certain kind of interaction (which we shall describe 
more fully in the course of this paper). We begin here with a discussion of 
the one-body system. Thus, we suppose, for example, that an individual 
electron is a particle with well-defined coordinates X which are functions 
of the time t. 
However, we postulate further that there is also a new kind of wave 
field, ~b(X, t), that is always associated with this particle, and that is just as 
essential as the particle for understanding what the "electron" is and what 
it does. 
To show how the wave field acts on the particle, we write the complex 
function ~b(X, t) in the form ~b = ReiS/~, where R and S are real. Then 
Schr6dinger's equation reduces to 
with 
and 
aP 
(p VS 
~) 
0 
(1) 
at + div 
= 
= 
R 2 = 
~*~ 
(2) 
aS 
(vS) 2 
a---/-q- 2~+ 
V+Q=0 
(3) 
where V is the classical potential and Q is a new "quantum potential" given 
by 
h 2 V~R 
Q- 
2m 
R 
(4) 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
97 
Evidently, Eq. (1) may be taken as an expression of conservation of the 
usual probability density of particles P = ~b*~b with a current given by 
j = P VS/m. So one can take 
v = VS/m 
(5) 
as the mean velocity of the particles. In the 1951 papers (8~ this was also 
taken as the actual velocity, but in a later paper, ~9~ it was suggested that the 
particle executes some sort of random movement (resembling Brownian 
motion) with an average velocity given by (5), and it was shown that the 
probability density P = ~b*~b is the "steady state" distribution ultimately 
resulting from the random movements of the particle. 
The essential new features of quantum theory first show up in Eq. (3). 
In the classical limit (h-+ 0) we may neglect the quantum potential (4), 
and then (3) reduces to the classical Hamilton-Jacobi equation for a particle 
under the action of a classical potential V. So we are led to propose that, 
more generally, the particle is also acted on by the "quantum potential" Q, 
which of course depends on the new "Schr6dinger field" ~ and which cannot 
be neglected in processes for which a single quantum of action h is significant. 
By way of illustrating how this theory works for the one-body system, 
we shall mention here two essential aspects of the quantum theory. First, 
there is the well-known phenomenon of interference of electrons (e.g., in a 
beam that has passed through several slits). The fact that no electrons arrive 
at points where the wave function is zero is explained simply by the infinite 
value of the quantum potential Q = --(h2/2m) V~R/R, which repels particles 
and keeps them away from points at which R = 0. Second, let us consider 
the phenomenon of barrier penetration. As shown in detail in Ref. 8, the 
wave function for such a system is a time-dependent packet. As a result, the 
quantum potential Q fluctuates in such a way that occasionally it becomes 
negative enough to cancel the positive barrier potential V, so that from time 
to time a particle may pass through before the quantum potential changes to 
a significantly less negative value. 
In a rather similar way, all the essential features of the quantum mechan- 
ical one-body system were explained in Ref 8. Such an explanation was 
made possible merely by adding the concept of a wave field ~b to that of the 
particle and by relating these two through the quantum potential Q. 
Although some new, nonclassical features have thus been brought in, there 
is still nothing foreign to the general classical conceptual structure involving 
basic notions of space, time, causality, localizability of matter, etc. So it is 
possible to understand the one-body quantum system without the need for 
any really striking changes in the overall conceptual structure of physics. 
It is only when we try in this way to understand the many-body system 
that quantum mechanics begins to show the need for a radically novel 
825/5/~-7 

98 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
general conceptual structure. To show how this comes about, let us first 
consider a two-body system (with two particles of equal mass m). The wave 
function T depends on the six variables X1 and X~ constituting the coordinates 
of the two particles as well as on the time t. Evidently, 7t(X1, X2, t) can no 
longer be thought of as a field in ordinary three-dimensional space. Rather, 
it is a function defined in the configuration space of the two particles. Thus ~t 
has no such simple and direct physical interpretation as is possible in the 
one-particle case. Nevertheless, we can still develop an indirect interpretation 
by writing W = Rd s/r~ and substituting this in the Schr6dinger equation for 
the two-particle system. The result is 
with 
and 
with 
--~t + vl" 
~-~ / + v2" 
T/ 
= 0 
(6) 
P = W*7 t 
(7) 
OS_~_+ (7~S)~m -t- (vzS)~m + V(xl, x2) + Q = 0 
(S) 
ha (VRR 
V22R] 
Q - 
2m - -  
-}- ~ ]  
(9) 
Evidently, Eq. (6) describes the conservation of probability P = ~'7 ~ in 
the configuration space X1, X2 of the two particles. Equation (7) is a 
Hamilton-Jacobi equation for the system of two particles, acted on not 
only by the classical potential V but also by the quantum potential 
Q(X1, X2, 't). Thus, if we take into account that, in the Hamilton-Jacobi 
equation, vl = v~S/m and v~ = g2S/rn, we have an implicit determination 
of the meaning of T = Re ~s/r~ (in the sense that R determines both the 
probability density and the quantum potential, while S determines the mean 
momenta of the particles). 
In 
an 
N-body 
system, 
we 
would 
have 
hr~(X~ ..... XN,t) 
with 
Q = Q(x~ ,..., xN). This gives rise to what is called a "many-body force," 
i.e., an interaction that does not reduce to a sum of terms, one for each pair 
[e.g., F(X,~ --Xn)], but rather one in which the interaction between each 
pair depends on all the other particles. Of course, such forces do not 
necessarily go beyond the general conceptual framework of classical physics 
(e.g., the van der Waals force may in principle be a many-body force, in 
which the interaction between a given pair of molecules is capable of being 
influenced by all the other molecules in the system). 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonloeality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
99 
However, what is new here are the following two points. 
(a) 
The quantum potential Q(Xl ..... Xw) does not in general produce 
a vanishing interaction between two particles i and j as t Xl -- Xj i ~ oe. 
In other words, distant systems may still have a strong and direct inter- 
connection. This is, of course, contrary to the general requirement, implicit 
in classical physics, that when two particles are sufficiently far apart, they 
will behave independently. Such behavior is evidently necessary if the notion 
of analysis of a system into separately and independently existent constituent 
parts, which can conceptually be put together again to explain the whole 
is to have any real meaning. 
(b) 
What is even more strikingly novel is that the quantum potential 
cannot be expressed as a universally determined function of all the coordinates 
X~ ,..., XN- Rather, it depends on kg(X~ .... , XN) and therefore on the 
"quantum state" of the system as a whole. In other words, even apart from 
the point made in (a), we now find that the relationships between any two 
particles depend on something going beyond what can be described in terms 
of these particles alone. Indeed, more generally, this relationship may depend 
on the quantum states of even larger systems, within which the system in 
question is contained, ultimately going on to the universe as a whole. 
If this dependence of the relationships of parts on the state of the whole 
is what generally prevails, how, then, are we to understand the fact that, in 
broad domains of physical experience, the world can successfully be treated 
by analysis into separately existent parts related in ways that do not thus 
depend on the whole ? 
To answer this question, we first consider the special case in which 
the wave function is factorizable. In a two-body system, for example, suppose 
we can write 
= ¢1(xl) ¢~(x~) 
P= 
[~i 2 = 1~112 [ ~212 
ha 
Q - 
2m ( VI~Ra(Xl)RI(X~) + 
(10) 
(1i) 
V22R2(X2) 
R2(X2) 
) 
(12) 
In this case, the quantum potential reduces to a sum of terms, each dependent 
only on the coordinates of a single particle, and therefore each particle 
behaves independently. So as far as the functioning of the particles is concerned, 
we can get back the quasiindependence of behavior of the particles. But now 
this comes out as a special case of nonindependence (i.e., quantum inter- 
connectedness). 
In Ref. 8 it was shown in some detail that this theory actually does 
give a complete and consistent way of understanding the (nonrelativistic) 

100 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
many-body system. To help bring out in more detail how this works, let us 
now look briefly at the EPR experiment. In the original proposals of EPR, 
one considers a system of two "noninteracting" particles in a quantum state 
given by the wave function 
= exp[ip(Xx -k X2)/21 8(X~ -- X~ -- a) 
(13) 
This is a state in which the total momentum of the system is p and in which 
the two particles are separated by the distance a, which, as EPR noted, may 
be of macroscopic dimensions. If one now measures the position of the first 
particle )(1, then it follows that )(2 = a -k )(1. 
This could perhaps be explained by supposing that X, and X2 were 
initially correlated in this way before the measurement took place. But 
then, one could instead have measured Pl and obtained the correlated result 
P2 = P --Pl. However, according to the uncertainty principle, X1 and p~ 
cannot both be defined together. It would follow that somehow the measure- 
ment of the momentum of the first particle actually "put" this particle into 
a definite state of momentum p~, while it "put" the second particle into a 
correspondingly definite correlated state of momentum p --pl. The para- 
doxical feature of this experiment then is that particle 2 somehow seems to 
"know" into which state it should go, without any interaction that could 
transmit this information. 
Let us now consider how all this is understood in terms of the causal 
interpretation. First, to avoid infinite terms, we will replace the wave function 
(13) by 
= exp[ip(X1 + X2)/2]f(X~ -- X~) 
(14) 
where f is a real function, sharply peaked at X~- X1 = a. By allowing 
the peak to grow sharper and sharper, we can approximate the wave function 
(13) and closely as necessary. 
Let us now write down the quantum potential 
h a vsc(xl - 
x~) 
(15) 
Q- 
2m f(x~- x2) 
This emplies that, even when the classical potential vanishes--so that, in 
the usual interpretation of the theory, it is said that the two particles do not 
interact--there is still a "quantum interaction" between them which does 
not approach zero as I X1 -- X~ I approaches macroscopic dimensions and 
which depends on the quantum state of the whole system. 
When any property, e.g., the momentum of particle 1, is measured, then 
particle 2 will react in a corresponding way, as a result of the interaction 
brought about by the quantum potential. And so (as shown in some detail 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonloeality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
101 
in Ref. 8) it is possible intuitively and imaginatively to explain the correla- 
tions of measured properties of the two particles, which have no such explana- 
tion in terms of the usual interpretation of the theory. 
The above explanation of the experiment of EPR helps us to understand 
how quantum interconnectedness may come about, even over distances of 
macroscopic order. But such interconnectedness shows itself in many other 
ways which have (like the experiment of EPR itself) been confirmed in 
actual observation. For example, it is well known that in the superfluid 
state of helium there are long-range correlations of helium atoms, c1°~ The 
wave function for such a state can easily be shown to lead to a quantum 
potential in which there is in general a significant interaction between 
distant particles. At high temperatures, such correlations become unimpor- 
tant, so that helium atoms that are distant from each other move more or 
less independently, with the result that they undergo random collisions, 
leading to viscous friction. Below the temperature of transition to the 
superfluid state, however, the long-range interactions implied by the quantum 
potential give rise to a coordinated movement of all the particles (resembling 
a ballet rather than a disorderly crowd of people). And so, because there 
are no random collisions, the fluid is free of viscous friction (a similar 
explanation can also be given for superconductivity). 
In this way, we see how in certain domains of large-scale experience, 
we can intuitively apprehend the essential quality of quantum intercon- 
nectedness, in the sense, for example, that we understand the observable 
property of superfluidity as the result of the movements of subsystems 
(atoms) whose relationships (i.e., interactions over long distances) depend 
on the state of the whole system. Thus, we do not have to restrict ourselves 
to a purely mathematical treatment, from which we can derive formulas 
implying the vanishing of the viscosity, without us, however, obtaining a real 
imaginative insight into why this happens. 
3. ON A NEW NOTION OF UNBROKEN WHOLENESS 
As indicated in Section 2, the quantum theory understood through the 
causal interpretation implies the need for a radical change from the classical 
notion of analyzability of the world into independently existent parts, each 
of which can be studied in relative isolation, without our having to consider 
the whole, and which can in turn be put together conceptually to explain 
this whole. Rather, the basic qualities and relationships of all the "elements" 
appearing in the theory are now seen to be generally dependent on the state 
of the whole, even when these are separated by distances of macroscopic 
order. However, when the wave function can be expressed approximately 

102 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
as a product of functions of coordinates of different "elements," then these 
latter will behave relatively independently. But such a relative independence 
of function is only a special case of general and inseparable dependence. So 
we have reversed the usual classical notion that the independent "elementary 
parts" of the world are the fundamental reality and that the various systems 
are merely particular contingent forms and arrangements of these parts. 
Rather, we say that inseparable quantum interconnectedness of the whole 
universe is the fundamental reality and that relatively independently behaving 
parts are merely particular and contingent forms within this whole. 
We can express this view more succinctly by considering the possible 
meanings of the word "system." Now each system may be regarded as 
constituted of many subsystems, while in turn such a system may be con- 
sidered as a constituent of various supersystems. Thus, we may say that a 
standard or canonical form of treatment in physics has been one that makes 
a distinction that establishes three levels of description 
Supersystem 
System 
Subsystem 
Classically, it has been supposed that we can eventually arrive at subsystems 
(e.g., elementary particles) whose basic qualities and relationships are 
independent of the states of the systems and supersystems in which they 
participate. But, quantum mechanically, as we have seen, we cannot arrive 
at such an analysis. Nevertheless, this distinction into supersystem, system, 
and subsystem is still both meaningful and useful. However, its role is not 
to give an analysis into constituent parts, but rather to serve as a basis of 
description, which does not imply the independent existence of the "elements" 
that are distinguished in this description (e.g., as we may describe a ruler 
as divided into yards, feet, or inches, without implying that the ruler is 
ultimately constituted of separately existent "elementary inches" that have 
been put together in some kind of interaction). The distinction into super- 
system, system, and subsystem is thus a convenient abstraction, which in 
each case has to be adapted to the actual content of the physical fact. 
We emphasize that from this point of view there can be no ultimate set 
of subsystems nor an ultimate supersystem that would constitute the whole 
universe. Rather, each subsystem is only a relatively fixed basis of description. 
Thus, atoms, originally thought to be the absolute and final constituents 
of the whole of reality, were later found to be only relatively stable units, 
being constituted of electrons, protons, neutrons, etc. And now physics 
seems to be pointing to the likelihood that such "elementary particles" are 
also only relatively stable units, possibly being constituted of finer elements, 
such as "patrons." However, we are not basing our view here solely on 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
103 
contingent facts of this kind. Rather, what we are proposing is that we be 
ready to explore a new notion of physical reality, in which we start from 
unbroken wholeness of the totality of the universe. Any attempt to assert 
the independent existence of a part would deny this unbroken wholeness 
and would thus fail to be consistent with the proposed notion. To state that 
a given part is ultimate, in the sense of not being describable in terms of 
subsystems, would likewise still give this part a certain absolute character 
that would be independent of the whole. 
This does not necessarily mean that the subsystems are always spatially 
smaller than the system as a whole. Rather, what characterizes a subsystem 
is only its relative stability and the possibility of its dependence of behavior 
in the limited context under discussion. For example, a crystal can be 
described as a system of interacting atoms. But it can also be described as 
a system of interacting normal modes (sound waves). In this latter descrip- 
tion, the subsystems are the normal modes. These are spatially coextensive 
with the system as a whole. But functionally, the normal modes have a 
relative stability of movement and possibility of independent behavior 
which allows them to be consistently regarded as subsystems of the crystal 
as a whole. 
When we turn in the opposite direction toward the supersystems in 
which a given system participates, similar considerations will hold. Thus, in 
general, it will not be possible to regard the relationships of systems as 
being independent of such supersystems. A very simple example of this is 
provided by the process of measurement in quantum mechanics. If we regard 
a "particle" as "the observed system," then we cannot properly understand 
their relationships, except in the context of the overall experimental situation, 
created by the "observing apparatus" which, together with the observed 
object, has to be regarded as a kind of supersystem (in Ref. 8, the measure- 
ment process is treated from this point of view in some detail). 
There is a considerable similarity here to Bohr's point of view. Thus, 
Bohr emphasizes the wholeness of the form of the experimental conditions 
and the content of the experimental results. ~5) But Bohr also implies that this 
wholeness is not describable in intuitive and imaginative terms, because (in 
his view) we must use classical language and classical concepts to describe 
our actual (large-scale) experience in physics, and these evidently contradict 
the wholeness that both Bohr and we agree to be necessary. 
In our approach, we do, however, give an intuitive and imaginative 
description of such wholeness. We do this by dropping the notion that actual 
large-scale experience in physics has to be described solely in terms of classical 
concepts. Rather, even when we describe such experimental results, we have 
explicitly to incorporate these into the language of supersystem, system, and 
subsystem. In this way, we will imply that whatever is observed at the large- 

104 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
scale level is only a relatively stable system, in which the relationships of the 
subsystems may depend significantly on the state of the system as a whole. 2 
Thus we differ from Bohr in giving an intuitive and imaginative description 
of our large-scale experience, which does not contradict the wholeness 
implied by the quantum properties of matter. 
In this way we are able to have not only unbroken wholeness in the 
content of physics, but also we can have such unbroken wholeness in the form 
of description, in the sense that the one form of supersystem, system, and 
subsystem is valid for the whole field of physics, large-scale and small-scale. 
Subsystems will then generally depend intimately on the systems in which 
they participate, which will in turn depend on supersystems, etc., ultimately 
merging with the unknown totality of the whole universe, with no sharply 
delineated cuts or boundaries. In principle, this includes even the observer. 
But in typical cases, the observer himself can be treated as functionally 
independent of what is observed (i.e., the observed object is taken as the 
system, its deeper constitution as the set of subsystems, and the overall 
environment, including the observing apparatus, as the supersystem). So, 
without implying the breaking of wholeness, we are able to make a certain 
relatively independent physical context stand out "in relief" against a 
background (including the observer) that is not important for its function 
or behavior. The whole is thus always implicitly present in every description. 
In different contexts, the functional independence of what we are studying 
may cease, and we may then have to go back to the whole, to come to a new 
act of abstraction, making a different structure of supersystem, system, and 
subsystem stand out "in relief." 
It is clear then that wholeness of form in our description is not compatible 
with completeness of content. This is not only because subsystems may 
eventually have to be regarded as constituted of subsubsystems, etc. It is 
also because even supersystems will ultimately have to be seen as inseparable 
from supersupersystems, etc. This form of description cannot be closed on 
the large scale, any more than on the small scale. Thus, if we supposed that 
there was an ultimate and well-defined supersystem (e.g., the entire universe), 
then this would leave out the observer and it would break the wholeness, 
by implying that the observer and the universe were two systems, separately 
and independently existent. So, as pointed out earlier, we do not close the 
description on either side, but rather, we regard the supersystems and 
subsystems as ultimately merging into the unknown totality of the universe. 
It follows then that because there is no ultimate description, each level 
makes an irreducible contribution to the content of the description. Thus, 
when we describe a superfluid as constituted of helium atoms, we have not 
2 E.g., as we have suggested in Section 2 for the case of superfluid helium. 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonlocality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
105 
completely reduced it to a set of helium atoms, because the interactions of 
these atoms are still determined by the state of the whole system. Similarly, 
the helium atoms are made up of electrons, protons, and neutrons, but the 
behavior of these depends on the state of the helium atom as a whole. 
If the elementary particles have a finer constitution (e.g., partons), the 
behavior of these latter will still depend on the state of the particle as a whole. 
So each level is any description makes an irreducible contribution to the 
overall description and to the expression of the overall law. 
It is clear then that incompleteness of content of a theory is necessary 
for wholeness in form. A theory that is whole in form may be compared 
with a seed that can grow in an indefinite number of ways, according to 
the context in which it finds itself; but however it grows, it always produces 
a plant in harmony with the environment, so that together they constitute 
a whole. Clearly, this is possible only because the articulation of the plant 
is not predetermined in detail in the seed. On the other hand, any theory 
that claims completeness of content must close itself off from the unknown 
totality in which all ultimately merges, so that it will eventually give rise to 
fragmentation in form. 
Of course, we have thus far been discussing wholeness of form in terms 
of the causal interpretation of quantum theory. As indicated in Section 1, 
we are quite aware of the limitations and unsatisfactory features of the 
interpretation. Nevertheless, we feel that it has served a useful purpose, by 
leading us to an intuitive and imaginative understanding of the unbroken 
wholeness of the totality of existence, along with the possibility of abstracting 
specified fields of study having relative functional independence, as described 
through the distinctions of system, supersystem, and subsystem. Our attitude 
is that we can sooner or later drop the notion of the quantum potential (as 
we can drop the scaffolding when a building is ready) and go on to radically 
new concepts, which incorporate the wholeness of form--which we feel to 
be the essential significance of quantum descriptions. This implies that we 
have to go deeply into all our basic notions of space, time, and the nature 
of matter, which are at present inseparably intertwined with the idea of 
localizability, i.e., that the basic form of existence is that of entities that are 
located in well-defined regions of space (and time). We have instead to start 
from nonlocality as the basic concept, and to obtain locality as a special 
and limiting case, applicable when there is relative functional independence 
of the various "elements" appearing in our descriptions. This means that 
our notions of space and time will have to change in a fundamental way. 
At present we are working along these lines. Some progress has been 
made, m,12) and in the next section some of the further possible directions 
of work in which we are now engaged will be discussed briefly. 
Before going on to this, however, we point out that the form of 

106 
D.J. Bohm and B. J. Hiley 
wholeness (i.e., supersystem, system, subsystem, with parts dependent on 
the state of the whole) is relevant in fields going far beyond physics. Thus, 
for example, individual human beings may be considered as subsystems in 
a system consisting of a social group, which is in turn part of a supersystem, 
consisting of a larger social group. Evidently, the relationships of any two 
individual human beings depend crucially on the state of the immediate 
social group to which they belong, and ultimately on that of the larger social 
group. Similarly, the interactions of any two cells in the body depend on 
the state of the whole organ of which they are a part, and ultimately on 
that of the organism as a whole. Likewise, such a description holds for 
mental phenomena (e.g., the relationships of two concepts depend crucially 
on broader concepts within which they are comprehended, etc.). In this way 
we see that there is accessible to us a very wide range of direct intuitive 
experience in the form of wholeness. What quantum theory, as understood 
through the causal interpretation, shows is that this form is appropriate 
not only biologically, socially, and psychologically, but also even for under- 
standing the laws of physics. And so we are able to comprehend the whole 
world in all of its aspects through the one universal order of thought, thus 
removing an important source of fragmentation between physics and other 
aspects of life. 
4. ON A POSSIBLE EXTENSION OF THE NOTION OF 
UNBROKEN WHOLENESS TO RELATIVISTIC CONTEXTS 
Thus far, we have restricted ourselves to a nonrelativistic context, so 
that the instantaneous interactions of distant particles implied by the quantum 
potential do not give rise to any fundamental difficulties of principle. There 
does not exist as yet, however, a consistent relativistic quantum theory, 
with a generally satisfactory physical interpretation. At present, relativistic 
quantum mechanics is a set of fragmentary algorithms, each working in its 
own domain, but there is no clear theory of how these algorithms form a 
whole body of theory that would be related in some definite way to experi- 
ment (e.g., there is no consistent relativistic theory which includes a theory 
of measurement). So all we can do now is to see if we can obtain some hints, 
or indications of what is needed in a relativistic context, by looking at this 
problem through the intuitive notions given here. 
First of all, we point out that in the theory of relativity, the concept 
of a signal plays a basic role in determining what is meant by separability 
of different regions of space. 8 In general, if two such regions A and B are 
3 For a more detailed discussion of this point, see Ref. 11. 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonloeality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
107 
separate, it is supposed that they can be connected by signals. Conversely, 
if there is no clear separation of A and B, a signal connecting them could 
have little or no meaning. So the possibility of signal implies separation, 
and separation implies the possibility of connection by a signal. 
Can the quantum potential carry a signal ? If it can, we will be led to 
a violation of the principles of Einstein's theory of relativity, because the 
instantaneous interaction implied by the quantum potential will lead to the 
possibility of a signal that is faster than light. However, the mere fact of 
interaction does not necessarily give rise to the possibility of carrying a signal. 
Indeed, a signal has in general to be a complex structure, consisting of many 
events that are ordered in definite ways. Or, in terms of our language, each 
signal is a supersystem of events, while each event is in turn a system of 
subevents. 
It is not at all clear that the action of the quantum potential on a particle 
would have the regular order and complex stable structure of superevents, 
events, and subevents needed to carry a meaningful signal. And if such a 
signal could not be carried by the quantum potential, then the basic principles 
of relativity theory would not necessarily be violated. So one avenue of 
enquiry is to try to find out to what extent the quantum potential can carry 
a signal. At present, the answer is, of course, not known. 
For example, as pointed out in Section 3, in the experiment of EPR, 
an observer A can measure either the position or the momentum of particle 1, 
and the corresponding property of particle 2 will be immediately determined 
in a properly correlated way. From a measurement on particle 1, the observer 
A knows the corresponding property of particle 2. But an observer B near 
particle 2 cannot learn anything from this that he did not know before. For 
example, if he measures the momentum of particle 2, he will get a definite 
result, but he will have no way of knowing that the observer A has helped 
to produce this result (unless information is exchanged between observers 
in some other way). This follows because the events in a measurement of 
momentum do not have enough structure to carry to observer B any informa- 
tion as to what has been measured by observer A, and also because any event 
observed by B could have occurred equally well with or without the action 
of observer A. So it is quite possible that the instantaneous interactions 
implied by the quantum potential do not violate the basic principles of 
relativity theory. 
A closely related point is that the wave function of a many-body system 
is written as ~(X1 .... , X~, t) with a single time t for all the particles. In 
other words, all the particles have to be considered together at the same time 
if they are to be treated as a single system. If one does not do this, one fails 
in general to obtain the correct experimental results (e.g., for stationary 
states). And evidently the instantaneous interaction of the quantum potential, 

108 
D.J. Bohm and B. & Hiley 
which depends on [ ~(X1 ..... Xn, t)l, is a consequence of the fact that all 
particles are considered at the same time, in the definition of the quantum 
state. 
Clearly, there is something deeply noncovariant in this procedure. We 
would, however, remove this noncovariance by introducing here the new 
concept of a particular time frame associated with each stable many-body 
system in a stationary (or quasistationary) state. Systems moving at different 
speeds would have different time frames related by a Lorentz transformation. 
In this way, we have extended our descriptive form of supersystem, 
system, and subsystem by proposing that the relevant time order for sub- 
systems (e.g., atoms) in a system (e.g., a solid block of matter) depends on 
the overall state of movement of the whole system, and is not (as implied 
in classical and commonsense notions of time) fixed in a way that is inde- 
pendent of the state of the whole system. Moreover, general relativity shows 
that this time order depends even on the states of supersystems (e.g., on the 
gravitational fields of the surrounding matter and of the cosmos as a whole). 
The time order that belongs to a system is not only relevant for 
descriptive purposes. It is also relevant dynamically in the sense that each 
system has a certain characteristic time frame, within which "instantaneous" 
interactions between subsystems are possible. But, as indicated earlier, this 
theory may still be covariant, first because the same laws hold for all systems, 
regardless of their speeds, and second, because these "instantaneous" inter- 
actions may not be capable of carrying a signal. 
In this way, the concept of time (and ultimately of space) may be 
enriched, not only to fit the principles of relativity, but also to harmonize 
with the general spirit underlying a relativistic approach. For the relevant 
time order of a subsystem is now relative to the system and supersystem 
within which the subsystem participates. This makes the time order well 
defined, i.e., nonarbitrary, without, however, implying a universally fixed 
and absolute order of time. 
We see then that with the aid of an intuitive understanding of quantum 
mechanics, we are led to the possibility of new ways of looking at both 
quantum theory and relativity theory, along with new ways of bringing 
them together in terms of novel concepts of time (and space) order. Work 
is now going on along these lines. We hope to report on it later. 
REFERENCES 
1. A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935). 
2. E. SchrSdinger, Proe. Camb. Phil. Soc. 31, 555 (1935). 
3. J. S. Bell, Physics 1, 195 (1964). 
4. S. J. Freedman and J. F. Clauser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 938 (1972). 

Intuitive Understanding of Nonloeality as Implied by Quantum Theory 
109 
5. N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press, 
1934); Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge (Wiley, New York, 1958). 
6. J. M. Jauch and C. Piron, Helv. Phys. Acta 42, 842 (1969). 
7. D. Finkelstein, Phys. Rev. 184, 1261 (1969). 
8. D. Bohm, Phys. Rev. 85, 166, 180 (1952). 
9. D. Bohm and J.-P. Vigier, Phys. Rev. 96, 208 (1954). 
10. F. W. Vinen, Rep. Progr. Phys. 31, 61 (1968); see also H. A. Mook, R. Scherm, and 
M. K. Wilkinson, Phys. Rev. A 6, 2268 (1972). 
11. D. Bohm, Found. Phys. 1, 359 (1971); Found. Phys. 3, 139 (1973). 
12. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley, and A. E. G. Stuart, lnt. J. Theoret. Phys. 3, 171 (1970). 

