Foundations of Physics, Vol. 21, No. 2, 1991 
On the 
Theory 
Relativistic Invariance of a Quantum 
Based on Beables 
D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley ~ 
Received September 17, 1990 
We discuss the question of the relativistic invariance of a quantum theory based 
on beables, and we suggest the general outlines of one possible form of such a 
theory. 
It gives us great pleasure to write this article on the occasion of John Bell's 
sixtieth birthday, especially because he has shown a sustained and critical 
interest in finding an interpretation of the quantum theory that is not based 
on measuring instruments and observables, but rather on what he has 
called beables. Nonrelativistically it appears that there is no serious dif- 
ficulty in doing this. (13). However, because of quantum nonlocality, the 
extension to special relativity is not obvious. Nevertheless it raises some 
interesting questions which we shall discuss in this paper and which we 
hope may help resolve some of the problems pointed out by BellJ 4) 
We base our discussion on our proposed ontological approach. (1,2) 
Briefly we assume the electron is a particle guided by the quantum field 
according to the equation 
p~=V~S 
(1) 
where Pi is the momentum of the ith particle and xi is its coordinate, while 
S is determined by 
~(Xl "''X n, t):R(Xl""xn, 
t) expI~S(Xl"'Xn, 
t)] 
i Department of Physics, Birbeck College, University of London, Malet Street, London 
WCIE 7HX, United Kingdom. 
243 
0015-9018/91/0200-0243506.50/0 © 1991 Plenum Publishing Corporation 

244 
Bohm and Hiley 
With these assumptions it follows from Schr6dinger's equation that each 
particle is acted on not only by the classical potential, but also by the 
quantum potential 
h 2 
V~R 
Q=-2--~ 
R 
(2) 
It is further assumed that in a statistical ensemble of systems with the same 
wave function, i.e., in the same quantum state, the probability is given by 
P(xl---x., t)= R2(x~---x., t) 
(3) 
It also follows from Schr6dinger's equation that l t//j 2 satisfies the conserva- 
tion equation 
O I~I20t 
+~ V~fV~S- 1012 j=O 
(4) 
This means that if P= I~,12 initially, this will hold for all times. 
We then extend our model to incorporate an additional stochastic 
component of the velocity of the particles, in which v¢ = (ViS)/m will now 
be the mean velocity of the ith particle, while the stochastic component will 
be ~ which varies at random. We show (s) that an arbitrary initial proba- 
bility distribution will then approach 1012 . With these assumptions, it can 
then be shown that all the usual statistical results of quantum theory 
follow. We are able to do this without giving a primary role to measuring 
instruments or to observables. Rather, everything, including the process of 
measurement itself, is discussed in terms of beables. These beables are the 
particle variables and the wave function. 
Because the quantum potential does not depend on the intensity of the 
wave function but only on its form, it is possible to have a strong and 
direct connection between distant particles. It is this connection that, in our 
interpretation, explains the nonlocality implied by the failure of the predic- 
tions of quantum theory to satisfy the Bell inequality. (6~ This nonlocality 
further implies an instantaneous connection, as has indeed been confirmed 
in the experiments of Aspect et aL (7'8). The question at issue here is then 
that of how such nonlocality is to be reconciled with relativity. 
In order to bring this question into sharper focus, we outline here our 
extension of the ontological interpretation of the quantum theory to a 
relativistic context. (2's~ We begin with the one-particle Dirac equation. It 
follows from this equation that there is a conserved charge-current density 
whose time component is positive definite. This is 
j = ~t*lll~, 
j° = ~t* 0 
(5) 

Quantum Theory Based on Beables 
245 
with 
•jo 
%-T+v-j=o 
(6t 
As in the nonrelativistic case, we assume a definite particle trajectory, but 
now we define the velocity as 
*a~ 
(7) 
v-i~,l 2 
(It can easilty be shown that Ivl ~< c.) 
Noting that jo is equal to the particle density p, we obtain for the 
conservation equation 
~t+ V. (pv) =0 
(8) 
Equation (7) may be taken instead of Eq. (1) as the guidance relation. 
Then if we assume probability density P=p at any time, Eq. (8) will 
guarantee that it will hold for all time. 
The assumptions given here are sufficient to determine the one-particle 
theory completely. It is evident that this theory is Lorentz invariant in 
content because the Dirac equation is covariant and because from this it 
follows that Eq. (8) is also covariant. 
There is thus no real difficulty in finding a relativisticalls? covariant 
extension of our interpretation of the quantum theory for the one-particle 
system. However it does not follow that our further extension to a 
stochastic model is also Lorentz invariant. (5) Indeed it is well known that 
there are, as yet, unresolved difficulties in obtaining a consistent and 
covariant stochastic process because the noncompactness of the Lorentz 
group prevents us from defining a covariant velocity distribution in the 
way in which this can be done nonrelativistically. However, the interesting 
point here is that for an equilibrium distribution in which P has become 
equal to p= IOl 2, we do not need a retativistically covariant stochastic 
process. For it follows from the analysis given in Bohm and Hiley (5~ that 
P = 1~'12 will result even from noncovariant assumptions on the stochastic 
process. All the experimental results available thus far follow from the equi- 
librium distribution alone, This means that we can, in principle at least, 
obtain a statistically covariant theory of the single particle with experimen- 
tal results equivalent to those given by the current relativistic quantum 
mechanics. Moreover, we can do this on the basis of an underlying 
stochastic process that is not relativistically covariant. At present there is 
evidently no way experimentally to rule out this sort of theory. 

246 
Bohm and Hiley 
To raise the question of nonlocality, we have to go to a many-particle 
system. ~5) Firstly we define the wave function of the many-body system to 
be 
~=0il i. (xl""xn'"0 
where in represents the four possible values of the index for the nth particle. 
We take all particles at the same time t, noting that it can be shown that 
this can be done in a covariant way. (2'5~ 
From the N-body Dirac equation it follows that 
~* +~ Vn-~*a~ =0 
(9) 
Ot 
n 
where in the above we also sum over all the indices of all the particles. We 
define the density p(xl...xn...t)= 
I~tl 2 in the configuration space of all 
the particles. The guidance relation for the nth particle is then 
Ip 
*an ~t 
v. 
(10) 
P 
If P = p initially, it follows that this will hold for all time. And if we assume 
a suitable stochastic process, it further follows that an arbitrary initial 
value of P will eventually approach p. 
As long as we stay in a particular Lorentz frame, the above assump- 
tions provide a consistent ontological interpretation of the many-body 
Dirac equation. We should, however, add that the wave function of all the 
fermionic particles (which are the only ones obeying the Dirac equation) 
will have to be completely antisymmetric, so that the Pauli exclusion 
principle will apply. Then, as Dirac indeed proposed in his original work 
on this subject, the negative energy states of the vacuum are assumed to be 
full. (It can be shown that this approach is completely equivalent to the 
one that treats fermions in terms of anticommuting annihilation and 
creation operators/4)) Pair production is then, of course, brought about by 
the transition of a fermion from a negative to a positive energy state 
leaving behind a "hole" with opposite quantum numbers, e.g., charge. 
Although this theory is completely consistent when considered in any 
one Lorentz frame, it is not completely covariant in content. However, note 
that the Dirac equation itself and the continuity equation (9) are Lorentz 
covariant. The reason for this is that the guidance condition (10) has a 
nonlocal significance. That is to say, changes in position of any one particle 
will in general imply the possibility of corresponding instantaneous changes 
in the velocities of all the particles no matter how far apart they may be. 

Quantum Theory Based on Beables 
247 
This would seem at first sight to prevent us from extending our inter- 
pretation to a relativistic context. However, one can see this is not so, if 
one considers the fact that the statistical results of our theory depend only 
on the invariance of the Dirac equation [and with it Eq. (9)]. Thus we 
could assume a special favored frame in which nonlocal contacts could be 
instantaneous and in which there was a noncovariant stochastic process. 
Nevertheless, since the equilibrium probability distribution P= IOj 2 is the 
one that would hold for all present practical purposes, it would follow that 
the statistical results of all the quantum mechanical experiments that we 
can now do would be the same as in the usual interpretation and therefore 
be covariant. Evidently it is impossible at this stage to give any evidence 
that the above view is not correct. 
In effect we are in this way ted to a new model of quantum processes. 
We begin by assuming what may be called a subrelativistic level of 
stochastic process which is also subquantum mechanical (in the sense that 
the details of the stochastic process can never be revealed directly in any 
quantum mechanical experiment). The current quantum theory and 
relativity then follow only for the statistical results of the experiments. 
These do not depend sensitively on the details of the underlying model, 
rather as the laws of thermodynamics do not depend sensitively on the 
details of the underlying atomic model. So, at present, a wide range of sub- 
relativistic and subquantum mechanical models is open to us. 
To make our ideas a bit more definite, we could propose that the 
stochastic process holds only down to some definite length lo, which plays 
a role similar to that of the mean free path for ordinary particles under- 
going Brownian motion. (As we shall bring out later, lo is probably of 
the order of the Planck length.) For distances much greater than lo, the 
stochastic process will be a good approximation. But for distances of the 
order of lo or less, the stochastic treatment will fail and new qualities will 
reveal themselves. One may expect, for example, for waves of length of the 
order of lo, the current laws of quantum mechanics and relativity would 
break down even in a statistical context (e.g., as the laws of macroscopic 
physics break down for distances of the order of the mean free path.) This 
is at least one example of the new kinds of experimental results that would 
be possible and that could reveal the subrelativistic and subquantum 
mechanical level. 
Another possibility is that in the special frame in which instantaneous 
contact is possible, the speed of transmission of impulses is not infinite but 
still very much greater than that of light. In this case even the statistical 
predictions of the quantum theory would break down in measurements 
that were accurate enough to respond to such very short time differences. 
(This would almost certainly require accuracies far greater than available 
825/21/2-9 

248 
Bohm and Hiley 
in the Aspect et al. experimentsff '8)) In this case one would find in an EPR 
experiment, for example, that Bell's inequality would be satisfied with the 
use of instruments that responded to such short times, while they would 
not be satisfied in measurements that did not do this. Measurements made 
in such short times would in effect reestablish locality in the subrelativistic 
and subquantum level. 
To carry out experiments of this kind one would have to do something 
analogous to a Michelson-Morley experiment which, however, would 
involve an EPR-type situation. Let us suppose the velocity of the earth 
relative to the preferred frame is v. By measurements of EPR correlations 
at different times of the year we could not only find out which is the 
preferred frame, but also demonstrate the existence of the subretativistic 
and subquantum mechanical level. 
But what would a good surmise be for the value of v? One suggestion 
is that the preferred frame should be the one that is at rest in a system of 
coordinates in which the time axis connects the point in question to the 
origin of the universe. It seems reasonable to suggest that this would be 
close to the frame in which the 3°K radiation is isotropic. This is the sort 
of velocity we have to measure relative to the earth. 
Are there any reasons available at present which would lead us to sup- 
pose the domain of relativity is limited? Actually there are some. Firstly it 
is clear that Lorentz invariance fails for distances so large that the cur- 
vature of space becomes significant. Generally this is dealt with by saying 
that Lorentz invariance only holds in a tangent space mapping onto an 
infinitesimal part of the actual manifold. But in this approach, Lorentz 
invariance should become more and more applicable for shorter and 
shorter distances. However, one can give arguments showing that Lorentz 
invariance will also fail to hold for very short distances as we approach 
Planck length. 
To see how this comes about, let us consider a vector v" of ordinary 
length and regard it as made up of many smaller vectors 6v ~ which are on 
a straight line 
i 
Suppose that we make a Lorentz transformation. Strictly speaking, 
this cannot be defined without giving the metric tensor g,,. But at very 
short distances this tensor has large quantum fluctuations and does not 
reduce to its simple diagonal form. The Lorentz transformation will then 
give us 
= Z 

Quantum Theory Based on Beables 
249 
It is clear that what begins as a simple vector becomes transformed into a 
rather foggy distribution of constituent elements which are not well defined. 
So the whole idea of a simple Lorentz transformation of one line into 
another breaks down and this especially so as we go to very short distances 
for which the notion of tangent space has been assumed to apply. The idea 
of Lorentz invariance becomes relevant only over intermediate distances 
for which the fluctuations of g~ will average out to something relatively 
small, implying that g,~ can be taken as effectively constant. 
All of this suggests that the Lorentz group may not be as fundamentel 
as has generally been assumed. If it is not valid in the domain of very large 
distances, nor in the domain of very small distances, it may well cease to 
be valid in yet other domains. The analysis given earlier suggests that even 
at intermediate distances, it may cease to be valid for individual processes 
involving beables wherever quantum nontocality is important. 
It is understandable that there may be a great deal of reluctance even 
to contemplate giving up the notion that relativity and quantum mechanics 
are universally valid. To do so, however, may give us significant advan- 
tages. Firstly it provides a way of developing a point of view in which 
physical processes are intuitively intelligible so that we do not have to 
restrict ourselves to using mathematical algorithms for computing 
probabilities of experimental results without giving any idea of how these 
results come about. Secondly it permits us properly to confront the ques- 
tion of making a cosmological theory that is compatible with quantum 
mechanics. In the conventional interpretation there is no waL to do this 
because the apparatus would have to be outside the cosmos. (For further 
discussion of these two points, see Bohm and Hiley (2) and Hiley. (1°~ 
Finally it may help to resolve some of the difficulties in the quantum 
treatment of special and general relativity. Recall that special relativity 
leads to infinities. To be sure, these can be avoided by the algorithm of 
renormalization, but this algorithm contradicts the initial starting point. So 
the theory is ultimately not based on a set of logically coherent fundamen- 
tal principles, but rather on technical procedures brought in from outside 
such principles merely for the sake of avoiding certain difficulties. On the 
other hand, if there is ultimately a preferred frame, then there is no incon- 
sistency in assuming that there is a "cut off" somewhere near the Planck 
length beyond which the extrapolation of current laws is not appropriate. 
With regard to general relativity, we also avoid unresolved difficulties 
arising from the infinite fluctuations in gu~ at short distances. 
It therefore seems to us that it is worthwhile to keep open the options 
that relativity and quantum theory may have limited domains of 
applicability. At present there is, of course, no way to settle this issue, but 
still keeping an open mind on this question seems to be the best approach. 

250 
Bohm and Hiley 
We would further add that it is really a continuation of one of the 
basic traditions of physics to consider the possibility of a deeper level out 
of which emerges a very different level conforming to relativity and 
quantum theory. A case in point is the assumption of a deeper atomic level 
as something very different from the continuous macroscopic level of the 
older physics. Einstein's attempt to explain particles as singularities or 
pulses in a field is another such case. 
The new level always looks very different from the older one yet con- 
tains the latter as a limiting case or as an approximation. Our proposed 
new level is also very different from previous levels of physics. We explain 
these differences elsewhere, (~'2) but here we shall mention that it contains 
concepts that are very strange and new, such as nonlocality and the activity 
of information. It need hardly be surprising that behavior as strange as that 
of the quantum theory (and to some extent that of relativity too) would 
have to come out of a deeper level that was very different in crucial ways 
from those that have already been known. 
REFERENCES 
1. D. Bohm, B. J. Hiley, and P. N. Kaloyerou, Phys. Rep. 144, 321 (t987). 
2. D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe (An Ontological Interpretation of 
Quantum Mechanics) (Routledge, London, 1991). 
3. J. S. Bell, Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1987). 
4. J. S. Bell, Op. cir., Chap. 14. 
5. D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, Phys. Rep. 172, 93 (1989). 
6. J. S. Bell, Op. eit., Chap. 2. 
7. A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 91 (1982). 
8. A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804 (1982). 
9. S. S. Schweber, H. A. Bethe, and F. de Hoffmann, Mesons and Fields (Row Peterson, 
Illinois, 1955), Chap. 13. 
10. B. J. Hiley, "Vacuum or holomovement," in Bell's Theorem, Quantum Theory and Concep- 
tions of the Universe, K. Kafatos, ed. (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1989). 

