No
Foreword by Ellen Lupton
ON WEB
TYPOGRAPHY
Jason Santa Maria
Brief books for people who make websites
11
www.allitebooks.com

MORE FROM THE A BOOK APART LIBRARY
HTML5 for Web Designers
Jeremy Keith
CSS3 for Web Designers
Dan Cederholm
The Elements of Content Strategy
Erin Kissane
Responsive Web Design
Ethan Marcotte
Designing for Emotion
Aarron Walter
Mobile First
Luke Wroblewski
Design Is a Job
Mike Monteiro
Content Strategy for Mobile
Karen McGrane
Just Enough Research
Erika Hall
Sass for Web Designers
Dan Cederholm
You’re My Favorite Client
Mike Monteiro
Responsible Responsive Design
Scott Jehl
www.allitebooks.com

ON WEB
TYPOGRAPHY
Jason Santa Maria
www.allitebooks.com

Copyright © 2014 Jason Santa Maria
All rights reserved
Publisher: Jeffrey Zeldman
Designer: Jason Santa Maria
Editor-in-Chief: Mandy Brown
Editor: Tina Lee
Technical Editor: Nick Sherman
Copyeditor: Nicole Fenton 
Proofreader: Caren Litherland 
Compositor: Rob Weychert
Ebook Production: India Amos
ISBN: 978-1-9375570-7-2
A Book Apart
New York, New York
http://abookapart.com
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
www.allitebooks.com

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1
 5 
How We Read
Chapter 2
 13 
How Type Works
Chapter 3
 21 
Evaluating Typefaces
Chapter 4
 58 
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces
Chapter 5
 86 
Typographic Systems
Chapter 6
 109 
Composition
 
129 
Conclusion
 
130 
Resources
 
133 
Acknowledgements
 
135 
References
 
139 
Index
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

FOREWORD
Before users start reading a single word of text on a web­
site, they are already judging the typography. More than any 
other design element, type sends instant messages about a site’s 
content and purpose. Is this digital environment designed for 
reading, shopping, or gaming? Is it meant for experiencing over 
time or cruising by in a minute or two? Is its primary function 
to lead you through a process (subscribing to a service or an­
swering a survey), or does it aim to submerge you in content 
(reading an article, watching a video, or choosing a stock photo)? 
Typography—its size, style, and system—helps tell people what 
all this content is actually for.
The quality and tone of a website’s typography also sends 
instant messages about the people who made the site. Good 
type makes you look good. Bad type makes you look bad. Good 
type inspires confidence and trust; bad type triggers disdain and 
disgust. We’ve all landed on a website that we immediately know 
is a dumping ground for stolen content and crappy ads. Without 
even reading that come-on for pimple cream or the latest work-
at-home scheme, we’re already hitting the back button in search 
of a more savory place to invest our time.
Jason Santa Maria’s approachable guide to web typography 
narrates the thought process behind working with type, from 
choosing fonts to crafting hierarchies to building grids. Rather 
than handing down a list of rules and prohibitions, Santa Maria 
walks side by side with readers through a creative journey. 
He invites us to think about our own reading experience right 
now—as we peruse this book—by providing clear and compel­
ling examples for visual comparison. We the readers get to judge 
and evaluate different styles, combinations, and configurations 
of type, applied to real text that we can picture in the real world.
Designing for the web should always consider the needs 
of the user. This book considers the needs of you: the reader 
www.allitebooks.com

of these pages. Whether you are a developer or a designer, a 
student or a professional, a veteran of the web or a secret lover 
of print, you will find inspiration and guidance in this wise 
and kindly book, written by one of the web’s most respected 
typographic minds.
—Ellen Lupton
www.allitebooks.com

	
Introduction	 1	
INTRODUCTION
In the 1977 documentary film Powers of Ten, designers Charles 
and Ray Eames investigate what makes up the structure of our 
world and the universe, from the smallest particles to the most 
vast collections of matter (http://bkaprt.com/owt/1/). The film 
starts by focusing overhead on a couple having a picnic on a 
one-square-meter blanket (FIG 1). From there, we zoom out at 
one power of ten (see?) every ten seconds, all the way out to 
10²⁴—100 million light years from Earth. Then we retrace our 
path to the picnicking couple and delve through the powers of 
ten on a microscopic scale, down to 10–16 where quarks operate. 
The film shows how big things are made up of smaller things, 
and how the relationships of those smaller things are integral 
to forming the bigger ones. Even when we can’t perceive them 
all at the same time.
When I first saw the film, I had an immediate revelation. It 
put to words and pictures things I had never verbalized. The 
way everything is connected, whether implicitly or explicitly, 
is the same way I approach typographic design.
I often work by zooming in and out between the general 
and the specific, orchestrating the tone and message of a de­
sign. Type is design’s smallest atomic unit—the framework for 
everything we try to communicate with our boxes, grids, CSS 
properties, and the other elements that go into making a website.
Whether you move from largest to smallest or smallest to 
largest, these elements are spun from one another. The width 
of a grid column influences the line length of a paragraph. A 
typeface’s contrast influences how small you can set that type­
face so it’s still legible on your phone. The tools we use and the 
choices we make affect a design up and down the supply chain.
It’s this reflexive relationship that holds a design together—
the design equivalent of gravitational force. Okay, maybe not 
that far, but typography is the craft of setting type to give lan­
guage a visual form. Typography is a design’s voice.
This idea informs the way I like to work and helps me take 
a relaxed and practical approach to typography. I don’t mean I 
www.allitebooks.com

	
2	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
haphazardly throw letters around on a page, but I do believe 
that developing a feel for typography trumps an encyclopedic 
knowledge of its history.
Are you with me? Good!
WHAT THIS BOOK WILL DO
Get ready, because I want to show you how to see type beyond 
a pretty set of letters with flourishes. To see in and around a 
typeface. To know how it speaks.
I want to show you how to get to know the myriad typefaces 
out there, evaluate them for different purposes, and under­
stand how your choices affect the ways we read content and 
interpret design.
I want to show you ways to improve your typographic design 
right now. While typography is a centuries-old visual language, 
we need to see where it works and reinterpret where it falls 
short for the medium of the interactive screen, where to em­
brace old design methodologies, and where to diverge to create 
new ones.
FIG 1: The documentary short Powers of Ten by Charles and Ray Eames, 1977.
www.allitebooks.com

	
Introduction	 3	
I want to show you that even though this stuff can be difficult 
to wrap your head around, what you get back is well worth it. 
Being good at typography makes you a more adept thinker, com­
municator, and designer. When you immerse yourself in the fine 
details of text, you not only make yourself aware of those details 
and how they affect communication, but you also put yourself 
in your readers’ shoes.
Typography is a craft that rewards ongoing practice. This 
book will help you understand how the language of typography 
adapts when applied to the web and how to choose good type­
faces to support your designs.
And while this book is about typography for the web, it 
overlaps with a lot of good typographic methods that transcend 
any medium. We can distill good practices from the past, before 
type existed on glowing panels in front of our faces, and learn 
about specific considerations for the screen.
Don’t just throw up your hands and use Helvetica (or, gasp!, 
Arial). You can do better than that, and I’ll show you how.
What follows is my personal take on typography. It won’t be 
the same as everyone else’s, and some people may disagree with 
my approaches, but this represents most everything I’ve gleaned 
about designing with type. Some points may feel like common 
sense that don’t merit a mention. Some concepts may seem 
minor on their own, but they add up. Typography is a practice 
of small improvements made in concert to create a whole better 
than the sum of its parts.
Take these things to heart, and you will get better with type.


	
How We Read	 5	
HOW WE READ
1
I want you to think about what you’re doing right now. I mean 
really think about it. As your eyes move across these lines and 
funnel information to your brain, you’re taking part in a conver­
sation I started with you. The conveyance of that conversation 
is the type you’re reading on this page, but you’re also filtering 
it through your experiences and past conversations. You’re put­
ting these words into context. And whether you’re reading this 
book on paper, on a device, or at your desk, your environment 
shapes your experience too. Someone else reading these words 
may go through the same motions, but their interpretation is 
inevitably different from yours.
This is the most interesting thing about typography: it’s a 
chain reaction of time and place with you as the catalyst. The 
intention of a text depends on its presentation, but it needs you 
to give it meaning through reading.
Type and typography wouldn’t exist without our need to 
express and record information. Sure, we have other ways to do 
those things, like speech or imagery, but type is efficient, flex­
ible, portable, and translatable. This is what makes typography 

	
6	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
not only an art of communication, but one of nuance and craft, 
because like all communication, its value falls somewhere on a 
spectrum between success and failure.
The act of reading is beautifully complex, and yet, once we 
know how, it’s a kind of muscle memory. We rarely think about 
it. But because reading is so intrinsic to every other thing about 
typography, it’s the best place for us to begin. We’ve all made 
something we wanted someone else to read, but have you ever 
thought about that person’s reading experience?
Just as you’re my audience for this book, I want you to look 
at your audience too: your readers. One of design’s functions is 
to entice and delight. We need to welcome readers and convince 
them to sit with us. But what circumstances affect reading?
READABILITY
Just because something is legible doesn’t mean it’s readable. 
Legibility means that text can be interpreted, but that’s like saying 
tree bark is edible. We’re aiming higher. Readability combines the 
emotional impact of a design (or lack thereof) with the amount 
of effort it presumably takes to read. You’ve heard of TL;DR (too 
long; didn’t read)? Length isn’t the only detractor to reading; 
poor typography is one too. To paraphrase Stephen Coles, the 
term readability doesn’t ask simply, “Can you read it?” but “Do 
you want to read it?” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/2/).
Each decision you make could potentially hamper a reader’s 
understanding, causing them to bail and update their Facebook 
status instead. Don’t let your design deter your readers or stand 
in the way of what they want to do: read.
Once we bring readers in, what else can we do to keep their 
attention and help them understand our writing? Let’s take a 
brief look at what the reading experience is like and how design 
influences it.
THE ACT OF READING
When I first started designing websites, I assumed everyone 
read my work the same way I did. I spent countless hours craft­
ing the right layout and type arrangements. I saw the work as a 

	
How We Read	 7	
collection of the typographic considerations I made: the lovingly 
set headlines, the ample whitespace, the typographic rhythm 
(FIG 1.1). I assumed everyone would see that too.
It’s appealing to think that’s the case, but reading is a much 
more nuanced experience. It’s shaped by our surroundings (am 
I in a loud coffee shop or otherwise distracted?), our availability 
(am I busy with something else?), our needs (am I skimming for 
something specific?), and more. Reading is not only informed 
by what’s going on with us at that moment, but also governed 
by how our eyes and brains work to process information. What 
you see and what you’re experiencing as you read these words is 
quite different.
As our eyes move across the text, our minds gobble up the 
type’s texture—the sum of the positive and negative spaces inside 
and around letters and words. We don’t linger on those spaces 
and details; instead, our brains do the heavy lifting of parsing 
the text and assembling a mental picture of what we’re reading. 
Our eyes see the type and our brains see Don Quixote chasing 
a windmill.
Or, at least, that’s what we hope. This is the ideal scenario, 
but it depends on our design choices. Have you ever been com­
pletely absorbed in a book and lost in the passing pages? Me too. 
Good writing can do that, and good typography can grease the 
wheels. Without getting too scientific, let’s look at the physical 
process of reading.
Saccades and fixations
Reading isn’t linear. Instead, our eyes perform a series of back 
and forth movements called saccades, or lightning-fast hops 
across a line of text (FIG 1.2). Sometimes it’s a big hop; some­
times it’s a small hop. Saccades help our eyes register a lot of 
information in a short span, and they happen many times over 
the course of a second. A saccade’s length depends on our pro­
ficiency as readers and our familiarity with the text’s topic. If 
I’m a scientist and reading, uh, science stuff, I may read it more 
quickly than a non-scientist, because I’m familiar with all those 
science-y words. Full disclosure: I’m not really a scientist. I hope 
you couldn’t tell.

	
8	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
FIG 1.2: Saccades are the leaps that happen in a split second as our eyes move across 
a line of text.
FIG 1.3: Fixations are the brief moments of pause between saccades.
FIG 1.1: A humble bit of text. But what actually happens when someone reads it?

	
How We Read	 9	
Between saccades, our eyes stop for a fraction of a second in 
what’s called a fixation (FIG 1.3). During this brief pause we see 
a couple of characters clearly, and the rest of the text blurs out 
like ripples in a pond. Our brains assemble these fixations and 
decode the information at lightning speed. This all happens on 
reflex. Pretty neat, huh?
The shapes of letters and the shapes they make when com­
bined into words and sentences can significantly affect our 
ability to decipher text. If we look at an average line of text and 
cover the top halves of the letters, it becomes very difficult to 
read. If we do the opposite and cover the bottom halves, we can 
still read the text without much effort (FIG 1.4).
This is because letters generally carry more of their identi­
fying features in their top halves. The sum of each word’s let­
terforms creates the word shapes we recognize when reading.
Once we start to subconsciously recognize letters and com­
mon words, we read faster. We become more proficient at read­
ing under similar conditions, an idea best encapsulated by type 
designer Zuzana Licko: “Readers read best what they read most.”
FIG 1.4: Though the letters’ lower halves are covered, the text is still mostly legible, 
because much of the critical visual information is in the tops of letters.

	
10	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
It’s not a hard and fast rule, but close. The more foreign the 
letterforms and information are to us, the more slowly we dis­
cern them. If we traveled back in time to the Middle Ages with 
a book typeset in a super-awesome sci-fi font, the folks from 
the past might have difficulty with it. But here in the future, 
we’re adept at reading that stuff, all whilst flying around on 
hoverboards.
For the same reason, we sometimes have trouble deciphering 
someone else’s handwriting: their letterforms and idiosyncrasies 
seem unusual to us. Yet we’re pretty fast at reading our own 
handwriting (FIG 1.5).
There have been many studies on the reading process, with 
only a bit of consensus. Reading acuity depends on several fac­
tors, starting with the task the reader intends to accomplish. 
Some studies show that we read in word shapes—picture a chalk 
outline around an entire word—while others suggest we decode 
things letter by letter. Most findings agree that ease of reading 
FIG 1.5: While you’re very familiar with your own handwriting, reading someone else’s (like 
mine!) can take some time to get used to.

	
How We Read	 11	
relies on the visual feel and precision of the text’s setting (how 
much effort it takes to discern one letterform from another), 
combined with the reader’s own proficiency.
Consider a passage set in all capital letters (FIG 1.6). You can 
become adept at reading almost anything, but most of us aren’t 
accustomed to reading lots of text in all caps. Compared to the 
normal sentence-case text, the all-caps text feels pretty impen­
etrable. That’s because the capital letters are blocky and don’t 
create much contrast between themselves and the whitespace 
around them. The resulting word shapes are basically plain 
rectangles (FIG 1.7).
Realizing that the choices we make in typefaces and typeset­
ting have such an impact on the reader was eye-opening for me. 
Small things like the size and spacing of type can add up to great 
advantages for readers. When they don’t notice those choices, 
we’ve done our job. We’ve gotten out of their way and helped 
them get closer to the information.
FIG 1.6: Running text in all caps can be hard to read quickly when we’re used to 
sentence case.

	
12	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
STACKING THE DECK
Typography on screen differs from print in a few key ways. 
Readers deal with two reading environments: the physical space 
(and its lighting) and the device. A reader may spend a sunny day 
at the park reading on their phone. Or perhaps they’re in a dim 
room reading subtitles off their TV ten feet away. As designers, 
we have no control over any of this, and that can be frustrating. 
As much as I would love to go over to every reader’s computer 
and fix their contrast and brightness settings, this is the hand 
we’ve been dealt.
The best solution to unknown unknowns is to make our 
typography perform as well as it can in all situations, regardless 
of screen size, connection, or potential lunar eclipse. We’ll look 
at some methods for making typography as sturdy as possible 
later in this book.
It’s up to us to keep the reading experience unencumbered. At 
the core of typography is our audience, our readers. As we look 
at the building blocks of typography, I want you to keep those 
readers in mind. Reading is something we do every day, but we 
can easily take it for granted. Slapping words on a page won’t en­
sure good communication, just as mashing your hands across a 
piano won’t make for a pleasant composition. The experience of 
reading and the effectiveness of our message are determined by 
both what we say and how we say it. Typography is the primary 
tool we use as designers and visual communicators to speak.
FIG 1.7: Our ability to recognize words is affected by the shapes they form. All-caps text 
forms blocky shapes with little distinction, while mixed-case text forms irregular shapes 
that help us better identify each word.
www.allitebooks.com

	
How Type Works	 13	
There are no rules in typography.
This is the hardest fact for people to grapple with when they 
try to familiarize themselves with the rules, because there aren’t 
any. We have principles, best practices, and methods that work 
most of the time, but nothing that works all of the time. We can 
do our best to ensure that something is durable: good-sized type 
for reading, plenty of whitespace, pleasing typefaces, and visual 
appeal, but we can’t account for all environments and devices, 
which are often in flux. Learning typography is about figuring 
out what choices work best for each situation.
Whether we’re the designers or the readers, we’re all part of 
the audience for those choices. From the moment we wake up 
to the time we go to bed, we’re bombarded by type: newspapers 
and magazines, signs on subways and freeways, emails and web­
sites, the myriad interfaces and labels adorning everything we 
touch. We’re exposed to more type each day than at any other 
point in history. Type is pervasive—and thus so is typography—
yet bad typography remains. Why?
HOW TYPE 
WORKS2

	
14	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Put plainly, good typography is hard. And the sheer number 
of options we have can feel overwhelming.
For one, more typefaces exist than any one person could use 
in a lifetime. Typeface families themselves are enormously in­
tricate, some containing thousands of glyphs, and each of them 
containing many small details. Filtering through the options 
is a Sisyphean task. You also have to consider the elements of 
composition. Things like size, spacing, color, and tone all affect 
the reading experience.
The bulk of typography, if done well, isn’t supposed to be 
noticed. Unlike a painting, song, or other creative output, type 
is a means, not an end. It’s often said that good typography is 
invisible. Readers may only snap to the realization of the pres­
ence of type when they struggle with understanding what it’s 
trying to convey. Namely: when typography fails.
When it comes to designing for the screen, we have even 
more considerations, from new devices with new screen reso­
lutions every month, to techniques like responsive web design 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/3/), let alone the constant temptation for 
visitors to click away from your site. With all these elements on 
the table, it’s no wonder that many people find the prospect of 
using type a bit daunting.
But by creating websites, we assume the role of communica­
tors. Whether you are a designer, writer, developer, or anyone 
contributing to a site, your work is connected to communica­
tion. Luckily, we have history on our side—many approaches 
to typography from centuries’ worth of print design hold up 
on the web. We can stand on the shoulders of those who came 
before us. But first, let’s dig deeper into typography’s purpose.
WHY TYPOGRAPHY MATTERS
Whether online, in print, or on the side of a spaceship, typogra­
phy is the primary vehicle we use as designers to communicate 
our message. When we get it right, it’s powerful. And to do it 
well, we need to strike the balance between beauty and ­utility—
and then disappear into the night.
Typography is one of your greatest design assets. It’s not 
visual decoration or something that gets added at the end to 

	
How Type Works	 15	
spice up a design. Good typography gives spirit to words and is 
a potent mechanism to inform and delight.
It doesn’t matter how well-considered your layout is, how 
wonderful your website’s interactions, code, colors, imagery, 
or writing are. If your type is bad, the design fails.
Typography is communication
Most of the communicative heavy-lifting in our designs hinges 
on text. And because we’re inundated with things asking for our 
attention, our typography needs to put its best foot forward. 
That means setting our type to avoid getting in our readers’ 
way, and nudging them to give us a moment of their busy day. 
Through our typography, we’re often politely asking: “Will you 
look at this?” With the glut of information out there, that ques­
tion becomes a tricky proposition. Most people are short on 
time. By not caring, by not attending to your typography, you 
might as well close the browser window for them.
Through type, we’re able to communicate our message and 
play with the tone and tenor of the delivery. Just as different 
musicians perform the same song differently, we can take a 
variety of approaches to the way we deliver a message.
With that in mind, you want to equip yourself with the best 
tools you can find, so you have the best shot at someone say­
ing, “Yes! I want to read this!” Well, they likely won’t say it out 
loud, but if you get them to stick around for a little while, that’s 
just as good. You want to grab people and pique their interest.
AN EMBARRASSMENT OF RICHES
Given type’s critical nature, it’s no wonder we have so many 
typefaces to choose from. If you open the font menu in any ap­
plication on your computer, you’ll see quite a long list of fonts. 
Companies like Apple and Microsoft bundle fonts with their 
operating systems so you have a selection of basic options when 
you want to make something.
What’s staggering to most people is how many fonts are out 
there. No one has an exact figure, but according to Karen Cheng, 
author of Designing Type, we have well over fifty thousand 

	
16	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
commercial typeface families out in the world, and even more 
free fonts and typefaces that never made the leap from the analog 
world of wood and metal type.
With that many fonts, you may ask why anyone would want 
to design new ones. Like the clothes we wear or the cars we 
drive, typefaces are a response to time, place, and culture. As 
our world and technologies change, so too must our means to 
communicate. New typefaces are welcome additions to our 
growing palette.
That said, we shouldn’t leave behind some tried and true 
classics. While new typefaces have the ability to respond to tech­
nological advancements, old typefaces have design equity. Like a 
family legend that gets passed down through generations, they 
amass gravity and history. At times, these traditional typefaces 
capture a moment or feeling just by their presence. They’re also 
a foundation for many new faces.
Until recently, the majority of typefaces were created for 
traditional printing processes. Type designers took factors into 
account like the thickness and texture of paper, how ink gets 
absorbed and dries, and the speed and physics with which 
printing happens. As an example, Matthew Carter designed 
Bell Centennial—a replacement for Chauncey H. Griffith’s Bell 
Gothic—for AT&T with the printing of telephone books in 
mind.
Bell Centennial included a key design feature called ink traps, 
small notches cut into the tightest corners of letters to give ink a 
place to spread as it dries (FIG 2.1). At the time, telephone books 
were printed on newsprint, which tends to absorb and spread 
ink. The ink traps allowed the letters to expand to their intended 
shapes during the printing process. Without them, the letters 
would have been an over-inked blobby mess.
Carter’s design was a response to the conditions the typogra­
phy needed to withstand: high-speed printing with low-quality 
paper. These letters may look odd when you see them in their 
pre-printed form, but that’s because they aren’t finished until 
after printing. We don’t need to accommodate ink traps on a 
digital screen, but we have plenty of other things to worry about.

	
How Type Works	 17	
FIG 2.1: Bell Centennial has notches that fill with ink during printing to complete its 
letterforms. Without these ink traps, the tighter intersections would overfill as messy blobs.
FIG 2.2: Georgia (pictured) and Verdana were designed as bitmaps first, outlines afterward. 
Image courtesy of Matthew Carter.

	
18	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
In the mid-1990s, Microsoft approached Carter to design 
typefaces for screen use. Verdana and Georgia are the most no­
table and lasting results of Carter’s work. He started with bitmap 
fonts to match screen-rendering environments at the time. He 
then translated those forms into the smooth vectors that we 
know today as Verdana and Georgia (FIG 2.2). As he had with 
Bell Centennial, Carter optimized these typefaces for the current 
state of the medium, considering the attributes of the screen 
that affected their display. Both typefaces have a large lowercase 
height and ample spacing between letters to aid legibility. And 
while many designers may be a little tired of their pervasive 
presence, Verdana and Georgia remain among the most sturdy 
and realized workhorses for onscreen type ever made.
As display resolutions sharpen and rendering engines evolve, 
we need new typefaces that keep the conditions for screen-based 
media in mind. Visual communication on the web is growing 
up fast. Let’s look at how far we’ve come.
TYPE ON THE WEB
We are just on the other side of a transitional state in typography. 
Until recently, if you wanted to get type onto a web page, you 
were limited to a few options.
System fonts
You could take the easiest route and tell a browser to use fonts 
installed on nearly every computer. Popular examples include 
Times, Verdana, Arial, and Georgia.
Images
You could load your typeface as an image, which freed you to 
use any typeface you had on your computer. The downside? The 
text was locked inside the image, which meant it was forever 
fixed at specific dimensions and resolution. And unless you took 
additional steps for accessibility, the text wouldn’t be selectable, 
searchable, or translatable.

	
How Type Works	 19	
Text replacement
You could also programmatically hide text on a page with combi­
nations of images, CSS, Flash, or JavaScript. Any hidden text was 
then replaced with an image or a pseudo-font file (e.g., a Flash 
file that contained the font’s outlines). While these methods 
were more extensible than text images in some ways, they could 
feel foreign to readers, have mixed results with accessibility, 
and be difficult to maintain. In some cases, they even required 
additional technology (e.g., a Flash plugin).
Thankfully, all major browsers now support the CSS 
@font-face rule, which allows websites to link to font files like 
any other asset. Type foundries like Typotheque and Hoefler & 
Co. (formerly Hoefler & Frere-Jones) offer web licenses and host­
ing for their typefaces. Other companies like Typekit, Webtype, 
and Fontdeck offer subscription services with typefaces from 
various foundries. Specifying font files for your web pages is as 
easy as dropping a few lines of code into your CSS. For more 
on that, check out Paul Irish’s article “Bulletproof @font-face 
Syntax” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/4/).
Loading fonts for use on a website isn’t without its flaws. 
Like other assets, font files need to be loaded from a server, 
and they can be rather large. People aren’t accustomed to wait­
ing for every page asset to load just to serve up some text. But 
@font-face is easier, more accessible, and more future-proof 
than the old methods, and it’s only getting better as font files get 
smaller and we develop better ways to handle the user experi­
ence while assets load.
Web typography has made huge strides in a short amount 
of time. We can now reliably use fonts outside of the handful 
of typefaces that are pre-installed on our readers’ devices. CSS 
gives us more fine-tuned control over typography than ever 
before. We’ve broken away from less desirable, and sometimes 
inaccessible, methods like using images of actual font files. All 
of these changes mean we have better options for communicat­
ing in our designs. But as web practitioners, we not only need 
to be conversant in the technical side of designing for the web, 
but we also need to understand the visual nature of typefaces.

	
20	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
THE LANGUAGE OF TYPE
Half of the battle in understanding typography for the web or 
any other context is becoming familiar enough to talk about it. 
To know how to point out a serif or lowercase numeral. To be 
able to talk about the counters in letters or the kerning between 
them. As with other highly specialized skills, if you aren’t the 
one who is ultimately responsible for bringing a design to frui­
tion, you need to know enough to discuss it with the people who 
are. I may not know how to configure a server from scratch, but 
I know enough to have a conversation with an engineer about it. 
Being fluent in typography makes you part of the design process, 
and that’s exactly where you want to be.
To develop your gut instinct for typography, start by learn­
ing the language of type. It will take your typography from 
mere words on a page to something that resonates. Learn what 
a descender and an ear are; recognize the differences between 
pixels, percentages, and ems when sizing type; know when to 
use small caps, an em dash, and more. Get the basic principles, 
or the stuff that works most of the time, under your belt and 
then take the leap on your own.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 21	
Type is a tool. You need to understand the components of 
a typeface family to evaluate its potential. When it comes to 
designing for various screen sizes, internet connections, and 
browser capabilities, the importance of the decisions you make 
is compounded. Having a working knowledge of how a typeface 
fits into those considerations as a design asset will help you make 
decisions beyond what you see on the surface.
In this chapter, we’ll look at some of the structural patterns 
in typefaces and see how they’re grouped and sorted. Then, 
we’ll examine what makes typefaces look the way they do from 
a visual and a technical perspective. But first, we need to talk 
about terminology.
FONT VERSUS TYPEFACE
Two common terms you’ll see thrown around when talking 
about typography are typeface and font. Typeface is the name 
for the design in full, whether it’s a style or family of styles. 
3
EVALUATING 
TYPEFACES

	
22	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
For example, Helvetica is a typeface. Font refers to the format 
or storage mechanism for that design. Helvetica.ttf is a font.
Typefaces can be made up of numerous font files. No matter 
how many files there are, it’s still one typeface. Nick Sherman 
gave us a great analogy to remember the distinction: a typeface 
is to a font as a song is to an mp3 (http://bkaprt.com/owt/5/).
How much does this distinction matter in day-to-day con­
versation? It depends on whom you ask. Most people use the 
two terms interchangeably. A friend might call me and ask, 
“What’s a good font to use for the recipe I want to send my 
sister?” What they really mean is “typeface,” but that’s not the 
important thing here. The important thing is that my friend is 
talking about typography.
That’s a huge step in getting people more comfortable with 
type! Does that mean you should let imperfect uses of “font” 
slide? Sometimes, yes. But since you know the difference be­
tween the two, you can also use it as an opportunity for teach­
ing, not correcting (type lovers who spend the day swooning 
over typefaces have a hard enough time convincing others that 
we totally know how to party, thank you very much). Helping 
collaborators understand what’s behind your choices lays the 
groundwork for better design discussions.
CLASSIFICATIONS
All typefaces fall into some sort of classification. Unlike the 
scientific organization of the animal kingdom, however, there 
has been little consensus on one scheme to rule them all. We 
struggle with these systems, because typefaces are thoroughly 
dynamic works diverse in visual structure, intent, influences, 
and historical context. Defining a classification system that 
comfortably accommodates typefaces from 500 years ago as well 
as five months ago—and getting everyone to agree on it—is not 
an enviable task. Fortunately, a foundation has settled enough 
for us to build on.
You’re probably familiar with these classifications in a casual 
capacity. Groupings like serif, sans serif, and script are well known 
(FIG 3.1). More descriptive subclassifications exist to reference 
a particular set of physical traits or time periods. For instance, 
www.allitebooks.com

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 23	
some common subclassifications for serif are Old Style (e.g., 
Bembo) and Modern (e.g., Bodoni).
 When thinking about typefaces for use in my designs, I 
mentally sort them into a few common groups: serif, sans serif, 
slab serif, script, monospace, and decorative (which is mostly 
made up of anything that doesn’t fit into those other categories). 
Obviously, these groups don’t represent all typefaces, but they 
work for the majority. Understanding the most basic classifica­
tions helps you filter the vast number of typefaces out there, and 
can be handy for searching on the web when you have a rough 
idea of the look or feel you’re after.
While each classification evokes a kind of feeling, it’s rarely 
something you can grab hold of because of how broad the clas­
sifications are. Two given typefaces may belong to the same class 
but spark very different responses, depending on their intended 
use or when they were made. Look to the typefaces themselves 
to support a feeling or mood in your design.
While not comprehensive, these working classifications help 
me sort typefaces against a mix of physical attributes and usage. 
For example, decorative isn’t just a synonym for fancy type; it 
describes the context for using a typeface. A decorative typeface 
could have serifs or be a script or monospaced, but its overriding 
characteristics likely prevent it from everyday use.
Thinking of typefaces this way lets me slice my work into 
smaller chunks. If I’m designing a website that has articles, I’m 
generally looking at typefaces for running text. Most of what 
I’m after will fall in the serif and sans serif classifications, as 
typefaces in other groupings will be too distracting for long 
FIG 3.1: Examples of common typeface classifications.

	
24	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
stretches of text. Along those lines, if I’m looking for a typeface 
to set my new tagline across the top of a website, I may look at 
more decorative or distinct typefaces first.
Beyond the traditional classifications, there is another cat­
egory of typefaces: icon fonts. Icon fonts have characters filled 
with symbols other than letters (FIG 3.2). Pictograms in font 
form—also known as dingbat, symbol, picture, or pi fonts—have 
been around for a long time, but the urge to use them online is 
rising. There are clear, practical benefits: a scalable version of 
your logo or a shopping cart icon that you can size and color 
with CSS, while keeping the icons bundled as a single loaded 
asset. The benefits compound with responsive web design, since 
your icons can always scale up and down to the right size to suit 
a range of screens and resolutions.
 But icon fonts can run into trouble online. Some of them 
remap individual letters to pictures, leaving little regard for 
FIG 3.2: An example of an icon font from Font Awesome (http://bkaprt.com/owt/6/).

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 25	
someone using a screen reader, which may read the letter e aloud 
while displaying an icon of an envelope onscreen. For examples 
of icon fonts and best practices, check out Filament Group’s 
handy article “Bulletproof Accessible Icon Fonts” (http://bkaprt.
com/owt/7/). I have found, however, that the cons of icon fonts 
outweigh the pros, and I tend to agree with Chris Coyier and his 
article “Inline SVG vs Icon Fonts [Cagematch]” (http://bkaprt.
com/owt/8/)—SVG is the more flexible solution.
Classifications, whether your own personal divisions or ones 
from an established system, can be a rabbit hole of information 
and history. And while they’re interesting—especially when 
you want to geek out on type—you don’t necessarily need to 
discern the minutiae of time periods and serif brackets to do 
your job. Classifications are helpful in the same way knowing 
about the history of jazz or rock ’n’ roll can make you a better 
musician: they allow you to sort typefaces across criteria and 
find aesthetic and mental connections to help communicate your 
design. Sometimes these links are interesting juxtapositions or 
cultural references. Indra Kupferschmid covers classifications 
in detail and proposes a more flexible system for the future 
in “Type Classifications Are Useful, But the Common Ones Are 
Not” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/9/). Knowing about classifications 
makes you a better designer, because you can traverse these 
connections and use them to your advantage.
PHYSICAL TRAITS
Classification is only one facet of why a typeface may look and 
feel a certain way. But what causes some typefaces to appear 
larger than others when set at the same size? What causes them 
to feel lighter or heavier? And what makes the same letter look 
different from one typeface to another? The answers to these 
questions will help you understand the visual differences be­
tween typefaces. Understanding these traits lets you trace the 
varied ways typefaces approach and solve the same problems.
Typefaces are specialized tools, but they’re also the expres­
sive creation of a typeface designer. Some of the choices those 
designers make when creating a typeface may be based on a per­
sonal preference or technical reason. The sum of these choices 

	
26	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
influences the features we judge when choosing a typeface: leg­
ibility, flexibility, contrast, and more. Similar to classifications, a 
working knowledge of these traits gives you the power to speak 
confidently about typography—and helps you make mental con­
nections between typefaces that share traits.
You’re probably familiar with the basics of type: upper­
case and lowercase letters, numbers, punctuation, and some 
special characters. Like any rich visual art form, typography 
has a vast depth of terminology to describe the diverse parts of 
letterforms. While you could fill another book discussing type 
anatomy—like Stephen Coles’s The Anatomy of Type: A Graphic 
Guide to 100 Typefaces—I’d like to point out the most common 
parts of letters you’ll encounter.
All letterforms are made up of a variety of strokes, a gen­
eral term for most parts of a letter (FIG 3.3). Typefaces whose 
strokes vary in width to several degrees, from hairline thin to 
very broad, are known as high-contrast. Typefaces whose stroke 
widths are consistent throughout are monoline designs. Some 
strokes are straight and long, like the stem on a lowercase h or 
the descender on a p, while others are short and curved, like the 
neck and ear on a two-story g. Some strokes resolve in serifs, 
while others, as you sometimes see in the top hook of an f, can 
end in a bulbous shape as a ball terminal or a teardrop shape as 
a lachrymal terminal. Some strokes encase whitespace in what’s 
called a counter, like the inside of an o.
Understanding the vocabulary of type helps you discover 
why a typeface looks the way it does, when or where it comes 
FIG 3.3: Some common parts of typeface anatomy.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 27	
from, and its intended purpose. And greater knowledge of your 
tools means you’re better equipped to make good decisions. 
Later in this chapter, we’ll take a closer look at two familiar 
typefaces, Helvetica and Georgia, to see how we can extend this 
vocabulary to new typefaces.
In addition, a strong vocabulary for type is excellent when 
you’re critiquing work. For instance, when you see inconsistent 
strokes or when something within a design feels off balance, 
you can point to a specific piece by name, rather than saying 
something like “that wiggly bit.” That precision results in more 
productive discussions. For more information on why letters 
look the way they do, check out Tim Brown’s article “Drawing 
Letters” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/10/).
EM BOX
Aside from the anatomical differences, typefaces also vary in 
physical size, and much of that variance depends on the relative 
size of the em. Despite the name, em does not refer to the size of 
the capital letter M in a given font. Rather, an em is a relative unit 
of measurement that’s equal to your font size. So, if your text is 
set at 16 pixels, 1 em is equal to 16 pixels. This relative nature of 
the em is why it’s so useful for responsive web design instead 
of fixed pixel measurements.
With ems, as far as the font is concerned, each character ex­
ists within a bounding box whose height is always 1 em (in this 
case, 16 pixels tall) but whose width varies (FIG 3.4).
FIG 3.4: Two typefaces that appear to 
be different sizes despite being set to 
the same pixel size.

	
28	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
That part is easy to grasp, but what many folks find trouble­
some is that the em is merely the available height of each charac­
ter’s canvas, and no rules state how much space a character can 
take up inside that box. We get this invisible box from a time 
when a type designer quite literally had a physical block upon 
which to design each letter—when fonts were tools made of 
metal and wood (FIG 3.5).
If you’ve ever set text in one font, changed it to another, and 
then noticed the text got smaller or larger even though you’re 
using the same numerical font size, it’s because of the difference 
in how large the glyphs were drawn in relation to the em (FIG 
3.6). The font you switched to is designed to be smaller—a deci­
sion that resides with the type designer.
When it comes to web fonts, a type designer’s intent has big 
implications for your design. Each web font you choose means 
a little more wait time for users as browsers load the font file. 
Some browsers handle that wait by displaying content as as­
sets are still loading. When that happens, you may briefly see 
page content in a default font and then see it redrawn in the 
correct font when it’s ready. The effect is a FOUT, or flash of 
unstyled text.
The more your web font veers in size or look from the brows­
er’s default font or your fallback font, the more noticeable the 
FOUT. The worst case is if your font fails to load entirely. If your 
layout depends heavily on the precise size of a font, it may break 
in unpredictable ways.
FIG 3.5: Some metal type. The physical 
dimensions of the metal around the 
letter make up the em canvas.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 29	
We do have methods to handle these issues, namely tools 
like Web Font Loader, which we’ll look at later in this chapter. 
What’s important to understand is that you need to consider 
the relative sizing of a typeface from a visual standpoint, not by 
numbers alone.
TYPEFACE CONTRAST
The contrast of a typeface refers to the differences in the thick 
and thin strokes of its characters. A monoline typeface has 
the absolute least amount of contrast. A typeface with low 
contrast has some, but relatively little, variation in the thick­
ness of its strokes. For instance, Helvetica features consistent 
stroke widths. Compare that to a high-contrast typeface like 
Bodoni, whose strokes vary from beefy to delicate, all in one 
letter (FIG 3.7).
Higher-contrast typefaces tend to be useful in small bursts or 
headlines, because the extreme variation in stroke width is bur­
densome in long text. Our eyes are attracted to the exceptions—
the stuff that looks different from everything else. Contrast is 
not only a duality of thicks and thins in the typeface, but it also 
involves the whitespace between and inside the letters. That 
variance adds up. I find I’m more likely to stop or slow down 
FIG 3.6: Setting the same text in two separate fonts at the same font-size can result in 
two visually different sizes.

	
30	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
and notice the letters, rather than read, when my eye encounters 
that kind of modulation.
A typeface with less contrast can create a smooth, welcoming 
rhythm for reading. Most typefaces intended for long-form text 
have medium to low contrast, which creates less interplay be­
tween the individual letters and words. This gives text a steadier 
visual rhythm as your eyes move across a line, which in turn 
aids readability. When we aren’t distracted by the exceptions, 
we can focus on the act of reading itself. On the other hand, too 
little contrast in stroke or distinction between letterforms, as in 
the case of Helvetica, can be unsuitable for long stretches of text 
because the letterforms appear too uniform, reducing legibility. 
Like most things in design, it’s about finding the right balance.
WEIGHTS AND STYLES
Many typeface families have at least four basic styles: regular 
(sometimes called roman or book), italic, bold, and bold italic. A 
style’s weight refers to the thickness of its strokes, or their bold­
ness. Posture refers to an alteration of the letter’s skeleton, like 
the difference between regular and italic. However, variations 
in style aren’t limited to weight and posture; they can include 
different optical sizes, numeral sets, and many other kinds of 
structural and stylistic alternates.
On the web, we commonly employ numerical CSS 
font-weight values. These currently range from 100 to 900—
nine in total, each on the whole hundred value—with the lightest 
weight at 100 and the heaviest at 900. Not all fonts include every 
weight (some may only have a single weight), but this serves as 
FIG 3.7: Two typefaces with differing contrasts.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 31	
a framework. While some typefaces deviate a little up or down 
the spectrum, most fonts place their normal or book weight at 
400 and their bold at 700. Since these names and numbers aren’t 
absolutely prescriptive, it’s best to make your judgment visually 
to be certain you have the weight you want.
The four basics are a standard minimum set of family mem­
bers, especially for text faces, but some typefaces are part of 
massive families. Take Titling Gothic by Font Bureau, the con­
densed sans serif used on the covers and chapter openings of 
the A Book Apart series. The style used for headlines is regular 
condensed, but it is only one of fifty-eight styles (!) that make 
up the Titling Gothic family. Family members range from very 
thin and condensed to very heavy and wide (FIG 3.8).
FIG 3.8: Some styles from the expansive Titling Gothic family.

	
32	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Many families include condensed and expanded widths, 
which are what they sound like: condensed and compressed widths 
feature narrower letterforms, while extended and expanded ones 
have wider letterforms (FIG 3.9).
Why would anyone need so many styles? It depends on what 
you’re designing. Flexibility is often one of my biggest consid­
erations when choosing a typeface. If I can create a good level 
of contrast by using different styles within a typeface family, it 
accomplishes a few important things. For one, it lets me stay 
stylistically consistent within my design. I can use different 
styles for headlines, subheads, and maybe even text, and they 
will all share a common background throughout the piece. That 
flexibility helps me establish a clear hierarchy while keeping the 
visual language simple.
FIG 3.9: Proxima Nova, a very large type family by Mark Simonson.
www.allitebooks.com

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 33	
I find that the more typefaces I use in a design, the weaker 
the design becomes. Many people say not to use more than 
one or two typefaces at the most. Though obviously not a rule, 
this can be a good guideline as it puts some constraints on your 
visual palette (FIG 3.10). Having a variety of typefaces can create 
a cacophony of mixed styles and messages. But when you work 
from a smaller pool of options, you allow yourself to rely on 
typographic attributes like size and color to create distinction. 
And those elements will naturally feel like they belong together, 
because they come from the same place.
Pay close attention to the members of a type family on the 
web, especially where browsers may try to fill in for a missing 
style. When text is set to bold or italic in CSS, the browser 
FIG 3.10: Liz Danzico’s personal site uses a single type family but still achieves design 
diversity among different kinds of content (http://bkaprt.com/owt/11/).

	
34	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
will first look for the appropriate font to render it. If that font 
is absent, the browser will try to formulate an italic or bold 
by artificially skewing or beefing up the letterforms from the 
existing font.
We call these pseudo or faux italics and bolds, and they’re the 
typographic equivalent of mistakenly tucking your shirt into 
your underwear (FIG 3.11). Italics are not merely slanted letters, 
but instead have different shapes adapted from the typeface’s 
normal upright style. Notice how the correct italic and bold 
seem tailored for their form? In this typeface, the italic letters de­
velop a slant and some trailing strokes, and some letters change 
drastically, like the lowercase a morphing from a two-story to a 
one-story letter. Now look at the faux italic. It’s literally a skewed 
version of the normal style. Some of the letters’ thinner bits look 
squished, and the counters appear misshapen.
Moving to the faux bold, the letters are a bit blobby, like 
someone spilled water on paper and the ink started to bleed. The 
letters’ serifs crowd together because the spacing wasn’t created 
with these mutated letterforms in mind. Proper bold weights feel 
heavier than normal weights, but they may not have a uniform 
FIG 3.11: Comparing browser-generated pseudo italics and bolds with proper ones.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 35	
increase in their body size. In this example, the correct bold is 
thicker in the areas that were already heavy, but the thinner 
strokes and serifs remain largely unchanged. Small details like 
this allow the visual weight of the typeface style to increase, but 
keep parts like counters from filling in. Choose typefaces that 
have the styles your text needs to display properly, or you will 
be laughed right off the web. Okay, maybe not, but it’s an ugly 
misstep you can easily avoid.
X-HEIGHT
A typeface’s x-height refers to the height of its lowercase letters 
from the baseline (the implied line that the letters rest on) to the 
top of an uppercase letter (FIG 3.12). Just as an em has little to 
do with the letter M, x-height does not specifically refer to the 
height of the lowercase x. But because we’re talking about the 
height of lowercase letters, the two are usually equal.
Like the relative size of a typeface’s body, the x-height can 
be as large or small as the type designer wishes. Some typefaces 
have very low x-heights, which can communicate elegance, as in 
the case of some script typefaces. A low x-height can also create 
an interesting tension between letterforms, as the contrast is 
more pronounced between upper and lower cases.
When considering text faces, a high x-height is usually ideal; 
more space for the letterform means more information to help 
the reader. This is true of typefaces for print or web, but is of ut­
most importance where interfaces or wayfinding are a concern. 
FIG 3.12: Two typefaces with different x-heights.

	
36	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
A typeface with healthy strokes and tall x-height can mean the 
difference between sparse text and one that fills out the space 
comfortably.
But a high x-height isn’t always the winning choice. The 
larger the x-height in a text face, the less room for other distinc­
tive characteristics. For example, the letters a and d, or n and 
h, can become difficult to distinguish as the x-height increases 
(FIG 3.13).
 Just as important to readability are the spaces and openings 
inside the letters: counters and apertures. Counters are a letter’s 
interior space. Counters can be enclosed, like the middle of the 
letter o, or open, like the middle of the letter c. An aperture is 
the actual opening of the counter, like the space between the 
ends of the letter c. Typefaces with a high x-height usually have 
large counters, and their letters take up more of the em box. 
That translates into more information as to what distinguishes 
a specific letter, but finding the proper x-height is a balancing 
act. While a higher x-height may mean larger space for counters 
and apertures, it’s a tradeoff. Too big and you might diminish 
the recognizability of a letter. Too small and you might diminish 
the legibility of your text. Thankfully, we have a good deal of 
wiggle room. The easiest way to see if a typeface has the right 
mixture of attributes is to set some text and give it a read. If 
you get tripped up on some letters and letter combinations, it’s 
probably best to keep looking.
FIG 3.13: As x-height increases, a typeface’s letters can be confused. Image courtesy of Ralf 
Herrmann (http://bkaprt.com/owt/12/).

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 37	
NUMBERS, PUNCTUATION, AND SPECIAL 
CHARACTERS
Strive to use typefaces that support numbers, correct punctua­
tion, and special characters, especially if you’re presenting your 
text in a variety of languages.
Numeral sets come in a few varieties (FIG 3.14). Uppercase 
numerals (sometimes also called lining or titling figures) have the 
same height and contrast as capital letters. Lowercase numerals, 
also known as text or old style figures, are designed for running 
text. Lowercase numerals act like lowercase letters, some with 
ascenders (6, 8), some with descenders (3, 4, 5, 7, 9), and some 
that reside at x-height (0, 1, 2), allowing them to blend in with 
text and cause less visual disruption than uppercase numerals. As 
you can see in FIG 3.15, uppercase numerals in text can call a lot 
of attention to themselves, while lowercase numerals continue 
the flow of text and read more evenly.
FIG 3.14: Two numeral sets, with uppercase (left) and lowercase (right).
FIG 3.15: Uppercase numerals (left) can call too much attention to themselves in running 
text, but lowercase numerals (right) fit right in.

	
38	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
While many fonts might have only one numeral set, typefaces 
can contain multiple sets. This is sometimes a stylistic choice 
by the type designer—but it can also add to the size of your 
font files. If you’re working with a typeface that has multiple 
numeral sets, you can access them with specific CSS rules for 
OpenType. Browser support for OpenType features is still gain­
ing traction, but you can find a good browser-support matrix at 
CanIUse.com (http://bkaprt.com/owt/13/). Alternatively, some 
web font solutions, like Cloud.typography from Hoefler & Co. 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/14/), let you select a numeral set or spe­
cial character set to customize your font (FIG 3.16).
FIG 3.16: Hoefler & Co.’s custom configuration of fonts.
FIG 3.17: Tabular figures align vertically, 
making them easier to scan.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 39	
Tabular figures are numbers designed with fixed spacing for 
use in tables (FIG 3.17). Tabular figures keep your numbers lined 
up nicely in vertical columns, making data in things like tables 
and spreadsheets easier to scan.
For punctuation, make sure your fonts contain the basic 
forms you’ll need for sentences (period, question mark, etc.), a 
set of dashes (hyphen, en dash, and em dash), and proper quota­
tion marks (not straight quotes) (FIG 3.18).
Proper quotation marks are often overlooked, but it’s impor­
tant to know the difference. Curly quotes, usually called smart 
quotes, commonly look like filled-in 6s and 9s. Straight quotes, 
often called dumb quotes, are usually straight and vertical (FIG 
3.19). Curly quotes are the correct punctuation for quoted text 
and dialogue. Dumb quotes are called as such because they are 
not only incorrect, but are also an instant sign of sloppy typog­
raphy. Use of improper quotation marks shows a designer who 
either hasn’t learned the right way to signify quoted text, or 
didn’t spend enough time looking for a font with full punctua­
tion support.
Punctuation is a system. That’s why proper quotation marks 
and apostrophes look like they’re part of the same family as 
FIG 3.18: Some basic punctuation.

	
40	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
commas, periods, colons, semicolons, and more, whereas 
straight quotes don’t.
Straight quotes stem from the time of typewriters when 
keyboard real estate was at a premium, so reducing open and 
closing quotes to one key was economical. Unfortunately, this 
same choice of economy was copied to the computer keyboard 
and proliferated in the days of desktop publishing. Unless the 
software you’re using corrects them, the default result when 
typing a quotation mark from your keyboard may be straight 
quotes. On the web, due to lazy implementations or force of 
habit, we’re still plagued with dumb quotes.
 Luckily, it’s easier than ever to get proper quotes and apos­
trophes on your web pages, by either using the raw characters 
and specifying UTF-8 encoding or using HTML entities. Better 
still, use one of the many CMS plugins out there to automatically 
convert dumb quotes to proper quotation marks. Any of those 
methods is better than resorting to a claw-handed key combina­
tion to type them out.
I made a single-serving site called Smart Quotes for Smart 
People to show how easy it can be (http://bkaprt.com/owt/15/). 
For more info on quotes and dashes, check out Jessica Hische’s 
excellent site Quotes and Accents (http://bkaprt.com/owt/16/).
FIG 3.19: Proper quotation marks are usually curly or sloped.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 41	
One last thing to note in the realm of quotation marks: primes. 
Primes look like italicized straight quotes and signify things like 
feet and inches, minutes and seconds, and coordinates on a map. 
Primes are not the same as dumb quotes; they’re a different set 
of punctuation marks altogether (FIG 3.20).
It’s not uncommon for free fonts to be incomplete or have 
mismatching punctuation. Most decent typefaces have the 
whole lot, but it’s always a good idea to check before licensing 
a font or deciding to use a typeface.
SMALL CAPS AND LIGATURES
Some fonts contain alternate styles or characters like small caps 
and ligatures. Small caps are capital letters that are slightly taller 
than the x-height and often used for acronyms. It’s important 
to note that these are not shrunken-down capital letters, but 
smaller capitals specifically designed to work alongside normal 
capital letters. Just as we saw with lowercase numerals, small 
caps have proportions that adapt the same stroke widths and 
contrasts in normal letters to maintain the text’s visual flow. 
If you were to simply shrink down normal caps, the strokes 
would feel thin compared to the regular text, thus creating undue 
contrast (FIG 3.21).
FIG 3.20: Primes bear a resemblance to quotation and apostrophe marks, but are unique 
marks in their own right.

	
42	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Using small caps on the web usually means specifying a 
separate font file with just the small caps. In some cases, the ad­
ditional weight of another asset may deter you from using small 
caps, but it can really look stunning. Small caps aren’t just an 
aesthetic decision, but aid readability by reducing the distraction 
of acronyms and other all-caps words in running text.
A ligature combines two or more characters to create a joined 
letterform. The most common ligatures solve for letterforms 
that unappealingly crash into each other. For example, in the 
fi ligature, the dot of the i would normally crash into the f and 
create a blobby mess. But by combining the letters, the dot of 
the i is removed and the top of the f extends over the base of 
the i (FIG 3.22).
Ligatures are useful in large text in which colliding letters 
create an unsavory disturbance, but they make running text 
feel smooth as well.
Web support for ligatures is getting better too. The CSS3 
Fonts Module has several options for standard ligatures (such as 
ff, fi, ffi) and discretionary ligatures (st, Th), as well as options for 
small caps, text figures, and swashes (http://bkaprt.com/owt/17/).
FIG 3.21: Shrunken capital letters usually look too thin next to text, while real small capitals 
keep a consistent weight with the text.
FIG 3.22: Some letters commonly crash 
into each other, but this pitfall is easily 
avoided with ligatures.
www.allitebooks.com

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 43	
LANGUAGE SETS
Many professionally designed typefaces have the characters 
you need to set text in dozens of languages. Even better, a mas­
sive and realized family like Hoefler & Co.’s Gotham, designed 
by Tobias Frere-Jones, can support text in over 140 languages 
(FIG 3.23).
Choosing typefaces that accommodate the languages you’re 
designing for is essential. When a browser needs to render a 
word and your font doesn’t support the needed characters, the 
browser will cascade its way through your CSS font stack until it 
FIG 3.23: Hoefler & Co.’s typeface Gotham with default accented characters and Latin-X 
accents (http://bkaprt.com/owt/18/).

	
44	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
reaches a font that does, or worse, it will display the notdef char­
acter: an empty rectangle. This happens most often with special 
and accented characters. Don’t undercut your beautifully set 
type with odd characters in a system font. It’s a careless mistake 
that you can easily avoid by researching your type choices and 
testing them in the browser. For this reason, it’s good to ensure 
that your font stack is ordered as best as you can manage so that 
if fallback fonts are needed, you have a font that almost matches 
the web font you’re using (FIG 3.24). Of course, this isn’t always 
possible, especially with more decorative fonts. In those cases, 
it’s best to make sure your font has what you need.
OPTICAL SIZES
Some typefaces have family members that suit a specific size 
range, called optical sizes. These variants harken back to the 
days of metal type, when different sizes of a typeface were cut 
independently to accommodate different sizes of output. For 
instance, an optical size intended for headlines was cut thinner 
than one for text, because it would be uncomfortably heavy if 
you just scaled the outlines up.
Most digital typefaces inspired by metal type are based on 
medium-sized fonts, so using them to set large type results in 
unbalanced and heavy typography. Similarly, using them to set 
small type results in crowded or harder-to-read typography. 
Type families like Adobe’s Garamond Premier Pro are designed 
FIG 3.24: The word résumé is set in one font, but the accented e falls back to a default font 
or undefined character box.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 45	
with alternate sizes like caption, text, and display (mostly meant 
for headlines) for this very purpose. Typefaces with optical 
sizes can be especially useful for screen typography, because 
you can pick tailored fonts for the size and output you wish to 
use (FIG 3.25).
Captions can get pretty small in print at around 6–8 points, 
but on the web, type that small would likely be illegible. On 
screen, captions work better at around 12 pixels, depending on 
the typeface you use and the environment it’s rendered in. Some 
higher-resolution screens are more forgiving, because more 
pixels are devoted to rendering the text. We’ll examine setting 
type at text and display sizes later in the book.
The rise of web fonts brings us more typefaces specifically 
designed for the medium of the screen. Font Bureau has released 
their Reading Edge series (http://bkaprt.com/owt/19/), a collec­
tion of typefaces “designed to function reliably at 9px–18px.” 
Many of these families correspond to other existing optical 
styles. For instance, Benton Modern RE pairs with Benton 
Modern and Benton Modern Display.
Now that we have the vocabulary to talk about type, let’s look 
at a few specific typefaces.
FIG 3.25: Optical variants are useful for making type look its best at a particular size range.

	
46	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
Just as we can pick typefaces suited to our intended output and 
content, we can also work with typefaces throughout history to 
piggyback on their historical connotations. Every typeface was 
created at a certain time and place; some were created with spe­
cific uses in mind or in response to the conditions of their use, 
as we saw with Bell Centennial. Even if a typeface is reminiscent 
of a time and place, looks can deceive. Remakes and revivals are 
common, like Hollywood movies—though revisiting typefaces 
usually yields far more pleasing results.
Classic typefaces
Even if you’re not typographically inclined, you probably know 
the names of some popular typefaces, either by merit of having 
them on your computer or by hearing about them in public. 
Names like Helvetica, Garamond, Futura, Caslon, and Gotham 
may ring some bells.
Using “classic” typefaces can be a big time-saver, because 
they’ve generally proven themselves to be sturdy and inoffen­
sive. But keep a couple of things in mind when considering a 
tried-and-true typeface:
Typography is inextricably tied to time. Styles come and go, 
and type fluctuates along with them. Many designs benefit from 
contemporary typefaces. Just because a typeface is classic or 
revered doesn’t mean it has a place on a website. For instance, 
Caslon is a beautiful book face. Printers used to say, “When in 
doubt, use Caslon,” because it was so dependable. But Caslon 
originated in the 1700s as a response to the low quality of paper 
and inks at the time. Those constraints don’t exist on screen. 
As beautiful as it is, I have trouble recommending Caslon over 
more contemporary typefaces like Chaparral or FF Meta Serif, 
which better suit the screen.
Remakes and revivals
As you get more familiar with typefaces, you may start to no­
tice variations or editions of the same typeface. In the same 

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 47	
way popular songs make comebacks from time to time, so do 
typefaces. Because the original metal matrices or printings for 
these typefaces are often outside the realm of copyright, design­
ers can revisit past works and digitally reinterpret them. As of 
this writing, more than a dozen versions of Garamond are out 
there (FIG 3.26).
Some of these Garamonds are based on the drawings and 
work of a 15th-century Italian printer named—you guessed it—
Claude Garamond. Some Garamonds are based on the metal cuts 
of letters in Garamond’s original work, while others are based on 
Jean Jannon’s work that was misattributed to Garamond (http://
bkaprt.com/owt/20/). Others are based on the phototypesetting 
fonts based on the metal cuts based on the original work. Still 
others are based on all of those things, with a bit of something 
extra thrown in. And on and on.
That doesn’t even count the numerous Garamond revivals 
like Sabon, which seek to extend or sometimes “correct” earlier 
editions. How the hell can you determine which is the right 
one to use?
Each of these Garamonds is actually a different typeface. 
Some are technically better crafted than others; some are nearly 
FIG 3.26: A gaggle of Garamonds.

	
48	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
identical; others are quite different. If you were set on using 
some form of Garamond on a project, you would first need to 
gather them up and evaluate their qualities.
Evaluating these interpretations can make your head spin. 
Do you judge a typeface based on how closely it adheres to the 
source material or in the context of its own design? Because I’m 
often more concerned with how well a typeface will perform 
than with its historical correctness, I prefer the latter. For ex­
ample, Garamond Premier Pro (Robert Slimbach’s 2005 revival) 
is based on different optical sizes of cast metal meant to support 
varied contexts. The typeface includes regular, caption, subhead, 
and display sizes, each crafted for optimal display within those 
uses. Such flexibility in size and weight makes this version es­
pecially versatile.
On the other hand, many designers consider ITC Garamond 
a particularly bad adaptation. Just ask Michael Beirut, who re­
gretfully refused to read a book after discovering it was set in 
ITC Garamond (http://bkaprt.com/owt/21/). From its almost 
comically large x-height to the way some strokes seem to push 
and pull at odd angles, ITC Garamond may retain its namesake, 
but it takes enough liberties with the source material to reduce 
it to a mere Garamond-like substance. Its presence feels campy 
and retro in all the wrong ways.
Then we have Sabon (named for Jacques Sabon, a student of 
Claude Garamond), a Garamond revival that sought to modernize 
the classic design. Created by typographer Jan Tschichold, it was 
prominently featured in the design system that made Penguin 
Books famous. Sabon is a beautiful, flexible reinterpretation of 
Garamond. Its success is due in part to Tschichold’s addition 
of italics based on the work of Robert Granjon, a Garamond 
contemporary. Tschichold designed the weights and styles to 
take up the same space when typeset so that compositors could 
use the same measurements to estimate the type fit, regardless 
of using regular, italics, or bolds. I bet Tschichold’s collabora­
tors threw him a parade for this wonderfully efficient solution.
Do you need to know all this information about Garamonds 
or any other typeface? Well, it pays to do your homework. It’s 
one thing to choose a suitable typeface, but you can make a 

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 49	
design even stronger by choosing one that matches the content 
and the context.
Revivals can be a mixed bag. They sometimes make great 
strides forward in design and in technical features for modern 
use. But they can just as easily make missteps, contorting the 
best parts of their predecessors. It’s not always easy to tell the 
difference, but if you find a revival typeface you want to use, 
spend time reading up on its background. Getting well acquaint­
ed will make spotting a typeface’s strengths and weaknesses 
seem like second nature.
FINDING ALTERNATIVES
The rewards of typographic knowledge are cumulative. If you 
already know a typeface well, you can build on that knowledge 
to find other typefaces. To do so, let’s look at some specific vi­
sual attributes of a typeface. By scrutinizing a typeface, we can 
quickly determine if it suits our needs. Let’s start with something 
we all recognize as an example: Helvetica.
Now, Helvetica is about as pervasive as a typeface gets; it’s 
used on everything from logos to public signage around the 
globe. But is Helvetica the best choice for all of these uses? What 
are the visual attributes that make Helvetica Helvetica (FIG 3.27)? 
Let’s take a closer look:
•	 Helvetica has very little stroke contrast; the lines are basically 
the same weight.
•	 It has a generous x-height.
•	 The letters are based on simple geometric forms.
•	 The apertures, or openings inside of the letters, are nearly 
closed. Helvetica hugs that space tightly.
•	 The terminals, or ends of the strokes, are at right angles.
From these attributes, we can deduce a few things: Helvetica 
is clear and geometric, but not always very legible. Since the let­
terforms carry so little variation, it can be easy to confuse some 
letterforms for others. If we need a typeface for small type or 
long-form content, we may need to keep looking.

	
50	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Staunch devotees of Helvetica may decry any criticism of the 
typeface. Some people see it as the ultimate typeface for design, 
because it’s basically a blank slate. They think you can throw 
anything at Helvetica and it will look just fine, because Helvetica 
brings little baggage and few connotations.
I feel the opposite. Helvetica is technically a beautiful face, 
but it’s also so overused that I have trouble feeling any response 
when I see it. To me Helvetica has become a generic default. 
People use it as a safe choice rather than face the fear of mak­
ing a bad choice. They’d rather say nothing than risk saying the 
wrong thing.
Take a stronger stance. Since we already broke down some 
of Helvetica’s attributes, you can seek out typefaces that share 
FIG 3.27: A few physical attributes of Helvetica.
FIG 3.28: Some Helvetica alternatives.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 51	
similar traits (FIG 3.28). And don’t worry if you aren’t sure where 
to start looking—we’ll cover some good resources for finding 
typefaces in the next chapter.
To start, let’s look at FF Dagny. FF Dagny has similar pro­
portions and counters, but it’s slightly more compact without 
the perpendicular terminals. FF Dagny also feels more diminu­
tive than Helvetica, and not so machined. Another option is 
Pragmatica Slabserif, which shares many of Helvetica’s physical 
attributes but adds serifs, making it feel more academic. Either is 
a good option if you’re familiar with Helvetica but want some­
thing a little different.
Let’s try another example: Matthew Carter’s darling of early 
web typography, Georgia. Used widely across the internet, 
Georgia is a modern workhorse for onscreen type. As we saw 
in the last chapter, Carter not only designed it for the screen, 
but he built Georgia to stand up to some of the least hospitable 
rendering environments. Can we find typefaces that embody 
that same durability but aren’t as omnipresent? First, we need 
to break down what makes Georgia Georgia (FIG 3.29).
Let’s take a closer look:
•	 Georgia features a moderate stroke contrast.
•	 It has a generous x-height, counters, and spacing across letters.
•	 It has some sharp and pointy angles, as if it were elbowing 
its way through a crowded room.
•	 It has beefy, almost slab-like serifs.
We gravitate toward a few key things. Due to its spacing, 
high x-height, and lower stroke contrast, Georgia is a great 
candidate for setting long swaths of text. And it’s true: Georgia 
is a comfy typeface to sit back and read with. Because of the 
lower contrast, the letterforms carry a good rhythm, so text set 
in Georgia seems to flow. Georgia also has a mild heft to it—it’s 
not quite a slab serif, but not a delicate flower either. With these 
traits in mind, we can track down typefaces that share similar 
attributes (FIG 3.30).
Take Chaparral (a personal favorite). It has some of the same 
traits that make Georgia so legible, like its x-height and openness, 
but with softer angles that evoke a more restrained elegance. Or 

	
52	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
look at FF Tisa—a sure option for running text with more mod­
ern serifs and even less stroke contrast. Lastly, Droid Serif takes 
Georgia’s angularity a step further as a pointier, boxier cousin, 
almost as if it’s sucking in a small paunch to impress someone.
Comparing type like this is one of my favorite exercises be­
cause you can clearly see the lines between typefaces. We don’t 
need to match every trait of a typeface we like to an alternate. 
The important thing is to recognize the traits that make the 
typeface unique. Playing off of that knowledge is extremely 
useful, because you can apply many of the same typographic 
methods as you would to the original typeface. Most important, 
building on that knowledge saves you time and makes you more 
proficient with type.
FIG 3.29: A few physical attributes of Georgia.
FIG 3.30: Some Georgia alternatives.
www.allitebooks.com

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 53	
Now that you’ve learned how to look at and understand type’s 
anatomy, let’s see how we translate those traits to the screen, 
along with some considerations for bringing new assets to our 
websites.
TECHNICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Every typeface or typeface family consists of one or more font 
files. Fonts are individual files that contain the outlines of all the 
characters (i.e., the letters’ actual shapes as vectors) and informa­
tion from the designer to space and render the type.
Fonts are software. Chances are you’ve seen these files be­
fore. They’re commonly TrueType (.ttf) or the newer standard, 
OpenType (.otf). OpenType fonts can contain outlines from 
either PostScript or TrueType fonts, but they’re bundled in a 
common wrapper. OpenType fonts work for Mac and Windows 
systems, while older fonts and formats may only support one or 
the other. As a major bonus, OpenType fonts can support more 
characters, more languages, and special features, like small caps 
and ligatures, all in one file.
In 2009, the Web Open Font Format (.woff) was introduced 
to promote a single format that could work across all browsers. 
WOFF is essentially a wrapper that contains a TrueType or 
OpenType font, but significantly compresses the files for website 
visitors. These advantages make WOFF the best choice when it’s 
available, and browser support is only increasing.
Loaded assets
All non-system web fonts are assets that need to download from 
a server for a page to render. While the trend is for file sizes to 
get smaller and connections to grow faster, you should keep 
the number of fonts you use to a minimum to keep your page 
weight as low as possible. Limiting your palette will help you 
maintain a coherent visual system and make sure your page load 
time is snappy.
Loading your fonts in CSS is the most basic way to get them 
onto your website, whether from your own server, a content 

	
54	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
delivery network (CDN), or a web font service. Depending on 
the size of your font file and the browser that’s loading it, visi­
tors may not see text in your font right away. They may see a 
page rendered in system fonts instead. But there are ways to 
orchestrate the loading process and have more control over 
what a visitor sees first.
Web Font Loader
Some browsers display content before all assets are loaded, 
while others wait until they have every asset to render the page. 
In the first case, a visitor will experience FOUT and briefly see 
content in a default system font before it snaps into the web 
font after the file loads.
A great way to deal with FOUT is by using Web Font Loader, a 
framework codeveloped by the engineers at Typekit and Google 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/22/). It provides custom webhooks—
callback events via CSS and JavaScript—so you can tell your 
page to use different CSS rules as fonts load, after they load, or 
if they fail to load.
Having more control is useful in a variety of circumstances. 
You could specify default fonts for your page and override those 
with web fonts after they load. Web Font Loader also lets you 
adjust sizes and styles before and after loading, so your page 
looks balanced in either scenario. For example, condensed fonts 
can take up less horizontal space and often need to be set a bit 
larger than other fonts at the same size.
Even if you’re using Web Font Loader, you should still tailor 
your font stack to use the best fallback fonts for the situation. 
Fallback fonts are rendered when your web fonts fail to load, or 
are still loading. They’re your best bet to having good typogra­
phy shine through in your web fonts’ absence.
Fallback fonts are the system fonts found on a visitor’s device. 
Depending on the platform and operating system they’re using, 
these fonts can vary. Code-wise, it’s the same approach we’ve 
been using with CSS stacks for years, but with our web font 
added to the front, like so:

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 55	
font-family: chaparral-pro, Georgia, "Times New » 
Roman", Times, serif;
Here, I’m loading the font Chaparral with common serif sys­
tem fonts as my fallbacks. Depending on the browser, the first 
fallback font may be used to render my design until Chaparral’s 
file has loaded.
You can also use Web Font Loader to hide your content with 
the CSS attribute display: none; until your web fonts load, and 
thereby avoid FOUT altogether. But use caution: hiding your 
content also means a visitor won’t see any text for a potentially 
long time, especially if your fonts have large files or take more 
than a few seconds to load. Further, if your web fonts don’t 
load, content will stay hidden until your browser stops trying 
and times out, rendering the page in system fonts.
Some designers consider FOUT more of a feature than a bug, 
and I tend to agree. With reading and browsing happening on 
unknown connection speeds (like flaky cell connections), seeing 
content first can be a very good thing, even if it’s not in your 
ideal typeface. The thing I try to avoid most in my designs is not 
FOUT but a jarring shift in the layout when a web font finishes 
loading. This shift is usually due to sizing discrepancies between 
your layout in system fonts and your chosen web font.
Because of these potential drawbacks, I prefer to approach 
web typography using system fonts (my fallback fonts) and save 
web fonts as a progressive visual enhancement partnered with 
Web Font Loader. This way, my pages load and render with 
nice typography even if JavaScript is disabled or some other 
unforeseen circumstance occurs. When the web fonts do load, 
Web Font Loader ensures that my CSS will switch over to the 
values appropriate for the fonts I’m using. But the fallback fonts 
are key. They’re like the alt attribute for fonts, and they ensure 
that no matter what, your site can still be read.
With a little extra effort, you can use Web Font Loader to 
load your fonts asynchronously, or separately from the rest of 
the page and its assets. This means that if the files are large or 
slow to transfer, they won’t block the page from displaying. Sean 

	
56	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
McBride’s article on the topic outlines a few different patterns, 
along with potential benefits and drawbacks (http://bkaprt.com/
owt/23/).
Rendering
Browsers and operating systems use a variety of technologies 
to display, or render, a font on a web page. As a result, a font can 
appear different in different situations. In some cases, a font 
that looks crisp and clear in one browser will look pixelated 
and ugly in another.
Fortunately, rendering problems like these are a temporary 
issue. Browsers are evolving and self-updating faster than ever, 
and as they do they’re incorporating new, better rendering 
engines. Likewise, high-resolution screens—such as the Retina 
displays on the latest Apple devices—mean that some older 
rendering concerns are falling by the wayside.
That said, rendering quality is a factor we need to consider. 
Legacy browsers are still out there in large numbers, and they’re 
often the worst affected. Even though rendering engines are 
improving, there are enough differences that we need to take 
them into account.
The two latest and best rendering engines are Core Text (used 
by Mac OS X and present on all iOS devices) and DirectWrite 
(used on the latest version of Windows). Both render text very 
well, but they do so very differently (http://bkaprt.com/owt/24/). 
Core Text adheres closer to the intended design, but it has a 
heavier hand with anti-aliasing that can make letters feel beefy 
or soft; DirectWrite, meanwhile, favors the screen’s pixel grid, 
which can make the letterforms very crisp, but also spindly 
(FIG 3.31).
Neither approach is wrong; they’re two ways to tackle the 
same problem. When people look at text on the opposite plat­
form than they are used to, it can feel weird to them. When Safari 
for Windows introduced Core Text rendering to Windows users, 
many people were repulsed by the fuzzy text (http://bkaprt.com/
owt/25/). How we react to font rendering often comes down to 
what we’re familiar with, not which approach is right.

	
Evaluating Typefaces	 57	
With the level of fragmentation across platforms and devices, 
it’s crucial to test our designs for proper typographic rendering 
and fidelity.
For more information on rendering type on the web, 
check out Tim Brown’s articles, “CSS Properties That Affect 
Type  Rendering” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/26/) and “Type 
Rendering on the Web” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/27/).
Soon, though never soon enough, rendering will be even 
less of a concern. Take heed, though; it still won’t mean you 
can use any old typeface. But the conversation will shift toward 
appropriateness and technical acuity—that is, the design—and 
away from the display performance. For in-depth information 
about rendering and screen optimizing, see Peter Biľak’s article 
“Font Hinting” (http://bkaprt.com/owt/28/).
We’ve gone through the gritty details on why typefaces 
look the way they do. Now, let’s look at how to select and com­
bine typefaces.
FIG 3.31: Examples of the same typeface and how it’s rendered by Core Text (top) and 
DirectWrite (bottom).

	
58	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Once you start down the road of looking at type as a tool and 
conveyance for communication, you turn into a new person: 
someone who has opinions about type. It’s a dubious honor, and 
your friends will only tolerate you for so long as you sound 
off on the typefaces used on various restaurant menus. Your 
new excitement about type may also make you look like you 
have “answers,” and we’ve already learned that that’s a can of 
worms. As soon as you get that reputation among friends and 
family, they will inevitably ask you the same question: “What’s 
a good font to use?” It’s a difficult question, because typefaces 
don’t exist in a vacuum. If you decided to make a painting, you 
probably wouldn’t start by asking an artist friend, “What color 
should I use?”
Choosing typefaces relies on weighing the context of what 
you’re designing against your technical requirements, typo­
graphic knowledge, and gut instinct. Just as the best coffee 
machine won’t necessarily make you the best cup of coffee, 
4
CHOOSING AND 
PAIRING TYPEFACES

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 59	
good typography depends on the ingredients you choose, the 
particular combination of those ingredients, and the ways you 
combine them. Your typeface choices must fit the circumstances 
you need them for and so must your design.
And we’re back to that old chestnut about rules: there are 
many right answers, and no answers are really wrong; there are 
just different degrees of good.
KNOW YOUR CONTEXT
As with any creative process, there are many approaches to 
choosing type, and it’s a personal pursuit to find what works best 
for you and what feels most productive. But you have quantifi­
able considerations too, like the conditions under which you’re 
going to use a typeface. I’m a minimalist by nature, so I like to 
simplify the kinds of uses for type into two camps: type for a 
moment and type to live with. Let me show you what I mean.
Type for a moment
Put simply, type for a moment is content that someone should 
only need a moment to read. This includes small interface copy 
(like a button or login link), brief asides to an article, and display 
type for a headline or large marketing copy (FIG 4.1). 
As another example, think of it like a sign in an airport. It 
needs to quickly convey its meaning and let you be on your 
way. You don’t want to spend precious minutes when you’re 
late for a flight trying to decipher the artistic intent behind a sign 
before you can run off to your gate. And you don’t want people 
to puzzle over where to click to find what they need.
After you get your readers’ attention, there may be more to 
discover, like in the case of a logo or a big, promotional headline, 
but the key is to be clear up front.
The typeface you start with should suit a purpose. For navi­
gation or interface text, I look for typefaces that hold up well 
at small sizes and aren’t fussy with extra style. More times than 
not, I narrow it down to a simple sans serif. Let’s look at JAF 

	
60	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Facit to see why. It can get very small, but it remains clear and 
legible because of its large, open counters and simple construc­
tion. Compare that with Futura or Zapfino (FIG 4.2). Either 
could work when used sparingly in a headline, but they both 
appear fussy as navigational text. They also take up more space. 
The strict simplicity of Futura’s letterforms makes some letters 
hard to tell apart (for instance, the lowercase a and o look very 
similar), not to mention the tight spacing and small x-height. 
And Zapfino is a bit too decorative at the expense of legibility.
FIG 4.1: An example of a big headline from FiftyThree’s Pencil homepage 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/29/).

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 61	
At larger sizes—especially in print or on a higher-resolution 
display—even delicate, light weights are easily readable. You can 
run the gamut of decorative typefaces and settings, as long as 
there isn’t too much text. For extremely decorative headlines, 
stick to a few words or less. With these short bursts, type acts 
more like an image, so the viewer is more forgiving.
As you can see in FIG 4.3, using a decorative face like Bello for 
a headline doesn’t give us much trouble as readers. A headline 
with a lot of personality immediately sets a mood, which can be 
a great way to draw a reader in. That said, you wouldn’t want 
to use Bello for more than a line or two, as it quickly becomes 
cumbersome to read. Like salt, country music, and in-laws, a 
little goes a long way.
FIG 4.2: JAF Facit versus Futura and Zapfino for navigational text.
FIG 4.3: Bello is beautiful, but not suited for longer text.

	
62	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Type to live with
Type to live with is text we spend a lot more time with, usually 
long-form text like an article or book. The typefaces you use here 
can mean the difference between someone reading or not. If a 
typeface is too loud, too high contrast, or otherwise disruptive, 
we might lose the reader. And we can’t blame them either—read­
ing large swaths of text in all caps or in a decorative face is like 
yelling at a reader when you really mean to talk in an even tone.
Typefaces for longer reading should give a page an even 
texture. The texture of flowing text is the sum of the type­
face’s color (the general combinations of lights and darks in 
and around letters), the actual color of the text and its contrast 
with the background, and the size of the setting. You can see 
what I mean by blurring your eyes while looking at a chunk of 
text. If you see repeating patterns of weird letterforms that keep 
sticking out to you, the typeface may not be right. We’ll look 
at typographic color in Chapter 6, but the general guideline is 
that a reader shouldn’t notice the type. They shouldn’t stop or 
stumble over the text, or wonder why something looks the way 
it does. Because when a reader notices the type, they’re taken 
out of the act of reading and are instead trying to decode why 
something else is calling attention to itself.
In 1930, renowned typographic scholar Beatrice Warde 
penned an essay titled “The Crystal Goblet, or Printing Should 
Be Invisible” on this topic (http://bkaprt.com/owt/30/). She com­
pares typographic choices to the difference between drinking 
wine from a clear crystal goblet—a vessel that lets you fully 
experience its contents visually alongside your other senses—or 
a goblet of “solid gold, wrought in the most exquisite patterns” 
that trades function for form. Warde urges designers to strive 
for clear presentation of their messages, allowing the contents 
to speak for themselves, and for designs to be a transparent 
window to those messages.
You want that clear goblet. Help people forget that they’re 
staring at a screen and instead immerse them in the words and 
the story you’re telling. The type you use should be smooth, 
removing as much friction as possible between the reader and 
the text (FIG 4.4).
www.allitebooks.com

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 63	
FIG 4.4: A nice space for reading from the site Stories and Novels 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/31/).

	
64	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Choosing type for extended reading
When searching for good options for long-form text, we need to 
recognize that we’re asking someone to live with this typeface 
for an extended period of time. Every eccentricity is amplified 
when used page after page. A visual quirk like a whimsical tail on 
the end of a g’s bowl may be cute when we see it once or twice, 
but over the course of a few pages, it can stick out and distract 
from the text, like that guy sitting in front of you at the movies 
whose nose whistles every time he breathes.
For instance, Bree is a beautiful typeface, but it also boasts 
a particular personality that I may or may not want in running 
text (FIG 4.5). Look at how some of the descenders (like the g or 
y) have a closed loop. It’s a nice detail, but it plays cuter in text 
than I may want. These kinds of details shape the texture and 
overall mood of the page, much like how the tone or accent in 
a person’s voice contributes to your impression of their speech.
In general, I’ve found it’s best to look for typefaces that have 
a touch of personality (and I mean ever so little) and fulfill a few 
requirements. Like Bree, something with a big personality is ap­
pealing, but it runs the risk of overwhelming the text’s message. 
When a typeface is decorative like a script or has embellishments 
like swashes, our eye is drawn to those exceptions. The smallest 
hint of idiosyncrasy—like extra contrast to the strokes or deeper 
descenders—adds some life to a text, especially since 99 percent 
of the type in the world seems to be set in Helvetica.
FIG 4.5: Calluna is simple, with just enough personality to make for an interesting text 
face. By contrast, Bree may have too much personality, making it potentially distracting for 
extended reading.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 65	
Since a little personality goes a long way, it’s useful to learn 
about the smaller details that set a typeface apart. Over the 
years, I’ve found myself looking at three main things when 
evaluating a typeface for extended reading: x-height, contrast, 
and letterforms.
Sufficient x-height
The lowercase letters should be tall enough to not feel dwarfed 
by the uppercase letters and create a nice balance at the page 
level (FIG 4.6). If the texture of the text looks like it favors the 
capitals too much, the x-height may be too small. Again, we’re 
looking for features that will give us an even texture. In this 
example, Minion and FF Meta Serif are sufficient for most uses, 
but Mrs. Eaves may be too diminutive.
Low or medium contrast
A little contrast is okay, but too much can be, well, too much. 
In running text, a high-contrast typeface can really throw off 
the balance (FIG 4.7). In this example, the contrast on Georgia 
would work fine, but Bodoni may distract readers, and Omnes 
may prove too uniform as a result of its geometry. As we saw in 
Chapter 1, reading is easiest when we provide a smooth texture 
without too much contrast.
FIG 4.6: Three typefaces, ranging from 
small to large x-height.
FIG 4.7: Three typefaces, ranging from 
low to high contrast.

	
66	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Recognizable and distinct letterforms
I shouldn’t have to stop to discern if a capital I is a lowercase l 
or number 1 (FIG 4.8). Every moment I spend decoding text is a 
moment wasted. This isn’t usually a problem in running text, 
where a reader has more context to help distinguish words. But 
it becomes paramount when a reader has fewer contextual cues, 
like a headline or a single word from an interface’s navigation, 
or instances where numbers are mixed, like code, license plates, 
and serial numbers.
I keep these points in mind, because they can trip up readers. 
They’re easy to temper once you know what to look for, but 
equally easy to get wrong if you don’t take them into consider­
ation when picking a typeface. Which brings us to…
METHODS FOR CHOOSING TYPEFACES
Below are a few exercises I work through as I plot out a design. 
One quick tip before we start: don’t get attached. While you may 
have your list of the usual suspects, each project carries its own 
needs and goals. Be ready to abandon your favorite typeface. It 
doesn’t matter if it’s the loveliest hairline or the most elegant 
serif. If it doesn’t serve your design, it doesn’t serve the reader.
Word association
Selecting a typeface with that special something can be tough. 
With all the factors that go into a typeface, from aesthetic and 
historical nods, to the subtle effects of different kinds of serifs, 
how can you make a good choice?
FIG 4.8: Some typefaces, like Gill Sans, 
have very little distinction among 
letterforms with similar structures. 
The 1, lowercase l, and uppercase I blur 
together.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 67	
One method I use is word association. Rather than scroll­
ing endlessly through pages of typefaces and getting tangled 
up thinking, “Is this the right one?”, come at it from a differ­
ent angle. Ask yourself: what do I want my design to convey? 
Think of words that describe the feelings or moods you’d like to 
impart. Perhaps you’re designing a website for a day care. You 
may think of descriptive words like playful, innocent, colorful, 
handmade, and more.
Grab some paper and scribble down any words that come 
to mind. You’re brainstorming, so there are no wrong answers, 
and you can always cross some out later. The important thing is 
to write as many ideas as you can. After you’ve exhausted that, 
start sorting similar words together into groups.
A while ago, I set out to design a quick page for my design 
consultancy, Mighty (http://bkaprt.com/owt/32/). I wanted the 
design to evoke feelings of being strong but casual. I wrote down 
words like stable, powerful, industrial, boxy, angular, geometric, 
machined, and blue collar (FIG 4.9).
FIG 4.9: My list of word associations from early plans for the Mighty website design.

	
68	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
With these adjectives in hand, I can look for typefaces that 
suggest the same thing or help me portray those traits (FIG 4.10). 
For instance, to chase down the theme of stable, I may look at 
typefaces that run thick and strong. Blackoak is wide and chunky 
and looks like it could support a skyscraper.
This exercise breaks the process down into smaller pieces. 
Most important, word associations give you permission to delay 
answering that nebulous question, “Which typeface is right for 
my company?”—which can spiral into thoughts about what 
your company does, who works there, whom you work for, 
the building you occupy, and more. Those are key things to 
consider, of course, but they’re larger ideas that the typography 
will come to support. 
By narrowing your focus to a word or two, you may find it 
easier to collect potential typefaces. Once you gather a few con­
tenders—and I’ll share some of my favorite foundries and start­
ing points later—it’s far easier to address those other questions.
In the case of my company site, I chose a bold, condensed 
version of Proxima Nova and set it large in all caps (FIG 4.11). 
Though I was leaning toward Blackoak, it had some Wild 
West baggage. Eurostile had the right bones but felt too open, 
FIG 4.10: My shortlist of typefaces for the Mighty website design.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 69	
especially when compared with the way Proxima Nova seemed 
to stroll in and command as much of the space as it could muster. 
Its letterforms are simple and geometric without being bland. 
The final setting is powerful but not fussy, and fits the bill nicely. 
Proxima Nova’s straight lines contrast perfectly with the Mighty 
logo’s script lettering, adding some visual variety to an otherwise 
simple design.
Comparisons of real text
The most useful thing you can do when deciding whether to use 
a typeface is to try it out in a situation as close to the real thing 
as possible. If you’re making a website, this means testing that 
typeface in context on an actual web page.
Some typefaces look beautiful when you see them in printed 
specimens or in the context of their marketing pages on type 
foundry websites. However, when you work with them in the 
frame of your own project, you may experience different results. 
FIG 4.11: The final Mighty homepage.

	
70	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
As we saw before, flourishes and pieces of letters may not seem 
like deal breakers, but then stick out in running text. In this 
regard, typefaces sometimes feel like “the clothes that words 
wear,” as perfectly put by typeface designer Tobias Frere-Jones 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/33/). If you’ve ever bought a pair of jeans 
that you thought looked great in the store only to find they 
look totally weird when you try them at home, you know what 
I mean. Typefaces need to be tried and tested in a real setting.
I often work up dummy pages that have little more than a few 
headings and paragraphs. It’s basically a prototype, but I con­
sider it more of a type sketch: not so refined as a design comp, 
but more revealing than browsing for fonts online. You can do 
this so quickly you have no reason not to. Simply drop blocks 
of the same text into an HTML document, set each paragraph to 
a different typeface or size, and open in a browser. Don’t forget 
that typefaces can vary in appearance from one browser to an­
other, so test a range of browsers and devices. Your typefaces 
should hold up across myriad environments.
Designer Richard Rutter made a template system for this 
express purpose called Body Text Tester (http://bkaprt.com/
owt/34/). The web service Typecast (http://bkaprt.com/owt/35/) 
lets you test web fonts from a variety of foundries right in your 
browser, so you can play with the size and setting to your heart’s 
content (FIG 4.12).
Many foundries and font services offer thirty-day trials or 
free plans so you can try some options before committing. 
Tools like FontShop’s WebFonter (http://bkaprt.com/owt/36/)
and Webtype’s Font Swapper (http://bkaprt.com/owt/37/) allow 
you to preview any of their fonts on a given URL.
Once you review some typefaces in context, run through 
your list of aesthetic and technical requirements:
•	 Does the typeface have the right feel? 
•	 Is it good for extended reading? 
•	 Do the characters in your headline or company name 
look weird? 
•	 Does the typeface family have additional styles you can use 
to flesh out your type palette?

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 71	
At this point, I’ve ruled out a few typefaces and tucked the 
rest away for further experimentation. I may come out with 
two or three typefaces as starting points when I begin comping 
pages. There’s no magic number—you may discover the perfect 
typeface and just roll with it—but this can be a valuable exercise 
to look at the possibilities from different viewpoints and whittle 
your options down to a chosen few.
Appropriateness
Just as we need to find typefaces that have the right stuff techni­
cally, we also need to ensure our choices are appropriate for our 
aesthetic context. Most of the time, it’s not a matter of finding 
a singularly perfect typeface, but rather a matter of avoiding 
inappropriate ones.
As we’ve seen earlier, all typefaces stem from a specific time 
and place, and many have an intended purpose for existing. That 
purpose can be technical, as with Verdana, which was made for 
type on screens. Or it can be aesthetic, as with Trajan, which 
FIG 4.12: Informally setting type for some fast comparisons helps you identify or rule out 
potential picks. Typecast provides a quick means to try out type options in your browser.

	
72	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
was inspired by the chiseled letterforms of Trajan’s Column in 
Rome. These qualities imbue your design with an air of a time 
and place; it’s easy enough to conjure ancient Rome with Trajan. 
But these same associations can work against your design if they 
don’t complement what you want to convey.
I live in New York and use the subway every day. Almost all 
of the signage for the subway system is set in Helvetica (http://
bkaprt.com/owt/38/). Helvetica is a Swiss typeface made in 1956 
(the name Helvetica is based on the Latin name for Switzerland), 
and the subway design system was rebranded in the 1970s by 
Massimo Vignelli. So, it’s a Swiss typeface in a design system 
made by an Italian designer for the American city of New York. 
The logical associations are scant, and I’d argue Helvetica is a bad 
choice. More important, as we saw in the last chapter, Helvetica’s 
letterforms adhere to such similar geometry that it’s difficult to 
discern one from another, making the typeface an even unlike­
lier choice for wayfinding signage (FIG 4.13).
FIG 4.13: New York’s subway signage uses Helvetica almost exclusively.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 73	
Compare that with the typeface chosen for the monument 
at the National September 11 Memorial & Museum. Both the 
identity and signage use Tobias Frere-Jones’s Gotham (FIG 4.14). 
Gotham is a typeface born and bred in New York City. Not 
only is its designer from New York, but he took his inspiration 
from the city’s indigenous typography as found in places like 
the Port Authority Bus Terminal. On the surface, this is a far 
more resonant choice, one that marries a typeface’s origins to 
a project’s meaning.
Of course, you could argue that Helvetica is a great choice 
for the New York subway, because it has become a worldwide 
design staple and New York is a melting pot of culture. And you 
may be right. As I said, there are no right answers, just different 
degrees of appropriateness.
How do we find out if a typeface is appropriate or, more 
likely, inappropriate? The best place to start is to track down 
FIG 4.14: The Freedom Tower cornerstone at the World Trade Center in New York uses 
Tobias Frere-Jones’s Gotham, a typeface with roots in local signage (http://bkaprt.com/
owt/39/). Photograph by Rick Mackler/Rangefinder/Globe Photos, Inc.

	
74	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
information about the typeface itself, either on the designer’s or 
foundry’s website or in printed specimens. Like an artist’s state­
ment at a museum, a typeface’s background information reflects 
the tremendous amount of thought and research poured into the 
work. Designers will often outline why they created a typeface, 
where they drew their inspiration from, what they intended the 
type to be used for, and more.
For instance, if you want to evoke a certain period, look for 
typefaces made during that time. They may not end up being 
what you need, but they have characteristics you can identify 
and use as criteria to find other choices.
It’s hard to pin down cultural associations in typefaces, be­
cause they depend on the typeface’s use in the wild. A great 
resource is the website Fonts In Use (http://bkaprt.com/owt/40/), 
which catalogs imagery of typefaces in real settings. The ex­
amples are well documented and tagged so you can quickly 
find work featuring a specific typeface. This is also a wonderful 
place to see which typefaces are paired with the ones you’re 
researching.
A bit of research under your belt and attention to a typeface’s 
connotations help make your design more cohesive. You’ll also 
stand a better chance of avoiding bad typeface choices.
Avoid ready-mades
What’s a ready-made? A typeface that has design baked in. These 
are the TV dinners of the design world: they (maybe) get the job 
done by doing the bare minimum. You see a lot of them around 
the holidays, such as spooky typefaces dripping in blood or 
dangling with icicles. Although those probably aren’t for the 
same holiday.
Type choices like these limit you, because you can’t escape 
the strong associations that come with them. They don’t give 
you much room to work. Instead of using a font with design 
baked in, think about the associations you’re trying to make. 
Remember, your typeface is the starting point, not the center­
piece. Let the typography—all of the ways you make that typeface 
be the voice of the message—do the talking.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 75	
Be careful with free fonts
Yes, fonts can be expensive, but that doesn’t mean you should 
use free fonts either. We have a plethora of fonts at our finger­
tips, from scads of available foundries to our computers, which 
come bundled with a whole set. It’s easy to take the amount of 
skill and time required to design a solid typeface for granted—
and not just anybody can do it well.
A typical roman (meaning upright) face can take a type de­
signer at least a year or two to complete. Depending on the 
design and designer, the size of the typeface family, the history 
and research involved, and the ebb and flow of the creative 
process, it’s not unheard of for a typeface family to take five or 
more years to create. See Tal Leming, who spent over six years 
making his sans serif family Balto (http://bkaprt.com/owt/41/).
Beyond the basic set of Latin alphabet characters (A-Z, a-z, 
0-9, common accented characters, and punctuation), a serious 
typeface family may include international character sets, mul­
tiple numeral sets, ligatures, small caps, and multiple styles for 
text, titling, and captions (FIG 4.15). That can add up to hundreds 
of individual glyphs per style, which means you’re talking about 
potentially thousands of letterforms in total. That takes heaps 
of time, expertise, and testing, which you’re less likely to get 
with free fonts.
In my experience, free fonts are a mixed bag and tend to suf­
fer from common failings:
•	 Incomplete character sets (missing lowercase characters, or 
worse, punctuation)
•	 Less technical or aesthetic cohesion (the typeface feels uneven)
•	 A chance of being highly derivative of another font (sometimes 
due to an unaware or eager designer with good intentions)
Are free fonts doomed to failure? Not at all, but you should 
be extra cautious. Good fonts cost money because they take a 
lot of work to become good fonts. They can stretch your budget, 
but consider this: a type designer’s work provides tools for us 

	
76	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
to use to make money, and our money gives them the means to 
keep making tools. We get paid for our work, and they get paid 
for their work. It’s that simple.
Narrowing the field
One last way to make choosing type easier is to narrow the field 
from the get-go: create your own list of regulars. I keep lists of 
typefaces that I know well, or that I’d like to use, to give myself 
a head start when I sit down to work on a new project. Some are 
typefaces that’ve carried past projects; others I’ve come across 
and noted for future use when an opportunity pops up.
I’ve been asked what would top my list of “desert island” 
typefaces. Back in 2009, for the type-focused magazine 8 Faces, 
I included typefaces like Caslon and Trade Gothic. A year later, 
when asked a similar question by FontShop, I had a few different 
choices like Garamond Premier Pro and News Gothic (http://
bkaprt.com/owt/42/). My typeface shortlist changes every so 
often as various choices fall in and out of favor, or as I get to 
know others better, but I gravitate toward simple and sturdy 
sans serifs and book serifs.
As we saw in the last chapter with Helvetica and Georgia, 
your go-to typefaces serve as a springboard for finding new and 
related options. But you still need to cull the best typefaces for 
your design goals, which will shift with every job.
A great place to start is by referencing something whose de­
sign you already enjoy. Many books, magazines, and websites 
list their typefaces within the colophon for this purpose. For 
instance, in the back of this book, you’ll see that A Book Apart 
FIG 4.15: A small sampling of the accented characters you may find in a font with good 
multilingual support.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 77	
uses FF Yoga and FF Yoga Sans for running text and captions, 
and Titling Gothic for condensed titles. If you like the way those 
typefaces look, you can try them out online and see if they work 
for your project.
If you see a typeface you want to learn about, you can use 
a bookmarklet like Fount (http://bkaprt.com/owt/43/) to reveal 
its name. You can also upload pictures to WhatTheFont (http://
bkaprt.com/owt/44/) to find matches in MyFonts’ extensive type 
database. Similarly, you can find typefaces with David Johnson-
Davies’s Identifont (http://bkaprt.com/owt/45/) by answering 
questions about the visual characteristics of different letters.
Or, maybe you’re the kind of person who relies on recom­
mendations or scours new typeface releases. Sites like I Love 
Typography (http://bkaprt.com/owt/46/) cover type releases on 
a regular basis, and many textbooks and design annuals offer 
beautiful examples that identify the typefaces used.
When I started out, I learned a lot by following in the footsteps 
of designers whose work I admired. People like Jan Tshichold 
and his wonderful work at Penguin Books, Fred Woodward 
and his eclectic editorial design for Rolling Stone in the late ’80s 
and ’90s, and, of course, Paul Rand and his amazing branding 
and identity systems. I tried similar combinations of typefaces 
they used to better understand how the typefaces functioned. 
Work from these and other designers served as a treasure map 
to typographic gold. Finding designers you like and adopting 
their type palettes can be a great way to build your own library.
As you become more familiar with typefaces, you may start 
to favor a handful of foundries. There are some foundries whose 
work I follow very closely, because they consistently produce 
great stuff that both speaks to me as a designer and is useful to 
the kind of design work I do. Some of my favorites are Mark 
Simonson Studio (fantastic revivals and, of course, Proxima 
Nova), Tim Ahrens and Shoko Mugikura’s Just Another Foundry 
(wonderful text faces), Font Bureau (amazing book and display 
types, and some of the best web fonts around through Webtype), 
and Darden Studio (lovely text and display faces, with italics 
that flow beautifully). With so many more foundries to love! 
See a longer list of my favorites in the Resources in the back of 
this book.

	
78	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Phew, where were we?
You’ve got oodles of ways to approach choosing an appropri­
ate typeface. But what happens when you need more than one?
METHODS FOR PAIRING
Pairing typefaces gives our designs more variety, and it makes 
it much easier to create hierarchy and contrast, so we can 
group similar types of information (e.g., headings, sidebars) 
under a common visual system and guide the reader around 
our websites.
One or two typefaces are enough for most designs. When in 
doubt, a good rule of thumb is to pair a serif and a sans serif. This 
provides you with what are likely the two most flexible kinds of 
typefaces, and nearly guarantees you have sufficient variation 
between the two as they’re inherently different. Obviously, this 
method doesn’t ensure a good pairing, but it should help you 
avoid a bad one.
When it comes to choosing and pairing typefaces, I keep 
two things in mind: distinction and harmony. To keep the system 
you’ve created for visual communication properly balanced, 
you need to choose typefaces that don’t compete too much 
with each other, but aren’t so similar as to be indistinguishable. 
For instance, I would avoid pairing two serifs like Caslon and 
Baskerville, because they share too many traits (FIG 4.16). Placing 
them in the same design wouldn’t yield any advantage, as most 
people wouldn’t be able to tell them apart. I’d be better off using 
one typeface, or, better yet, choosing a contrasting sans serif 
like Museo Sans.
It’s a tricky balance to pinpoint something that’s different and 
complementary, but we can achieve that by flexing what we’ve 
learned about the structure of letterforms, like stroke contrast 
and x-height.
Look for distinction
Creating distinction can be as simple as pairing typefaces with 
strong visual differences, as in the case of a decorative script 
like Bello and an angular sans serif like Auto (both designed 

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 79	
by Underware). Both are solid typefaces—nice aesthetics, full 
character sets, stylistic alternates, and OpenType features—and 
their visual contrast results in an interesting push and pull. Bello 
is like the eccentric friend in a road trip movie, while Auto is like 
the protagonist trying to get from point A to point B (FIG 4.17).
But the distinction need not be so pronounced. You can keep 
it subtle and still get the job done. Extending this example, you 
could pair stalwart Auto with a lower contrast or sturdier serif 
like Chaparral for a bookish departure. Although they’re built 
on similar bones—both feature straightforward, non-decorative 
letterforms—they’re still different type styles (sans serif versus 
serif), so they work well together (FIG 4.18).
If you do play it more subtly, be sure you have enough distinc­
tion between your two choices to make it work. In general, it 
can be difficult to pair typefaces that share a lot of traits. Don’t 
be too subtle. For instance, I usually avoid pairing two sans serifs 
or pairing two serifs together, because of the lack of distinction. 
Without enough contrast, the hierarchy is less clear, and we 
want to reinforce our design system whenever possible. Using 
typefaces that are too similar muddies that up.
You can also achieve distinction in the way you employ your 
typefaces. A strong type system with distinct sizes, styles, and 
FIG 4.16: Baskerville and Caslon are too similar and are easily confused when used together, 
but Museo Sans provides a nice contrast.

	
80	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
usage for specific kinds of content gets you the most mileage. 
(We’ll look closer at systems for typographic design in the next 
two chapters.) Visual changes like letter-spaced all caps, italics, 
bolds, condensed weights, colors, and combinations thereof 
make a diverse palette for your type, even within a lone typeface.
For example, on the latest version of my personal website, I 
use only Chaparral and a couple widths of Proxima Nova (FIG 
4.19). But by playing with the sizes and colors of particular ele­
ments, I’ve established a typographic system. Even though I 
only use two type families, the different elements on the page 
feel distinct and stand on their own.
FIG 4.17: Bello and Auto make a good pairing.
FIG 4.18: Chaparral and Auto make for a cozy, bookish feel.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 81	
Look for harmony
Typographic harmony comes from a combination of things: 
size, hierarchy, layout, color, juxtaposition, and anything else 
that affects the visual presentation of information. A good way 
to build a foundation for harmony is by finding typefaces with 
inherent visual relationships in their structure. Complementary 
forms strengthen connections between typefaces and, in turn, 
your design. For instance, many typefaces have similar skeletons 
or strong geometrical foundations based on circles and rectan­
gles. Find two typefaces that share similar shapes, like Helvetica 
FIG 4.19: My personal website uses only two typefaces, but still feels like it uses a rich 
typographic palette by playing with size, spacing, and color (http://bkaprt.com/owt/47/).

	
82	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
and Bodoni, and pair them together. Then they can play off of 
each other. Their shared skeletons form a visual union, but their 
contrasting letterforms spark healthy dissonance (FIG 4.20).
Harmony is based on both visual structure and gut instinct, 
but if you’re stuck, one reliable method is to work with type­
faces designed with systems in mind, like superfamilies. These 
systems commonly have a serif and sans serif counterpart meant 
to be used together.
Returning to the A Book Apart series as an example, I used 
FF Yoga and FF Yoga Sans by Xavier Dupré for the running text. 
Dupré designed these typefaces to complement each other, so 
they work nicely right out of the box. Both faces have the same 
basic structure but diverge beyond that, with one a nice book 
serif and the other a pleasingly low-contrast sans serif.
As another approach, opt for typefaces that share the same 
maker. Take Joanna and Gill Sans by Eric Gill (FIG 4.21). Just 
FIG 4.20: Same skeleton, different body. Helvetica and Bodoni pair well together, because 
they share similar underlying geometry but differ in contrast.
FIG 4.21: Joanna and Gill Sans were 
both made by Eric Gill and share a very 
similar skeleton.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 83	
as you can hear a new song by a favorite band and have it feel 
familiar, you can see the designer’s hand in these two faces.
You can simplify things further by staying within a family that 
has a variety of styles. For instance, a large family like Benton 
Modern gives you lots of options for establishing hierarchy by 
varying the weights or widths of different elements (FIG 4.22). I 
wouldn’t recommend using all of the weights from a large fam­
ily, but two or three are enough to give you a broad palette to 
work with. Here, I use Benton’s display weights for the head­
ings—including a condensed style for the sidebar—and Benton 
Modern RE for the copy, a text weight tailored for small sizes.
Start with one and build outward
The easiest way to tackle combining typefaces is to lock in 
one typeface choice and build on it. Remember how we pulled 
Helvetica apart to see how and why it looks the way it does? 
You can apply that same exercise to any typeface to find another 
one that would make a good companion.
For example, let’s say our top pick is Proxima Nova, a crisp, 
geometric sans serif. It has low stroke contrast, is a touch wide, 
and is more than a little round. That’s our starting point. From 
there, we can choose fonts with qualities that either juxtapose 
FIG 4.22: One typeface, the expansive Benton Modern family, readily supports a diverse 
typographic palette.

	
84	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
or complement those features. We may decide to play off of 
Proxima Nova’s linear strokes and generous width by pairing it 
with Abril, a high-contrast serif that’s a bit condensed (FIG 4.23). 
The simple openness of Proxima Nova pleasantly combines with 
Abril’s quiet austerity.
Alternatively, we could complement Proxima Nova’s uniform 
strokes with a low-contrast serif like FF Meta Serif. Both fonts 
are very clear and legible and feature a high x-height—so we 
have a lot of flexibility for text or display typesetting with this 
pairing (FIG 4.24). Proxima Nova feels modern and friendly set 
FIG 4.24: Pairing Proxima Nova and FF Meta Serif feels modern and friendly.
FIG 4.23: Proxima Nova and Abril contrast nicely.

	
Choosing and Pairing Typefaces	 85	
large as headlines, and FF Meta Serif adds a wonderful bookish 
quality to the text.
You can see how breaking down a typeface’s components 
helps you identify opportunities to create harmony or disso­
nance for the sake of your design system.
FIND YOUR OWN CLASSICS
To sum up, you have many avenues for choosing and pairing 
typefaces. It pays to be a design sponge in the world, so take 
note of what works and keep refining your visual palette. I pore 
over editorial design magazines and newspapers, because I love 
the way text looks in long form. I also love digging into well-
designed books that deeply consider the reading experience; 
I discovered one of my favorite text faces, Fred Smeijers’s FF 
Quadraat, by first seeing it in a book a friend was designing. (I’m 
pretty sure it was about mythical beasts. Or Batman.) Inspiration 
can hit when you least expect it.
Traditional printing, like posters and letterpress, also inspires 
and informs the way I design. Something about the constraint 
of a few colors or typefaces creates beautiful opportunities. I 
hoard posters and books, and take every chance I can to get the 
letterpress clanking.
Finding the kind of typographic design that speaks to you 
helps you spot your own influences and develop your own can­
on of design classics. To be an informed student of typography, 
you need to train your brain to look for good typography every­
where. This is actually easier than it sounds. Once you’re aware 
of type, you can’t help but notice the good and (unfortunately) 
the awful. But this is one of the parts of typography I enjoy most: 
we always have new methods and tools to discover at every turn, 
because typography is a living craft. We’re all standing on each 
other’s shoulders, pushing this rich tradition forward.

	
86	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Typography is an art of finding and shaping relationships be­
tween elements, from largest to smallest and smallest to largest. 
Now that you understand the technical and aesthetic sides of 
evaluating typefaces, let’s zoom out a little more and talk about 
how typography’s smaller building blocks come together as a 
communication system. In the next two chapters, we’ll explore 
how content elements within a design affect one another and 
how the nature of the medium itself shapes our designs.
Like any good system, typography provides a method to 
accomplish a task. A typographic system establishes hierarchy, 
meaning it helps us prioritize content based on individual ele­
ments and relationships between them. It also helps our readers 
easily scan chunks of information and understand what they’re 
looking at. When done right, a typographic system feels intui­
tive, like an unspoken set of instructions. Without any internal 
logic in place, our content may look like a monolithic block, 
essentially stranding readers in a dark room without so much 
as a match.5
TYPOGRAPHIC 
SYSTEMS

	
Typographic Systems	 87	
Luckily, we have some powerful tools at our disposal to help 
our typography form a strong foundation. And some of our most 
potent tools are also our most basic: size, space, color, and prox­
imity. Together, they give us an infinite number of possibilities 
for crafting our messages in effective, readable ways.
HIERARCHY AND CONTRAST
On the surface, hierarchy may seem like a simple visual trans­
lation in which the most important items are the biggest and 
the least important are the smallest, but it’s far more nuanced 
than that.
Size is one way to achieve hierarchy, but you could also do 
so with color or placement; the real heavy lifting happens when 
you combine two or more of these properties. The most impor­
tant things don’t always have to be the largest; they just need 
to be more distinguished than other elements. In other words, 
they need more contrast.
Contrast is, in my humble opinion, the most crucial tenet of 
graphic design. It instantly forges connections and distinctions 
between elements and, when used in concert with other tools 
like a grid, it helps our viewers discern what’s vital, what’s re­
lated, and what’s not. That information gives readers the ability 
to navigate our designs efficiently. Without contrast, everything 
on a page may appear similar in size and importance, leaving 
a viewer the choice of either reading and decoding every bit 
of information or bouncing away to look at adorable cat GIFs.
A new order
Hierarchy applies a systemic approach to grouping similar items 
and distinguishing dissimilar ones. We express hierarchy both 
semantically (in the underlying HTML markup) and visually 
(in our design). For instance, if you look at the default browser 
stylings for things like an h1 or a paragraph, you’ll see a baked-
in hierarchy: h1s are bigger than h2s and h3s, and are distinct 
from a paragraph’s style.
The best way to create a hierarchical typographic system 
is to first audit your website’s basic elements. You can break 

	
88	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
down these elements in a variety of ways. Sometimes it’s based 
on what the elements are semantically, as with headlines like 
h1 and h2 and so on; other times it’s based on what those ele­
ments need to do, as in the case of very small type like captions 
or specialized text like block quotes. Understanding the subtle 
distinctions helps you make your type more readable and ef­
ficient—and ensures that your type suits an element’s purpose.
One more note: since hierarchy is a system, be sure to keep it 
consistent. For instance, you may determine that headings and 
subheadings are always red and all caps, with supplementary 
text (like captions) set in Georgia at 12 pixels with a color of 
#666. Whatever you decide, once you’ve established those traits, 
deviating from the rules for similar kinds of content weakens 
your design and can confuse readers. To see what I mean, let’s 
look at some of the key elements we commonly encounter.
PARAGRAPHS
Ah, the humble paragraph, the basic building block for most web 
pages. Paragraphs come in many shapes, sizes, and categories, 
but for now, let’s talk about the kinds you commonly see for 
running text in articles.
Paragraphs are where we spend the most time when we 
read, so we need to be certain we’re using a typeface that is 
comfortable for a long stay. This isn’t too difficult a task; it’s 
more a matter of not making something uncomfortable to read. 
Luckily, we have a lot of leeway: choosing a sturdy typeface and 
setting it well will get you there almost every time. Typefaces 
with less flourish and a uniform shape make for pleasing reading 
experiences, as they fade into the background and let the text 
take center stage.
As we saw in the last chapter, picking paragraph typefac­
es means looking closely at the letterforms in action. Less is 
usually more—we’re not looking to impress anyone with our 
paragraph styles.
FIG 5.1 shows a fine start for paragraph styling. We have a 
good type size, a simple typeface choice of Chaparral, sufficient 
contrast with the background color, and decent spacing between 
the lines. Where we eventually end up with our paragraph style 

	
Typographic Systems	 89	
depends on other factors like intended use, device size, align­
ment, and more. We’ll look at those considerations in Chapter 6.
Type size
So, what’s a good font size? Is there a universal sweet spot, or 
is everything circumstantial? As we learned with the em box, 
numerical sizes can be deceiving since they don’t always reflect 
what a typeface actually looks like.
The best way to approach sizing is to consider the reader and 
the reading distance. Most people sit about 18–24 inches away 
from their screens when it comes to a desktop; for mobile de­
vices, it’s a bit less (FIG 5.2). Put simply: the farther we are from 
our device, the larger the affordance of type size.
Considering the typical distance and common text sizes in 
printed matter—about 10 points or roughly 13 pixels, which 
reflects shorter reading distances—I tend to make my base type 
size 16 or 18 pixels, or 1–1.2 ems. I’ve listed fixed pixel units so we 
have a shared understanding of roughly how big the body text 
should be. In your own work, however, it’s still best to use ems, 
rems (root em, whose value is relative to the html element), or 
percentages—all of whose relative sizes let you better respond to 
a gamut of devices and viewports. You can still use pixels when 
your elements require a specific size. Otherwise, relative units 
FIG 5.1: A simple, pleasing paragraph style set in Chaparral.

	
90	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
give the greatest control over keeping your sizing flexible while 
allowing users to resize text and pages within their browsers. 
For more on ems and rems, check out Jeremy Church’s article 
on the topic (http://bkaprt.com/owt/49/).
In general, I would rather err on the side of making some­
thing too large than risk it being too small. When in doubt, 
make it bigger. This is true few times in design, but I’ve often 
found it to be the case in designing for the screen. Don’t tell 
your clients though.
Measure and line-height
Conventional wisdom is to aim for a 45–75 character measure 
(the length of a line of text) on average in your running text, 
depending on the particular font, size, and setting. While you 
can go above or below that range—some news websites capably 
accommodate measures in the 80s—it’s a good yardstick. That 
FIG 5.2: The reading distance and type sizes from a desktop monitor are roughly 
comparable to those of a magazine held at arm’s length. Photograph courtesy of Wilson 
Miner (http://bkaprt.com/owt/48/). 

	
Typographic Systems	 91	
range exists because of the motion an eye makes from the end of 
one line to the start of the next. As lines contain more characters 
and grow longer, it’s harder for a reader’s eyes to successfully 
make the trip.
If you do need to use a longer measure, you’ll want to bal­
ance it out by increasing the amount of space between lines 
(line-height). The extra spacing gives the reader’s eyes room 
to make the trip and reduces the chance of losing their place 
along the way (FIG 5.3).
Similarly, if you’re on the shorter end of the spectrum, you 
can get away with less line-height, since the distance from line 
end to line beginning is a shorter trip (FIG 5.4).
Awareness of line-height is especially important when 
dealing with responsive websites. As blocks of content expand 
and contract, you may need to adjust line-height values along 
with the font-size to ensure the type remains at a comfortable 
FIG 5.3: A longer measure needs a bit more line spacing than a shorter one.

	
92	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
measure. We’ll touch on responsive design and the effects on 
measure and line-height in the next chapter.
A true ideal line-height doesn’t exist, because every type­
face is different. You need to take into account the design of the 
typeface as well as the typesetting. Is this a wide or decorative 
typeface? You may need more space between lines to let the 
details breathe. Is this a narrow text column, as you might see in 
hanging captions in an article’s margins? You could use a smaller 
type size and keep the line-height tighter than the article text 
next to the caption. By observing these factors, you can judge 
what a particular setting requires.
A good starting point with line-height is about 1.2–1.8. It’s 
best to omit units for line-height, as its values can get messy 
by dint of CSS’s cascading properties (see CSS Tricks’ Almanac 
for specifics (http://bkaprt.com/owt/50/). It takes some trial and 
error to see what’s right for a given typeface at a given size in a 
given situation. I find it useful to declare a line-height and see 
how it feels to read text at that setting. Do letter ascenders and 
descenders crash into one another or run a little too close be­
tween lines? If so, more line-height is needed. Are the spaces 
between the lines more prominent than the lines themselves? If 
so, try reducing the line-height. When you find an appropriate 
line-height, the text will seem to fall into a natural rhythm, 
feeling neither too far apart nor too close.
FIG 5.4: Line spacing that’s too tight makes text feel dense and congested, while line 
spacing that’s too loose makes the lines feel like disconnected elements.

	
Typographic Systems	 93	
Indents and blank lines
There are several ways to denote a new paragraph, from out­
dented first lines to actual paragraph marks (¶), called pilcrows. 
On the web, these approaches skew toward either a blank line 
between paragraphs or an indent of the first line (FIG 5.5). While 
there is no right way to mark a new paragraph—it’s largely based 
on personal preference or house style—it’s a solid idea to rein­
force common patterns, because people know what they mean.
Writing on the web tends to be more “chunked,” where each 
paragraph holds a complete thought—as opposed to something 
like fiction, where a full line break may disrupt dialogue—so 
paragraphs can stand farther apart. As a bonus, these bite-sized 
chunks prove useful for skimming content.
If you use a blank line, make it equal to your type size or a 
touch smaller. For a first-line indent, it’s customary to indent 
about 1 em. Again, this falls to personal preference. The crucial 
thing is making the distinction of the new paragraph apparent.
I like to think of paragraphs as akin to the underlying drum­
beat in a song. They lay the groundwork for other kinds of 
content. Building outward, let’s talk about a common paragraph 
companion: the headline.
FIG 5.5: Two common ways to denote paragraphs: a blank line between paragraphs or an 
indent of the first line.

	
94	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Headlines
Headlines are the attention grabbers. People skim them to decide 
whether or not to keep reading. Headlines come in a variety of 
forms, from straightforward article headings and subheadings 
to big marketing taglines and everything in between.
The headline marks the starting line for a text. It orients read­
ers and serves as a kind of handshake and smile. It’s your first 
chance to make an impression (FIG 5.6). A headline should not 
only distinguish itself from other text on the page (so as not to 
confuse the eye), but also help anchor the page as a whole. For 
the most part, headlines appear as larger text, but you can also 
opt to emphasize them through weight, spacing, alignment, or 
FIG 5.6: Headlines on Trent Walton’s website (http://bkaprt.com/owt/51/).

	
Typographic Systems	 95	
color. A small headline can flatten your hierarchy and stunt one 
of your visual system’s strongest tools. But a sturdy headline 
welcomes readers and guides them through the text.
A headline is typically set at some ratio larger than the body 
text. I usually work in simple math, doubling or tripling the 
body text size to find a potential headline size. So, I may try a 
body text size of 12 pixels and a headline size of 32 pixels. We 
can even split some of the difference to get a subhead size of 16 
pixels. Take these numbers as rough starters; you always need 
to scrutinize how they look when typeset (FIG 5.7).
Once you have your base headline size, you can establish re­
lationships between headings and subheadings. A reader should 
be able to distinguish, even at a glance, the role of one element 
from another. The visual prominence of an element may not al­
ways reflect its semantic value, but key elements will often have 
greater visual weight than other page content. Happily, many 
of the visual relationships on the web come prebuilt, thanks to 
semantic markup: h1, h2, and so on. Your visual styling should 
FIG 5.7: A headline at 32 pixels, subhead at 16 pixels, and text at 12 pixels.

	
96	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
reinforce those roles, which often means moving from the 
highest semantic element (h1) downward. That gives the reader 
a pathway through your content. If you set your h2 the same 
size as your h1, a reader may rightly think they’ve started a new 
article rather than a subsection.
In the last example (FIG 5.7), you can see that the headline 
is at the top, followed by some text, a subhead, and then more 
text. The difference in heading sizing provides enough contrast 
to set up this relationship. A reader can assume that the largest 
text is important because it appears first in the reading flow, 
and because it’s so big. Also, the paragraphs are related not only 
because they both fall under the headings, but also because 
they’re the same size. This is a subtle visual exchange, one that 
we encounter enough in life as to be ingrained in us.
Contrasts like those are shorthand methods for creating visu­
al hierarchy and building a typographic system in your designs, 
which in turn will imbue your work with variety and structure. 
They may seem simple, but don’t mistake simple for obvious.
Once I understand the general relationships between ele­
ments, I look at how my typeface choices can support them. 
For instance, if I need a typeface for headlines, I like to find 
something that both looks good large, to let the details of the 
typeface shine, and holds up against fluctuating word lengths.
For a typical news site with numerous articles, you need to be 
able to deal with headlines of varying lengths, names that may 
require punctuation or accented characters, cited works set in 
italics, and more. Your typeface choice must handle these with 
grace. A slightly condensed face can work well in these situa­
tions, because you can fit more characters on each line and avoid 
awkward line breaks. For instance, FF Meta Serif is a somewhat 
narrow face, which accommodates a couple more characters per 
line than a wider serif like Georgia does (FIG 5.8).
Many folks, myself included, tend to use sans serifs for head­
lines. It comes down to simple geometry: most sans serifs can 
be packed in tighter than serifs because the letters take up less 
space. This allows for more characters per line and a larger type 
size. As you see in FIG 5.9, FF Meta takes up a little less room 
than its serif counterpart at the same type size. It’s a small gain, 

	
Typographic Systems	 97	
but it’s enough to keep a word from wrapping to a new line and 
gives us a bit more space to make our headlines bigger.
Another kind of headline is more of an offshoot—it doesn’t 
always accompany paragraphs and is sometimes quite large or 
decorative. It’s a bit of an outlier and has more leeway to shake 
things up. I lump this into a category I like to call big type.
Big type
While big type is a kind of headline, it may not be atop an 
article. We often see these on homepages and splash pages for 
marketing sites.
Type this large is best considered in the same way you might a 
photograph: a picture of type that anchors a layout or creates the 
sort of mood you might spot on a movie poster or book cover.
FIG 5.8: A narrower typeface like FF Meta Serif helps keep longer headlines from wrapping.
FIG 5.9: Sans serif typefaces work well for headlines, because they often take up less 
horizontal space than serifs.

	
98	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
On Siteleaf (http://bkaprt.com/owt/52/), the headline is a large 
focal point for the page (FIG 5.10). It not only informs the reader, 
but also sets an open and welcoming atmosphere alongside the 
image. The big type complements the large screenshot through 
its proximity and color, creating a unified visual. Snappy head­
lines like these are the hallmarks of marketing design.
The same approaches for headlines apply here, with a couple 
of extra caveats. If you’ve been eyeing a decorative typeface, a 
one-off use here may be just the right amount of personality. 
Similarly, any errors in your text like incorrect punctuation 
(mind your smart quotes!) or bad line breaks will only be more 
apparent because they’re larger. With responsive designs, it’s 
also a good idea to tailor your line breaks. Visitors come to your 
site via all sorts of screen sizes, so consider customizing the type 
size and line breaks to keep the headline organized.
Go the extra mile and take care of how your headlines re­
spond to varying screen sizes and conditions, rather than letting 
a browser handle the reflow. Some good ways to approach that 
level of detail are the jQuery plugins FitText and Lettering by 
Paravel or Font-to-Width by Nick Sherman and Chris Lewis.
FitText (http://bkaprt.com/owt/53/) allows an element’s type 
size to increase or decrease in relation to its container so that it 
FIG 5.10: The big headline on Siteleaf’s site is text that also acts as a large graphical element.

	
Typographic Systems	 99	
completely fills the width. This additional control is especially 
handy when working responsively: your big, important head­
line is always full-width (FIG 5.11).
Font-to-Width (http://bkaprt.com/owt/54/) builds on similar 
concepts, but takes advantage of large type families by letting 
you specify a different typeface weight to fill a container’s width 
instead of changing the type size. Both are useful in different 
situations: FitText changes your type’s size, while Font-to-Width 
changes the actual font.
Lettering (http://bkaprt.com/owt/55/) wraps the individual 
letters of a specified element so that you can access them with 
CSS, allowing for some quick adjustments to kerning (the space 
FIG 5.11: FitText is a jQuery plugin that lets you size text up or down relative to 
its container.

	
100	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
between individual letters), colors of particular letters, or any­
thing else you think up (FIG 5.12). Unlike in desktop applica­
tions for print design, we don’t have much built-in control over 
kerning in CSS, as those settings mostly reside with the type 
designer. For limited use like a big headline, it’s helpful to have 
more control over the way letters lock up, especially in difficult 
letter pairings that typically end up with extra space (e.g., most 
anything involving a capital A or T).
Obviously, you wouldn’t want to use any of these plugins 
for a large amount of text. But for a crucial homepage headline, 
these methods give you the flexibility of a prepared image while 
retaining all the advantages of live text (as we saw in Chapter 2).
Some great new CSS values are also rolling out in browsers 
to support viewports, like vw (1vw = 1% of viewport width) and 
vh (1vh = 1% of viewport height), which let you achieve similar 
results without the need for JavaScript. Browser support for 
these values is still scarce, but it’s on the rise. For more on this, 
check out Chris Coyier’s article “Viewport Sized Typography” 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/56/).
SMALL TYPE
Small type is comprised of an unassuming variety of support­
ing elements. Interface, which we’ll cover shortly, is a common 
kind of small type, but article-specific categories like captions, 
footnotes, and asides are also important to distinguish.
FIG 5.12: Lettering is a jQuery plugin that appends dynamic classes to a given piece of text; 
you can style the classes individually with CSS.

	
Typographic Systems	 101	
First, realize that small type serves a specific purpose. It 
marks a visual contrast and shift in tone—a separate point of 
information from a text’s main stream. The change in size is 
equivalent to a change in the tone or volume of your voice when 
speaking. You’re still the speaker, but this is something worth 
saying differently. A change in type size (which may be as simple 
as 80% of our base type size) signals that shift (FIG 5.13).
As this type is smaller, you need to be extra aware of your 
typeface choice. Test your type in context to make sure it re­
mains legible and clean under your sizing conditions. You can 
use the same typeface as your body text if it holds up well to the 
smaller sizing, or choose something better suited to small sizes. 
Picking a separate caption typeface gives you the added ability 
to visually signal a change in voice—as when a side note comes 
from an editor instead of the author.
Another example of small type is the line of contact infor­
mation, which can be important even if infrequently accessed 
(FIG 5.14). It doesn’t need much prominence and, luckily, it’s an 
accepted convention that contact information appears at the 
bottom of a page, so people know where to find it. As a result, 
the type can be small and understated if that serves your design.
FIG 5.13: A simple caption treatment on Liz Danzico’s site, Bobulate 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/57/).

	
102	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
One last note on small type: if we’re talking about more than 
a few lines, small type may not be the way to go. Prolonged read­
ing of small text gets cumbersome really fast. For quick asides 
and captions, though, it’s perfect.
OTHER NOTABLE TYPES
For the rest of the common elements you may encounter, you 
can mix and match the approaches we’ve already looked at. 
Elements like blockquote, code, status messages in modal win­
dows, and anything else outside the norm pop up from time to 
time. The biggest thing to remember with any other element 
is to evaluate its purpose, its importance, and where it appears 
in context.
In the case of a blockquote, some small-text principles apply 
(though it’s less about size). A blockquote is a bit of text quoted 
outside of an article’s main text. It’s common to set a blockquote 
apart visually from the normal text to mark this change in voice, 
and this can be a good opportunity to switch from a serif to a 
sans serif (or vice versa, depending on your body typeface). In 
print, quotes are typically distinguished with indented text and 
italics, but on the web, the patterns can be more stylized. You 
can mark quotes with italics, a change in type size, a change in 
typeface, the addition of larger open and close quotation marks, 
a change in color or border, or any combination of the above.
In the case of pull quotes, you may even take an ornamental 
approach by setting the blockquote larger to add interest. These 
can be particularly effective in running text to add some variety 
to type and imagery (FIG 5.15). Pull quotes serve as a nice visual 
anchor and draw readers into the article.
Some of these styles are fine for a quote here or there, but if 
you’re doing lots of quoting, a more subtle style (as we often see 
FIG 5.14: A typical contact line.

	
Typographic Systems	 103	
FIG 5.15: A stylistic pull quote treatment grabs a skimming reader’s attention 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/58/).
FIG 5.16: A simple blockquote style on kottke.org (http://bkaprt.com/owt/59/).

	
104	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
in print) is probably a better choice to keep the article text and 
the quotes from fighting each other.
On Jason Kottke’s website (FIG 5.16), you see probably the 
most common blockquote style, which makes the type a little 
smaller than the base type and lighter in color. This works well, 
because it’s a simple visual change that marks a shift in voice 
while still feeling tied to the rest of the text.
So now we’ve got multiple ways to handle text-heavy content. 
But that’s only one facet of the web. What about the elements 
that we not only read, but also click, tap, and otherwise interact 
with? That’s right, cue interfaces!
INTERFACE
User interface (UI) refers to elements that enable actions and 
give context within a website or app (FIG 5.17). Common UI 
components include site navigation, buttons, form elements and 
labels, status messages, account links, and anything in between.
These elements serve a dual purpose: like paragraphs, they’re 
content, but like headlines, they may be set large to nab atten­
tion or anchor a layout. For instance, the text in a button may 
be bigger or smaller than our base text size, depending on its 
purpose and place on the page. A button that supports a headline 
or call to action requires a more prominent visual style, whereas 
a button for compulsory secondary actions (log out, search, etc.) 
may figure smaller (FIG 5.18).
Because websites have various layers of UI elements depend­
ing on their function, we must gauge the visual weight needed 
to convey an element’s idea and the hierarchy required for its 
purpose. Important UI elements like navigation may need more 
visual prominence than less frequently accessed elements like a 
logout button. That isn’t to say they aren’t both important, but 
we can visually rank these elements based on their use.
Even with a variety of uses and kinds, some conventions for 
these items do emerge. Many web apps tend to make UI text 
smaller so they can squeeze a lot of elements into a limited space. 
Keep the text legible above all else. What use is an important 
button if I can’t read it?

	
Typographic Systems	 105	
FIG 5.17: Twitter’s header shows common interface elements like a navigation bar and a 
search form.
FIG 5.18: Typecast’s homepage features a bright, prominent button and a less prominent 
secondary link in gray text (http://bkaprt.com/owt/60/).

	
106	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Because of how quickly a header can become crowded with 
options (especially after signing into a site where more options 
are revealed), I favor sans serif typefaces for UI. As we saw ear­
lier, they can be set smaller and a little tighter than serifs. And 
in these situations, every bit of space counts, especially if you 
need to translate your navigation labels into other languages.
There’s no accepted size or styling for UI, because it depends 
on its purpose and importance. But no matter what kind of in­
terface element we’re talking about, we need to make it legible 
and recognizable to a user.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Once you have your building blocks accounted for, you can as­
semble your typographic system and then focus on hierarchical 
relationships. Which elements are most important? What rela­
tionships do elements share? To figure this out, you can look at 
the markup and see what the semantic structure looks like. An 
h1 is likely our biggest and most important text, and then down 
the line to h2, h3, and so on.
That’s fine for text, but what about navigational elements, im­
ages, and other kinds of content that need to fit in? Always think 
about your intent—the things you want a visitor to do—and use 
that to influence your visual styling.
If you want someone to read an article, focus your efforts on 
styling the text. Make sure it’s nice and readable, with a clear 
entry point—like a big, appealing headline that shepherds read­
ers into the article.
If you want someone to watch a video or register for an ac­
count, focus on making those elements shine. They don’t need 
to be the biggest items on the page, but they should have enough 
heft and visual prominence through placement and color to 
draw attention.
Let’s look at a content-heavy website like the New York Times 
and examine some of the decisions that give the design structure 
and flow (FIG 5.19).
Right off the bat, we see a few different kinds of content: past 
the masthead and navigation, we have a big headline and excerpt 
at the top left, some text with an accompanying large image in 

	
Typographic Systems	 107	
the middle, and some smaller articles listed on the top right. 
Using what we learned in the last chapter, you can pick up on 
the ways the site distinguishes various elements:
•	 On the top left, the large headline—set in italics for further 
distinction—quickly grabs a reader’s attention and provides 
an entry point.
•	 Because of contrast, it’s even more likely that a reader’s eye is 
drawn to the middle image; its size and placement set it apart.
•	 Other text may be big, too, like secondary headlines, but that 
central, lone image is the page’s focal point.
FIG 5.19: The New York Times’ homepage, a great example of hierarchy and contrast.

	
108	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
So, if mammoth type or images are surefire ways to pull in 
a reader, why don’t we stuff our pages with them? If you think 
about it, that type and image are so alluring because they’re 
unique. If we bombarded the page with more images and an 
army of big headlines, each would bear the same weight and can­
cel out any contrast. Without contrast, we don’t have hierarchy, 
and without hierarchy, the typography feels indistinguishable 
and our readers are left without a map.
On the New York Times site, contrasts in type size, style, and 
placement apply structure to its content and set up relationships. 
When we first glance at something, we tend to seek patterns; 
we mentally group similar elements and try to uncover a peck­
ing order.
Titles on the New York Times homepage are set large, with 
key headlines closer to the top. Subheadings and bylines tie into 
the headline at smaller sizes but remain visually distinct from 
paragraphs. This styling underscores that the subheading is 
part of the same system as the headline, while establishing that 
the subheading is hierarchically less important. The paragraph 
excerpts tap into this same hierarchical system; while their type 
size is even smaller than that of the subheading, the paragraphs 
are set and styled the same as one another. This consistency 
means readers quickly understand that these chunks are similar 
kinds of content.
I’ve noted simple arrangements here, but, together, they form 
the backbone of a strong typographic system built on relation­
ships. All of typography is based upon a reflexive relationship: 
the small things inform the big things, and the big things inform 
the small things. The sum of this give and take means the differ­
ence between beautiful and forgettable.
We’ve covered the most important typographic consider­
ations you can make at the micro level. But what about the other 
end of the spectrum: the page? How do larger elements, like the 
browser window or grid systems, affect our lovingly crafted 
paragraphs and headlines? Let’s look at the big picture.

	
Composition	 109	
Type helps form the message our designs seek to impart, but 
it resides in a larger environment made up of a page, a browser, 
and a device. From the outside looking in, we understand that 
our text, our fonts, and our beautiful typography do not exist in 
a vacuum. The shape of our design and the web’s fluctuating na­
ture directly influence our typographic choices and everything 
we hope we convey.
Depending on the problems we’re trying to solve, our ap­
proach can take different forms. Sometimes our process follows 
a straightforward and ordered path, especially given the num­
ber of fixed constraints a project may impose, like ad sizes or 
required artwork and assets. Other times, our process is more 
malleable, like working with clay. A sculptor may sit down to 
sculpt something without a clear idea of the exact form it will 
take; sometimes we need to start pushing and pulling on the clay 
to see what comes out of it.
I often work in what I consider rough typographic explo­
rations, even if they’re in a high-fidelity environment like 
COMPOSITION
6

	
110	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Photoshop or a browser, to see how the content speaks to me 
and if it becomes apparent how it wants to be set. Just as planks 
of wood have a grain to observe when you’re building some­
thing, so too does our content.
Whatever path we embark on, composition of our layout and 
typographic systems needs to take our medium’s constraints 
into account.
KNOWN UNKNOWNS
If we all sat down and read the same printed book, we’d likely 
experience it under similar constraints. We’d be limited to the 
same page size, type, and layout. Printed books are a static for­
mat. From the designer’s initial layout of the book to its trip to 
the press bed, the warehouse, the bookshelf, and your hands, 
the output of that book doesn’t change. It’s delivered exactly 
as the designer conceived it. That’s consistency you can plan 
around, and it builds on principles of mass production that have 
held constant for many decades.
Compare that with any website. If we were all to visit the 
same site, what we each see would be determined by a number 
of cascading factors, like our chosen device (desktop, mobile, 
tablet, etc.), the physical screen size, the screen resolution, our 
chosen browser, the size of the browser window, the browser 
settings, and more. Some of these factors can cause drastic dif­
ferences in our experiences. Some may give us the impression 
that the type is too small, others may cause us to miss something 
important just off screen, and still others may make it nearly 
impossible to view the web page at all.
These factors are at once a blessing and a curse. For those of 
us making websites, they can cause seemingly endless, frustrat­
ing hours of debugging code, and for those of us viewing, they 
can stand in the way of doing something as simple as reading 
the news.
But, understanding that these things are baked into the way 
the web works gives us tremendous power. We can tailor our 
content to adapt to virtually any screen size and to look pretty 
good while doing so. Sure, it’s more difficult to achieve the set 
precision you get with designing for a physical book’s single size, 

	
Composition	 111	
but we gain the advantage of having a design that can potentially 
be viewed by almost anyone, anywhere, on anything.
All of these factors prove to be a challenge for managing 
typography. How can you ensure that your type feels right on 
any screen?
RESPONSIVE TYPOGRAPHY
While the full gamut of responsive design falls outside of this 
book’s scope, it’s important to briefly go over its effects on 
typography, namely: sizing. Though I’m framing this around 
the idea of responsive design, the same principles apply to 
stand-alone mobile sites, applications, and any specialized ver­
sion of your website targeted at various devices. This includes 
your site’s design at its largest size on a huge screen, the myriad 
in-between breakpoints, all the way down to the smallest, palm-
sized screen.
As your site responds to various displays and devices, your 
type needs to maintain its integrity and adapt with the layout. As 
we saw in Chapter 5, you can relieve many sizing headaches by 
using relative units like ems or percentages for type, the widths 
of columns, and the widths of other page elements. This keeps 
your hierarchy intact as your designs and typography grow 
and shrink in size. It’s still a catch-all method though, so you 
may need to tailor your sizing to ensure a better experience and 
visual lockup.
Happily, you have help—and you can still rely on some con­
stants. With the advent of responsive web design, you can use 
CSS media queries to specify breakpoints and tailor your con­
tainer widths—and thus the widths of the lines of text inside 
those containers—to always be an appropriate length. The 45–75 
characters per line range is still a good starting point, but you’ll 
need to see what that looks like in a typeface at a given size. 
If your line lengths grow longer at larger breakpoints, your 
type size should increase too. Conversely, as your line lengths 
shorten, your type size can decrease.
You may, however, need to further adjust your line-height 
to suit unknown screens. The line-height that worked so well 
at a display size for your desktop may appear too large on a 

	
112	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
smaller phone display. You might need to compensate to make 
things look right. If you’re sticking with a typical line-height 
of 1.5, you might nudge it down to 1.2 or 1.3 on smaller screens, 
as you’ll have shorter line lengths that won’t need as much 
breathing room.
On designer Trent Walton’s site, his base type size gets quite 
large on a big monitor, 137.5% with a 1.6 line-height, but as the 
page or device width gets smaller, the base font size drops to 
100% with a 1.4 line-height to better accommodate the shorter 
line lengths (FIG 6.1).
Methods like these are simple to implement but powerful, 
because they can govern so much of your typography’s visual 
presentation. Type and all of your page elements can be spun 
out of these relative measurements. That links everything to­
gether like Powers of Ten, as the small influences the big and the 
big influences the small. So whenever the screen, device, or 
parameters change, your design responds. And whenever you 
need to make changes, you can alter the way your layout works 
by modifying only a few values.
FIG 6.1: The type size and line lengths in Trent Walton’s design subtly adapt depending on 
the screen or device size (http://bkaprt.com/owt/61/).

	
Composition	 113	
No matter which device someone is viewing your work on, 
you want to give them the best experience possible. Luckily, 
type is like water flowing into a glass; it fills whatever container 
you put it in. You just have to make sure the content suits the 
width of the container. But how do several containers on the 
same page affect your typography?
COMPOSING THE PAGE
Understanding the constraints in our medium informs our de­
sign approach and better prepares us for things we can’t plan 
for. One of the best ways to help our design system serve as a 
solid foundation is to equip ourselves with a layout plan. That’s 
right, everyone’s favorite design topic: grids!
Grids for layout
Much has been written about the use of grids, and rightly so. 
They’re handy as all get-out and also one of the most misunder­
stood design elements. A grid helps you organize your content 
and reinforce your typographic hierarchy. While hierarchy lets 
you plan your typography at a micro level, a grid allows you to 
arrange the type and everything else it interacts with on the page 
at a macro level. It helps readers traverse content and exposes an 
informational system to them. For example, if you use a grid and 
your headlines always appear in a certain spot or your images 
always appear at certain dimensions, readers can recognize that 
consistency. Those patterns are signposts that light the way for 
viewers to find what they’re looking for in the content and to 
distinguish between elements.
Grids have gotten a bad rap because, on the surface, they ap­
pear too restrictive a tool for layout. Many folks are still under 
the impression that grids limit and force a designer to simply fill 
out prearranged buckets with content and images, like a design 
paint-by-number kit. To the uninitiated, that may be the case; 
a grid looks like little more than a rigid framework. But a grid’s 
power lies in the suggestion of flow and alignment. A grid does 
not dictate where elements go; it merely serves as a collection 
of possibilities (FIG 6.2).

	
114	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
A grid allows you to frame your layout with purpose to align 
page elements and build hierarchical relationships. Put plainly, 
a grid is an essential building block for intentional design.
Many kinds of grid systems exist, though you may be most 
familiar with a column grid. Most grid frameworks for the web 
consist of uniform vertical columns spaced evenly across a page. 
But as you can see in FIG 6.3, this is only one type. Modular grids 
are similar to column grids but have lots of horizontal lines that 
divide columns into a matrix of modules. Hierarchical grids or­
ganize disparate kinds of flexible content (cue dramatic music: 
like a web page!) based on their needs to grow and shrink, rather 
than at regular intervals.
I often use a combination of grids in my work. For instance, 
on my personal site, I employ a hierarchical grid to layer ele­
ments like a cake, and within that, I sometimes use a column 
grid to vertically organize things.
A hierarchical grid slats horizontal modules vertically one 
after another, moving down the page. This linear procession, 
like Hansel and Gretel leaving a trail of bread crumbs, gently 
leads a viewer down a path. The vertical flow from top to bottom 
FIG 6.2: Khoi Vinh’s Subtraction uses a basic eight-column grid 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/62/).

	
Composition	 115	
FIG 6.3: Some common kinds of grid systems for the web.
FIG 6.4: My site with a hierarchical grid overlay (left), and a column grid overlay (right).

	
116	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
FIG 6.5: A grid system lets you improvise on a consistent structure to achieve varied layouts.
FIG 6.6: The Grid System site uses a basic six-column grid with an underlying baseline grid 
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/63/).

	
Composition	 117	
focuses the design on one message—in this case, the article—and 
reinforces a natural hierarchy. As a bonus, a hierarchical grid 
easily lends itself to the stacked, one-column layouts common 
in responsive web design’s smaller breakpoints (FIG 6.4).
But a page is multidimensional, and we must also consider the 
horizontal axis. For my site, I used a column grid in addition to 
the hierarchical grid to organize elements across the page. For 
instance, the columns provide regular intervals to space ele­
ments out, but also separate different content types like columns 
of body text or sidebars. These divisions are especially effective 
for the large footer and complex articles, because they extend the 
design system to have more possibilities inside the hierarchical 
grid’s layer cake (FIG 6.5).
That’s a quick tour of grids, but their usefulness cannot be 
understated. If a design is to provide a clear message, its form 
must be clear as well. A layout grid helps us put our best face 
forward. I have one last grid I want to touch on, and it’s a special 
one just for type.
Baseline grids
A baseline grid is a series of rows spun out of the spacing between 
baselines in text, or the invisible line that letters sit on. It’s a 
means to horizontally align all the type on the page, including 
captions, headlines, and running text (FIG 6.6).
In print, baseline grids evolved to serve two purposes: to 
provide a consistent rhythm to text as it cascades down a page, 
and, more important, to deal with the printed page’s inherent 
translucency. As light shines through a printed page, text aligned 
on the same grid on both sides of the paper keeps the text from 
looking distorted. If the text were misaligned, you’d see the faint 
whisper of reversed text through the page.
But do these constraints apply to a web page?
The first point on vertical rhythm is debatable, at least when 
it comes to web design. The more variables you throw at a 
baseline grid, the harder it is to use. A single typeface at various 
sizes aligns to the grid easily enough. But once you add a second 
typeface, you have to contend with the properties specific to 

	
118	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
each of them. One typeface may require more spacing than the 
other, which may not work with your baseline grid. Add im­
ages, videos, and other assets of varying dimensions to a page, 
and the difficulty in maintaining the baseline grid compounds.
The second point about page translucency and ghostly text 
is moot on a screen.
Further, layout applications typically used for print, like 
Adobe InDesign, boast many more affordances to automate us­
ing a baseline grid. A designer can easily establish styles to break 
out of the grid as needed, and get back on rhythm afterward—as 
you might see in a large headline that goes off-grid and breaks to 
multiple lines. On the web, CSS isn’t optimized to achieve this 
level of control yet, and any attempts to emulate it usually lead 
to a mire of additional rules and headaches.
So, when should you use baseline grids on the web? Perhaps 
the best use case is aligning columns of text that appear next 
to each other, as with multicolumn websites or secondary ele­
ments (e.g., pull quotes and sidebars). The baseline grid keeps 
a consistent rhythm vertically across the horizontal blocks. 
Overall, however, I’ve found baseline grids more trouble than 
they’re worth.
Unlike the physical page, the web is a fluid medium, and base­
line grids seek to reinforce an idealized web where the designer 
has ultimate control over the reading experience. Factors like 
browser rendering, layout interpretations, image sizes, ad sizes, 
and general unforeseen wonkiness make employing a baseline 
grid pretty time intensive. You can achieve rhythm through size 
and spacing just as well. The most important thing to shoot for, 
whether you use a baseline grid or not, is a nice even texture 
and pacing to your design.
ALIGNMENT AND HYPHENATION
Now that we’ve looked at how to pace content with various 
grids, we must also examine how type responds to its container’s 
width when line breaks occur and the various options for text 
alignment. Currently, we have four basic alignment types: left, 
right, center, and justify (FIG 6.7). Left, right, and centered 
refer to where the text aligns, and these styles include uneven 

	
Composition	 119	
“ragged” edges. Justified text aligns to both the left and right 
sides of its container by expanding or compressing the spaces 
on each line.
Most magazine and book text is justified and makes ample 
use of hyphenation, as it creates pleasing shapes from the text 
blocks and is an efficient use of space. Until recently, this has 
been very difficult to do on the web. Hyphenation wasn’t read­
ily available, and—depending on factors like font selection and 
size—justification could produce less desirable results (FIG 6.8).
Things have progressed a little, and you can now enable crude 
hyphenation with CSS:
-webkit-hyphens: auto;
-moz-hyphens: auto;
hyphens: auto;
Be forewarned: the results are unpredictable. Desktop appli­
cations like InDesign have extensive libraries and options that 
let you configure hyphenation thresholds to avoid undesirable 
results, like multiple sequential lines that end in hyphens. But on 
the web, we don’t have anything that approaches that flexibility 
yet. So while at first blush a hyphenated text block may seem to 
FIG 6.7: Types of text alignment.

	
120	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
FIG 6.8: CSS hyphenation is a balancing act. Hyphenation may create more pleasing shapes 
for text, but it may also break words in unexpected places (http://bkaprt.com/owt/64/).
FIG 6.9: By default, justified text on the web doesn’t provide the fine control you may see 
with a desktop publishing application, yielding unsightly rivers in your paragraphs (right).

	
Composition	 121	
create a more pleasing shape on the page, once you settle in to 
read, you may find some awkward line breaks.
Justification suffers from a similar lack of fine control. In a 
world of publishing that still relies on templates to make sense 
of dynamic text dumped out of a CMS, we do little more than 
cross our fingers for a good result when justifying text.
Beyond CSS, many scripts out there can programmatically 
do a better job hyphenating text, but you’ll need to weigh the 
addition of another page asset against nicer line breaks.
The narrower the text column, the more the problems with 
justification and hyphenation are exacerbated. Varying word 
lengths, unpredictable reading environments, custom settings, 
and unknown font substitutions can produce an unexpected 
collection of rivers, or apparent openings cascading vertically 
through text (FIG 6.9).
Both justified type and hyphenation are very potent tools in 
laying out type, but be sure they work well with the typefaces 
you use and their settings in your design.
TYPOGRAPHIC COLOR
Every typeface has color, and when set, it gives the overall page 
a color too. I’m not referring to an actual hue; I mean the gray 
value. To see what it looks like, squint your eyes at the bits of 
text in FIG 6.10.
I’ve provided a little cheat sheet in the form of the gray circle 
above each text block. That gray value is the text’s typograph­
ic color. Color is created by both the letterforms themselves 
(some fonts may have more color if their letterforms have heavy 
strokes, high contrast between thicks and thins, or a larger x-
height) and their settings (tight lines or letter-spacing may make 
a passage feel darker).
You don’t want to overwhelm a design, call too much at­
tention to the type, or create running text that is too high in 
contrast, so I find it’s best to strive for a medium gray value.
Fonts with less color may need a tighter line-height to carry 
more weight, and fonts with more color can usually do with a 
bit more line-height to temper their heaviness (FIG 6.11).

	
122	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
If you look at a page as a whole, you see that text is one 
element in a larger experience. Make sure your typography 
integrates as well as possible with that experience. To do this, 
you may need to adjust your text’s overall color to keep things 
in balance with your page and site interface.
FIG 6.10: Typefaces have inherent typographic color values that come from their shapes 
and typesetting.
FIG 6.11: You can adjust properties like line-height to tweak text’s typographic color and 
find an even gray that is neither too light nor too dark.

	
Composition	 123	
Finding a good balance could mean adjusting the actual hue 
of the text. For instance, text set as dark gray (e.g., #333) is often 
more comfortable to read on screen than full-black text.
And other times, you may play with the line-height of 
paragraphs or the spacing of elements to create a harmonious 
lockup. There isn’t always a method to determine these things, 
and many times designers nudge things a little or play with ele­
ment values incrementally to see what works best. Whatever 
your method, strive for an even tone and relationship among 
text, images, and page so that the elements all come together to 
support the design’s message.
WHITESPACE
Despite what some clients may tell you, empty space in a design 
isn’t space that’s waiting to be filled with content or (gasp!) ban­
ner ads. Whitespace is just as important as your company logo. 
Claude Debussy once said that music is the space between notes. 
Similarly, good typography is as much about the space between 
the letters as the letters themselves.
Whitespace frames the content and provides structure to the 
page. And when it comes to articles, whitespace is an indispens­
able factor not only in giving the eye room to read, but also in 
creating a welcoming environment. If your pages are too clut­
tered, you’re inviting the reader to head elsewhere.
In FIG 6.12, whitespace frames the content in the center, 
which provides focus for the eye. It also imbues the text with 
space to breathe, which in turn gives the reader comfort to enjoy 
reading. These small touches go a long way, and like most of the 
niceties of design, they aren’t usually apparent unless they’re 
missing. Whitespace is our design’s picture frame and a watchful 
guardian against the ever-advancing forces of clutter.
Margins
Margins can appear between and around elements on the page, 
as well as at the boundaries of your layout. They aid readability 

	
124	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
FIG 6.12: Mandy Brown’s personal site, A Working Library, has ample whitespace to give 
readers room to enjoy reading (http://bkaprt.com/owt/65/).

	
Composition	 125	
by differentiating elements from one another. I use the term 
margin generally here, as it doesn’t matter if you’re using CSS 
properties for margins, padding, or any other means of position­
ing. What matters is the amount of space between and around 
the elements.
If you’re reading this book as a paperback, you’ll notice a bit 
more space on the outside of the pages than the inside. That 
extra space is a direct nod to the print medium. You need space 
for your thumbs to hold the book without covering text (FIG 
6.13). Obviously, we don’t have that same constraint on a screen, 
but that space also supplies breathing room for the text, not just 
thumbs. Without a healthy margin around our text, our words 
will feel congested like a highway on-ramp at rush hour.
In general, I like to allot at least around 1.5–2 ems of margin 
around body text. Depending on the text’s size and proximity 
to other page elements, you may need more of a margin or be 
able to get away with less.
FIG 6.13: It’s common for books to have roomy side margins for thumb holds, but this also 
helps frame the content.

	
126	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
TYPOGRAPHIC SCALES AND RHYTHM
Devising a system for sizing and spacing your typography has 
many advantages. It standardizes a method to your typographic 
madness in a reproducible way, enables consistency across a 
team of designers, and can make a lone designer’s job easier by 
creating a framework.
When it comes to sizing, most designers fall into one of two 
camps: those who like to eyeball their type and those who prefer 
to arrange a sizing scale. I’m a chronic eyeballer, but I sometimes 
use scales to rough out sizing relationships.
Scales, often based on music signatures or ratios like the 
golden section (1:1.61803399), are used to create a palette of 
size options. For instance, let’s look at the Fibonacci sequence, 
where each number is the sum of the previous two: 0, 1, 1, 2, 
3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987, and so on. Since 
those numbers have built-in relationships with each other, you 
can pluck your sizing choices straight from that lineup. For 
instance, you could set your type at 13px and your headings 
at 34px. Moving higher on the scale, you could pick 987px for 
your layout width, with a main column of 610px and a sidebar 
of 377px.
Hop along that scale as you need—and think of the numbers 
as pant sizes. They all do the same thing (dress your legs); you 
just need to choose the one that suits your situation (your waist 
and height) the best (FIG 6.14).
Alternatively, you could start with a base type size and then 
apply a ratio to create a custom scale. Say your design’s basic 
type and paragraphs read comfortably at 18 pixels when set in 
Chaparral. Using the same ratio as above (1:1.61803399), your 
resulting scale looks like: 6.876, 11.125, 18, 29.124, 47.123, and so 
on. As before, you can size other elements moving up and down 
the scale as you please.
In Tim Brown’s A List Apart article “More Meaningful 
Typography,” he argues that starting with a text size like this, 
and including another meaningful number from your design 
like a text column’s width or a large headline’s type size, creates 
a relevant and flexible modular scale for sizing (http://bkaprt.
com/owt/66/). Tim even made a handy site called Modular Scale 

	
Composition	 127	
(http://bkaprt.com/owt/67/) that calculates the math for an array 
of scale ratios. A ratio has definite appeal: it helps rationalize 
and constrain the choices we make into a formula that we can 
apply throughout the design. Plus, it gives our design elements 
an underlying relationship. Our readers may never be aware of 
it, but a considered connection between everything exists, and 
that can sometimes make a design feel more cohesive.
But there is a small problem to be wary of when designing 
this way: it’s very easy to become bound to the numbers instead 
of what looks appropriate.
As we learned earlier, finding typographic common ground 
between browsers can be a struggle, and typefaces of the same 
size don’t always take up the same visual space. These are not 
fixed elements like bricks in a wall. Typefaces are unique and 
need to be considered uniquely in the context of their design. 
Typography is not always about numbers. While the crispness 
of numbers is appealing, what’s important in typography is how 
something looks and reads. And designing by the numbers may 
not always get you there.
My starting point is often some scale, whether historically 
inspired or not, but I rarely adhere to it as I develop my design 
system. You should always evaluate your type in context, even 
FIG 6.14: A simple layout based on a scale.

	
128	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
if it resists the pristine nature of the scale you’ve devised. Scales 
are a great place to start, but they may not be where you fin­
ish. The key is knowing when to deviate. The visual results are 
what’s important to refine, and those make more sense than the 
numbers. After all, your readers see the text and relationships, 
not the math behind them, as the end result.

	
Conclusion	 129	
CONCLUSION
As I proposed at the start of this book, everything in typographic 
design is connected. Like in Powers of Ten, the small pieces 
build the big pieces, and the big pieces are composed of the 
small pieces. The relationships they share can be approached 
from many different angles, but they are inextricably linked. 
Understanding these relationships gives you a deeper under­
standing of typography and the know-how to fiddle with the 
variables that affect it.
Just as there are no rules, the topics we’ve discussed are not 
an endpoint on typography for the screen. Breaking away from 
convention has been a massive part of typography’s history, and 
often yields unexpected and interesting results. New methods, 
workarounds, and advancements are published online every 
day. But that’s typography doing what it has always done: grow­
ing with the times and media as needs arise.
With practice, you’ll find your own pathways and shortcuts 
without needing to use a formal process. You’ll develop a gut 
instinct for what looks right or wrong typographically and you’ll 
make critical judgements to arrive at your solutions faster.
Typography is a pursuit that combines the best of history, 
writing, math, artistry, and craft. No one thing rules over an­
other. Sometimes the math won’t add up, but the type may look 
right. When that happens, you need to rely on your instincts. 
Successful type will always be about the way something looks 
and the way something communicates. If you nail both of those 
things, you’ve done your job.
Trust your gut.

	
130	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
RESOURCES
Quick tips for improving your typography
•	 When in doubt, make it bigger. This is rarely true in design, 
but I’ve found it to be the case when designing for the screen. 
Err on the side of making your type too big rather than 
too small.
•	 Create hierarchy. Type embodies what you want to say 
with your design, and it creates and supports your website’s 
structure. Use contrast, size, color, and placement to create a 
design system that prioritizes content to guide your readers.
•	 Look for quality typefaces. Just as buying fresh ingredients is 
a good way to start preparing a meal, finding quality typefaces 
is the first step toward good typography. Those typefaces 
may not be free, but they’re often more sturdy and versatile 
than free options.
•	 Limit your palette to one or two typefaces. In my experi­
ence, the more typefaces I use in a design, the weaker the 
design becomes.
•	 Pair a serif and a sans serif. The inherent structural differ­
ences should present useful contrast, and you’ll likely have 
enough options for styling various kinds of text elements.
•	 Use proper quotation marks and apostrophes. These are 
easy to miss and easy to forget, especially when your con­
tent moves from a text editor to a system that stumbles over 
proper quotation marks or swaps them for dumb quotes. 
Check and double-check that you have proper quotes, espe­
cially on headlines and big type.
•	 Embrace space. Space to read, space to breathe. The space 
that isn’t occupied by text and imagery is often more impor­
tant than the space that is. Whitespace gives readers time to 
rest their eyes, reflect, and reorient themselves.
•	 Test and test again. You can’t expect your typography to look 
the same everywhere, but you can make sure it’s legible and 
accessible. At a minimum, make sure you have a backup plan 
for when your fonts don’t load.

	
Resources	 131	
Further reading and favorites
What follows are the books, websites, and type foundries I turn 
to time and again. If you’re hungry for more information about 
typographic history, grids, or in-depth studies on typesetting, I 
urge you to take a look.
While many of these books approach typographic design 
from a print perspective, the techniques are transferable to the 
screen with a little extra consideration. The websites and type 
foundries often post about typeface releases and industry news.
Consider these as new starting points for your own typo­
graphic lineup.
Books
•	 The Anatomy of Type: A Graphic Guide to 100 Typefaces, 
Stephen Coles.
•	 Book Typography: A Designer’s Manual, Michael Mitchell and 
Susan Wightman. 
•	 Combining Typefaces, Tim Brown.
•	 Detail in Typography, Jost Hochuli.
•	 The Elements of Typographic Style, Robert Bringhurst.
•	 Grid Systems in Graphic Design, Josef Müller-Brockmann.
•	 Inside Paragraphs: Typographic Fundamentals, Cyrus Highsmith. 
•	 Making and Breaking the Grid: A Graphic Design Layout Workshop, 
Timothy Samara.
•	 Stop Stealing Sheep & Find Out How Type Works, Erik 
Spiekermann and E.M. Ginger. 
•	 Thinking with Type: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, 
Editors, & Students, Ellen Lupton.
•	 Type and Typography, Phil Baines and Andrew Haslam.
•	 Type on Screen: A Critical Guide for Designers, Writers, Developers, 
& Students, Ellen Lupton.
•	 Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art, Scott McCloud.
Websites
•	 A List Apart, typography tag, http://bkaprt.com/owt/68/
•	 Can I use..., http://bkaprt.com/owt/69/

	
132	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
•	 FontsInUse, http://bkaprt.com/owt/70/
•	 I Love Typography, http://bkaprt.com/owt/71/
•	 MyFonts, http://bkaprt.com/owt/72/
•	 Practical Typography, http://bkaprt.com/owt/73/
•	 Tobias Frere-Jones, http://bkaprt.com/owt/74/
•	 Type Sample, http://bkaprt.com/owt/75/
•	 Typecast, http://bkaprt.com/owt/76/
•	 Typedia, http://bkaprt.com/owt/77/
•	 Typekit blog, http://bkaprt.com/owt/78/
•	 Typekit Practice, http://bkaprt.com/owt/79/
•	 Typographica, http://bkaprt.com/owt/80/
•	 Webtype blog, http://bkaprt.com/owt/81/
Foundries and services
•	 Bold Monday, http://bkaprt.com/owt/82/
•	 Commercial Type, http://bkaprt.com/owt/83/
•	 Darden Studio, http://bkaprt.com/owt/84/
•	 Font Bureau, http://bkaprt.com/owt/85/
•	 FontShop, http://bkaprt.com/owt/86/
•	 Hoefler & Co., http://bkaprt.com/owt/87/
•	 House Industries, http://bkaprt.com/owt/88/
•	 HVD, http://bkaprt.com/owt/89/
•	 Just Another Foundry, http://bkaprt.com/owt/90/
•	 Klim Type Foundry, http://bkaprt.com/owt/91/
•	 The League of Movable Type, http://bkaprt.com/owt/92/
•	 Lost Type Co-op, http://bkaprt.com/owt/93/
•	 Mark Simonson Studio, http://bkaprt.com/owt/94/
•	 MVB, http://bkaprt.com/owt/95/
•	 Okay Type, http://bkaprt.com/owt/96/
•	 p.s.type, http://bkaprt.com/owt/97/
•	 Sudtipos, http://bkaprt.com/owt/98/
•	 Suitcase Type Foundry, http://bkaprt.com/owt/99/
•	 TypeTogether,  http://bkaprt.com/owt/100/
•	 TypeTrust, http://bkaprt.com/owt/101/
•	 Typekit, http://bkaprt.com/owt/102/
•	 Typofonderie, http://bkaprt.com/owt/103/
•	 Underware, http://bkaprt.com/owt/104/
•	 Webtype, http://bkaprt.com/owt/105/

	
Acknowledgments	 133	
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book was tough on me. I foolishly imagined it would take 
me about six months to draft up, and here I am years later with 
considerably more gray hair. The fact that this book exists is 
in large part due to the help, ideas, support, and—most impor­
tant—patience selflessly imparted by friends and colleagues. I’ve 
learned that writing a book takes a village.
My deepest thanks to Jeffrey Zeldman for taking me under 
his wing many years ago and always being there for me as an 
inspiration, mentor, and friend. Tina Lee and Mandy Brown, the 
best editors I can imagine, make me sound like a much better 
writer than I am and also constantly pushed for clarity in com­
munication. The good parts of this book are likely good because 
of them. Katel LeDu seems superhumanly unflappable and was 
the guiding light during this whole process. Nick Sherman 
made sure I kept my foot out of my mouth and helped with nu­
merous figures and references; he remains one of the sharpest 
typographic minds in our industry. Nicole Fenton and Caren 
Litherland made astute observations while editing and found the 
right spaces between the words. I’m also grateful to the entire 
A Book Apart family of colleagues and authors for making this 
library possible. 
My closest friends are humble folks who would deny that 
they helped at all, but I get the last word, so there. Rob Weychert 
introduced me to graphic design and typography back in col­
lege, and he remains one of the most generous and thoughtful 
designers I’ve ever known. Liz Danzico is a dear friend and 
cohort who makes inquisitiveness an art; she taught me to try 
things I don’t know how to do. Frank Chimero is wise and re­
sourceful beyond his years, always quick with a helping hand, 
keen advice, or pizza party.
Thank you to Jeff Veen and the entire staff at Typekit for 
teaching me how to work quickly without being afraid to fall 
down. Professor Elaine Cunfer gave me my first A on a project 
and made me realize I wasn’t a screwup.
Sympathy is extended to readers of embarrassing early 
drafts, and to friends who put up with me perpetually being 
a month away from done: Tim Brown, Leah Chamberlain, 

	
134	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
Stephen Coles, Kevin Cornell, Kim Cornell, Chris Coyier, 
Greg Hoy, Grant Hutchinson, Erin Kissane, Jenn Lukas, Ethan 
Marcotte, Matt Sutter, Allen Tan, Trent Walton, David Yee, and 
my Studiomates—you are all saints and I will totally help you 
move or pick you up from the airport.
Thanks to Amtrak for always having an open seat on the 
Northeast Corridor for me to longingly look out the window 
from while I wrote, but not to New York’s Penn Station, where 
imagination and happiness go to die.
I am honored that Ellen Lupton wrote this book’s foreword. 
Her prolific work, writing, and teaching have influenced me 
more than I can put into words.
Thanks to my family: Mom and Dad, Pete, Marina, Giancarlo, 
and my grandparents for your unconditional support, even 
when I can’t explain what I do all day—you mean everything 
to me.
Finally, I owe so much to my partner, Megan Born. You in­
spire me, make me laugh, and put up with my dumb jokes and 
freak-outs, all with an open heart and mind. I love you always.

	
References	 135	
REFERENCES
Shortened URLs are numbered sequentially; the related long 
URLs are listed below for reference.
Intro
	 1	 http://youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0
Chapter 1
	 2	 https://twitter.com/typographica/status/268091875746009088
Chapter 2
	 3	 http://alistapart.com/articles/responsive-web-design/
	 4	 http://paulirish.com/2009/bulletproof-font-face-implementation-syntax/
Chapter 3
	 5	 http://typographica.org/features/our-favorite-typefaces-of-
2007/#comment-37743
	 6	 http://fontawesome.io/
	 7	 http://filamentgroup.com/lab/bulletproof_icon_fonts.html
	 8	 http://css-tricks.com/icon-fonts-vs-svg/
	 9	 http://kupferschrift.de/cms/2012/03/on-classifications/
	 10	 http://typedia.com/blog/post/torch-drawing-letters/
	 11	 http://bobulate.com/
	 12	 http://opentype.info/blog/2012/04/10/x-height-and-legibility/
	 13	 http://caniuse.com/#feat=font-feature
	 14	 http://typography.com/cloud/
	 15	 http://smartquotesforsmartpeople.com/
	 16	 http://quotesandaccents.com/
	 17	 http://w3.org/TR/css3-fonts/
	 18	 http://typography.com/fonts/gotham/features/gotham-language-support/
	 19	 http://fontbureau.com/ReadingEdge/
	 20	 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Garamond#Jean_Jannon_misattribution
	 21	 http://observatory.designobserver.com/entry.html?entry=2577
	 22	 https://developers.google.com/fonts/docs/webfont_loader

	
136	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
	 23	 http://blog.typekit.com/2011/05/25/loading-typekit-fonts-asynchronously/
	 24	 http://blog.typekit.com/2010/10/15/type-rendering-operating-systems/
	 25	 http://joelonsoftware.com/items/2007/06/12.html
	 26	 http://blog.typekit.com/2011/01/26/css-properties-that-affect-type-
rendering/
	 27	 http://blog.typekit.com/2010/10/05/type-rendering-on-the-web/
	 28	 https://typotheque.com/articles/hinting/
Chapter 4
	 29	 http://fiftythree.com/pencil
	 30	 http://gmunch.home.pipeline.com/typo-L/misc/ward.htm
	 31	 http://storiesandnovels.com/buster.php
	 32	 http://madebymighty.com/
	 33	 http://articles.latimes.com/2008/mar/30/image/ig-font30
	 34	 http://blog.fontdeck.com/post/23601339698/body-text-tester
	 35	 http://typecast.com/
	 36	 http://webfonter.fontshop.com/
	 37	 http://webtype.com/tools/swapper/
	 38	 http://aiga.org/the-mostly-true-story-of-helvetica-and-the-new-york-city-
subway/
	 39	 http://nytimes.com/2004/07/08/nyregion/08blocks.html
	 40	 http://fontsinuse.com/
	 41	 https://typesupply.com/news/2013/9/the-development-of-balto
	 42	 http://fontshop.com/blog/newsletters/june10a/indexEMAIL.html
	 43	 http://fount.artequalswork.com/
	 44	 http://myfonts.com/WhatTheFont/
	 45	 http://identifont.com/
	 46	 http://ilovetypography.com/
	 47	 http://jasonsantamaria.com/
Chapter 5
	 48	 http://wm4.wilsonminer.com/posts/2008/oct/20/relative-readability/
	 49	 http://j.eremy.net/confused-about-rem-and-em/
	 50	 http://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/l/line-height/
	 51	 http://trentwalton.com/2013/02/07/where-to-start/
	 52	 http://siteleaf.com/
	 53	 http://fittextjs.com/

	
References	 137	
	 54	 http://font-to-width.com/
	 55	 http://letteringjs.com/
	 56	 http://css-tricks.com/viewport-sized-typography/
	 57	 http://bobulate.com/post/22192501341/a-shape-of-design
	 58	 http://theverge.com/2013/6/6/4394808/brian-vaughan-marcos-martin-
interview
	 59	 http://kottke.org/13/06/ethan-hawke-answers-some-questions
	 60	 http://typecast.com/
Chapter 6
	 61	 http://trentwalton.com/2012/06/19/fluid-type/
	 62	 http://subtraction.com/
	 63	 http://thegridsystem.org/
	 64	 http://jasonsantamaria.com/articles/the-space-between-the-notes/
	 65	 http://aworkinglibrary.com/writing/on-the-library/index.html
	 66	 http://alistapart.com/article/more-meaningful-typography/
	 67	 http://modularscale.com/
Resources
	 68	 http://alistapart.com/topic/typography-web-fonts/
	 69	 http://caniuse.com/
	 70	 http://fontsinuse.com/
	 71	 http://ilovetypography.com/
	 72	 http://myfonts.com/
	 73	 http://practicaltypography.com/
	 74	 http://frerejones.com/
	 75	 http://typesample.com/
	 76	 http://typecast.com/
	 77	 http://typedia.com/
	 78	 http://blog.typekit.com/
	 79	 http://practice.typekit.com/
	 80	 http://typographica.org/
	 81	 http://blog.webtype.com/
	 82	 http://boldmonday.com/
	 83	 https://commercialtype.com/
	 84	 http://dardenstudio.com/
	 85	 http://fontbureau.com/

	
138	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
	 86	 http://fontshop.com/
	 87	 http://typography.com/
	 88	 http://houseind.com/
	 89	 http://hvdfonts.com/
	 90	 http://justanotherfoundry.com/
	 91	 https://klim.co.nz/
	 92	 http://theleagueofmoveabletype.com/
	 93	 http://losttype.com/
	 94	 http://marksimonson.com/
	 95	 http://mvbfonts.com/
	 96	 http://okaytype.com/
	 97	 http://cargocollective.com/pstype/
	 98	 http://sudtipos.com/
	 99	 http://suitcasetype.com/
	100	 http://type-together.com/
	101	 http://typetrust.com/
	102	 http://typekit.com/
	103	 http://typofonderie.com/
	104	 http://underware.nl/
	105	 http://webtype.com/

	
Index	 139	
@font-face  19
A
Abril  84
alignment  118
anatomy  26
aperture  36
appropriateness  71
asynchronous font loading  55
B
ball terminals  26
baseline grids  117
Beirut, Michael  48
Bell Centennial  16, 17, 18
Bell Gothic  16
Bello  61
Benton Modern  83
big type  97
Bil’ak, Peter  57
bitmap fonts  18
blockquote  102
Bodoni  29, 82
Body Text Tester  70
Bree  64
Brown, Mandy  124
Brown, Tim  27, 57, 126
C
Carter, Matthew  16, 17, 18, 51
Caslon  46
Chaparral  46, 51, 88, 89
Cheng, Karen  15
choosing typefaces  66
Church, Jeremy  90
classic typefaces  46
classifications  22
Coles, Stephen  6, 26
condensed widths  32
contrast  29, 65, 87
Core Text  56
counters  26, 36
Coyier, Chris  25, 100
CSS font-weight  30
curly quotes  39
D
Danzico, Liz  33, 101
Darden Studio  77
decorative type  23
dingbat fonts  24
DirectWrite  56
Droid Serif  52
Dupré, Xavier  82
E
Eames, Charles  1
Eames, Ray  1
em size  27
extended widths  32
F
fallback fonts  44, 55
faux italics  34
FF Dagny  51
FF Meta Serif  46, 84, 96
FF Quadraat  85
FF Tisa  52
FF Yoga  82
Filament Group  25
FitText  98, 99
fixation  9
Font Bureau  31, 45, 77
Fontdeck  19
font rendering  56
Fonts In Use  74
Font Swapper  70
Font-to-Width  98, 99
font versus typeface  22
Fount  77
FOUT (flash of unstyled text)  28, 
54, 55
free fonts  75
Frere-Jones, Tobias  43, 70, 73
Futura  60, 61
INDEX

	
140	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
G
Garamond  47
Garamond Premier Pro  44, 48
Georgia  17, 18, 51
Gill, Eric  82
Gill Sans  82
Google  54
Gotham  43, 73
grids  113
Griffith, Chauncey H.  16
H
harmony  81
heading size  95
headlines  94
Helvetica  29, 49, 72
hidden text  19
hierarchical grids  114
hierarchy  87
high-contrast  26
Hische, Jessica  40
Hoefler & Co.  19, 38, 43
hyphenation  119
I
icon fonts  24
Identifont  77
identifying features (of letters)  9
identifying typefaces  77
I Love Typography  77
images, typefaces loaded as  18
ink traps  16, 17
interface text  104
Irish, Paul  19
ITC Garamond  48
J
JAF Facit  59, 61
Joanna  82
Johnson-Davies, David  77
Just Another Foundry  77
justification  121
K
Kottke, Jason  104
Kupferschmid, Indra  25
L
lachrymal terminals  26
language sets  43
legibility  6
Leming, Tal  75
letterform recognition  10, 66
Lettering (plugin)  98, 99
Lewis, Chris  98
Licko, Zuzana  9
ligatures  42
line spacing  91, 111
loading fonts in CSS  53
long-form text  62
lowercase numerals  37
M
margins  123–125
Mark Simonson Studio  77
McBride, Sean  55
measure  90–91
Microsoft  18
Mighty  67, 68, 69
Modular Scale  126
monoline  26
N
navigational text  60
New York Times  106, 107
number of commercial typefaces  15
O
old style figures  37
OpenType  38, 53
optical sizes  44–45

	
Index	 141	
P
pairing typefaces  78–85
paragraphs  88–89
paragraph spacing  93
Paravel  98
pictograms  24
posture  30
Powers of Ten  1, 112, 129
Pragmatica Slabserif  51
primes  41
progressive enhancement  55
Proxima Nova  32, 68, 69, 83, 84
pseudo-font files  19
pseudo italics  34
pull quotes  102
punctuation  39–41
purpose of typography  14–15
R
Rand, Paul  77
readability  6
reading, act of  6–12
reading acuity  10
Reading Edge series  45
ready-mades  74
rems  89
responsive design  98, 111–113
rivers  120, 121
Rutter, Richard  70
S
Sabon  48
saccades  7
Sherman, Nick  22, 98
Simonson, Mark  32
Siteleaf  98
sizing type  89–90
small caps  41–42
small type  100–102
smart quotes  39
Smeijers, Fred  85
straight quotes  39
strokes  26
styles  30
system fonts  18
T
tabular figures  38, 39
testing type  70
texture  7
Titling Gothic  31
TrueType format  53
Tschichold, Jan  48, 77
Twitter  105
Typecast  70, 105
typeface versus font  22
Typekit  19, 54
typographic color  121–123
typographic scales  126–128
Typotheque  19
U
UI (user interface)  104
uppercase numerals  37
V
Verdana  17, 18, 71
viewports  100
Vignelli, Massimo  72
Vinh, Khoi  114
W
Walton, Trent  94, 112
Warde, Beatrice  62
WebFonter  70
Web Font Loader  54
webhooks  54
Web Open Font Format (WOFF)  53
Webtype  19
web typography  19
weights  30
WhatTheFont  77
whitespace  123
Woodward, Fred  77
word association  66
word shapes  10

	
142	 ON WEB TYPOGRAPHY
X
x-height  35, 65
Z
Zapfino  60, 61

ABOUT A BOOK APART
We cover the emerging and essential topics in web design and 
development with style, clarity, and above all, brevity—because 
working designer-developers can’t afford to waste time.
COLOPHON
The text is set in FF Yoga and its companion, FF Yoga Sans, both 
by Xavier Dupré. Headlines and cover are set in Titling Gothic 
by David Berlow.
This book was printed in the United States 
using FSC certified Finch papers.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Jason Santa Maria is a graphic de­
signer with a deep love for letters. 
He’s the founder of Brooklyn-based 
design firm Mighty; a faculty mem­
ber at SVA’s MFA Interaction Design 
program; a cofounder of A Book 
Apart; and the founder of Typedia, 
a shared online encyclopedia of 
typefaces. Previously, he cofounded 
the collaborative writing platform 
Editorially; he also served as the vice president of AIGA/NY 
and as the creative director for A List Apart and Typekit. He has 
designed websites that balance beauty and usability for clients 
such as AIGA, The Chicago Tribune, Housing Works, Miramax 
Films, The New York Stock Exchange, PBS, The United Nations, 
and WordPress.
Photo by Julia Robbs

