
Online around  
the World

This page intentionally left blank

Online around  
the World
A Geographic Encyclopedia  
of the Internet, Social Media,  
and Mobile Apps
LAURA M. STECKMAN AND  
MARILYN J. ANDREWS, EDITORS

Copyright © 2017 by ABC-­CLIO, LLC
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, ­photocopying, 
recording, or other­wise, except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without 
prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-­in-­Publication Data
Names: Steckman, Laura M., editor. | Andrews, Marilyn J., editor.
Title: Online around the world : a geographic encyclopedia of the Internet,  
social media, and mobile apps / Laura M. Steckman and Marilyn J. Andrews,  
editors.
Description: Santa Barbara, California : ABC-CLIO, [2017] | Includes  
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016048706 | ISBN 9781610697750 (hbk : alk. paper) |  
ISBN 9781610697767 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Online social networks—Encyclopedias. | Social  
media—Encyclopedias. | Mobile apps—Encyclopedias.
Classification: LCC HM742 .O552 2017 | DDC 302.30285—dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016048706
ISBN: 978-1-61069-775-0
EISBN: 978-1-61069-776-7
21  20  19  18  17  1  2  3  4  5
This book is also available as an eBook.
ABC-­CLIO
An Imprint of ABC-­CLIO, LLC
ABC-­CLIO, LLC
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, CA 93116​-­1911
www​.­abc​-­clio​.­com
This book is printed on acid-­free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of Amer­i­ca

Contents
Preface	
ix
Introduction	
xi
Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites	
xxiii
Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History	
xxxvii
Af­ghan­i­stan	
1
Algeria	
5
Angola	
8
Argentina	
11
Australia	
16
Bangladesh	
21
Botswana	
24
Brazil	
27
Cameroon	
33
Canada	
37
Chile	
41
China	
45
China: Hong Kong	
51
China: Macau	
54
Colombia	
55
Cuba	
59
Denmark	
65
Ec­ua­dor	
71
Egypt	
74
El Salvador	
79

Contents
vi
Estonia	
82
Ethiopia	
87
Finland	
93
France	
96
Georgia	
101
Germany	
103
Ghana	
107
Greece	
110
Honduras	
115
Hungary	
118
Iceland	
123
India	
126
Indonesia	
130
Iran	
134
Iraq	
139
Ireland	
142
Israel	
144
Italy	
148
Jamaica	
153
Japan	
155
Kazakhstan	
161
­Kenya	
164
Kyrgyzstan	
168
Libya	
173
Malaysia	
177
Mexico	
181
Mongolia	
184
Morocco	
188
Mozambique	
191

Contents
vii
Myanmar	
194
Namibia	
199
Nepal	
204
Nigeria	
208
North ­Korea	
214
Pakistan	
221
Paraguay	
224
Peru	
227
Philippines	
230
Poland	
234
Qatar	
239
Romania	
243
Rus­sia	
247
Saudi Arabia	
255
Senegal	
258
Singapore	
262
Somalia	
266
South Africa	
270
South ­Korea	
274
Spain	
281
Suriname	
284
Syria	
288
Taiwan	
293
Tanzania	
297
Thailand	
301
Timor-­Leste (East Timor)	
305
Tunisia	
308
Turkey	
313
Ukraine	
317

Contents
viii
United Arab Emirates	
320
United Kingdom	
324
United States	
328
Uzbekistan	
333
Venezuela	
337
Vietnam	
342
Yemen	
347
Zimbabwe	
351
Bibliography	
355
About the Editors and Contributors	
367
Index	
373

Preface
Online around the World aims to give readers a glimpse of how ­people use the inter-
net, social media, and social apps differently around the globe. ­There is a tendency 
to think that ­because they are popu­lar forms of communication, every­one uses them 
the same way and for the same purpose. The real­ity, however, is far more complex. 
For example, ­there is no singular version of Facebook or Instagram, the two most 
popu­lar social media platforms worldwide at the time of this writing. How they 
are used in the United States varies—at times greatly—­from how ­people use them 
in Nigeria, Colombia, or other areas. In some parts of the world, they ­aren’t used 
at all, ­either by choice or through government restrictions.
This encyclopedia focuses on explaining some of the major differences between 
the online experience in multiple countries, often in countries occupying the same 
geographic regions. It includes information on the history of the internet, gives 
­social media and app profiles of countries that include user demographics when 
available, and examines some of the freedoms, restrictions, and activism that the 
web has enabled. In some countries, the internet is not always used for pro­gress or 
positive social change; when this is the case, the corresponding entries include in-
formation on the darker side of the internet and social media. The entries can be 
read ­either individually or used to compare and contrast across hemi­spheres, con-
tinents, regions, and next-­door neighbors.
Compiling a book on the internet and social media has its challenges. ­Because 
the environment is robust, expanding, and moving at an increasingly rapid pace, it 
can be difficult to capture the essence of what it looks like at any given moment for 
an entire country. In some cases, how it functions in the national capital and urban 
centers is vastly dif­fer­ent from rural or more remote areas. In composing this vol-
ume, the most reliable, up-­to-­date sources ­were available online rather than being 
based primarily in academic journals and books—­a contrast to other encyclope-
dias. Each entry, as it was written, encompassed the general online preferences and 
realities of the country at that time; inevitably, as is the nature of the online world, 
some of that information has already become outdated as ­people change how they 
access the internet, where they go online, and with whom they choose to exchange 
information.
This volume is a culmination of the research and hard work of vari­ous talented 
researchers. The editors ­were already familiar with a community of researchers 
working on dif­fer­ent online environments in vari­ous regions and multiple lan-
guages. Starting with that original group, the author pool expanded to include refer-
rals from the community and, on occasion, the identification of researchers posting 

Preface
x
exceptional papers and scholarship on sites such as Academia​.­edu and Research-
Gate. Our sincerest thanks go to all our contributors, as well as the publishing 
team at ABC-­CLIO, without whose hard work this book would not have been 
pos­si­ble.

Introduction
Worldwide, the internet and social media constitute phenomena that have become 
integral to ­people’s lives. They permit real-­time, rapid communication, including 
information and content sharing with ­people all over the world, at the touch of a 
few buttons. Less than twenty years ago, while the internet was spreading across 
the world, it was almost unforeseeable that it would lead to the invention and mass 
adoption of social media, and ­later applications or apps, that would revolutionize 
how ­people consume and create online content. The online information environ-
ment started very small—­mostly at the behest of universities and government-­
sponsored institutions—­and has grown to the extent that ­today, it reaches almost 
­every corner of the globe. The early internet grew from a few providers and several 
budding social media platforms into a dynamic, high-­velocity, ubiquitous, and in-
teractive environment that reaches almost ­every enabled device. It stands to reason 
that this environment ­will continue to improve faster and grow ever more complex 
as new technologies are introduced and ­people keep up their demand for and in-
terest in new uses for them. At the same time, ­these technologies are ultimately 
used and produced by ­people from vari­ous cultures and online needs. ­These dif-
ferences between ­peoples have led to innovations in emerging communications 
technology, as well as global entrepreneurship that develops new ideas to meet 
mainstream and niche cultural needs.
Internet
The term internet refers to the hardware and software infrastructure that connects 
multiple networks located all over the globe. It is, in a nutshell, the overarching 
framework that connects and enables the sharing of information among ­these net-
works. The U.S. government laid the initial groundwork for the internet in the late 
1950s. In the midst of the space race between the United States and the Soviet Union 
that began ­after World War II (1939–1945), the United States created the Advanced 
Research Proj­ect Agency (ARPA) to invigorate research and development of the 
country’s science and technology in 1958. ARPA’s portfolio contained some of the 
early technologies that paved the way for the internet, although it did not emerge 
in its current form ­until ­after 1993, when the Eu­ro­pean Organ­ization for Nuclear 
Research, known colloquially as CERN, released the software required to run the 
World Wide Web over the internet. ­After 1993, the internet grew exponentially, 
allowing freer and faster exchanges of information.
Many ­people envisioned the internet as a tool to promote freedom of speech and 
open access to information. The freedom of speech issue usually resonates in local 

Introduction
xii
politics and is often attached to internet speech and communications; arguably, 
while the internet has supplied the means to communicate with ­others quickly from 
anywhere, it has not been entirely successful at promoting freedom of speech 
throughout the world. In terms of access, ­there are infrastructural and financial con-
siderations that limit mass access to the internet—­namely, speed and cost. Internet 
speed is a mea­sure of how fast data travels from a computer, over the internet via 
the World Wide Web, to another wired device. The mea­sure is often dif­fer­ent for 
download speed, or how quickly information goes from the web to a device, and 
upload speed, the speed of transfer from a device to a computer. The unit used for 
this speed is megabits per second (Mbps).
Average internet speed is one of the most reported mea­sure­ments. It refers to 
the mean number derived from tests conducted at multiple places throughout a 
twenty-­four-­hour period. In early 2016, Akamai’s State of the Internet (2016) re-
port found the world’s average connection speed to be 6.3 Mbps. In a comparison 
of average connection speeds worldwide, the com­pany designated South ­Korea as 
the overall speed winner, at 29 Mbps. Rounding out the top ten ­were Norway, Swe-
den, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Latvia, Japan, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, 
and Finland. The United States did not make the list ­because its overall average 
was too low; in a closer study of the country, the District of Columbia had the fast-
est internet speed, at 24 Mbps, with the runners-up being Delaware, Rhode Island, 
Mas­sa­chu­setts, Utah, New Jersey, Mary­land, New York, ­Virginia, and Washington 
State.
Sometimes average peak internet speed is reported. Peak speed is similar to “in-
ternet rush hour.” It is the mean derived from testing internet speeds in multiple 
locations during the times when the most ­people are online. In the United States, 
the internet rush hour period is 7–10 p.m., when the majority of ­people are home 
from work. Rush hours can change by country, though typically they are in the eve­
nings. When the internet is being accessed by a lot of ­people, ­there can be conges-
tion that slows connection speeds. In some countries, average peak connection 
speeds can be higher than the average speed over a day. For example, Mongolia 
ranks in the top ten for average peak connection speed worldwide, but performs 
much worse in terms of average speed overall (Akamai 2016).
Internet costs around the world are difficult to mea­sure ­because telecommuni-
cations companies set the price relative to download and upload speed. In addi-
tion, to keep prices relatively affordable for the ­middle and upper classes, many of 
whom rely on mobile phones for internet access, companies often consider where 
to place their cellular towers and other equipment to increase access and therefore 
increase their customer base. Prices can fluctuate based on competition among pro-
viders and local consumer demand. ­There are also cultural ­factors that determine 
what a typical data plan is; it could be unlimited or set to a certain data amount, 
such as 1 gigabyte (GB) or 4 GB. Data plans could also be offered as prepaid, pay-­
as-­you-go, or monthly packages. To provide some comparisons, a Pakistani re-
searcher priced country-­specific broadband packages offering unlimited data plans 
through cable or digital subscriber line (DSL) at 10 Mbps. He determined that the 
cost in Pakistan averaged $35.81. In contrast, the same plan costs $84.24 in the 

Introduction
xiii
United Arab Emirates (UAE), $55.81 in Australia, $48.41 in the United States, 
$18.28 in China, and $6.80 in Rus­sia (Sheikh 2015). This example demonstrates 
that multiple ­factors contribute to price differences among countries, or essentially, 
that internet and data pricing is not universal.
The percentage of ­people in a country who have access to the internet is ex-
pressed as a country’s internet penetration. Many ­people and organ­izations believe 
that every­one should have internet access. ­These ­people and groups are experiment-
ing with dif­fer­ent ways for populations with ­little or no access to gain it. Examples 
of efforts to achieve global connectivity include Facebook’s work with drones and 
Google’s Proj­ect Loon, an initiative that involves using inflated balloons that fly over 
unconnected areas and provide internet access. ­These examples represent two novel 
ways to provide internet access to areas without stable internet connections, as com-
panies seek innovative ave­nues to connect ­people with internet ser­vice. In countries 
where expensive technologies are prohibitive, such as Bangladesh, a group of ­women 
called the Info Ladies bicycle through the countryside, carry­ing computers and other 
equipment to bring the internet to isolated villages and other remote areas.
Speed, cost, and access barriers, in addition to a country’s internal politics, laws, 
and sociocultural norms, affect which members of the population have internet ac-
cess. The International Telecommunications Union (ITU), an organ of the United 
Nations, released a report in December 2015 describing discrepancies in global 
­connectivity (ITU 2015). It discussed the fact that approximately 3.2 billion 
­people—­slightly less than half of the world’s population—­had access to the internet. 
However, that access was not equally available across the world; the least-­
developed countries accounted for only 9.5 ­percent of the 3.2 billion. The report also 
stated that ­there is no gender equality for internet users, and in some cases, ­there 
are wide regional variations as well. For example, the report concluded that 
18.4 ­percent of ­women had internet access on the African continent, as opposed 
to men, at 23.1 ­percent. In contrast, in Eu­rope, 74.3 ­percent of ­women had inter-
net access, as compared to 81 ­percent of men. For men, however, ­there was ­little 
difference between American users and users from the former Soviet Union, with 
65.8 ­percent and 62.2 ­percent online, respectively (Truong 2015). ­There is no stan-
dard internet user demographic that can be applied globally. Infrastructure, costs, 
politics, and sociocultural ­factors play a role in who has internet access where.
Fi­nally, the internet is a dynamic system that is always in flux. The internet of 
the ­future is already ­here in some ways. It is poised to change how ­people connect, 
in person and through their devices, with the world around them. On top of the 
internet itself, which is essentially a network of networks, the number of enabled 
objects, sensors, and devices that can connect and communicate over the internet 
is rapidly accelerating. This phenomenon is often referred to as the Internet of ­Things 
(IoT). IoT is not ­really a new idea; in fact, Mark Weiser (1952–1999), the chief sci-
entist at Xerox PARC Labs, offered a vision of IoT in 1991 ­under the name “ubiq-
uitous computing” (Weiser 1991). Weiser’s conceptualization differs slightly from 
how IoT has developed technologically, but ­there is ­little doubt that his work laid 
the foundation for the current number of devices that can transmit information via 
the internet.

Introduction
xiv
Social Media and Social Networking Sites
The term social media currently has no accepted single definition; ­there are dozens 
of proposed definitions, yet the term ­either means dif­fer­ent ­things to dif­fer­ent ­people 
or gets boiled down to specific platforms such as Facebook or Twitter. In fact, in 
spoken American En­glish, Facebook and Twitter are sometimes used synonymously 
with social media. In contrast, many definitions are too vague, in that they catego-
rize anything posted to the internet as social media. Other definitions explain so-
cial media by the back-­end technology used to create specific platforms. Andreas 
Kaplan (1977–) and Michael Haenlein (n.d.–) proposed a definition of social media 
that bridges the two viewpoints, stating that social media encompasses “a group of 
Internet-­based applications that build on the ideological and technological foun-
dations of Web 2.0 and that allow the creation and exchange of User Generated 
Content” (Kaplan and Haenlein 2010, 60). In other words, social media is character-
ized by the tools, such as the platforms and/or apps that allow users to create and 
transmit content. It is akin to broadcasting information to large groups of ­people. 
In a technical sense, social media is like a broadcasting channel rather than a specific 
site or location.
Occasionally, the terms social media and social networking site are used interchange-
ably. However, ­there are distinct differences between the two. Social networking 
sites are online spaces, which could be platforms, websites, or apps, where users 
go to join and communicate with a like-­minded community of interest. Social net-
working sites allow ­people to converse and share information about specific top-
ics, such as a hobby, sports team, or other common interest. Whereas the emphasis 
on social media falls on the apps that allow content creation and exchange, social 
networking sites enable communication and unite ­people of similar interests. Some-
times ­there are even instances where a platform has the capacity to do both. Face-
book, which began as a social media platform in 2004, ­later added Facebook 
Messenger, to enhance the platform with a social networking component. Thus, 
Facebook could be considered as ­either social media or a social networking site, 
depending on the ele­ments of the site being discussed.
­People have several primary motivations for using social media and social net-
working sites. According to the Global Web Index (2015), ­there are ten main rea-
sons that ­people use social media: (1) staying in touch with friends and ­family, 
(2) keeping up with the news and current events, (3) passing time, (4) searching 
Social media data, along with other information posted on the internet, comprise what 
analysts now refer to as “big data.” If all the big data produced online in one day 
­were burned to recordable DVDs, the resulting stack of DVDs would be tall enough to 
reach the moon twice (Nabila 2014). DVDs are 1.2 millimeters thick, meaning that 
the stacks would total more than 640 billion discs. ­Every day, as the amount of data 
posted online increases, ­those stacks would continue to reach even farther into the 
solar system.

Introduction
xv
for content, (5) sharing opinions and reviews, (6) sharing photos and video, 
(7) maintaining a presence in social circles, (8) networking, (9) meeting new 
­people and dating, and (10) sharing personal details. ­These are the general catego-
ries that came from the report, though they do not represent all the motivations 
that ­people have when they access social media. For instance, social media can 
become a way for social activists to engage a larger audience, help a small business 
attract new consumers and launch new products, foster romantic relationships, and 
so much more. Often, ­people ­will choose a social media or social networking site 
that corresponds to the community that they want to reach and is considered cul-
turally acceptable by that community.
Social media and communications preferences across the world are not the same. 
­People may choose certain social media apps over ­others, based on how they trans-
mit information or whom the information is most likely to reach. The same is true 
of social networking sites. Preferences change based on language and script com-
patibility, existing interpersonal social relations and means of communications, pri-
vacy policies, and the purpose of the site. For example, Facebook attracts “friends,” 
as opposed to Twitter, which attracts “followers.” The types of information shared 
with friends can be dif­fer­ent than with ­people who declare themselves followers. 
Likewise, dif­fer­ent genders and age groups may prefer one site over another. In the 
United States, for instance, Pinterest claims that ­women comprise its majority user 
demographic; Snapchat declares itself the clear winner for the eighteen-­ to twenty-­
four-­year-­old user bracket (Becker 2015). The diversity of social media allows groups 
of almost any age, gender, and culture to find a suitable space to discuss common 
interests. It just may be, however, that young male bicyclists from South ­Korea 
would use an entirely dif­fer­ent platform than young men with the same interests 
in Peru. Sometimes a social media site ­will bring global enthusiasts or hobbyists 
together and create a new space for multicultural dialogue and exchange.
User demographics and preferences can fluctuate widely by country and region. 
Vincenzo Cosenza (1973–), an Italian blogger and researcher, created the World 
Map of Social Networks to map major social networking sites. It is updated ­every 
six months to track the popularity and changes in global demand for the major 
platforms. The current global winner is Facebook. As of January 2016, it was the 
most popu­lar site in 127 countries and boasted over 1.6 billion unique monthly 
users. Twitter, commonly believed to be a popu­lar competitor to Facebook, has 
strug­gled in many markets. In 2016, it held the most popu­lar spot only in Japan. 
Apart from Facebook and, in Japan, Twitter, other notable popu­lar sites that held 
the top spot in at least one country ­were Qzone (China), VKontakte (Rus­sia), 
­Facenama (Iran), and Odnoklassniki (Moldova, Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyzstan). The 
second place winner worldwide was Instagram. Some notable deviations for the 
second place rank included Facebook (    Japan), LinkedIn (India), Reddit (Norway), 
Odnoklassniki (Rus­sia, Germany, Israel, and Ukraine), and VKontakte (Czech Re-
public). The map is updated ­every January and August. Twitter strug­gled in third 
place overall, though it maintained second place in the United Kingdom, Spain, 
France, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Pakistan.

Introduction
xvi
Applications or Apps
Applications, commonly referred to as apps, are software programs that appear as 
colorful icons on a tablet or mobile phone. The earliest apps ­were arcade games, 
calculators, calendars, and other utility programs. In fact, one of the earliest apps 
to reach mass popularity was Nokia’s Snake game in 1997, which sold an estimated 
400 million copies. The Snake game captivated many ­people, despite the fact that 
its design was pretty ­simple, containing only small black squares that moved around 
a solid, dark-­colored background.
The Snake game would not have been called an app during its heyday. The term 
app has become prevalent with the popularity of smartphones and tablets in the 
2000s, though technically they have existed for a much longer time. As consumers 
became accustomed to the internet in the late 1990s, they wanted access to the 
same information on their phones. Developers had to contend with the fact that 
webpages ­were already colorful, used dynamic scripts (such as Java), and contained 
too much information to be rendered as simply as the earlier apps had. Through a 
series of advances in technology, mobile phones started evolving into smartphones, 
which enabled the development of mobile apps that could access the web.
­There is ­little difference between what an app icon on a smartphone does and 
an icon that launches a computer program does—in fact, even Microsoft’s Xbox 
calls its programs apps. The differences are often structural due to decisions made 
during the early development stages. From a development perspective, most mo-
bile phone apps are classified as being native, web, or hybrid apps. A native app is 
an app that resides on a device, meaning that it appears as an icon and can utilize 
the features of the device when the user gives it all the necessary permissions. Most 
native apps are device specific. For example, while ­there may be Android and iOS 
versions available, ­these are distinct apps designed to function solely on the plat-
form in question. Some native apps can work even when the device is offline. Most 
computer programs would be considered the equivalent of native apps; however, 
this is not set in stone as technology advances.
In contrast, a web app looks like a native app, but instead of operating the same 
way, it is ­really a website coded to look like an app and run through a browser. 
Web apps tend not to be programmed to use the device’s par­tic­u­lar features, and 
they usually can be used offline only if the browser has a caching feature where it 
saves the pages in the app’s memory. Web apps are usually not available in an app 
store, but directly on the web from a com­pany or website.
A hybrid app combines the features and functionality of native and web apps. It 
relies on a browser as the web app does, wherein the developers usually build a 
browser directly into the app. Hybrid apps can use some of a device’s built-in fea-
tures, such as the camera and notifications. ­Because of this, hybrid apps are gener-
ally designed for a specific platform, such as Android or iOS, though they sometimes 
rely on cross-­platform programming. Ideally, a hybrid app marries the best features 
and functionality of native and web apps to provide a satisfactory user experience.
Some of the most common types of apps are for messaging and gaming or en-
tertainment. However, apps can do a lot more than messaging and gaming. The 

Introduction
xvii
expression “­There’s an app for that” seems true when searching through app stores 
such as Google Play and the App Store. At the end of 2014, Google expanded the 
number of categories for apps to twenty; similarly, Apple grew to twenty-­four dis-
tinct categories in the App Store. Gaming apps remained the most popu­lar and 
profitable overall in 2016. With the popularity of apps and the growing usage of 
smartphones and tablets, developers ­will continue creating apps that satisfy their 
customers’ needs.
­Because of high levels of consumer demand, the app market has expanded 
­continuously with the growing demand for mobile devices. For example, when Apple 
first launched its App Store in mid-2008, it had only a few apps. By early 2009, the 
store contained approximately 35,000 apps. By June 2016, Apple now boasts more 
than 2 million apps in its store (Statista 2016b). Similarly, in June 2016, Google Play 
offered 2.2 million apps, the Win­dows Store had 669,000, the Amazon App Store 
around 600,000, and BlackBerry World with the fewest, at 234,500 (Statista 
2016a). As new technologies emerge, the current trend suggests that the number of 
apps ­will increase in order to take advantage of new device features; app producers 
­will likely push themselves to stay on the cutting edge, ahead of their competitors.
Technology is not the only feature driving app design; ­there is also a ­human di-
mension, meaning that ­people’s culture influences which types of apps are most 
useful and most relevant in their day-­to-­day lives. It is not uncommon to find mo-
bile phones in villages or small communities that ­either have no electricity or share 
a generator to power electronic devices. ­Those phones may be difficult to charge, 
but they ­will still have apps, and ­those apps can vary from village to village or coun-
try to country.
Another ­factor that influences app choice has to do with how devices (in this 
instance mobile phones) are used culturally. In the United States, for example, the 
average person has one cell phone. Phones ­were originally used primarily by adults, 
but ­today it is becoming more and more common for ­middle school–­aged ­children, 
generally defined as ­those eleven to thirteen years old, and older to possess a phone. 
In other parts of the world, where mobile phone usage is ­either popu­lar or prevalent 
due to the lack of landlines, the average person often has two or more phones. 
From data collected at the beginning of 2014 examining the number of mobile 
phones per country and per capita (per 100 ­people), Macau, a former Portuguese 
colony and now a Chinese territory, ranked the highest, with 2.79 phones per per-
son or 279 phones per 100 ­people. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) took second 
place, with 2.59 phones per person, and Hong Kong took the third position, at 
2.25 phones per person. At the bottom of the list was Eritrea, with 5 mobile phones 
per 100 ­people. Second to last ­were the Marshall Islands, with 5.7 phones per 100 
­people, and Somalia ranked slightly higher, with 6.5 phones per 100 ­people 
­(Indexmundi 2014). ­These differences are significant for understanding mobile 
app usage around the world ­because almost all smartphones contain some apps. 
App preferences can vary from country to country, and likely even vary on mul-
tiple phones carried by the same person.
Apps are not always dif­fer­ent from social media or social networking sites. Rather, 
apps enable ­people to reach ­those sites quickly from vari­ous devices. Most social 

Introduction
xviii
media and social networking sites have an official app available for multiple mo-
bile phone operating systems. Four of the most popu­lar apps related to social net-
working sites have been Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and Snapchat. They are also 
among the most popu­lar sites globally. However, a new international study indi-
cates that app usage around the world has decreased, including all four of ­these 
apps, which have lost popularity in terms of downloads and time spent using them 
(Tuchinsky 2016). While it is unknown if the demand for apps ­will continue to 
decline, the loss of ­favor for some of the larger social networking sites usually means 
that ­people have shifted their preferences ­toward new social media sites. Specifi-
cally, young adults have been shifting away from Facebook and to other platforms 
in the United States, while in other countries, they are shifting away from Twitter. 
However, all that this means is that once ­these audiences have chosen a platform, 
they ­will seek the corresponding app to maintain ease of access and to receive up-
dates. Social media, and social apps, are ­here to stay.
Around the World
­Every region of the world has had a dif­fer­ent experience with the internet, social 
media, and apps. The variations stem from dif­fer­ent levels of technology develop-
ment and telecommunications infrastructure to a wide range of government types, 
such as demo­cratic, socialist, authoritarian, oligarchic, and more. In addition to eco-
nomic and po­liti­cal considerations, ­human social ­factors have played a huge role 
in the adoption and use of social media, especially in terms of preferred platforms 
and how they connect with a person’s worldview, culture, and lifestyle. Cost and 
availability also play a role in what gets ­adopted when and where, as prohibitive 
costs and lack of access discourage ­people from considering ­going online. ­People 
also have dif­fer­ent activities that they prefer to do or discuss on dif­fer­ent platforms. 
All ­these considerations lead to the conclusion that ­people do not use the internet 
or social media in exactly the same way; they are just as diverse in real life as they 
are in the virtual realm online around the world.
Africans are only emerging now with a strong presence online, and that pres-
ence ­will continue to grow as more ­people go online. The internet and social me-
dia arrived rather late to Africa, especially sub-­Saharan Africa, than the rest of the 
world. Part of the delay was that internet communications technology (ICT) re-
quired specific infrastructure that was not prevalent in Africa. For example, only 
one undersea cable connected West Africa to the internet ­until 2009. Due to con-
struction proj­ects that lasted ­until 2012, additional cables ­were added to support 
the growing demand (Ward 2016). Through similar advancement proj­ects, inter-
net penetration advanced rapidly on the continent and most ­people gain access via 
mobile phone.
Africa’s social media also grew in availability and popularity with increasing ac-
cess to the internet. Across the continent, approximately 9 ­percent of the popula-
tion uses social media (Parke 2016). South Africans, Nigerians, and ­Kenyans rank 
among the top African countries using social media and social networking plat-
forms. Facebook is the most popu­lar platform for communications and informa-
tion sharing. It has helped achieve this ranking by investing in new ways to provide 

Introduction
xix
its ser­vices at low costs over low-­bandwidth connections. Twitter varies in popu-
larity depending on the country and topic; politics in par­tic­u­lar are usually dis-
cussed over the platform, especially in, but not limited to, the En­glish language.
Twitter has been an essential communications tool in Africa for po­liti­cal protests, 
demonstrations, and even government regime changes. Across photo-­sharing plat-
forms, many Africans prefer posting photos that they believe show the real Africa, 
as evidenced in hashtags such as #TheAfricaTheMediaNeverShows, or a variation 
thereof, which tends to trend on Instagram.
Other forms of social media in Africa have been used to revitalize the continent 
on a microeconomic level. Social media has been used to encourage local invest-
ments, to create and distribute microloans to small businesses and individuals, and 
as a burgeoning platform to develop e-­commerce. In many countries, the govern-
ments now calculate iGDP (internet gross domestic product). GDP is the value of 
all goods and ser­vices produced within a country annually, whereas iGDP mea­sures 
the internet’s contribution to gains in a country’s economy. In 2013, Africa’s total 
iGDP was $18 billion and by 2025, when at least 84 ­percent of the continent is 
expected to have internet access, iGDP could reach $300 billion (Amberber 2013).
­Because the continent is diverse in terms of language and culture, African choice in 
internet, social media, and app usage can vary. More specifically, the continent boasts 
more than 3,000 distinct ethnic groups that speak over 2,000 languages (Zijlma 
2015). Popu­lar world languages used online include En­glish, Arabic, French, and 
Portuguese, which are completed by a host of indigenous African languages.
Asia’s experience online has been vastly dif­fer­ent than Africa’s in some re­spects. 
Asia has over 50 ­percent of the world’s population and a large percentage of the 
world’s diversity. Countries in Asia ­were among the first to adopt and advance in-
ternet technologies, particularly Japan and South ­Korea in the early 1980s. South 
­Korea introduced the first internet gateway with two nodes in 1982 and many Asian 
countries followed suit. Initially, North Amer­i­ca and Eu­rope had more users, but 
by the 2000s, Asia had surpassed ­these numbers and, especially in East Asia, had 
become a leader in internet penetration, online gaming, and mobile device usage.
One major challenge for some Asian internet users is the language barrier. As 
most technologies ­were made to be En­glish or Roman-­character compatible, many 
Asian languages could not be utilized online. For example, though email had been 
available in some Asian environments since the late 1980s or mid-1990s, the 
internet had not been designed to interpret and render non-­Roman fonts. As an 
example, Google launched as a search engine in 1998. Gmail came ­later in 2004. 
In 2005, it was available in select Asian languages such as Chinese, Japa­nese, Thai, 
and Viet­nam­ese. Several years ­later, it added support for Urdu and a number of 
languages spoken in India. Since 2014, it added Khmer, Lao, Mongolian, and Ne-
pali. Without the ability to type and see their language on a screen, many ­people 
had high barriers to access not ­because they ­couldn’t read, as literacy in many parts 
of Asia is very high, but ­because the technology itself excluded them.
To address this issue of language in­equality, Asians in­ven­ted a number of indig-
enous platforms and apps. China, for example, in­ven­ted its own equivalents to Face-
book, Twitter, and a number of other sites that are available almost worldwide, and 
then shut the international sites down to have greater control over the internal use 

Introduction
xx
of internet and to impose censorship. In Myanmar, several new sites have fi­nally 
cracked the language font barrier and, with the country’s improvement of its tele-
communications infrastructure, is likely to see a huge influx of its citizens online 
by 2017. South ­Korea and Japan continue to be innovators of social media and apps, 
with sites like Line and KaokaoTalk starting to have a greater Asian market share.
Latin Amer­i­ca’s history with the internet and social media is both parallel to and 
dif­fer­ent from that of Africa and Asia. Like most of the rest of the world, universi-
ties started the initial foray into exploring the possibilities of the internet and helped 
connect researchers to this new information highway. Most Latin American coun-
tries ­were not connected to the internet ­until 1997, though to put internet pene-
tration in perspective, Uruguay, one of the early leaders in Latin American connectivity, 
only had 5 ­percent penetration in 1999.
Latin Amer­i­ca is in an unusual position. It is considered the third-­largest region 
for internet consumption, ­after the Asia-­Pacific and the ­Middle East and Africa. It 
is also considered to be the region with the third-­highest mobile phone penetra-
tion in the world, ­behind Central and Eastern Eu­rope and Western Eu­rope. While 
many countries have a very high internet penetration rate, such as Brazil and Chile, 
other countries in the region have lower penetration numbers (usually ­under 
20 ­percent), including Nicaragua, Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador. ­There 
are cultural, po­liti­cal, and economic reasons that contribute to this disparity. How-
ever, the region shows promise for the growth of internet usage in the ­future, espe-
cially as many ­people already have access to cellular phones.
North Amer­i­ca and Eu­rope, unsurprisingly, continue to utilize the internet and 
social media frequently. In Eu­rope, most of the northern countries of Scandinavia, 
as well as other developed countries in Western Eu­rope, have fully embraced be-
ing connected online with other parts of the world. Issues that affected Eu­ro­pe­ans 
tend to be about privacy rights and data sharing. The Eu­ro­pean Union has passed 
strict laws about personal electronic data and how it is pro­cessed and retained. 
­These laws apply to companies operating in their territory. For example, Google, a 
U.S.-­based com­pany, makes its money by storing as much personal data as pos­si­
ble on its individual users. Allegedly, this information is used to provide tailored 
advertisements to consumers. When content is posted online and Google archives 
it, it is available permanently in most of the world. In Eu­rope, citizens have the 
right to ask Google to forget about an incident or even not to store their data. Eu­
ro­pean law requires that Google comply with ­these requests, though individual coun-
tries may have more lenient or even stricter requirements. In contrast, U.S. citizens 
who use Google products consent to allowing Google to do what­ever it wants with 
their information, restricted only by its broad privacy policy. In terms of privacy 
laws, Eu­rope has the most advanced in contrast to other regions. One notable dif-
ference is that Eu­ro­pe­ans, by law, must opt in or consent to sharing their infor-
mation. Throughout the rest of the world, consumers must actively choose to opt 
out to restrict the dissemination of their personal data. In addition, the options to 
opt out are often time-­consuming or obscured on corporate webpages.
In this volume, all the world’s regions are represented. Talented researchers who 
work on or in the region have compiled the most recent descriptions of how the 

Introduction
xxi
internet, social media, and apps are used in their countries of focus. Through ­these 
national-­level profiles, the variations of what social media and apps are being used, 
who uses them, and major issues surrounding e-­communications are available for 
exploration. Together, they show how ­people from multiple countries and regions 
have tailored their usage to fit personal, cultural, and technological preferences. This 
is what it looks like ­today, online around the world.
Further Reading
Akamai. 2015. “State of the Internet.” Accessed July 12, 2016. https://­www​.­akamai​.­com​/­us​
/­en​/­multimedia​/­documents​/­report​/­q3​-­2015​-­soti​-­connectivity​-­final​.­pdf
Amberber, Emmanuel. 2013. “The Internet of Africa.” [Infographic] December 2. Accessed 
July 31, 2016. https://­yourstory​.­com​/­2013​/­12​/­internet​-­africa​/­
Becker, Tyler. 2015. “The 9 Major Social Networks Broken Down by Age.” April 9. Accessed 
July 6, 2016. https://­socialmediaweek​.­org​/­blog​/­2015​/­04​/­9​-­major​-­social​-­networks​-­age​/­
Cosenza, Vincenzo. 2016. “World Map of Social Networks.” Accessed July 6, 2016. http://­
vincos​.­it​/­world​-­map​-­of​-­social​-­networks​/­
Global Web Index. 2015. “Social Networking Motivations.” Accessed July 31, 2016. http://­
www​.­globalwebindex​.­net​/­blog​/­top​-­10​-­reasons​-­for​-­using​-­social​-­media
Indexmundi. 2014. “Telephones—­Mobile Cellular per Capita.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­
www​.­indexmundi​.­com​/­g​/­r​.­aspx​?­v​=­4010
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2015. “Mea­sur­ing the Information Society 
Report.” Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­en​/­ITU​-­D​/­Statistics​/­Documents​/­pu​
blications​/­misr2015​/­MISR2015​-­w5​.­pdf
Kaplan, Andreas M., and Haenlein, Michael. 2010. “Users of the World, Unite? The Chal-
lenges and Opportunities of Social Media.” Business Horizons, 53: 59–68.
Parke, Phoebe. 2016. “How Many ­People Use Social Media in Africa?” January 14. Accessed 
July 13, 2016. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2016​/­01​/­13​/­africa​/­africa​-­social​-­media​-­consumption​/­
Sheikh, Mahnoor. 2015. “The Cost of Internet: How Does Pakistan Compare to the Rest of 
the World?” October 1. Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­propakistani​.­pk​/­2015​/­10​/­01​/­the​
-­cost​-­of​-­internet​-­how​-­does​-­pakistan​-­compare​-­to​-­the​-­rest​-­of​-­the​-­world
Statista. 2016a. “Number of Apps Available in Leading App Stores as of June 2016.” Ac-
cessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­276623​/­number​-­of​-­apps​-­avai​
lable​-­in​-­leading​-­app​-­stores​/­
Statista. 2016b. “Number of Available Apps in the Apple App Store from July 2008 to 
June 2016.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­263795​/­number​
-­of-­available​-­apps​-­in​-­the​-­apple​-­app​-­store​/­
Truong, Alice. 2015. “The State of Internet Connectivity Around the World,” December 7. 
Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­www​.­weforum​.­org​/­agenda​/­2015​/­12​/­the​-­state​-­of​-­internet​
-­connectivity​-­around​-­the​-­world​/­
Tuchinsky, Peter. 2016. “Social Media App Usage Down Across the Globe,” June 2. Accessed 
July 31, 2016. https://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​/­blog​/­social​-­media​-­usage
Ward, George F. 2016. “Social Media in Africa—­A Growing Force.” Institute for Defense Analy­
sis Africa Watch, 11: 5–7.
Zijlma, Anouk. 2015. “Facts About Africa.” August 5. Accessed July 13, 2016. http://­goafrica​
.­about​.­com​/­od​/­africatraveltips​/­a​/­africafacts​.­htm

This page intentionally left blank

Overview of Popu­lar International 
Social Media Sites
Since the first email sent in 1971, the first bulletin board system developed in 1978, 
and the first website designed to connect ­people over the internet in 1995, social 
media evolved in numerous directions, and dif­fer­ent cultures have interpreted them 
in a variety of ways. Globally, multitudes of social media apps and websites are 
available. With one to cater to ­every need and whim, it helps to think about the 
dif­fer­ent types of platforms in terms of categories. While ­there are many ways this 
can be accomplished, no taxonomy of social media can truly account for the diver-
sity found in the social networking landscape, nor the heterogeneous nature of the 
available media. Nevertheless, categories allow an examination of similar types of 
social media, which aid researchers and students in understanding how they 
function among dif­fer­ent sectors of society. The categories established for the pres­
ent volume are not intended to be exhaustive, but rather to allow the pre­sen­ta­tion 
of an overview of the more prominent social media found around the globe.
Social media categories began to define themselves with the introduction of Com-
puServe’s CB Simulator, one of the first instant messaging (IM) programs. With this 
tool, ­people could communicate via text in real time. The ability to send instant 
messages and converse in real time is still one of the most popu­lar ways that ­people 
in dif­fer­ent parts of the world use the internet. Some examples of this category of 
social media include QQ, Skype, and WhatsApp. However, more often than not, 
social media is associated with the websites that allow users to build profiles and 
network with one another. Facebook’s pre­de­ces­sors, SixDegrees, Friendster, and 
MySpace, may not have ultimately succeeded in their visions, but they paved the 
way for the networking websites that dominate the internet ­today. By far, the most 
­There is truly a social media app for ­every interest. Animal lovers can communicate 
with like-­minded ­people at Catster, Dogster, and Hamster. Fans of the zombie genre 
can discuss books and movies at LostZombie, a site advertised as being ­under devel-
opment in the fall of 2015. Parents with single ­children can set them up on dates at 
Date My Single Kid. Sight-­impaired ­people can chat with other ­people who have a 
disability or their ­family and supporters at Blindworlds. ­People who like facial hair 
can discuss the perfect mustache at Stache Passions. Science fiction fans can find a 
mate at Star Trek Dating, and fans of the paranormal can plot alien sightings at UFO 
Social (Interlat 2015). The bound­aries of social media are unlimited and ­there is a 
platform for ­every interest.

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxiv
popu­lar of ­these websites is Facebook, but ­others, such as Renren, VK, and Mixi, 
are also prominent. A media-­sharing feature is common to most social networking 
platforms but can also comprise a category on its own. YouTube, Instagram, and 
YY are such instances and are representative of the diverse ways ­these types of 
websites are utilized. Modern forums can trace their roots to the early days of the 
internet, but have also transformed in in­ter­est­ing directions, such as commentary 
news websites like Reddit and Taringa! or bookmarking websites like Stumble-
Upon and Pinterest. Blogging is an activity that naturally fits with the tools that the 
internet offers, and recent years have seen this category of social media re­imagined 
as microblogging with websites such as Twitter and Weibo. In what follows, each 
of ­these categories ­will be examined through a sample of the more popu­lar and 
influential websites preferred by social media users ­today.
IM and VoIP
IM is the ability to exchange text messages in real time. This idea was expanded 
with voice over internet protocol (VoIP), a function that allows users to speak to 
one another with or without video using the internet instead of phone ser­vices. This 
is also sometimes called telephony or videotelephony.
One of the first mobile messaging apps on the market was QQ. The first version 
of this program was released by the Chinese com­pany Tencent in February 1999. 
Originally called OICQ, the name was quickly changed to QQ due to its similarity 
with ICQ, a dif­fer­ent IM app owned by AOL. QQ is currently the most popu­lar IM 
app in the world, second only to Facebook in total active social media users. In the 
wake of mobile cell phone proliferation, QQ was adapted for use with virtually any 
kind of mobile device in China, which is contributes to its popularity. In 2010, QQ 
officially became international ­after a year of beta testing when Tencent introduced 
the mobile messaging app to the global market in En­glish, French, and Japa­nese, 
with ­later versions in Spanish, German, and Korean. Currently, QQ is accessed pri-
marily via phone and also serves as the primary entry point for Qzone, the most 
popu­lar social networking site in China. It offers games, shopping, and ­music in 
addition to its messaging function. In August 2015, QQ had 830 million active us-
ers worldwide.
Weixin, another IM app to come out of China, has also dominated the market, 
with just ­under 549 million active monthly users by August 2015. Known as WeChat 
in the United States, the product was first introduced to the public in January 2011 
by the Chinese com­pany Tencent. The app was designed specifically for mobile de-
vices as an IM ser­vice. It incorporates ele­ments found on sites like Facebook and 
Instagram, but also offers the unique feature of being able to hold down a button 
and rec­ord a message for another user. Three years ­after its introduction, Weixin 
had more than 300 million users, which is a faster adoption rate than popu­lar so-
cial media sites in the United States, such as Facebook and Twitter.
Skype is also one of the most popu­lar IM apps in the world and was one of the 
first VoIP programs with video capability. This meant that users could commu-
nicate via video over the internet for ­free. Skype provides other ser­vices, such as 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxv
voice-­only calling to telephone numbers, IM, file transfers, and conference call 
capabilities. Two Eu­ro­pean entrepreneurs, Janus Friis (1976–) and Niklas Zennström 
(1966–), introduced the app in 2003. During this time period, telephone calls could 
be expensive, especially to other countries, which meant that Skype being ­free was 
a huge draw for users.
The com­pany has changed hands several times. In 2005, eBay acquired Skype 
for $2.6 billion with the intention of combining the software with their e-­commerce 
franchises to create a central hub for business on the internet. At the time, Skype 
had 53 million registered users and the com­pany reported over 2 million ­people 
using the product at any given time. In 2009, ­after years of not having been able 
to successfully integrate Skype into their business model, eBay deci­ded to sell 
65 ­percent of its share in the com­pany for about $2 billion to a group of private 
investors that included the Canadian Pension Plus Investment Board. At the time, 
eBay reported that Skype was earning $551 million from its pay ser­vices and had 
a user base of about 480 million. In 2011, despite a lifetime accumulation of over 
$680 million in debt, several companies ­were interested in purchasing or partner-
ing with Skype. In May, however, Microsoft acquired the com­pany for $8.5 billion 
in cash and took on Skype’s debt.
Currently, Skype has about 300 million active monthly users and is one of the 
top ten most popu­lar social media platforms in the world. This is true despite com-
petition from other VoIP products, such as the Apple program FaceTime (intro-
duced in 2010) and Google’s Hangouts (introduced in 2013). On the other hand, 
Facebook Messenger, the IM ser­vice with voice and video capability that Facebook 
introduced in 2011, has surpassed Skype in global popularity, with about 700 mil-
lion active monthly users. However, part of the reason why Skype has so many ac-
tive users is that it is popu­lar all over the world. With only about 1 in 7 users from 
the United States, it is also widely used in India, Rus­sia, the United Kingdom, and 
Brazil. In fact, many IM and VoIP apps find their popularity in countries other than 
the United States.
Blackberry Messenger, while it has only 100 million active monthly users, is still 
among the top twenty most popu­lar social media apps in the world. Also known 
as BBM, Blackberry Messenger was first launched in August 2005, with voice capa-
bility introduced in 2012. According to inventor Gary Klassen (c. 1969–), BBM was 
the first of its kind to offer cross-­carrier capability when IM was still considered a 
PC phenomenon. Currently, over one-­third of BBM users are from India, about 1 in 5 
users are located in Saudi Arabia, and more than 1 in 7 users are located in Nigeria.
In 2009, Jan Koum (1976–) and Brian Acton (1972–) released WhatsApp, an 
IM app that allows users to send messages internationally without incurring any 
costs from smartphone providers. The original idea ­behind the app was that smart-
phone users should not have to pay fees to text from phone to phone. Koum also 
wanted a ­simple product that gave users what they wanted without the advertise-
ments and fluff that are common to many other apps. Based on ­these ideas, the 
ser­vice was initially ­free, but it switched to a subscription model to avoid growing 
too quickly. Now the first year of ser­vice is ­free; each year thereafter is $0.99. 
WhatsApp also relied on word of mouth rather than self-­promotion. Koum’s 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxvi
childhood experience in Eastern Eu­rope with oppressive government control in-
spired him to create a unique registering pro­cess; instead of giving the com­pany 
personal information, such as name, age, and gender, the user was only required to 
provide a phone number. WhatsApp’s business model was successful ­because in 
2014, when Facebook acquired the com­pany for $19 billion, WhatsApp had over 
450 million monthly users. By August 2015, this number had almost doubled to 
800 million monthly users and was the third ­most ­popular social media site in the 
world. WhatsApp users are all over the world, with almost a fifth of them located in 
India. The app is also popu­lar in Brazil, Turkey, Italy, and Spain.
The IM and VoIP app Viber is most popu­lar in Rus­sia, parts of Eastern Eu­rope, 
and Southeast Asia. In December 2010, Israeli-­American Talmon Marco (c. 1975–) 
launched the app to compete directly with Skype. Viber initially only offered ­free, 
web-­based voice ser­vices, but a few months ­later, it added a text­ing function. Within 
the first 24 hours ­after the app was made available, it had already reached 100,000 
users, and by the end of the third day, it had millions of users. Viber quickly grew 
to be one of the five most downloaded smartphone call and messaging apps in the 
world. The Japa­nese Internet com­pany Rakuten announced in February 2014 that it 
would acquire Viber for $900 million. This would add 300 million users to Ra-
kuten’s 200 million registered user base. A year and a half ­later, the mobile voice 
and messaging app Viber ranked in the top fifteen most popu­lar social media sites, 
with just ­under 300 million active monthly users.
Line, a South Korean IM and VoIP app, has an in­ter­est­ing origin. In the wake of 
the devastating 2011 tsunami and subsequent nuclear crisis that crippled Japan and 
disrupted telephone communications in the country, NHN Corp in South ­Korea 
and Naver, a Japa­nese search engine, deci­ded to develop Line. The app provides 
an ave­nue for users to text and make calls with their smartphones via the internet, 
rather than being charged minutes or text­ing fees. Within a year of launch, Line 
users had surpassed 58 million and the app had reached top ranking in the Apple 
App Store in over twenty dif­fer­ent countries, including Kuwait and Kazakhstan. 
While the com­pany has plans to try and expand its market to China and the United 
States, over two-­thirds of its users are from ­either Taiwan or Japan.
Social Networking
The concept of social media is most often associated with social networking web-
sites; however, while the term social media refers to all the dif­fer­ent categories, social 
networking covers a more narrow set of websites. Essentially, online social net-
works help connect ­people with similar interests or backgrounds by providing a 
comprehensive space where they can communicate. This most often entails users 
building profiles and creating lists of online connections, which represent their per-
sonal networks. ­These lists can be cross-­referenced and used to build a user’s net-
work. Often, social networking sites ­will combine tools from other social media 
categories, such as IM or media-­sharing capabilities.
While Facebook dominates the social networking category, it is nevertheless com-
prised of a wide variety of popu­lar social media sites that differ from country to 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxvii
country. One in­ter­est­ing notable fact is that many of ­these websites have been fairly 
well established for about a de­cade or more. Exceptions to this observation include 
Facenama (based in Iran) and Google+. Facenama is a local alternative to Facebook 
in Iran ­because the government blocks Facebook access. Google+ is focused around 
communities and circles and often promotes collaboration over communication.
Some of the oldest social networking websites are business oriented, such as 
LinkedIn. This website was launched in May 2003 by Reid Hoffman (1967–) and 
his collaborators with the purpose of connecting business professionals around the 
world. Within the first month, the website had 4,500 members. Currently, LinkedIn 
has 380 million members, about a quarter of whom are active users. The website 
is available in twenty-­four dif­fer­ent languages, and it takes more than 8,700 full-­time 
employees to keep it ­running successfully. While one in four members is from the 
United States, LinkedIn is also commonly used in India, Brazil, the United King-
dom, and Canada, with registered members in over 200 countries.
Other popu­lar examples of business professional social networking websites in-
clude Xing from Germany and Viadeo from France. Xing was originally founded as 
openBC (Open Business Club) in 2003 in Hamburg, Germany, and went public in 
2006 when it changed its name to Xing. Currently, it has over 13 million members 
from all over the world, including Austria, Switzerland, and India; however, over 
60 ­percent of Xing’s web traffic occurs in Germany. Viadeo, launched in 2004 by 
Dan Serfaty (1966–) and Thierry Lunati (c. 1965–), is currently the leading profes-
sional social network in France, with 9 million members. In total, Viadeo has over 
65 million members, at least a third of whom are from China, and, while the site 
is most popu­lar in France, Viadeo also sees a lot of traffic from India, Morocco, 
Algeria, and Rus­sia.
Some of the more prominent social networking sites that still affect society ­today 
­were established between the years of 2004 and 2006. Facebook is the primary ex-
ample, which would eventually come to dominate the internet in many countries. 
While originally launched by Mark Zuckerberg (1984–) in 2004, the website did not 
expand beyond college campuses ­until two years ­later. During this time, several other 
social networking websites ­were introduced, some of which became very popu­lar 
in dif­fer­ent countries around the world. ­Others, which ­were successful for a time, 
­were eventually outpaced by Facebook and shut down or forced to change their 
business model completely to stay competitive.
In January 2004, Google launched Orkut. It was named ­after its designer, Orkut 
Büyükkökten (1975–), whose intended audience was non-­English-­speaking youth. 
With at least 1,500 users within the first few weeks, Orkut became very popu­lar in 
Brazil and India. However, just over a de­cade ­after it launched, on September 30, 
2014, Orkut was shut down. Google made that decision in order to focus attention 
on other proj­ects that had outpaced Orkut, such as YouTube, Blogger, and Google+. 
The latter was an endeavor by the search engine ­giant to launch a social network-
ing site that combined ele­ments of many other popu­lar social media platforms. 
Google+ launched on June 28, 2011, and offered a number of functions to facili-
tate connecting with other ­people online. One of the more prominent functions 
was Circles, a way to or­ga­nize the ­people on a user’s friends list. Sparks was also 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxviii
prominently advertised in the beginning. It was a tool to save web searches and 
intended to be a vehicle for starting conversations online. Hangouts was a messag-
ing and videotelephony communication tool. Google Circles and Hangouts are still 
common functions on the site; however, Sparks was a rapid failure. Within a few 
months of launch, it was no longer emphasized and by November 2012, it had been 
completely removed from the website. Google’s social networking endeavor was not 
an immediate success and due to the way that Google required Google+ mem-
bership to use other websites, such as YouTube, it was difficult to tell how many 
­people ­were active users of the ser­vice. In 2015, Google fi­nally stopped attempting 
to integrate Google+ into all its other products.
Other popu­lar social networking sites launched during this two-­year period fo-
cused on countries other than the United States. For example, founded in February 
2004, Mixi was to become one of Japan’s most successful social networking sites; 
during its peak success, it had around 30 million members. Facebook was intro-
duced to Japan in 2008. Nevertheless, it had not become popu­lar in Japan and, 
­towards the beginning of 2011, ten times more Japa­nese ­people ­were members of 
Mixi than Facebook. This was due in part to Japa­nese cultural values regarding pri-
vacy. Facebook had been emphasizing real identities, where most Japa­nese social 
media websites, including Mixi, allowed users to use pseudonyms. Many Japa­nese 
internet users ­were uncomfortable with the idea of displaying and broadcasting their 
real names and the details of their lives; therefore, they shied away from Facebook. 
However, due to a number of ­factors, this trend was completely reversed by the end 
of 2014, when Facebook was not only the most popu­lar social media website in 
Japan, with almost 34 million users, but Mixi had lost most of its membership. 
Mixi had never ­really expanded outside Japan, and ­today it ranks as the thirty ninth 
most popular website in the country, while Facebook is the tenth most popular 
website.
However, not all local social media is consumed by Facebook when it enters a 
national arena. Draugiem, out of Latvia, is a good example of a social media web-
site that manages to stay competitive with Facebook while catering to a limited au-
dience. Draugiem was founded in 2004 and currently has about 2.6 million registered 
users, with about 500,000 visitors to the website each day. The name means some-
thing like “friends” in Latvian. It is the fifth most popular website in Latvia, and 
Joe Fernandez (1977–), the inventor of Klout, developed the idea ­after undergoing 
major jaw surgery. In 2007, when his jaw was wired shut, Fernandez was able to 
communicate only through Facebook and Twitter. During this time, he started think-
ing about how ­people communicate via social networking and wondered about the 
impact that electronic communications can have on individual reputations and on 
spreading messages to other ­people. His curiosity led to work on how to mea­sure the 
impact that an individual has using ­these applications, especially Twitter. Once he 
recovered, he took several months to develop and launch Klout, a tool that applies 
an algorithm to a person’s social media communication to determine the amount of 
online influence that they exert across platforms (Shontell 2014).

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxix
three-­quarters of its traffic comes from within the country. Other countries that 
use Draugiem tend to be ­those in Eu­rope, such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, 
Sweden, and Germany. Draugiem has a strong presence in Hungary, where it is 
known by a dif­fer­ent name, baratikor, which is a loose translation of the name into 
Hungarian. Draugiem also has an En­glish version, called Frype, but this version is 
mostly used in Latvia, Ireland, and Germany. One in­ter­est­ing fact about Draugiem, 
which may be a ­factor in maintaining its popularity, is that registration to the web-
site is by invitation only, making it feel more private and exclusive.
In 2005, two very popu­lar social media sites ­were launched in China. The first, 
introduced by Tencent, one of the largest internet companies in the world, was 
Qzone. It was originally conceived as an online space for users to customize their 
blogs, share photos, keep diaries, and listen to ­music. Over the years, it transformed 
from a personal space to more of a social network. Currently, it is one of the five 
most popu­lar social networking sites in the world, with almost 670 million active 
users. Then, in December, Joseph Chen (c. 1970–) founded Renren, which has be-
come known as the “Facebook of China.” It was originally called Xiaonei, or “school-
yard” in Chinese, and was intended as a platform for reconnecting with former 
classmates. Ranked among the 165 most popu­lar websites in China, only 80 ­percent 
of its users are Chinese, with about one in eight originating from the United States. 
In 2009, the Chinese government blocked several Western websites, including 
Google, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Vimeo, and Blogspot. One consequence of this 
action is that the Chinese social media ­were allowed to flourish. In August 2015, 
four of the top ten most popu­lar social media websites in the world ­were Chinese.
The two most popu­lar social networking platforms in Rus­sia both launched in 
2006. VKontakte, now known simply as VK, was created by Pavel Durov (c. 1985–) 
and is often called “the Rus­sian Facebook” due to the similarity between the two 
products. In November 2014, ­there ­were almost 55 million Rus­sian users of VKon-
takte, while ­there ­were less than half that number of Rus­sian Facebook users. 
Odnoklassniki, the second most popular social networking site in Rus­sia, had just 
over 40 million monthly Rus­sian users in the same time period. In August 2015, 
­there ­were about 100 million monthly users of VKontakte worldwide, many of them 
­under the age of eigh­teen. VKontakte tends to attract younger users, while Odnok-
lassniki tends to attract older users (i.e. older than forty-­five). This was one of the 
deciding ­factors in Odnoklassniki’s decision to rebrand in 2014 to try and attract a 
younger audience. The website is now known as OK.RU.
The year 2006 was also when Facebook opened up to the general public. Since 
that time, it has grown enormously and, as of August 2015, it had about 1.5 bil-
lion monthly users worldwide. It was also ranked the second most ­popular web-
site in the world, just ­behind Google. Other regional websites are often touted as 
that region’s version of Facebook; for instance, VK is the “Rus­sian Facebook” and 
Renren is the “Facebook of China.” In some places, Facebook and the regional so-
cial media are able to coexist or even beat Facebook, as in Latvia and Rus­sia. More 
often than not, Facebook overwhelms the regional social media, as with Mixi.
In some countries, such as China or Iran, Facebook has been banned. Facenama 
is Iran’s answer to that ban. It is just like an Ira­nian version of Facebook and, as of 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxx
December 2014, it was the number one social networking website in the country. 
­There are suggestions that just as Facebook is banned from being used in Iran, 
­Facenama has banned all non-­Iranian internet protocol (IP) addresses so that the 
site cannot be accessed from outside Iran; however, usage statistics point to ­there 
being users in other countries, most notably Rus­sia, the Netherlands, and Brazil. 
Thus, despite Facebook’s incredible global penetration, its popularity is not guar-
anteed in all corners of the globe.
Media Sharing
When digital cameras became more prevalent than film cameras in the mid-2000s, 
media-­sharing websites that utilized this technology started becoming more popu­
lar as well. The primary function of media-­sharing websites is to provide a space to 
users to share their media. Unlike social networking sites that use media-­sharing 
abilities to supplement their users’ experience, media-­sharing websites highlight this 
function as their specialty.
Flickr, launched in February 2004 by the Canadian com­pany Ludicorp, was one 
of the first of ­these types of websites. The website allowed users to tag photos and 
make comments. The website was a photo management system with social network 
features. A year ­after the com­pany launched, it was purchased by Yahoo. At the 
time, Flickr had 1 million registered users; by 2013, it had 87 million of them. De-
spite this huge increase in membership, the website was most successful in early 
2009. However, by the ­middle of 2011, 6 billion photos had been hosted on Flickr. 
While this number did not even come close to the 100 billion photos then hosted 
on Facebook, Flickr users ­were concerned with quality rather than the more mun-
dane shots of vacations and ­children that filled Facebook’s pages. However, due to 
its slow transition to mobile and the introduction of other media-­sharing platforms, 
Flickr’s relevance and use has declined. In 2013, Yahoo overhauled the website and 
changed its pricing plan. In 2015, they revised it again and boasted 113 million 
members.
Where Flickr focused on pictures, YouTube focused on videos. ­Today, along with 
Facebook and Google, YouTube is one of the most popu­lar websites in most coun-
tries and is ranked number three in the world. It was launched in February 2005, 
and by November of the same year, YouTube users ­were utilizing 8 terabytes (TB) 
of data ­every day. In the fall of 2006, Google purchased the video-­sharing website 
for $1.65 billion. At the time, YouTube had over 700 million views a week. In 2007, 
the site also offered the ability for users to monetize their content, which helped 
pave the way for the myriad innovative ways that it is used ­today. By 2010, You-
Tube users ­were uploading more video in two months than all three major tele­vi­
sion networks in the United States had created in the past sixty years.
Youku Tudou, a Chinese video-­sharing platform, was the result of the 2012 
merger of two websites. Tudou was introduced in China in April 2005 by Gary Wang 
(1973–) as a video-­sharing website. The name means “potato” in Chinese, and was 
meant to invoke the idea of the “couch potato.” Tudou’s model was similar to that 
of YouTube, in that it facilitated user-­generated content; however, it also delivered 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxxi
its own drama series called That Love Comes. Youku was founded in 2007 by Victor 
Koo (c. 1967–), former president of the Chinese internet com­pany Sohu. While the 
names may seem similar, Youku and YouTube ­were very dif­fer­ent kinds of video web-
sites. First, Youku, in Mandarin, means “good” and “cool,” contrasting with YouTube’s 
name, which promotes the idea of a channel. Second, CEO and founder Koo delib-
erately did not adopt YouTube’s business model; instead, he chose to focus on provid-
ing alternative tele­vi­sion to young, urban professionals by licensing shows from 
China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
In March 2012, Youku and Tudou announced a merger, with Youku acquiring 
Tudou for $1.1 billion in an all-­stock deal. The previous rivals’ new com­pany would 
be known as Youku Tudou, with Victor Koo retained as the chief executive officer 
(CEO). Before the two companies merged, Youku was ranked as the eleventh most 
popular website in China and Tudou was the fourteenth most popular website. ­After 
the merger, Youku Tudou still only composed about a third of the market share of 
video websites in China. The resulting com­pany eventually dominated the market; 
however, ­today it is being overtaken by more aggressive video-­sharing platforms, 
like LeTv and iQiyi.
China’s YY is another very popu­lar video-­streaming website. It was launched in 
2008 by David Li (c. 1974–) and Lei Jun (1969–). Originally, it was a voice-­based 
gaming ser­vice that allowed users to communicate with one another via ­either 
voice chat or text chat while playing online video games. ­Later, it added video-­
streaming capabilities. By 2012, YY had over 100 million channels, each which 
could support an excess of 100,000 users si­mul­ta­neously. YY also incorporated some 
unique features that set it apart from similar websites in the United States. For ex-
ample, users can buy virtual “roses” and give them to performers on their YY channel. 
The performers, in turn, can sell ­these roses back for real currency. Virtual class-
rooms are also a feature of YY, which include educational tools, such as embedded 
whiteboards and Microsoft Power­Point-like slides. By 2012, YY had over 300 mil-
lion registered users, and by 2015, it had 100 million active monthly users.
In October 2010, Kevin Systrom (1983–) and Mike Krieger (1986–) launched 
Instagram in the iPhone App Store. Within the first twenty-­four hours, the app had 
been downloaded 25,000 times. By the third week, it had 300,000 users. Part of 
this instant popularity stemmed from word-­of-­mouth advertising by some very 
influential ­people in the tech world, including Jack Dorsey (1976–) of Twitter, who 
had tested the app before it became available to the public. Instagram grew into an 
international phenomenon. In addition to being able to upload photos and videos, 
users can use filters to transform the images. Two years ­after the app came out, 
Facebook bought it from ­Systrom and Krieger for $1 billion. The acquisition neu-
tralized a rival for Facebook and opened up its mobile offerings. At the time, Ins-
tagram had 30 million active users; in August 2015, it had ten times that number.
Snapchat is one of the most recent media-­sharing websites, and it has a twist. 
Photos and videos that are uploaded to the website are available only for a few 
­seconds. The original incarnation of this ephemeral mobile messaging app was 
launched as Picaboo in the iOS app store in July 2011. Two months ­after its launch, 
it had fewer than 130 users. At that point, cofound­ers Evan Spiegel (1990–) and 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxxii
Bobby Murphy (c. 1988–) deci­ded to remove the third member of their partner-
ship, Reggie Brown (n.d.). The original idea for Snapchat can be traced back to 
Brown, who was then serving as chief marketing officer. Brown brought a lawsuit 
against the com­pany for one-­third of its worth. In 2014, the lawsuit between Reg-
gie Brown and Snapchat was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount. The 
press release regarding the settlement, however, suggests that Brown settled for 
less than the one-­third of the com­pany’s worth that he had been seeking. At that 
time, Snapchat, Inc. was valued at $10 billion. Around the same time that Brown 
was removed from the partnership, the name was changed from Picaboo to Snap-
chat. Shortly thereafter, the number of Snapchat users began to rise, mostly 
­because Snapchat marketed the short duration that the pictures lasted on the app 
as a social media solution to the permanence of information on other sites, and by 
the end of the year, it had more than 2,000 users. By the end of January 2012, it 
had more than 20,000 users and by the end of April 2012, it had more than 100,000 
users. The majority of activity on Snapchat was taking place between the hours of 9 
a.m. to 3 p.m., marking it a tool primarily used by school-­aged young ­people.
Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook offered to buy Snapchat in 2012 for $3 billion in 
cash, which would have been Facebook’s most expensive acquisition to date. In 
what some considered a bold move by Spiegel and Murphy, the offer was declined. 
At the time, Snapchat users ­were posting 50 million photos a day, compared with 
the 300 million photos a day shared by Facebook users. Zuckerberg responded by 
developing an app called Poke, which, while it had some additional features, was 
essentially a copy of Snapchat. Poke was designed in 12 days and launched on 
­December 21. The day ­after its launch, Poke was the most-­downloaded app. How-
ever, publicity from Facebook’s offer garnered a ­great deal of interest in Snapchat. 
Three days ­after Poke’s launch, on December 25, Snapchat had surpassed it in pop-
ularity and Poke rapidly fell ­behind, dropping out of the thirty most-­downloaded 
apps. On May 9, 2014, Facebook fi­nally ended its failed ephemeral messaging app, 
Poke, removing it from the app store. In September 2015, Snapchat introduced its 
first in-­app purchase, Replay. Previously, all of Snapchat’s features ­were ­free, includ-
ing a version of Replay introduced in 2013, which allowed users to replay one 
message a day. The pur­chas­able version of Replay, available for $0.99, allows users 
to replay up to three messages a day. In 2015, Snapchat’s daily active users num-
bered in excess of 100 million ­people and the com­pany was valued at $16 billion.
Commentary and Bookmarking Forums
Commentary forums are ­those that allow users to upload links or other content 
with the purpose of starting a conversation about that topic. ­These websites usu-
ally provide a voting mechanism that pushes the most popu­lar posts to the top of 
a list of related posts. Bookmarking forums are less about starting a conversation 
and more about providing users with mini-­web-­browsing experiences. ­These web-
sites allow users to bookmark websites that they find in­ter­est­ing. The links are saved 
on a board or user-­created category that allows them to or­ga­nize ­these bookmarks. 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxxiii
Their boards can be shared with and followed by other users, which provide them 
with a kind of personalized web-­browsing experience.
The commentary and bookmarking forums are fairly diverse in terms of what 
the dif­fer­ent websites offer. StumbleUpon, for example, founded by Garrett Camp 
(1978–) in 2001, was designed to offer a browsing experience tailored to user in-
terests. At the time, Google was relatively new and could be difficult to navigate. 
The idea was to make it easier for internet users to find something cool and in­ter­
est­ing. Users can follow other users with similar interests; however, that was about 
the extent of the social networking tools that StumbleUpon offered. Pinterest, a 
much newer platform, offers a very similar model. Users find content on the web 
they like and can “pin” it to boards on their profile. Meanwhile, other users can 
browse ­these boards for content that interests them. While it was launched at the 
end of 2009, the com­pany had been founded several years earlier, which meant 
that a lot of planning and investment was already ­behind the website at launch. 
Despite this preparation, Pinterest did not take off immediately. Cofounder Ben 
Silbermann (1982–) claims that ­people ­didn’t get it. However, when it launched in 
the iPhone App Store in 2011, user numbers started climbing. ­Today, it is ranked 
number sixteen in the United States, and over half of its users are from other coun-
tries, like India, the United Kingdom, Brazil, and Canada. Silbermann does not 
consider Pinterest a social network site, but rather a “cata­log of ideas.” As with 
StumbleUpon, users can follow other users, but outside of commenting on pins 
and repinning content, ­there are no real social networking tools.
Other websites in this category involve interacting and communicating with other 
users in a more bulletin board or forum fashion. Baidu Tieba is one of the first ex-
amples of this type of website. In December 2003, the Chinese com­pany Baidu (also 
an internet search site), introduced its communication platform, Tieba. Baidu 
Tieba is a kind of bulletin board system (BBS) in which users can search keywords 
and discuss topics with other ­people who share the same interests. At its tenth an-
niversary, Baidu reported that Tieba had 1 billion users, 200 million active monthly 
users, and over 8 million bars. (A bar is a forum created when a term is searched 
so that users have a space to discuss the topic.) By 2015, Baidu Tieba had become 
one of the top ten most popu­lar social networking sites in the world, with about 
300 million active monthly users.
In Latin Amer­i­ca, Taringa! is one of the most popu­lar social media websites, trail-
ing only Facebook. Launched in early 2004 by Argentine high school student 
­Fernando Sanz (c. 1988–), known as Cypher, Taringa! was originally based on an 
already existing website, Teoti​.­com, which was a news-­feed community where users 
linked content and then commented on it. Taringa! quickly became bigger than 
Cypher could ­handle, and the website was acquired in 2006 by Hernán Botbol 
(1981–) and his ­brother Matias Botbol (1978–).
Reddit, a similar website, was launched a year ­after Taringa! in June 2005, by 
Steve Huffman (1983–) and Alexis Ohanian (1983–), recent gradu­ates of the Uni-
versity of ­Virginia. As with Taringa!, users can post content and comment on it. 
One of the central features of Reddit is the ability for users to vote content up or 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxxiv
down, thereby organ­izing content according to user opinion. Condé Nast Publica-
tions bought Reddit in October 2006 for about $20 million. At the time, the website 
had 500,000 unique visitors a day. Over half of Reddit’s user traffic originates in the 
United States, where the website is ranked tenth, but it is popu­lar in other coun-
tries as well, including India, Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
Blogging and Microblogging
Blogging is one of the earliest examples of social media; the name is derived from 
the term weblog. Blogger is one of the oldest websites to offer this ser­vice to inter-
net users, and, as an early platform, it helped to pop­u­lar­ize the format of online 
web journaling. It was launched in August 1999 by Pyra Labs, out of San Fran-
cisco, California. By 2002, Blogger had hundreds of thousands of users. The com­
pany was sold to Google in February 2003 for an undisclosed amount. Around the 
time of this acquisition, Blogger hosted more than a million blogs, about 200,000 
of which ­were active. One of the benefits of using Blogger over some other blogging 
platforms, like WordPress, is that it gives users the option to using the Blogger 
domain host, Blogspot, or, for ­free, users can use their own domain name. Word-
Press charges for using a dif­fer­ent domain name. On the other hand, WordPress, a 
blogging platform that was introduced in 2005, is also a content management sys-
tem, which means that ­there are opportunities for a lot more customizability and 
control over how the content is delivered. Blogger is largely used by En­glish speak-
ers and most commonly used in the United States, but it also has a very strong 
presence in India, along with Indonesia, Pakistan, and Thailand. WordPress, on the 
other hand, has a slightly more diverse user base, with less than 20 ­percent of its 
users originating in the United States. It is also popu­lar in India and Brazil; the 
second most common language used with WordPress is Spanish.
With the launch of Twitter in 2006, social media users ­were introduced to the 
idea of microblogging. That is, instead of composing an entire essay on a topic, us-
ers are limited to 140 characters in each post, on which other users can then com-
ment. Due to the character limitation, the microblogging phenomenon is supposed 
to be more spontaneous than traditional blogging. Cofounder Jack Dorsey posted 
the first “tweet” in March 2006, writing “Just setting up my twttr.” The influence of 
Twitter has been enormous, and as of August 2015, the website had over 315 mil-
lion active monthly users. It is ranked in the top ten, both in the United States and 
globally. Around 500 million tweets are posted daily, and almost three-­quarters of 
Twitter accounts are located outside the United States. In late 2015, Twitter an-
nounced that it was considering offering a feature that expands the 140-­character 
limit; however, it had not yet finalized this mechanism.
Despite its global influence, Twitter is not the most popu­lar microblogging plat-
form in all countries. In China, the microblogging platform Sina Weibo is one of 
the top five most used websites, and while often compared to Twitter, it is ­really 
more of a Twitter-­Facebook hybrid. Due to its popularity, Sina Weibo is often re-
ferred to simply as Weibo; however, as the term is Chinese for “microblog,” nu-
merous other sites also use the term in their name. Weibo was launched in 2009 

Overview of Popu­lar International Social Media Sites
xxxv
by the Sina Corporation, headquartered in Shanghai and Beijing. A year ­later, 
­Weibo already saw more than 5 million users. By 2013, Weibo would have over 
600 million registered users, and by 2015, over 200 million active users would 
visit the site ­every month.
­These five categories represent the bulk of what social media has to offer ­today. 
Their special functions and abilities often overlap, but nevertheless each kind fills 
a dif­fer­ent need for social media users. What becomes most evident in examining 
­these categories and looking at the vari­ous social media websites from each one is 
the fact that, while some stand out as global ­giants, like Facebook and YouTube, 
­there is a wide range when it comes to what is popu­lar in dif­fer­ent regions of the 
world. The websites examined in this overview represent a small sample of some 
of the more prominent social media sites at the time of writing. Some social media 
websites and apps are able to sustain interest longer than ­others by staying com-
petitive, but user preferences change over time, and new start-­ups are always be-
ing introduced. This means that the landscape of social media is fluid and 
ever-­changing.
Further Reading
Angwin, Julia. 2009. Stealing MySpace: The ­Battle to Control the Most Popu­lar Website in Amer­
i­ca. New York: Random House.
Avalaunch Media. 2013. “The Complete History of Social Media,” April 15. Accessed Au-
gust 13, 2015. http://­avalaunchmedia​.­com​/­history​-­of​-­social​-­media​/­Main​.­html
Boyd, Danah M. 2008. “Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship,” Journal 
of Computer-­Mediated Communication, 13(1):210–230.
Doll, Jen. 2011. “R.I.P., Friendster, the Social Media Site of Our Relative Youth,” April 26. 
Accessed August 12, 2015. http://­www​.­villagevoice​.­com​/­news​/­rip​-­friendster​-­the​-­social​
-­media​-­site​-­of​-­our​-­relative​-­youth​-­6666000
Jones, Steve. 2003. Encyclopedia of New Media: An Essential Reference to Communication and 
Technology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Kaplan, Andreas M., and Haenlein, Michael. 2010. “Users of the World, Unite? The Chal-
lenges and Opportunities of Social Media.” Business Horizons, 53: 59–68.
Noor Al-­Deen, Hana S., and Hendricks, John Allen. 2012. Social Media: Usage and Impact. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Solomon, Brian. 2014. “From Alibaba to Weibo: Your A-­Z Guide To China’s Hottest Inter-
net IPOs,” March 19. Accessed August 31, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­brian​
solomon​/­2014​/­03​/­19​/­from​-­alibaba​-­to​-­weibo​-­your​-­a​-­z​-­guide​-­to​-­chinas​-­hottest​
-­internet​-­ipos​/­
­Waters, John. 2010. The Every­thing Guide to Social Media: All You Need to Know About Par­
ticipating in ­Today’s Most Popu­lar Online Communities. Avon, MA: F+W Media, Inc.

This page intentionally left blank

Chronology of Significant Events in 
Cyber History
1958	
The U.S. Department of Defense issued Directive 5105.15 to establish the 
Advanced Research Proj­ect Agency (ARPA). The purpose of this agency 
was to stimulate and support research proj­ects to advance the development 
of science and technology in the United States. ARPA was ­later renamed 
to DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Proj­ect Agency.
1968	
Bolt Beranek and Newman (BBN) was hired to construct the Advanced 
Research Proj­ect Agency Network (ARPANET), which connected computers 
at vari­ous universities around the country in order to facilitate ARPA 
proj­ects. This marked the beginning of networked computers and is the 
pre­de­ces­sor of the modern-­day internet.
1969	
CompuServe was founded as a subsidiary of Golden United Life Insurance. 
At its inception, it was called Compu-­Serv Network, Inc., and its original 
intent was as a time-­sharing ser­vice. During the 1960s, many large 
corporations used computers in everyday business; however, as computers 
­were still prohibitively expensive, they did not own them. Instead, ­these 
corporations would rent time on a computer owned by a com­pany who 
provided a time-­sharing ser­vice. CompuServe introduced two impor­tant 
changes to this ser­vice. The first was technology that allowed the network 
to transmit data over ordinary telephone lines. The second was the use of 
business software, which CompuServe made available for a fee, in addition 
to time on the computer.
1971	
Ray Tomlinson (c. 1941–), an engineer employed by BBN, sent the first 
email from one computer to another. While the two computers sat side 
by side, the only connection between them was ARPANET, making this 
the first networked message ever sent. It has been reported that the text 
of this first email was “QWERTYUIOP;” however, Tomlinson has stated 
only that the first message was something like “QWERTYUIOP.” In fact, 
he does not recall the contents of the first email.
1977	
The first personal modem was offered to the public by DC Hayes Associates.
1978	
Computer Bulletin Board System (CBBS), the first functional online 
bulletin board system, was developed by Ward Christensen (1945–) and 
Randy Suess (n.d.). The bulletin board system, or BBS, became one of the 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xxxviii
first real tools that personal computer (PC) users had to interact with other 
PC users at dif­fer­ent locations. It offered the ability for users to create their 
own boards, to upload and download files, share messages on public 
boards, disseminate news, and even play the first online games. In the 
early 1990s, at the height of their popularity, more than 60,000 BBSs could 
be found in the United States alone.
The first multiuser dungeon (MUD) was written by Roy Trubshaw (1959–) 
and Richard Bartle (1960–), students at Essex University in the United 
Kingdom. A MUD is a program that allows multiple users from dif­fer­ent 
computers to interact in a virtual environment si­mul­ta­neously. MUDs 
­were text-­based and consisted of “rooms” that represented dif­fer­ent 
environments. Many MUDs ­were used primarily for online role-­playing 
games. MUDs and BBSs ­were the first examples of ­people socializing over 
computer networks and ­were the primary method of online communication 
before the arrival of the World Wide Web.
1979	
On September 24, CompuServe became the first provider of dial-up ser­
vice to the general public. Part of their business model included email and 
BBSs for consumers. At the time, it was also the only com­pany to offer 
technical support to PC users. Initially, this ser­vice was named MicroNET, 
but was quickly renamed CompuServe Information Ser­vice (CIS).
The Source, the com­pany that would become CompuServe’s biggest rival 
for nearly a de­cade, was launched by William von Meister (1942–1995). 
It was the first online ser­vice in the United States to target individual 
consumers exclusively.
1980	
CompuServe released its CB Simulator, which was one of the first real-­
time chat ser­vices on the internet. Initially, it offered only 40 dif­fer­ent 
channels, but it became so popu­lar that, not long ­after its release, it 
accounted for 20 ­percent of the traffic on CIS.
The first online newspaper article was published by the Columbus Dispatch.
1984	
Trintex, a ser­vice that provided online connection and content to consumers 
was founded as the collaborative endeavor of Sears, CBS, and IBM. The 
“tri” in the name stood for the three companies. The idea was that Sears 
would provide online shopping, CBS would provide content, and IBM 
would provide the supporting technology. Ultimately, the endeavor failed 
and was replaced in 1988 with the much more successful Prodigy.
1985	
The pre­de­ces­sor of Amer­i­ca Online (AOL) was introduced to the public 
by Quantum Computer Ser­vices. It was known as “Q-­link,” a dial-up 
network ser­vice for Commodore 64 computer users.
1986	
CompuServe was bought by H&R Block for $23 million.
1988	
Prodigy became available to the general public, with backing from IBM 
and Sears. It offered two very attractive benefits over the very successful 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xxxix
CompuServe. Prodigy introduced a flat-­rate pricing plan that allowed 
customers to pay a monthly fee of around $10 to $13 for five hours of 
access to the internet at any time. At the time, CompuServe’s model was 
the prohibitively expensive pay-­per-­minute plan, which ran consumers 
anywhere between $5 and $12 an hour, depending on the speed of the 
connection. Prodigy also offered a graphical interface, which was more 
attractive and easier to use than the ASCII-­based textual interface of 
CompuServe.
1989	
CompuServe, at the time a subsidiary of H&R Block, bought The Source 
in June and closed the ser­vice down in August.
AOL was born as Amer­i­ca Online, a revised version of an earlier network 
ser­vice for Macintosh and Apple II computers. Previous incarnations of 
this ser­vice ­were introduced by Quantum Computer Ser­vices, which 
officially changed its name to Amer­i­ca Online, Inc. in 1991. Originally, 
­there was some debate over the acronym AOL, with suggestions that AO 
was sufficient. Stephen Case (1958–), cofounder of AOL, noticed that 
many successful companies at the time had three-­letter acronyms for their 
names, such as IBM and MTV; therefore, AOL was ­adopted. This same 
year, the com­pany introduced the Instant Messenger ser­vice and coined 
the phrase “­You’ve got mail,” spoken in a distinctive electronic voice. AOL 
would become extremely successful and be the first internet com­pany to 
be included in the Fortune 500.
1990	
A British scientist, Tim Berners-­Lee (1955–), employed at the Eu­ro­pean 
Organ­ization for Nuclear Research (other­wise known as CERN) in­ven­ted 
the World Wide Web. It was originally conceived as a vehicle to facilitate 
the sharing of information among universities and other research 
institutions. Often confused with the internet itself, the World Wide Web 
is software that utilizes Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), a markup 
language that describes the text, images, and other ele­ments of a webpage 
using tags. The web browser interprets ­these tags and pres­ents the webpage 
in a visually pleasing format. HTML introduced hypertext and hyperlinks 
to the internet, which allowed data to be or­ga­nized in a weblike manner 
rather than in a linear format. This facilitates a high level of interactivity 
in a multimedia setting, which forms the backbone of the internet ­today.
1991	
Berners-­Lee posted the first website using HTML. While its contents have 
changed slightly over the years, this page is still accessible at http://­info​
.­cern​.­ch​/­hypertext​/­WWW​/­TheProject​.­html.
Prodigy surpassed its millionth subscriber. This same year, it became 
embroiled in a censorship and ­free speech controversy related to anti-­
Semitic posts and messages. This controversy prefigured the debates to 
come regarding freedom of expression online.
1993	
CERN released into the public domain the software that runs the World 
Wide Web. This resulted in its growth through the developments of 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xl
numerous innovators, which helped to transform it into the web with 
which we are familiar ­today.
1995	
Randal Conrads (c. 1949–) created Classmates​.­com as a tool for reconnecting 
with ­people from high school. He ­later added features to promote social 
interaction, such as user profiles and message boards. In 2016, Classmates​
.­com focused on collating nostalgia and serving as an online tool for 
organ­izing reunions. In 2015, Classmates​.­com boasted the largest directory 
of high school rosters, with over 57 million names, and the largest online 
collection of high school yearbooks, currently totaling over 300,000.
1997	
Andrew Weinreich (c. 1968–) launched SixDegrees​.­com. This website 
allowed users to create personal profiles and connect with friends. A year 
­after its launch, it added the capability of being able to browse other 
­people’s friends lists. While building profiles and listing friends ­were 
features of some websites at the time, SixDegrees​.­com was the first to 
combine the two and allow ­others to view them. While Classmates​.­com 
was first on the scene, it did not add ­these functions ­until much ­later, 
thus making SixDegrees​.­com the first recognizable social networking site.
AOL acquired CompuServe for $1.2 billion.
1999	
The first version of QQ, the Chinese instant messaging (IM) ser­vice, was 
released by Tencent.
SixDegrees​.­com was bought by YouthStream Media Networks for $125 
million.
Prodigy was first traded as a public corporation and partnered with SBC 
Communications.
2000	
While SixDegrees​.­com had millions of registered users, its business model 
was not sustainable and the website was shut down. Weinreich believed that 
­people ­were just not ready for it. As access to the internet was still limited 
for many, once ­people connected via the website, ­there was not much 
­else to do. He has also suggested that the technology was not advanced 
enough yet, as digital cameras ­were not prevalent ­until years ­later.
2001	
SBC Communications bought all Prodigy stock for a total of $384 million 
and then converted it back to a private com­pany. Prodigy remained active 
in some form ­until 2011, when it discontinued support for its users.
AOL was the biggest internet provider in the United States. It was worth 
more than $125 billion and, at the time, earned more than $7 billion a 
year in revenue. AOL acquired Time Warner for $106 billion, firmly 
establishing the com­pany as the largest media conglomerate in the world.
2003	
Jonathan Abrams (c. 1972–) launched Friendster in March. The website 
was originally conceived as a competitor to Match​.­com, the dating website. 
The idea was that dating friends of friends would lead to more successful 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xli
relationships than dating strangers from a dating site. Since viewing friends 
of friends was limited to four degrees, ­people began amassing as many 
“friends” as pos­si­ble in order to expand their network.
MySpace​.­com was released in August to compete with sites like 
Friendster. The new site was able to capitalize on some alienating decisions 
by Friendster, such as when it deleted fake identities and considered a 
subscription model. While MySpace was not initially conceived as a 
­music promoter, the website embraced the way that bands and musicians 
­were using it. ­Today, MySpace has been instrumental in the ­careers of 
many musicians, such as Sean Kingston (1990–), Panic! at the Disco, and 
Owl City.
2004	
In February, Mark Zuckerberg (1984–) introduced the first incarnation 
of Facebook to the Harvard University student body. Originally, it was 
called “thefacebook” and was intended as a vehicle for Harvard students 
to connect with one another. Within a month of its launch, over half the 
undergraduate population had registered. Shortly thereafter, the website 
expanded to other universities in the area; and a year ­later, “the” was 
dropped from the name.
Successful through the beginning of the 2000s, Classmates​.­com was 
bought in October by United Online, Inc. for $100 million.
2005	
In February, YouTube was launched.
Tencent released Qzone, a social networking site that grew out of the IM 
program QQ.
2006	
Jack Dorsey (1976–), cofounder of Twitter, sent the first tweet via an 
internal system in March: “Just setting up my twttr.” By July, the full version 
of Twitter was introduced to the public as a type of group IM system, 
with a 140-­character limit for its messages. While it was not the first 
microblogging website, it has certainly been one of the most influential.
Facebook expanded beyond university systems in September and became 
available to anyone with an email. Since that time, it has grown tremendously, 
and currently it has almost twice as many active users than any other 
social media website in the world.
Despite the video-­sharing website YouTube’s ­legal trou­bles over copyright 
infringement, Google purchased it in October for $1.65 billion. At the 
time, it was by far the com­pany’s most expensive purchase.
2009	
Jan Koum (1976–) and Brian Acton (1972–) released WhatsApp, the IM 
app that allows users to sends messages internationally without incurring 
any costs from smartphone providers.
In June, China severely restricted its citizens’ use of Google by blocking 
many of Google’s communication tools, such as Gmail, Google Apps, and 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xlii
Google Talk. A few weeks ­later, ­after 140 ­people ­were killed in riots that 
took place in Xinjiang’s capital of Urumqi, China also banned Facebook 
and Twitter. Other foreign websites blocked in China in 2009 included 
YouTube, Vimeo, and Blogspot.
In December, MOL Global, one of Asia’s largest internet companies, 
acquired Friendster for $26.4 million.
2011	
In January, the Chinese com­pany Tencent released Weixin, known as 
WeChat in the United States.
Friendster shut down in May and erased all user-­created content. A few 
months ­later, it reemerged as an entertainment and gaming website.
2014	
In March, a lengthy lawsuit between Viacom and Google fi­nally concluded. 
In 2007, Viacom had filed a lawsuit asking for $1 billion for copyright 
infringement by YouTube over more than 79,000 videos broadcasted 
between 2005 and 2008. While reportedly no money was exchanged, the 
details of the settlement ­were not released to the public. However, this 
would not be the last lawsuit against Google for YouTube’s copyright 
infringement.
2015	
Verizon acquired AOL for $4.4 billion, making the resulting com­pany one 
of the world’s most prominent media technology companies.
Streaming apps grew exponentially in popularity. Aleph, an Israeli-­based 
firm, launched Meerkat, an app that can livestream a Twitter feed, in 
March. That same month, Twitter launched Periscope, an app that streams 
in real time from a user’s phone camera to the web. At the end of the year, 
Periscope won Apple’s award for best app of 2015.
As of August, the top social media websites with the most active users ­were 
Facebook (1.490 billion), QQ (832 million), WhatsApp (800 million), 
Facebook Messenger (700 million), Qzone (668 million), Weixin/WeChat 
(549 million), and Twitter (316 million).
In September, when Instagram officially boasted 400 million monthly 
active users, it became more popu­lar than Twitter.
2016	
In response to the ­legal trou­bles that Apple faced when refusing to unlock 
an iPhone for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) ­after a mass 
shooting in San Bernardino, California, WhatsApp added end-­to-­end 
encryption to its messaging ser­vice in April for ­every method of 
communication. This meant that regardless of the device used, not even 
WhatsApp employees would have access to the data sent over their 
network, thereby making it impossible for any government or other agency 
to compel the com­pany to grant access to a user’s data.
In June, Microsoft purchased LinkedIn for more than $20 billion.
In July, Niantic released Pokémon Go, the first mobile app to introduce 
an augmented real­ity game for iOS, Android, and some Apple wearables. 

Chronology of Significant Events in Cyber History
xliii
The game was introduced in select countries, such as the United States, 
and was expanded to other countries, such as Brazil so that it could be 
used during the 2016 Summer Olympic Games.
The same month, Verizon purchased Yahoo, along with Tumblr, for 
approximately $5 billion.
The number of Facebook Messenger monthly active users reached more 
than 1 billion in July.
Tencent, owner of QQ, Qzone, WeChat, and several other online ser­vices, 
surpassed Alibaba, the e-­commerce ­giant whose annual transactions 
exceeded that of Amazon and eBay combined, as China’s most valuable 
tech com­pany in August. This increase in wealth can be seen in the 
continued popularity of its ser­vices, such as WeChat, whose active user 
base grew by over 40 ­percent from 2015 to 2016.
On September 1, YouTube rolled out a new notification policy intended 
to create more transparency and goodwill among its content creators. 
Notifications began being sent to users when they ­violated the “ad-­friendly” 
policy, which demonetized their videos for potentially offensive content, 
including swearing. According to YouTube, the ad-­friendly policy had 
been in place since ads ­were initially run with user content. Ironically, 
this attempt at improving communication led to a community uproar 
documented via the hashtag #YouTubeIsOver. Users ­were angry over lost 
potential revenue and began rehashing old feelings of being taken for 
granted.
­Later in September, Twitter was set to change its method of counting 
characters, effectively increasing its 140-­character limit. Some examples 
included not counting quoted tweets, attached media, or user names that 
appear at the beginning of a reply. This decision could be an attempt to 
rekindle interest in the microblogging platform, as the number of active 
Twitter users has stagnated and even fallen over the past year.
As of September 2016, the top social media websites with the most active 
users ­were Facebook (1.712 billion), WhatsApp (1 billion), Facebook 
Messenger (1 billion), QQ (899 million), Weixin/WeChat (806 million), 
Qzone (652 million), Tumblr (555 million), Instagram (500 million), and 
Twitter (313 million).

This page intentionally left blank

AFGHANISTAN
Located in South and Central Asia, Af­ghan­i­stan, with a population of 33 million 
­people, is a country that has faced serious conflict, most recently during the Soviet 
occupation (1979–1989), a civil war in 1992 that eventually involved the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organ­ization (NATO) and a U.S.-­led co­ali­tion (2001–2014), and 
the transfer of that war effort to Afghan forces (2015–). Although conflict still plagues 
the nation, the Afghan government continues to make strides that have made im-
provements for its residents; some of its greatest successes have involved the coun-
try’s telecommunications infrastructure. As of 2016, the Ministry of Communications 
and Information Technology claimed that 90 ­percent of the country had network 
capabilities, though this number reflected the amount of territory where ­people can 
go online, not how many users actually had access. Social media has been slowly 
penetrating the country as ­people have acquired enabled devices and used them to 
promote social change online; both citizens and the government use social media 
sites to address some of the country’s most urgent needs and challenges.
­Because of the ongoing conflict in the country between the Taliban, an Islamic 
fundamentalist group that has committed acts of terrorism, and the Afghan gov-
ernment, security issues have historically hindered the availability and accessibil-
ity of the internet in the country. However, Af­ghan­i­stan has also seen some pro­gress 
despite the fighting. In 2007, Afghan Wireless completed the construction of a 
“Micro­wave Ring” around the country, a proj­ect that ultimately provided internet 
access to thirty-­one provinces and covered more than 250 towns, cities, and major 
transportation routes (Afghan Wireless 2007). The proj­ect cost millions of U.S. dol-
lars. The ring paved the way for the introduction of mobile 3G capability. Etisalat, 
a telecommunications com­pany, first announced its 3G offerings in 2012 (Capac-
ity 2012); by the end of 2016, all mobile ser­vice providers offered 3G ser­vice (Budde 
2016). Some major cities, such as the capital, Kabul, already had 4G access.
Afghans primarily connect to the internet via mobile phone. As of 2016, the 
country’s five major providers claimed 25 million users, of which approximately 
20 million could access the internet (Budde 2016). Subscription numbers have 
trended downward since 2015, as foreign military members working in the coun-
try have departed. The statistics from 2015 must include the foreign military pres-
ence, as statistics from late 2016 show a 30–40 ­percent drop in mobile subscriptions 
­after the foreign militaries departed (Budde 2016). Nonetheless, internet penetra-
tion in the country remains low. Freedom House (2016) reported that Af­ghan­i­stan’s 
internet penetration hovered around 8 ­percent at the end of 2016. When Afghans 
connect to the internet, their most accessed sites are Google​.­com, Google​.­com​.­af, 
A

AFGHANISTAN
2
YouTube, Facebook, Yahoo, BBC​.­com, MyWay​.­com (an internet portal), Wikipedia​
.­org, Acbar​.­org (a job site), and Amazon​.­com (Alexa 2016). They access online ser­
vices at some of the lowest connection and load time speeds of any other Asian 
nation.
Af­ghan­i­stan’s app usage is difficult to discern. While some top app lists include 
Afghan tele­vi­sion and radio stations, a number of the apps appearing on ­those lists 
for iOS and Android include English-­language chatting apps. From comments on 
app ratings’ sites, many of ­these downloads ­were used by foreign troops deployed 
to Af­ghan­i­stan rather than by Afghans themselves. ­Because of the foreign troop us-
age, Af­ghan­i­stan’s ­actual app usage and preferences are unclear, and no definitive 
lists currently exist.
In April 2016, a controversial indigenous app appeared on the market. Alemarah, 
an Android app created by the Taliban and briefly hosted on Google Play before it 
was removed, provided Pashtu-­language videos and statements to the group’s sup-
porters in eastern Af­ghan­i­stan. Researchers speculated that the app was attempting 
to provide the Taliban direct digital access to its supporters and compete with the 
so-­called Islamic State or Daesh, a terrorist organ­ization based in Iraq and Syria 
that has a large presence on social media and claims to control territory in 
­Af­ghan­i­stan that they refer to as “Khorasan province” (Guardian 2016). ­Because 
Google removed the app quickly, however, it is not known how many ­people 
downloaded it.
In 2015, Af­ghan­i­stan’s most used social media platforms included Facebook 
(98 ­percent), Twitter (1.3 ­percent), Pinterest (0.1 ­percent), Google+ (0.1 ­percent), 
Tumblr (0.09 ­percent), YouTube (0.02 ­percent), StumbleUpon (0.02 ­percent), and 
VKontakte (0.01 ­percent); other platforms, such as WhatsApp, LinkedIn, Instagram, 
and Paywast, had nominal use (StatsMonkey 2015). On ­these platforms, users are 
predominantly male (97.5  ­percent) and primarily communicate in En­glish 
(62.1 ­percent), Dari (30.1 ­percent), and Pashtu (3.3 ­percent) (GIZ 2014). More re-
cent statistics suggest that 37 ­percent of ­women used social media in 2016 and 
that this demographic is ripe for expansion, though official tallies have this num-
ber much lower. The low number of ­women online is a reflection of local culture, 
where ­women traditionally received ­little education. It may also be in part ­because 
­women reportedly experience significant harassment online, especially on Face-
book, the country’s preferred platform. ­There is also an Association of Afghan Blog 
Writers, which connects bloggers of both genders in the country and mobilizes them 
to defend their rights when necessary.
Afghans are using innovative ways to promote social media in their country. Al-
though Af­ghan­i­stan is not yet known for regular, active social media use, the coun-
try held its first annual Social Media Summit in 2013. The two-­day conference 
attracted more than 200 social media users from twenty-­four of the thirty-­four prov-
inces. It focused on promoting social media as a legitimate form of communica-
tion, especially for journalism. In 2014, the summit expanded to three days and 
attracted more widespread attention. Its focus also shifted to how social media can 
be used for promoting positive social change. The 2015 conference utilized the 
hashtag #ASMS2015 to promote online discussion and to attract more attention to 

AFGHANISTAN
3
the event. It also featured the Af­ghan­i­stan Social Media Awards, which honored so-
cial media personalities and companies in ten categories. ­After a public nomina-
tion, voting, and then international jury deliberation, the awards recognized Safi 
Airways in the category of Best Social Media Advertising Campaign, Norband​.­com 
as the Best Blogger, SR Bros Entertainment as the Best YouTube Star, Malali Bashir 
(n.d.) as the Twitter Power User, and Wais Barakzai (n.d.) as the Citizen Journalist 
of the Year (Wadsam 2015). A 2016 conference did not take place, and ­there was 
no indication ­whether one would be held in 2017.
One area where social media has received credit for improving is ­women’s rights. 
In 2015, a young ­woman called Farkhunda Malikzada (c. 1988–2015) was beaten 
to death on the streets of Kabul ­after being wrongfully accused of burning the 
­Koran, the Muslim holy book, a blasphemous act. ­After her tragic death, videos 
taken of the assault helped identify her assailants so they could be brought to trial. 
Eleven police officers ­were also charged for not intervening during the riot (Kargar 
2015). Despite the tragic outcome in this case, social media has played a role in 
combating harassment aimed at ­women. Harim, a local app, provides ­women with 
updates on street harassment. Social media also allows ­women who might other­
wise be voiceless to defend their rights and have a say in the country’s politics and 
On March 17, 2016, ­women from Af­ghan­i­stan’s Solidarity Party took to the streets of Kabul to 
memorialize the death of Farkhunda Malikzada. Social media captured the tragic death of Fark-
hunda, leading to the arrest of her killers and the police officers who refused to interfere as she 
was ­dying. Her death and the social media surrounding it exposed some of the harsh truths 
about ­women’s rights in the country and is ultimately credited with improving ­women’s rights 
in the country. (AP Photo/Rahmat Gul)

AFGHANISTAN
4
development (Af­ghan­i­stan Times 2016). The power of social media for ­women’s 
rights is that it can highlight injustices and social issues that ­were previously not 
discussed in any public forum.
Another challenge facing Af­ghan­i­stan is that many ­people are tired of the seem-
ingly endless conflict. In a 2016 national survey, 40 ­percent of the ­people indicated 
that they would leave if given the opportunity, citing the fighting and the po­liti­cal 
and economic prob­lems in the country (Guardian 2015). When they leave, most 
of them head to Eu­rope, exacerbating the prob­lem that that region is facing with 
refugees from Syria, other parts of the ­Middle East, and North Africa. To combat 
this prob­lem, Af­ghan­i­stan’s Refugees and Repatriations Ministry initiated a social 
media campaign, primarily on Facebook and Twitter, encouraging its ­people to stay. 
The campaign uses high-­quality pictures and promotes slogans such as “Stay with 
Me.” The driving force ­behind the campaign is the real­ity that if every­one leaves, 
no one ­will remain ­behind to rebuild the country (Bezhan 2015). Thus, in appeal-
ing to Afghans’ patriotism and sense of nationalism, the government wants to pre-
vent the loss of both its highly educated and working class populations. The initial 
campaign has spread to a popu­lar, citizen-­driven Twitter campaign called “Af­ghan­
i­stan Needs You.” It has also led to initiatives that promote education and jobs for 
unemployed young ­people.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Iran; Iraq; Rus­sia; Syria; United States
Further Reading
Afghan Wireless. 2007. “Afghan Wireless Again Creates History in Af­ghan­i­stan.” Novem-
ber 3. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­afghan​-­web​.­com​/­economy​/­afghan​_­wir​
eless​_­history​.­html
Afghanistan Times. 2016. “Social Media Can Empower ­Women: Raziya Masumi.” June 19. 
Accessed August  28, 2016. http://­afghanistantimes​.­af​/­social​-­media​-­can​-­empower​
-­women​-­raziya​-­masumi
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Af­ghan­i­stan.” Accessed August 20, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­AF
Bezhan, Frud. 2015. “ ‘Stay With Me’: Afghan Government Begs Citizens Not to Flee.” Sep-
tember 22. Accessed August 20, 2016. http://­www​.­theatlantic​.­com​/­international​/­archive​
/­2015​/­09​/­afghanistan​-­brain​-­drain​-­migrant​-­crisis​/­406708​/­
Budde. 2016. “Afghanistan—­Telecoms, Mobile and Broadband—­Statistics and Analyses: Ex-
ecutive Summary.” Accessed December  29, 2016. https://­www​.­budde​.­com​.­au​/­Rese​
arch​/­Afghanistan​-­Telecoms​-­Mobile​-­and​-­Broadband​-­Statistics​-­and​-­Analyses​?­r​=­51
Capacity Media. 2012. “Etisalat Launches 3G in Af­ghan­i­stan.” March 19. Accessed Au-
gust 20, 2016. http://­www​.­capacitymedia​.­com​/­Article​/­2997565​/­Etisalat​-­launches​-­3G​
-­in​-­Afghanistan​.­html
Freedom House. 2016. “Af­ghan­i­stan.” October 4. Accessed December 29, 2016. https://­fre​
edomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­press​/­2016​/­afghanistan
GIZ, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit. 2014. “Social Media in Af­
ghan­i­stan: Mea­sur­ing the Usage & Perceptions of the Afghan ­People.” Accessed August 
28, 2016. http://­ez​-­afghanistan​.­de​/­fileadmin​/­content​/­news​/­Social​_­Media​_­251114​.­pdf

ALGERIA
5
Guardian​.­ 2015. “Discontent Rife in Af­ghan­i­stan: 40% of ­People Keen to Leave, Survey Says.” 
November 18. Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­global​-­dev​
elopment​/­2015​/­nov​/­18​/­afghanistan​-­survey​-­discontent​-­40​-­per​-­cent​-­people​-­keen​-­to​
-­leave
Guardian​.­ 2016. “Afghan Taliban Create Smartphone App to Spread their Message.” April 3. 
Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­world​/­2016​/­apr​/­03​/­afghan​
-­taliban​-­create​-­smartphone​-­app​-­spread​-­message
Kargar, Zarghuna. 2015. “Farkhunda: The Making of a Martyr.” August 11. BBC News. Ac-
cessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­magazine​-­33810338
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Media Usage Statistics in Af­ghan­i­
stan.” Accessed August 20, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21279​-­afghan​
istan​-­mobile​-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
Wadsam. 2015. “10 Awards Given Out in First-­Ever Afghan Social Media Awards.” Octo-
ber  21. Accessed August  28, 2016. http://­wadsam​.­com​/­afghan​-­business​-­news​/­10​
-­awards​-­given​-­out​-­in​-­first​-­ever​-­afghan​-­social​-­media​-­awards​-­232​/­
ALGERIA
Algeria is a country located in the northern part of Africa. It has a population of 
nearly 39 million inhabitants and a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of 
$3,316. Internet access was available to about 18 ­percent of the population in 2014 
(World Bank Data 2014). ­There are no less than 6.8 million Facebook accounts 
and close to 400,000 Twitter ­handles (Baala 2014). Social media platforms are 
mostly in Arabic and French, although some personal blogs can be found in 
Tamazight (Algeria’s official language, along with Arabic) or En­glish. The majority 
of the country’s online users access the internet from computers at home or at in-
ternet cafés. Despite the developing mobile phone market, internet is still over-
whelmingly accessed via desktops.
Compared to its neighboring countries, 3G ser­vices in Algeria, first available in 
2013, ­were introduced much ­later. For instance, Morocco launched its first 3G ser­
vices in 2007, Tunisia in 2010, and Egypt in 2008 (Yaici 2013). However, despite 
such a delayed start, mobile internet usage and the access of social media through 
phones and mobile devices in Algeria have grown very rapidly. The Algerian Min-
istry of Post and Information and Communications Technologies (MPTIC) reports 
that in 2015, ­there ­were nearly 2 million internet users and 423,280 4G LTE users, 
and that 3G had surpassed 18 million subscriptions. As of summer 2016, users 
can expect to pay 1,000–1,600 dinars ($12.60–20) monthly for decent 3G ser­vice 
on their mobile phones, compared to a cost of at least 1,600 dinars monthly for 
internet ser­vices at home. Access to internet at home is much more limited than 
via mobile phones ­because the number of landlines is limited.
Mobile telephony subscribers had reached 45 million as of 2015, primarily 
through prepaid subscriber identify module (SIM) card ser­vices. ­After a 2000 law 
opened mobile telephone ser­vices to international competition, three main com-
panies came to dominate the Algerian market: the Egyptian-­owned Orascom Tele-
com Algerie (Djezzy), whose share of mobile telephony reached 45 ­percent in 
November 2015, and in 2016, it became the dominant provider, with 18.6 million 

ALGERIA
6
subscribers; Qatar’s Wataniya Telecom Algerie (Ooredoo), with 11.7 million; and 
state-­owned Mobilis Algerie Telecom, the former market leader in the number of 
3G subscribers, with 13 million (Mayer 2016). In order to remain at the top of 
mobile internet competition in Algeria, Mobilis has contracted with China’s ­giant 
Huawei com­pany for migration to 5G. The competition among ­these three opera-
tors is driving internet costs down for consumers and creating connectivity oppor-
tunities for Algerians.
Statistics show that Facebook is by far the most used platform for social media 
(97 ­percent), followed by Twitter (1.26 ­percent), Google+ (0.42 ­percent), Tumblr 
(0.12 ­percent), and Pinterest (0.25 ­percent) (StatsMonkey 2015). Accessing the in-
ternet and social media has had an impor­tant impact on Algeria’s economic, po­liti­
cal, and social spheres. Eco­nom­ically, easy internet access has prompted an increase 
in networking opportunities, the development of crowdsourcing apps, and linking 
young entrepreneurs from dif­fer­ent parts of the country to their international 
counter­parts. On a more commercial level, internet access permitted the creation 
of a local version of Craigs­list called OuedKniss. This website is a platform for sell-
ers to advertise their products and for buyers to contact them. While mostly used 
for car sales and apartment hunting, the website advertises a wide variety of ser­
vices and products.
Socially and po­liti­cally, internet and social media access has facilitated a strong 
presence of Algerian civil society organ­izations, with groups advocating for topics 
as diverse as gender equality rights, environmental protection, and anticorruption. 
Algerians take to Facebook and Twitter to tell the world of their disappointments, 
disagreements, and general reactions to both domestic and international events. 
During the series of popu­lar uprisings that spread in neighboring countries Tunisia, 
Libya, and Egypt in 2011, Algerians used Facebook to or­ga­nize protests and “rage 
days.” While the so-­called Arab Spring did not have a major influence on Algeria’s 
regime, Algerians or­ga­nized several protests and engaged in long debates asking 
for po­liti­cal reforms via social media.
Facebook and social media also have played a curious role in the latest presidential 
election in 2014, when slogans equating the reelection of Abdelaziz Bouteflika 
(1937–) with stability and security ­were disseminated. During the campaign, 
Bouteflika supporters circulated pictures of suicide bombings that occurred dur-
ing Algeria’s de­cade of turmoil in the 1990s prior to Bouteflika’s presidency. This 
pro-­Bouteflika social media campaign suggested that he was the only candidate who 
succeeded in putting an end to that vio­lence, and that changing the status quo may 
result in triggering instability anew. In addition, several of the presidential candi-
dates had official Facebook accounts for their campaigns, using ­those pages to reach 
out and mobilize the diaspora abroad, explain agenda points, communicate rally 
and event information to supporters, and call for boycotts.
Upon Bouteflika’s reelection for a fourth presidential term, a civil society group 
opposing the election results was formed and became very active on social me-
dia. The movement, called Barakat (which translates as “Enough!”), used its 
Facebook page to call for sit-­ins and demonstrations. Barakat’s founding mem-
bers are doctors, ­lawyers, teachers, and citizens who ­were not previously po­liti­
cal activists. Although Barakat’s impact has been marginal, their Facebook page 

ALGERIA
7
collected 30,000 likes in just one month, March 2014 (Bouraoui and Benneoune 
2014).
Other civil society activist groups who primarily use social media to voice their 
positions include the anti-­fracking movement No! It used Facebook to raise aware-
ness of the dangers of fracking by sharing videos explaining the pro­cess and its 
consequences. It also carried a wide campaign to change profile pictures to yellow, 
the official color symbolizing the antifracking campaign.
Besides Facebook, Algerians seem to use applications such as Skype, Twitter, You-
Tube, Tumblr, and Viber. Frequently, Twitter is a ­great place to follow debates and 
get a sense of the topic of the day in Algerian politics. Algerian Twitter accounts 
often mix wit, satire, and intelligent analyses of po­liti­cal situations in the country. 
­There has also been a rise in creating apps in Tamazight in order to facilitate both 
learning the language and accessing news content for speakers of Tamazight. One 
example of such apps is Azul, which was developed for Tamazight-­language learn-
ers. Fi­nally, in addition to ­these apps, some Algerians have personal blogs, many of 
which are in French and Arabic, but some are also in En­glish. Some of ­these blogs 
are dedicated to po­liti­cal conversations, while ­others are cultural, educational, en-
tertainment, or a mix thereof.
It should be noted that the government has a strong grip on internet access. The 
scandal concerning the BAC high school exit exam that arose in June 2016, when 
several exam questions ­were leaked through Facebook and Twitter, resulted in can-
celling some of the exam subjects and rescheduling a retake session held in early 
July. For the second round of the exam, the Ministry of Education collaborated with 
the Ministry of Telecommunication to block access to social media during the first 
day of the exam to prevent cheating (Le Matin D’Algérie 2016). This disruption in 
internet accessibility was reported to have had a severe negative economic impact 
on companies and enterprises that rely on the internet for their ser­vices. While the 
idea that blocking access to the internet was efficient in preventing cheating re-
mains questionable, it nonetheless showed the extent of the government’s willing-
ness and ability to control access to social media.
Algeria has a number of hacker groups and individual hackers who are notorious 
not only at home, but also abroad. Perhaps one of the most renowned cases is that of 
Algerian hacker Hamza Bendelladj (1988–), who was arrested in Thailand in 2013 
and extradited to the United States to face several charges of cybercrime. Bendelladj, 
also known as the Algerian digital Robin Hood and “BX1,” pleaded guilty to devel-
oping SpyEye, a Trojan ­horse program used against more than 200 bank accounts to 
extract millions of dollars that he sent to Palestinian nongovernmental organ­izations 
(Hatuqa 2015). Other forms of cybercrime include web defacement, which is fre-
quent in North Africa and involves hacking into foreign websites and replacing con-
tent as a sign of protest or activism. Some of Algeria’s best-­known hacker groups 
include Algeria to the Core and the hacktivist group Anonymous Algeria. The latter 
was involved in hacking and defacing over forty French websites ­after the Charlie 
Hebdo attack in order to protest the periodical’s defamatory caricatures.
Lina Benabdallah
See also: Algeria; China; Egypt; France; Libya; Morocco; Qatar; Tunisia

ANGOLA
8
Further Reading
Baala, Hamdi. 2014. “L’Algérie Compte 6.8 Millions D’utilisateurs sur Facebook, seulement 
37 500 sur Twitter (Étude).” June 30. Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­www​.­huffpost​
maghreb​.­com​/­2014​/­06​/­30​/­facebook​-­twitter​-­algerie​-­​_­n​_­5543478​.­html
Bakarat Movement. 2014. “Algeria: Barakat Movement Manifesto.” Secularism Is a ­Women’s 
Issue. Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­www​.­siawi​.­org​/­article7193​.­html
Bouraoui, Amira, and Karima Bennoune. 2014. “The Birth of the Barakat Movement In Al-
geria: ­Every Generation Needs Hope.” Accessed July 22, 2016. https://­www​.­open​
d​emocracy​.­net​/­5050​/­amira​-­bouraoui​-­karima​-­bennoune​/­birth​-­of​-­barakat​-­movement​
-­in​-­algeria​-­every​-­generation​-­needs​-­hope
Hatuqa, Dalia. 2015. “Hamza Bendelladj: Is the Algerian Hacker a Hero?” September 21. 
Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­www​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­news​/­2015​/­09​/­algerian​-­hacker​-­hero​
-­hoodlum​-­150921083914167​.­html
International Media Support (IMS). 2013. “Authoritarianism and Media in Algeria.” Ac-
cessed July 22, 2016. https://­www​.­mediasupport​.­org​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2013​/­07​/­au​
thoritarianism​-­media​-­algeria​-­ims​-­20131​.­pdf
Le Matin D’Algérie. 2016. “BAC: les Réseaux Sociaux Bloqués en Algérie depuis Samedi Soir.” 
June 19. Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­www​.­lematindz​.­net​/­news​/­21040​-­bac​-­les​-­reseaux​
-­sociaux​-­bloques​-­en​-­algerie​-­depuis​-­samedi​-­soir​.­html
Liebelson, Dana. 2015. “Meet the Algerian Hackers Who Say ­They’re Attacking French Web-
sites over Charlie Hebdo.” January 13. Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­www​.­huffington​
post​.­com​/­2015​/­01​/­13​/­charlie​-­hebdo​_­n​_­6464318​.­html
Mayer, Sheldon. 2016. “Algerian Telecom Djezzy Sees Path Forward.” April 5. Accessed De-
cember 29, 2016. http://­africa​-­me​.­com​/­algerian​-­telecom​-­djezzy​-­sees​-­path​-­forward​/­
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Social Network Usage Statistics Using Mobile.” Accessed July 22, 2016. 
https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­sunburst​/­21282​-­algeria​-­mobile​-­social​-­media​-­usage​
-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
World Bank Data. 2014. “Internet Users per 100 ­People.” Accessed July 22, 2016. http://­
data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2​?­locations​=­DZ
Yaici, Karim. 2013. “Mobile Telecoms Market in Algeria: the Untapped Potential of 3G.” 
Accessed July  22, 2016. http://­inspiremagazine​.­anasr​.­org​/­feature​-­mobile​-­telecoms​
-­market​-­in​-­algeria​-­the​-­untapped​-­potential​-­of​-­3g​/­
ANGOLA
Angola, a southern African nation, gained in­de­pen­dence in 1975, following the de-
colonization pro­cess initiated ­after the demo­cratic revolution that took place in 
Portugal in April 1974. ­After in­de­pen­dence, Angola was ravaged by a civil war that 
only ended in 2002. In one interlude of this war resolved by the Bicesse Accords 
in 1991, and ­after almost two de­cades of one-­party rule, Angola initiated some 
demo­cratic reforms with the adoption of a demo­cratic constitution, the introduc-
tion of a multiparty system, and a legislative election that was held in 1992. The 
incumbent party, MPLA (Popu­lar Movement for the Liberation of Angola), won that 
election with an absolute majority.
­Today, Angola exemplifies a hybrid regime or a defective democracy ­because it 
blends many undemo­cratic with some demo­cratic features: constraints to freedoms 
are significant and long-­lasting, the same president has held power since 1979, and 
Angola has one of the world’s most unequal income distributions (Diamond 2002; 

ANGOLA
9
Merkel 2004). Although Angola is sub-­Saharan Africa’s second-­largest exporter of 
oil and the world’s fifth-­largest producer of diamonds, and its economy has been 
recently growing at an average rate of 7 ­percent per year, a significant part of the 
population still suffers from extreme difficulties. In 2012, 36 ­percent of the popu-
lation lived below the poverty line and 26 ­percent lived in extreme poverty (Africa 
Pro­gress Panel 2013, 20), and in 2016, the literacy rate was 71 ­percent (CIA 2016).
In addition to constraints to freedom and to the attempts of the po­liti­cal regime 
to control online media contents and dissemination, poverty, education, and lack 
of infrastructure—­only 35 ­percent of the population have access to electricity, for 
example (Africa Pro­gress Panel 2015, 16)—­have been major impairments in the 
development of the Angolan online environment. Furthermore, what is demanded 
of citizens in an information society is much more than just knowing how to read 
and write: it involves other types of literacy related to comprehension and inter-
pretation skills and to the ability of understanding dif­fer­ent types of media and 
media genres (Salgado 2014, 111).
According to Internet World Stats (2016), internet users in Angola amounted to 
29.5 ­percent of the population in June 2016, representing 1.8 ­percent of the entire 
African continent. However, the numbers have been growing rapidly in recent years; 
in 2000, ­there ­were only 30,000 users, but in 2012, 14.8 ­percent of the Angolan 
population was connected to the internet (Internet World Stats 2016). With re-
gard to mobile phones, although the ratio is more proportional than in other Afri-
can countries, more ­people in Angola have access to mobile phones than to bank 
accounts. In 2011, 47 ­percent of the population had a mobile phone subscription, 
while only 39 ­percent had accounts at formal financial institutions (Africa Pro­gress 
Panel 2014, 115).
A few proj­ects have aimed to address the limited access to technology and low 
computer literacy level in Angola. One of ­those proj­ects had the goal of providing 
all provinces with media libraries, including in the least-­populated provinces, and 
to distribute mobile media libraries throughout the country, while more definitive 
structures are not in place. ­These mobile structures seek to facilitate the access of 
the general population to new technology and allow citizens to do all kinds of re-
search on the internet (Angop 2015). In 2015, Angola had six media libraries in 
Luanda, Benguela, Huambo, Lubango, Saurimo, and Soyo; six mobile media librar-
ies scattered across the country; and a plan for at least one media center to be fully 
operational in each of Angola’s eigh­teen provinces by 2017 (Deutsche Welle 2015). 
The Angola Media Libraries Network is integrated into the larger N’gola Digital pro-
gram, which is led by the Angolan Ministry of Telecommunications and Informa-
tion Technologies and focuses on providing communities with computers connected 
to the internet and organ­izing workshops on how to use computers and software 
at dif­fer­ent levels of proficiency.
Another proj­ect was put in place by Movicel, an Angolan mobile phone com­
pany, that developed a partnership with Facebook to create an app called Internet.­org 
to provide ­free internet access to a limited se­lection of websites related to news, 
health, employment, weather, and Facebook (O País 2015). The implementation 
of this kind of proj­ect and the availability of cheaper ser­vices have made inter-
net access easier in Angola; however, the prices are still very high for most of the 

ANGOLA
10
population. For example, one of the main Angolan providers, Tvcabo Angola, 
charges more than $40 for 1 Mb in 2016 and most usage is still confined to the 
capital city, Luanda, and to the other major cities.
The use of social media is also evolving rapidly. The trend ­toward the use of so-
cial networking sites was followed in Angola, but in 2009, the most popu­lar plat-
forms ­were Hi5 and Sonico, but not Facebook. ­These social networking websites 
motivated young ­people to use computers and the internet, and they ­were also an 
impor­tant means to reconnect the diaspora communities with their country, as well 
as an incentive for many citizens to give opinions about the main issues facing their 
country (Salgado 2011). ­Today, following the world trend, Facebook is the most 
used social network in Angola, with 3.3 million users in 2015 (Internet World Stats 
2016).
Blogs have also been an impor­tant vehicle for alternative voices in the Angolan 
public sphere, but ­these social media also reflect strong inequalities in the use of 
and access to technology in general. Most bloggers are from the ­middle and upper 
classes and have a high academic level compared with the rest of the population; 
­there are blogs, for example, by politicians, journalists, academic researchers, his-
torians, and artists (Salgado 2012). Although ­there are many posts on po­liti­cal issues 
in the Angolan blogosphere, including criticisms of po­liti­cal authorities, blogs are 
not a privileged means for collective action and mobilization, as they are mainly 
used as means of individual expression. When the objective is to or­ga­nize protest 
or support actions, other online tools are usually preferred, such as emails, short 
message ser­vice (SMS) messages, and social networks.
­After the revolutionary events of the Arab Spring in Tunisia and Egypt in 
March 2011, some Angolan protesters used the internet—­namely, emails and an 
anonymous website (http://­revolucaoangolana​.­webs​.­com, which has since moved 
to http://­novarevolucaoangolana​.­yolasite​.­com)—to announce the “New Revolution 
of the Angolan ­people” and called the Angolan ­people to demonstrate against the 
government and President José Eduardo dos Santos (1942–). The MPLA govern-
ment, not willing to tolerate any comparison between Angola and the northern Af-
rican countries, reacted strongly and quickly ensured that public order would be 
maintained at any cost, despite the fact that the Angolan constitution grants all citi-
zens the right to demonstrate peacefully.
It is thus not surprising that the MPLA government prepared new legislation to 
control and restrict the online environment. In 2011, the National Assembly ap-
proved a bill criminalizing the use of the internet and mobile phones to send any 
type of information without the prior written consent of every­body mentioned in 
its contents. This new law, presented as a data protection mea­sure, was also care-
fully designed to prevent protests initiated and coordinated through the internet 
from happening. It established imprisonment as a penalty and allowed the security 
forces to conduct searches and confiscate data and documents without a court 
order. This attempt to regulate online activity through repressive legislation is in 
keeping with the MPLA government’s restrictive posture ­toward the media in gen-
eral. It also shows that the number of ­people with internet access in the country is 
already enough to shake up the po­liti­cal situation—at least slightly. ­Until a few 

ARGENTINA
11
years ago, almost no one dared criticize the president in public; however, more 
recently, the internet and pro-­democracy and freedom initiatives have encouraged 
more ­people to show their discontent.
Susana Salgado
See also: Egypt; Mozambique; Namibia; Tunisia
Further Reading
Africa Pro­gress Panel. 2013. “Equity in Extractives: Stewarding Africa’s Natu­ral Resources 
for All.” Accessed August 10, 2016. http://­africaprogresspanel​.­org​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​
/­2013​/­08​/­2013​_­APR​_­Equity​_­in​_­Extractives​_­25062013​_­ENG​_­HR​.­pdf
Africa Pro­gress Panel. 2014. “Grain, Fish, Money. Financing Africa’s Green and Blue Revo-
lutions.” Accessed August 10, 2016. http://­app​-­cdn​.­acwupload​.­co​.­uk​/­wp​-­content​/­up​
loads​/­2014​/­05​/­APP​_­APR2014​_­24june​.­pdf
Africa Pro­gress Panel. 2015. “Power, ­People, Planet. Seizing Africa’s Energy and Climate Op-
portunities.” Accessed August 10, 2016. http://­www​.­africaprogresspanel​.­org​/­publicatio​
ns​/­policy​-­papers​/­2015​-­africa​-­progress​-­report​/­
Angop. 2015. “Bié: Província Ganha Mediateca Móvel.” Angop: Agência Angola Press, April 22. 
Accessed October 1, 2015. http://­www​.­portalangop​.­co​.­ao​/­angola​/­pt​_­pt​/­noticias​/­lazer​-­e​
-­cultura​/­2015​/­3​/­17​/­Bie​-­Provincia​-­ganha​-­mediateca​-­movel,099252ba​-­f1f8​-­414e​-­a908​
-­7e533926d6d0​.­html
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). 2016. “The World Factbook: Angola.” Accessed August 10, 
2016. https://­www​.­cia​.­gov​/­library​/­publications​/­the​-­world​-­factbook​/­geos​/­ao​.­html
Deutsche Welle. 2015. “Acesso ‘Sem Filtros’ à Internet em Angola.” Deutsche Welle, June 3. 
Accessed October 1, 2015. http://­www​.­dw​.­com​/­pt​/­acesso​-­sem​-­filtros​-­à​-­Internet​-­em​
-­angola​/­a​-­18495315​?­maca​=­bra​-­cb​_­po​_­globalvoices​-­14551​-­xml​-­mrss
Diamond, Larry. 2002. “Elections Without Democracy: Thinking About Hybrid Regimes.” 
Journal of Democracy, 13(2): 21–35.
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Angola: Internet Usage and Marketing Report.” Accessed Au-
gust 10, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­af​/­ao​.­htm
Merkel, Wolfgang. 2004. “Embedded and Defective Democracies.” Democ­ratization, 11(5): 
33–58.
O País. 2015. “Internet Grátis Chega a Angola.” June 29. Accessed October 1, 2015. http://­
opais​.­co​.­ao​/­Internet​-­gratis​-­chega​-­angola​/­
Salgado, Susana. 2011. “Angola.” In Encyclopedia of Social Networks, edited by George Bar-
nett. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 42–44.
Salgado, Susana. 2012. “The Web in African Countries. Exploring the Pos­si­ble Influences 
of the Internet in the Democ­ratization Pro­cesses.” Information, Communication, & Soci­
ety, 15(9): 1373–1389.
Salgado, Susana. 2014. The Internet and Democracy Building in Lusophone African Countries. 
London and New York: Routledge.
ARGENTINA
Argentina is located in the southern cone of South Amer­i­ca along the Atlantic Ocean. 
In 2015, the country had a population of 43.4 million ­people. At the beginning 
of 2015, Argentina’s internet penetration rate was 75 ­percent, making it the most 

ARGENTINA
12
connected nation in Latin Amer­i­ca. This also represented a growth of 37 ­percent in 
active internet users from the previous year. While only 59 ­percent of the popula-
tion used cell phones, the number of mobile connections was 62 million. This sug-
gests that a sizable proportion of cell phone users had more than one mobile 
subscription. Of ­those mobile phone users, 71 ­percent of them used prepaid ac-
counts. Despite this proliferation of cell phones, Argentine internet users tended to 
spend an average of forty more minutes a day on their PCs or tablets than on their 
mobile devices (We Are Social 2015). A total of 71 ­percent of ­these internet users 
­were over the age of twenty-­five, and the gender distribution was about even (com-
Score 2015).
Android devices are typically more common in Latin Amer­i­ca than other devices; 
this trend holds true for Argentina. At the beginning of 2015, 75 ­percent of smart-
phones ­were Android devices; 13 ­percent of smartphones ­were Blackberry devices; 
and only 11 ­percent ­were iPhones. The lesser preference for Apple devices also holds 
true for tablets; only about 
19 ­percent of tablet users owned 
an iPad. Tablet users in Argen-
tina overwhelmingly tend to use 
their devices with Wi-­Fi rather 
than 3G/4G (comScore 2015). 
­Toward the end of 2015, the top 
­free app downloaded for both 
Android and Apple devices was 
WhatsApp Messenger. For An-
droid devices, the next most com-
monly downloaded ­free apps 
­were Facebook Messenger, Face-
book, Instagram, and Moto Traf-
fic Race game. For Apple devices, 
the next most commonly down-
loaded ­free apps ­were Spotify, 
Facebook Messenger, Facebook, 
and Instagram (App Annie 2015).
The most visited website on 
any device was Google​.­com​.­ar, 
followed by Facebook, YouTube, 
Google​.­com, Mercadolibre​.­com​
.­ar (an online marketplace), 
Live, Yahoo, Twitter, Clarín (a 
Spanish-­language news website), 
and Amazon. Facebook is the 
most popu­lar social media web-
site in Argentina, followed by 
YouTube, Twitter, and Taringa! 
(Alexa 2015). The Facebook page 
Lionel “Leo” Messi, a star Argentine soccer player 
with FC Barcelona, poses with a Eu­ro­pean Golden 
Boot award before the FC Barecelona-­RCD Mallorca 
match at Nou Camp Stadium in October 2010. Leo 
Messi has found the same type of stardom online as he 
has on the soccer field: his Facebook page has more 
“likes” than anyone ­else in the country of Argentina. 
(MaxiSports​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

ARGENTINA
13
from Argentina with the most “likes” is Leo Messi, with 80,475,301. The Facebook 
pages with the most fans across all age ranges in the ­middle of 2015 ­were both soc-
cer related: BOCA, with 7,509,234 fans, and Club Atlético River Plate, with 
6,049,998 fans. The next top Facebook pages ­were the news outlets Diario Clarín 
(4,521,328 fans) and Todo Noticias, or TN (4,328,168 fans). The top Facebook 
page, which had the fifth-­highest number of fans at 4,119,293, was Quilmes Cer-
veza (Allin1 Social 2015).
In December 2014, the Argentine government passed Law 27.078, known as 
the “Argentine Digital Law.” This new law governs telecommunications in the coun-
try and replaces the previous law passed in 1972. The Argentine Digital Law is an 
impor­tant update ­because it addresses technology that did not exist in 1972. The 
new law establishes that information and communications technologies are public 
ser­vices that should be accessible to all citizens. It states that this technology is nec-
essary for social development and that access should be guaranteed for all citizens, 
regardless of their geographic or socioeconomic situation. To this end, the law aims 
to encourage competition between ser­vice providers so that consumers can choose 
what best fits their needs. It provides the Argentine government with the right to 
regulate rates for ­these ser­vices so that smaller companies can reach consumers even 
if they lack their own infrastructure. The law also established mandatory minimum 
transmission speeds to ensure equal access and quality everywhere in the country 
(Télam 2014). In order to guarantee that ­these objectives are realized and that all 
citizens receive quality access, Argentina established La Autoridad Federal de Tec-
nologías de la Información y las Comunicaciones (AFTIC; the Federal Authority of 
Information and Communication Technologies) as a demo­cratic body with repre­
sen­ta­tion from dif­fer­ent sectors of society and government. While the Argentine 
Digital Law initially received a mixed reception, only time ­will tell how ­successfully 
it can achieve its goals of national telecommunications penetration (AFTIC 2015).
Argentina is also home to Taringa!, the largest social networking website of Latin 
American origin. It is ranked number sixteen in Argentina and is used throughout 
the Spanish-­speaking world. In addition to Argentina, Taringa! receives the most 
traffic from Mexico, Spain, Venezuela, and Colombia. The website is similar to Red-
dit, in that users post links or upload content and then vote to rank posts accord-
ing to popularity. ­Today, it also offers gaming and ­music experiences. The website 
is known as a collaborative system of online interaction with the tag­line “collective 
intelligence.” It was designed in early 2004 by Fernando Sanz (c. 1988–), who was 
still in high school at the time. In November 2006, once the website exceeded 
30,000 daily visitors and he could no longer manage it on his own, Sanz sold it for 
$5,000 to ­brothers Matías Botbol (1978–) and Hernán Botbol (1981–), who ­were 
partnered with Alberto Nakayama (c. 1981–). Over the years since the site’s acqui-
sition, the design of Taringa! has under­gone several dif­fer­ent incarnations. By 2015, 
the website had more than 75 million unique visitors and 27 million registered 
members (Duarte 2012).
In April  2015, Taringa! announced an innovative addition to the website. 
­Taringa! partnered with Xapo, a California-­based bitcoin wallet provider, to offer 
Taringa! users opportunities to earn bitcoins for the content they post on the 

ARGENTINA
14
website. The program, called Taringa! Creadores, combines advertisement revenue 
sharing (similar to YouTube’s model) and incentives based on Taringa’s ranking 
system. According to Hernán Botbol, the director of Taringa!, offering financial 
compensation was something that he and his partners had been considering for a 
while; however, due to a lack of financial infrastructure in the region, implement-
ing such a program would have been too complicated (Casey 2015). The low 
overhead and ease of bitcoin transfers allow Taringa! to immediately deposit bit-
coins into users’ wallets instead of requiring them to wait a certain amount of 
time. Users can then choose to ­either cash the bitcoins in for regional currency, 
save the bitcoins as an investment, or use them for other e-­commerce opportuni-
ties. Since the introduction of this program, Taringa! has seen a 40 ­percent in-
crease in content creation (Young 2015).
In addition to creating content on social media sites, Argentines use them to mo-
bilize for social justice. For example, on June 3, 2015, demonstrations ­were held 
in eighty cities and towns all over Argentina, as well as in Chile and Uruguay, to 
raise awareness of vio­lence against ­women. The movement was advertised across 
social media platforms with “#NiUnaMenos.” The hashtag means “Not One Less” 
and refers to the idea of “not one more death, not one ­woman less” (Télam 2015). 
One of the motivating ­factors in this movement was the death of fourteen-­year-­old 
Chiara Paéz (c. 2001–2015). While she was pregnant, Paéz was beaten to death by 
her sixteen-­year-­old boyfriend. According to La Casa del Encuentro, a civil rights 
organ­ization, ­there ­were 1,808 murdered ­women between 2008 and 2014, which 
left over 2,000 ­children without a ­mother. While ­there are laws to protect ­women 
against this kind of vio­lence, Ingrid Beck (n.d.), a demonstration or­ga­nizer, has 
stated that they are very seldom used to prosecute perpetrators of vio­lence against 
­women (CNN Español 2015).
The #NiUnaMenos movement has garnered support from all over Argentina, and 
supporters have used social media to spread this issue. Then president of ­Argentina, 
Christina Fernández de Kirchner (1953–), went to Twitter to express solidarity. 
Trivia Crack was the number one ­free app downloaded in Latin Amer­i­ca in 2014. 
The game requires users to spin a wheel and then answer a question ­under the cat-
egory where the wheel stops. The game can be played alone or with friends and is 
specifically designed to allow social media friends to compete against each other. 
The app’s creator, Maximo Cavazanni (c. 1986–), has turned it into a successful 
­Argentine game show, with negotiations regarding versions in Mexico, Brazil, and 
Colombia already underway (Woolley 2015). One of the app’s unique features is that 
it has a question factory that uses the power of crowdsourcing to ensure that ques-
tions reflect its users’ tastes by region. For example, the sports questions are about the 
sports that that country watches. In Latin Amer­i­ca, soccer players and scores are more 
impor­tant than ­those of American football. In the same vein, the crowd performs a 
language check so that soccer questions concern fútbol or futebol, the regionally appro-
priate names for soccer.

ARGENTINA
15
She stated that the prob­lem is not just a po­liti­cal or judicial one, but a cultural one 
(CNN Español 2015). The famous soccer player Lionel Messi also used social me-
dia to add his voice to the movement. On his Facebook page, he reiterated the 
movement motto by stating that all Argentines join in the cry “not one ­woman less” 
(BBC 2015).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Brazil; Chile; Mexico
Further Reading
AFTIC. 2015. “Qué es AFTIC.” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­aftic​.­gob​.­ar​/­que​
-­es​-­aftic​_­p33
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Argentina.” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­AR
Allin1Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Argentina.” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​-­statistics​/­countries​/­argentina​?­page​=­1&period​=­six​
_­months
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” September 27. Accessed September 27, 
2015. https://­www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­argentina​/­
BBC News. 2015. “Argentine Marches Condemns Domestic Vio­lence.” June  4. Accessed 
­September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­latin​-­america​-­33001990
Casey, Michael J. 2015. “BitBeat: Latin Amer­i­ca Facebook Rival to Use Bitcoin to Pay for 
Content.” The Wall Street Journal, April 21. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­blogs​
.­wsj​.­com​/­moneybeat​/­2015​/­04​/­21​/­bitbeat​-­latin​-­america​-­facebook​-­rival​-­to​-­use​-­bitcoin​
-­to​-­pay​-­for​-­content​/­
CNN Español. 2015. “ ‘Ni Una Menos,’ La Movilización que Pide Parar la Violencia de Gé-
nero en Argentina.” June 3. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­cnnespanol​.­cnn​.­com​
/­2015​/­06​/­03​/­ni​-­una​-­menos​-­la​-­movilizacion​-­que​-­pide​-­parar​-­la​-­violencia​-­de​-­genero​-­en​
-­argentina​/­
ComScore. 2015. “ComScore IMS Mobile in LatAm Research Study.” April 20. Accessed 
September 27, 2015. https://­www​.­comscore​.­com​/­Insights​/­Presentations​-­and​-­White​
papers​/­2015​/­comScore​-­IMS​-­Mobile​-­in​-­LatAm​-­Research​-­Study
Duarte, Joel. 2012. “Historia y Evolución de Taringa!” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­
www​.­taringa​.­net​/­posts​/­taringa​/­16286651​/­Historia​-­y​-­evolucion​-­deTaringa​.­html
Télam. 2014. “Promulgan Ley que Garantiza el Acceso Universal y Equitativo a Los Servi-
cios de Comunicación.” December 19. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­telam​
.­com​.­ar​/­notas​/­201412​/­89431​-­promulgan​-­ley​-­argentina​-­digital​.­html
Télam. 2015. “Más de 200 Mil Personas Se Concentraron Frente al Congreso Para Decirle 
Basta a Los Femicidios.” June 3. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­telam​.­com​
.­ar​/­notas​/­201506​/­107330​-­niunamenos​-­mas​-­de​-­80​-­ciudades​-­argentinas​-­unidas​
-­contra​-­los​-­femicidios​.­html
We Are Social. 2015. “Digital, Social, & Mobile Worldwide in 2015.” January 21. Accessed 
September 27, 2015. http://­wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2015​/­01​/­digital​-­social​-­mobile​-­world​
wide​-­2015​/­
Young, Joseph. 2015. “Taringa! Social Network Sees 40% Spike in Content Creation Fol-
lowing Bitcoin Integration.” June 7. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­cointelegraph​
.­com​/­news​/­114492​/­taringa​-­social​-­network​-­sees​-­40​-­spike​-­in​-­content​-­creation​
-­following​-­bitcoin​-­integration

AUSTRALIA
16
AUSTRALIA
The Commonwealth of Australia consists of the Australian continent, mainland Tas-
mania, and over 8,000 smaller islands. Australia’s population density is compara-
ble to Canada’s, at about three ­people per square kilo­meter. That said, the population 
is heavi­ly concentrated in the eastern and western coastal areas of the continent, 
particularly in the major cities, where around 64 ­percent of the country’s popula-
tion lives. While Australia’s internet penetration is somewhere between 86 ­percent 
and 99 ­percent, this is mostly owing to mobile technologies; 99 ­percent of Austra-
lians have at least one device capable of accessing the internet (Sensis 2016). The 
country’s geography and population distribution make access to higher-­speed fixed 
internet ser­vice somewhat difficult for ­those not located in major population hubs. 
A total of 87 ­percent of Australians use the internet daily (Sensis 2016), and since 
2007, the status of Australia’s internet infrastructure has been a controversial bat-
tleground for the country’s po­liti­cal parties. Facebook is the most popu­lar social 
media platform in Australia, at around 15 million active users. YouTube is equally 
popu­lar, with around 14 million users (Sensis 2016).
Australia’s internet ranks sixtieth in the world for peak connection speed and 
forty-­eighth for average peak connection speed (Akamai 2016). In terms of relative 
ranking, this places Australia a ­little below half of its geo­graph­i­cal peers in the Asia 
Pacific region, such as South ­Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Taiwan, and 
Singapore. Moreover, while Akamai’s report puts the average peak connection speed 
at around 39 mbps, this figure includes the more robust government, business, and 
educational access points as well as residential ones, and it is only an indicator of 
capacity, not of the ­actual speeds experienced by consumers. Australian consum-
ers are often unable to access the maximum potential connection speed due to two 
main ­factors: insufficient residential internet infrastructure and a dearth of residen-
tial internet packages that offer the highest speeds available.
Prior to the 2007 national election, the Australian ­Labor Party ran on a platform 
that included the construction of a $43 billion fiber to the premises (FTTP) Na-
tional Broadband Network (NBN) to replace the preexisting copper wire network. 
The proj­ect commenced in July 2009. The NBN and its high cost have become a 
contentious issue between Australia’s po­liti­cal parties. Prior to the 2013 national 
election, the Liberal-­National Co­ali­tion (Co­ali­tion) opposition government sought 
changes to the NBN proj­ect that included replacing FTTP with fiber to the node 
(FTTN), a slower but ostensibly more affordable option. Research challenges this 
idea, arguing that FTTP has a significantly lower operating cost that would save 
the government as much as $9 billion over ten years (Ferrers 2016). ­After winning 
the election in 2013, the Co­ali­tion government made further changes to the NBN 
proj­ect, forecasting a $29.5 billion cost and a completion date of 2019. As of 
­August 2015, costs ­were expected to reach as high as $56 billion.
The proj­ect is ongoing and continues to generate controversy due to its rising 
costs. Leaked government documents in February 2016 revealed the proj­ect to be 
massively ­behind schedule. In May 2016, NBN Co Limited, the government-­owned 
corporation tasked with the design, construction, and implementation of the NBN, 

AUSTRALIA
17
put a temporary hold on NBN rollouts in Tasmania. NBN Co plans to provide 
­Tasmania with satellite-­delivered internet rather than the originally proposed FTTN, 
a significantly lower-­quality ser­vice. Currently, ­there is a local movement in Tas-
mania to reverse the decision and reinstate fiber optics in Tasmania. As of Janu-
ary 2016, NBN Co reports some 736,052 active NBN ser­vices (NBN CO Ltd. 2016). 
This figure includes fiber optic, satellite, and wireless ser­vices.
Mobile technologies have proven to be overwhelmingly impor­tant to Australian 
internet users (Sensis Social Media Report 2016). Australia’s current 4G mobile net-
works, owned by Telstra Corporation and Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd., 
offer speeds comparable to Akamai’s reported peak connection speed. Access to net-
works via cellular devices is, therefore, competitive with currently available fixed 
internet ser­vices. Some users still waiting for access to the NBN have taken advan-
tage of high-­cap cellular data plans to replace their residential internet ser­vice pro-
viders (ISPs) with a mobile hotspot. Moreover, Telstra announced in February 2016 
that it was working aggressively to develop an Australia-­wide 5G network, which 
could conceivably render the NBN obsolete before it is even completed. Telstra ex-
pects to run a trial 5G network at the Commonwealth Games in 2018. Mobile 
computing provides a massive boost to the Australian economy and has contrib-
uted $43 billion throughout 2015 (Deloitte 2016).
For their own part, Australian consumers continue to rely heavi­ly on mobile 
computing. A total of 21 ­percent of Australians are mobile-­only internet users (but 
still use landline telephones), whereas 12 ­percent of the population have cut the 
cord completely and have replaced fixed internet and telephone with mobile alter-
natives (ACMA 2015). This may be related to the difficulty in getting access to 
broadband internet outside the major cities, as only 10 ­percent of mobile-­only us-
ers ­were found within the major cities. In addition, 76 ­percent of Australians own 
a smartphone and 70 ­percent have a laptop; the popularity of ­these devices far out-
weighs desktop PCs (52 ­percent) and even tablet computers (55 ­percent) (Sensis 
2016).
With regard to social media access, Australians overwhelmingly ­favor using their 
mobile devices with dedicated apps over browser-­based access, with 72 ­percent re-
lying on their smartphones to keep in touch with their social networks (Sensis 
2016). More than 50 ­percent of Australians report making use of their social net-
working sites between one (24 ­percent) and five (26 ­percent) times per day (Sensis 
2016). Facebook is the most used social networking site by Australians, with 
95 ­percent of social networkers maintaining a Facebook profile. The next most 
popu­lar site is Instagram, at 31 ­percent (Sensis 2016). Twitter, with only 19 ­percent 
usage by social networkers, is the most rapidly declining social media site in Aus-
tralia, with 34 ­percent of all users who abandoned a social media platform in the 
previous year having abandoned Twitter (Sensis 2016).
In June 2016, Australia ­adopted new legislation that allowed the blocking of web-
sites to work against online piracy. The Copyright Amendment (Online Infringe-
ment) Bill 2015 allowed rights holders to force Australian ISPs to block access to 
websites whose primary purpose is the facilitation of copyright infringement. 

AUSTRALIA
18
Passage of the bill has been controversial, with opponents arguing that such legis-
lation interferes with legitimate file-­sharing as well. ­These concerns are not wholly 
unfounded, as a 2013 attempt by the Australian Securities and Investment Com-
mission to block sites that it deemed illegitimate resulted in nearly 250,000 com-
pliant sites being blocked as well. Despite public criticism of the bill, both of 
Australia’s major po­liti­cal parties support it.
In February 2016, the American internet security com­pany Webroot released a 
Threat Intelligence Brief that noted a doubling of Australian-­based cyberthreats over 
the previous year. While Australia has been moved to “high-­risk” status by the 
security com­pany, it is worth noting that while 2 ­percent of global malicious URLs 
are hosted in Australia, the United States hosts around 30 ­percent, China 11 ­percent, 
and Hong Kong 5 ­percent (Webroot 2016). The report further indicates that 
­Australia hosts around 2 ­percent of global phishing sites (Webroot 2016). While 
Australian media have made much of this “high-­risk” classification, the report 
itself ­doesn’t single out Australia in any par­tic­u­lar way beyond grouping it with 
other top-­ten high-­risk countries, which include the United States, Canada, ­Great 
Britain, China, South ­Korea, and Japan. In February 2016, ABC News Australia 
suggested that the small to medium-­sized businesses that comprise 95 ­percent of 
Australia’s organ­izations are more attractive targets than the higher-­risk large banks 
and multinational corporations, which are equipped with robust IT security.
To help combat cybercrime, the Australian government hosts the Australian Cy-
bercrime Online Reporting Network (ACORN), at www​.­acorn​.­gov​.­au. ACORN is 
an outgrowth of the 2013 National Plan to Combat Cybercrime and is a collabora-
tive effort between Australian law enforcement and intelligence agencies, the At-
torney General, the Australian Communications and Media Authority, the Australian 
Competition and Consumer Commission (http://­www​.­scamwatch​.­gov​.­au), and 
the ­Children’s e-­Safety Commissioner (https://­www​.­esafety​.­gov​.­au). ACORN is 
primarily a reporting tool coupled with awareness-­raising initiatives around 
computer ­attacks, cyberbullying, identity theft, online scams, and internet-­
assisted child sexual abuse.
Jeff Gagnon
See also: China: Hong Kong; Japan; Singapore; South ­Korea; Taiwan
Languages are always changing, yet with the invention and popularity of social media, 
they are changing faster than in the past. The Oxford En­glish Dictionary adds words 
officially to the En­glish language by putting them to the dictionary. In 2015, the 
dictionary added several words that originated on social media and then caught on 
in ­people’s vernacular, everyday, speech. ­Those words included selfie stick (selfie 
was added in 2013), concern troll, lamestream, downvote, upvote, cyberwarrior, and 
in-­app, among many ­others (Oxford En­glish Dictionary 2015). Social media and 
internet users ­will continue to invent new terms, and as they become popu­lar, ­these 
words ­will also find their way into the dictionary as official new words.

AUSTRALIA
19
Further Reading
ABC News Australia. June 2016. “Fact Check: Has Australia’s Internet Speed Dropped from 
30th to 60th in the World ­Under the Co­ali­tion?” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​
.­abc​.­net​.­au​/­news​/­2016​-­06​-­21​/­fact​-­check​-­australias​-­internet​-­speed​-­rank​/­7509352
Akamai. March 2016. “Akamai’s [State of the Internet] Q4 2015 Report.” Accessed July 4, 
2016. https://­www​.­akamai​.­com​/­us​/­en​/­multimedia​/­documents​/­content​/­state​-­of​-­the​-­int​
ernet​/­q4​-­2015​-­state​-­of​-­the​-­internet​-­connectivity​-­report​-­us​.­pdf
Australia Bureau of Statistics. 2015. “8153.0—­Internet Activity, Australia, December 2015.” 
Accessed July  4, 2016. http://­www​.­abs​.­gov​.­au​/­ausstats​/­abs@​.­nsf​/­0​/­00FD2E732C939
C06CA257E19000FB410​?­Opendocument
Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA). 2015. “Australians Get Mobile.” 
Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­acma​.­gov​.­au​/­theACMA​/­engage​-­blogs​/­engage​-­blogs​
/­Research​-­snapshots​/­Australians​-­get​-­mobile
Australian Council of Social Ser­vice. January 2016. “Staying Connected: The Impact of Dig-
ital Exclusion on ­People Living on Low-­Incomes and the Community Organisations 
That Support Them.” Accessed July 4, 2012. http://­www​.­acoss​.­org​.­au​/­wp​-­content​
/­uploads​/­2016​/­01​/­Digital​-­Divide​-­Policy​-­Snapshot​-­2016​-­Final​.­pdf
Deloitte. 2016. “$43bn in Productivity and Workforce Participation Benefits.” Accessed 
July 4, 2016. http://­www2​.­deloitte​.­com​/­au​/­en​/­pages​/­media​-­releases​/­articles​/­australias​
-­mobile​-­revolution​-­continues​-­170316​.­html
Ferrers, Richard. December 2016. “Value Management: Innovation 2.0 Blog: FTTP vs FTTN; 
When is Spending $4,000 Better Value Than Spending $2,100?” Accessed July 4, 2016. 
http://­valman​.­blogspot​.­ca​/­2015​/­12​/­fttp​-­vs​-­fttn​-­when​-­is​-­spending​-­4400​.­html
LeMay, Renai. May 2015. “Quigley Releases Detailed Evidence Showing MTM NBN Cost 
Blowout.” Delimiter. Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­delimiter​.­com​.­au​/­2015​/­11​/­05​/­quig​
ley​-­releases​-­detailed​-­evidence​-­showing​-­mtm​-­nbn​-­cost​-­blowout​/­
NBN Co Ltd. 2016. “Half Year Results 2016 Pre­sen­ta­tion.” Accessed on July 4, 2016. http://­
www​.­nbnco​.­com​.­au​/­content​/­dam​/­nbnco2​/­documents​/­nbn​-­half​-­year​-­financial​-­results​
-­2016​-­presentation​.­pdf
Ogilvie, Felicity, and Sam Ikin. 2016. “NBN Suspends Tasmania West Coast Rollout as Re-
gion Lobbies for Fibre Over Satellite.” ABC Premium News, May 10. Accessed July 4, 
2016. http://­www​.­abc​.­net​.­au​/­news​/­2016​-­05​-­10​/­nbn​-­suspends​-­rollout​-­to​-­tasmanias​-­w​
est-­coast​/­7400454
Oxford En­glish Dictionary. 2015. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sensis Social Media Report 2016. June 2016. “How Australian ­People and Businesses Are 
Using Social Media.” Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­www​.­sensis​.­com​.­au​/­assets​/­PDF​di-
rectory​/­Sensis​_­Social​_­Media​_­Report​_­2016​.­PDF
Webroot. 2016. “Next-­Generation Threats Exposed.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­webroot​
-­cms​-­cdn​.­s3​.­amazonaws​.­com​/­7814​/­5617​/­2382​/­Webroot​-­2016​-­Threat​-­Brief​.­pdf

This page intentionally left blank

B
BANGLADESH
Bangladesh is a country in South Asia that is surrounded by India. It became an 
in­de­pen­dent nation in 1971, and it is one of the most densely populated countries 
in the world, as well as one of the poorest. Overall, internet usage is still low in the 
country, but it is experiencing fast growth due to the mobile phone market. Similar 
to a number of other countries in South and Southeast Asia, a very high percentage 
of Bangladeshi internet users visit Facebook. Recently, online activity has played a 
prominent role in Bangladeshi politics. At the same time, security, censorship, and 
­free speech issues online have led to vio­lence in the country in recent years.
The Bangladesh Telephone and Telephone Board granted licenses to Bangladesh’s 
first two internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) in 1996. Liberal government policies al-
lowed more and more ISPs to register. In 2001, the Telecommunications Act cre-
ated the Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC) to regulate 
the industry. Currently, ­there are over 200 ISPs active in Bangladesh.
Infrastructure in Bangladesh for internet access is also affected by the subma-
rine cable that supplies internet to the region. The fiber optic cable was constructed 
in 2005 by a consortium of sixteen countries, including Bangladesh and other Asian, 
­Middle Eastern, and Eu­ro­pean nations. Over the years, it has experienced a num-
ber of outages, which have a ­great effect on Bangladesh since cable provides the 
country’s only international internet line. Currently, a new cable is ­under construc-
tion that ­will offer a broadband connection and stretches from Singapore to France. 
It is expected to be completed in 2016.
Internet usage does not fully reflect the large number of providers available, al-
though the internet penetration rate is beginning to rise more rapidly. As recently 
as 2005, Bangladesh was near the very bottom of the list for the percentage of in-
ternet users in the country as compared to the rest of the world. In 2014, this num-
ber increased to 9.6 ­percent, showing significant growth between 2009 and 2014 
(Internet Live Stats 2016). According to the BTRC, the number of internet users 
increased by over 38 ­percent from March 2015 to March 2016, and this fast-­paced 
growth is likely to continue as mobile internet usage expands (Bdnews​.­com 2016).
The BTRC also reported over 130 million mobile phone subscribers in 2016, 
based on the sale of prepaid subscriber identity module (SIM) cards (Bdnews​.­com 
2016).This number has taken a downward turn recently, which may be due to a 
government initiative to reregister SIM cards in order to obtain more accurate counts. 
Smartphones currently represent a small portion of this usage, with around 
20 ­percent of mobile phone ­owners utilizing them (Husain 2015).
As with other countries in the region, internet users in Bangladesh skew ­toward 
the ­middle and upper classes and live in urban areas, which are primarily around 

BANGLADESH
22
the capital, Dhaka. The overall low rate of internet connectivity can be attributed 
to a number of ­factors, including the large number of poor ­people with no expend-
able income, high taxes and ser­vice charges for internet usage, low literacy rates, 
lack of websites with Bangla-­language content, and lack of infrastructure in rural 
areas.
One unique and innovative proj­ect to provide internet and related ser­vices to 
rural villages has been underway in Bangladesh since 2008 (Bouissou 2013). The 
program, known as Infolady, was created through a nonprofit and provides train-
ing and equipment to local ­women so that they can become traveling internet ser­
vice providers. The ­women, currently about 60 in number, use bicycles to travel 
through villages with laptops, cell phones, and other digital equipment. Thanks to 
this proj­ect, remote villages that other­wise would have no internet availability are 
able to connect online.
The government has taken some progressive stances in the move to digital con-
nectivity. The Prime Minister’s Office developed the Access to Information (a2i) Pro-
gramme in 2007 to make the move to providing public ser­vices in a digital format 
and to widen access. One of the current proj­ects associated with a2i is “Digital Ban-
gladesh by 2021.” This effort represents a large technological step forward for 
­Bangladesh in multiple ways and is predicated on the notion of widespread inter-
net usage and availability. ­There has been some criticism over ­whether this vision 
is achievable and ­whether it ­will bring the kind of economic growth to Bangladesh 
that it promises.
Google and Facebook, which are the top two global sites, also represent the top 
two websites used in Bangladesh (Alexa Internet 2016). A number of other ­globally 
recognized websites are also in the top twenty for Bangladesh, including Yahoo, 
YouTube, Twitter, LinkedIn, Wikipedia, and Amazon. Bangladesh news sites are also 
represented in the top websites, holding four of the top twenty spots. One notable 
Bangladesh’s Info Ladies bring social media and communications technologies to Saghata, a 
­remote farming village north of Dhaka, on September 30, 2012. The Info Ladies ­ride bicycles 
all across the countryside to ensure that all Bangladeshis in rural areas without sustained elec-
tricity or telecommunications infrastructure are still able to be connected with friends and 
families at home and abroad. (A.M. Ahad/AP Photo)

BANGLADESH
23
website, called Espncricinfo​.­com, ranks at number twelve. This is an ESPN subsid-
iary devoted wholly to news about cricket, a popu­lar sport in many South Asian 
countries.
Given this interest in cricket, it may come as no surprise that cricket is well rep-
resented in the top ten Facebook pages for Bangladesh (Socialbakers 2016). The 
number one page is for the national Bangladesh cricket team, the Tigers, which has 
over 7.8 million fans. In addition, the number three and number five pages are for 
individual cricket players on the national team. Four of the remaining top ten spots 
are for Bangladesh news sites that publish ­either exclusively in Bangla or in Bangla 
and En­glish. The ninth most liked page is Radio Munna, a digital radio station. The 
final two top ten most popu­lar Facebook pages in Bangladesh are for two of the 
top ISPs and mobile phone operators, Grameenphone and RobiAxiata Limited. In 
Bangladesh, as with a number of other countries in the region, Facebook is a key 
source for news and information. Over 80 ­percent of Bangladeshi internet users 
are on Facebook. As reflected in the page rankings, the popu­lar social media site is 
used for multiple purposes, ranging from entertainment to the dissemination of gov-
ernment information.
In 2013, Bangladeshi bloggers made the news when they held the 2013 Bengali 
blog blackout. This action was taken in response to the arrest of Asif Mohiuddin 
(1974–), a well-­known blogger, and three other bloggers ­because of offensive com-
ments on their blogs that ­violated the country’s antiblasphemy laws. At the time, 
the government monitored many in­de­pen­dent blog sites and also temporarily shut 
down a number of them. During the blackout, all the Bengali blogs shut down for 
a few days and came back online as a group with a press release demanding the 
release of their fellow bloggers. Ultimately, the three other bloggers ­were released, 
but Mohiuddin stayed in jail for three months.
Recently, ­there has been an increase in domestic terrorism in Bangladesh. One 
infamous example of this in 2015 was the “blogger killings,” in which at least four 
men ­were killed in separate incidents ­because of their blogs. They included Avijit 
Roy (1972–2015), Ananta Bijoy Das (1982–2015), and Washiqur Rahman (1988–
2015). Each of ­these victims was known for secular or atheist and antifundamen-
talist writings.
Fi­nally, also in 2015, the government cited security concerns when they shut 
down the internet completely for approximately one and a half hours. When the 
internet was made available again, Facebook, WhatsApp, Viber, and other social 
media sites had been banned from access within Bangladesh. All of this began when 
the Bangladeshi Supreme court convicted and sentenced to death two men, 
­Salahuddin Quader Chowdhury (1949–2015) and Ali Ahsan Mohammad Muja-
hid (1948–2015), for war crimes committed during the war of in­de­pen­dence in 
1971. The arrests occurred ­after the Bangladesh National Party lost power ­after rul-
ing from 1971 to 2011; both men ­were active in national politics ­until their arrest. 
Based on concerns about protests and vio­lence, the Bangladeshi government 
banned ­these social media sites for three weeks, beginning November 18, 2015 
(Colhoun 2015). The Facebook ban was lifted ­after that time, although it remained 
in place for both WhatsApp and Viber. On December 13, 2015, amid contradictory 

BOTSWANA
24
reports of additional vari­ous social media bans, a state minister stated that all so-
cial media was available (Bdnews24​.­com 2015).
Karen Stoll Farrell
See also: India; Nepal; Pakistan; Singapore
Further Reading
Alexa Internet. 2016. “Top Sites in Bangladesh.” Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­BD
BBC. 2015. “Bangladesh Death Sentences Lead to Facebook Ban.” November 18. Accessed 
February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­asia​-­34860667
Bdnews24​.­com. 2015. “Bangladesh Unblocks All Social Media, Communication Apps.” 
­December  14. Accessed April  18, 2016. http://­bdnews24​.­com​/­bangladesh​/­2015​/­12​
/­14​/­bangladesh​-­unblocks​-­all​-­social​-­media​-­communication​-­apps
Bdnews24​.­com. 2016. “Internet Users in Bangladesh Cross 60 Million, Says Telecoms Reg-
ulator.” April 18. Accessed April 18, 2016. http://­bdnews24​.­com​/­business​/­2016​/­04​/­18​
/­internet​-­users​-­in​-­bangladesh​-­cross​-­60​-­million​-­says​-­telecoms​-­regulator
Bouissou, Julien. 2013. “ ‘Info Ladies’ Go Biking to Bring Remote Bangladeshi Villages On-
line,” July 20. Accessed April 18, 2016. http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­global​-­develop​
ment​/­2013​/­jul​/­30​/­bangladesh​-­bikes​-­skype​-­info​-­ladies
Colhoun, Damaris. 2015. “Social Media Censorship in Bangladesh Hints at Long-­Term Prob­
lems for Publishers.” December 2. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­cjr​.­org​/­an​
alysis​/­bangladesh​_­social​_­media​.­php
Dhaka Tribune. 2015. “Bangladesh Outshines Neighbours in Mobile Internet Use.” Octo-
ber 6. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­dhakatribune​.­com​/­business​/­2015​/­oct​
/­06​/­bangladesh​-­outshines​-­neighbours​-­mobile​-­internet​-­use
Husain, Ishtiaq. 2015. “Smartphone Users on the Rise.” Accessed January 7, 2017. http://­
archive​.­dhakatribune​.­com​/­business​/­2016​/­jan​/­24​/­smartphone​-­users​-­rise
Infolady. 2015. “Infolady.” Accessed April 18, 2016. http://infolady.com.bd/; archived ver-
sion available: http://­web​.­archive​.­org​/­web​/­20160229213634​/­http://­infolady​.­com​.­bd​/­
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Bangladesh Internet Users.” Accessed April 18, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­bangladesh​/­
Islam, Arafutel. 2015. “Internet Users Defy Facebook Ban in Bangladesh.” November 20. 
Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­dw​.­com​/­en​/­internet​-­users​-­defy​-­facebook​-­ban​
-­in​-­bangladesh​/­a​-­18863635
Prime Minister’s Office, Dhaka, Bangladesh. “Access to Information (a2i) Programme.” Ac-
cessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­a2i​.­pmo​.­gov​.­bd​/­
­Reuters. 2015. “Bangladesh Lifts Ban on Facebook ­After Three Weeks.” December 10. Ac-
cessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­nbcnews​.­com​/­tech​/­tech​-­news​/­bangladesh​-­lifts​
-­ban​-­facebook​-­after​-­three​-­weeks​-­n477981
Socialbakers. 2016. “Bangladesh Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed February 22, 2016. 
http://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­bangladesh​/­
BOTSWANA
Botswana is a landlocked country of just over 2 million in southern Africa, sharing 
borders with South Africa, Zimbabwe, Namibia, and Zambia. A former British 

BOTSWANA
25
protectorate, the country gained in­de­pen­dence in 1966, by which time it was the 
second-­poorest country in the world (­after Bangladesh). However, by the mid-
1990s, Botswana had the fastest-­growing economy in Africa (Mosime and Chiumbu 
2010). Although the country has experienced stunted growth in the recent past 
following a global price decline in commodities, it is still categorized as an upper-­
middle-­income country, with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of $6,360 
in 2015 (World Bank 2016).­There are two main languages spoken by over 
90 ­percent of the population: Setswana and En­glish. This relative linguistic homo-
geneity makes mediated communication in the country relatively less complex and 
more accessible to the majority of the population. Botswana has a small but fairly 
diversified group of mainstream media made of both state-­owned and privately-­
owned broadcasters and print titles. However, most of ­these are concentrated in 
urban areas.
Like most African countries, Botswana belatedly joined the so-­called informa-
tion superhighway (Nyamnjoh 2005). For example, in 2000, ­there ­were only 15,000 
­people in the country with access to the internet, then a predominantly urban phe-
nomenon. This represented a motley 0.03 ­percent of the population (ITU 2016). 
At the same time, access to mobile phones was also very limited, as the costs of 
both handsets and voice and data ­were extremely high, especially compared with 
fixed lines. However, by 2014, the situation in Botswana had changed drastically, 
thanks to the increased availability of cheap handsets and the rapid rollout of broad-
band in the country. In 2015, for example, ­there ­were 620,000 Batswana with 
­active Facebook accounts, making up just over 28 ­percent of the population 
(InternetWorldStatistics 2016). Batswana with access to the internet also comprised 
28 ­percent of the population, a figure that is set to increase in 2016.
The increase in access to the internet in Botswana also means that more Batswana 
are using other online social media platforms such as Twitter, WhatsApp, Instagram, 
and Myspace, especially young ­people between eigh­teen and twenty-­four years old 
(Butane 2013). The country’s telecommunications market is dominated by three 
players: the privately owned (and biggest) mobile telephone com­pany Mascom, an-
other privately owned mobile com­pany called Orange Botswana (formerly Vista), 
and the Botswana Telecommunications Com­pany (BTC), the state-­owned, fixed-­
line provider. Against the background of declining subscriptions to fixed-­line ser­
vices, BTC recently launched a subsidiary, Be Mobile, to compete with the mobile 
operators and broaden access to mobile data and voice ser­vices.
A recent study (Butane 2013) of internet use by Botswana’s young ­people showed 
that access to the internet was still relatively quite low and was characterized by 
multiple “digital divides” between and among young college students. For exam-
ple, the study found that students attending universities (such as the University of 
Botswana) had far more regular access to the internet than ­those attending other, 
smaller, nondegree-­offering institutions. Even within the smaller institutions, some 
students reported no access to the internet at all. It also found that in the majority 
of cases, young ­people accessed the internet predominantly for entertainment pur-
poses. The average number of hours spent on the internet, according to the study, 
was five hours per week.

BOTSWANA
26
The history of mobile telephony in Botswana dates back to the late 1990s, when 
the government launched its first comprehensive telecommunications policy, which 
established the licensing body, the Botswana Telecommunications Authority. The 
first licensees, Mascom and Vista, ­were licensed and started offering mobile tele-
phony ser­vices in 1998. In 1996, the Botswana government launched “Vision 2016,” 
which, among other ­things, articulated an ambitious program of expanding tele-
communication ser­vices to all citizens (Zaffiro 2010). Partly thanks to this program, 
access to mobile telephone ser­vices among Batswana has jumped from 33 ­percent 
in 2005 to more than 131 ­percent in 2010, an indication of multiple cell phone use 
and subscriptions by the ­people of Botswana (Lesitaokana 2014). Granted, the high 
level of access to mobile telephony does not necessarily reflect access to mobile in-
ternet. However, an in­ter­est­ing fact is that the high level of access to mobile tele-
phony has allowed the proliferation of “tele-­medicines,” whereby hospitals are able 
to communicate with patients through mobile apps that keep track of patients’ ad-
herence to medicine-­taking schedules, especially patients with chronic diseases. 
This is particularly impor­tant in Botswana, which has the third-­highest rates of HIV/
AIDS ­after Lesotho and Swaziland.
For the past four de­cades, Botswana has often been cited as a shining example 
of a stable democracy. However, in recent years, the government of President Ser-
etse Ian Khama (1953–) has been accused of, among other ­things, stifling the ­free 
press and freedom of expression (Freedom House 2015). For example, in Septem-
ber 2014, the government arrested two journalists from the in­de­pen­dent weekly 
paper Sunday Standard and charged them with sedition for publishing a story 
­alleging that the president’s earlier involvement in a car accident had been due to 
speeding. The paper’s premises ­were subsequently raided by the country’s 
­intelligence ser­vices, looking for seditious material (Freedom House 2015).One 
of the journalists fled the country to South Africa to seek asylum, while the other 
was eventually released pending court trial. President Khama’s critics also ar-
gue  that, perhaps ­because of his military and security background, his govern-
ment is actively involved in the widespread electronic surveillance of citizens, 
effectively limiting and discouraging freedom of expression on the internet 
­(Mokone 2016).
Wallace Chuma
See also: ­Kenya; Namibia; South Africa; Zimbabwe
Further Reading
Butane, T. 2013. “Internet Access and Use Among Young ­People in Botswana.” International 
Journal of Information and Education Technology, 3(1):117–119.
Freedom House. 2015. “Botswana Country Report.” Accessed August 12, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­press​/­2015​/­botswana
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2016. “Percentage of Individuals Using the 
Internet, 2000–2013.” Accessed August 12, 2016. http://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­net​/­itu​_­search​
/­index​.­aspx​?­cx​=­001276825495132238663%3Anqzm45z846q&cof​=­FORID%3A9&ie​
=­UTF​-­8&q​=­Botswana+internet+statistics+in+2000

BRAZIL
27
Internet World Statistics. 2016. “Africa: Botswana.” Accessed on August 6, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­africa​.­htm#bw
Lesitaokana, W. O. 2014. “Key Issues in the Development of Mobile Telephony in Botswana 
(1998–2011): An Empirical Investigation.” New Media and Society, 16(5): 840–855.
Mokone, O. 2016. “Khama Turns Botswana into a Surveillance State.” August 12. Accessed 
August 12, 2016. http://­www​.­sundaystandard​.­info​/­khama​-­turns​-­botswana​-­surveillance​
-­state
Mosime, S. T., and Chiumbu, S. 2010. “Global Pressures, Local Disparities: Deregulation’s 
False Promise and Botswana’s Domestic Digital Divide.” In Media Policy in a Changing 
Southern Africa: Critical Reflections on Media Reforms in the Global Age, edited by Dumis-
ani Moyo and Wallace Chuma. Pretoria, South Africa: Unisa Press.
Nyamnjoh, F. 2005. Africa’s Media, Democracy, and the Politics of Belonging. London: Zed 
Books.
World Bank. 2016. “GDP Per Capita: Botswana.” Accessed August 12, 2016. http://­data​
.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­NY​.­GDP​.­PCAP​.­CD​?­locations​=­BW
Zaffiro, J. 2010. “Realising or Dreaming? Vision 2016, Media Reform, and Democracy in 
2016.” In Media Policy in a Changing Southern Africa: Critical Reflections on Media Re­
forms in the Global Age, edited by Dumisani Moyo and Wallace Chuma. Pretoria, South 
Africa: Unisa Press.
BRAZIL
Brazil, the largest country in South Amer­i­ca, has a total population of 208.7 mil-
lion ­people and an internet penetration of 58 ­percent (i.e. a ­little more than half of 
the population has regular access to the internet). However, once individuals have 
access to the internet, they remain connected. About 78 ­percent of active internet 
users are online on any device daily. Brazilians use the internet on computers and 
tablets for an average of five hours and fourteen minutes per day.
In fact, the country’s internet penetration has steadily risen annually. As the 
country becomes more technology friendly, the tech culture has become deeply in-
grained into Brazilian society. The country’s population, especially millennials, has 
become reliant on the internet and social media platforms. The younger generation 
accounts for much of the country’s active internet users and has a strong presence 
on social media. Brazilians have also forayed into app development, with many 
developers creating localized apps. Apps that offer ser­vices such as ­free calls and 
texts over the internet appeal to Brazilians. In addition, in-­app content has proved 
to be quite profitable in Brazil.
The country currently leads Latin Amer­i­ca in the number of social media users, 
with about 88 ­percent of young Brazilians using Facebook on their mobile phones. 
YouTube and WhatsApp follow ­behind Facebook, with 81 ­percent and 79 ­percent, 
respectively. Brazilians spend about an average of three hours and fifty-­six minutes 
on the internet and three hours and eigh­teen minutes on social media while using 
mobile phones (Kemp 2016). Many of Brazil’s social media users are in the younger 
generation, largely within the fifteen-­ to thirty-­two-­year-­old age bracket. This is 
­because Brazil’s overall population is primarily made up of ­people ­under age forty. 
Their online presence accounts for more than half of site visits (Mason Gray 2015).

BRAZIL
28
Social media has become ingrained into the Brazilian culture. In 2008, Brazil 
was one of the largest user bases of Orkut, a Google-­developed platform. The user 
base was so large that Google set up an office in Belo Horizonte to navigate Brazil’s 
­legal system. In December 2015, the Brazilian internet population was in a tumult 
over a 48-­hour ban of WhatsApp. The social media app was temporarily banned 
­because of WhatsApp’s failure to comply with a court order to provide investiga-
tors with information for a criminal court case. Once the 48-­hour ban was put into 
effect, many Brazilian users complained about the app’s suspension. ­Others created 
the hashtag #Nessas48HorasEuVou (“In ­these 48 hours, I ­will”) and humorous 
memes, which spread across social media platforms that ­were still accessible. Dur-
ing this 48-­hour period, competing messaging apps saw an influx of new accounts. 
Tele­gram, a secure messaging app that is similar to WhatsApp, attracted more than 
a million users during the ban. WhatsApp is very popu­lar among the Brazilian pop-
ulation ­because of its ­free ser­vices to call and message ­family and friends within 
the country or abroad. The high cost of living in Brazil is often compared to the 
United Kingdom, except Brazilians make a third of the wages that the British earn. 
Having cost-­effective products or ­free ser­vices offered by WhatsApp appeals to the 
Brazilian population’s need for low-­cost communications (BBC 2015).
Brazilian telecommunication ser­vice providers are feeling the loss of business 
with their customers’ preferences for voice over internet protocol (VoIP) ser­vices. 
The country’s telecom providers are urging the government to enforce a more re-
strictive regulation on VoIPs. Telecom companies state that apps like WhatsApp and 
Facebook Messenger are damaging to their businesses. This maneuver to regulate 
WhatsApp, an instant messaging ser­vice for smartphones, is one of the most popu­lar social 
media platforms in Brazil. The ­free ser­vices that WhatsApp provides allow Brazilians to stay 
in touch with friends and ­family anywhere in the world. (Viorel Dudau​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

BRAZIL
29
VoIP ser­vices is similar to the ban on VoIPs implemented by Moroccan telecom-
munication ser­vice providers. When the Brazilian court banned WhatsApp for 
48 hours, only one of the four major telecom companies protested the decision.
If telecom providers are ever successful in banning VoIPs completely, this move 
could be in violation of the 2014 Marco Civil da Internet (MCI), a bill that was 
passed by the Brazilian Congress in 2014 with the support of President Dilma Rous-
seff (1947–). The MCI is the regulatory framework that provides a strong founda-
tion for online ­human rights in Brazil. In essence, this law states that all Brazilian 
internet users have a right to net neutrality, online privacy and development, lia-
bility of internet ser­vice providers, e-­government expansion, and digital inclusion. 
Despite having a law that covers multiple online user rights, some areas still lack 
suitable enforcement to ensure proper regulation. While general rules have been 
established, they do not guarantee online user rights, especially in light of the ad-
dendum to the so-­called spy bill. The surveillance law allows telecom ser­vice pro-
viders to collect and store customers’ personal information, such as emails, phone 
numbers, and addresses, which in turn can be turned over to the authorities with-
out a court order. Many civil society organ­izations protested the adoption of this 
bill. Even though ­there is an explicit clause that any ­future decisions would be made 
in accordance with the law, civil society leaders believe that it is still a violation of 
online privacy and a threat to Brazilians’ freedom of expression (Article 19 2015).
Experts believe that Brazil should be considered as a location for global invest-
ment. ­Because of the country’s strong social media presence, global companies 
would be able to utilize the highly trafficked social media platforms. The amount 
of time that Brazilians spend on the internet and social media can be crucial for 
companies looking to break into the Brazilian market. By marketing their product 
and ser­vices on social media, they would be able to reach much of the Brazilian 
population online (Walters 2015).
Three companies have utilized social media to market their brand through unique 
social media campaigns that captured the Brazilian passion for soccer and used it 
to attract even more customers. One of them is Santadar, one of the largest banks 
in the world. In 2013, the bank launched a new campaign that focused on its 
­customers. Using footage of Brazilian soccer fans at games, the bank’s marketing 
team created unique videos highlighting the fans and equating them to the bank’s 
Brazil comprises the second-­largest national audience on Facebook, ­after the United 
States (Levy 2015). However, Facebook was not always Brazilians’ favorite platform. 
In 2004, Google launched its first social media platform, a program called Orkut ­after 
its primary developer, Orkut Büyükkökten. The platform took off in Brazil in 2005, 
when Orkut added Portuguese-­language support; it was also extremely popu­lar in 
India. Brazil remained one of Orkut’s strongest user bases through two major rede-
signs and some controversy. In 2012, ­after Google announced that it was no longer 
providing support to Orkut, Brazilian users started relying more heavi­ly on Facebook. 
Orkut fi­nally closed in 2014 (Ahmad 2014).

BRAZIL
30
customers. Knowing that more than 80 ­percent of Brazil’s internet population uses 
YouTube, the videos ­were uploaded to the bank’s official YouTube channel. Not 
only did the bank see positive feedback on all its social media channels, but it also 
increased the number of views on the bank’s official YouTube channel by 6.1 mil-
lion views in four months (Walter 2015).
During the 2014 World Cup, Adidas created a social media campaign that pro-
duced real-­time results. Brazilians active on social media experienced a creative global 
campaign that featured videos, pictures, player information, and live tweets about 
team highlights and exciting play-­by-­plays. As a result, the Adidas brand was one 
of the most talked-­about brands during the World Cup and was successful in 
amassing nearly 5.8 million followers on its official social media channels. The ABC 
Group, a com­pany that produces plastics, launched another successful social me-
dia campaign during the 2014 World Cup. When Brazil’s captain, Neymar da Silva 
Santos Ju­nior (1992–), was injured during a World Cup game against Colombia, 
the ABC Group distributed 60,000 masks for fans to wear at the next game against 
Germany as a tribute to the injured player. Fans ­were encouraged to take selfies 
wearing the masks and share them on the ABC Group’s social media channels. More 
than 12,000 pictures ­were shared on the com­pany’s Instagram account with the 
hashtag #somostodosneymar (“We are all Neymar”). ­These campaigns are prime 
examples of using Brazil’s social media presence to engage audiences and market 
products.
Even though Brazil is the world’s eighth-­largest economy, the mobile device soft-
ware industry did not initially provide a significant contribution to the country’s 
growing economy. The smartphone penetration, 26 ­percent, was relatively small 
compared to the country’s population in 2013. However, the Brazilian population 
has become increasingly tech friendly, specifically with regard to smartphones. In 
fact, smartphone usage has increased to over 53 ­percent in the country. Even though 
the mobile device software industry in Brazil is less developed than in other coun-
tries, like the United States where more than half the population owns a smart-
phone, it is quickly catching up to them. Compared to other countries in Latin 
Amer­i­ca, Brazil is currently the leading country in the mobile market. In response 
to the country’s growing mobile usage, Brazilian developers have created a number 
of local apps. What is unique about the apps developed in Brazil is the movement 
away from the “one size fits all” model. By creating localized apps, Brazilian com-
panies engage with their consumers in more ways than traditional advertising and 
social media marketing do. They are targeting a specific demographic that would 
be interested in the companies’ ser­vices or products (Ayers 2016).
With localized apps, Brazilians can download apps that ser­vice only certain cit-
ies or areas, such as São Paolo and Rio de Janeiro. ­There is not a single app for one 
ser­vice that is used by the entire country. For example, Brazil offers at least ten ma-
jor taxi ser­vice apps, not unlike Uber, that ser­vice dif­fer­ent areas of the country. 
EasyTaxi and 99Taxis are two popu­lar examples. Brazilians can also download a 
variety of utility apps in areas ranging from food ser­vice to banking to education. 
If Brazilians wish to participate in the improvement of cities, they can send sugges-
tions to the local government via an app. Tourists also have access to apps to help 

BRAZIL
31
improve their visit to the country by providing information about navigation, city 
guides, ­hotels and motels, and restaurants (Tech in Brazil 2015a). With the arrival 
of the app development era, Brazil has seen the creation of more than 80,000 apps 
designed for the dif­fer­ent needs or wants of consumers. This is especially helpful 
for small businesses looking to reach multiple audiences while tapping into a new 
revenue source (Ayers 2016).
Even though most Brazilians prefer the ­free ser­vices and products offered by apps, 
this does not exclude in-­app purchases available on freemium apps. Freemium us-
ers are not pressured to buy the in-­app content, but it is available for purchase if 
users choose. This method of offering ser­vices within the freemium app has proven 
to be highly successful. It allows consumer engagement, as well as generating more 
revenue. In 2015, studies found that 39.5 ­percent of Brazilians bought in-­app con-
tent from freemium apps. This is more than double the percentage calculated for 
Brazilians who paid for apps. Research shows that freemium apps with in-­app con-
tent are more profitable and have a higher penetration than paid apps. In-­app 
content can come in many dif­fer­ent forms (Tech in Brazil 2015b).
The most popu­lar form is freemium game apps. Brazilian players download a 
­free app but then make purchases within it to obtain necessary objects to advance 
a game or in exchange for app “currency,” similar to games like Candy Crush in 
the United States. Based on 2016 projections, experts estimate about $400 million 
­will be made through mobile gaming in Brazil. In-­app content can also come in 
the forms of video and utility content. Many video-­streaming apps have in-­app con-
tent for users. Some content may be additional videos that ­aren’t included in the 
freemium app and must be purchased in order to be viewed. Utility apps, such as 
the antivirus software AVG, are available for ­free; however, AVG only offers mini-
mum protection ser­vices on the mobile phone and tablet. If users wish to have the 
app ­running at full capacity, they must make in-­app purchases to get the additional 
ser­vices (Tech in Brazil 2015b).
Karen Ames
See also: Morocco; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Article 19. 2015. “Country Report: Brazil’s Marco Civil da Internet.” November 5. Accessed 
April 6, 2016. https://­www​.­article19​.­org​/­resources​.­php​/­resource​/­38175​/­en​/­country​
-­report:​-­brazil’s​-­marco​-­civil​-­da​-­internet
Ayers, Jamie. 2016. “Smartphone Usage and Local Apps Soar in Brazil.” February 2, 2016. 
Accessed April 6. https://­www​.­appmakr​.­com​/­blog​/­smartphone​-­usage​-­local​-­apps​-­brazil​/­
BBC. 2015. “Brazil Judge Lifts WhatsApp Suspension.” December 17. Accessed April 7, 
2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­latin​-­america​-­35125559
Kemp, Simon. 2016. “Digital in 2016: We Are Social’s Compendium of Global Digital, So-
cial, and Mobile Data, Trends, and Statistics.” January 27. Accessed April 6, 2016. http://­
wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Mason Gray, Chloe. 2015. “5 In­ter­est­ing Social Media & Technology Statistics About Brazil 
Globally-­Minded Enterprises.” May 13. Accessed April 6, 2016. https://­www​.­sprinklr​
.­com​/­the​-­way​/­social​-­media​-­statistics​-­brazil​/­

BRAZIL
32
Tech in Brazil. 2015a. “101+ Brazilian Apps to Have on Your Mobile Device.” February 4. 
Accessed April 5, 2016. http://­techinbrazil​.­com​/­101​-­brazilian​-­apps​-­to​-­have​-­on​-­your​
-­mobile​-­device
Tech in Brazil. 2015b. “In-­App Purchases in Brazil.” June 19. Accessed April 5, 2016. http://­
techinbrazil​.­com​/­in​-­app​-­purchases​-­in​-­brazil
Walter, Ekaterina. 2015. “4 Social-­Media Campaigns That Demonstrate Brazil’s Passionate 
Digital Culture.” October 22. Accessed April 6, 2016. https://­www​.­entrepreneur​.­com​
/­article​/­250303

CAMEROON
Cameroon is an African country situated north of the equator along the Atlantic 
coastline. It became a German protectorate in 1884. ­After World War I, it became 
a League of Nations mandate territory, with governance split between France and 
­Great Britain ­until 1946, when the United Nations placed the country ­under French 
and British trusteeship. As a result of this trusteeship, Cameroon is one of the few 
countries in the world with both French and En­glish as official languages. Although 
geo­graph­i­cal maps and many English-­speaking authors locate Cameroon in West 
Africa, ­others, notably French-­speaking writers, situate the country in Central 
­Africa. Yet, as a member of the Central African Economic and Monetary Commu-
nity (CEMAC), Cameroon has officially aligned itself with the Central African re-
gion, though its main economic partner and northwest neighboring country is 
Nigeria, which belongs to the Economic Community of West African States 
(ECOWAS). With close to 24 million inhabitants, Cameroon is home to more than 
half of the population of the CEMAC region. The other members of CEMAC are 
also neighboring countries, including Gabon, the Central African Republic, Chad, 
the Republic of Congo, and Equatorial Guinea.
According to the 2015 Global Information Technology Report, the Networked 
Readiness Index, which mea­sures the propensity for countries to leverage oppor-
tunities offered by information and communication technologies (ICTs), places 
Cameroon at 3 on a scale of 7 and ranks it at 126 out of the 143 countries sam-
pled. In fact, the International Communication Union figures indicate that in 2014, 
6.7 ­percent of users accessed the internet at home, and in 2015, the internet pen-
etration rate in Cameroon stood at 20.68 ­percent (Dutta et al. 2016).
Cameroon experienced a long period of economic growth from in­de­pen­dence 
in 1960 to 1985; however, like many sub-­Saharan African countries, Cameroon 
sank into a major economic crisis from 1986 to 1994. During this period, the coun-
try was placed ­under Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs) by the Bretton 
Woods institutions (namely, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund), 
with the aim of restoring a healthy economy through widespread liberalizations. 
The purpose of ­these liberalizations was to foster the transition from a state-­led 
economy to a more market-­coordinated one. Among the economic reforms initi-
ated was a campaign, which began in 1995, to privatize CAMTEL, a historic tele-
communications com­pany, through international investors. However, privatization 
of the com­pany has yet to occur, largely due to domestic obstacles, which have of-
ten been linked to issues of national sovereignty.
Nevertheless, while CAMTEL still enjoys a mono­poly on fixed telephone lines, 
as well as submarine fiber optic cables and their use in deploying internet all over 
C

CAMEROON
34
the country, it now shares the mobile telephony market with three other companies: 
Orange Cameroon, MTN Cameroon, and Nexttel Cameroon. ­These four compa-
nies also provide internet ser­vices, alongside Yoomee, Ringo, Saconets, cyberlink, 
and Matrix. Despite the number of providers, connection costs remain among the 
highest in Africa (Banque Mondiale 2011). In fact, prices in 2015 ­were so high that 
for unlimited internet access with relatively comfortable speed users had to pay 
around $55 per month, an exorbitant amount considering that the country’s monthly 
GDP per capita was only $109.11. A survey funded by the African Economic Re-
search Consortium, conducted in 2015 by researchers from the Group for Studies 
and Research in Theoretical and Applied Economics of the University of Douala, 
revealed that users still consider connection costs to be the key hindrance to internet 
use (23.79 ­percent of the 2,232 respondents), well ahead of lack of usefulness, 
which is the second obstacle (19.25 ­percent of respondents) (Bakehe et al. 2016).
Despite ­these infrastructure setbacks, Cameroon has made some strides ­toward 
becoming the telecommunications hub of Central Africa. For example, the Central 
African Backbone (CAB) proj­ect, which ­will connect Cameroon, Chad, and the Cen-
tral African Republic in its first phase and ­will ultimately involve eleven African 
countries, including the Demo­cratic Republic of Congo, the Republic of the Congo, 
Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe, Nigeria, Niger, and Sudan 
(World Bank 2009), has laid twelve of eigh­teen planned optical fiber cables along 
the Chad/Cameroon oil pipeline (Nana and Tankeu 2012). Cameroon is connected 
to the internet by two fiber optic submarine cables—­namely, South Atlantic 3 (SAT-3) 
and West African Submarine Cable (WASC), which connect Eu­rope to the West 
African coasts. Furthermore, in mid-2015, Cameroon signed an agreement with Or-
ange Cameroon for the construction and operation of a third fiber optic submarine 
cable called the African Coast to Eu­rope (ACE).
According to the International Communication Union, Cameroon witnessed a 
drop in the rate of its mobile-­cellular phone subscriptions between 2014 and 2015, 
from 75.69 ­percent to 71.85 ­percent. A pos­si­ble explanation for this may be found 
in the governmental initiative that required the compulsory registration of subscrib-
ers for security purposes that reached its peak between July 2015 and June 2016. 
Since most Cameroonians use mobile devices to access the internet, the drop in 
mobile subscriptions is likely a cause for the decrease in internet penetration in 
Cameroon. Indeed, 84.2 ­percent of respondents in the 2015 University of Douala 
survey indicated that they accessed the internet via mobile networks. Once con-
nected, 82.92 ­percent of respondents reported logging on to social networks. To 
understand ­these figures, which seem relatively high for a developing country, con-
sider that this survey was conducted mainly in urban areas, especially in the follow-
ing towns: (1) Douala, the country’s economic capital (39.9 ­percent of the sample); 
(2) Yaoundé, the country’s po­liti­cal headquarters (34.4 ­percent); (3) ­Bafoussam, 
the country’s third-­largest city (10.59 ­percent); (4) Limbe, which hosts the coun-
try’s sole oil refinery (7.09 ­percent); and (5) Buea, which hosts the very first purely 
Anglophone university in the country (7.85 ­percent). To counterbalance the pos­
si­ble impression of all Cameroonians being very connected to the internet, accord-
ing to the 2015 Global Information Technology Report, Cameroon is still at the 

CAMEROON
35
initial stage of content development with re­spect to its total population ­because, 
for instance, average YouTube views of local channels accounts for only 2.6 ­percent 
of the time users spend online.
However, Cameroonians are increasingly familiarizing themselves with social me-
dia and over-­the-­top (OTT) ser­vices that are web-­based applications focusing on 
the delivery of text, audio, video, or other telecommunication ser­vices via the in-
ternet without a network operator controlling the distribution of content (Godlovitch 
et al. 2015). StatsMonkey, a network usage monitoring institution, shows on its 
website that, in 2014, the five most used search engines in Cameroon ­were Google 
(with approximately 86.43 ­percent market share), Yahoo (about 6.49 ­percent mar-
ket share), Bing (about 3.35 ­percent), Ask Jeeves (approximately 2.35 ­percent) and 
Webcrawler (approximately 0.73 ­percent) (StatsMonkey 2015a). The same institu-
tion also shows that, in the same year, the social network that was mostly used by 
Cameroonians was Facebook with about 97.56 ­percent rate of usage, followed by 
Twitter (1.29 ­percent), Pinterest (0.38 ­percent), Vkontakte (0.22 ­percent), Thmbr 
(0.2 ­percent), Google+ (0.16 ­percent) and YouTube (0.16 ­percent) (StatsMonkey 
2015b). This ranking corroborates the results of the University of Douala’s 2015 
survey, which revealed that respondents mostly cited Facebook (90.46 ­percent) as 
the social media that they used, followed by Google+ (47.96 ­percent), Twitter 
(34.99  ­percent), Viadeo (7.25  ­percent), LinkedIn (5.86  ­percent), Monster.lu 
(1.88 ­percent), Tudivz (1.5 ­percent) and Xing (1 ­percent). Even though statistics 
are still scarce, users of ser­vices such as WhatsApp, IMO, and Skype are on the rise 
across all social groups of the Cameroonian population. In fact, about 86 ­percent 
of respondents in the 2015 survey said that they use Yahoo Messenger, Skype, MSN 
Messenger, or IMO at least once a month to chat with relatives within the country 
or abroad.
Nevertheless, though Cameroonian users rely heavi­ly on foreign social media (as 
­these figures show), ­there are a few local initiatives, especially in the area of health. 
Two of the most prominent of them are cardiopad and giftedMom. The cardiopad 
is an innovative iPad in­ven­ted by a young Cameroonian engineer, Arthur Zang 
(1987–), for medical use, particularly in cardiology. It is a medical tablet connected 
to a mobile network, capable of performing cardiac readings of a patient and trans-
mitting the data collected all over the world via the internet to a doctor who can in-
terpret them and advise on the appropriate treatment. It is an e-­healthcare mobile 
device solution for developing countries suffering from an acute shortage of heart 
disease specialists. Another effort, with its vision of “a world ­free of maternal and 
infant deaths,” giftedMom appears to be a social network–­like solution for devel-
oping countries suffering from insufficient prenatal healthcare centers. In­ven­ted by 
young Cameroonian entrepreneur Alain Nteff (1992–), its website (www​.­giftedmom​
.­org), declares: “giftedMom is a leading mobile health solutions provider in Africa. 
We leverage last-­mile technologies to provide pregnant ­women and new ­mothers 
access to health information and strengthen linkages to antenatal care.”
A peculiarity in the use of social media in Cameroon relates to online dating and 
marriage. Cameroonian girls are known for their propensity to use social media as 
a tool to look for husbands abroad, especially in Eu­rope and North Amer­i­ca. This 

CAMEROON
36
mail-­order-­bride phenomenon has been the subject of many research proj­ects, and 
even films, the most popu­lar of which is Le Blanc d’Eyenga (Eyenga’s White Man), 
directed by Cameroonian-­born Thierry Roland Ntamack (n.d.). Their reputation 
in this area is so established that Cameroonian girls have been referred to as the 
ideal for web dating (Draelants and Tatio 2003).
All ­these trends are pos­si­ble in Cameroon ­because ­there is extensive freedom in 
the use of all social media. The government has not imposed any restrictions on 
any of them. Consequently, ­these media are widely used for both noble and devi-
ant purposes. For instance, while they enable ­people to share information and com-
panies to advertise themselves and their products and ser­vices, they also serve as 
channels to spread rumors. With regard to the sharing and commenting of view-
points, especially on issues relating to politics, sports, religion, or culture, Camer-
oonians not only use conventional social media, they also are fond of transforming 
online web news comment sections into de facto social media.
Despite the December 2010 enactment of law No. 2010/012 on cybersecurity 
and cybercrime, a major weakness of Cameroonian cyberspace appears to be the 
lack of a nationwide operational cybersecurity strategy. While it is on the rise, the 
internet penetration rate shows that almost 80 ­percent of Cameroon’s population 
is excluded from the digital revolution, demonstrating that the digital divide in the 
country is still an impor­tant concern. According to the 2015 survey, the five key 
impediments to the use of internet include the high cost of internet connection, 
lack of usefulness, complexity of the tool, lack of guidance, and absence of secu-
rity. ­These findings identify three key areas for ICT development policy in 
Cameroon—­namely, classical training, vocational training in internet-­related com-
petencies, and incentives for competition between domestic internet providers 
(Tamokwe 2013).
Georges Bertrand Tamokwé Piaptie
See also: Angola; France; Ghana; Nigeria
Further Reading
Bakehe, Patrick Novice, Fambeu, Ariel Herbert, and Tamokwe Piaptie, Georges Bertrand. 
2016. “Internet Adoption and Use in Cameroon.” AERC Research Paper 609.
Banque Mondiale—­Unité de la Réduction de la Pauvretéet la Gestionéconomique/Région-
Afrique. 2011. “Le Réveil du Lion? Point Sur la Situation Économique du Cameroun.
SpécialTélécommunications.” Cahiers économiques du Cameroun, Numéro 1. Accessed 
July 25, 2016. http://­siteresources​.­worldbank​.­org​/­AFRICAINFRENCHEXT​/­Resources​
/­Cahiers​EconCam001FR​.­pdf
Draelants, ­Hugues, and Tatio Sah, Olive. 2003. “Femme Camerounaise Cherche Mari Blanc: 
Le Net Entre Eldorado et Outil de Reproduction.” Esprit Critique, Automne 2003, 5(4). 
Accessed July 27, 2016. http://­www​.­espritcritique​.­fr​/­0504​/­esp0504article07​.­pdf
Godlovitch, Ilsa, Kotterink, Bas, Marcus, Scott, Nooren, Pieter, Esmeijer, Jop, and Roos-
endaal, Arnold. 2015. “Over-­the-­top (OTTS) Players: Market Dynamics and Policy 
Challenges.” Policy Department Economic and Scientific Policy, Eu­ro­pean Parliament. 
Accessed July 27, 2016. http://­www​.­europarl​.­europa​.­eu​/­supporting​-­analyses

CANADA
37
Nana Nzépa, Olivier, and Tankeu Keutchankeu, Robertine. 2012. “Understanding What Is 
Happening in ICT in Cameroon.” Evidence for ICT Policy Action, Policy Paper 2. Research 
ICT Africa. Accessed July 25, 2016. https://­www​.­researchictafrica​.­net​/­publications​
/­Evidence​_­for​_­ICT​_­Policy​_­Action​/­Policy​_­Paper​_­2​_­​-­​_­Understanding​_­what​_­is​
_­happening​_­in​_­ICT​_­in​_­Cameroon​.­pdf
Soumitra, Dutta, Geiger, Thierry, and Lanvin, Bruno. 2016. “The Global Information Tech-
nology Report 2015.” World Economic Forum. Accessed August 6, 2016. http://­www3​
.­weforum​.­org​/­docs​/­WEF​_­Global​_­IT​_­Report​_­2015​.­pdf
StatsMonkey. 2015a. “Cameroon Social Media Usage Statistics Using Mobile, Usage Statis-
tics—2014.” Accessed July  26, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21314​-­ca​
meroon​-­mobile​-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
StatsMonkey. 2015b. “Cameroon Search Engine Market Share, Usage Statistics—2014.” Ac-
cessed July  26, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­18345​-­cameroon​-­search​
-­engine​-­market​-­share​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2014​.­php
Tamokwe Piaptie, G. B. 2013. “Les Déterminants de l’Accèset des Usages d’Internet en Af-
rique Subsaharienne. Analyse des Données Camerounaiseset Implications Pour une 
Politique de Développement des TIC.”Réseaux, 2013/4(180): 95–121.
World Bank. 2009. “Central Africa Backbone—­Proj­ect Information Document (PID) Ap-
praisal Stage. Report No. AB4611.” Accessed August 9, 2016. http://­www​.­icafrica​.­org​
/­fileadmin​/­documents​/­Knowledge​/­World​_­Bank​/­PID​-­Central​-­Africa​-­BckBone​-­JUNE​
-­2009​.­pdf
CANADA
A country that is part of the continent of North Amer­i­ca, Canada is situated di-
rectly north of the United States and boasts a landmass of 3,560,238 square miles 
(Statistics Canada 2016a), which makes it the second-­largest country in the world 
in terms of size. From statistics compiled in 2015, over 35 million ­people live in 
Canada (Statistics Canada 2016b). Countless Canadians use the internet and so-
cial media daily. Currently, Canada ranks second to the United Kingdom in inter-
net penetration among its G8 counter­parts (CIRA 2016); G8 refers to a group of 
eight highly industrialized nations that also includes France, Germany, Italy, the 
United Kingdom, Japan, the United States, and Rus­sia (Council on Foreign Rela-
tions 2016). Canadians are also the second-­heaviest users of the internet, averag-
ing 41.3 hours per month online, trailing only the United States. To put this in 
perspective, globally, the average number of hours spent online by a user was 24.6. 
With approximately 87 ­percent of Canadian ­house­holds having access to the in-
ternet, Canada is most definitely one of the most “wired” countries in the world 
(CIRA 2016). In 2013, Canada continued to lead the world in internet use, as Ca-
nadians visited the most web pages, averaging 3,371 sites per month. In compari-
son, the global average for visited pages per month was 2,278 (CIRA 2016).
Unfortunately, access to the internet in Canada, and social media more specifi-
cally, remains highly dependent on where one lives, with rural areas continuing to 
lag ­behind Canadian cities. For instance, although broadband is available to all Ca-
nadians who reside in urban areas, 13 ­percent of ­those living in rural areas did not 

CANADA
38
have access to the internet as of 2012 (CIRA 2016). Although this number contin-
ues to decrease yearly as more technological developments are implemented in rural 
areas, this disparity does hint at the “digital divide” that nevertheless also exists in 
Canada. Moreover, internet access varies between provinces. Whereas British Co-
lumbia and Alberta have the most ­house­holds with internet access at 86 ­percent, 
followed by Ontario at 84 ­percent, ­house­hold access in New Brunswick is the low-
est at 77 ­percent, followed by Quebec and Prince Edward Island, both at 78 ­percent 
(CIRA 2016). In addition, the digital divide is equally manifest among ­those with 
large incomes and ­those with lower incomes: 95 ­percent of Canadians who belong 
to the highest income quartile are connected to the internet, as opposed to 62 ­percent 
of ­those belonging to the lowest income quartile (CIRA 2016).
In addition, the use of social media by Canadians remains relatively similar to 
most of the other industrialized Western nations. According to the Canadian Inter-
net Registration Authority (CIRA), almost 24 million Canadians visited at least one 
social networking site last year. This number translates to 69 ­percent of the Cana-
da’s total population. Facebook remains the most popu­lar social media site in Can-
ada, with its Canadian users increasing by 8 ­percent. This means that more than 
19 million Canadians log on to Facebook at least once a month. In 2013, Pinter-
est’s Canadian users increased by 792 ­percent from the previous year, while Tum-
blr boasted a 96 ­percent increase in Canadian users (CIRA 2016).
In 2015, Forum Research conducted a survey among Canadians who ­were eigh­
teen years and older that investigated their use of social media. It found that Face-
book was the most popu­lar social media site by far (59 ­percent of the respondents 
used it). Canadians visit Facebook approximately nine times each week. Facebook 
is popu­lar with 75 ­percent of the youn­gest ­people surveyed, and 75 ­percent of ­those 
earning between $80,000 and $100,000 Canadian dollars a year use the site. In other 
findings, 70 ­percent of ­mothers of ­children ­under the age of eigh­teen are on Face-
book; 65 ­percent of Quebec residents and 65 ­percent of Francophones, or French-­
language speakers, use it; and 68 ­percent of college and university gradu­ates prefer 
Facebook over all other social media sites (Forum Poll 2015).
The survey found that LinkedIn was the second most popu­lar social media site, 
with 30 ­percent of the respondents using it. Canadians visit LinkedIn approximately 
twice per week. LinkedIn is most popu­lar with middle-­aged Canadians (i.e. forty-­
five to fifty-­four years of age, the so-­called Gen Xers). Further, 46 ­percent of ­those 
earning between 100,000 and 250,000 Canadian dollars a year use LinkedIn; 
36 ­percent of ­mothers of ­children ­under the age of eigh­teen are on LinkedIn; 
39 ­percent of British Columbians use LinkedIn; and 48 ­percent of ­those who have 
received a postgraduate degree prefer LinkedIn over all other social media sites.
Forum Research findings demonstrated that Twitter was the third most popular 
social media site for Canadians, and that 25 ­percent of the respondents used that 
site. Canadians visit Twitter approximately five times each week, and it is popu­lar 
among the youn­gest Canadians surveyed at 36 ­percent. In addition, 31 ­percent of 
­those earning over 80,000 Canadian dollars use Twitter; 29 ­percent of all parents 
reporting in the survey with ­children use the site; 31 ­percent of ­those living in the 
Prairies use it; and 18 ­percent of college and university gradu­ates prefer Twitter over 
all other social media sites.

CANADA
39
Instagram was the fourth most popular social media site for Canadians. Accord-
ing to the survey findings, 16 ­percent of the respondents use Instagram, and Cana-
dians visit the site approximately six times each week. Instagram is popu­lar among 
the youn­gest Canadians, ­those aged eigh­teen to thirty-­four, at 32 ­percent; and 
18 ­percent of ­those earning less than 20,000 Canadian dollars and 18 ­percent of 
­those earning between $80,000–­$100,0000 Canadian dollars use Instagram. Also, 
25 ­percent of ­mothers of ­children ­under eigh­teen are on Instagram; 22 ­percent of 
­those living in the Prairies use it; and 18 ­percent of college and university gradu­
ates prefer Instagram over all other social media sites.
Social media itself is used by Canadians in a number of dif­fer­ent ways. Aside 
from Facebook, social networking, and self-­promotion, Canadians use social me-
dia for news, commerce, politics, and even games. Perhaps the most indicative use 
of social media for po­liti­cal purposes in Canada occurred in the spring of 2012. 
A Quebec student strike of 2012, commonly referred to as “Maple Spring” by pun-
dits, journalists, and regular Canadians, featured the largest display of civil disobe-
dience in Canada, as over 300,000 students protested in the streets of Montreal. 
The Quebec student strike began as the students’ mea­sured response to a proposed 
university tuition fee increase by the provincial government. It quickly escalated, 
with the help of social media, into a social movement that opposed neoliberalism, 
austerity mea­sures, economic injustice, the criminalization of protest, and the cor-
poratization of higher education.
Social media was one of the main tactics used by the striking students alongside 
developing and adhering to a united front by all three student organ­izations in Que-
bec, and the use of both diversity and the escalation of tactics. The diversity and 
escalation of tactics included the use of petitions, the “red square” (a red piece of 
cloth worn by supporters of the movement that symbolized students being in debt, 
or “in the red”), the casseroles (a series of nightly protests that spread to residen-
tial neighborhoods where ­people stood on their balconies and banged on pots and 
pans, a tactic borrowed from protesters in Central Amer­i­ca who used it as a sym-
bol of solidarity), and the MaNUfestation—­other­wise referred to as “the almost 
nude march,” and described as striking students “stripping down to their birthday 
suits and an astonishing array of red underwear” (Sutherland 2012). However, the 
role of social media during the strike should not be understated. It was used in 
conjunction with and in addition to the variety of other tactics utilized by the 
students.
As noted by Laurent Gauthier (1986–), one of the student organizers, Facebook 
allowed the organizers “to get instant feedback and advertise for ­free” (Teruelle 2016, 
167). In fact, many of the student organizers ­were quick to credit Facebook and 
Twitter for helping with the movement. Another student or­ga­nizer, Nadia Lafrenière 
(1991–), shared ­these sentiments, crediting both social networking sites with help-
ing to create “spontaneous actions”: “The night demos (protests/marches) ­were 
started by calls on social media, and then they happened each night . . . ​the slogan 
was ‘each night ­until victory’ . . . ​In the beginning, it was totally spontaneous and 
created through social media by the students, and then ­people knew it was each 
night, so they met at 8 pm at the same places” (Teruelle 2016, 168). In a similar 
fashion, student or­ga­nizer Anne Marie Provost (1983) underscored Facebook’s 

CANADA
40
strength in supporting “spontaneous” and “rapid” organ­ization: “The strategies 
used . . . ​I ­wasn’t involved directly . . . ​but, I think that it was useful for spontane-
ous organ­ization. ­Because Facebook events, like in the strike, it could go viral. So 
in two hours, you could have 6,000 attendees for a big demo. It was a good way to 
wrap up every­body, in one day or two days or three days go to that big demo or go 
to that event. It was ­great for rapid organ­ization” (Teruelle 2016, 168). As evidenced 
by ­these student organizers, both Facebook and Twitter ­were instrumental in help-
ing the students share information, coordinate, and or­ga­nize during Maple Spring.
More recently, surfeit examples of social media being used to or­ga­nize, coordi-
nate, and spread information can be found on the Facebook page of Black Lives 
­Matter Toronto (#BLM TO). On Sunday, July 3, 2016, despite being given the honor 
of being Pride Toronto’s “2016 Honoured Group” and tasked with helping to lead 
the annual LGBTQ’s Pride Parade, #BLM TO staged a sit-in midway through the 
event as a form of protest. Its Facebook page chronicles the group’s actions that 
day, including demands to shut down the parade. Also, a list of the group’s demands 
appeared alongside commentary alluding to the fact that Pride actually began as 
an or­ga­nized response against police brutality.
In a similar fashion, grassroots organ­izations such as the Syrian Refugee Sup-
port Group, which is based in Calgary, Alberta, also utilize social media to their 
advantage. A quick scan of the group’s Facebook page reveals the following 
The movement Black Lives ­Matter Toronto participated as honored guests in the Pride Parade 
2016. Part of the group’s participation included a sit-in demonstration that was coordinated 
almost entirely over the group’s Facebook page. Black Lives ­Matter Toronto successfully used 
social media as a po­liti­cal tool to spread its message, finding that it was the best conduit to 
garner support for its message. (Roberto Machado Noa/LightRocket via Getty Images)

CHILE
41
activities that they have engaged in: the coordination of bicycle donations for Syr-
ian refugee ­children; the coordination of school supplies donated for Syrian refu-
gee ­children; and the coordination of a goodwill soccer match between some of the 
Syrians versus local Calgary police officers. Groups such as #BLM TO and the 
Syrian Refugee Support Group provide concrete examples of how social media is 
being used effectively as both a communications and a po­liti­cal tool by countless 
Canadians.
Although the ste­reo­type of a Canadian is that of an affable individual, many Ca-
nadians are indeed political—­motivated to enact meaningful social change and 
use social media as a communications tool to help further their respective ­causes. 
Certainly, social media is an excellent tool for social movements ­because of one 
­simple yet pragmatic reason: that’s where the ­people are.
Rhon Teruelle
See also: France; Germany; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Black Lives ­Matter Toronto. 2016. Official Facebook Page. Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­
www​.­facebook​.­com​/­blacklivesmatterTO​/­​?­fref​=­ts
Canadian Internet Registration Authority (CIRA). 2016. Factbook. Accessed July 5, 2016. 
https://­cira​.­ca​/­factbook​/­2014​/­index​.­html
Council on Foreign Relations. 2016. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­www​.­cfr​.­org​/­international​
-­organizations​-­and​-­alliances​/­group​-­eight​-­g8​-­industrialized​-­nations​/­p10647
Forum Poll. 2015. Forum Research. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­poll​.­forumresearch​.­com​
/­post​/­213​/­facebook​-­leads​-­in​-­penetration​-­linkedin​-­shows​-­most​-­growth​/­
Statistics Canada. 2016a. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­www65​.­statcan​.­gc​.­ca​/­acyb02​/­1967​
/­acyb02​_­19670186004​-­eng​.­htm
Statistics Canada. 2016b. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­www​.­statcan​.­gc​.­ca​/­tables​-­tableaux​
/­sum​-­som​/­l01​/­cst01​/­demo02a​-­eng​.­htm
Sutherland, A. (2012, May 4). “Nearly Nude Students Take to Montreal’s Streets to Protest 
Tuition Hike.” National Post. May 4. Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­news​.­nationalpost​
.­com​/­news​/­canada​/­nearly​-­nude​-­students​-­take​-­to​-­montreals​-­streets​-­to​-­protest​-­tuition​
-­hike
Teruelle, R. (2016). Social Media, Red Squares, and Other Tactics: The 2012 Québec Student 
Protests. Doctoral dissertation. University of Toronto. Accessed Sept. 7, 2016. https://­
tspace​.­library​.­utoronto​.­ca​/­bitstream​/­1807​/­73206​/­3​/­Teruelle​_­Rhon​_­201606​_­PhD​
_­thesis​.­pdf
CHILE
The Republic of Chile is a long, narrow country that shares the southern cone of 
South Amer­i­ca with Argentina. With a population of 18.1 million, it has one of the 
highest internet penetration rates in Latin Amer­i­ca and, while high-­quality broad-
band is not evenly available in all areas, Chile has one of the fastest connection 
speeds in South Amer­i­ca. Nevertheless, ­there is a rather stark disparity between 
internet access in urban versus rural areas of the country. The Chilean government 

CHILE
42
has implemented programs, such as ­free internet access through WiFiChileGob, to 
help ameliorate this digital divide. YouTube and Facebook are by far the most popu­
lar social media in the country; however, WhatsApp and Line messaging ser­vices 
have taken hold as well.
In mid-2016, Chile had 14.1 million internet users, which totaled about 
78 ­percent of the population. While the past five years have seen slightly more 
growth, in part due to government initiatives, the country’s internet penetration has 
been steadily increasing over time, from 16.6 ­percent in 2000, 31.2 ­percent in 2005, 
and 45 ­percent in 2010 (Internet Live Stats 2016). Chile’s penetration rate is one 
of the highest among South American countries; it is surpassed only by Ec­ua­dor at 
83.8 ­percent and barely by Argentina at 79 ­percent (Internet World Stats 2016).
Average broadband speeds in Chile are some of the fastest in Latin Amer­i­ca at 
7.68 Mbps, which is twice as fast as Brazil (4.88 Mbps) and three times as fast as 
Colombia (2.52 Mbps) and Argentina (2.4 Mbps) (Bryan 2013). The fixed internet 
market, which accounts for about a quarter of internet access, is controlled largely 
by VTR and Movistar. Three companies dominate the mobile internet market in 
Chile: Claro, Movistar (which holds 40.9 ­percent of prepaid plans), and Entel (which 
holds 42.5 ­percent of contract plans) (Subtel 2015). In March 2015, 23.7 million 
cell phones ­were active in Chile; according to the Department of Telecommuni-
cations (Subtel), this represents a 132 ­percent mobile penetration rate (González 
2015). At that time, 77.8 ­percent of internet access occurred using cell phones, 
primarily smartphones.
According to the Minister of Transportation and Telecommunications, the recent 
growth in internet penetration across the country was evidence that the govern-
ment’s initiatives have had a positive effect. ­These proj­ects are meant to close the 
digital divide and make access to the internet more demo­cratic (Subtel 2015). While 
Chile’s internet is one of the fastest and most pervasive in South Amer­i­ca, ­there re-
mains a rather large divide between urban and rural regions. Somewhere between 
10 to 15 ­percent of the country resides in rural areas. This low population density 
is largely due to the phenomenon of young ­people leaving ­these regions to seek 
employment in the cities. Santiago, the capital, is the primary destination for job 
seekers; the greater metropolitan Santiago area now contains nearly 40 ­percent of 
the country’s entire population. As such, rural areas are not attractive markets for 
internet providers, as they are sparsely populated and are usually poorer commu-
nities. However, this disparity negatively affects the Chilean populace by further 
isolating po­liti­cally and socially marginalized communities.
One of the initiatives of the government to improve this situation has been WiFi 
ChileGob, which provides ­free Wi-­Fi hubs across the country. In 2015, it was an-
nounced that 612 of ­these connection hubs would be added to help increase inter-
net access and promote digital inclusion (Subtel 2015). As of mid-2016, WiFi 
ChileGob has established at least four hotspots in most cities and small towns across 
the country (WiFi ChileGob 2016). ­These hotspots allow up to twenty-­five ­people 
to access the internet si­mul­ta­neously for thirty-­minute sessions each.
YouTube is the most visited website in Chile (Alexa 2016). It plays a role in Chil-
ean society in multiple ways. Much like the original content being produced in the 
United States and around the world, Chileans are creating videos. The most 

CHILE
43
successful YouTube personality in Chile also happens to be the second-­ranking You-
Tuber (based on worldwide subscribers), just ­behind PewDiePie (Kang 2015). 
Germán Alejandro Garmendia Aranis (1990–), a comedian, musician, and video-
gamer, has a YouTube site called HolaSoyGerman, with more than 29 million 
subscribers, and he made more than $1 million in 2015 through advertisements. 
His style is very frenetic, ­whether he is performing comedic bits or playing games. 
While HolaSoyGerman is more lucrative, he currently uploads more frequently to 
a second channel, JuegaGerman (14.6 million subscribers), on which he provides 
commentary for video games that he plays.
YouTube has also been a valuable tool in Chile in terms of social justice. The 
Mapuche are an indigenous ­people living in the southern regions of Chile (and 
­Argentina). They are a marginalized ­people with limited po­liti­cal power and impov-
erished communities, and have experienced severe discrimination from the Chil-
ean police force. The mainstream media in Chile often portray the Mapuche as 
violent and dangerous, and rarely provide the opportunity for the Mapuche to 
pres­ent their side. YouTube has been used for nearly a de­cade now as a vehicle to 
pres­ent video productions of Mapuche reporting their side of events that happen in 
the country. However, they also frequently use the site to disseminate short docu-
mentaries and other videos representing their rural communities and cultural 
identity. For example, the channel Adkimvn, which has a complimentary website, 
Facebook page, and Twitter account, hosts Mapuche-­made videos ranging from 
trailers to news coverage to events that take place in Wallmapu (Mapuche terri-
tory). The YouTube channel Kimeltuwe, Materiales de Mapudungun (Mapuche 
Language Materials) focuses on posting videos for the purpose of teaching Mapuzu-
gun, the Mapuche language. Another YouTube channel, Wetruwe Mapuche, mainly 
posts recordings of live Mapuche ­music. In many cases, ­these musicians are per-
forming rap, a genre that has become popu­lar among indigenous ­peoples all over 
the Amer­i­cas to draw attention to their ongoing strug­gles for po­liti­cal recognition, 
rights, and equality.
Facebook is the second-­most-­trafficked social media website in Chile (Alexa 
2016). ­There are about 12 million Facebook subscribers in Chile, many of whom 
like using social media sites on their phones, making it one of the most popu­lar 
smartphone apps. A survey conducted by Motorola and Adimark GFK in Santiago 
reported that 46 ­percent of ­women consider Facebook their favorite app (Amer­i­ca 
Digital 2004). The most popu­lar smartphone apps ­were related to social network-
ing and communications (82 ­percent), followed by games (70 ­percent) and ­music 
(66 ­percent).
Chileans use Facebook mainly to post pictures (62 ­percent), but they also enjoy 
using it to post links (20 ­percent) and videos (16 ­percent) (Socialbakers 2016). The 
vast majority of the time Chilean Facebook users interact with this content by “lik-
ing” the content (95 ­percent), but sometimes they also share (4 ­percent) or com-
ment (1 ­percent). Chileans are much more likely to comment on Twitter posts 
(20 ­percent) than Facebook, although Twitter is not as popu­lar in Chile, ranking 
only eigh­teenth in web traffic (Alexa 2016; Socialbakers 2016).
­After a devastating earthquake of 8.3 magnitude in 2015 that killed at least eight 
­people and evacuated a million more, Chileans used Facebook’s Safety Check 

CHILE
44
feature to check on friends and ­family to make sure that they ­were all right (Gar-
ske 2015). While Chile’s infrastructure is designed to withstand the effects of most 
earthquakes, telecommunications connections are often severely affected ­after 
earthquakes, especially ones of such magnitude, making it impossible for ­those 
affected to call, text, or post a message on social media. Facebook’s Safety Check al-
lows ­those affected to simply click a button to let their Facebook friends know that 
they are safe.
WhatsApp has also become very popu­lar in Chile; it ranks alongside Facebook 
as one of the most downloaded apps for smartphones (Amer­i­ca Digital 2014). 
WhatsApp competes with Line to provide ­free text­ing and calling ser­vices to Chil-
eans. In fact, half of female smartphone ­owners in Santiago report using ­either 
WhatsApp or Line. Interestingly, the term “WhatsApp” has been turned into a verb 
This Mapuche ­woman is playing the kultrun, a traditional drum used ceremonially by machi, 
or spiritual leaders, which is often used online as a symbol of her ­people’s cultural identity. 
Inhabiting the southern regions of Chile and Argentina, the Mapuche are a marginalized indig-
enous ­people who have endured tremendous discrimination and have historically been denied 
a public voice. YouTube has become a power­ful tool, allowing them to challenge mainstream 
media repre­sen­ta­tions about who they are, and to draw attention to their ongoing strug­gle for 
po­liti­cal recognition and social equality. (Marcelo Vildósola Garrigó​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

CHINA
45
in Chile. One may frequently hear the phrase “Wazapéame!” (abbreviated “Wz-
pme”), which means “WhatsApp me!” in Spanish (Amer­i­ca Digital 2014).
The only nationally produced websites in Chile that rank in the top ten most 
popu­lar websites are news sites: Biobiochile, Emol, and Lun (Las Últimas Noticias) 
(Alexa 2016). However, Taringa! (the Reddit-­like forum out of Argentina) ranks 
­fourteenth, Twitter ranks nineteenth, and Instagram ranks nineteenth.
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Argentina; Brazil; Colombia; Ec­ua­dor; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Chile.” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­CL
Amer­i­ca Digital. 2004. “Facebook and WhatsApp Are Chile’s Favorite Smartphone Apps.” 
Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­congreso​.­chile​-­digital​.­com​/­english​/­whatsapp​-­face​
book​-­chiles​-­favorite​-­smartphone​-­apps​/­
Bryan, Mason. 2013. “Chile’s Internet Speed Fastest in Latin Amer­i­ca.” Santiago Times, 
­October  26. Accessed August  27, 2016. http://­santiagotimes​.­cl​/­2013​/­10​/­26​/­chiles​
-­internet​-­speed​-­fastest​-­in​-­latin​-­america​/­
Garske, Monica. 2015. “Facebook’s ‘Safety Check’ Feature Used in Aftermath of 8.3-­Magnitude 
Chile Earthquake.” NBC San Diego, September 18. http://­www​.­nbcsandiego​.­com​/­news​
/­local​/­Chile​-­Earthquake​-­Facebook​-­Safety​-­Check​-­Santiago​-­328086861​.­html
González, Francisco. 2015. “Subtel: 77% de Lasconexiones a Internet Son a Través del 
Celular.” La Tercera, June 13. Accessed 28, 2016. http://­www​.­latercera​.­com​/­noticia​
/­negocios​/­2015​/­06​/­655​-­634150​-­9​-­subtel​-­77​-­de​-­las​-­conexiones​-­a​-­internet​-­son​-­a​-­traves​
-­del​-­celular​.­shtml
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Chile Internet Users.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­chile​/­
Internet World States. 2016. “Internet Penetration in South Amer­i­ca, June 30, 2016.” Ac-
cessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats15​.­htm
Kang, Cecilia. 2015. “The Real Reasons Why YouTube’s 5 Biggest Stars Became Millionaires.” 
Washington Post, July 23. Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​
/­news​/­the​-­switch​/­wp​/­2015​/­07​/­23​/­how​-­these​-­5​-­youtube​-­stars​-­became​-­millionaires​
-­and​-­why​-­you​-­wont​-­be​-­joining​-­them​-­anytime​-­soon​/­
Socialbakers. 2016. “March 2016 Social Marketing Report Chile.” Accessed August 28, 2016. 
https://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­resources​/­reports​/­chile​/­2016​/­march​/­
Subtel. 2015. “Penetración de Internet en Chile Alcanza los 64,2 Accesosporcada 100 Ha-
bitantes.” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­subtel​.­gob​.­cl​/­penetracion​-­de​-­internet​
-­en​-­chile​-­alcanza​-­los​-­642​-­accesos​-­por​-­cada​-­100​-­habitantes​/­
Worldometers. 2016. “Chile Population (Live).” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​
.­worldometers​.­info​/­world​-­population​/­chile​-­population​/­
ZonaWiFiChileGob. 2016. “Bienvenido a la ZonaWiFiChileGob.” Accessed August 28, 2016. 
http://­www​.­wifigob​.­cl​/­
CHINA
China, one of the world’s largest countries in terms of landmass, is located in East 
Asia and is officially known as the ­People’s Republic of China (PRC). It has the 

CHINA
46
largest population in the world with over 1.3 billion ­people. While the PRC was 
not one of the early adopters of the internet, it now boasts the world’s largest on-
line population, with over 650 million ­people using some 700 million connected 
devices. Internet usage was initially limited to a few computer research labs ­until 
the government developed its own infrastructure for official use in the early 1990s. 
By the latter half of the de­cade, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) had deci­ded 
to reap the economic benefits of cyberspace and began a massive campaign to bulk 
up infrastructure across the country. Since then, China’s internet usage has experi-
enced explosive growth, particularly with the advent of mobile computing and the 
rise of smart devices.
As the PRC’s internet has expanded from a largely academic tool to an engine of 
economic growth, so too has the population of internet users, or “netizens” (网友). 
Early users ­were typically well-­educated, urban males, even as the use of the inter-
net expanded beyond the initial research labs. This was mainly due to the expenses 
associated with acquiring a computer and an internet connection; it was not ­until 
the rise of internet cafés and drastic increases in disposable income that the demo-
graphics of China’s online community began to reflect that of the country as a ­whole. 
Lowered barriers to entry have allowed for the exponential growth of internet us-
age among lower-­income groups, particularly among young students.
While wealthier knowledge brokers still tend to be the heaviest internet users, 
young gamers between the ages of 19 and 25 make up the bulk of social media 
users and thus tend to have the most influential voices on online forums (CNNIC 
2015).
Even now, however, Chinese netizens are more likely to be young males living 
in medium-­sized to large cities. Despite having a staggering number of internet 
­users, less than half of China’s population has access to the internet. The lack of 
Many ­people visit an internet cafe in Chengdu, China, to surf the web and play online games. 
Internet cafes have become an integral part of Chinese online culture, to the extent that some 
customers have been known to stay for long hours, or even days, at a time. To combat online 
addiction and to ensure the ­people’s safety, the government has been imposing stricter regula-
tions on café ­owners. (Piero Cruciatti​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

CHINA
47
internet penetration in rural areas in par­tic­u­lar is primarily due to the CCP’s con-
trol over the nation’s internet infrastructure. Six state-­owned internet operators 
strictly control access to internet bandwidth. Three telecom corporations (China 
Telecom, China Unicom, and China Mobile), along with three government net-
works (China Science and Technology Network, China Education and Research 
Network, and China International Economy and Trade Net), jointly maintain a 
mono­poly on the country’s backbone of fiber optic networks. State control has al-
lowed the PRC to invest billions in rapidly developing this network while still 
maintaining control over the spread of information.
Much of China’s online activity actually takes place within a closed, hierarchical 
intranet. The largest portion of this network is dedicated to domestic traffic between 
users of the same internet operator. For information to be shared between the op-
erators (and thus across the entire country), internet connections have to be routed 
through one of three network access points (NAPs). Fi­nally, any information that 
enters or leaves the country has to connect through one of the three gateways op-
erated by Telecom and Unicom in Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou. ­These con-
secutive levels of centralized network access, along with a centrally channeled 
connection to the global internet, create multiple points for the government’s cen-
sors to limit (and even block) certain activities.
This censorship of the Chinese internet is a complex issue. The CCP maintains 
a strict control on anything that can potentially mobilize social forces and under-
mine the authority of the state. Along with the state’s ­family planning policies, the 
censorship of the government is one of the greatest examples of the Chinese gov-
ernment’s direct involvement in the lives of its citizens. While other countries have 
had to address burgeoning social movements and the vari­ous issues arising from a 
hyperconnected society, the CCP has both limited the impact that the internet has 
had on Chinese netizens and used it to strengthen its own control. Early analyses 
of Chinese netizens indicated that they ­were more politicized and open to infor-
mation that had not been filtered through government sources. As a result, many 
external observers have expressed the hope that the internet would be a tool to help 
de­moc­ra­tize China by providing unfettered access to information and allowing pre-
viously unheard voices to become very vocal (Lei 2011). However, the CCP has 
proven very ­adept at addressing ­these issues and manipulating online discourses 
in its ­favor.
Part of the reason that the CCP has been so ­adept at controlling the internet is 
that its censorship is both reactive and proactive. At its most basic level, the Chi-
nese internet is shielded from foreign influence by the Golden Shield Proj­ect 
(金盾工程)—­often referred to as the “­Great Firewall of China”—­a series of hard-
ware and software ele­ments built into the nation’s internet infrastructure that filter 
out key words and websites that have been identified as potentially subversive. 
While internet usage is largely monitored and controlled by the Ministry of Indus-
try and Information Technology, the Ministry of Public Security and the Publicity 
Department of the CCP provide guidance on what information users should and 
should not be allowed to access. Domestically, this system is backed up by legisla-
tion that has established licensing requirements for websites to operate legally and 

CHINA
48
holds the ­owners responsible for maintaining proper content (Feng and Guo 
2013). As with more traditional media outlets, fines and prison sentences against 
violators have compelled many internet users to police themselves.
As impressive as China’s system of blocking unfavorable content is, its system of 
editing existing content and promoting certain ideals is even more extensive. In 
addition to blocking specific websites, censorship software actively scans articles, 
blog posts, and even comment threads against an ever-­changing list of sensitive 
terms to identify and edit out potentially harmful statements. While the exact par­
ameters of what this software is looking for is not public knowledge, researchers 
have found that it is nuanced enough to allow limited criticism of government pol-
icy, while deleting any potential references to calls for collective action (King et al. 
2014). The government has become even more proactive in recent years by hiring 
internet commentators to publish websites, articles, and even comments on online 
forums that promote a positive view of the CCP. Known as the “50 Cent Party” 
(五毛党) for the supposed fee that they are paid per internet post, ­these commenta-
tors are a new way for the government to guide public opinion. The exact number 
of paid commentators is unknown; however, since large websites are required to 
train their own internal teams to direct online discussions in order to operate le-
gally, they are estimated to be in the tens of thousands. The government has also 
started to sponsor the creation of a parallel “­Water Army” (网络水军), where pro-
files designed to resemble normal users are actually programmed to post preap-
proved statements on vari­ous social media (Yu, Asur, and Huberman 2015). While 
most savvy Chinese netizens are scornful of ­these paid commentaries and are quick 
to call out posts that they think are sponsored by the CCP, the sheer number of 
such users serves to muddy any potential discourse critical of the government.
It is difficult to determine the extent of the impact of censorship on the nature 
of discourse within China’s online forums. Early analy­sis of Chinese netizens indi-
cated that they ­were more critical of government and willing to voice dissent; how-
ever, the “democ­ratization” of the internet has allowed a number of previously 
unheard voices to become very vocal, many of which approve of the CCP and its 
policies. At the same time, the government’s most ardent critics have had to be-
come more nuanced in vocalizing their concerns in order to evade censors. Ini-
tially, this was largely accomplished through vari­ous linguistic tricks. Netizens often 
used homophones or pidgin En­glish to replace potentially offensive words with 
more benign terms that censorship software would often let pass. Nevertheless, in-
creasingly sophisticated censorship techniques, alongside a constantly updated list 
of key terms, have limited the effectiveness of this tactic, with even seemingly in-
nocuous terms like “Grass Mud Horse,” “River Crab,” and “Jasmine” blocked tem-
porarily due to their connection to vari­ous protests (Byer 2015).
Eventually, this method fell out of ­favor, and most netizens who wish to escape 
the ­Great Firewall use virtual private networks (VPNs) to access international sites 
through remote logins or the Tor anonymity network to disguise their identity. Even 
though both of ­these methods are frequently subject to blocking by the ­Great Fire-
wall, they have led to an essentially hollowing-­out of the Chinese internet. ­Those 
who are content to operate within the confines of China’s censors remain the largest 

CHINA
49
users of local blogging ser­vices and social media sites, while dissidents have become 
a more globalized community that prefer overseas diaspora forums, where they 
can access unfiltered news sources and freely share their ideas with a receptive 
audience. While this has had the intended effect of removing critics, it has also 
served to create an overblown sense of government support, even for unpop­u­lar 
public policies.
This separation of netizens into a more global-­minded community, interested in 
the international internet, and ­those willing to operate within the Chinese intranet 
has had a profound impact not only on the nation’s po­liti­cal discourse, but also on 
the cyber economy. As mentioned earlier, the fact that the demographics of Chi-
nese netizens skew younger has had an impact on how the internet is used in China. 
The vast majority of users now access the internet through mobile devices like 
smartphones and tablets, and they are also active users of social media. Limited 
access to international sites like Facebook and Google have led domestic compa-
nies to create a native set of websites meant to mimic the functions of their foreign 
counter­parts. Some of ­these indigenous sites have formidable audiences; for in-
stance, Tencent QQ, an instant messaging ser­vice coupled with online shopping 
and microblogging, claims 830 million active users—­nearly ­triple the number of 
Twitter users in China. Even niche sites like Jiayuan, a dating ser­vice, and Douban, 
for hobbyists, claim over 100 million users (Millward 2013).
The creation of a robust, native intranet has played well into the CCP’s attempts 
to shift the nation’s economic reliance upon export-­driven growth to domestic con-
sumption. Even though the PRC was able to weather the 2009 financial crisis, the 
­Great Recession proved that Chinese manufacturing was extremely vulnerable to 
shocks to the international economy. Bolstering domestic spending is seen as a way 
to continue to drive China’s economic growth, and the cyber economy is seen as 
the best way to convince Chinese shoppers to spend their savings. Online retailers 
have proven critical in shaping the attitudes of Chinese consumers; brands are aware 
that internet-­savvy shoppers research for the best deal and no longer adhere to a 
single brand. Furthermore, e-­commerce holidays like Singles’ Day, on November 11, 
have proven enormously successful, bringing in profits that dwarf ­those of similar 
events in the United States.
Government departments like the previously mentioned Ministry of Informa-
tion Technology and Industry are not only bolstering ­these online marketplaces 
through new business-­friendly regulations, they are also pushing ­these companies 
The first Chinese social media world rec­ord was set by Lu Han (1990–), a Chinese 
pop star. Back in September 2012, Lu Han posted about his love for Manchester 
United. His post received more than 13 million responses through August 2014, the 
highest response rate to date on China’s Weibo platform. The Guinness Book of World 
Rec­ords confirmed the achievement, making Lu Han the first-­ever recipient of a veri-
fied Chinese social media world rec­ord. Lu Han is a former member of the Asian 
boyband EXO and is now working on his acting ­career (Lynch 2015).

CHINA
50
to revamp China’s nascent tech sector. Much as manufacturing was able to lift mil-
lions of Chinese citizens out of poverty, recent government white papers on cyber 
policy have suggested that building up the nation’s tech industry could create an 
even larger ­middle class. In addition to writing new regulations regarding online 
banking and real estate transactions, ­there has even been a push to expand inter-
net coverage by further extending existing infrastructure into rural areas and sim-
plifying the language used in online documents.
This dichotomy of attempting to limit the social impact of the internet while still 
reaping its economic benefits carries over to the CCP’s distinction between pro-
moting a secure domestic intranet and exploiting flaws in the global internet to 
launch cyberattacks against foreign countries. China, like many other nations, has 
been engaging in cyber espionage for years; some of the culprits are believed to be 
private businesses attempting to get ahead of their foreign competition, while ­others 
are explic­itly backed by the government. In 2011, the ­People’s Liberation Army 
(PLA) established a cyberwarfare group whose nominal purpose is to defend Chi-
nese servers from foreign attacks. However, the U.S. government has officially de-
clared China-­based cyberattacks to be advanced, per­sis­tent, and ongoing; and given 
the fact that recent attacks have targeted the U.S. military’s advanced systems, it is 
largely assumed that they emanate from the PLA (Brownlee 2015).
Cyberspace in China is a rapidly changing place, full of contradictions. Even as 
the government promotes the expansion of the internet to an ever-­wider audience, 
young male students remain the most vocal users. Although the CCP purposefully 
limits expression on online forums, it also believes that the freedom of information 
provided by the internet has the potential to drastically revamp its economy by bol-
stering consumerism and a nascent tech sector. Despite the fact that China fiercely 
guards its domestic intranet from foreign meddling, the Chinese military has proven 
itself willing and able to conduct serious cyberattacks against other countries. While 
the PRC may be able to keep ­these competing interests in balance for the time be-
ing, the sheer growth of its online community means that it ­will eventually have to 
address ­these very pressing concerns.
Jonathan Dixon
See also: Japan; South Korea; Vietnam
Further Reading
Brownlee, Lia. 2015. “China-­Based Cyber Attacks on US Military are ‘Advanced, Per­sis­tent, 
and Ongoing’: Report.” Accessed December 13, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​
/­lisabrownlee​/­2015​/­09​/­17​/­chinese​-­cyber​-­attacks​-­on​-­us​-­military​-­interests​-­confirmed​
-­as​-­advanced​-­persistent​-­and​-­ongoing​/­
Byer, Kelly. 2015. “Jumping the ­Great Firewall: Social Media Among China’s Youth.” Ac-
cessed December 13, 2015. http://­internationalstorytelling​.­org​/­china​/­scaling​-­the​-­great​
-­internet​-­wall​/­
China Internet Network Information. 2015. “Statistical Report on Internet Development in 
China.” Accessed December 13, 2015. http://­www1​.­cnnic​.­cn​/­IDR​/­ReportDownloads​
/­201507​/­P020150720486421654597​.­pdf

CHINA: HONG KONG
51
Feng, Guangchao Charles, and ZhongshiGuo, Steve. 2013. “Tracing the Route of China’s 
Internet Censorship: An Empirical Study.” Telematics and Informatics, 30: 335–345.
King, Gary, Pan, Jennifer, and Roberts Margaret E. 2014. “Reverse-­Engineering Censorship in 
China: Randomized Experimentation and Participant Observation.” Science, 345: 1–10.
Lei, Ya-­wen. 2011. “The Po­liti­cal Consequences of the Internet: Po­liti­cal Beliefs and Prac-
tices of Chinese Netizens.” Po­liti­cal Communication, 28: 291–322.
Millward, Steven. 2015. “Check out the Numbers on China’s Top 10 Social Media Sites.” 
Accessed December 13, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​/­2013​-­china​-­top​-­10​-­social​
-­sites​-­infographic​/­
World Bank. 2015. “China.” Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­country​
/­china
CHINA: HONG KONG
Officially called the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the ­People’s Re-
public of China, Hong Kong was a British colony ­until 1997 and is now an au-
tonomous territory located south of mainland China. With 7.2 million residents, 
Hong Kong is the world’s fourth most densely populated sovereign territory. Rooted 
in a society that had a free-­market system due to its being a British colony, Hong 
Kong takes pride in its long-­standing colonial history of press freedom and signifi-
cant degree of civil liberties. Hong Kong’s transition to Chinese government con-
trol in 1997 required the region to transform its po­liti­cal and social institutions 
rapidly. Its mass media, previously a symbol of modern capitalism, has gradually 
needed to adapt itself, both culturally and ideologically, to accommodate China’s 
more restrictive social and po­liti­cal policies (Lee 2000). ­These changes in media 
organ­izations’ po­liti­cal positions, however dramatic, did not occur overnight ­after 
being officially returned to mainland China. Constrained by the promise of one 
country, two systems, the Chinese government did not continuously interfere with 
Hong Kong, and it chose not to impose the same degree of media censorship on 
the territory that it instilled across the rest of the country (Fung 2007).
Internet user growth across the Asia-­Pacific region directly correlates with the 
growing popularity of smartphones and their rapid assimilation regionwide. How-
ever, the growth in Hong Kong has been saturated over the years. As of 2016, Hong 
Kong has 4.8 million smartphone users, a figure equal to 80.7 ­percent of the pop-
ulation. While the penetration rate is slightly ­behind South ­Korea, Taiwan, and 
­Japan, it is about equal to the top three in the region (Emarketer 2016). As a result 
of high-­speed internet and advanced telecommunications infrastructure imple-
mented in the city, 96 ­percent of Hong Kong smartphone users browse the internet 
daily via mobile—­the highest rate in Asia. As for the region’s use of vari­ous lan-
guages, traditional Chinese (the complicated form of Chinese used for Hong 
Kong’s Chinese dialects, such as Cantonese) remains the most popu­lar, followed 
by En­glish, traditional Chinese (the complicated form of Chinese used to repre-
sent Taiwan’s Chinese dialects, such as Mandarin), and subsequently, simplified 
Chinese used in mainland China (Go-­globe 2016).
As a Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong is exempt from the internet re-
strictions imposed on the rest of mainland China, particularly the ­Great Firewall 

CHINA: HONG KONG
52
and site blocking. ­Because of the 
looser internet policies, social 
media and app penetration is 
more diverse and competitive 
than that of North Amer­i­ca. 
Facebook, along with other so-
cial network platforms, are 
blocked in China, but they are 
accessible in Hong Kong. Social 
media ­giants in China, such as 
Ren-­Ren 
(literally 
meaning 
“­people” in Mandarin Chinese, 
this site is akin to Facebook) and 
SinaWeibo (akin to Twitter), are 
also extremely popu­lar in Hong 
Kong due to its increasing inte-
gration with China. With such a 
wide variety of social network 
platforms to keep up with, it is 
normal to see ­people enjoying 
their daily activities, such as cy-
cling or walking, while text­ing in 
Hong Kong. And it is common 
to hear a public ser­vice an-
nouncement for ­people to ob-
serve their surroundings rather 
than their mobile phones while 
performing tasks such as riding 
an escalator.
Despite a wide range of social media platforms available to ­people in Hong Kong, 
Facebook is overwhelmingly the most popu­lar social network. A TNS survey de-
termined that Hong Kong has at least 4.4 million ­people on Facebook, equal to 
more than half of the area’s population using the platform (Go-­globe 2016). Al-
most half of ­these users, or approximately 44 ­percent, utilize Facebook as their first 
point of contact for keeping up with impor­tant news. Of the platform’s 4.4 million 
active users, around 70 ­percent (3.1 million ­people) log on to Facebook daily. Most 
users stay online for at least 30 minutes per unique visit. WhatsApp earns the sec-
ond spot; however, the tenure of this position remains to be seen. Since Facebook 
acquired WhatsApp, the com­pany has initiated changes that appear to be loosen-
ing WhatsApp’s historical policy of excluding advertisements; ­these changes, along 
with the site’s usage in local protests against the government that have placed the 
site ­under scrutiny, make it unclear if WhatsApp can retain its position as the second 
most popular platform. WhatsApp is currently the preferred site for public relations 
and media personalities working in Hong Kong’s Chinese-­language media arena 
(Emarketer 2016).
In August 2016, hundreds gathered in the Tin Shui 
Wai district of Hong Kong to play Pokémon Go. This 
augmented real­ity game for mobile devices, released 
just a month earlier by Niantic, caught on rapidly and 
became popu­lar all over the world. (Yiu Tung Lee​/­​
Dreamstime​.­com)

CHINA: HONG KONG
53
SinaWeibo is the third most popular social platform. The site’s popularity stems 
from the fact that China blocks Western social media platforms on the rest of the 
mainland through its ­Great Firewall. SinaWeibo facilitates social media communi-
cations with the largest audience of Chinese ­people (Stecklow 2016). The Chinese 
government’s preference for only allowing indigenous platforms has allowed them 
to dominate the world’s most populous nation. Along ­these same lines, SinaWe-
ibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter, functions all across China, whereas Twitter 
is accessible only in less restricted areas such as Hong Kong (Go-­globe 2016). 
However, SinaWeibo’s high penetration rate in Hong Kong is not solely a prod-
uct of Chinese internet policy; it is also correlated to the fact that it is highly used 
by well-­known and followed personalities, ranging from celebrities to government 
officials and business elites. In addition, sites like Tencent’s WeChat (called 
“Weixin,” or “micro-­message” in Mandarin Chinese), is at its simplest form a 
multifunctional platform that includes social media and voice communications, 
text ser­vices, and online gaming, similar to other platforms. It also has some 
unique functionality, such as allowing users to join large groups of up to 500 and 
allowing them to access “city ser­vices,” which are available to users located in 
specific urban areas (Emarketer 2016). The platform has become quite significant, 
as it has successfully integrated with a banking and payment system, referred to as 
the “wallet,” that connects users’ credit cards to their accounts and allows them to 
pay for ser­vices via their WeChat accounts. In some areas, users can make and pay 
for doctor’s appointments and ride-­sharing ser­vices.
With Hong Kong having such significant internet and social media penetration 
rates, the social media landscape is always in flux. Hong Kong, in par­tic­u­lar, is in 
a unique space at the crossroads of Western and Chinese social media and com-
munications innovations, where citizens can enjoy the best of both worlds. In some 
ways, Hong Kong has access to more online communications media than other parts 
of the world, and the trends from the region, while similar to other Asian nations 
at the moment, could markedly change in the ­future. Twitter, for instance, opened 
a Hong Kong office in early 2015; Line, the largest social media player in Japan, 
South ­Korea, and Taiwan, has slowly gained popularity; and LinkedIn has slowly 
come to dominate the business and ­career online space.
Hong-­Chi Shiau
See also: China; China: Macau; Japan; South ­Korea; Taiwan; United Kingdom
Further Reading
Emarketer. 2016. “Asia-­Pacific Boasts More than 1 Billion Smartphone Users: China, the 
World’s No. 1 Smartphone Market, Is Beginning to Mature.” Accessed August 1, 2016. 
http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Asia​-­Pacific​-­Boasts​-­More​-­Than​-­1​-­Billion​-­Smartphone​
-­Users​/­1012984#sthash​.­WtABffED​.­dpuf
Fung, Anthony. 2007. “Po­liti­cal Economy of Hong Kong Media: Producing a Hegemonic 
Voice.” Asian Journal of Communication, 17(2), 159–171.
Go-­globe. 2016. “Social Media Usage in Hong Kong: Statistics and Trends: 2016.” Accessed 
August 1, 2016. http://­www​.­go​-­globe​.­hk​/­blog​/­social​-­media​-­hong​-­kong​/­

CHINA: MACAU
54
Lee, Chin-­Chuan. 2000. “The Paradox of Po­liti­cal Economy: Media Structure, Press Free-
dom, and Regime Change in Hong Kong.” In Power, money, and media: communication 
patterns and bureaucratic control in cultural China, edited by Chin-­chuan Lee. Evanston, 
IL: Northwestern University Press, 238–336.
Socialbakers. 2016. “June 2016 Social Marketing Report Hong Kong Social Media Use in 
Hong Kong: Statistics and Trends.” Accessed July 17, 2016. https://­www​.­socialbakers​
.­com​/­resources​/­reports​/­hong​-­kong​/­2016​/­june​/­
Stecklow, Sam. 2016. “How China’s Biggest Social Network Works with the Government.” 
New York Magazine, March. Accessed July 17, 2016. http://­nymag​.­com​/­selectall​/­2016​
/­03​/­how​-­weibo​-­works​-­with​-­the​-­chinese​-­government​-­to​-­censor​.­html
CHINA: MACAU
Macau, also spelled Macao, is a Special Autonomous Region of the ­People’s Repub-
lic of China, located across from Hong Kong on the Pearl River Delta. The signifi-
cance of Macau can easily be underrated, which is why this section singles out 
Macau to shed light on its unique history and social po­liti­cal environment. ­Here 
are three facts about Macau that might not be common knowledge (BBC 2013):
•	 With a size thirty-­nine times smaller than Hong Kong, Macau is the most densely 
populated region in the world.
•	 Macau was the last remaining Eu­ro­pean colony in Asia ­until late 1999, and it had 
long been administered by the Portuguese Empire.
•	 Macau has maintained one of the most open economies worldwide since being rein-
tegrated into China in 1999.
Macau’s economy thrives on tourism, specifically gambling, which was legalized 
in the nineteenth ­century and has continued to be an integral source of govern-
ment revenue. The tax revenue from Macau’s robust gambling industry has en-
abled the government to institute a number of social welfare programs, including 
the initiative to provide all Macau citizens with fifteen years of ­free education (Bar-
boza 2007). However, Macau’s Chinese casino capitalism comes at a price: while 
the gambling industry “stimulates economic growth, provides employment, and 
strengthens the post-­colonial state,” it also widens the income gap between the 
rich and the poor and enables addictive gambling (Lo 2009, 19).
Against the backdrop of the aforementioned dialectical social po­liti­cal tenden-
cies, Macau reportedly has the highest “media density” in the world—­nine Chinese-­
language dailies, three Portuguese-­language dailies, two English-­language dailies, 
and about half a dozen Chinese-­language weeklies and one Portuguese-­language 
weekly. Macau is prob­ably the most saturated smartphone market across the world. 
The majority of the country’s internet users go online via mobile phone (Social-
bakers 2016). Also heavi­ly influenced by its casino capitalism, its social media sys-
tem has been the most diverse—­with Weibo and Zenzen for its connection with 
Chinese visitors, and Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube as well, with additional grow-
ing user bases on Viber, WhatsApp, Line, WeChat, and BeeTalk outside the ­Chinese 
circle (Socialbakers 2016). According to a Creativity, Solution, Growth (CSG) re-
search report, one conclusion suggested that despite the popularity of smartphones, 

COLOMBIA
55
individuals’ intention to purchase a new one in the near ­future is low, possibly due 
to the lack of new innovations in the market (CSG 2013). By 2013, most Macau 
residents possessed at least one smartphone, while tablet owner­ship reached half 
of all ­house­holds. Consumers spent an average of 28 ­percent of their time online—­
around forty-­seven hours per week (CSG 2013). Social media browsing via smart-
phone is becoming as frequent as browsing the internet overall. The use of tablets 
for online activities is still not evident in 2016.
Hong-­Chi Shiau
See also: China; China: Hong Kong; Taiwan
Further Reading
Barboza, David. 2007. “Asian Rival Moves Past Las Vegas.” New York Times, January 24. Ac-
cessed August 2, 2016. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2007​/­01​/­24​/­business​/­worldbusiness​
/­24macao​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
BBC News. 2013. “Macau Profile—­Media.” BBC News, January 21. Accessed August 8, 2016. 
http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­asia​-­pacific​-­16599928
Creativity, Solution, Growth (CSG) Research Report. 2013. “Macau Smartphone Market Re-
search.” Accessed August 1, 2016. http://­www​.­csg​-­worldwide​.­com​/­csg​/­wp​-­content​/­up​
loads​/­2014​/­01​/­Macau​-­Mobile​-­and​-­Social​-­Media​-­Report​-­Dec​-­2013​.­pdf​?­phpMyAdmin​
=­d1bb9c7d2d321d9948e75af396f89348
Lo, Sonny. 2009. “Casino Capitalism and Its Legitimacy Impact on the Politico-­Administrative 
State in Macau.” Journal of Current Chinese Affairs, 38, 1:19–44.
Socialbakers. 2016. “Macao Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed August 2, 2016. https://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­macao​/­
COLOMBIA
Colombia is a country of roughly 48 million ­people situated in the northwest por-
tion of South Amer­i­ca. In the mid-1990s, the internet user base in the country grew 
slowly, but it has subsequently grown to half the population. Many users still ac-
cess the internet from community centers, but mobile access is growing and gov-
ernment support of internet use is both generous and pervasive. Personal and 
journalistic freedoms are strongly protected, and yet sanctions for defamation and 
libel are severe.
Internet connectivity first came to Colombia in June 1994, when a handful of 
corporations and universities created the INTERRED–CETCOL (Red Nacional de 
Ciencia, Educación y Tecnología) that connected the United States to the Univer-
sity of Los Andes also called Uniandes (Lu 2010). In 1995, Colombia had 0.2 in-
ternet users for ­every 100 citizens. That number slowly ­rose to 1.1 in 1998 and 
then doubled by the year 2000 to 2.2. Between the years 2001 and 2005, the per-
centage of internet users ­rose from 2.9 ­percent to 11.0 ­percent. A steady increase 
in the number of internet users continued, as it ­rose to 15.3 ­percent in 2006, 
21.8 ­percent in 2007, and ultimately 36.5 ­percent in 2010 (World Bank 2016).
Vive Digital (Live Digital), a national campaign to expand the use and access 
to the internet throughout Colombia, was launched in 2010. It had a drastic and 

COLOMBIA
56
beneficial effect on the scale of internet usage. Broadband connections went from 
3.1 million installations in 2010 to 9.9 million installations by the ­middle of 
2014. Small business and medium sized business use of the internet ­rose from 
7 ­percent in 2010 to more than 60 ­percent in 2014, and Colombian municipal 
internet usage grew from 17 ­percent to 96 ­percent in that same period (Vega 
2015). The total number of internet users went from 40.4 ­percent in 2011 to 
52.6 ­percent by 2015 (World Bank 2016).
Infrastructure in rural areas was key to the Vive Digital campaign. Nearly 900 
internet access centers (community centers with access to the internet) and 7,621 
kiosks (computers installed in ­family homes, community centers, drugstores, 
schools, or shops) ­were installed from 2010 to 2015 (Vega 2015). Community 
­centers, known as Los Centros Tecnológicos Comunitarios, are buildings situ-
ated in rural areas to bring the internet to citizens who live outside cities or ur-
ban areas.
Accessibility for the disabled helps to bring the internet to ­those with visual or 
hearing impairments. Over 77,000 ­free licenses for screen readers and text-­
magnifying software ­were provided to visually impaired users, and the hearing 
impaired ­were provided with centers to help them communicate with text chat or 
video (Vega 2015).
Despite ­these improvements in infrastructure, a marked slowdown in the expan-
sion of internet to the remaining population persisted in 2014, partly ­because only 
11 ­percent of ­house­holds had personal computers (Freedom House 2014). In 2015, 
though, internet penetration reached 53 ­percent in spite of the slowdown. Barriers 
to greater access stem from socioeconomic ­factors such as lack of funds or access 
to developed urban areas. Infrastructure still has not reached all rural areas, and 
technology prices are still beyond the reach of much of the population (Freedom 
House 2015).
Facebook may be helping break through some of ­these barriers. According to 
Mark Zuckerberg (1984–), chief executive officer (CEO) of Facebook, only 
50 ­percent of Colombians have access to the internet. Therefore, Facebook intro-
duced its Internet​.­org app in Colombia, making it the first Latin American country 
to receive it to give more Colombians the opportunity to gain access to the internet 
(Murphy 2015). The average internet speed in 2015 was 3.7 Mbps, and a majority 
of internet users accessed the internet from cybercafés or education centers (Free-
dom House 2015). However, increased home and mobile use has reduced ­people’s 
need to use ­these public facilities (ICT Ministry 2013).
Mobile internet may be the key to allowing the remaining 47 ­percent of citizens 
who currently do not have access to the internet to go online, as mobile phones 
are increasingly used to access the internet, but the disparity between ­those mobile 
users who have subscription plans and ­those who have pay-­as-­you-go plans may 
indicate that socioeconomic ­factors still play a role in limiting internet access where 
land-­based digital subscriber line (DSL) ser­vice cannot reach. In 2015, approxi-
mately 5.6 million mobile internet users (12 ­percent of the entire population of 
Colombia) had subscription plans, and 21.4 million mobile internet users had pay-­
as-­you-go plans (Freedom House 2015). A 2014 survey of the ­people who did not 
have internet in their homes revealed that 44 ­percent of them list high prices as the 

COLOMBIA
57
reason why they do not have access. The average price per month for internet ac-
cess is $19.80, yet the minimum ­legal monthly wage is $260.00, which means that 
internet access is too costly for ­people in the lowest socioeconomic class (Freedom 
House 2015).
Cost is not the only barrier, though. More than half of Colombia’s landmass is 
comprised of the southern regions of Amazonas, Vaupés, Vichada, Guainía, and 
Guaviare, which are rural areas. Even though a small percentage of the Colombian 
population lives in that southern region, the indigenous languages spoken ­there 
are not accounted for in internet apps or websites (Freedom House 2015).
Of all internet websites, Facebook and Twitter are widely used social media. 
­Colombia ranks ­fourteenth in the world in number of Facebook users (15 million) 
and the city of Bogotá ranks as the ninth city in the world in terms of internet use, 
with 6.5 million users (MINTIC 2016). The city of Medellín has 2.5 million users, 
Cali has 1.6 million users, and Barranquilla has 1.2 million users. Between May 2014 
and May 2015, the total number of Facebook users nationwide grew by 2 million. 
By the year 2015, the total number of Facebook and Twitter users reached 24 million 
(Abad 2015). Approximately 6 million internet users use Twitter, which has be-
come the premier method of communication for po­liti­cal campaigns, sports, and 
government officeholders. This usage places Colombia above France and Germany 
in terms of Twitter popularity (MINTIC 2016).
The gender divide among Facebook users is even at 50 ­percent, and most users 
(30 ­percent) are between the ages eigh­teen and twenty-­four. Nearly 100 ­percent of 
Facebook and Twitter users speak Spanish and only 8.75 ­percent speak En­glish. 
­Those who use Facebook and Twitter via a mobile device primarily do so with an 
Android-­powered phone (16 million), while much smaller numbers use iOS-­based 
phones (1.5 million) and BlackBerry devices (1.5 million) (Abad 2015).
Governmental regulation of content is limited. The Colombian Ministry of In-
formation and Communications Technologies has decreed that the only content to 
be blocked is child pornography, and internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) are required 
to prevent child pornography from being made available online. While the gov-
ernment itself does not often order the removal of content from view, court ­orders 
sometimes result in content removal when it is deemed to violate fundamental 
rights. For example, content from the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colom-
bia (FARC) guerrilla group has been removed or restricted at times. Conversely, 
the seminal court case of Guillermo Martínez (n.d.) v. Google in 2013 involved the 
newspaper El Tiempo, ­after it reported that Martínez was part of a mafia group. 
Charges ­were dropped against him, but when he searched for his name on Google, 
the original mafia allegation still appeared. He sued to have it removed, but 
­Colombia’s Constitutional Court ruled that Google was not responsible for the 
content that it indexed in its search engine (Freedom House 2014). In spite of 
­these relative freedoms, 47 ­percent of respondents to a national survey of journal-
ists reported that they avoid publishing certain information online due to fear of 
aggressive action against them, and 35 ­percent of respondents feared losing their 
jobs. Furthermore, 25 ­percent of respondents feared pressure from government 
entities, and 57  ­percent believed that local governments pressure the media 
through government advertising (Freedom House 2015).

COLOMBIA
58
In 2015, President Juan Manuel Santos (1951–) put forward a National Develop-
ment Plan (Plan Nacional de Desarrollo, or PND) which left out language found in 
Article 56 of its pre­de­ces­sor stating that telecommunications authorities should reg-
ulate neutrality on the internet. Internet neutrality is the princi­ple that the govern-
ment or ISPs should allow access to all content without favoring or blocking based on 
sources, par­tic­u­lar products, or websites visited (Peñarredonda 2015). ­After fervor 
and uproar, however, a debate ensued and Article 56 ended up being preserved.
Articles 20 and 73 of Colombia’s National Constitution guarantee freedom of ex-
pression, prohibit prior restraint, and protect the liberty and in­de­pen­dence of 
journalistic activity. However, Colombia still enforces its criminal penalties for 
defamation—­even speech online. The penal code allows punishment of any third 
party who publishes, reproduces, or repeats an insult or libel. A private citizen was 
convicted of libel for an anonymous insult to a public utility com­pany man­ag­er in 
2014. ­After posting an insulting comment about the man­ag­er to El Pais’s online com-
ment section in 2008, the government tracked him down using his internet 
­protocol (IP) address. Colombia’s Constitutional Court rejected his appeal in 
February 2015. Yet, overall, the freedoms enjoyed in Colombia are fairly strong 
(Freedom House 2015).
Jeffrey M. Skrysak
See also: Brazil; Ecuador; Peru; Venezuela
Further Reading
Abad, Daniel. 2015. “Estadísticas de Facebook y Twitter en Colombia (2015).” Accessed 
March 13, 2016. https://­www​.­latamclick​.­com​/­estadisticas​-­de​-­facebook​-­y​-­twitter​-­en​
-­colombia​-­2015​/­
Freedom House. 2014. “Freedom on the Net 2014—­Colombia.” Accessed March 11, 2016. 
https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2014​/­colombia
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net 2015—­Colombia.” Accessed March 11, 2016. 
https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­colombia
ICT Ministry. 2013. “ICT Trimestral Bulletin.” December. Accessed March 12, 2016. http://­
colombiatic​.­mintic​.­gov​.­co​/­602​/­w3​-­article​-­4992​.­html
Lu, Tania. 2010. “Historia de Internet en el Mundo y Su Llegada a Colombia.” January 12. 
Accessed March 13, 2016. http://­tanialu​.­co​/­2010​/­01​/­12​/­historia​-­de​-­internet​-­en​-­el​-­mu​
ndo​-­y​-­su​-­llegada​-­a​-­colombia​/­
MINTIC. 2016. “Colombia es Uno de los Países con Más Usuarios en Redes Sociales en 
la Región” Accessed March 13, 2016​.­http://­www​.­mintic​.­gov​.­co​/­portal​/­604​/­w3​-­article​
-­2713​.­html
Murphy, David. 2015. “Facebook Rolls out ­Free Internet​.­org App in Colombia.” January 15. 
Accessed March 14, 2016. http://­www​.­pcmag​.­com​/­article2​/­0,2817,2475278,00​.­asp
Peñarredonda, Jose Luis. 2015. “Neutralidad en la Red: ¿En Riesgopor el Plan de Desarollo?” 
Accessed March 13, 2016. http://­www​.­enter​.­co​/­cultura​-­digital​/­colombia​-­digital​/­neutr​
alidad​-­en​-­la​-­red​-­colombia​-­plan​-­de​-­desarrollo​/­
Vega, Diego Molano. 2012. “Inforgrafia, Historia de Internet en Colombia.” May 17, Ac-
cessed March 13, 2016. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­DiegoMolanoVega​/­infografa​-­historia​
-­de​-­internet​-­en​-­colombia

CUBA
59
Vega, Diego Molano. 2015. “Colombia’s Internet Advantage.” May 7. Accessed on March 13, 
2016. http://­www​.­americasquarterly​.­org​/­content​/­colombias​-­internet​-­advantage
Venegas, María del Rosario Atuesta. 2003. “Los CentrosTecnológicos Comunitarios, una Op-
ciónpara el Acceso a la Tecnología en la ZonasRurales.” Accessed on March 13, 2016. 
http://­publicaciones​.­eafit​.­edu​.­co​/­index​.­php​/­revista​-­universidad​-­eafit​/­article​/­download​
/­917​/­822
World Bank. 2016. “Internet Users (per 100 ­People).” Accessed March 14, 2016. http://­
data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2​/­countries​/­1W​?­page​=­3&display​
=­default
CUBA
Cuba is an island in the Ca­rib­bean Sea, just south of Florida. The main language 
spoken ­there is Spanish. The population is 11.39 million; 64 ­percent of Cubans 
are between fifteen and fifty-­nine years of age, with the median age being forty-­
one. In 1959, rebels led by Fidel Castro (1926–2016) overthrew the Cuban gov-
ernment and the Communist Party has governed the island ever since. In 1960, 
the United States placed an embargo on Cuba, which meant that no trade could be 
exchanged between the countries. ­Until December 2014, relations between the two 
countries had been hostile, and ­little po­liti­cal interaction had taken place over the 
past fifty years. As of late 2015, the trade embargo remained in place.
On December 17, 2014, ­after a phone conversation between President Barack 
Obama (1961–) of the United States and President Raúl Castro (1931–) of Cuba, 
the two countries announced that they would reestablish diplomatic relations. This 
was the first exchange between the presidents of ­these two countries since Vice Pres-
ident Richard Nixon met with Fidel Castro a few months ­after the Cuban Revolu-
tion (1953–1959). The decision to restore relations between countries included 
plans to reopen the U.S. embassy in the capital city of Havana, to reduce trade and 
travel restrictions, and release certain po­liti­cal prisoners (DeYoung 2014). One of 
the prisoners released was Alan Gross (1949–), a government contractor who had 
been arrested and imprisoned by Cuban officials five years earlier for attempting to 
destabilize the Cuban government. He had been working with the U.S. Agency for 
International Development (USAID) and had been in Cuba to secretly distribute 
internet equipment to Jewish community groups (DeYoung 2014; Ruane 2014). 
­After their phone conversation, President Obama commented publicly that Cuba 
had also promised to expand internet access throughout the country, although 
President Castro did not include this statement in his public address to the Cuban 
­people. In April 2015, the two presidents met for the first time in person when 
they held a one-­on-­one meeting during the Summit of the Amer­i­cas in Panama (Lee 
2015). While the two countries still disagreed on many issues, ­these meetings rep-
resented the first substantive attempt in the past fifty years to normalize relations 
between Cuba and the United States.
Cuba has restrictive internet practices that correspond mainly with access to the 
internet, such as prohibiting home internet connections, requiring official approv-
als for office-­based connections, prohibiting satellite connections, and control-
ling and monitoring all access points. As of 2014, only about a quarter of the 

CUBA
60
population could get online, and 
many of ­these users had to deal 
with outdated technology and 
slow connections. Once online, 
however, the censorship was ac-
tually less comprehensive than it 
is in other places in the world, 
like North ­Korea or China. Web-
sites like Facebook and Twitter 
are not officially banned; how-
ever, other websites are blocked, 
such as YouTube or ­those written 
by Cuban journalists that have 
been deemed antigovernment.
Several ­factors contribute to 
the low internet penetration in 
the country. ­Until 2008, for ex-
ample, it was illegal for private 
citizens to own computers. In 
2011, ­there ­were fewer than 
783,000 computers in the ­whole 
country (Franceschi-­Bicchierai 
2014). In 2014, almost all inter-
net traffic occurred on desktops 
or laptops (We Are Social 2014). 
Home connections are very rare, 
and only approved jobs, such as 
academics, doctors, or govern-
ment officials, have access to the 
internet at work. ­There are cybercafés where Cubans can pay to connect online; 
however, it can be prohibitively expensive, at $6–­$10 an hour, while an average 
monthly salary in Cuba is only $20. At cybercafés, computers are made available 
to tourists, who have access to the entire internet, and ­there are computers for 
Cuban citizens, who have access only to state-­approved websites. In ­either case, 
the connection speed can be very slow, which prevents most Cubans from ­doing 
much other than checking their email (Franceschi-­Bicchierai 2014). Due to em-
bargo restrictions and lack of internet penetration, ­there are not many statistics 
available on how Cubans use the internet and social media.
Once online, Cubans utilize some of the most globally popu­lar social media sites. 
Among the most popu­lar sites in Cuba are Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Pinterest, 
and Vkontakte. The first two are by far the most popu­lar; of ­these top social media 
sites, Facebook receives 87.44  ­percent of the traffic and Twitter receives 
10.44 ­percent. The other websites all receive less than 1 ­percent of the traffic apiece 
(StatsMonkey 2015).
In addition to ­these internationally popu­lar websites, the Cuban government is 
involved in providing local social media to ­those Cubans who use the internet. For 
A woman stops to check her cell phone in Cuba’s his­
toric neighborhood of La Habana Vieja. In a country 
where internet is strictly controlled, access to popu­
lar sites such as Twitter is restricted. Nevertheless, 
Cubans have found ways around ­these mea­sures by 
using a system called “speak-­to-­tweet,” which allows 
­people to use their cell phones to rec­ord a message 
that is converted to text and posted to restricted 
sites. (Lembi Buchanan​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

CUBA
61
example, EcuRed is the Cuban version of Wikipedia. However, EcuRed had only 
78,000 articles as of 2014, and unlike Wikipedia, its editing is not open. ­There are 
only a few government-­approved editors who write articles for the website 
(Franceschi-­Bicchierai 2014). Interestingly, EcuRed has a rather large following in 
Mexico, from which about a third of the website’s traffic occurs (Alexa 2015). EcuRed 
was popu­lar enough to inspire a mobile app called EcuMobil.
The Cuban government also introduced Red Social in December 2011, which was 
supposed to be the Cuban Facebook. The site mirrored that of Facebook and even 
had Facebook in the domain name: facebook​.­ismm​.­edu​.­cu. However, this website 
was short-­lived; it no longer exists. In September 2013, the Cuban government 
announced another attempt at launching a social network. This was called La Tend-
edera, which would be available from only Joven Clubs (youth centers). As of 
December 2014, the website was still in existence, but it had not reached anything 
close to the popularity of Facebook (Franceschi-­Bicchierai 2014; Freedom House 
2014).
In 2010, the U.S. government introduced to the Cuban ­people a social media 
site akin to Twitter. The intention was to help promote democracy in the region; 
however, the Associated Press uncovered evidence suggesting that the U.S. govern-
ment actually planned to use it as a tool to incite unrest and potentially “renegoti-
ate the balance of power between the state and society” (Arce, Butler, and Gillum 
2014). It was commissioned by the U.S. Agency for International Development 
­(USAID), but when it was introduced, ­there was no mention of this origin. It was 
called ZunZuneo, which is Cuban slang for a hummingbird’s tweet. Within six 
months of its launch, it had almost 25,000 subscribers.
As ZunZuneo grew in popularity, USAID strategized about how to maintain the 
website without disclosing its involvement. By March 2011, ZunZuneo had 40,000 
members, at which time USAID deci­ded to cap the number of subscribers at a rela-
tively low number to avoid attracting too much attention. Nevertheless, in the 
­middle of 2012, the website vanished. It had been rerouted to a ­children’s website, 
and ­later Cuban intelligence informed users that the website had been blocked. 
Some time ­after this occurrence, USAID announced that the program ran out of 
money and ZunZuneo was abandoned. Users of ZunZuneo ­were left feeling as 
though a vacuum existed where the social network had once been (Arce, Butler, 
and Gillum 2014).
In the wake of reopened relations between Cuba and the United States, technology 
companies are looking into expanding their market to the island. This includes the 
­actual Twitter, which has stated that it is in talks with the Cuban government to 
introduce the messaging app to the country. Due to low internet penetration, the 
com­pany plans to allow Cubans to send tweets via text messages from their cell 
phones (Scola 2015). However, Cubans have already found a way to do this. It is 
a system known as “speak-­to-­tweet.” A Cuban can call a phone number in the United 
States and rec­ord a message. That message is converted to text and shared over 
Twitter or Facebook. However, this method can be expensive, as it can cost up to $1 
per message (Franceschi-­Bicchierai 2014). Other methods of working around 
Cuba’s restrictions include setting up illegal dial-up connections and sharing 
access.

CUBA
62
Despite Cuba’s tightly controlled internet, many activist bloggers and digital jour-
nalists have become internationally recognized for their writing on daily life in 
Cuba and their opinion pieces on the Cuban government. This movement is ex-
panding, despite Cuba’s attempts at discouraging it. One of the best-­known Cuban 
bloggers is Yoani Sánchez (1975–). She has been blogging since 2007, when she 
started her blog, Generation Y (http://­www​.­14ymedio​.­com​/­blogs​/­generacion​_­y​/­). 
She would pose as a tourist to access the unrestricted internet at cybercafés in or-
der to publish her pieces. In 2008, she was named one of the 100 most influential 
­people in the world by Time magazine (Hijuelos 2008). She is married to Reinaldo 
Escobar (1947–), the editor-­in-­chief of 14ymedio, an online newspaper that they 
began together in May 2014.
Sánchez is also an active Twitter user. Over the years, the Cuban government 
has harassed, repressed, and detained Cubans who are viewed as dissident or who 
are openly critical of the government. On at least two occasions, Sánchez has been 
arrested for her activities. In October 2012, she and her husband ­were arrested as 
they traveled to cover the story of a Spanish man on trial for a fatal car crash that 
killed another activist. They ­were released ­after being held for thirty hours (Orsi 
2012). In December 2014, Sánchez and her husband ­were arrested again, along 
with several other ­people, in order to prevent them from taking part in an event at 
Havana’s Revolution Square, where artists ­were scheduled to perform. The Cuban 
government had called the event a “po­liti­cal provocation.” The arrests ­were part of 
a pattern of the Cuban government taking preemptive action to deter activities that 
it deemed po­liti­cally dissident. The detainees ­were released the next day (Trotta 
2014).
Generally, in situations like this, the Cuban government does not hold ­people 
for very long; however, ­there are cases of activist artists and writers receiving lengthy 
prison sentences. This happened with Angel Santiesteban-­Prats (1966–), who was 
tried and convicted in December 2012 on suspicious charges of home violation and 
injuries (Reporters Without Borders 2014). Santiesteban-­Prats is a dissident blog-
ger who has been openly critical of the Cuban government. He started his blog, 
The ­Children That No One Wanted (Los hijos que nadie quiso) (https://­
blogloshijosquenadiequiso​.­wordpress​.­com​/­), in 2008. ­After serving two-­and-­a-­
half years of a five-­year sentence, he was released July 17, 2015 (14ymedio 2015). 
In addition to Generation Y, 14ymedio, and Los hijos que nadie quiso, other no-
table in­de­pen­dent digital journalism outlets have appeared, including On Cuba, 
Voces Cubanas, and the Havana Times (Fortes 2015).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: China; Mexico; North ­Korea; United States; Venezuela
Further Reading
14ymedio. 2015. “Blogger and Activist Angel Santiestaban Released from Prison.” July 17. 
Accessed September  29, 2015. http://­www​.­14ymedio​.­com​/­englishedition​/­Blogger​
-­Activist​-­Santiesteban​-­Released​-­Prison​_­0​_­1819018095​.­html
Alexa. 2015. “Ecured.cu.” Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​
/­ecured​.­cu

CUBA
63
Arce, Alberto, Butler, Desmond, and Gillum, Jack. 2014. “US Secretly Created ‘Cuban Twit-
ter’ to Stir Unrest.” April 4. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­bigstory​.­ap​.­org​/­article​
/­us​-­secretly​-­created​-­cuban​-­twitter​-­stir​-­unrest
DeYoung, Karen. 2014. “Obama Moves to Normalize Relations with Cuba as American is 
Released by Havana.” December 17. Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­www​.­was​
hingtonpost​.­com​/­world​/­national​-­security​/­report​-­cuba​-­frees​-­american​-­alan​-­gross​-­after​
-­5​-­years​-­detention​-­on​-­spy​-­charges​/­2014​/­12​/­17​/­a2840518​-­85f5​-­11e4​-­a702​
-­fa31ff4ae98e​_­story​.­html
Fortes, Heidi. 2014. “Forbidden Freedom: Yoani Sánchez’ Strug­gle for an Open Cuba.” 
July 3. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­cjfe​.­org​/­forbidden​_­freedom​_­yoani​
_­s​_­nchez​_­s​_­struggle​_­for​_­an​_­open​_­cuba
Franceschi​-­Bicchierai, Lorenzo. 2014. “The Internet in Cuba: 5 ­Things You Need to Know.” 
April  3. Accessed September  29, 2015. http://­mashable​.­com​/­2014​/­04​/­03​/­internet​
-­freedom​-­cuba​/­#Y6WAwUWVEkk5
Freedom House. 2014. “Cuba.” Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​
/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2014​/­cuba
Freedom House. 2015. “Cuba.” Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​
/­report​/­freedom​-­world​/­2015​/­cuba
Hijuelos, Oscar. 2008. “Yoani Sánchez.” May 12. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­
content​.­time​.­com​/­time​/­specials​/­2007​/­article​/­0,28804,1733748​_­1733756​_­173​
5878,00​.­html
Lee, Carol E. 2015. “Barack Obama and Cuban President Raúl Castro Hold Historic Meet-
ing.” April 11. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­barack​
-­obama​-­and​-­cuban​-­president​-­raul​-­castro​-­hold​-­historic​-­meeting​-­1428783765
Orsi, Peter. 2012. “Yoani Sanchez, Cuban Blogger, Released from Jail.” October 6. Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­2012​/­10​/­06​/­yoani​-­sanchez​-­cuba​
-­blogger​_­n​_­1945283​.­html
Reporters Without Borders. 2014. “Dissident Blogger Completes Year in Detention.” Feb-
ruary 28. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­en​.­rsf​.­org​/­cuba​-­dissident​-­blogger​-­com​
pletes​-­year​-­28​-­02​-­2014,45939​.­html
Ruane, Michael E., Shapiro, T. Rees, and Shapira, Ian. 2014. “Amid Jubilation by Relatives 
and Friends, a ‘Hannukkah Miracle’ for Alan Gross.” December 17. Accessed Septem-
ber 29, 2015. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­local​/­amid​-­jubilation​-­marylander​-­alan​
-­gross​-­is​-­released​-­from​-­cuban​-­incarceration​/­2014​/­12​/­17​/­e257c56e​-­8607​-­11e4​-­9534​
-­f79a23c40e6c​_­story​.­html
Scola, Nancy. 2015. “Twitter Wants a Way into Cuba.” June 17. Accessed September 29, 
2015. http://­www​.­politico​.­com​/­story​/­2015​/­06​/­twitter​-­cuba​-­social​-­media​-­119086
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Media Usage Statistics in Cuba.” Ac-
cessed September 29, 2015. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21330​-­cuba​-­mobile​
-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
Trotta, Daniel. 2014. “U.S. Condemns Cuba’s ‘Practice of Repressing’ ­After Activists De-
tained.” December 31. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​
/­2014​/­12​/­31​/­us​-­cuba​-­usa​-­dissidents​-­idUSKBN0K81DN20141231
We Are Social. 2014. “Digital in the Amer­i­cas.” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­
wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2014​/­06​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­americas​/­

This page intentionally left blank

D
DENMARK
The internet, information and communications technologies (ICTs), and social 
media have become ordinary yet ubiquitous parts of everyday life in Denmark. As 
most Danes enjoy comparatively low-­priced high-­speed connections, they have be-
come network ready and mediatized heavy users of social media. As a Scandina-
vian country located in northern Eu­rope, Denmark is a small constitutional 
monarchy with a parliamentary democracy, as well as a member of the Eu­ro­pean 
Union (EU).
Even though Denmark is considered a small country, with a population of 5.7 
million ­people, territory of 43,000 square kilo­meters, and only one border with 
Germany, the country’s size has never been a limiting ­factor with regard to develop-
ment. Danes often take pride in being citizens in an open, equal, and homogeneous 
welfare state built on a highly industrialized and modern society with or­ga­nized 
­labor, liberal markets, high standards of living, a public sector that facilitates 
a  comprehensive health system, a high educational level, a public service and 
government-­funded media system, and nationwide infrastructure. A total of 
95.2 ­percent of Denmark’s population have Danish citizenship, speak Danish, and 
have the same cultural understanding; even though Denmark is a secular society, 
83 ­percent of the population are members of the Danish National Church, which 
is Lutheran (Nielsen 2016). Although Danes do not always share the same world 
views, their background, their way of living and traditions, and their values are 
often very similar.
Although the penetration of internet connectivity is high, the adaptation of ICT 
is ubiquitous, and social media is an integral part of everyday life, it seems that 
Denmark is on the verge of an even greater expansion of internet and mobile con-
nectivity, which lead to a more diversified use of social media, new forms of com-
munications, and access to more streaming ser­vices within the foreseeable ­future. 
However, the promise of a greater and more transformative digital potential is not 
without challenges for legacy media, po­liti­cal life, and, last but not least, equality 
and homogeneity within the Danish population.
Danish internet penetration has been stable and high for many years, and, ac-
cording to Akamai’s State of the Internet report in 2016, it is ranked among the 
best in Eu­rope, as well as globally (Belson 2016). This is not surprising in any way. 
Connectivity and internet penetration has been on the po­liti­cal agenda for years 
and is regarded as a strategic part of the development of the Danish infrastructure. 
In February 2015, most of the parties in the Danish parliament, Folketinget, signed 

DENMARK
66
an agreement on the ­future digitization of Denmark, in which the government is 
committed to secure high-­speed broadband of at least 100 Mbit/s for all ­house­holds 
and business, as well as to secure a complete penetration of mobile broadband in 
all of Denmark by 2020 (Erhvervs-­ ogVækstministeriet 2015). The agreement’s goal 
is to prepare Danish businesses for structural changes in production in the near 
­future, thereby securing economic growth and supporting and promoting changes 
in the educational system in order to equip students with digital skills and facili-
tate adequate learning methods.
Current Danish internet penetration was, in 2015, well above the average pen-
etration within the Eu­ro­pean Union of 83 ­percent, and ranged somewhere between 
92 ­percent and 97.4 ­percent of Danish ­house­holds for fixed broadband solutions 
(Elkjær and Tassy 2016, 7; the Eu­ro­pean Commission 2015, 2; Schrøder and 
Ørsten 2016, 54; Kulturstyrelsen 2015, 5). It is worth noting that penetration has 
decreased since 2013, whereas the penetration of smartphones and mobile broad-
band has grown significantly in recent years. In 2011, smartphone penetration 
was at 33  ­percent, but by 2015, its penetration had increased to 77  ­percent 
(Lauterbach 2015, 13).
According to the World Economic Forum’s yearly report on Global Information 
Technology, the Danes are the most network-­ready ­people when it comes to indi-
vidual skills (2016, 88), which they use online to communicate via email, use 
phone ser­vices such as voice over internet protocol (VOIP), search, shop and trade, 
do their banking, download software, and consume streaming media from ser­vices 
like Netflix, HBO, iTunes, and Spotify (Lauterbach 2015, 17ff). And then, of course, 
Danes have embraced social media in large numbers and to a degree where it is 
often described as an ordinary and even integral part of everyday life in Denmark 
(Rossi, Schwartz, and Mahnke 2016). The overall penetration of social media in 
­Denmark ranges from 65 ­percent to 76.7 ­percent of the population for ­people 
aged twelve and older with at least one social media profile (Lauterbach 2015; 
Kulturstyrelsen 2015, 5).
Facebook is, by far, the largest social media platform in Denmark, both in terms 
of penetration and active usage, and apart from Facebook and YouTube, which have 
a high penetration but comparatively low usage, most social media sites in Den-
mark appear small and limited to specific segments of the population. Some social 
media platforms, like Pinterest, Vimeo, and Tumblr, have an estimated penetration 
in Denmark of 1 ­percent or less. The fact that a social media site has a low penetra-
tion rate or is used fragmentarily in Denmark does not indicate that it is not impor­
tant, however. The use of Twitter in Denmark is a good example: It has a very low 
penetration and low usage, but it is still an impor­tant social media site in the ex-
tensive exchange of news and views between Danish politicians, journalists, and 
legacy media, and, as such, it is often referred to as a “media ­bubble.”
For many Danes, Facebook is the social media of choice, and in terms of pene-
tration, the platform has almost 3.6 million active users (Runge 2016) of a total 
Danish population of 5.7 million ­people (Danmarks Statistik 2016a). In 2006, Face-
book was introduced in Denmark, but the platform’s breakthrough happened ­after 
it was translated into Danish in 2007, and since then, Facebook’s growth in 

DENMARK
67
Denmark has been remarkable. In 2008, Lisbeth Klastrup (1970–), a researcher of 
information technology (IT) at the University of Copenhagen, noted that 460,000 
Danes used Facebook (Damgaard Nielsen 2012). By 2010, a comparative study 
showed that the number of Danes active on Facebook was above 2.2 million 
(Damgaard Nielsen 2010), and when the study was replicated in 2013, the num-
ber had risen to 2.9 million (Damgaard Nielsen 2013).
More ­women than men use Facebook—51.4 ­percent are ­women and 48.6 ­percent 
are men (Runge 2016)—­and this statistic is similar to the composition of the Dan-
ish population, where 50.3 ­percent are ­women and 49.7 ­percent men (Danmarks 
Statistik 2016b). The Facebook users’ locations are also representative of the Dan-
ish population, with more than 40 ­percent being in five Danish cities: the capital, 
Copenhagen, and the major cities Aarhus, Odense, Aalborg, and Esbjerg (Facebook 
2016). ­There is, however, a considerable, but not surprising, gap when it comes to 
age: the Danish population is getting older, as current life expectancy is high—
82.5 years for ­women and 78.6 for men (Danmarks Statistik 2016c), and the older 
generation has more members than the younger generation. The reverse is true on 
Facebook, however, where young ­people constitute the majority.
The embrace of social media is not without its challenges, both in a practical 
and a mundane sense, but also on a structural level. In a practical sense, users still 
have to adapt to the ever-­changing affordances and limitations on social media. On 
a more structural level, prob­lems and challenges are increasing with the Danish me-
dia system. For legacy media, social media may be a valuable channel to distribute 
content, but it can also be expensive, as large quantities of advertising directed 
­toward social media platforms and search engines can carry high costs. Thus, so-
cial media poses a substantial threat to legacy media’s earnings. Another, and 
Facebook: Active Danish users 2010, 2013, and 2016 (Damgaard Nielsen, 2010; 2013; Runge, 
2016).

DENMARK
68
perhaps more impor­tant, challenge for legacy media is that social media is render-
ing legacy media redundant.
On Facebook and Twitter, politicians have demonstrated over and over that so-
cial media is an efficient way to bypass journalists and editors of legacy media, and 
some of the more prominent politicians on social media are even able to boast larger 
audiences than most national Danish newspapers and tele­vi­sion. In addition, 
YouTube, along with streaming media ser­vices, like Netflix and HBO, seem to have 
made a substantial impact on Danish tele­vi­sion (e.g. overall viewing has dropped 
by twenty-­nine minutes a day from 2010 to 2015). That may not sound like much, 
but it becomes clear how massive the transition ­really is when one regards the 
change among young ­people, where the young viewers between twelve to eigh­teen 
years old have reduced viewing by a massive seventy-­one minutes a day to only 
sixty-­five minutes (Christensen 2016).
Although the flux stirred by social media can raise challenges, bypassing the news 
media or losing viewers are ­matters that naturally go to the very foundation of leg-
acy media, and, ultimately, they may erode the legitimacy of legacy media and di-
minish its position within the Danish media system.
Troels Runge
See also: Finland; Germany; Iceland; Poland
Further Reading
Belson, D. 2016. “Akamai’s State of the Internet.” Q1 2016 Report, Volume 9 / Number 1. 
Accessed August 5, 2016. https://­content​.­akamai​.­com​/­PG6575​-­q1​-­2016​-­soti​-­connec​ti​
vity​-­report​.­html
Christensen, D. 2016. DR Medieforskning: Medieudviklingen 2015. Copenhagen: Danish 
Broadcasting.
Damgaard Nielsen, L. 2010. “Facebook Statistik: Sådaner Den Danske Befolkning Fordelt 
Efter Alder OgKøn.” Accessed August 5, 2016. http://­www​.­nettendenser​.­dk​/­2010​/­03​/­18​
/­face​book​-­statistik​-­sadan​-­er​-­den​-­danske​-­befolkning​-­fordelt​-­efter​-­alder​-­og​-­k%C3%B8n​/­
Damgaard Nielsen, L. 2012. “Sådan Blev Facebook en Succes.” Danish Broadcasting Cor-
poration. Accessed August 5, 2016. http://­www​.­dr​.­dk​/­nyheder​/­indland​/­saadan​-­blev​
-­facebook​-­en​-­succes
Damgaard Nielsen, L. 2013. “Facebookstatistik 2013 for Danmark: Sådan er Befolkningen 
Fordelt.” Accessed August 5, 2016. http://­www​.­nettendenser​.­dk​/­2013​/­01​/­25​/­facebook​
-­statistik​-­2013​-­for​-­danmark​-­sadan​-­er​-­befolkningen​-­fordelt​/­
Danmarks Statistik. 2016a. “Population in Denmark.” Accessed July 29, 2016. https://­www​
.­dst​.­dk​/­en​/­Statistik​/­emner​/­befolkning​-­og​-­befolkningsfremskrivning​/­folketal
Danmarks Statistik. 2016b. “FOLK1A: Folketal den 1. i Kvartalet Efter Område, Køn, Alder 
Og Civilstand.” Accessed July 29, 2016. https://­www​.­statistikbanken​.­dk​/­statbank5a​
/­SelectVarVal​/­Define​.­asp​?­MainTable​=­FOLK1A&PLanguage​=­0&PXSId​=­0&wsid​=­cftree
Danmarks Statistik. 2016c. “FaldiKvindersLevetid for Første Gang i Over 20 år.” Nyt Fra 
Danmarks Statistik. February 16. Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­www​.­danmarksstatistik​
.­dk​/­da​/­Statistik​/­NytHtml​?­cid​=­20889
Elkjær, Kamilaa, and Tassy, Agnes. 2016. “It-­anvendelseiBefolkningen—­EU-­sammenligninger 
2015.” Danmarks Statistik. Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­www​.­dst​.­dk​/­Site​/­Dst​/­Ud​giv​
elser​/­GetPubFile​.­aspx​?­id​=­20743&sid​=­itanvbefeu2015

DENMARK
69
Erhvervs​-­ ogVækstministeriet. 2015. “Aftale: Vækstplan for Digitalisering.” Aftale: Erhvervs-­ 
ogVækstministeriet. Accessed August 5, 2016. https://­www​.­evm​.­dk​/­aftaler​-­og​-­udspil​
/­15​-­02​-­26​-­aftale​-­om​-­vaekstplan​-­for​-­digitalisering
European Commission. 2015. “Denmark, October 2015.” Excerpted from Special Euroba-
rometer 438: E-­Communications and the Digital Single Market. October 2015.” Eu­ro­
pean Commission: Brussels. Accessed August 5, 2016. http://­ec​.­europa​.­eu​/­information​
_­society​/­newsroom​/­image​/­document​/­2016​-­22​/­eb​_­ecommunications​_­and​_­the​_­digital​
_­single​_­market​_­dk​_­en​_­15839​.­pdf
Facebook. 2016. “Audience Insights.” Accessed July 19, 2016. https://­www​.­facebook​.­com​
/­ads​/­audience​-­insights
Hjarvard, S. 2013. The Mediatization of Culture and Society. New York: Routledge.
Kulturstyrelsen: MediernesudviklingiDanmark. 2015. “SOCIALE MEDIER. BRUG, INTER-
ESSEOMRÅDER OG DEBATLYST.” Kulturstyrelsen. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­
slks​.­dk​/­fileadmin​/­user​_­upload​/­dokumenter​/­medier​/­Mediernes​_­udvikling​/­2015​
/­Specialrapporter​/­Sociale​_­medier​/­PDF​-­filer​_­dokumenter​/­SPECIALRAPPORT​_­2015​
_­SOCIALE​_­MEDIER​_­ENDELIG​.­pdf
Lauterbach, T. 2015. “It-­anvendelseiBefolkningen—2015.” Danmarks Statistik. Accessed 
July 29, 2016. http://­www​.­dst​.­dk​/­da​/­Statistik​/­Publikationer​/­VisPub​?­cid​=­20737
Nielsen, B. 2016. “Danmark.” Den Store Danske, Copenhagen: Gyldendal. Accessed 
­August 4, 2016. http://­denstoredanske​.­dk​/­Danmarks​_­geografi​_­og​_­historie​/­Danmarks​
_­geografi​/­Danmark​_­generelt​/­Danmark
Rossi, L., Schwartz, S., and Mahnke, M. 2016. “Social Media Use & Po­liti­cal Engagement in 
Denmark, Report 2016.” Decidis Research Group at the IT University Copenhagen. Ac-
cessed July 29, 2016. https://­blogit​.­itu​.­dk​/­decidis​/­2016​/­03​/­10​/­slides​-­decidis​-­survey​/­
Runge, T. 2016. “Danskerneog Facebook 2016, Copenhagen: Digitalkommunikation​.­net​.­” 
Accessed August 8, 2016. http://­digitalkommunikation​.­net​/­danskerne​-­og​-­facebook​
-­2016​/­
Schrøder, K. C., and Ørsten, M. 2016. “Denmark.” Digital News Report 2016, ­Reuters Insti-
tute for the Study of Journalism. Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­www​.­digitalnewsreport​
.­org​/­survey​/­2016​/­denmark​-­2016​/­
Slots​-­og Kulturstyrelsen. 2016a. “Mediernesudviklingi Danmark 2016: Internetbrugogen-
heder.” Slots-og Kulturstyrelsen. Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­slks​.­dk​/­mediernes​-­ud​
vikling​-­2016​/­internetbrug​-­og​-­enheder​/­
Slots​-­og Kulturstyrelsen. 2016b. “MediernesudviklingiDanmark 2016: TV.” Slots-og Kul-
turstyrelsen. Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­slks​.­dk​/­mediernes​-­udvikling​-­2016​/­tv​/­

This page intentionally left blank

E
ECUADOR
Ecuador is a country of roughly 15 million ­people situated in the northwestern por-
tion of South Amer­i­ca. It currently has a large internet user base, but that was not 
always the case. Internet penetration lagged ­behind the rest of the world but has 
accelerated in recent years to the point where ­today 75 ­percent or more of the popu-
lation regularly uses the internet and social media. Many users access the internet 
from a desktop PC, but over half of them connect using a laptop or mobile device. 
Few domestic social media ser­vices are offered or widely used. Most Ec­ua­dorans 
prefer to use Facebook, WhatsApp, Twitter, Skype, and YouTube. In spite of the 
popularity of social media and the large percentage of internet users, crackdowns 
on freedom of speech have had a chilling effect on social media usage.
The growth of the popularity of social media has lagged ­behind most other coun-
tries, and it is paired with the growth of infrastructure and access to technology. 
From 1996 to 1998, only 0.1 of 100 ­people used the internet in Ec­ua­dor. ­Those 
numbers ­rose to 0.8 ­people per 100 in 1999 and 1.5 ­percent in 2000. Between 
2001 and 2006, the percentage of internet users ­rose from 2.7 ­percent to 6.0 ­percent 
(World Bank 2016).
In 2010, Ec­ua­dor accounted for 1.5 ­percent of total internet users in South Amer­
i­ca. In that year, the internet was used by 16 ­percent of the population ­after expe-
riencing an extreme growth rate of 1,211 ­percent from 2000 to 2010. The most 
popu­lar search engine in 2010 was Google, with 96.89 ­percent of users preferring 
it over other search engines (Global Search Engine Marketing 2011). In 2011, in-
ternet users grew to 27.2 ­percent of the population, and by the year 2014, the per-
centage of citizens who used the internet skyrocketed to 74.4 ­percent (Internet 
World Stats 2014).
Mobile users are also at an all-­time high for Latin American countries in 2015, 
with 14 ­percent of citizens using 3G+4G devices, 26 ­percent using 2G, 23 ­percent 
In Los Rios, Ec­ua­dor, an officer with the Transit Authority had an unusual experience 
in early 2016. ­After traffic had stopped, the traffic officer discovered a sloth clinging 
to a metal pole by the side of the road, appearing as if it wanted to cross. The Transit 
Authority took pictures of the scared sloth before and during the rescue. When 
­those photos hit Facebook, they went viral; one photo alone generated over 800,000 
“likes.” ­After the rescue, a veterinarian checked the sloth and determined it fit to re-
turn to its habitat.

ECUADOR
72
using voice only, and 36 ­percent not using a mobile device at all (GSMA Intelli-
gence 2016).
Key improvements to infrastructure have helped the growth of mobile phone 
penetration in spite of state-­owned intervention in the marketplace. State-­owned 
companies are sometimes given preference over privately owned entities. In 2012, 
the state-­owned CNT Mobile (Corporación Nacional de Telecomunicaciones) was 
awarded a 4G spectrum, while its competitors Movistar and Claro ­were refused one. 
Yet Telefónica deployed approximately 100 solar-­powered base stations to improve 
network coverage for rural areas of Ec­ua­dor (GSMA Mobile 2014).
Even though mobile infrastructure continues to grow, landline broadband pro-
vided by internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) continues to have a strong presence in 
the country, with CNT Mobile accounting for 51.1 ­percent of the market, Grupo 
TV Cable accounting for 29.2 ­percent, and Claro serving the remaining 9.4 ­percent 
(ITU 2013). In 2015, a $300 million investment proj­ect neared completion: The 
Pacific Ca­rib­bean Cable System (PCCS) ­will provide 100-­Gbps ser­vice to internet 
users in the country (El Telegrafo 2015).
Facebook is a very commonly used social media site. According to an April 2015 
poll by the Ec­ua­dor­ian Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos (INEC), 
98 ­percent of Ec­ua­dor­ian citizens over the age of twelve have a Facebook account. 
Approximately 96.8 ­percent of Guayaquil residents have a Facebook account, and 
97.9 ­percent of Quito residents have a Facebook account (Sandoval 2015). Guaya-
quil, a coastal city in the province of Guayas, is the largest city in the country, eclips-
ing the population of the capital, Quito, by a few hundred thousand residents. 
Guayaquil also has eclipsed Quito in terms of the percentage of social network usage. 
Twitter is quite popu­lar; 29.3 ­percent of Guayaquil residents and 21.4 ­percent of 
Quito’s residents use it. WhatsApp is even more popu­lar; 48.6 ­percent of Guaya-
quil residents and 37.4 ­percent of Quito’s residents use it. Further, 15.1 ­percent of 
Guayaquil residents and 17.5 ­percent of Quito residents use Skype.
All social media users reported their reason for using each software or website. 
According to ­those results, Facebook is used primarily for entertainment 
(53.4 ­percent) and reading the news (18.1 ­percent), followed closely by keeping in 
touch with ­family and friends (14.7 ­percent). Conversely, Twitter is used primarily 
for reading the news (53.1 ­percent) and entertainment (12.3 ­percent). Roughly 
30 ­percent of social media users used a desktop computer to access websites or 
software; meanwhile, 21.7 ­percent used a laptop, 6 ­percent used a tablet, and 
36.1 ­percent used a smartphone (Sandoval 2015).
In spite of the overwhelming use of portable devices and laptops to access social 
media, an overwhelming 78.4 ­percent of users claim that they access social media 
only while they are at home. Approximately 13.5 ­percent access social media while 
they are at work (Sandoval 2015).
Home usage may explain why Gmail, Google’s email ser­vice, is the most popu­
lar email provider in the country. Gmail’s current market share is 66 ­percent, which 
far overshadows the 15.81 ­percent market share of Microsoft Outlook, 5.67 ­percent 
market share of Zimbra, and 4.21 ­percent market share of Hotmail (Datanyze 
2016).

ECUADOR
73
Yet in spite of ­these statistics, censorship and fear of government reprisal have 
had a chilling effect on social media usage. In July 2011, the editor of the newspa-
per El Universo, Emilio Palacio (1954–), was found guilty of libel for publishing an 
article online and in its print edition implying that President Rafael Correa (1963–) 
was a dictator and a liar. All four men accused, including Palacio and three top 
executives at the newspaper, received three-­year jail sentences, and the newspaper 
was fined $40 million. In order to bring the libel suit, Correa used an obscure part 
of Ec­ua­dor’s penal code, Article 230, which prohibits disrespect of the president 
(Lauderbaugh 2012, 165). In November 2012, an Ec­ua­dor­ian blogger named Paul 
Moreno (n.d.–) identified a security hole in the nation’s national identity database 
and posted information about it on the internet. The victim of Moreno’s hacking 
test was Correa himself. The blogger was arrested and held for forty-­five days, which 
caused a popu­lar outcry. ­After the outcry, President Correa ordered him released 
from prison (Conan 2012)
Furthermore, President Correa passed a $42 tax on all international online pur-
chases in October 2014. The goal was to prevent Ec­ua­dor­ian citizens from bypass-
ing their own local stores and sellers in ­favor of dealing with international retailers 
(Goldman 2015).This was a continuation of the encroachment on freedom of 
speech, keeping internet users from feeling that they could comment openly about 
the president or the government via a bill that regulates media in Ec­ua­dor. Article 
474 of the penal code (Código Orgánico Integral Penal) was eventually rescinded 
by the government, but only ­after large public outcry (Freedom House 2014).
Article 16.2 of the Ec­ua­doran constitution guarantees “universal access to infor-
mation technologies and communication” (Constitute Proj­ect 2016) yet laws have 
been passed that require all content to be properly verified or ­else the content cre-
ators would be fined. This provision, Article 11 ­under the Organic Law on Com-
munications, was used to fine a humorist, and the newspaper El Universo for 
publishing a cartoon satirizing a police raid on the home of Francisco Villavicencio 
(n.d.–). Journalist Juan Carlos Calderon (c. 1972–) received death threats for launch-
ing a digital magazine in 2013 that exposed fraud in state institutions (Solano 
2013). In January 2014, a government representative allegedly targeted and threat-
ened a writer and former TV news anchor Carlos Vera (1955–) on Twitter. Vera 
subsequently abandoned his blog Polificcion and online po­liti­cal debate (Freedom 
House 2014). A law passed in June 2013 created two media regulatory bodies, the 
Information Authority and the Communications Regulation Council, which can levy 
fines on media outlets or writers who are found guilty of slander or discrimination. 
This also extends to speech on social media.
Jeffrey M. Skrysak
See also: Colombia; Ec­ua­dor; Peru
Further Reading
Conan, Matt. 2012. “Blogger Jailed ­After Password-­Hacking Ec­ua­dor’s President.” December 3. 
Accessed March 11, 2016. http://­www​.­wired​.­com​/­2012​/­12​/­security​-­post​-­lands​-­ecuad​
orian​-­blogger​-­in​-­jail​/­

EGYPT
74
Constitute Proj­ect. 2016. “Ec­ua­dor Constitution of 2008.” Accessed March 11, 2016. https://­
www​.­constituteproject​.­org​/­constitution​/­Ecuador​_­2008​.­pdf
Datanyze. 2016. “Gmail Market Share in Ec­ua­dor.” March 13. Accessed March 13, 2016. 
https://­www​.­datanyze​.­com​/­market​-­share​/­email​-­providers​/­Ecuador​/­gmail​-­market​
-­share
El Telegrafo. 2015. “Ec­ua­dor Tendrá Internet con 100 Megas de Velocidad.” May 4. Accessed 
March 13, 2016. http://­www​.­eltelegrafo​.­com​.­ec​/­noticias​/­economia​/­1​/­ecuador​-­tendra​
-­internet​-­con​-­100​-­megas​-­de​-­velocidad
Freedom House. 2014. “Freedom on the Net 2014—­Ecuador.” Accessed March 11, 2016. 
https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­resources​/­Ecuador​.­pdf
Global Search Engine Marketing. 2011. “Internet and Search Engine Usage by Country.” 
Accessed March 11, 2016. http://­ptgmedia​.­pearsoncmg​.­com​/­images​/­9780789747884​
/­supplements​/­9780789747884​_­appC​.­pdf
Goldman, Alex. 2015. “Ec­ua­dor’s President ­Will Respond to You on Twitter.” May  21. 
­Accessed March 13, 2016. http://­digg​.­com​/­2015​/­ecuadors​-­president​-­does​-­all​-­his​-­own​
-­tweets
GSMA Intelligence. 2016. “Connected Society—­Content in Latin Amer­i­ca: Shift to Local, 
Shift to Mobile.” February. Accessed March 13, 2016. http://­www​.­gsma​.­com​/­latinamerica​
/­resources
GSMA Mobile. 2014. “The Mobile Economy—­Latin Amer­i­ca 2014.” Accessed March 12, 
2016​.­http://­www​.­gsmamobileeconomylatinamerica​.­com​/­GSMA​_­Mobile​_­Economy​
_­LatinAmerica​_­2014​.­pdf
Internet World Stats. 2014. “Ec­ua­dor Internet Usage Population and Telecom Reports.” 
May 29. Accessed March 10, 2016. http://­www​.­internetw​orldstats​.­com​/­sa​/­ec​.­htm
ITU Telecommunication Development Bureau. 2013. “International Internet Connectivity 
in Latin Amer­i­ca and the Ca­rib­bean.” March. Accessed March 12, 2016. https://­www​
.­itu​.­int​/­en​/­ITU​-­D​/­Regulatory​-­Market​/­Documents​/­Internationalpercent20Internetperc
ent20Connectivitypercent20inpercent20Latinpercent20Americapercent20andper​
cent20thepercent20Caribbean​.­pdf
Lauderbaugh, George. 2012. The History of Ec­ua­dor. Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood.
Sandoval, Carla. 2015. “Facebook es la Red Social másUtilizada en el Ec­ua­dor y No 
TieneCompetencia.” April 15. Accessed March 11, 2016. http://­www​.­elcomercio​.­com​
/­tendencias​/­facebook​-­redessociales​-­ecuador​-­inec​-­usuarios​.­html
Solano, Gonzalo. 2013. “Journalists: Death Threats, Intimidation Mark Rising Hostility 
against Press in Ec­ua­dor.” December 7. Accessed March 12, 2016. http://­www​.­foxnews​
.­com​/­world​/­2013​/­12​/­07​/­journalists​-­death​-­threats​-­intimidation​-­mark​-­rising​-­hostility​
-­against​-­press​-­in​.­html
World Bank. 2016. “Internet Users (per 100 ­People).” Accessed March 14, 2016. http://­
data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2​/­countries​/­1W​?­page​=­3&display​
=­default
EGYPT
The most populous Arab country, Egypt has historically played a significant role in 
the ­Middle East, setting trends across the region in media and culture. While the 
golden age of Egyptian cinema has long passed, the country remains a major influ-
ence, even as the media of communication and consumption have changed. De-
spite the relatively late adoption of internet and social media, per­sis­tently low 

EGYPT
75
penetration rates, and slow internet speeds, Egypt’s social media landscape is par-
ticularly dynamic. This was most evident in the prominent role that social media 
played in the country’s 2011 revolution; however, it also manifests itself in the fre-
quency and ways in which Egyptians use social media platforms to collect, com-
municate, and express ideas.
While the numbers remain low, internet usage has spiked dramatically in recent 
years, as the government has worked to implement policy and achieve universal 
access. In 2002, the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
launched the ­Free Internet Initiative, providing internet at the same price as local 
phone calls. At the same time, the ministry and other private and public stakehold-
ers implemented plans to make PCs and internet connection available to all 
­house­holds and communities. With the majority of the population living in rural 
areas, the aims of ­these proj­ects include raising computer literacy levels and reduc-
ing the digital divide between ­these areas and urban centers, particularly the capi-
tal, Cairo (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 2015).
The effect of ­these and other initiatives reflect clearly in the numbers. In 2000, 
Egypt had less than half a million internet users. By 2004, that number had jumped 
to 1.5 million, and in 2008, ­there ­were almost 14 million internet users (Vargas 
2012), and by 2016, that number had spiked to over 45 million, representing a 
An Egyptian man uses a laptop in Tahrir Square during an anti-­government demonstration in 
2011. Social media played a pivotal role in the uprising that led to the Egyptian Revolution in 
the same year, culminating in the end of President Hosni Mubarak’s thirty-­year rule. ( Joel 
Carillet​/­iStockphoto​.­com)

EGYPT
76
penetration rate of approximately 50 ­percent (Abdulla 2016). Still, the numbers 
remain low relative to the overall population. And despite government efforts, the 
numbers indicate the infrastructure is still lacking. According to the Internet Soci-
ety, an organ­ization that tracks and mea­sures internet access and speeds, Egypt 
ranked 127th out of the 144 countries mea­sured for download speeds (Internet 
Society 2016).
With a population of over 90 million (as of 2016) and a median age of around 
twenty-­five, Egypt’s young ­people are becoming increasingly engaged on digital me-
dia platforms. A high youth unemployment rate, which has risen steadily since 
well before the 2011 uprising (World Bank 2016), has inevitably affected the fre-
quency and ways in which users engage on ­these platforms.
The 2011 uprising that led to the end of former president Hosni Mubarak’s 
(1928–) thirty-­year rule was dubbed by many as a Facebook, Twitter, or social me-
dia revolution due to the pivotal role that ­these platforms played in organ­izing and 
coordinating the protests that ultimately led to the change in regime. In the years 
leading up to the so-­called Arab Spring, which saw mass protests across the ­Middle 
East and North Africa that in most cases resulted in regime change, civil war, or 
mass suppression, many scholars had begun to identify the potential impact of the 
internet and social media as an instrument for collective action. This action origi-
nally took the form of blogging, eventually shifting to more interactive websites like 
Facebook and Twitter.
It is widely believed that what tipped the balance and helped spur the events of 
2011 in Egypt was the death of a young man named Khaled Said (1982–2010), 
who had been placed in police custody the previous year. Years of police brutality, 
growing social in­equality, and inaccessibility of many basic goods and ser­vices had 
led to wide-­scale disillusionment with the government. In June 2010, ­after Said’s 
death, a young Google executive named Weal Ghonim (1980–) started a Facebook 
page called Kulena Khaled Said (“We are all Khaled Said”). The page, with 32 mil-
lion “likes,” 1.9 million active users, and widespread engagement by Egyptians, 
ended up being one of the main organ­izing platforms for the January 25 revolu-
tion (Abdulla 2016). It was largely through exposure to Facebook pages like this 
that protests in the form of ­silent stands ­were or­ga­nized; in many ­silent stands, pro-
testors wearing black clothes chained themselves together and stood silently, 
sometimes reading a Koran or Bible, standing at least five meters apart so as not to 
break Egyptian laws outlawing mass assemblies. As a result, as early as January 26, 
2011, the Egyptian government began shutting down websites, including Facebook 
and Twitter, to minimize the spread of the unrest.
For the last several de­cades, Egypt’s social and po­liti­cal system has provided less 
and less space for youths to have a voice. As the young population has grown, they 
have become increasingly disenfranchised. Educated but unable to find employ-
ment, and without access to decision makers to have their grievances heard, social 
media increasingly became a place for young ­people to engage. However, as quickly 
as this new space for dissent emerged, it has in recent years become riskier to use.
On June 30, 2013, exactly one year ­after the inauguration of Mohamed Morsi 
(1951–), Egypt’s first demo­cratically elected president and a member of the Mus-
lim Brotherhood, mass protests erupted as millions of Egyptians gathered in the 

EGYPT
77
streets, demanding his immediate removal for what many viewed as violations of 
democracy taken during his time in office. ­These protests, widely recognized as the 
largest in the country’s history despite varying estimates, ­were also or­ga­nized via 
social media for the most part. On the eve­ning of July 3, General Abdel Fatah 
­el-­Sisi (1954–), announced that Morsi had been deposed.
In the period following the removal of Morsi, several mea­sures ­were taken that 
­were widely viewed as limiting freedom of expression. While social media and other 
digital platforms remained among the most open environments to voice dissent 
­because they are harder to regulate and individuals are harder to track, ­these new 
mea­sures have affected how Egyptians engage online. In November 2013, ­under 
the governance of interim president Adly Mansour (1945–), a controversial protest 
law was instituted that significantly limited freedom of assembly and provided se-
curity forces with broader reach to disperse protests forcibly. While the law more 
directly targeted offline engagement, it inevitably influenced the type of online 
organ­ization that had been so pivotal in the three years prior.
While this and other actions indirectly affected social media activity in the coun-
try, it was announced in 2014 that broad surveillance of the most widely used so-
cial media platforms would be introduced. With the technical support of a private 
com­pany, SEE Egypt, operating ­under the umbrella of the larger U.S.-­based cyber-
security firm Blue Coat, the Ministry of Interior announced that it would begin 
broad surveillance of social media platforms, including Facebook, Twitter, Skype, 
WhatsApp, and Viber (Frankel 2014).The official purpose of this surveillance was 
to combat terrorism, portrayed as a necessary mea­sure in light of numerous threats 
and attacks attributed to both members and supporters of the banned Muslim Broth-
erhood (who officially gained status as a terrorist organ­ization in late 2013) and 
local affiliates of the so-­called Islamic State organ­ization. However, it was widely 
reported that ­these mea­sures ­were also taken to protect the moral fabric of Egyp-
tian society and monitor the online activity of certain groups. This type of surveil-
lance ultimately affects Egyptians active on social media in terms of how they engage. 
As a result, self-­censorship has been observed and discussed widely, as the spaces 
for po­liti­cal discourse have shrunk.
According to the ­Middle East Media Survey, an annual publication of Northwest-
ern University in Qatar, in 2015, Egyptians ­were most active on Facebook, What-
sApp, and YouTube, representing 87 ­percent, 58 ­percent, and 49 ­percent of internet 
users, respectively. The same survey also found that of internet users in Egypt, 50 
percent use online platforms to increase contact with friends and ­family, whereas 
26 ­percent use them to connect with individuals with the same religious beliefs, and 
29 ­percent use them to connect with individuals with the same po­liti­cal beliefs.
Despite slow internet speeds and still low penetration rates, ­those Egyptians us-
ing social media are extremely active. According to the social media analytics com­
pany Socialbakers, as of 2012, Egypt was among the most “Facebook-­addicted” 
countries in terms of posting (second only to Brazil).
Egyptians have long been known for their colorful sense of humor. Limits on 
many forms of freedom of expression, combined with social and po­liti­cal grievances, 
have fostered a tradition of humor as an outlet for much of society. With the emer-
gence of new media, this has extended beyond jokes told between friends and 

EGYPT
78
­family in coffee shops and homes to online memes. ­These can vary from mocking 
major events to making light of some of the inefficiencies and oddities in day-­to-­
day life in the country, often opening discussions about the bound­aries of tasteful 
comedy. For instance, when a man hijacked a plane in May 2016, forcing it to land 
in Cyprus (allegedly so he could re­unite with his estranged wife), many Egyptians 
immediately jumped on the opportunity to make light of the situation, posting im-
ages and jokes on Facebook and Twitter. Some used Photoshop to manipulate the 
Egyptair logo, changing the tag­line to “Egyptair: We Fly You to Your Love,” while 
­others quipped that the hijacker was unable to email his wife due to slow internet 
connectivity in the country. ­There are countless examples of similar viral memes, 
from an Egyptian ­woman caught on camera saying “Shut up your mouse, Obama” 
in 2014, to donkeys breaking into Cairo International Airport, to Photoshopped 
images making light of the devastating flood in Alexandria in late 2015.
The introduction of the internet, and more specifically social media, into Egyp-
tian society has had a massive impact. While it initially created new space for dis-
cussion and opposition, this space has been made more restricted since. Still many 
analysts and media scholars see this shift as irreversible, particularly in a country 
like Egypt, with consistently growing penetration rates and a young population.
Sarah El-­Shaarawi
See also: Brazil; Libya; Syria; Tunisia; Yemen
Further Reading
Atef, Mageg, and Frenkel, Sheera. 2014. “Egypt Begins Surveillance of Facebook, Twitter, 
and Skype on Unpre­ce­dented Scale.” Buzzfeed, September 17. Accessed July 30, 2016. 
https://­www​.­buzzfeed​.­com​/­sheerafrenkel​/­egypt​-­begins​-­surveillance​-­of​-­facebook​
-­twitter​-­and​-­skype​-­on​-­u​?­utm​_­term​=­​.­rd7VxKrA6#​.­adzV63pLm
Arab Republic of Egypt Ministry of Communications and Information Technology. 2015. 
“WSIS +10 Overall Review of the Implementation of the WSIS Outcomes Profiles of 
Pro­gress.” World Summit on the Information Society. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­
www​.­mcit​.­gov​.­eg​/­Upcont​/­Documents​/­Profiles​-­of​-­Progress​.­pdf
Arab Social Media Influencers Summit. 2015. “Arab Social Media Report.” Accessed July 30, 
2016. http://­dmc​.­ae​/­img​/­pdf​/­white​-­papers​/­ArabSocialMediaReport​-­2015​.­pdf
Faris, David. 2013. Dissent and Revolution in a Digital Age: Social Media Blogging and Activism 
in Egypt. London: I. B. Tauris.
Hughes, Thomas, and Mubarak, Emad. 2014. “Censorship in Egypt: Online and Offline.” 
Madamasr, November 30, Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­madamasr​.­com​/­opinion​
/­politics​/­censorship​-­egypt​-­online​-­and​-­offline
International ­Labour Organ­ization. “Unemployment Youth Total.” World Bank. Accessed 
July 30, 2016. http://­data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­SL​.­UEM​.­1524​.­ZS
Internet Society. “Global Internet Maps.” Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­internetsociety​
.­org​/­map​/­global​-­internet​-­report​/­​?­gclid​=­Cj0KEQjwt​-­G8BRDktsvwpPTn1PkBEiQA​
-­MRsBYsc​_­ntfS1okNJGbS4GkuFVVtoUz1​_­SG2qlXJwEfuucaArfI8P8HAQ#download​
-­speed​-­fixed
Khamis, Sahar, and Vaughn, Katherine. 2011. “Cyberactivism in the Egyptian Revolution: 
How Civic Engagement and Citizen Journalism Tilted the Balance.” Arab Media & So­
ciety, 14. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­arabmediasociety​.­com​/­​?­article​=­769

EL SALVADOR
79
Northwestern University in Qatar. 2015. “Media Use in the ­Middle East, 2015.” Accessed 
July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­mideastmedia​.­org​/­survey​/­2015​/­
Socialbakers. 2012. “10 Most Facebook-­Addicted Countries.” October 16. Accessed July 30, 
2016. https://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­blog​/­961​-­10​-­most​-­facebook​-­addicted​-­countries​
-­on​-­facebook
 Vargas, Jose Antonio. 2012. “Spring Awakening: How an Egyptian Revolution Began on 
Facebook.” The New York Times, February 17. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​
.­nytimes​.­com​/­2012​/­02​/­19​/­books​/­review​/­how​-­an​-­egyptian​-­revolution​-­began​-­on​
-­facebook​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
World Bank. 2016. “Egypt: Unemployment, Total (% of ­Labor Force).” Accessed January 8, 
2017. http://­data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­SL​.­UEM​.­TOTL​.­ZS​?­locations​=­EG
EL SALVADOR
Located along the Pacific coast of Central Amer­i­ca, the Republic of El Salvador is 
nestled between Guatemala and Honduras. The tiny country of over 6 million in-
habitants endured twelve years of a devastating civil war, from roughly Decem-
ber  10, 1981, to December  15, 1992. At the war’s conclusion, the country 
embarked upon a path of reconciliation and economic reconstruction, including 
the country’s informational infrastructure, which has led to one of Central Amer­i­
ca’s smallest and most densely populated countries ranking higher in networked 
readiness than many other Central American countries (World Economic Forum 
2016). ­Today, despite the legacy of years of war and a history of devastating na-
tional disasters in the form of hurricanes and earthquakes, ­there are approximately 
2.352 million internet users in El Salvador (Internet Live Stats 2016).
Salvadorans abroad, especially in the United States, play a large role in the eco-
nomic and technological development of the country. In response to the civil war, 
many Salvadorans fled to other countries, such as Guatemala, Mexico, Honduras, 
and the United States. ­Today, over 2 million ­people of Salvadoran origin live in the 
United States. In addition to contributing to the global marketplace as users of the 
internet and consumers of mobile communications technology, ­these expatriates 
engage in the practice of sending “remittances,” the transfer of money by a person 
in one country to ­family and friends in another, back to ­family members in El Sal-
vador. Remittances sent from the United States to El Salvador have increased ­every 
year for de­cades. At the end of the civil war, Salvadorans received less than $1 
­billion in remittances; however, this total nearly tripled in the succeeding fifteen 
years (Gammage 2007). In 2013, the country received $3.965 billion (90 ­percent of 
which originated from the United States), which accounted for 16.5 ­percent of El 
Salvador’s annual gross domestic product (GDP) (Pew Research Center 2013). By 
2015, this total had increased to $4.27 billion (Trading Economics 2016). Some 
have suggested that remittances have become one of the most effective tools for 
reducing poverty and in­equality in El Salvador.
Remittances go far beyond the personal support of friends and relatives. Some 
of ­these funds go ­toward purchasing computers for classrooms in their former com-
munities. In other cases, money has been donated to build or rebuild soccer sta-
diums. In Intipuca, a former cotton farming community with fewer than 10,000 

EL SALVADOR
80
inhabitants whose industry collapsed during the economic crash of the 1960s, new 
business has been introduced as a result of money that flows into the town through 
foreign remittances. For example, ­there are five money transfer agencies, a travel 
agency booking flights to the United States, and an internet café (Elton 2002).While 
the U.S. dollar had been used alongside the Salvadoran Colon for years in com-
munities like Intipuca, on January 1, 2001, the U.S. dollar became the official cur-
rency of El Salvador.
In accord with the policy of reconciliation and reconstruction established ­after 
the conclusion of the civil war, Armando Calderón Sol (1948–), who became El 
Salvador’s first demo­cratically elected president on June 1, 1994, began advocating 
for privatized telecommunications companies in an effort to stimulate the economy 
and spur the development of the country’s information infrastructure, paving the 
way for internet access. Unfortunately, development efforts suffered severe setbacks 
as a result of the devastation that followed Hurricane Mitch in 1998 and a severe 
earthquake in 2001. Reports of ­people waiting ten years to have a telephone in-
stalled may provide answers as to why fixed-­line telephony penetration had only 
reached 15 ­percent by 2013 (ITU 2013). On the other hand, mobile telephony pen-
etration, which had reached 19.3 ­percent in 2004, had grown enormously to a rate 
of 136 ­percent by 2013 (Internet World Stats 2014; ITU 2013). Despite access to 
mobile telephones, access to the internet remained limited. By the year 2000, ­there 
­were 68,428 internet users in El Salvador. During the next five years, the number 
of internet users more than tripled, to 249,783. In 2013, only 6 ­percent of the popu-
lation had access to mobile broadband and national internet penetration had only 
reached 23 ­percent (ITU 2013).
Many individuals working to enhance and sustain El Salvador’s information in-
frastructure believe that technologies such as the internet, personal computers, wire-
less or mobile communication, along with increased access to education, are the 
answers to El Salvador overcoming its “lost de­cade” and become an active partici-
pant in the global network. For example, Salvadoran poet and novelist Manlio 
­Argueta (1935–) returned to El Salvador ­after twelve years of exile in Costa Rica. 
Argueta believed that books, reading, and libraries ­were essential ele­ments in the 
reconstruction of El Salvador. He also recognized the value of the internet and li-
braries as major components of El Salvador’s efforts to move forward (McPhail 
2000).
As of January 1, 2016, internet penetration in El Salvador was approximately 
38 ­percent of the population (Internet Live Stats 2016). ­These figures do not take 
into account the millions of Salvadorans abroad that use the internet to maintain 
regular contact with friends, relatives, and business associates. Similar to other coun-
tries in Central Amer­i­ca, the majority of internet users in El Salvador access the 
internet with their cell phones. Initially, the majority of internet users lived in one 
of El Salvador’s fourteen largest cities, like San Salvador, with a population of 1.7 
million ­people. However, with the advent of foreign investments from countries 
like France and the United States, the introduction of mobile technology offering 
­free Wi-­Fi, and social media like Facebook and Twitter in predominantly rural 
areas, ­these demographics changed drastically. In fact, although El Salvador is the 
smallest and perhaps one of the most impoverished countries in Central Amer­i­ca, 

EL SALVADOR
81
by the end of 2008, it had the largest number of cell phones per person in the re-
gion, with 6.6 million for a population of 5.8 million ­people, the estimated num-
ber of residents at that time (Gutierrez 2009).
Several Salvadoran daily news outlets dominate the rankings of most visited web-
sites in El Salvador: namely, El Blog, El Salvador, La Prensa Gráfica, and La Página 
(Alexa 2016). The top two social networking websites are Facebook, dominating 
social media usage with 92.6 ­percent penetration; and Twitter, with 6.89 ­percent 
penetration (StatsMonkey 2015). Not only does Facebook allow users to connect 
with ­family and friends, upload photos, and share links, the platform has recently 
added a new feature that allows users to send and receive money online via a se-
cure connection. Other social media sites used in El Salvador are YouTube and 
Google+. Top Facebook pages reflect overall internet usage, with some of the most 
visited sites belonging to popu­lar Salvadoran news outlets. Salvadorans’ reasons for 
using the internet are communicating, watching and uploading videos, sending re-
mittances, taking classes, searching for information, and promoting local businesses.
In addition to the typical uses of El Salvador’s most popu­lar social media website, 
many organ­izations and programs have found Facebook to be the most successful 
method of reaching target audiences. For example, Carana Corporation’s non-
governmental organ­ization (NGO) proj­ect, the Improving Access to Employment 
Program, aimed at young Salvadorans seeking employment found success only ­after 
creating a Facebook page. In the two-­year lifespan of the proj­ect, their Facebook 
page grew from 800 to 65,000 fans, and by 2014, forty companies ­were sharing 
multiple job opportunities ­every week (Taurasi 2014).
Other uses of social media have been less positive for Salvadorans. For some time, 
gang vio­lence in El Salvador has been a major national issue; in the first three months 
of 2016, ­there was one murder per hour in the country on average (Harris et al. 
2016). Access to social media allowed gang members to glorify gang life through 
images of vio­lence and other and symbols like ­music, modes of dress, and be­hav­
ior that romanticizes the life of the outlaw in society. In June 2016, El Salvador’s 
director of prisons, Rodil Hernández (n.d.–), announced that inmates at prisons 
filled with gang members had been accessing Wi-­Fi signals to use social media sites 
such as WhatsApp to control gang activity outside the prison, including extorting 
victims and issuing death warrants. Hernández did not explain how inmates had 
been able to access the internet but explained that in the past, ­family members had 
aided inmates by moving close to the prisons to provide them with internet signals 
(Alonso 2016; López 2016).
John G. Hall and Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: France; Honduras; Mexico; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in El Salvador.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­SV
Alonso, Luis Fernando. 2016. “El Salvador Inmates Using WhatsApp for Extortion: Offi-
cial.” InSight Crime. Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­insightcrime​.­org​/­news​-­briefs​
/­el​-­salvador​-­inmates​-­using​-­whatsapp​-­extortion​-­official

ESTONIA
82
Elton, Catherine. 2002. “Remembering Their Roots; Emigrants to U.S. Maintain Strong 
Ties to Hometown.” Washington Times, March 26. Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­
www​.­questia​.­com​/­article​/­1G1​-­84182418​/­remembering​-­their​-­roots​-­emigrants​-­to​-­u​-­s​
-­maintain
Gammage, Sarah. 2007. “El Salvador: Despite End to Civil War, Emigration Continues.” 
MPI: Migration Policy Institute. Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­migrationpolicy​
.­org​/­article​/­el​-­salvador​-­despite​-­end​-­civil​-­war​-­emigration​-­continues
Gutierrez, Raúl. 2009. “El Salvador: Central Amer­i­ca’s Leader in Cell Phone Use.” January 14. 
Inter Press Ser­vices News Agency. Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­ipsnews​.­net​
/­2009​/­01​/­el​-­salvador​-­central​-­americarsquos​-­leader​-­in​-­cell​-­phone​-­use​/­
Harris, Dan, Desiderio, Adam, Milliman, Jenna, and Effron, Lauren. 2016. “In El Salvador, 
the Murder Capital of the World, Gang Vio­lence Becomes a Way of Life.” ABC News. 
Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­abcnews​.­go​.­com​/­International​/­el​-­salvador​-­murder​
-­capital​-­world​-­gang​-­violence​-­life​/­story​?­id​=­39177963
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2013. “El Salvador Profile.” Accessed Au-
gust 21, 2016. https://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­net4​/­itu​-­d​/­icteye​/­CountryProfileReport​.­aspx​?­countryID​
=­210
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “El Salvador Internet Users.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­
www​.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­el​-­salvador​/­
Internet World Stats. 2014. “El Salvador.” Accessed August  21, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­am​/­sv​.­htm
López, Jaime. 2016. “Reos Siguen Comunicándo se por Internet.” Noticias de El Salvador, 
June 24. Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­elsalvador​.­com​/­articulo​/­sucesos​/­reos​
-­siguen​-­comunicandose​-­por​-­internet​-­116913
McPhail, Martha E. 2000. “­After the War in El Salvador.” American Libraries, 31:1. Accessed 
August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­questia​.­com​/­read​/­1G1​-­59013163​/­after​-­the​-­war​-­in​-­el​
-­salvador
Pew Research Center. 2013. “Remittances Received by El Salvador.” Accessed August 21, 
2016. http://­www​.­pewhispanic​.­org​/­2013​/­11​/­15​/­remittances​-­to​-­latin​-­america​-­recover​
-­but​-­not​-­to​-­mexico​/­ph​-­remittances​-­11​-­2013​-­a​-­08​/­
StatsMonkey. 2015. “El Salvador Social Media Usage Statistics Using Mobile.” Accessed Au-
gust 21, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­sunburst​/­21339​-­el​-­salvador​-­mobile​-­soci​
al-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
Taurasi, Lynda-­Marie. 2014. “Social Media for Development: Making the Most of Facebook.” 
The Guardian, June 2. Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­global​
-­development​-­professionals​-­network​/­2014​/­jun​/­02​/­social​-­media​-­facebook​-­case​
-­studies
Trading Economics. 2016. “El Salvador Remittances.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­
www​.­tradingeconomics​.­com​/­el​-­salvador​/­remittances
World Economic Forum. 2016. “Network Readiness Index.” Accessed August 21, 2016. 
http://­reports​.­weforum​.­org​/­global​-­information​-­technology​-­report​-­2015​/­network​
-­readiness​-­index​/­
ESTONIA
Estonia, located on the northeastern edge of the Eu­ro­pean Union, is a tiny Baltic 
state that has become known as one of the most wired and digitally advanced 
­socie­ties in the world. Currently, “Estonia has a technological ecosystem in which 

ESTONIA
83
almost ­every regular daily activity of public life provides the impetus for its 
transformation into an e-­service” (Kotka, Alvarez del Castillo, and Korjus 2015, 2), 
earning the country the label of “e-­Estonia.” The country’s success story of transi-
tioning from a postsocialist country to a modern democracy has been built upon 
the “internetization” of the society, the result of a partnership among a forward-­
thinking government, a proactive information and communication technology (ICT) 
sector, and a tech-­savvy population of 1.3 million ­people.
When the country regained in­de­pen­dence in 1991 ­after nearly fifty years of So-
viet rule, Estonia’s new leadership initiated an ambitious agenda for administrative 
reform, aiming to build a tech-­savvy society that would be competitive in the world. 
By the end of 2015, 939 institutions use the x-­road system (i.e. a technological 
and orga­nizational environment enabling secure internet-­based data exchange be-
tween information systems), daily in Estonia and 1,723 dif­fer­ent e-­services, includ-
ing digital identification, digital signature, e-­voting, electronic tax filing, online 
medical prescriptions, internet voting, online banking, and mobile parking ­were 
made available to Estonian citizens (Introduction of X-­Road 2016). For instance, 
filing an online tax declaration takes on average five minutes, participating in elec-
tions via internet can be done in ninety seconds, and it takes about fifteen minutes 
to create a new com­pany.
The Estonian ICT success story is largely made pos­si­ble due to the nature of its 
infrastructure, which was designed as a decentralized system. In 2000, the Esto-
nian Parliament passed the Digital Signature Act, which made the digital signature 
equivalent to a handwritten one. The law also enabled the development of elec-
tronic identity (ID) cards that would allow Estonian citizens and residents to sign 
documents digitally and to use private and governmental e-­services that require 
secure authentication. The first electronic IDs ­were issued in January 2002 and have 
become compulsory for all citizens are as they are equally valid for both digital and 
physical identification. Since 2011, the citizens of Estonia can also officially identify 
themselves with a mobile ID and use vari­ous public and private sector e-­services 
via cell phones. For example, mobile-­ID ­owners can provide digital signatures, 
apply for a driver’s license, access and pro­cess real estate data and documents, apply 
for a personal loan, purchase and manage insurance, file court cases, pay for bills, 
­etc. Currently, more than 1 million active ID cards have been issued and more than 
75,000 ­people use mobile IDs (ID.ee 2016).
By the year 2000, internet access had been established as a basic ­human right in 
Estonia; nevertheless, most Estonians at the time ­were still unable to afford com-
puters or internet connections in their homes. In fact, at the beginning of the new 
millennium, less than one third of Estonians had used the internet (Kalkun and 
Kalvet 2002). Furthermore, in addition to the digital divide in terms of access, the 
majority of the population lacked the motivation and skills to use the ICT. In order 
to address ­these issues, vari­ous public-­private partnership proj­ects emerged that 
aimed to promote the spread of internet use among the Estonian population. Two 
of the most well known proj­ects of the time ­were the Tiger Leap proj­ect, which 
helped to bring computers and provide internet access to all schools in Estonia, 
and the Look@World Proj­ect, which helped to create hundreds of internet access 

ESTONIA
84
points all around Estonia, thereby enabling 10 ­percent of the adult population in 
Estonia to learn about the use of ICTs.
By September 2015, 88.4 ­percent of the Estonian population used the internet 
(Facts about e-­Estonia 2016). Internet penetration was highest among the youn­
gest age groups—­reaching 100 ­percent in the sixteen to twenty-­four-­year-­old age 
group, followed by 99 ­percent among twenty-­five to thirty-­four-­year-­olds (Ait 
2016). Eurostate Information Society indicators reveal that 88  ­percent of the 
­house­holds and 97 ­percent of the enterprises in Estonia have internet access (eGov-
ernment in Estonia 2016). Furthermore, ­free and speedy wireless internet access is 
available almost everywhere around the country—­not only in public transport, 
parks, pubs and restaurants, airports, and bus stations, but internet can also be ac-
cessed from a forest or while lying on the beach.
In comparison to the other Eu­ro­pean Union countries, where only 41 ­percent 
of the individuals who use the internet use it for interacting with public authorities 
and only 39 ­percent of individuals use the internet for obtaining information from 
the public, the respective numbers for Estonia are 81 and 79 ­percent (eGovernment 
in Estonia 2016). Estonia’s success in modernizing its public sector and providing 
transparent governance has turned the country into a champion of e-­governance, 
which has helped to provide a model for developing similar e-­solutions for many 
countries in the world.
Estonian success in this realm is built on the understanding that vari­ous 
­e-­government systems used in Estonia, such as e-­tax, online health-­registry, or e-­law, 
help to create an atmosphere of openness and trust between the state and the ­people 
that it serves. Furthermore, all levels of administration in Estonia, from the national 
leadership to local councils, use vari­ous e-­solutions. For instance, since 2000, the 
Estonian government has been using the e-­Cabinet, which allows the ministers to 
prepare for cabinet meetings, conduct them, and review minutes entirely without 
paper. As the e-­Cabinet system uses web-­based software and audiovisual equip-
ment, ministers can participate in the meetings remotely.
Estonia was also the first country in the world to introduce nationwide internet 
voting. E-­voting was first practiced on the local government elections in 2005, and 
two years ­later, the country also implemented the first online parliamentary elec-
tions in the world. In ten years’ time, Estonia has held eight elections during which 
citizens have been able to cast their legally binding vote ­either via internet or, since 
2011, via mobile phone. The number of internet voters has grown considerably—­
while only ­every fiftieth vote was cast over the internet during the first internet en-
abled elections in 2005, ­every third vote was cast online during the Eu­ro­pean 
Parliament elections in 2014 (Vassil 2016, 3).
Estonia also has a striving start-up culture that has sometimes been referred to as 
“Eu­rope’s Silicon Valley” or “the Eu­ro­pean Union’s Delaware.” In fact, it has been sug-
gested that Estonia produces more start-­ups per head of population than any other 
country in the Eu­ro­pean Union. For instance, Estonian programmers have been 
­behind creating such digital brands as Hotmail, Skype, Transferwise, and CrabCad.
One of the first social networking sites in the world was also created in Estonia; 
on May 1, 2002, a national-­language based dating and communication website 

ESTONIA
85
called Rate was launched. The site provided its users with vari­ous opportunities 
for communication, self-­expression, and identity-­creation (e.g. uploading photos, 
rating the photos and sending comments to other users, socializing in the chatroom, 
keeping a blog, reading news stories, ­etc.). The site was im­mensely popu­lar among 
the young, but also among the adult population as of the year 2007, ­there ­were 
more than 300,000 registered users of the site, which meant that ­every third Esto-
nian was a user of Rate (Siibak & Ugur 2010). Currently, the most popu­lar social 
media site in Estonia by far is Facebook, with 58 ­percent of the Estonian-­speaking 
and 39 ­percent of the Russian-­speaking population using the site (Seppel 2015). 
Other popu­lar social media sites among Estonians are YouTube, Instagram, and 
LinkedIn, whereas among the Russian-­speaking population, Odnaklassniki and 
VKontakte are most often used. Research suggests that the majority (72 ­percent) 
of Estonian internet users engage in social media, with 51 ­percent of the users 
claiming to create content on the sites, and 15  ­percent acting as lurkers 
­(Murumaa-­Mengel, Pruulmann-­Vengerfeldt, & Laas-­Mikko 2014). The most 
­active social media users are young ­people, fifteen-­ to twenty-­nine year olds, 
where the usage is close to 100 ­percent, but the number decreases for older age 
groups.
In 2014, Estonia launched a new e-­residency program with the aim to offer a 
transnational digital identity to ­every citizen of the world. E-­residents receive an 
e-­ID that, in addition to other opportunities, enables them to establish an Estonian 
com­pany and manage it from anywhere in the world. However, in contrast to the 
digital ID of Estonian residents, the digital-­ID of e-­residents does not confer Esto-
nian citizenship, tax residency, ­free access to Estonia or the Eu­ro­pean Union, nor 
is it valid as a travel document. By August 2016, more than 12,400 e-­residency 
applications from 133 countries had been issued (e-­residents dashboard, 2016).
The aim of the program is to have more than 10 million e-­residents all over the 
world by 2025.
The multitude of e-­services, including the e-­Cabinet system, and the comfort-
able and effective online lifestyle that ­these offer to the public is why Estonia has 
invested heavi­ly in its cybersecurity infrastructure. In fact, a secure 2,048-­bit en-
cryption powers Estonia’s electronic-­ID, digital signature, and X-­road-­enabled sys-
tems to provide built-in safety and security to ­every single Estonian e-­government 
and IT infrastructure system. Nevertheless, in April 2007, Estonia made interna-
tional headlines by becoming the first nation in history to fall ­under a large-­scale 
cyberattack; some scholars have referred to it as the first cyber war in history. The 
distributed denial of ser­vice (DDoS) attacks, which ­were reportedly perpetrated by 
po­liti­cally motivated Russian hacktivists, lasted for several days, during which web-
sites of vari­ous Estonian ministries, banks, government, and news agencies ­were 
hacked and defaced. The Estonian government’s decision to relocate the Soviet 
World War II memorial known as the Bronze Soldier from its original place to the 
Tallinn Military Cemetery has been identified as the pos­si­ble trigger both for riot-
ing on the streets of its capital, Tallinn, by the Russian-­speaking individuals, as well 
as cyberattacks. Estonia’s experience in ­handling the cyberattacks of 2007 has 
­positioned the country as a leader in cybersecurity. Its model of building national 

ESTONIA
86
defensive cybersecurity capability systems has been studied by many countries of 
the world. Since 2008, Tallinn has been home to the Cyber Defense Centre of North 
Atlantic Treaty Organ­ization (NATO).
Andra Siibak
See also: Finland; Rus­sia
Further Reading
Ait, Jaanika. 2015. “Internet Use among ­People Aged 65–74.” Quarterly Bulletin of Statistics 
Estonia, 3: 94–99. Accessed June 26, 2016. http://­www​.­stat​.­ee​/­90737
Anthes, Gary. 2015. “Estonia-­ a Model for e-­Government.” September 14. Accessed July 5, 
2016​. ­http://­incorporate​.­ee​/­news​/­estonia​-­a​-­model​-­for​-­e​-­government
e​-­Estonia. 2016. Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­e​-­estonia​.­com​/­
e​-­residents dashboard. 2016. Accessed August 13, 2016. https://­app​.­cyfe​.­com​/­dashboards​
/­195223​/­5587fe4e52036102283711615553
European Commission. 2016. “E-­Government in Estonia.” Accessed 26 June, 2016. https://­
joinup​.­ec​.­europa​.­eu​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­ckeditor​_­files​/­files​/­eGovernment%20in%20Es​
tonia%20​-­%20February%202016%20​-­%2018​_­00​_­v4​_­00​.­pdf
Herzog, Stephen. 2011. “Revisiting the Estonian Cyber Attacks: Digital Threats and Multi-
national Responses.” Journal of Strategic Security, 4 (2):49–60. Accessed July 4, 2016. 
http://­scholarcommons​.­usf​.­edu​/­cgi​/­viewcontent​.­cgi​?­article​=­1105&context​=­jss
ID​.­ee. “ID.ee.” Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­id​.­ee​/­​?­lang​=­en&id​=­36881
Tallinn, Estonia, hosts the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence, a center 
that conducts training and research on cybersecurity for its twenty-­eight members. Estonia is 
not only working at the forefront of cybersecurity; the country itself is sometimes nicknamed 
­e-­Stonia ­because of its pro­gress on e-­Government and e-­Residency. Many other countries are 
keeping an eye on the country’s efforts to learn how they might be incorporated into their own 
policies. (AP Photo/NIPA, Timur Nisametdinov)

ETHIOPIA
87
Information System Authority. 2016. “Introduction of X-­Road.” Republic of Estonia. Ac-
cessed August 13, 2016. https://­www​.­ria​.­ee​/­en​/­introduction​-­of​-­xroad​.­html
Kalkun, Mari, and Kalvet, Tarmo. 2002. “Digital Divide in Estonia and How to Bridge It.” 
Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­praxis​.­ee​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2014​/­03​/­2002​-­Digital​
-­divide​-­in​-­Estonia​.­pdf
Kotka, Taavi, Alvarez del Castillo, Carlos Ivan, and Korjus, Kaspar. 2015. “Estonian e-­
Residency: Redefining the Nation-­State in the Digital Era.” University of Oxford Cyber 
Studies Programme, Working Paper Series, 3, 1–16. Accessed June 26, 2016. http://­
www​.­politics​.­ox​.­ac​.­uk​/­materials​/­publications​/­14883​/­workingpaperno3kotkavargasko
rjus​.­pdf
Murumaa​-­Mengel, Maria, Pruulmann-­Vengerfeldt, Pille, and Laas-­Mikko, Katrin. 2014. “The 
Right to Privacy as a ­Human Right and Everyday Technologies. Methodology and Re-
sults of the Study.” Accessed August 13, 2016. http://­www​.­humanrightsestonia​.­ee​/­wp​
/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2014​/­12​/­ENG​-­Study​-­IV​-­part​-­Methodology​-­and​-­results​-­of​-­the​
-­study​.­pdf
Seppel, Külliki. 2015. “Meediajainfoväli [Media and Information field].” Accessed August 13, 
2016​. http://­www​.­kul​.­ee​/­sites​/­kulminn​/­files​/­7peatykk​.­pdf
Siibak, Andra, and Ugur, Kadri. 2010. “Is Social Networking the New Online Playground 
for Young ­Children? A Study of Rate Profiles in Estonia.” In High-­Tech Tots: Childhood 
in a Digital World, edited by Ilene M. Berson, and Michael J. Berson. Information Age 
Publishing, 125–152.
Vassil, Kristjan. 2016. “Introduction.” In E-­voting in Estonia: Technological Diffusion and Other 
Developments over Ten Years (2005–2015), edited by Mihel Solvak and Kristjan Vassil. 
Johan Skytte Institute of Po­liti­cal Sciences: University of Tartu. Accessed June 26, 2016. 
http://­skytte​.­ut​.­ee​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­skytte​/­e​_­voting​_­in​_­estonia​_­vassil​_­solvak​_­a5​
_­web​.­pdf
ETHIOPIA
The Federal Demo­cratic Republic of Ethiopia is situated in the horn of Africa. It is 
located east of Sudan and South Sudan, west of Djibouti and Somalia, south of 
Eritrea, and north of ­Kenya. Ethiopia continues to have one of the lowest internet 
penetration rates in the world. In mid-2016, Ethiopia’s internet penetration was 
approximately 3 ­percent of a population estimated to be 94 million. More recently, 
the majority of residents living in major Ethiopian cities have begun accessing the 
internet through mobile phones. Internet users in Ethiopia mainly use Facebook, 
and YouTube, with growing user bases on Viber, Facebook Messenger, Imo, What-
sApp, and Tango. To date, ­there are no ­viable alternative domestic platforms that 
are positioned to prominently address local needs.
For many centuries, Ethiopia was ­under imperial rule; ­later it was governed by 
a communist dictatorship ­until the current ruling party, Ethiopian ­People’s Revolu-
tionary Demo­cratic Front (EPRDF). The EPRDF is a co­ali­tion of ethnically based 
po­liti­cal parties that took power in the early 1990s. Since taking power, the gov-
ernment has instituted multiyear economic development agendas that have included 
an emphasis on telecommunication ser­vices. Most notably, the government insti-
tuted a five-­year “growth and transformation plan” to upgrade existing networks 
to accommodate emerging information communication technologies (ICTs), and 

ETHIOPIA
88
to improve and maintain the quality of existing ICT infrastructure. As a result, the 
cost of owning mobile phones continues to decrease. Ethio Telecom, the sole 
government-­owned telecommunications operator in the country, offers varying lev-
els of connectivity alternatives, including 4G, 3G, EVDO, and CDMA 1X, in 
monthly packages from 1 GB to 100 GB, and at prices ranging from $8 to $440, 
respectively. The average retail price of a smartphone in Ethiopia is $262, which is 
about 47.6 ­percent of per capita income (KPCB Internet Trends 2016). Although 
the cost of mobile owner­ship and ser­vices are significantly lower than before, they 
remain out of reach for many Ethiopians whose livelihood depends on subsistence 
farming.
To improve infrastructure, the Ethiopian government has been working with the 
Chinese telecommunication technology companies ZTE Corporation, Huawei Tech-
nologies, the Chinese International Telecommunication Construction Corpora-
tion, and more recently with the Swedish telecom group Ericsson, to transform 
existing networks and increase network capacity to accelerate the rate in which 
­people living in rural parts of Ethiopia acquire access to ICT ser­vices. The result-
ing expansion is estimated to have reached a total of 85 ­percent land coverage, and 
to have increased the ser­vice capacity to 59 million mobile subscribers (Ethio Tele-
com 2013). The increase in subscribers is expected to accelerate the development 
of mobile devices and ser­vices that support local languages.
Although ­there are more than 80 languages spoken in Ethiopia, Amharic is the 
lingua franca (working language) of the federal government. Amharic uses non-­
Latin scripts that are sometimes referred to as abugida, which contain more than 
250 individual characters. It has been a challenge for Ethiopians who cannot speak 
En­glish to use the internet, or even operate computers and mobile phones. How-
ever, companies such as Microsoft and Google are actively working to change this 
by localizing their web-­based and desktop software. For example, as part of its lo-
cal language program, Microsoft Corporation has released an Amharic version of 
its Win­dows operating system and Microsoft Office suite, its flagship productivity 
software. The com­pany teamed up with Ethiopian language experts and technology 
professionals, as well as the Ethiopian Information Communications Technology 
Development Agency (EICTDA), to complete the proj­ect (SAHLE 2010).
Nevertheless, using their own language on the internet continues to be the big-
gest obstacle facing internet users in Ethiopia. For example, Facebook, the largest 
social network in the world, does not support any of Ethiopia’s languages. Ethio-
pian investors and entrepreneurs are beginning to address this issue. In 2011, TANA 
Communications began assembling one of the first mobile phones to use Amharic 
as its default language. Since then, additional mobile device manufacturers have 
begun assembling mobile phones that support the local languages in Ethiopia.
Government restriction over internet startups is slowly and selectively loosen-
ing. As a result, internet companies with limited reach have emerged. One such 
com­pany is ICE Addis, founded by Markos Lemma (1984–) and Oliver Petzoldt 
(c. 1976–), which has helped build ser­vices such as LOCALLY, a location-­based 
social networking platform that aims to connect businesses and ser­vices with their 
local communities in Ethiopia and the African continent. Karta is another web 

ETHIOPIA
89
ser­vice that focuses on creating digital mapping solutions for Ethiopia. Karta seeks 
to solve the prob­lem that many Ethiopians face navigating around their cities due 
to a lack of street name signage and general unfamiliarity with the concept of street 
names among city dwellers. Instead of using street names to locate a specific place, 
Karta uses local administrative structures such as subcities, districts, and ­house num-
bers. Although the two ser­vices have social components, neither of them directly 
compete with social networks such as Twitter and Facebook.
Facebook continues to be the most popu­lar social media platform in Ethiopia. 
In 2014, ­there ­were approximately 1,960,000 Facebook users in Ethiopia (Riaga 
2014). Ethiopian social media users tend to use Facebook somewhat differently than 
in neighboring countries and the world. Facebook in Ethiopia is used as a source 
of entertainment and news. In fact, seven of the other top ten pages are all dedi-
cated to ­either news or entertainment: DireTube, Yehabesha, Yegna Tube, Yeneta 
Tube, BeteTube, EthioTube, and Zehabesha (Socialbakers 2016). Still, many Ethio-
pians use Facebook for social engagement and community building as well. Social 
engagement and discussions tend to be dif­fer­ent depending on the age group in-
volved. While younger Ethiopians tend to be more interested in current affairs and 
less interested in addressing or discussing sensitive old grievances, older Ethiopian 
Facebook users are more likely to bring up historical injustices (Gagliardone et al. 
2016).
The Ethiopian government maintains strict control over internet and mobile tech-
nologies. As a result, it has the capability to monitor, restrict, and disrupt informa-
tion that flows through the internet, including day-­to-­day communication of 
Ethiopians taking place via ICTs. Due to long-­standing government mono­poly of 
telecommunication ser­vices, international watchdogs claim that the Ethiopian gov-
ernment actively limits access to information while keeping tabs on activities that 
it considers a threat, often without any “oversight from in­de­pen­dent legislative or 
judicial mechanisms that would typically ensure that surveillance capabilities are 
not misused” (­Human Rights Watch 2015). In fact, the Ethiopian government’s on-
line practices ­were recently labeled as some of the most restrictive and repressive 
in the world. The Committee to Protect Journalists, Freedom House, and ­Human 
Rights Watch claimed that the Ethiopian government abuses its power to silence 
online speech. ­These organ­izations claim that Ethio Telecom, in tandem with the 
Information Network Security Agency (INSA), routinely blocks critical news and 
opposition websites. The blockage is especially intensified during the lead-up to 
elections. The government’s approach to internet filtering generally entails hinder-
ing access to a list of specific internet protocol (IP) addresses or domain names at 
the level of international gateways. Deep-­packet inspection (DPI), a censorship strat-
egy used by China, Iran, and Kazakhstan, was also employed in the beginning of 
2012 (Runa 2012).
The Ethiopian government maintains that the restrictions and limitations im-
posed on selected sources of information on the internet ­are justified and consis-
tent with Ethiopia’s constitution. However, in addition to restricting internet activities 
in the country, INSA targets individuals and groups living outside Ethiopia. For 
­example, in 2013, 2014, and 2015, Ethiopian Satellite Tele­vi­sion Ser­vice (ESAT) 

ETHIOPIA
90
employees residing in the United States received a spyware file concealed as a Mi-
crosoft Word document file through Skype. When installed, the spyware would 
grant access to files, emails, passwords, Skype calls, and keystrokes made on the 
infected computer via a remote control system. Citizen Lab, a research laboratory 
that focuses on ICTs, ­human rights, and global security, linked the attacker to 
Ethiopia’s INSA. Testing conducted by researchers at Citizen Lab linked the spy-
ware to an Italian private security group known as Hacking Team, implying that 
the INSA attacker obtained access to the Hacking Group spyware and utilized it 
(Citizen Lab 2015). The Ethiopian government claimed that its targets in the 
United States and elsewhere in the world ­were threats to national security. In some 
instances, according to the government, the individuals belonged to terrorist 
organ­izations seeking to overthrow the Ethiopian government by force.
Ethiopia does not have prominent citizen hacker groups. However, po­liti­cal ac-
tivists use social media (and, more specifically, Facebook) to conduct their activ-
ism. Often, they share photos and videos of police brutality with commentary and 
propaganda that aims to grab attention of Ethiopians living abroad. On May 31, 
2016, Oromo activist groups leaked the Ethiopia Higher Education Entrance Exam 
on social media before it was administered to force the Ethiopian government to 
comply with their demands. The activists reportedly asked the government to post-
pone the national exam ­because for the previous five months, schools in the Oro-
mia region ­were closed due to protests. ­These protests had resulted in widespread 
conflict between government forces and students, which in turn resulted in vio­
lence and the arrests of a large number of high school students in the Oromia re-
gion. ­After posting images of the examination, the activists said that they ­were forced 
to do so ­because the Ethiopian government declined to comply with their demands, 
which they insisted ­were reasonable. As a result of the leak, the Ethiopian ministry 
of education had to suspend the exam in­def­initely and vowed to bring ­those in-
volved in the leak to justice (Fantahun 2016).
Solen Feyissa
See also: China; Iran; Italy; Kazakhstan; United States
Further Reading
Citizen Lab. 2015. “Hacking Team Reloaded? US-­Based Ethiopian Journalists Again Tar-
geted with Spyware.” Accessed June 5, 2016. https://­citizenlab​.­org​/­2015​/­03​/­hacking​
-­team​-­reloaded​-­us​-­based​-­ethiopian​-­journalists​-­targeted​-­spyware​/­
Ethio Telecom. 2013. “Press Release: Ethio Telecom Concluded Vendor Allocation for 
Launching Telecom Expansion Proj­ects.” Accessed June 5, 2016. http://­www​.­ethiote​
lecom​.­et​/­​?­q​=­node​/­158
Fantahun, Arefayné. 2016. “Matric Exam Postponed ­After Paper ‘Leak.’ ” Ethiopia Newspa­
per. Accessed July 31. http://­www​.­ethiopiaobserver​.­com​/­2016​/­05​/­matric​-­exam​-­postpo​
ned​-­after​-­paper​-­leak​/­
Garliardone, Iginio et al. 2015. “MECHACHAL: Online Debates and Elections in Ethiopia. 
From Hate Speech to Engagement in Social Media.” October 2. Accessed July 31. http://­
papers​.­ssrn​.­com​/­sol3​/­papers​.­cfm​?­abstract​_­id​=­2782070

ETHIOPIA
91
­Human Rights Watch. 2015. “Ethiopia: Hacking Team Lax on Evidence of Abuse.” Accessed 
June 4, 2016. https://­www​.­hrw​.­org​/­news​/­2015​/­08​/­13​/­ethiopia​-­hacking​-­team​-­lax​-­evi​
dence​-­abuse
Runa. 2012. “Deep Packet Inspection: An Update on the Censorship in Ethiopia.” Accessed 
June 4, 2016. https://­blog​.­torproject​.­org​/­category​/­tags​/­deep​-­packet​-­inspection
Socialbakers. 2016. “Ethiopia Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed June 5, 2016. http://­www​
.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­ethiopia​/­

This page intentionally left blank

FINLAND
Finland is a Nordic country that borders Sweden on the west, Norway on the north, 
and Rus­sia on the east. The country is officially called the Republic of Finland. It 
became a part of the Eu­ro­pean Union in 1995, and the Eurozone in 1999. Accord-
ing to a 2015 report from Internet World Stats (2016), 93.5 ­percent of the popula-
tion of Finland uses the internet. ­The people of Finland believe that having access to 
the internet is crucial to becoming an information society. They believe that ­every 
citizen should have equal rights to access information via the internet. Consequently, 
on July 1, 2010, Finland became the first country in the world to make broadband 
a ­legal right for ­every citizen. That means it is mandatory for telecommunications 
companies to give ­every person in the country access to a 1 Mbps broadband con-
nection (BBC News 2010).
Although Finland lags ­behind the Eu­ro­pean average for mobile device usage, ap-
proximately 70 ­percent of the Finnish population owns a mobile device, including 
smartphones and tablets (Deloitte and Touche 2014). The rate of adoption of tab-
lets is about 33 ­percent (Deloitte and Touche 2014). Consumers between the ages 
of thirty-­five and forty-­four are the biggest users of tablets (Deloitte and Touche 
2014). Smartphones are very popu­lar among eigh­teen to forty-­four-­year-­olds, and 
60 ­percent of consumers over the age of sixty-­six still use basic phones (Deloitte 
and Touche 2014). Finnish consumers frequently use smartphones for instant mes-
saging (IM), short message ser­vice (SMS), and voice calls. Most of the IM ser­vices 
are cheaper and have higher functionality than SMS. However, ­people in Finland 
continue to use SMS and voice calls.
The use of IM ser­vices is more popu­lar among young consumers. They use IM 
ser­vices to send and receive videos, photos, and text messages. Apps are commonly 
used by consumers between the ages of eigh­teen and fifty-­four, typically for online 
shopping and playing games. Despite their popularity and high usage, ­there is an 
overall decline in the number of apps that ­people download and purchase. In a 
typical month, 40 ­percent of Finns do not download any new app, and purchasing 
an app is very uncommon (Deloitte and Touche 2014). Likewise, ­people commonly 
use their smartphones to play games, but only 6 ­percent of smartphone ­owners 
spend money purchasing games (Deloitte and Touche 2014).
Finnish ­people between the ages of sixteen and sixty-­four are fast adopters of 
mobile devices that allow them to access the internet anywhere, anytime (Statistics 
Finland 2014). Consequently, they heavi­ly rely on the internet for their everyday 
activities. According to Statistics Finland (2014), 86 ­percent of the population be-
tween the ages of sixteen and eighty-­nine are internet users. Finns rely on the 
F

FINLAND
94
internet significantly for banking, social networking, online shopping, IM, job 
searching, and submitting job applications. The internet use for ­these activities is 
steadily increasing; however, online purchasing is more common in large towns than 
in semiurban and rural municipalities.
­There is a steady growth in the use of social networking ser­vices in Finland. Over 
51 ­percent of the population between the ages of sixteen and eighty-­nine follow 
social network and cloud ser­vices for storage and data pro­cessing (Statista 2016c). 
More and more ­people are avoiding external storage devices and use cloud servers 
to save their files. Facebook, YouTube, WhatsApp, and Google+ are the most popu­
lar social media in Finland, followed by blogs and online forums (Statista 2016c). 
Since the adoption of smartphones, Facebook usage has increased significantly. Twit-
ter, Pinterest, Foursquare, and LinkedIn are not as popu­lar as other forms of social 
media in Finland. While businesses use Facebook for advertising, entertainment, 
and casual discussion, ­people in Finland also use it as a platform to voice their opin-
ions to bring po­liti­cal and social changes to the country.
Manufacturing companies and other business enterprises leverage the power of 
online social media to communicate with their customers, employees, and part-
ners. The use of social networking sites is very common in industries. Companies 
also rely on video sharing, online discussion forums, and wikis to reach out to their 
customers. While many Finnish businesses are still using social media for tradi-
tional marketing purposes such as raising brand awareness, increasing traffic to the 
website, improving sales, generating leads, and recruiting, some companies have 
started using social media for customer ser­vice. The most common use of wikis is 
by employees to communicate internally and also to collaborate with partners. Com-
panies that steadily use social media have strict guidelines in place, including 
strategies for internal and external use and policies to monitor information flow. 
Despite the steady use of social media, Finnish companies believe that they have 
not figured out an efficient way to mea­sure the return of investment for using so-
cial media.
Schools and universities in Finland routinely use online learning platforms. Ed-
ucators believe that such platforms allow students to study collaboratively outside 
the classroom. Their availability has influenced the instructional goals and strate-
gies of teachers. Educators have integrated ­these tools into their curricula in order 
to encourage students to discuss and work collaboratively on their assignments. 
Students can upload their individual homework and download learning materials 
from their instructors any time. The most common learning platform used by Finn-
ish schools and higher-­education institutions is Moodle. Universities use a social 
networking platform called Yammer to facilitate interactions between students and 
faculty. Yammer, now owned by Microsoft, is a ­free social networking ser­vice used 
for private communications within organ­izations.
The use of social media in the country’s 2011 parliamentary election was a novel 
development in the history of Finnish politics. This was the first time that social 
media sites such as Facebook, YouTube, and Blogger ­were used in the election cam-
paigns. However, studies have found that social media had ­little effect on ­people’s 
voting decisions (Khaldarova et al. 2012; Strandberg 2012). This is ­because candi-
dates used social media as a broadcasting platform rather than a tool to engage with 

FINLAND
95
their constituents. ­After the election, members of parliament closed their personal 
accounts on Facebook, Twitter, Blogger, and other social media sites that they used 
for campaigning. This caused disappointment in ­people who searched for them ­after 
the election. Evidently, social media served as an interactive platform that was used 
by the candidates for one-­way mass communication. Thus, the innovation of us-
ing social media in the parliamentary election was in­effec­tive, with minimal influ-
ence on ­people’s voting decisions.
The government of Finland is very active in controlling and regulating informa-
tion flow on the internet. Censorship laws are implemented for the welfare of the 
citizens, especially ­children and youth. The Finnish National Bureau of Investiga-
tion (NBI) has partnered with Finnish internet ser­vice providers to maintain a se-
cret list of sensitive websites that should be blocked. The blocking list initially 
focused on foreign child pornography sites but has been extended to a number other 
sites since then. The law also allows the government to censor certain other for-
eign sites, as well as social media advertisements on online gambling and alcohol. 
The law does not prohibit Finnish alcohol companies from maintaining their 
­websites. However, they must delete or block any customer reviews of alcohol 
products.
In 2008, Matti Nikki (n.d.–), a software developer and internet activist, protested 
the government’s action to censor websites. He created a website called lapsiporno​
.­info, which listed many of the sites from the Finnish internet censorship list. The 
government did not object to the site ­until Nikki turned his website into a click-
able list of censored sites (Puolamaki 2008). In 2008, NBI blocked lapsiporno​.­info 
­because of its clickable links to child pornography websites (Puolamaki 2008).
Since most Finnish ­people use the internet for their everyday activities, they show 
an ongoing concern about cybersecurity breaches. A survey conducted by Statista 
(2016b) showed that although 91 ­percent of the respondents say that their social 
media and email accounts have never been hacked, 50 ­percent of the respondents 
­were concerned about pos­si­ble breaches (Statista 2016a). This affirms Finns’ alert-
ness about and awareness of such pos­si­ble threats.
To address ­those concerns, the government of Finland published a government 
resolution on January 24, 2013, called “Cyber Security Strategy.” It defines key goals 
and guidelines that can be used nationally to control deliberate or inadvertent threats 
in the cyber domain, respond to cyber disruptions, and recover from them (Secu-
rity Committee, 2015). This program focused on developing the Cyber Security 
Center, the Central Government 24/7 Information Security Operations, security 
­networks for encrypted data transfer and administration, police capabilities for 
­responding to cybercrime, legislation associated with the cyber domain and cy-
bersecurity, and research education programs to improve awareness among its 
citizens (Security Committee, 2015). ­Later that year, the Ministry of Foreign Af-
fairs announced that foreign intelligence agents have infiltrated the country’s gov-
ernment communication systems. This cyber espionage activity is currently ­under 
investigation.
Anamika Megwalu
See also: Denmark; Estonia; Iceland; Rus­sia

FRANCE
96
Further Reading
BBC News. 2010. “Finland Makes Broadband a ‘­Legal Right’.” Accessed August 4, 2016. 
http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­10461048
Deloitte and Touche. 2014. “Mobile Consumer 2014: The Finnish Perspective.” Accessed 
August 4, 2016. http://­www2​.­deloitte​.­com​/­content​/­dam​/­Deloitte​/­fi​/­Documents​/­tech​
nology​-­media​-­telecommunications​/­Global%20Mobile%20Consumer%20Survey%20
2014​_­medium​.­pdf
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Finland: Internet Usage Stats and Telecom Reports.” Accessed 
August 4, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­eu​/­fi​.­htm
Khaldaova, Irina, Laaksonen, Salla-­Maaria, and Matikainen, Janne. 2012. “The Use of So-
cial Media in the Finnish Parliament Elections 2011.” Media and Communications Stud­
ies Research Reports 3: 1–32. Accessed August 4, 2016. http://­www​.­helsinki​.­fi​/­crc​/­Jul​
kaisut​/­SoMe​_­Elections​.­pdf
Puolamaki, Kai. 2008. “Finnish Internet Censorship.” Accessed August 4, 2016. https://­effi​
.­org​/­blog​/­kai​-­2008​-­02​-­18​.­html
Security Committee. 2015. “Cyber Security Strategy.” Accessed August 4, 2016. http://­
www​.­turvallisuuskomitea​.­fi​/­index​.­php​/­en​/­component​/­k2​/­38​-­cyber​-­security​-­strategy
Statista. 2016a. “How Concerned Are You About Experiencing or Being a Victim of Your 
Social Media or Email Account Being Hacked?” Accessed August 4, 2016. http://­www​
.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­498080​/­levels​-­of​-­concern​-­over​-­the​-­hacking​-­of-­social​-­media​
-­or​-­email​-­accounts​-­in​-­finland​/­
Statista. 2016b. “How Often Has Your Social Media or Email Account Been Hacked?” Ac-
cessed August 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­498095​/­finland​-­frequency​-­of​
-­experiences​-­of​-­social​-­media​-­or​-­email​-­accounts​-­being​-­hacked​/­
Statista. 2016c. “Share of Social Media Users in Finland in 2015, by Platform.” Accessed 
August 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­540705​/­social​-­media​-­usage​-­in​-­fi​nla​
nd​-­by​-­platform​/­
Statistics Finland. 2014. “One Half of Finnish Residents Participate in Social Network Ser­
vices.” Accessed August 4, 2016. http://­www​.­stat​.­fi​/­til​/­sutivi​/­2014​/­sutivi​_­2014​_­2014​
-­11-­06​_­tie​_­001​_­en​.­html
Strandberg, Kim. 2012. “A Social Media Revolution or Just a Case of History Repeating It-
self? The Use of Social Media in the 2011 Finnish Parliamentary Elections.” New Media 
and Society, 15(8): 1329–1347.
FRANCE
Located on the Eu­ro­pean continent, north of the Iberian Peninsula and across the 
channel from the United Kingdom, France is a nation of approximately 64.5 mil-
lion ­people. Though internet penetration in the country has reached around 
86.4 ­percent, the French have been slow to adopt the internet and social media 
due to arguments that it could damage their culture and tarnish their strong pri-
vacy regulations. The slow ac­cep­tance was also partially based on the popularity of 
Minitel, a precursor to the internet that dominated France’s telecommunications 
infrastructure for almost thirty years. In spite of the challenges to internet and so-
cial media usage, the French utilize many international, Eu­ro­pean, and French-­
based social media and social networking sites. Usage is growing, especially among 

FRANCE
97
the lower and the elder age brackets, though members of ­those age groups fre-
quent dif­fer­ent sites.
The internet arrived in France relatively early in the 1990s, but it faced many 
challenges that slowed its adoption. Initially, internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) could 
not find subscribers willing to sign up for their ser­vice. French critics of the inter-
net levied a number of complaints against the internet, particularly the use of email, 
including accusations that the technology was available only in En­glish and it threat-
ened to destroy the French language. Other criticisms focused on how the internet 
invited chaos into French society, threatening its po­liti­cal, educational, and social 
traditions. By 1997, Amer­i­ca Online’s French office, one of the earlier providers of-
fering internet access in France, could barely find subscribers. At this time, only 
10 ­percent of French ­house­holds had computers—an extremely low number com-
pared to Canada and the United States, where more than 35 ­percent of all ­house­holds 
already possessed one (Schiller 1996). In fact, it appeared initially that the French 
might reject the internet as a valid means of communication.
French re­sis­tance to the internet was not, however, a bias against the adoption 
of new and emerging technologies. In fact, France had already ­adopted the Minitel 
online technology de­cades earlier. Minitel, a precursor to the World Wide Web, 
looked like an early computer model but was attached to a telephone landline. In-
stalled in the late 1970s as a limited provincial experiment, over 1 million Minitel 
terminals existed in ­people’s homes by 1985, and the number increased to more 
than 9 million terminals by 1999 (Lichfield 2012). Through Minitel, the French 
could search for information, make travel reservations, read news, and chat, among 
other ser­vices. Like its successor, ­people developed a special shorthand to com-
municate in French over the system that is comparable to modern-­day “text speak.” 
French companies had planned to export the Minitel technology abroad, but they 
­were unsuccessful. Though the United Kingdom and the United States developed 
similar systems, none of them gained and maintained the public’s attention, includ-
ing Minitel. Eventually, the internet offered more ser­vices and more content in the 
French language, which enhanced its appeal. In 2012, Minitel met a quiet end, as 
the internet far surpassed its capabilities, and with greater agility and speed.
Once the internet gained ac­cep­tance, social media and social networking fol-
lowed quickly. However, not every­one is excited about social media penetration. 
Specifically, the French government discourages social media usage, at least to some 
extent. France’s laws pertaining to social media use and how the data can be used 
are sometimes quite restrictive. In 2012, the government passed the Employment 
Law Review, which not only permitted but encouraged prospective employers to 
use social media to assess applicants.
At the same time, the French believe that internet access is a basic ­human right, 
but that it also must preserve high standards related to user privacy. In fact, the 
French government fined Google in 2011 for illegally collecting user data without 
permission (Pfanner 2011). A more recent, controversial privacy law passed in 2016 
allows grown-up ­children to sue their parents for posting pictures of their younger 
selves online (Chazan 2016). The French take privacy seriously, and violations of 

FRANCE
98
privacy are just as serious online as offline. Privacy concerns fuel some of the main 
objections to social media use.
Despite the concerns surrounding social media use in France, it is nonetheless 
on the rise for all age groups. In January 2016, Génération Numérique conducted 
a survey of eleven-­ to eighteen-­year-­olds and their social networking preferences. 
Among this age group, 37 ­percent claimed Facebook as their most used platform, 
followed by Snapchat at 27 ­percent and Instagram at 17 ­percent. Males used Face-
book more frequently than females; for eleven-­ to fourteen-­year-­olds, the rates ­were 
62.6 ­percent and 47.2 ­percent, respectively. The trend held for fifteen-­ to eighteen-­
year-­olds, with 93.1 ­percent of males surveyed using the network, as opposed to 
82.6 ­percent of females (eMarketer 2016b). Females overwhelmingly preferred 
Snapchat and Instagram over Facebook.
The same trend continues for older users, who are flocking to social networks. 
For ­people over eigh­teen years of age, Facebook was the most popu­lar site. Mem-
bers of both genders preferred the platforms in the same order and to almost the 
same degree; following Facebook, they listed Google+, the French-­language Copains 
d’avant, Twitter, and LinkedIn as their favorite sites (eMarketer 2016a). ­These sur-
veys mostly corroborate other studies on French social media, which show that 
France has 31 million users on Facebook, 24 million on YouTube, 12.8 million on 
Twitter, 10.7 million on Snapchat, 10 million on Instagram, 10 million on Google+, 
8.8 million on LinkedIn, 5.6 million on WhatsApp, 3.5 million on Viadeo, and 2.7 
million on Pinterest (Alexitauzin 2016). ­These numbers reflect total registered ac-
counts rather than unique individuals ­because some French citizens have accounts 
on multiple platforms.
France also has a popu­lar indigenous platform called Skyrock. As of August 2016, 
Skyrock was ranked 146 in France, frequented by the most users in France 
(56.5 ­percent), India (7 ­percent), Belgium (4.9 ­percent), Algeria (4.9 ­percent), and 
Morocco (2.2 ­percent) (Alexa 2016). Skyrock’s website contains a live ­counter to 
show the types of content available. As of August 2016, the site contained more 
than 657 million articles, 26 million blogs, 585,780 secret blogs (one accessible 
only to designated VIPs, or friends), 18 million profiles, 1.1 billion hearts (equiva-
lent to Facebook’s “like” feature), and 4.5 billion comments. In addition to ­these 
statistics, Skyrock features image and video sharing and hosts an active chat func-
tion (Skyrock 2016). The site also has a connection to Skyrock FM, a popu­lar on-
line radio station, and offers multiple apps to users. In addition to Skyrock and the 
major international platforms, French users can be found in smaller numbers on 
Win­dows Live Profile, MySpace, Amsterdam-­d Before Buddies, Badoo, and Trombi.
Since 2015, French social media has attracted local and international attention 
as the country suffered several major tragedies. In January 2015, armed men wreaked 
havoc in the country, starting with shootings at the office of Charlie Hebdo maga-
zine (BBC 2015). The shootings occurred ­because the gunmen believed that the 
magazine’s satirical images promoted blasphemy against Islam. In the wake of that 
tragedy, social media users across the globe responded, showing support through 
the hashtags #JeSuisCharlie and #IAmCharlie (Martinson 2015). In November 2015, 
simultaneous attacks on vari­ous locations across Paris, including bars, restaurants, 

FRANCE
99
a stadium, and a concert hall, pushed Facebook to launch a feature called Safety 
Check, which let ­people check during a public crisis event ­whether their loved ones 
survived. The hashtag #PorteOuverte (Open Door) allowed ­people to find refuge 
throughout the aftermath of the Paris attacks. In July 2016, another radical Is-
lamist attack occurred in Nice, when a man inspired by online militant jihadist 
propaganda killed more than eighty ­people. Similar to the earlier attacks, ­people 
around the world offered support through #JeSuisNice and #PorteOuverte or 
#PorteOuverteNice.
­After each of ­these tragic events, social media functioned to inform French po-
lice, locals, and ­people all over the world about what was happening (Sharkov 
2016). ­People not only shared information over the networks, but also used it as a 
mechanism to inform and report on useful details pertaining to the tragedy and its 
wake.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Algeria; Canada; Germany; India; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Site Overview: Skyrock​.­com​.­” Accessed August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­siteinfo​/­skyrock​.­com
Alexitauzin. 2016. “Combien d’Utilisateurs des Réseaux Sociaux en France de Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Snapchat, YouTube, Google+, Pinterest, WhatsApp, 
Viadeo.” [Infographie] June 22. Accessed July 15, 2016. http://­www​.­alexitauzin​.­com​
/­2013​/­04​/­combien​-­dutilisateurs​-­de​-­facebook​.­html
BBC. 2015. “Charlie Hebdo Attack: Three Days of Terror.” January 14. Accessed August 18, 
2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­europe​-­30708237
Chazan, David. 2016. “French Parents ‘Could be Jailed’ for Posting ­Children’s Photos On-
line.” March 1. Accessed August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­telegraph​.­co​.­uk​/­news​/­world​
news​/­europe​/­france​/­12179584​/­French​-­parents​-­could​-­be​-­jailed​-­for​-­posting​-­childrens​
-­photos​-­online​.­html
eMarketer. 2016a. “Social Networking on the Rise Among France’s Older Web Users.” 
March 2. Accessed July 15, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Social​-­Networking​
-­on​-­Rise​-­Among​-­Frances​-­Older​-­Web​-­Users​/­1013650
eMarketer. 2016b. “Young Social Network Users in France Love Facebook, Snapchat.” 
March 9. Accessed July 15, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Young​-­Social​
-­Network​-­Users​-­France​-­Love​-­Facebook​-­Snapchat​/­1013682
Lichfield, John. 2012. “How France Fell out of Love with Minitel.” June  8. Accessed 
­August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­independent​.­co​.­uk​/­news​/­world​/­europe​/­how​-­france​-­fell​
-­out​-­of​-­love​-­with​-­minitel​-­7831816​.­html
Martinson, Jane. 2015. “Charlie Hebdo: A Week of Horror When Social Media Came into 
Its Own.” January 11. Accessed August 18, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­media​
/­2015​/­jan​/­11​/­charlie​-­hebdo​-­social​-­media​-­news​-­readers
Pfanner, Eric. 2011. “Google ­Faces French Fine for Breach of Privacy.” March 21. Accessed 
August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2011​/­03​/­22​/­technology​/­22privacy​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
Schiller, Suzanne. 1996. “The Internet in France.” Accessed August 18, 2016. http://­besser​
.­tsoa​.­nyu​.­edu​/­impact​/­f96​/­Projects​/­sschiller​/­howard​.­htm

FRANCE
100
Sharkov, Damien. 2016. “­After Paris and Nice, Social Media Is France’s Newest Line of De-
fense.” July 18. Accessed August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­newsweek​.­com​/­after​-­paris​-­and​
-­nice​-­social​-­media​-­frances​-­newest​-­line​-­defense​-­481480
Skyrock. 2016. “In Figures.” Accessed August 18, 2016. http://­www​.­skyrock​.­com​/­common​
/­footer​.­php​?­page​=­chiffres

G
GEORGIA
The Republic of Georgia is a small country located at the intersection of Eastern 
Eu­rope and Asia. Georgia became part of the Soviet Union in 1921 following an 
invasion by Bolshevik Rus­sia and remained part of it ­until 1991. Upon its in­de­
pen­dence, the country fell into po­liti­cal and economic crisis, culminating in the 
2003 Rose Revolution. Despite a less than inauspicious beginning and the brief 
Russo-­Georgian War in 2008, Georgia has achieved significant economic and po­
liti­cal pro­gress, joining the Council of Eu­rope and the Organ­ization for Security 
and Cooperation in Eu­rope (OSCE) and becoming a member of the Eu­ro­pean 
Union’s ­Free Trade Area in 2014. The country’s pro­gress can also be seen in the 
sphere of internet development. Internet use in Georgia has grown rapidly in re-
cent years, with a sharp increase in usage among both citizens and government 
agencies. The internet is primarily utilized for social networking, although many 
also access the internet for news and, increasingly, for social activism. Despite some 
demo­cratic backsliding in recent years, Georgia remains the only country in the 
Caucasus without significant censorship and internet restriction.
As of 2015, approximately 49 ­percent of Georgia’s population of 4.8 million had 
access to the internet, compared to only 10 ­percent in 2008 (ITU 2016). This rapid 
growth is due in large part to a proliferation of social network use among citizens 
and increasing internet use among politicians and government agencies. Nearly half 
of Georgia’s population are internet users, with over one-­third (35 ­percent) access-
ing the internet ­every day (CRRC 2015). The most active internet users among 
Georgia’s population are located in the capital of Tbilisi.
Despite rapid growth in internet usage, internet is still a luxury item for many 
individuals with low income or located outside urban areas. As of 2014, when av-
erage monthly wages ­were less than $325 (Trading Economies 2017), the average 
cost per month for an internet connection was $20 (Freedom House 2015). Inter-
estingly, despite the high rate of mobile phone penetration, which had reached 
125 ­percent in 2014, the majority of internet users gain access from a home com-
puter or laptop (82 ­percent) rather than through mobile internet (12 ­percent) (Cau-
casus Research Resource Center 2013). The low rate of mobile internet use may be 
due to its high cost, which is often double that of broadband internet. This reli-
ance on broadband connections limits internet availability in rural areas, where 
broadband infrastructure is underdeveloped.
According to a 2015 survey for Transparency International, the majority of in-
ternet users in Georgia (75 ­percent) report that they access the internet primarily 
for social networking (CRRC 2015b). Over 40 ­percent use the internet to search 

GEORGIA
102
for information or news, with over one-­fifth (21 ­percent) of all users stating that 
the internet is their primary source for information. Other popu­lar internet ac-
tivities include downloading and listening to media (23 ­percent), sending emails 
(23 ­percent), and playing online games (10 ­percent).
Social media has become the primary reason for accessing the internet in Geor-
gia. Nearly nine out of ten regular internet users (individuals who use the internet 
at least once a month) frequent one of the four most popu­lar social media websites—­
Facebook, Twitter, Odnoklassniki, or VKontakte—at least once a week (CRRC 
2015a). Facebook is the most popu­lar social networking website; 79 ­percent of reg-
ular internet users visit Facebook at least once a week. Indeed, it has become the 
most visited website in the country, overtaking popu­lar search engines such as 
Google (Alexa Internet 2016).
Social media users can be divided into three categories: ­those that use only Rus­
sian networks, ­those that use only U.S. networks, and ­those that use a mix of both. 
Individuals who only use Rus­sian networks make up the smallest group (9 ­percent), 
followed by U.S. networks (36 ­percent). A plurality (43 ­percent) of internet users 
use both U.S. and Rus­sian social media networks on a regular basis (CRRC 2015b). 
U.S. network users are typically more highly educated, urban, and have a higher 
income than their counter­parts using mixed and Rus­sian networks. Given the over-
whelming popularity of social media, it should come as no surprise that social 
networks have become a platform for social and po­liti­cal activism. Activists and 
civil organ­izations utilize ­these networks to communicate with supporters and post 
calls for action.
The internet has also become a popu­lar tool for government agencies and poli-
ticians, who connect with citizens through social media and build new online ser­
vices to disseminate information to constituents. As of 2016, more than seventy 
electronic government ser­vices from fifty-­two state institutions have been integrated 
into a central online portal (https://­www​.­my​.­gov​.­ge). Through this portal, citizens 
can request information from public institutions, obtain ser­vices, and make 
payments.
­There is limited evidence of internet censorship in Georgia, due in part to provi-
sions put in place ­after the Rose Revolution that prevent the government from cen-
soring internet access. In addition, the majority of internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) 
are privately owned businesses, which limits the government’s ability to control the 
internet. While ­there was an increase in censorship in the last few years of Presi-
dent Mikheil Saakashvili’s (c. 1967–) rule (which ran from 2004 through mid-­
November  2013), recent years have seen a decrease in internet restrictions. 
Nevertheless, ­there have been some isolated incidents of censorship. For example, 
on March 14, 2016, access to YouTube was restricted around the country in the 
wake of anonymous threats to leak sex tapes of journalists and opposition politi-
cians (Civil Georgia 2016). Despite ­these and other rare incidents, internet use in 
Georgia remains largely ­free.
Hannah S. Chapman
See also: Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Rus­sia; Ukraine; Uzbekistan

GERMANY
103
Further Reading
Alexa Internet, Inc. 2016. “Top Sites in Georgia.” Accessed June 1, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­GE
Caucasus Research Resource Center (CRRCa). “Caucasus Barometer 2013 Georgia.” Ac-
cessed June 1, 2016. http://­www​.­crrccenters​.­org​/­caucasusbarometer​/­
Caucasus Research Resource Centers (CRRCb). “Caucasus Barometer 2015 Regional Dataset 
(Armenia and Georgia).” Accessed June 1, 2016. http://­www​.­crrccenters​.­org​/­caucasus​
barometer​/­
Civil Georgia. 2016. “Politicians, Journalists Threatened with Sex Tape Leak.” March 14, 
2016. Accessed June 1, 2016. http://­civil​.­ge​/­eng​/­article​.­php​?­id​=­29040
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Georgia.” Freedom House. Accessed May 31, 
2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­georgia
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). (2016). “ICT Statistics 2016—­Internet.” 
Accessed June 2, 2016. http://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­ITU​-­D​/­ICTEYE​/­Indicators​/­Indicators​.­aspx
Trading Economies. 2017. “Georgia Average Monthly Wages.” Trading Economies. Accessed 
January 19, 2017. http://­www​.­tradingeconomics​.­com​/­georgia​/­wages
GERMANY
Germany, a country located in central Eu­rope, is a nation teeming with 80.69 mil-
lion ­people. Germans value security and protection, especially with regard to per-
sonal information. The country’s internet and social media usage is highly reflective 
of ­these values. Despite the global trends of digital media consumption, Germans 
look to traditional regional media as credible sources of information. Germans use 
a mix of global and locally-based social media platforms and apps, such as What-
sApp, Threema, Mytaxi, and Xing. To keep up with its audience, Germany’s Bild-­
Zeitung tabloid even created a user interface with Facebook Messenger. The failure 
of some U.S. apps, such as Uber, also reflects Germany’s preference to use German 
ser­vices (or at least ser­vices that reflect German values), as discussed below.
With 71.73 million active internet users, the country has an internet penetra-
tion of 89 ­percent. Despite the high internet penetration, the country’s social me-
dia penetration is relatively low (36 ­percent). German users spend an average of 
three hours and twenty minutes a day on the internet using a computer or tablet, 
with only an hour of that time used for social media. About 77 ­percent of Germa-
ny’s internet users access the internet on a daily basis (Kemp 2016). Conservative 
values may have ­shaped Germany’s internet and social media usage, but Germans 
are slowly changing their online activities. About 86.7 ­percent of Germany’s online 
users utilized search engines frequently or occasionally, followed closely by check-
ing personal emails, at 86.4 ­percent. Considering how protective Germans are of 
their personal information, online commerce has surprisingly become the third most 
popu­lar online activity in Germany. About 73 ­percent of internet users shop online 
for practical needs (eMarketer 2015).
An average of 81 ­percent of Germans between the ages of eigh­teen to thirty-­
four have a strong social media presence (Cohen 2016). While Facebook domi-
nates  other global social media providers, Germans prefer to use WhatsApp. 
About 39 ­percent of German internet users ­favor WhatsApp, followed closely by 

GERMANY
104
Facebook at 38 ­percent (Kemp 2016). Even though Germany has a stronger pres-
ence on WhatsApp for instant messaging (IM), the situation is changing. Germans 
are not swapping WhatsApp for Facebook, but rather for another global app 
called Threema. Created in Switzerland in 2012, Threema offers Germany the 
­security that many messaging apps cannot guarantee. The app appeals to Ger-
mans’ need for protection and security by ensuring end-­to-­end encryption and se-
curity features for its users. Account users do not use their phone numbers, but 
rather a unique ID, affording ­people added protection and anonymity. Compared 
to ­WhatsApp’s 800 million monthly users worldwide, Threema has only 3.5 mil-
lion monthly users. Despite this huge disparity at the global level, Threema is top-
ping Germany’s paid download charts, and the user base increased by 900 ­percent 
between mid-2014 and mid-2015 (Acharya 2015).
As social media becomes the go-to for many internet users around the world for 
social connections, news, videos, and other activities, Germany is still rebelling 
against the global trend with regard to digital media consumption (Walpole 2015). 
Germans view traditional media as credible sources of information with journalis-
tic standards, whereas digital media can share conflicting information and sources. 
About 40 ­percent of German internet users ranked daily newspapers as the most 
reliable media available, while other internet users cited tele­vi­sion and radio as the 
most dependable source of information. Media sources on the internet (specifically 
Google and the German-­based news magazine Der Spiegel) ­were least trusted, with 
about 14 ­percent of Germans giving them credibility (eMarketer 2014).
As of January 2016, only 10 ­percent of Germans trusted U.S. internet ser­vices. 
This distrust is directed ­toward not only the United States, but also other foreign 
entities (only 22 ­percent of Germans trusted other Eu­ro­pean internet ser­vices). 
German society values consumer protection, safety, and privacy for its citizens, 
meaning that this distrust is largely related to the recording of personal, communi-
cation, and miscellaneous data with or without the user’s consent (eMarketer 
2016). In 2014, Google was warned, and consequently fined, for its methods of 
collecting personal information. Google routinely collects users’ personal data to 
build interest groups that marketers use for target-­specific ads. From their perspec-
tive, Google was creating nearly comprehensive personal rec­ords of their consum-
ers for its benefit, but Germany did not share that view. Germany’s data protection 
commission ordered the global com­pany to change its methods. While data col-
lection is not illegal, Google was not getting the consumers’ “explicit and informed 
The 2014 World Cup Final, in which Germany defeated Argentina 1-0, set a world 
social media rec­ord. While the players ­were on the field, spectators tweeted over 35.6 
million times using the #BRAvGER hashtag. ­After the German player Mario Gotze 
(1992–) scored the only goal of the game, Twitter users sent more than 580,000 tweets 
per minute, or around 9,667 tweets per second—­the highest volume of posts per min-
ute ever seen over the platform (Chase 2014). The Guinness Book of World Rec­ords 
now credits the game as the most tweeted event in history.

GERMANY
105
consent,” nor was Google giving them the opportunity to object to the data collec-
tion (Barr 2014). While the majority of Germans accept such procedures for secu-
rity mea­sures, a growing number believe that the federal government is not ­doing 
enough to protect its citizens’ personal online data (an increase from 28 ­percent in 
2013 to 32 ­percent in 2015) (eMarketer 2016).
­There are two examples of German-­created social media platforms and apps that 
are the by-­products of Germany’s caution about foreign options. The first is the Ger-
man social networking platform Xing. In 2006, Xing was initially established as 
the Open Business Club (openBC) in Hamburg, Germany. Since its inception, Xing 
has accumulated nearly 10 million users in Germany and 15 million worldwide. 
Companies and freelance workers utilize the social media network to find talent, 
search for jobs, and make connections. Xing also allows account users to start or 
join discussion forums about shared interests or the latest business trends. Many 
regard Xing as a German counterpart to LinkedIn. Xing’s popularity in German-­
speaking countries may also be attributed to the social network’s commitment to 
privacy. ­Because Xing is a German ser­vice, it reflects German values. Xing allows 
account users to choose their privacy settings. Members can decide on how much 
personal information is available for public consumption and what is kept private 
(Vitaud 2015). Xing also boasts that all personal data is not kept abroad, but rather 
stored in servers located only in Germany. Security for all members is highly val-
ued by the German social media network (Xing 2016).
A pair of glasses sit perched on top of the mobile app for Xing, a German social media network 
akin to LinkedIn. Xing is extremely popu­lar in Germany where it was designed to meet Ger-
man regulations and privacy laws, which are stricter than in the United States. (Tomnex​/­​
Dreamstime​.­com)

GERMANY
106
The second example is Germany’s Mytaxi app. When Uber expanded to Germany, 
they ­were entering a tightly-regulated transportation market. Uber ultimately failed 
­because of its unwillingness to adapt to German regulations for consumer protec-
tion and safety. Instead, Uber’s lobbyists insisted that Uber was a tech com­pany, 
not a taxi firm, contending that it should not be subjected to Germany’s rules for 
transportation. However, this strategy did not work. As some experts have noted, 
an American approach to a foreign market ­will not always succeed, which can be 
seen with this example in Germany. As of 2016, Uber is operating in only two 
major cities, Berlin and Munich (Vitaud 2015).
The Mytaxi app arose to take the place of Uber. Developed by a Hamburg tech 
startup, Intelligent Apps, in 2010, it shares a similar concept to Uber, but instead 
of having a single com­pany hiring ­drivers who then offer their ser­vices, existing 
taxis from multiple taxi companies can use the app. This option has enabled nearly 
45,000 affiliated taxis in more than forty German cities to find customers. The app 
has over 10 million downloads by consumers (Mytaxi 2016).
­These two examples showcase Germany’s reluctance to utilize global social me-
dia platforms and apps. Their preference for German ser­vices is prevalent through-
out the country and can be seen by many locally-created internet ser­vices. However, 
this does not mean that all Germans use only German products. Bild-­Zeitung, a 
widely popu­lar German tabloid, has utilized the internet to reach a wider audience, 
created an innovative interface for users, and developed additional ser­vices and 
functionalities in the form of downloadable apps. ­After noticing much of its online 
audience switching to Facebook for their daily news, Bild experimented with a new 
user interface through the Facebook Messenger app in early 2016. Initially, active 
Facebook users messaged the Bild Ticker to receive news and information in Ger-
man about the German soccer league’s transfer win­dow, the portion of the year when 
teams can transfer players. ­Later, the Bild Ticker expanded to provide other news 
tidbits. This experiment enabled Bild to stay connected with its audience and pro-
vide content faster through another internet platform (Hazard Owen 2016).
Karen Ames
See also: France; Poland; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Acharya, Sarmistha. 2015. “Germany’s Popu­lar Threema Secure Mobile Messenger Eyes U.S. 
Market.” June 22. Accessed March 16, 2016. http://­www​.­ibtimes​.­co​.­uk​/­germanys​-­pop​
ular​-­threema​-­secure​-­mobile​-­messenger​-­eyes​-­us​-­market​-­1507311
Barr, Alistair. 2014. “Google Runs Afoul of Germany Privacy Laws.” October 1. Accessed 
May, 2016. http://­blogs​.­wsj​.­com​/­digits​/­2014​/­10​/­01​/­google​-­runs​-­afoul​-­of​-­german​-­priv​
acy​-­laws​/­
Cohen, David. 2016. “Internet Users in Emerging Markets Flock to Social Networks.” 
­February  22. Accessed March  11, 2016. http://­www​.­adweek​.­com​/­socialtimes​/­pew​
-­research​-­center​-­smartphone​-­ownership​-­internet​-­usage​-­emerging​-­economies​/­634596
eMarketer. 2014. “Germany’s Digital Teens Trust Traditional Media More.” December 14. 
Accessed May 15, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Germanys​-­Digital​-­Teens​
-­Trust​-­Traditional​-­Media​-­More​/­1011732

GHANA
107
eMarketer. 2015. “Digital Commerce Is the Norm as Germany’s Internet Culture Matures.” 
April 27. Accessed May 13, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Digital​-­Commerce​
-­Norm​-­Germanys​-­Internet​-­Culture​-­Matures​/­1012399
eMarketer. 2016. “Internet Users in Germany Hope for Balance of Safety and Privacy.” 
March 4. Accessed March 14, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Internet​-­Users​
-­Germany​-­Hope​-­Balance​-­of​-­Safety​-­Privacy​/­1013664
Hazard Owen, Laura. 2016. “Axel Springer’s Bild Is Testing News Delivery via Facebook 
Messenger.” January 14. Accessed March 15, 2016. http://­www​.­niemanlab​.­org​/­2016​/­01​
/­axel​-­springers​-­bild​-­is​-­testing​-­news​-­delivery​-­via​-­facebook​-­messenger​/­
Kemp, Simon. 2016. “Digital in 2016: We Are Social’s Compendium of Global Digital, So-
cial, and Mobile Data, Trends, and Statistics.” January 27. Accessed March 10, 2016. 
http://­wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Mytaxi. 2016. “About Mytaxi.” Accessed March 15, 2016. https://­us​.­mytaxi​.­com​/­jobs​/­about​
-­mytaxi​.­html
Vitaud, Laetitia. 2015. “Freelancers in Germany: Why Global Gig Economy Platforms Find 
It So Hard to Succeed.” November 19. Accessed March 15, 2016. https://­medium​.­com​
/­switch​-­collective​/­freelancers​-­in​-­germany​-­why​-­global​-­gig​-­economy​-­platforms​-­find​-­it​
-­so​-­hard​-­to​-­succeed​-­134ccdff651#​.­na1m3165v
The Local. 2015. “Why Educated Germans Avoid Social Media.” December 22. Accessed 
March 14, 2016. http://­www​.­thelocal​.­de​/­20151222​/­why​-­do​-­educated​-­germans​-­avoid​
-­twitter
Walpole, Jennifer. 2015. “Traditional vs. Digital Media Consumption Rates Shifting.” Octo-
ber 4. Accessed May 12, 2016. https://­theamericangenius​.­com​/­business​-­news​/­traditional​
-­vs​-­digital​-­media​-­consumption​-­rates​-­shifting​/­
Xing. 2016. “Privacy Policy and Settings.” Accessed March 15, 2016. https://­www​.­xing​.­com​
/­help​/­help​-­and​-­faq​-­2​/­general​-­stuff​-­55​/­privacy​-­policy​-­and​-­settings​-­147
GHANA
Ghana is a West African nation along the coast of the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf 
of Guinea. It lies between the Ivory Coast and Togo, with Burkina Faso to the north. 
The official language spoken in the country is En­glish; however, ­there are several 
other national languages. The population distribution between urban areas and rural 
areas is about even, with slightly more ­people living in the cities. Ghana has 27.4 
million ­people, many of whom are very young. The median age of a resident in 
2015 was only twenty-­one years old; 39 ­percent of the population was less than 
fourteen years old, and all but 6 ­percent of Ghanaians ­were ­under the age of sixty. 
This affects the ways in which Ghanaians use the internet, as older ­people tend to 
prefer the traditional media that have been around longer, like radio and tele­vi­sion, 
whereas the internet is more likely to be used by ­those in the eighteen-­ to twenty-­
four-­year-­old category. In fact, internet users in the latter group ­were just as likely 
to use the internet as they ­were to use the radio or tele­vi­sion (Balancing Act 2014).
The internet and social media landscape in Africa is changing rapidly. A de­cade 
ago, ­there was virtually no connectivity in the ­whole region, but ­today, ­there are 
millions of internet users. Ghana, for example, had internet penetration of only 
1 ­percent in 2006. By 2013, this had risen to 21 ­percent of the population; how-
ever, internet connection accessibility varied in dif­fer­ent parts of the country. The 

GHANA
108
Central, Upper Eastern, Upper West, and Western regions had some of the lowest 
rates of penetration. Connection speeds also tended to be very slow, which made 
using data-­heavy websites like YouTube difficult. This has not affected that site’s 
appeal, however—­YouTube is the fifth most popu­lar website in the country (Alexa 
2015). Some notable ways in which Ghanaians use the internet in a unique fash-
ion include using national websites instead of social media sites like Facebook or 
Twitter for news gathering, and placing a strong emphasis on ­music.
Ghanaians are accessing the internet mainly with mobile devices. In 2006, only 
26 ­percent of the population owned mobile phones and only 5 ­percent owned a 
computer. By 2013, 88 ­percent of Ghanaians owned mobile phones, but only 
6 ­percent owned a smartphone. In 2014, about three-­quarters of Ghanaians in-
tended on upgrading to a smartphone in the near ­future. When they do, the fea-
tures that ­will be most impor­tant to them are the ability to play ­music, access the 
internet, play video, and have a touch screen (Balancing Act 2014). The rise of com-
puter owner­ship over the past several years has progressed much more slowly. As 
of 2014, about a fifth of the nation owned a laptop, making Ghana one of the 
highest-­ranking African countries for computer penetration. Tablets, however, ­were 
still not very common, with national owner­ship at only about 6 ­percent (Balancing 
Act 2014).
The most common ­free apps downloaded from the Google Play Store ­were What-
sApp Messenger, IMO ­free video calls and chat, Opera Mini web browser, Face-
book Messenger, Facebook, Holy Bible (King James version), Viber, 360 
Security–­Antivirus Boost, Photo Grid–­Collage Maker, and Instagram (AppAnnie 
2015). This usage suggests that Ghanaians are mostly using their Android devices 
for communication via messaging apps, and for taking and sharing photos. The fact 
that the Bible was one of the most common apps reflects Ghanaian cultural values, 
which are overwhelmingly Christian. This was reflected in religious ideas about the 
internet noted in 2014; some believe that social media was a waste of time and that 
its use would undermine morality. A more common belief regarding the internet 
was that it would damage Ghanaian culture; however, even ­those with fears about 
the internet saw it as a way for Ghana to become globally competitive (Balancing 
Act 2014). The priority of Ghanaian culture is evident in how many websites of 
Ghanaian origin rank in the top twenty, such as GhanaWeb, My Joy Online, Pulse, 
Peace FM, and Tonaton (Alexa 2015).
With 85 ­percent of the Ghanaian ­people owning radios and listening to it ­every 
day, it makes sense that many ­people ­will receive their news via that medium. Ra-
dio, tele­vi­sion, and friends and ­family ­were the most dominant ways in which Gha-
naians obtained their news. However, members of the younger generation 
(between eigh­teen and twenty-­four years old), who ­were generally more likely to 
use the internet than older generations, ­were just as likely to get their news from 
the internet as any other source. Men ­were also slightly more likely to seek out news 
on the internet than ­women (Balancing Act 2014). Of note, several of the more 
popu­lar websites originated in a radio station, such as Joy Online, Peace FM, and 
Citi FM. While the internet is catching up as a source of news, it is impor­tant to 
note that Ghanaians do not necessarily use social media sites like Facebook to 

GHANA
109
collect this information. Instead, they prefer news websites, such as Ghana Web, 
My Joy Online, and Pulse (Alexa 2015; Buzz Ghana n.d.).
The most popu­lar websites visited in any category are Google​.­com​.­gh, Google, 
Facebook, Yahoo, YouTube, Ghana Web, Ask, My Joy Online, Pulse, Twitter, and 
Peach FM. The number of Ghanaian Facebook users has qua­dru­pled over the past 
few years. In August  2010, ­there ­were only 621,000 Facebook accounts; in 
March 2014, ­there ­were 2.4 million accounts. In 2015, six of the top ten most popu­
lar Facebook pages ­were for companies in telecommunications or related indus-
tries: Airtel Ghana, MTN Ghana, Tigo Ghana, Vodafone Ghana, Samsung Mobile 
Ghana, and Samsung Ghana. The other four top pages ­were Goal​.­com Ghana 
(news), e.TV Ghana, UTV Ghana, and AllSports​.­com​.­gh (Allin1 Social 2015). Other 
social media platforms include Twitter, Pinterest, Tumblr, Google+, Stumble Upon, 
Reddit, and LinkedIn (StatsMonkey 2015). While they are not as competitive as 
­these Western social media, some African social media sites have a small user base 
in Ghana, including Eskimi, Mxit, 2Go, and biNu (Southwood 2014).
For several years now, Ghana has had the goal of becoming an “information hub” 
of West Africa (UNIDIR 2013). As part of this goal, education reforms began in 
2007 with the intent of improving the country’s education system at all levels. One 
of the stipulations of ­these reforms was that all primary and secondary students 
receive information and communications technology (ICT) training. This allowed 
the younger generation to develop computer literacy skills, which included inter-
net use, and learn how to apply ­these skills in everyday life.
Part of this goal has been realized, as most institutions have made some com-
puters available to students. Despite this achievement, very few of ­these comput-
ers ­were connected to the internet, and students far outnumbered the computers 
in each school (Mereku et al. n.d.). Nevertheless, this initiative continues and schools 
are improving their ICT resources. In 2015, the University of Ghana began its first 
distance-­learning program with the aid of a Chinese-­sponsored proj­ect that was in-
troduced in 2012. The vice chancellor of the university, Ernest Aryeetey (c. 1957–), 
stated that the distance learning program was just the first step ­toward elevating 
the university to a research-­intensive institution that can aid in Ghana’s develop-
ment (University of Ghana 2015).
In another step to become an information hub, Ghana passed the Electronic 
Communications Act and the Electronic Transactions Act in 2008. ­These laws 
helped establish Ghana’s cybersecurity program. At vari­ous stages over the past sev-
eral years, the Ghanaian government has revised its strategies for combating cyber-
crime (UNIDIR 2013). However, as of 2011, Ghana had developed a bad reputation 
for being the origination of cybercrime, which posed a threat to national security 
(Warner 2011). The National Information Technology Agency set forth a new strat-
egy in 2012 that included external collaboration, as well as plans to establish a 
Computer Emergency Readiness Team for each major hub within the country (UNI-
DIR 2013).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Cameroon; Nigeria; Senegal

GREECE
110
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Ghana.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­GH
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Ghana.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​-­statistics​/­countries​/­ghana
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” Accessed September 28, 2015. https://­
www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­ghana
Balancing Act. 2014. “A Detailed Snapshot of Africa’s Emerging Internet and Social Media 
Space—­The Users and What They Are ­Doing.” September 19. Accessed September 28, 
2015. http://­www​.­balancingact​-­africa​.­com​/­news​/­en​/­issue​-­no​-­724​/­top​-­story​/­a​-­detailed​
-­snapshot​/­en
Buzz Ghana. n.d. “10 Most Visited Websites in Ghana.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­
buzzghana​.­com​/­visited​-­popular​-­websites​-­ghana
Hill, Laurence. 2015. “Ghanaian Culture.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​
.­drumafrica​.­co​.­uk​/­articles​/­ghanaian​-­culture
Mereku, D. K., Yidana, I., Hordzi, W., Tete-­Mensah, I., Tete-­Mensah, W., and Williams, J. B. 
n.d. “Ghana Report.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­ernwaca​.­org​/­panaf​
/­pdf​/­phase​-­1​/­Ghana​-­PanAf​_­Report​.­pdf
Southwood, Russell. 2014. “CIMA—­The Changing Media Landscape in Sub-­Saharan Af-
rica.” October 29. Accessed September 30, 2015. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­newsbunny​/­​
media​-­internet​-­and​-­social​-­media​-­landscape​-­in​-­subsaharan​-­africa
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Social Network Usage Statistics Using Desktop in Ghana.” Accessed 
September 30, 2015. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­sunburst​/­21587​-­ghana​-­desktop​
-­social​-­network​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR). 2013. “The Cyber Index: 
International Security Trends and Realities.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​
.­unidir​.­org​/­files​/­publications​/­pdfs​/­cyber​-­index​-­2013​-­en​-­463​.­pdf
University of Ghana. 2015. “University of Ghana Inaugurates Distance Education ICT Proj­
ect ­Under the Chinese Phase 2 ICT Proj­ect.” February 4. Accessed September 28, 
2015. https://­www​.­ug​.­edu​.­gh​/­news​/­university​-­ghana​-­inaugurates​-­distance​-­education​
-­ict​-­project​-­under​-­chinese​-­phase​-­2​-­ict​-­project
Warner, Jason. 2011. “Understanding Cyber-­Crime in Ghana: A View From Below.” Inter­
national Journal of Cyber Criminoloigy, 5(1): 736–749.
GREECE
Greece is a country in southern Eu­rope, bordered by Albania, Macedonia, Bulgaria, 
Turkey, and the Mediterranean Sea. In a country of nearly 11 million ­people, social 
media—­the milestone of the Web 2.0 era—­has totally transformed both interper-
sonal and corporate communication by establishing the notion of a produser, a new 
media user who acts si­mul­ta­neously as a content producer. Within the business 
context, social media is becoming “an ideal, cost effective, interactive and, above 
all, targeted communication tool for ­every organ­ization thanks to its high consumer 
engagement offered through the eWOM (electronic word of mouth) and web-­
interactivity” (Belenioti et al. 2015, 2). Despite the popularity of social media in 
Greece, ­little is known about users’ be­hav­ior on ­these sites.

GREECE
111
Where does Greece stand in terms of internet and social media usage? When it 
comes to internet usage, Digital Scoreboard by Eu­ro­pean Commission, Directorate 
General for Communications Networks, Content & Technology (DG CONNECT) 
(2016), concludes that with an overall connectivity score of 0.43, the country ranks 
twenty-­sixth among Eu­ro­pean Union (EU) countries. Despite Greece’s pro­gress in 
terms of connectivity (i.e. access of ­house­holds to fixed broadband), it still per-
forms worse than most other EU countries. Specifically, while 99 ­percent of Greek 
­house­holds have access to fixed broadband, 34 ­percent still do not yet subscribe to 
it. In addition, high-­speed Internet (at least a 30-­Mbps download speed) is avail-
able to only 36 ­percent of homes—­far below the EU average of 71 ­percent. Thus, 
Greece, ranking twenty-­sixth out of the twenty-­eight EU member states, belongs 
to the “falling ­behind” cluster of countries according to the Digital Scoreboard clas-
sification (Eu­ro­pean Commission/DG CONNECT 2016).
All in all, the Eu­ro­pean Commission (EC) identifies two major challenges that 
Greece needs to overcome. First is the penetration of the level of mobile broad-
band access required for Greece to reap the full potential of the digital economy; 
only 66 ­percent of ­house­holds subscribe to fixed broadband and ­there are only 44 
mobile broadband subscriptions per 100 citizens. Second is the improvement of 
information technology (IT) infrastructure and the establishment of fast networks 
(i.e. Next-­Generation Access [NGA] networks) providing at least 30 Mbps. To date, 
NGA coverage in Greece is only half of the average EU level.
User be­hav­ior depends on a series of demographic ­factors, such as socioeconomic 
status, or behavioral ­factors, such as the conduit used to access the internet 
(Hargittai 2008) or information literacy (Chiang et al. 2010). Each user has dif­fer­
ent motivations for using the internet. For instance, Papacharissi and Rubin (2000, 
189) have identified five dif­fer­ent motives: “utility, pasttime, information seeking, 
con­ve­nience, and entertainment.”
Examining Greece’s information literacy, the Eu­ro­pean Commission also con-
cluded that it still lagged in terms of both digital skills and trust in the digital 
economy, such as the integration of digital technologies by businesses and online 
shopping transactions. Consequently, Greece’s score is lower than the EU average. 
In terms of the percentage of individuals with basic or better digital skills, regard-
less of employment, Greece ranks twenty-­first out of twenty-­eight, revealing a slow 
pace of internet ac­cep­tance. Similarly, Greeks fall ­behind in terms of online public 
ser­vices, even though a small but encouraging proportion (37 ­percent) has utilized 
online public administration ser­vices. Conversely, Greeks show a better per­for­
mance, ranking eleventh out of twenty-­eight in relation to digital specialized skills 
linked to software for content manipulation.
Likewise, Whiting (2013) has identified ten reasons for using social media: so-
cial interaction, information seeking, passing the time, entertainment, relaxation, 
communicatory utility, con­ve­nience utility, expression of opinion, information shar-
ing, and surveillance/knowledge about ­others. Consistent with the findings of 
Papacharissi and Rubin (2000) and Whiting (2013), Belenioti et al. (2015) classified 
Greek social media users into three segments based on reason of use: “Information 

GREECE
112
Seekers,” “Operational and Psychological Boost Benefits Seekers,” and “Communi-
cation Seekers.”
An online questionnaire (conducted by the author) examining patterns of Greek 
users on internet and social media found that, of the initial cohort of 280 respon-
dents, 47 ­percent ­were men and 53 ­percent ­were ­women, with ages ranging from 
eigh­teen to over sixty-­five years old. In terms of internet usage, the findings showed 
that the majority of Greeks (57.4 ­percent) have integrated internet use into their 
lives on a daily basis. Heavy internet users belong to the groups aged twenty-­five 
to thirty-­five years old (27.8  ­percent) and eigh­teen to twenty-­four years old 
(23.3 ­percent). Light internet users comprise a minority (3 ­percent) and belong to 
the dif­fer­ent age groups as follows: from eigh­teen to twenty-­five years old 
(1.5 ­percent), from twenty-­five to thirty-­five years old (1.1 ­percent), and from thirty-­
six to fifty years old (0.4 ­percent). Regardless of their demographics, on average, 
Greek users have a middle-­to-­high educational level. In the same vein, “heavy users” 
are shown to have a high educational level, with 31.9 ­percent of the users having 
a college degree and 18.4 ­percent holding a master’s degree. Fi­nally, 2.7 ­percent of 
light users have only a secondary level of education.
Greeks (54.8 ­percent) surf the web more than thirteen hours per week. More-
over, they use the internet for exchanging messages (mean, or m = 4.14), for infor-
mation seeking for job or educational issues (m = 4.10), for general information 
seeking (m = 3.92), for watching sports online (m = 3.92), for listening to e-­radio 
(m = 3.70), for entertainment (m = 3.43), for seeking tourist information (m = 3.34), 
for downloading ­music files (m = 3.15), and for chatting (m = 3.12). Surprisingly, 
Greeks rarely use the net for e-­banking activities (m = 2.08).
When it comes to social media usage, despite its small size, Greece ranks forty-­
third globally in internet penetration at 35.45 ­percent, with 3.9 million users (So-
cialbakers 2012). Roughly half of Greeks are social media users. Recent studies also 
conclude that a massive increase of social media usage followed the sharp, increas-
ing penetration of the internet. Greeks spend more than 80 minutes per day net-
working, as half the population is registered on at least one social media platform 
(Kassimi 2015). According to ELTRUN (2012), Facebook seems to be the most fa-
vorite social media platform, used by 77.29 ­percent of the country’s population. 
Three years ­later, ELTRUN showed again that Facebook remains the premier social 
media site, followed by YouTube and Twitter.
­These results suggest that social media experience depends both on the users’ 
age and the type of social media. For instance, experienced social networking us-
ers are ­women between eigh­teen and twenty-­four years old, while experienced blog 
users are ­women aged twenty-­five to thirty-­five years old. Most experienced video-
gamers are men aged eigh­teen to twenty-­four years old. Representative examples 
of the most popu­lar virtual games are World of Warcraft, Dotta, and Call of Duty. 
Furthermore, ELTRUN (2015) concluded that social media is an impor­tant part of 
business strategy, as Greeks tend to express their consumer attitudes and interact 
with brands via ­these platforms.
Moreover, research conducted by the Greek agency Focus Bari (    January–­
March 2015) reported that usual patterns of “networking” by Greek users consisted 

GREECE
113
of playing games, while the average time spent on social media websites was calcu-
lated at 82.2 minutes per day. On average, Greeks who are experienced users of 
information and communication technology (ICT) and social media fall between 
eigh­teen and thirty-­five (62.6 ­percent) years old and have high educational back-
ground and upper-­middle-­class status (Belenioti 2015). They primarily prefer 
­social networking sites, content-­sharing communities, blogs, and fi­nally games. 
They usually log in via PCs. The majority of Greeks has three accounts and 
they update content on a daily basis. Within content communities, most users 
have only one account, and they prefer to consume content rather than create it 
­(Belenioti 2015).
In terms of the frequencies of visits, social networking sites have the highest per-
centage use on a daily basis (38.9 ­percent), then content communities (32 ­percent), 
blogs (26 ­percent), and fi­nally, virtual games/worlds (3.1 ­percent). Interestingly, the 
usual frequency of the use of blogs and virtual games/worlds is one or two times 
per week (32.6 ­percent).
Social networking sites, especially Facebook, dominate social media in Greece, 
notably for young ­people and regular web users. In contrast, other social media 
applications, such as content communities, blogs, and virtual games/worlds, have 
fewer active users or less user penetration. Fi­nally, Greeks exhibit passive be­hav­ior 
in terms of content-­sharing sites, choosing to consume content and sometimes com-
ment one or two times a week, rarely creating content to share. ­These results are 
likely to be related to the popularity of the social networking sites in question and 
their multidimensional benefits, such as ease of use, interactivity, and multitasking 
applications (e.g. chatting, sharing files, playing games, and job and information 
seeking).
Zoe-­Charis Belenioti
See also: Hungary; Italy; Romania; Turkey
Further Reading
Belenioti, Zoe-Charis. 2015. A Snapshot of Greek Social Media Users, 1–15. http://­meanin​
gacrossmedia​.­mcc​.­ku​.­dk​/­proceedings​/­.
Belenioti, Zoe-Charis, Andronikidis, Andreas I., and Vassiliadis, Chris. 2015. “Classifying 
and Profiling Social Media Users: An Integrated Approach.” Proceedings of the Second 
Eu­ro­pean Conference on Media and Mass Communication, 183–204. http://­iafor​.­org​
/­archives​/­proceedings​/­EuroMedia​/­EuroMedia2015​_­proceedings​.­pdf.
Brandtzæg, Petter Bae, Heim, Jan, and Karahasanović, Amela. 2011. “Understanding the 
New Digital Divide—­A Typology of Internet Users in Eu­rope.” International Journal of 
Human-­Computer Studies, 69(3): 123–138.
Bruns, Axel. 2007. “Produsage.” Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI Conference on Creativity 
and Cognition, 99–106.
Chiang, I., Huang, Chun-­Yao, and Huang, Chien-­Wen. 2009. “Characterizing Web Users’ 
Degree of Web 2.0-­ness.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Tech­
nology, 60(7): 1349–1357.
Constantinides, Effthymios, Alarcón del Amo, María del Carmen, and Lorenzo Romero, Car-
lota. 2010. “Profiles of social networking sites users in the Netherlands.” 18th Annual 

GREECE
114
High Technology Small Firms (HTSF) Conference, May 25–28, 2010, Enschede, the 
Netherlands.
DeKay, S. 2009. “Are Business-­Oriented Social Networking Web Sites Useful Resources for 
Locating Passive Jobseekers? Results of a Recent Study.” Business Communication Quar­
terly, 72(1): 101–105. http://­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1177​/­1080569908330378
ELTRUN. 2015. “Annual Resereach for Social Networking.” Accessed May 5, 2016. http://­
www​.­eltrun​.­gr​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2016​/­01​/­%CE%94%CE%B5%CE%BB%CF%84
%CE%AF%CE%BF​-­%CE%A4%CF%85%CF%80%CE%BF%CF%85DigitalMKT2016​
.­pdf
European Commission (EC). 2016. “Digital Scoreboard.” Accessed May 5, 2016. https://­ec​
.­europa​.­eu​/­digital​-­single​-­market​/­en​/­scoreboard​/­greece#3​-­use​-­of​-­internet
Focus Bari Survey, “Social Media in Greece (     January–­March 2015).” Accessed May 8, 2016. 
http://­www​.­socialmediaworld​.­gr​/­presentations​_­2015​/­tsami​.­pdf
Hargittai, Eszter. 2007. “Whose Space? Differences Among Users and Non-­Users of Social 
Network Sites.” Journal of Computer-­Mediated Communication, 13(1): 276–297.
Kassimi, Alexandra. 2015. “Half of Greeks Engage in Social Media.” September 9. Accessed 
May 5, 2016. http://­www​.­ekathimerini​.­com​/­201228​/­article​/­ekathimerini​/­community​
/­half​-­of​-­greeks​-­engage​-­in​-­social​-­media
Katz, Elihu, Blumler, Jay G., and Gurevitch, Michael. 1973. “Uses and Gratifications Re-
search.” Public Opinion Quarterly, 37(4): 509–523.
Papacharissi, Zizi, and Rubin, Alan M. 2000. “Predictors of Internet Use.” Journal of Broad­
casting & Electronic Media, 44(2): 175–196.
Socialbakers. 2012. “Facebook Statistics.” Accessed June 2012. http://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​
/­facebook​-­statistics​/­
Urista, Mark A., Dong, Qingwen, and Day, Kenneth D. 2009. “Explaining Why Young Adults 
Use MySpace and Facebook Through Uses and Gratifications Theory.” ­Human Com­
munication, 12(2): 215–229.
Whiting. A 2013. “Why ­People Use Social Media: A Uses and Gratifications Approach.” Qua­
litiative Market Reasearch: An International Journal, 16(4): 362–369. http://­doi​.­org​/­10​
.­1108​/­QMR​-­06​-­2013​-­0041

H
HONDURAS
Honduras is one of the largest countries in Central Amer­i­ca. It has coastlines on 
both the Pacific Ocean and the Ca­rib­bean Sea, and is bordered on the west by Gua-
temala and El Salvador and on the east by Nicaragua. While Honduras has the 
lowest internet penetration rate in Central Amer­i­ca (Internet World Stats 2016), 
the number of ­people with access through mobile connections has significantly in-
creased since the 2011 infrastructure investment of Claro, a Honduran mobile 
ser­vice provider. However, fixed-­line connections remain prohibitively expensive. 
The constitution of Honduras provides for freedom of speech, but the vio­lence that 
has flooded the country since the 2009 presidential coup has forced many online 
users to censor their content in order to protect themselves.
Of the country’s nearly 8.2 million ­people, only 21.5 ­percent had access to the 
internet in 2016 (Internet Live Stats 2016). This represents only a 5 ­percent in-
crease from the previous year and actually marks a trend of very slow penetration 
growth, or even sometimes shrinkage—­for instance, from 2012 to 2013, the num-
ber of Hondurans using the internet actually decreased 0.3 ­percent. Throughout 
most of the 2000s, penetration was slow, largely owning to the fact that very few 
Hondurans owned computers. According to the National Institute of Statistics (In-
stituto Nacional de Estadística, or INE), only 19.4 ­percent of ­house­holds had a com-
puter (Rivera 2016). It has been within only the past five years, with the proliferation 
of smartphones, that internet access has not required a computer.
While growth in penetration has been slow, 2011 saw an enormous jump of 
45 ­percent in internet users (Internet Live Stats 2016). This is most likely due to 
the purchase of the mobile phone provider Digicel that year by Amer­i­ca Movil, 
­Claro’s parent com­pany, and subsequent investment of $150 million into mobile 
telecommunications infrastructure in Honduras (La Tribuna 2011). In 1996, ­there 
­were only about 2,276 cell phones in the entire country; however, by 2016, the 
cell phone penetration rate had reached 90 ­percent or more (Rivera 2016).
Claro and Tigo Communications are the two competing providers that control 
the prepaid mobile ser­vice market. Tigo controls 60 ­percent, while Claro controls 
39 ­percent; Hondutel, the state-­run provider, controls only about 1 ­percent of the 
market (Rivera 2016). Recently, a representative of Tigo reported a 50 ­percent smart-
phone penetration rate, and the vast majority of smartphone users use Android 
(Rivera 2016). Mobile internet connections are significantly less expensive than 
fixed-­line connections, which can run anywhere from $14 to $22 a month for speeds 
ranging from 256 kbps to 5Mbps (Rodriquez 2014). In contrast, mobile connec-
tions offer not only lower prices, but more varied plans, ranging from about 

HONDURAS
116
$0.35 to $0.44 a day to about 
$4.37 for fifteen days’ worth of 
ser­vice (Rodriquez 2014). Con-
sidering the average monthly 
income in 2015 was only $189 
(World Bank 2016), it is diffi-
cult for many Hondurans to af-
ford 
data 
plans 
for 
their 
smartphones even at ­these low 
prices, let alone fixed-­line inter-
net connections.
The websites with the most 
traffic in Honduras are similar to 
­those of other Latin American 
countries; for example, YouTube 
sees more web traffic than Face-
book in Colombia, Chile, Ec­ua­
dor, Peru, and Venezuela. In 
Honduras, with the exception of 
La Prensa, a news website that 
ranks 
number 
nine 
(Alexa 
2016), the most trafficked sites 
are almost entirely of foreign ori-
gin. With YouTube in first place, 
the rest of the top ten most traf-
ficked websites, in order of pop-
ularity in 2016, ­were Google.hn, 
Google, Facebook, Yahoo, Ama-
zon, Live, Wikipedia, and Blogspot. Other social media sites, such as Taringa! (a 
Reddit-­like forum out of Argentina), WhatsApp, Instagram, and Twitter are less 
popu­lar, ranking at seventeen, nineteen, twenty, and twenty-­four, respectively. On 
mobile devices, Facebook is the most used website for social networking; in 2015, 
it comprised 83.8 ­percent of social media usage. Twitter ranked a distant second, 
with 11.32 ­percent usage; Pinterest ranked third, with 3.61 ­percent usage; and 
other social media sites, such as Google+, Reddit, StumbleUpon, and Tumbler, 
comprised the remaining 1.27 ­percent (StatsMonkey 2015).
As stated previously, while the Honduran constitution guarantees freedom of 
speech, due to the horrific gang vio­lence and or­ga­nized crime that characterizes 
the country ­today, many journalists and bloggers self-­censor in order to keep them-
selves and their families safe. In 2015, the murder rate in Honduras was 169 in 
­every 100,000 ­people, one of the highest in the world (Crilly 2015), and about 
double what it had been just three years earlier (Pressly 2012).
The 2009 coup d’état of Honduran president Manuel Zelaya (1952–) is often 
cited as a major cause in the violent real­ity of the country ­today. ­After Zelaya was 
ousted, ­there ­were several po­liti­cal killings, which often involved private citizens 
A leader of the notorious Central American gang Bar-
rio 18, Cesar Vladimir Montoya Climaco, was ar-
rested on July 28, 2015. While freedom of speech is 
constitutionally guaranteed in Honduras, horrific 
gang vio­lence pres­ents a constant threat to ­those who 
would speak against them, leading online journalists 
and bloggers to self-­censor for their own safety. (AP 
Photo/Salvador Melendez)

HONDURAS
117
who spoke out against the new government. In addition, Honduras had to deal with 
pressures from the Mexican drug cartels and the pervasive spread of gangs through-
out Central Amer­i­ca. ­Today, gangs such as MS-13 and Barrio 18 pres­ent a constant 
threat on the streets of Honduras.
Since 2009, the Honduran government has not successfully addressed the ­human 
rights violations and attacks that occurred in the wake of the coup. Between 
­January 2010 and November 2011, unknown attackers killed at least twelve jour-
nalists, and many more received death threats or threats directly at their families 
(­Human Rights Watch 2012). Very few of ­these murderers, if any, ­were held ac-
countable for their crimes. Most of the journalists killed had spoken out against 
the 2009 coup or had frequently reported on corruption in the country.
Marilyn J. Andrews and John G. Hall
See also: Argentina; El Salvador; Mexico; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Honduras.” Accessed August  28, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­HN
Crilly, Rob. 2015. “The Majority of Hom­i­cides Are Young ­People. It’s So Sad.” The Telegraph, 
August 3. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­telegraph​.­co​.­uk​/­sponsored​/­lifestyle​
/­honduras​-­gangs​/­11701324​/­honduras​-­murder​-­rate​.­html
­Humans Rights Watch. 2012. “World Report 2012: Honduras, Events of 2011.” Accessed 
August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­hrw​.­org​/­world​-­report​/­2012​/­country​-­chapters​/­honduras
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Honduras Internet Users.” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­honduras​/­
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Internet Usage and Population in Central Amer­i­ca.” Accessed 
August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats12​.­htm
La Tribuna. 2011. “Claro Invests $150 Million in Honduras.” December  5. Accessed 
­August  28, 2016. http://­www​.­centralamericadata​.­com​/­en​/­article​/­home​/­Claro​_­Invests​
_­150​_­Million​_­in​_­Honduras
Pressly, Linda. 2012. “Honduras Murders: Where Life Is Cheap and Funerals Are ­Free.” BBC, 
May 3. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­magazine​-­17870673
Rivera, Juan Carlos. 2016. “El 30% de Hondureños se Conecta a Internet.” La Prensa, 
­February  8. Accessed August  28, 2016. http://­www​.­laprensa​.­hn​/­honduras​/­927465​
-­410​/­el​-­30​-­de​-­hondure%C3%B1os​-­se​-­conecta​-­a​-­internet
Latin Americans often turn to social media for social activism. In Panama, the adver-
tising agency P4 Oligvy and Mather used the TV program Telemetro Reporta to spread 
“El Hueco Twitter,” or the “Tweeting Pothole.” In a collaborative effort, the group 
placed motion sensors into Panama City’s worst potholes. When the motion sensors 
activated, they sent signals that initiated tweets directed at the country’s Ministry of 
Public Works. ­These tweets used gentle and humorous language to remind the mu-
nicipal government to fix the dangerous road conditions. The account generated 
public interest and led to improving public works (Matchar 2015).

HUNGARY
118
Rodriguez, Luis. 2014. “¿Cómo elegir el servicio de Internet más barato en Honduras?” El 
Heraldo, July 4. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­elheraldo​.­hn​/­economia​/­609408​
-­216​/­como​-­elegir​-­el​-­servicio​-­de​-­internet​-­mas​-­barato​-­en​-­honduras
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Honduras Social Media Usage Statistics Using Mobile.” Accessed Au-
gust 28, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­sunburst​/­21368​-­honduras​-­mobile​-­social​
-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
World Bank. 2016. “Honduras.” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­​
country​/­honduras
HUNGARY
Hungary is a country located in Central and Eastern Eu­rope, with approximately 
9.8 million inhabitants, and a gross domestic product (GDP) of $26,256 per capita 
(OECD 2016). The country is a member of the Eu­ro­pean Union, the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organ­ization (NATO), and the Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and 
Development (OECD).
According to Eurostat (2015) data, 76 ­percent of ­house­holds in Hungary have 
access to the internet. The Hungarian Central Statistical Office (Központi Statiszti-
kai Hivatal, or KSH) reported in 2013 that the overwhelming majority of internet 
connections ­were broadband. A Gemius (2014) report showed that the population 
of Hungarian internet users had reached 5 million. This translates to over 
60.78 ­percent internet penetration, in line with the Eu­ro­pean average and higher 
than the Central and Eastern Eu­ro­pean average. Further, 86 ­percent of users ac-
cess the internet on a daily basis.
Many internet users (22 ­percent) are based in the country’s capital, Budapest, 
which is the most developed region in Hungary. Of the rest, 52.8 ­percent live other 
urban areas, while 25.2 ­percent live in villages. This pattern illustrates how the digi-
tal divide is structured in Hungary: most of the internet users are concentrated in 
western Hungary, in the capital, and in the larger cities, while the smaller settle-
ments, particularly in the eastern part of the country, have less connection to the 
network. According to the Gemius data set, 51.2 ­percent of users are ­women and 
48.8 ­percent are men. Over half the online audience (52 ­percent) is between 
­eigh­teen and thirty-­nine years old.
Several internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) operate in the country; among the big-
gest players are Magyar Telekom (a subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom), UPC, Invitel, 
and DIGI. The estimated size of the Hungarian ISP market is about $580 million. 
The majority of Hungarians access the internet through mobile devices: by the end 
of 2015, 67 ­percent of internet subscriptions ­were mobile internet subscriptions 
(KSH 2016).
Mobile phone penetration is relatively high in the country; since 2007, the num-
ber of subscriber identity module (SIM) cards has outnumbered the population 
(Pinter 2008). The Hungarian National Media and Infocommunications Authority 
(Nemzeti Média-­és Hírközlési Hatóság, NMHH) reported in March 2013 that the 
number of active SIM cards in the country was 11.5 million, which translates to a 
116.1  ­percent penetration. According to Think with Google data, smartphone 

HUNGARY
119
penetration in the country in 2013 was 34.4  ­percent. This number grew to 
62 ­percent in 2015 (eNET 2015a). Three providers share the market: Magyar 
Telekom (45.87 ­percent), Telenor (31.48 ­percent), and Vodafone (22.65 ­percent).
The most popu­lar web browser is Google Chrome (46.9 ­percent), followed by 
Firefox (31.39 ­percent) and Opera (7.4 ­percent). The global players Google and 
Facebook dominate all statistics regarding online content and media. Around 
90 ­percent of the online audience is on Facebook, and almost all Hungarians use 
some ser­vices provided by Google. Google dominates the search market with no 
competitors, and is leading the online mapping, video streaming, and email mar-
kets as well. The top three most visited pages in Hungary are Facebook​.­com, Google 
(both the En­glish and Hungarian versions) and YouTube​.­com; domestic domains 
trail ­these in popularity. Twitter, Instagram, LinkedIn, Tumblr, Foursquare, and 
Snapchat are also used, but ­those platforms are not nearly as popu­lar as the lead-
ing ones (Alexa 2016; Similarweb 2016).
As of April 2016, the most visited Hungarian sites ­were Blog.hu (blogging 
­platform), Origo.hu (news and ser­vices), Jófogás.hu (e-­commerce), Index.hu 
(news), 24.hu (news), NLCafe.hu (entertainment), Blikk.hu (tabloid news), Hvg.hu 
(news), Startlap.hu (link portal), and Árukeresö.hu (e-­commerce) (Gemius 2014). 
­There ­were 2,656,411 total cross-­platform visitors for Blog.hu, the most popu­
lar, and 1,509,902 visitors for Árukeresö.hu, which was in tenth place.
The only social media in Hungary that is not overtaken by international plat-
forms is blogging. The country’s largest blogging platform, Blog.hu, is owned by 
the media com­pany CEMP, which also publishes the Index.hu news site. CEMP es-
tablished itself as the market leader by developing a par­tic­u­lar content manage-
ment strategy closely linked to Index.hu. In 2007, a so-­called blog cage was 
introduced on the Index.hu main page, which featured the most popu­lar posts writ-
ten by users and placed them between editorial content. The move resulted in the 
increasing visibility of user-­generated content and eventually led to the emergence 
of a par­tic­u­lar blogging ecosystem in which a news site (Index.hu) dominated the 
blogosphere by selecting, featuring, and editing posts.
Another uniquely Hungarian chapter of social media history was presented by 
iWiW, one of the first social networking sites of its kind in the world. Launched in 
2002, iWiW (then simply WiW) quickly grew into the most popu­lar social net-
working site in Hungary, essentially accommodating the ­whole internet user pop-
ulation of more than 4 million ­people by 2008. The site was purchased by Magyar 
Telekom in 2006 for more than $3.5 million, but due to several financial and tech-
nical difficulties, the com­pany shut down the site for good in 2014.
Now Hungarians overwhelmingly use Facebook for social networking and in-
creasingly for media consumption. Trends show that Facebook is actually taking 
over as a main source for news distribution, significantly affecting user attitudes 
­toward the nature of news. As a 2015 study by NRC Market Research Ltd., com-
missioned by the Association of Hungarian Content Providers (Magyarországi Tar-
talomszolgáltatók Egyesülete, or MTE), has shown, the average Facebook user in 
Hungary spends eighty-­six minutes on Facebook per day, and 46 ­percent of them 
tend to read news items only in their Facebook feeds, with no clickthrough to the 

HUNGARY
120
source of the content. According to the eNET-­Telekom “Report on the Internet Econ-
omy” in 2015, 83 ­percent of internet users believe that being online can be inter-
preted as acceptable ­family programming, or activities in which an entire ­family 
can participate, that may include social media usage, online shopping, listening to 
­music, or watching movies (eNET, 2015b).
In the 2015 Freedom of the Net report by Freedom House, Hungarian freedom 
of the press status for broadcast and print media was listed as only “partly ­free”; 
however, Hungarian internet scored a total of 24 points, with an overall assessment 
of “­free.” ­There is no evidence for governmental blocking of social media/informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT) apps, of access to internet, of filtering, 
of monitoring content, nor of censorship. In its 2016 Government Requests Re-
port, Facebook reported that in the second half of 2015, Hungarian governmental 
bodies requested the data of 224 users, 178 times altogether. Facebook deemed 
valid 42.13  ­percent of the requests and provided some information to the 
government.
Social media, online news industry, and internet policy is highly intertwined with 
politics in Hungary (­Reuters 2016; Toth 2012). ­After a series of government-­related 
scandals (such as alleged pressure put on news sites by a government official and 
opaque public money being channeled to favored media outlets), the online media 
market has been undergoing a constant transformation, with several new players 
appearing in the market and experimenting with new business models and con-
tent strategies (Tofalvy 2015).
A recent international internet and social media policy development that is re-
lated to a Hungarian case is the decision of the Strasbourg court on February 2, 
2016, regarding intermediary liability. In MTE and Index.hu Zrt v. Hungary, the Eu­
ro­pean Court of ­Human Rights ruled that an online news portal cannot be held 
responsible for offensive or vulgar comments posted by its readers, as that would 
violate Article 10 of the Eu­ro­pean Convention on ­Human Rights. This impor­tant 
decision marked a total reversal of the same court’s 2015 decision in Delfi v. Estonia, 
in which a website was held responsible for reader comments (MTE 2016).
Another recent internet policy issue that made headlines was the series of mass 
demonstrations in Budapest and across the country during the fall of 2014, which 
followed the governmental announcement of an “Internet tax” based on personal 
data traffic. Soon ­after the protests, the government withdrew the proposal and ­later 
started a new program aimed at surveying user attitudes on the internet, which 
has  often been criticized as unprofessional, biased, and part of government 
propaganda.
Tamas Tofalvy
See also: Germany; Poland; Romania
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Hungary.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­HU

HUNGARY
121
eNET. 2015a. “Breakthrough in Mobile Net Usage: Half of Hungarian Internet Users Keep 
the Web in Their Pockets.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­enet​.­hu​/­news​/­break​
through​-­in​-­mobile​-­net​-­usage​-­half​-­of​-­hungarian​-­internet​-­users​-­keep​-­the​-­web​-­in​-­their​
-­pockets​/­​?­lang​=­en
eNET. 2015b. “Internet in Hungary: (Dis)connecting Families?” Accessed July 4, 2016. 
http://­www​.­enet​.­hu​/­news​/­internet​-­in​-­hungary​-­disconnecting​-­families​/­​?­lang​=­en
Eurostat. 2015. “Level of Internet Access—­Households.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­ec​
.­europa​.­eu​/­eurostat​/­web​/­information​-­society​/­statistics​-­illustrated
Facebook. 2016. “Government Requests Report.” Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­govtrequests​
.­facebook​.­com​/­
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom of the Net—­Hungary.” Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­hungary
Gemius. 2014. “Facts about Hungarian Internet Users.” Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­www​
.­gemius​.­com​/­agencies​-­news​/­facts​-­about​-­hungarian​-­internet​-­users​.­html
Központi Statisztikai Hivatal (KSH). 2016. “Hungarian Central Statistical Office: Statistical 
Reflections—­Telecommunications, Internet, Q4, 2015.” Accessed July 4, 2016. https://­
www​.­ksh​.­hu​/­docs​/­eng​/­xftp​/­gyor​/­tav​/­etav1512​.­pdf
Magyarországi Tartalomszolgáltatók Egyesülete (MTE). 2016. “Online News Sites Are Not 
Liable for Vulgar Comments: The ruling in MTE and Index.hu Zrt v. Hungary leads the 
way to a new era ­after Delfi v. Estonia.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­mte​.­hu​/­mte​_­index​
_­v​_­hungary​/­
Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development (OECD). 2016. “Country Sta-
tistical Profile: Hungary.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­oecd​-­ilibrary​.­org​/­economics​
/­country​-­statistical​-­profile​-­hungary​_­20752288​-­table​-­hun
Pinter, Robert. 2008. “Development of the Hungarian Information Society in the Last De­
cade. Hungarian Country Report, 1998–2008.” BUTE-­UNESCO Information Society 
Research Institute (BME-­ITTK)—­GKIeNET Ltd. Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­ittk​
.­hu​/­netis​/­doc​/­textbook​/­Hungarian​_­country​_­report​_­final​.­pdf
­Reuters Institute. 2016. “Digital News Report—­Hungary.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​
.­digitalnewsreport​.­org​/­survey​/­2016​/­hungary​-­2016​/­
Similarweb. 2016. “Top 50 Sites in Hungary for All Categories.” Accessed July 4, 2016. 
https://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​/­country​/­hungary
Tofalvy, Tamas. 2015. “Newcomers in the Hungarian Online Media Market—­Business Mod-
els, Content Strategies and Media Pluralism.” Eu­ro­pean University Institute (EUI), 
Centre for Media Pluralism and Media Freedom (CMPF). Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­
cmpf​.­eui​.­eu​/­Documents​/­SS15​/­TamasTofalvyNewcomersinHungarianonlinemedia​
market​.­pdf
Toth, Borbala. 2012. “Mapping Digital Media: Hungary.” Open Society Foundation. Accessed 
July 4, 2016. https://­www​.­opensocietyfoundations​.­org​/­reports​/­mapping​-­digital​-­media​
-­hungary

This page intentionally left blank

ICELAND
Iceland is a Scandinavian country located in the Atlantic Ocean. In 2015, its popu-
lation numbered around 329,000 inhabitants. An estimated 98 ­percent of Iceland’s 
population has internet access, making it the most connected Eu­ro­pean nation 
(Robert 2015). The internet plays a large role in Icelandic society; it has functioned 
as a vital conduit in improving communications between the government and its 
citizens, and has become a platform for social activism. In fact, the government uti-
lizes social media innovatively and places few restrictions on freedom of expres-
sion. The Icelandic ­people pride themselves on having one of the freest, most 
unrestricted media in the world.
As of 2015, Icelanders preferred international social media sites, although they 
frequented pages featuring local content. They predominantly used the Facebook 
platform. Icelanders ­were also active on Reddit, Pinterest, Twitter, Tumblr, Stum-
bleUpon, Google+, LinkedIn, Instagram, Snapchat, and Y Combinator. A very small 
number appeared on vKontakte, the Rus­sian version of Facebook. Younger users, 
particularly thirteen-­ to fifteen-­year-­olds, spent an average of four hours a day on 
social media; they preferred to communicate via Facebook, Instagram, and Snap-
chat (Robert 2015). Across age groups, Facebook was the top platform. On Face-
book, the most popu­lar page during 2015 was Iceland Foods. With 376,498 
followers, the page had more followers than the country’s total population. ­After 
Iceland Foods, the top pages ­were Icelandair, Nói Síríus, Maurizio Moletta, and 
WOW Air (Allin1 Social 2015). The preference for international social media plat-
forms and local content held true when it came to Iceland’s most accessed web-
sites, which as of late 2015 ­were Facebook, Google, Google.is, YouTube, Mbi.is, 
Visir.is, Dv.is, Ja.is, Pressan.is, and Amazon (Alexa 2015).
Iceland’s app preferences differed slightly from ­those of other Eu­ro­pean nations. 
The country’s iOS users had a fascination with apps aimed at American celebrities, 
while Win­dows phone users took a more practical approach with local news and 
document reading apps. The country’s most popu­lar ­free iOS apps, listed in de-
scending order, ­were Pop the Lock, Kylie Jenner Official App, Kim Kardashian West 
Official App, Snapchat, and the Kendall Jenner Official App. The top paid apps ­were 
Minecraft: Pocket Edition, Photomyne, Fantasy Premier League 2015, Mono­poly, 
and the Big Day Event calendar. For Win­dows phones, the top ­free apps ­were One-
Drive, Facebook Messenger, Facebook, Adobe Reader, and Skype. The top paid 
apps ­were Ruv.is fréttir, Mbl.is fréttir, Stupid Test, Fridagr, and Fruit Ninja­ 
­(AppAnnie 2015). From the preferred apps, Icelanders liked to download games 
in addition to more practical programs.
I

ICELAND
124
The major trends in Icelandic social media revolved around how Iceland’s gov-
ernment has used social media in many innovative campaigns to entice tourists and 
to promote civic participation. One of the most in­ter­est­ing initiatives is Ask Guð-
mundur (#AskGudmundur), the world’s first ­human search engine designed to an-
swer questions about the country and its culture. Iceland chose representatives 
from its seven regions—­all named Guðmundur or Guðmunda, the female varia-
tion on the name—to answer all the questions posed via Facebook and Twitter 
­(Iceland Naturally 2015). For some questions, the answers appeared in specially-
produced YouTube videos. The initial campaign was a successful experiment, lead-
ing to the release of Guðmundur 2.0 in September 2015. The implementation of a 
human-­run search engine has been one of Iceland’s most successful social media 
efforts to date. The ­human search engine concept has provided tourists with a 
wealth of firsthand, credible information and placed a personal spin on how Ice-
land markets to its visitors.
A less successful, government-­sponsored social media effort was to attempt to 
harness the ­people’s voices on Facebook and Twitter to crowdsource and redraft 
the national constitution. In 2008, Iceland’s economy crashed due to overextended 
banks. ­People protested outside Parliament, demanding that the government en-
sure that the economy recover. In an effort to solicit the ­people’s opinions on how 
the government should implement reform mea­sures, the government established a 
Facebook page where the ­people posted their ideas and comments. ­Those posts 
Depicted ­here is an Icelander named Guðmundur, who is part of the world’s first ­human 
search engine. “Ask Guðmundur” is Iceland’s most successful social media endeavor ­to date. 
Staffed by volunteers from Iceland’s seven regions, the ser­vice provides answers about the county 
and its culture via Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. (Inspired by Iceland via AP Images)

ICELAND
125
helped inform the government what the public wanted. Based on ­these posts, face-­
to-­face discussions with Icelanders, and a voting pro­cess, Iceland drafted a crowd-
sourced constitution. However, the new constitution stalled in 2013 with the 
country’s change in government (Landemore 2014). The effort, while unusual and 
unsuccessful, showed how social media increased po­liti­cal participation and trans-
parency. The ­people provided inputs through a variety of channels, showing that 
social media did contribute to promoting democracy in Iceland.
In September 2015, social media became one of the channels through which the 
­people could influence the government over the refugee crisis. As Eu­rope experi-
enced a wave of refugees from Syria, the ­Middle East, and Eastern Eu­rope, Iceland 
had announced that it would admit up to fifty refugees between 2015 and 2016, 
with fifty being the ­legal cap as to the number of refugees permitted to enter the 
country. In response, citizens created the Facebook page “Syria Is Calling” to pres-
sure the government into raising the number of permitted refugees. By September 
2015, more than 16,000 Icelanders had responded to the page, many of whom 
offered to open their homes to refugees. ­People unable to provide shelter offered 
Syrian refugees food, plane tickets, and general support (Mendoza 2015). The Ice-
landic effort was popu­lar abroad, as well as at home. Shortly ­after its creation, the 
Facebook page “Open Homes, Open Hearts” opened in the United States, with simi-
lar goals as the Icelandic page. An already-­existing Facebook page, “Refugees Wel-
come,” received renewed attention as well; the page connects German hosts with 
refugees needing shelter as they start through the po­liti­cal asylum pro­cess. The “Syria 
Is Calling” site planned to continue spreading messages about the Syrian refugee 
plight ­until the government increased the annual national allotment for refugees.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Finland; Germany; Rus­sia; Syria; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Iceland.” Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­IS
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Iceland.” Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​-­statistics​/­countries​/­iceland​?­page​=­1&period​=­six​
_­months
AppAnnie. 2015. “Win­dows Phone Top App Charts.” Accessed September 19, 2015. https://­
www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­windows​-­phone​/­top​/­iceland​/­
Iceland Naturally. 2015. “Iceland Launches ‘Ask Guðmundur,’ the World’s First ­Human 
Search Engine.” April 28. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­icelandnaturally​.­com​
/­article​/­iceland​-­launches​-­ask​-­gudmundur​-­worlds​-­first​-­human​-­search​-­engine
Landemore, Hélène. 2014. “We, All of the ­People: Five Lessons from Iceland’s Failed Experi-
ment Creating a Crowdsourced Constitution.” July 31. Accessed September 19, 2015. 
http://­www​.­slate​.­com​/­articles​/­technology​/­future​_­tense​/­2014​/­07​/­five​_­lessons​
_­from_­iceland​_­s​_­failed​_­crowdsourced​_­constitution​_­experiment​.­html
Mendoza, Jessica. 2015. “Icelanders Use Facebook to Prompt Government to Welcome Ref-
ugees.” September 3. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­news​.­yahoo​.­com​/­icelanders​
-­facebook​-­prompt​-­government​-­welcome​-­refugees​-­204253122​.­html

INDIA
126
Robert, Zoë. 2015. “Teen­agers Spend Four Hours Per Day on Social Media.” February 6. 
Accessed September 18, 2015. http://­icelandreview​.­com​/­news​/­2015​/­02​/­06​/­teenagers​
-­spend​-­four​-­hours​-­day​-­social​-­media
INDIA
Surrounded by its South Asian neighbors, Pakistan, Nepal, and Bangladesh, India 
is a country of 1.2 billion ­people, second in population only to China. As of De-
cember 2015, India has the second-­highest number of internet users in the world; 
only China has more. Mobile internet access is growing rapidly in the country, 
though still unavailable in many rural areas. With increasing technical support for 
the Hindi language and a sizable English-­speaking population, language barriers 
are still a challenge in reaching more users. Rapid growth and a sheer massive num-
ber of users have led many of the largest international technology companies and 
smaller venture capital groups to make strides in providing ser­vices in India.
The Internet became available in India in 1995; however, slow speeds kept the 
growth of internet use at a minimum for the next de­cade. By 2005, the govern-
ment moved ­toward broadband access, but it was still defined by relatively slow 
speeds. In 2010, 3G and 4G ser­vices fi­nally became available in India, bringing a 
simultaneous rise in internet users.
In 2014, the federal government launched “Digital India.” One piece of this proj­
ect is BharatNet, which aims to bring broadband access to more areas and to con-
nect many rural areas to the internet. Currently, the majority of users in India do 
not have regular broadband access. Laying the optical fiber network, however, is 
still ­running on a delayed schedule. In early 2016, the Telecom Regulatory Author-
ity of India (TRAI) recommended creating a private-­public partnership for this 
proj­ect.
While the overall internet penetration rate in India remains low at about 
30 ­percent, ­there has been massive recent growth. As of December 2015, ­there 
­were estimated to be over 400 million users, which is a 49 ­percent increase over 
the previous year, and the second-­largest internet user base in the world (Verma 
2015). While this rapid growth has been affected by the availability of high-­speed 
internet ser­vices, it is primarily explained by the rapid increase in mobile use, which 
is in turn related to falling smartphone prices and low data rates. Due to competi-
tion between mobile operators, data rates for mobile phones are now available in 
India for as ­little as $0.17 for 30 MB (McLain 2015).
While smartphones in India still typically cost $100 to $150 at a minimum, in 
February 2016, the world’s cheapest smartphone was launched in India by a com­
pany called Ringing Bells. The Freedom 251 smartphone costs about $4 to pur-
chase and made international headlines upon its release (Chappell 2016). The 
phones have not yet arrived into the hands of customers, and some have concluded 
that the entire proj­ect is a scam. The com­pany is currently ­under investigation: how-
ever, if the phones become available, they have the potential to make internet ac-
cess available to a large portion of the Indian population that is not yet online.
Cybercafés in many towns in India have long provided computers with internet 
access for a fee. Some have been in business for twenty years, providing access to 

INDIA
127
a larger portion of the population that could not afford personal computers and 
internet access. ­These are on the decline as smartphones and faster internet speeds 
become increasingly affordable and available.
As with many other countries in South Asia, internet access is still biased ­toward 
urban areas and higher incomes. Rural areas are seeing recent large increases in in-
ternet use, primarily through mobile phones. By October 2015, rural internet us-
ers reached 108 million, a 77 ­percent increase over the previous year (Verma 2015).
The many languages and multiple scripts used in India are also a ­factor in internet 
use. An estimated 10 ­percent of the population speaks En­glish as a second lan-
guage. Hindi is the most widely spoken language in India; however, many states 
also have their own state-­level official languages. The 2001 census in India found 
that ­there ­were 29 languages across the country that had at least 1 million native 
speakers. Most of ­these languages do not have support in the online environment, 
as the majority of them have their own script. Google has made some recent strides 
to accommodate this. Hindi was added to Google Translate in 2007, with five more 
Indian languages (Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Tamil, and Telugu) added in 2011. 
Between 2013 and 2016, Marathi, Punjabi, Malayalam, and Sindhi ­were also added. 
At the end of 2014, Google launched the Indian Language Internet Alliance to in-
crease the amount of content available on the internet in Indian languages.
The Indian version of Google (google​.­co​.­in) is the number one website accessed 
in India (Alexa Internet 2016). While the main search page is in En­glish, searches 
can also be conducted in Hindi, Bengali, Telugu, Marathi, Tamil, Gujarati, Kannada, 
Malayalam, and Punjabi. Users are able to search using their own language, as well 
as the script itself, rather than a transliteration. Google​.­com, the com­pany’s main 
page and the version used in the United States, ranks second.
This doubling up of the Indian and U.S. versions of websites also occurs with 
Amazon, with the two coming in at number five and number seventeen in popu-
larity, respectively. Although e-­commerce is still a small market, reflecting only about 
15 ­percent of internet users in India, it is also growing rapidly, and other websites 
in the top twenty reflect this growth. One estimate of e-­commerce spending saw a 
27 ­percent jump, from $81 billion to $103 billion at the end of 2015 (Mukherjee 
and Malviya 2015). Beyond Amazon, two other major e-­commerce sites are in the top 
twenty websites for India: Flipkart at number seven and Snapdeal at number thirteen.
The remaining websites that make up the top ten in India are all well known 
globally: Facebook, YouTube, Yahoo, Wikipedia, LinkedIn, and Twitter (Alexa In-
ternet 2016). However, ­there are some variations in the kinds of websites found 
that rank eleventh through twentieth. In eleventh place is Indiatimes​.­com, which 
is a news portal covering world news, entertainment, and videos among other sub-
jects. Stackoverflow, coming in at number fifteen, is a website devoted to questions 
and answers about computer programming, and reflects the strong information 
technology (IT) industry in India. Three other sites are national banking sites. Phys-
ical banks in India are primarily located in urban areas, and only about 60 ­percent 
of the population has a bank account. The rise of three banking websites to the top 
twenty reflects the growth of the internet in daily life activities. Also reflecting this 
task-­oriented approach to the internet is the Indian Railway website, which can be 
used for viewing schedules and online ticket booking, comes in at number twenty.

INDIA
128
Facebook, ranking as the third most used website in India, represents the second-­
largest user base for the social media site. Unlike some of India’s neighboring 
countries, whose rankings reflect both entertainment and news-­based preferences, 
India’s Facebook users clearly focus on entertainment in their engagement with this 
major social media site. While the most liked Facebook page in India is that of 
Narendra Modi (1950–), the prime minister of India, the remaining top nine are 
entertainment-­ or sports-­related (Socialbakers 2016). Five of them are Bollywood 
actors and actresses, one is a Bollywood musician and ­music producer, and one is 
a Bollywood playback singer. Rounding out the top ten are two Indian cricket play-
ers and the Indian Cricket Team’s page.
Recently, the TRAI was prompted to review net neutrality issues in relation to 
Facebook’s ­Free Basics program. The ­Free Basics program offers ­free mobile access 
to Facebook, Wikipedia, and a number of other health and news sites that have 
agreements with Facebook to provide content. The format of the sites is for the pur-
pose of easy access and lower bandwidth.
While India does not have any laws regarding net neutrality, the TRAI announced 
a ruling in February 2016 that effectively barred the ­Free Basics program from 
­running in India, by stating that ­there could not be discriminatory fees based on 
dif­fer­ent kinds of content for data ser­vices. They ruled that Facebook’s ser­vice does 
not provide ­free and open internet access, which effectively shut down the pro-
gram in India immediately.
With the massive growth of internet users in India, other internet and technol-
ogy ­giants are looking ­toward India as well. In January 2016, Google made ­free 
wireless internet available at Mumbai’s train station. This is the first in a series of 
planned openings at train stations across the country, and the com­pany has imple-
mented the program in concert with the Indian government. Users at any platform 
of the train station can freely access one hour of high-­speed wireless internet, with 
ongoing access at a slower speed. Netflix joined this growing crowd in February 
2016, when they began to offer streaming ser­vices ­there for the first time.
Censorship of specific websites, of certain types of website content, and even of 
the internet itself has been on the rise in India. Four dif­fer­ent state-­level govern-
ments have shut down the internet within their respective states in 2014 and 2015. 
The federal government has blocked vari­ous Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) 
Police departments around the United States have started developing unofficial so-
cial media officers and units. At the San Francisco Police Department, Officer Edu-
ard Ochoa (n.d.–) has the unofficial nickname of “the Instagram Officer.” Part of his 
job is to examine social media—­and not just Instagram—to look for evidence of crim-
inal activity (Wong 2015). Similarly, the Indian police force, which already has dedi-
cated units to monitor social media, set up an official Social Media Lab in 2013. 
Specially trained personnel monitor public sentiment to prevent public protests and 
riots. While critics argue that the lab promotes censorship and cracks down on in-
ternet activism, the police claim to focus on maintaining order and public safety.

INDIA
129
and, more recently, certain kinds of content, such as pornography or ­those poten-
tially related to terrorist groups, on an increasing basis over the past eight years. 
Currently, India has blocked the most Facebook pages of any country. According 
to Facebook, they blocked over 15,000 pieces of content on their site in the first 
six months of 2015 (Facebook 2015).
Karen Stoll Farrell
See also: Bangladesh; China; Nepal; Pakistan
Further Reading
Alawadhi, Neha. 2015. “India’s Internet User Base 354 Million, Registers 17% Growth in 
First 6 Months of 2015: IAMAI Report.” September 3. Accessed February 22, 2016. 
http://­articles​.­economictimes​.­indiatimes​.­com​/­2015​-­09​-­03​/­news​/­66178659​_­1​_­user​
-­base​-­iamai​-­internet​-­and​-­mobile​-­association
Alexa Internet, Inc. 2016. “Top Sites in India.” Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­IN
Burke, Jason. 2015. “India Supreme Court Strikes Down Internet Censorship Law.” 
March 24. Accessed March 17, 2016. http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­world​/­2015​/­mar​/­24​
/­india​-­supreme​-­court​-­strikes​-­down​-­internet​-­censorship​-­law
Chappell, Bill. 2016. “ ‘World’s Cheapest Smartphone’ Goes on Sale for 4$ in India.” February 
18. Accessed March  17, 2016. http://­www​.­npr​.­org​/­sections​/­thetwo​-­way​/­2016​/­02​/­18​/​
­467220085​/­​-­world​-­s​-­cheapest​-­smartphone​-­goes​-­on​-­sale​-­for​-­4​-­in​-­india
Crabtree, James. 2016. “India Internet: Laying the Foundations.” January 14. Accessed 
March 17, 2016. http://­on​.­ft​.­com​/­1TYe7jH
Facebook. 2015. “Government Requests Report: India January 2015–­June 2015.” Accessed 
March 17, 2016. https://­govtrequests​.­facebook​.­com​/­country​/­India​/­2015​-­H1​/­
Goel, Vindu, and Isaac, Mike. 2016. “Facebook Loses a ­Battle in India over Its ­Free Basics 
Program.” February 8. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2016​/­02​
/­09​/­business​/­facebook​-­loses​-­a​-­battle​-­in​-­india​-­over​-­its​-­free​-­basics​-­program​.­html​?­ref​
=­technology
McLain, Sean. 2015. “India to Become World’s Second-­Largest Internet User Base.” November 
17. Accessed April 20, 2016. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­india​-­to​-­become​-­worlds​-­se​
cond​-­largest​-­internet​-­user​-­base​-­1447776612
Mukherjee, Writankar, and Malviya, Sagar. 2015. “India’s Ecommerce Market to Breach 100 
Billion Mark by FY20: Goldman Sachs.” October 26. Accessed April 20, 2016. http://­
economictimes​.­indiatimes​.­com​/­industry​/­services​/­retail​/­indias​-­ecommerce​-­market​-­to​
-­breach​-­100​-­billion​-­mark​-­by​-­fy20​-­goldman​-­sachs​/­articleshow​/­49532128​.­cms
Reisinger, Don. 2015. “India’s Internet Population Could Soon Rival China’s.” November 18. 
Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­fortune​.­com​/­2015​/­11​/­18​/­india​-­internet​-­population​/­
Socialbakers. 2016. “India Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­india​/
The Hindu. 2014. “Google Initiative to Promote Indian Languages on Web.” November 3. 
Accessed February 26, 2016. http://­www​.­thehindu​.­com​/­sci​-­tech​/­technology​/­internet​/­​
google​-­launches​-­alliance​-­to​-­promote​-­indian​-­languages​-­on​-­web​/­article6561353​.­ece
Verma, Shrutika. 2015. “India on Course to Overtake US Next Month in Internet User 
Base.” December  2. Accessed February  22, 2016. http://­www​.­livemint​.­com​/­Politics​
/­9Vipq3Xmcf​QuhJRMBleuwL​/­Indias​-­Internet​-­users​-­set​-­to​-­increase​-­49​-­to​-­402​-­million​
-­by​.­html

INDONESIA
130
Zachariah, Reeba, and Vipashana, V. K. 2014. “Are Cybercafes Logging Off?” September 1. 
Accessed March  17, 2016. http://­timesofindia​.­indiatimes​.­com​/­tech​/­tech​-­news​/­Are​
-­cybercafes​-­logging​-­off​/­articleshow​/­41393447​.­cms
INDONESIA
Indonesia is an archipelagic nation that consists of more than 17,000 islands. It 
sits between the Indian Ocean, the South China Sea, and the Pacific Ocean. Aus-
tralia lies to its south, and the Philippines to the north-­northeast. Indonesians love 
social media and have become one of the highest social media content producers 
in the world. In fact, scholarship on Indonesian culture often suggests that the coun-
try has an online social-­networking addiction (Lim 2013, 636). Approximately 73 
million ­people, or 29 ­percent of the country’s population, access the internet. Of 
­those, an estimated 62 million utilize social media; the majority of social media users 
fall into the thirteen-­ to thirty-­four-­year-­old age range (    Jakarta Post 2015). Indo-
nesians are active on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Pinterest, Tumblr, Reddit, Stum-
bleUpon, Instagram, Wordpress, WhatsApp, Line, Blogspot, and are often very 
active on public and private forums.
Across the country, Facebook is an extremely impor­tant platform. In fact, Indo-
nesian users fall into Facebook’s top five rankings by nation. Approximately 
57.6 ­percent of Indonesian users are male and 42.4 ­percent are female; the site is 
most popu­lar with eighteen-­ to twenty-­four-­year-­old males (Allin1 Social 2015). 
In general, Indonesian users post on Facebook about their activities. Parents post 
about their kids’ accomplishments, while adult men post about their activities and 
popu­lar culture (Lim 2013, 639). Facebook became popu­lar ­because of its ease of 
accessibility, its chat and messenger functions, and its photo-­ and video-­uploading 
features. Most users access the platform via mobile phone, and in fact, Indonesians 
use more mobile phones to access the site than any other country in the world. 
Prior to Facebook’s rise in popularity, many Indonesians used MySpace. It was not 
­until the late 2000s that Facebook’s greater functionality won over a large portion 
of Indonesians and caused them to shift away from MySpace.
Twitter is the second most popu­lar mainstream platform in the country. Indone-
sians tweet to inform followers about their activities, common among local celeb-
rities; to support sports teams; to galvanize ­people around po­liti­cal issues, such as 
to garner campaign support during elections as occurred during the presidential 
elections in 2014; to share news; and to promote and or­ga­nize social and civic ac-
tivism. For example, Indonesia’s top five hashtags of 2014 ­were #Halamadrid, in 
support of the Real Madrid soccer team; #GGMU, in support of Manchester United; 
#PrayForGaza, to show solidarity and support for the ­people in Gaza and Pales-
tine; #AkhirnyaMilihJokowi (or “Fi­nally Pick Jokowi”), during the presidential elec-
tions; and #YNWA (or “You Never Walk Alone”), which is the slogan for Liverpool 
FC (Lukman 2014). ­These popu­lar hashtags demonstrate some of the ways that 
Indonesians use Twitter.

INDONESIA
131
Twitter names a “Golden Tweet” 
each year, for the message that 
received the most retweets. In 
2014, the Golden Tweet was Ellen 
DeGeneres’s star-­studded selfie 
photo at the Oscars. The runner-
up tweet came from Indonesia, as 
part of the over 95 million tweets 
produced during the presiden-
tial election. Denny Januar Ali 
(1963–), a po­liti­cal con­sul­tant, 
tweeted that Indonesia’s netizens 
could ensure a win for the presi-
dential and vice presidential can-
didates, Joko Widodo (1961–) 
and Jusuf Kalla (1942–), solely by 
retweeting his message (Lukman 
2014). The tweet received more 
than a million retweets and, in 
the end, the candidates did win. 
Popu­lar support on Twitter was 
not the reason why they suc-
ceeded; however, the outpouring 
of support on social media was 
indicative of how much mass 
support they had and provided 
a solid indication that they ­were 
contenders for their respective 
po­liti­cal offices.
Apps are an impor­tant part of Indonesian social media usage, and apps that en-
able chat functions or provide real-­time information are preferred. On Google Play, 
the top ­free apps are BBM (BlackBerry), Facebook, Facebook Messenger, the UC 
Browser, and the WhatsApp Messenger. The top paid apps are Poweramp, Flight-
radar24, Afterlight, League of Stickman-­Samurai, and Link2 SD Plus. Data on iOS 
If Twitter ­were a nation, Jakarta, Indonesia, would be its capital. The city first received 
the accolade in 2012, and as of August 2015, continues to hold the title. Jakarta main-
tains this status ­because its citizens produce the highest volume of Twitter posts of 
anywhere ­else in the world. The city’s love for Twitter has grown so significant that 
in March 2015, Twitter opened its first office in Southeast Asia right in Jakarta, the 
heart—or virtual capital—of the Twitter nation (Russell 2014).
Joko Widowo, popularly known as Jokowi, was one 
of Indonesia’s presidential candidates in 2014. ­During 
his election campaign, he was so popu­lar that the cam-
paign hashtag #AkhirnyaMilihJokowi (#FinallyPick-
Jokowi) was one of the year’s top five most active Twitter 
hashtags. Indonesia boasts one of the world’s largest 
Twitter-­using populations. (Garudeya​/­Dreamstime​
.­com)

INDONESIA
132
top apps are similar. The top ­free apps include Go-­Jek, BBM (BlackBerry), Instagram, 
Line, and WhatsApp Messenger. Popu­lar paid apps are Pastel Keyboard Themes, 
Afterlight, Flightradar24, ­Free ­Music Pro (an MP3 player), and Minecraft Pocket 
Edition (AppAnnie 2015). The importance of apps and social media is vis­i­ble 
when viewing Indonesia’s most accessed webpages. As of September 2015, ­those 
pages ­were Google; Google​.­co​.­id; Facebook; YouTube; Blogspot; Yahoo; Detik, a 
national news site with a forum; Kaskus, arguably the world’s largest social media 
forum; Wordpress, and Ask​.­com (Alexa 2015).
­Because social media has become a key communications channel in Indonesia, 
local entrepreneurs and computer programmers have attempted to “Indonesianize” 
the environment. They have a rec­ord of developing local social media platforms 
designed to integrate local culture with all the features that Indonesians consider 
vital to maintaining their social networks. In 2015, Indonesians developed and 
launched more than twenty-­five distinct local apps and platforms. One of the more 
promising platforms is Kwikku, intended to compete directly with Facebook and 
Twitter. Kwikku’s primary features include the ability to use stickers and smiley 
­faces, an e-­learning feature, an email system, a blogging capability, file sharing, a 
business and marketing function, and an internal payment system. The platform 
also supports local languages (Tuliside 2015).
Other Indonesian social media platforms developed or modified in 2015 included 
Adandu, Akkucintasekolah, Salingsapa, Ayobai, Kenalanyuk, Indoface, Jomblo, 
­Blucool, Smallboy, Paseban, Digli, Indofesbuk, Temanku, FB​.­co​.­id, Fupei Friends, 
Goesmart Sosial, Kiber, Kombes, Mobinessia, MyPulau, Ruangmuslim, Getfolks, 
Zeetal, and Sebangsa (Rame 2015). Indonesia’s demand for social media consump-
tion indicates that ­there ­will always be developers seeking to invent Indonesia-­
specific programming. ­Unless that demand subsides, ­there is a high probability 
that local apps and platforms ­will be released to meet social media users’ needs and 
preferences.
Forums and discussion boards are another form of social communication where 
Indonesians are active. One of the largest forums in the world operates in Indonesia, 
catering primarily to Indonesians and Malaysians, ­whether regionally based or part 
of the diaspora. Kaskus was founded in Seattle, Washington, in November 1999 
by a group of Indonesian college students. It grew in popularity and quickly ­rose 
to become Indonesia’s largest forum. In 2008, the site ­owners chose to move its 
hosting location from the United States to Indonesia. By 2012, the site switched 
domains to an Indonesian server and modified its URL (Pardana n.d.). At the time 
of the switch, the site claimed to have over 6 million unique members. In the past 
few years, the site has met the changing demands of its users by developing its own 
mobile site and app to facilitate ease of use. It has also expanded the site to include 
online commerce and other features in addition to the discussion forum. The story 
and success of Kaskus have captured the Indonesian ­people’s interest to the point 
that film producers planned to start filming a movie about the site and its develop-
ers in March 2015 (Republika 2014). Other forums have achieved popularity in 
the country, though none has been as phenomenal as Kaskus.
Indonesians use social media to promote social and civic activism. Older users 
tend to utilize blogs to discuss and convey information, while younger users tend 

INDONESIA
133
to prefer shorter messages passed through Facebook and Twitter. The power of so-
cial media is that messages can be dispersed throughout multiple networks and 
communities that would normally have loose ties, in contrast to the strength of 
physical social networks, the primary channels for Indonesian social communica-
tions (Lim 2013, 643).
Ultimately, social media messaging can reach more ­people more quickly, which 
can lead to mobilization. Through that information, communities and individuals 
can act to support preferred ­causes. For example, Prita Mulyasari (1977–), a young 
­mother of two, wrote an email explaining about the poor care she received during 
a 2008 hospital stay. The hospital obtained a copy of the email and had her arrested 
for cyberdefamation. The courts convicted her in 2009; they ordered prison time and 
a fine of over $20,000. In response, Facebook users started a page called Coins for 
Prita and asked ­people to donate their change to help her pay what they viewed as 
an unfair fine imposed on a victim of mistreatment. Seeing the public response in 
support of Mulyasari, the hospital deci­ded to drop its civil suit against her. In 2012, 
the courts overturned her prison sentence on appeal.
In this instance, social media activism and ­people’s willingness to right a per-
ceived injustice succeeded. However, most social media activism does not achieve 
this level of activism and commitment. As one scholar wrote, most social media 
campaigns receive lots of clicks, or passive support, but often fail to reach any sort 
of critical mass that leads to ­actual change (Lim 2013, 646). However complex the 
transformation from social media to real-­world activism is, ­there are ­people who 
work online and offline to improve Indonesian society.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Australia; Malaysia; Spain; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Indonesia.” Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­ID
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Indonesia.” Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​/­country​_­stats​/­indonesia
AppAnnie. 2015. “iOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 5, 2015. https://­www​.­appannie​
.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­indonesia​/­​?­device​=­iphone
Jakarta Post. 2015. “Internet Users in Indonesia Reach 73 Million.” March 10. Accessed Sep-
tember 5, 2015. http://­www​.­thejakartapost​.­com​/­news​/­2015​/­03​/­10​/­internet​-­users​-­ind​
onesia​-­reach​-­73​-­million​.­html
Lim, Merlyna. 2013. “Many Clicks but ­Little Sticks: Social Media Activism in Indonesia.” 
Journal of Con­temporary Asia, 43: 636–657.
Lukman, Enriko. 2014. “­Here Are Some of Indonesia’s Most Memorable Tweets in 2014.” 
December 11. Accessed September 5, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​/­twitter​-­year​
-­in​-­review​-­2014​-­indonesia​/­
Pardana, Igusti. n.d. “Sejarah Kaskus.” Accessed August 31, 2015. http://­www​.­academia​.­edu​
/­9018872​/­Sejarah​_­kaskus
Rame, Ayo Kita Bikin. 2015. “25 Situs Media Sosial Asli Buatan Indonesia Terbaru 2015.” 
February 25. Accessed June 20, 2015. http://­ayokitabikinrame​.­blogspot​.­com​/­2015​/­02​
/­25​-­situs​-­media​-­sosial​-­asli​-­buatan​_­13​.­html

IRAN
134
Republika Online. 2014. “Sejarah Berdirinya Kaskus Diangat ke Layar Lebar.” November 1. 
Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­www​.­republika​.­co​.­id​/­berita​/­senggang​/­film​/­14​/­11​/­01​
/­necuio​-­sejarah​-­berdirinya​-­kaskus​-­diangkat​-­ke​-­layar​-­lebar
Tuliside. 2015. “Kwikku​.­com—Sosial Media Asli Buatan Indonesia.” January 21. Accessed 
June 20, 2015. http://­www​.­tuliside​.­com​/­2015​/­01​/­kwikkucom​-­sosial​-­media​-­asli​-­buatan​
.­html
IRAN
Known as Persia ­until 1935, the Islamic Republic of Iran is a ­Middle Eastern coun-
try located north of the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Peninsula and south of the 
Caspian Sea. It is bordered to the west by Azerbaijan, Armenia, Turkey, and Iraq, 
and to the east by Turkmenistan, Af­ghan­i­stan, and Pakistan. In 2016, the country’s 
population had reached 82.8 million (Internet World Stats 2016b). While histori-
cally Iran has ranked as having among the lowest internet penetration rates in the 
­Middle East, recent years have seen a surge in the number of Ira­ni­ans becoming 
connected. To some degree, this may be attributed to the development of new proj­
ects, supported by funding allowed by the 2016 lifting of sanctions against the 
country, aimed at improving telecommunications infrastructure. In part due to the 
rampant censorship practiced in the country, several indigenous social media sites 
have found ­favor among Ira­nian internet users. Nevertheless, studies suggest that 
the young population routinely find ways around national restrictions to access 
international social media sites.
By mid-2016, Iran’s 56.7 million internet users accounted for its 68.5 ­percent 
penetration rate (Internet World Stats 2016a). This represents substantial growth 
over the previous fifteen years, from 250,000 users in 2000 (3.8 ­percent), to 7.5 
million users in 2005 (10.8 ­percent), to 33.2 million users in 2010 (43.2 ­percent), 
to 46.8 million users in 2015 (Internet World Stats 2016b). The wide-­ranging in-
ternet penetration rates in the ­Middle East—­from 97.4  ­percent in Qatar to 
24.7 ­percent in Yemen—­average to 57.4 ­percent across the region, placing Iran 
slightly above average (Internet World Stats 2016a).
Over two-­thirds of Ira­ni­ans have access to a computer, and 39 ­percent of them 
surf the web daily (BBG 2012). However, Iran’s younger generation, the majority 
of whom are ­under the age of thirty, seems to be far more tech-­ and social media–­
savvy than the general population. According to a research study conducted in 2014 
by Iran’s Center for Research and Strategic Studies, 67.4 ­percent of the country’s 
younger generation uses the internet (primarily for chatting), and 70 ­percent of re-
spondents aged fifteen to twenty-­nine years old used software to bypass the gov-
ernment’s filters to access foreign social media sites like Facebook and YouTube 
(TeleGeography 2014).
As internet penetration in Iran has increased, censorship practices have become 
more comprehensive, particularly since the 2013 presidential elections. This cen-
sorship comes in many dif­fer­ent forms: the blocking of websites, the throttling of 
encrypted protocols, bandwidth limitations, and content filtering. Of Alexa’s top 
500 most common websites worldwide, nearly half of them are blocked from 

IRAN
135
being accessed inside the country, including social media sites like Facebook and 
Twitter (Lee 2013). Most of ­these websites contained adult content; however, a 
high number of ­these blocked websites fell ­under the categories of art, society, and 
news.
Iran has also used throttling practices to discourage the use of certain websites 
and types of encrypted protocols. ­These websites are allowed to run at only 
20 ­percent of the network’s full capacity (Lee 2013). Some of ­these websites ­were 
not only throttled, but access was cut off ­after sixty seconds. This practice is claimed 
to be only temporary; it was used most prevalently during the 2013 elections as a 
tactic to minimize po­liti­cal dissent. For years, bandwidth in the country was ac-
tively limited to just 128 kbps, which is only about twice as fast as a dial-up con-
nection and about one-­fiftieth the speed of a typical connection in the United States 
(Lee 2013). However, proj­ects based on new investments in the country to improve 
information technology infrastructure may eliminate such slow connection speeds.
More recently, a censorship tactic called “smart filtering” has been implemented. 
This procedure entails the blocking of selective content on websites rather than 
blocking entire websites. It is in part a reaction to government officials’ concerns 
about being able to censor access to the internet effectively, especially in light of 
the rapid rise in internet users in Iran. While this technique has been a de­cade in 
the making, its efficacy is currently minimal. Smart filtering capabilities are limited 
to content produced inside Iran, but government concerns are largely focused on 
foreign websites and apps, whose servers are encrypted and located outside the 
country. This makes it nearly impossible for Iran to execute its smart filtering on 
­these websites.
Some of the censorship in Iran has come in the form of arrests and prosecutions 
of Ira­ni­ans who have used social media in ways deemed threatening by the gov-
ernment. For example, Atena Farghadani (1987–), a po­liti­cal activist and cartoonist, 
was arrested in August 2014 for allegedly insulting government officials and spread-
ing propaganda with a cartoon that she published depicting parliament members 
as animals as a response to government mea­sures regarding reproductive rights. 
Farghadani was released a few months ­later, only to be arrested again shortly there-
after and sentenced to twelve years in prison. She was eventually released in 
May 2016 and intends on remaining in Iran (Cavna 2016). Other examples include 
the prosecution of Ali Ghazali (n.d.–), editor of two online newspapers, Baztab Em­
rooz and Ayandeh Online, for allegedly inciting public anxiety with posts made to 
Facebook (Freedom House 2015).
In tandem with Iran’s attempts at controlling internet content within the coun-
try, several Ira­nian companies, such as SabaIdea, have been developing indigenous 
social media to compete with foreign rivals. One of the most popu­lar of ­these is 
Facenama, launched in 2011. Despite the similarity in name to Facebook, Face-
nama’s format is more a discussion group than a social media site. In 2015, Face-
nama had about 2 million users and was ranked the ninth most popu­lar website in 
Iran ( Jafari 2015). However, its popularity has been significantly waning; as of 
August 2016, the website was only the forty-­third most popu­lar in Iran (Alexa 
2016b).

IRAN
136
Another popu­lar indigenous social media site in Iran is Cloob. In 2015, it had 
about 2.5 million users and was ranked the twenty-­ninth most popu­lar website in 
Iran (    Jafari 2015). Cloob offered discussion groups, photo sharing, blogs, and 
chat rooms. Interestingly, despite operating within the confines of Ira­nian laws, 
content on Cloob has been subjected to filtering at least twice since its launch in 
2004. As with Facenama, Cloob’s popularity has waned of late; as of August 2016, 
it was only the sixty-­fifth most popu­lar website in the country (Alexa 2016b). In 
both cases, the users of ­these so-
cial media ­were overwhelmingly 
college-­educated male users ac-
cessing the websites from home 
(Alexa 2016a, 2016b).
Despite competition with the 
Ira­nian search engine Yooz, 
Google remains the most popu­
lar website in Iran, followed by 
Varzesh3​.­com (a sports news 
website), Yahoo, Digikala (an Ira­
nian online shopping website), 
and Aparat (an Ira­nian photo-­
sharing website) (Alexa 2016c). 
While three of the top five most 
popu­lar websites in Iran are lo-
cally based, foreign social media 
also remains popu­lar in Iran. In 
August 2016, Instagram was the 
ninth most popu­lar website in 
Iran (Alexa 2016c). While Insta-
gram is not blocked by the Ira­
nian government, it is still subject 
to smart filtering, and some Ins-
tagram accounts (such as celebri-
ties) are inaccessible without 
using a virtual private network 
(VPN). Before being banned in 
2009, Twitter ranked the fourth 
most popu­lar website in the coun-
try ( Jafari 2015). ­Today, despite 
its censorship, Twitter is occasion-
ally used by Ira­nian government 
officials. Perhaps most surprising 
is the number of Ira­nian Face-
book users. While no official sta-
tistics can be gathered, estimates 
In Isfahan, Iran, a Shia mullah, or Islamic cleric, uses 
his cell phone while around town. Restrictions on in-
ternet usage is common in Iran; however, Android 
users take advantage of ­free apps such as VPN-­
Hotspot Shield to circumvent government controls by 
switching IP addresses to ­those located outside the 
country. ( Jens Tobiska​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

IRAN
137
suggest that ­there are at least 4.5 million Ira­ni­ans using this banned social media site 
(    Jafari 2015).
According to the Telecommunications Com­pany of Iran (TCI), Telegraph is the 
most popu­lar ­free app downloaded in the Google Play Store for Android devices, 
with 37.5 ­percent of Ira­ni­ans eigh­teen years and older stating that they actively 
use the app (Financial Times 2016). The second most popu­lar ­free Android app is 
VPN-­Hotspot Shield, which allows users to change their internet protocol (IP) ad-
dress to one that is located outside the country. This is how many Ira­ni­ans get 
around the filters set up by government in order to access foreign social media 
sites, such as Facebook and Twitter. In third and fourth place ­were WhatsApp and 
IMO, respectively; their ­free calling and video-­chatting tools likely contributed to 
their popularity. The fifth ­most ­popular ­free Android app was AndroDumper, 
which allows users to hack Wi-­Fi passwords so that they may illegally use ­others’ 
internet connections (Financial Times 2016).
While most Ira­ni­ans have access to mobile phones, network ser­vice provider 
competition in the country opened only in 2014, before which 3G was the primary 
option for many cell phone users. While 4G networks are now offered by the three 
primary mobile providers, MCI, Rightel, and Irancell, they are limited to the major 
cities of Iran. Maximum internet speeds vary widely from com­pany to com­pany: 
Rightel’s maximum speed is 5 Mbps, MCI’s maximum speed is 8 Mbps, and Iran-
cell’s maximum internet speed is 25 Mbps. While mobile technology is on the rise 
and is the primary method of connecting to the internet in Iran, in 2015, mobile 
internet penetration was only 38.7 ­percent. Other common methods of connection 
­were asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), with 22 ­percent penetration; dial-
up, with 9.23 ­percent penetration; and fiber optics, with 8.13 ­percent penetration 
(Azali 2015).
Facebook was initially blocked during the 2009 presidential elections ­after in-
ternational outcry over a video posted ­there of Neda Agha-­Soltan (1983–2009) 
being shot to death during a protest (AP 2016). While Facebook remains blocked, 
certain Facebook-­owned apps, such as Instagram and Tele­gram, are readily avail-
able in Iran. In fact, Tele­gram, currently ranked the twelfth most popu­lar website 
in Iran (Alexa 2016c), was widely used during the spring 2016 parliamentary 
elections by candidates who found the messaging app to be a quick and con­ve­
nient way to spread their campaign platforms. With over 6,000 candidates 
­running, the Tele­gram messaging app allowed lower-­profile candidates access to 
cheap advertising and helped Ira­nian voters keep track of election trends (BBC 
Trending 2016).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Af­ghan­i­stan; Iraq; Kazakhstan; Syria; Turkey
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016a. “Site Overview: Cloob​.­com​.­” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­siteinfo​/­cloob​.­com

IRAN
138
Alexa. 2016b. “Site Overview: Facenama​.­com​.­” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­siteinfo​/­facenama​.­com
Alexa. 2016c. “Top Sites in Iran.” Accessed August 25, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­IR
Associated Press (AP). 2016. “In Iran Elections, Getting Votes Means ­Going to Social Media.” 
Daily Mail. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­dailymail​.­co​.­uk​/­wires​/­ap​/­article​
-­3462193​/­In​-­Iran​-­election​-­getting​-­votes​-­means​-­going​-­social​-­media​.­html
Azali, Mohammad Reza. 2015. “Internet Penetration in Iran.” [Infographic] Techrasa. Accessed 
August 27, 2016. http://­techrasa​.­com​/­2015​/­11​/­20​/­infographic​-­internet​-­penetration​-­iran​/­
BBC Trending. 2016. “Punchy Politics on Social Media as Ira­ni­ans Go to Polls.” Accessed 
August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­blogs​-­trending​-­35662000
Broadcasting Board of Governors. 2012. “BBG Data Show Internet, Satellite Usage in Iran at 
All-­Time Highs.” Accessed August 23, 2016. https://­www​.­bbg​.­gov​/­2012​/­06​/­12​/­bbg​-­data​
-­show​-­iran​-­internet​-­satellite​-­usage​-­at​-­all​-­time​-­high​/­
Cavna, Michael. 2016. “Cartoonist Atena Farhadani, Sentenced for Satirizing Government 
as Animals, Is Freed in Iran.” Washington Post. Accessed August 25, 2016. https://­www​
.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­news​/­comic​-­riffs​/­wp​/­2016​/­05​/­04​/­cartoonist​-­atena​-­farghadani​
-­sentenced​-­for​-­satirizing​-­government​-­as​-­animals​-­is​-­freed​-­in​-­iran​/­
Financial Tribune. 2016. “Top 10 Android Apps in Iran.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­
financialtribune​.­com​/­articles​/­sci​-­tech​/­39700​/­top​-­10​-­android​-­apps​-­iran
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Iran.” Accessed August 23, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­iran
International Campaign for ­Human Rights in Iran (ICHRI). 2016. “Iran to Spend $36 Mil-
lion on Internet ‘Smart Filtering,’ To No Avail.” Accessed August 24, 2016. https://­www​
.­iranhumanrights​.­org​/­2016​/­02​/­iran​-­will​-­spend​-­36m​-­on​-­smart​-­filtering​/
Internet World Stats. 2016a. “Internet Usage in the ­Middle East.” Accessed January 21, 
2017. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats5​.­htm
Internet World Stats. 2016b. “Iran.” Accessed January 21, 2017. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​
.­com​/­me​/­ir​.­htm
Jafari, Hamed. 2015. “Even Our President Is More Social Than You!” Techrasa. Accessed 
August  27, 2016. http://­techrasa​.­com​/­2015​/­08​/­30​/­iran​-­even​-­president​-­digs​-­social​
-­media​/­
Lee, Timothy B. 2013. “­Here’s How Iran Censors the Internet.” Washington Post. Accessed 
August 24, 2016. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­news​/­the​-­switch​/­wp​/­2013​/­08​/­15​
/­heres​-­how​-­iran​-­censors​-­the​-­internet​/­
TeleGeography. 2014. “70% of Ira­nian Internet Users Bypass Government Web Restric-
tions.” Accessed August  24, 2016. https://­www​.­telegeography​.­com​/­products​/­comms​
update​/­articles​/­2014​/­09​/­11​/­70​-­of​-­iranian​-­internet​-­users​-­bypass​-­government​-­web​
-­restrictions​/­​?­​_­​_­hstc​=­43953530​.­ddcd5ebd8416e2dcd5bea7b432f0da41​.­147208341​
0850​.­1472083410850​.­1472083410850​.­1&​_­​_­hssc​=­43953530​.­2​.­1472083410852&​_­​
_­hsfp​=­2722755842
TeleGeography. 2016. “Iran to Boost Internet Speeds, Cooperate with Kazakhstan.” Accessed 
August 24, 2016. https://­www​.­telegeography​.­com​/­products​/­commsupdate​/­articles​/­2016​
/­05​/­17​/­iran​-­to​-­boost​-­internet​-­speeds​-­cooperate​-­with​-­kazakhstan​/­​?­​_­​_­hstc​=­43953530​.­
ddcd5ebd8416e2dcd5bea7b432f0da41​.­1472083410850​.­1472083410850​
.­1472083410850​.­1&​_­​_­hssc​=­43953530​.­3​.­1472083410852&​_­​_­hsfp​=­2722755842

IRAQ
139
IRAQ
Iraq is located in the ­Middle East, bordered by Turkey, Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, 
and Syria. It currently has a population of around 37.7 million. Arabs comprise 
75 ­percent of the population, followed by Kurds, at 16 ­percent, and other minor-
ity ethnic groups. The majority religion is Shia Islam. ­After several de­cades of sec-
tarian unrest and vio­lence imposed by terrorist groups, which followed de­cades of 
heavy authoritarian government control, Iraq continues to slowly expand its tele-
communications infrastructure to include a growing mobile market. As access rises, 
more ­people are adopting social media and using it to communicate with friends 
and access news. Along with the benefits of social media, it also has a down side, 
as opponents of the state use it to promote radical messages and vio­lence against 
non-­Sunni Muslims.
Iraq’s use of the internet started very slowly, and only in recent years has it ex-
panded and become more widespread. Prior to 2003, ­under the rule of Saddam 
Hussein (1937–2006), the government viewed the internet as a threat. While it did 
allow extremely limited access, usage was also highly controlled and restricted. In 
2000, approximately 12,500 Iraqis could access the internet. By 2011, the number 
was estimated to be around 325,000 ­people, achieving around a 1.1 ­percent inter-
net penetration rate (Rashid 2012). Barriers to access included government restric-
tions, high bandwidth cost, inadequate telecommunications infrastructure, and lack 
of providers (at one point in the mid-2000s, the country was primarily connected 
via one satellite terminal). As the mobile phone market expanded and costs low-
ered around 2008, many Iraqis used mobile phone connections to connect to the 
internet, often to communicate with friends and ­family abroad or to access news.
From the early days of the internet in Iraq, one form of internet media that could 
sometimes break through the government’s control was the blog. Salam Pax (a 
pseudonym) was the author of Iraq’s first major blog, entitled “Where Is Raed?” 
Salam Pax started writing in 2002, posting about his experiences before and dur-
ing the beginning of the Iraq war (2003), and ­later ­under the U.S.-­led forces (2003–
2011). The blog focused on what it was like to be Iraqi during that period and 
quickly gained followers in the United States and Eu­rope. Salam Pax was also a 
controversial blogger ­because many Iraqis speculated that he was not Iraqi, or even 
located in Iraq—­that he was just someone using their country to garner attention 
for himself. ­Later, it came out that the blogger was indeed Iraqi and worked as a 
translator (Rashid 2012). Salam Adbulmunem (1973–), became one of the coun-
try’s most notable bloggers, and many of his posts have been turned into or included 
in academic books.
­Today, Iraq has one of the highest, most robust local broadcast media markets in 
the ­Middle East. With hundreds of new publications, tele­vi­sion channels, and ra-
dio stations both online and offline in the country, most Kurds and Iraqis have an 
extensive assortment of news choices (BBC 2016). For the purpose of internet ac-
cessibility, home cable packages have become ubiquitous. The collapse of the au-
thoritarian government eliminated the severe regime control over Iraq’s media and 
social media, escorting in an era of risky social media pluralism, with individuals 

IRAQ
140
all over the nation starting dozen of tele­vi­sion and radio stations, as well as hun-
dreds of newspapers. Nevertheless, constant sectarian strug­gle and government reg-
ulation of media and social media policies hamper the ­people’s access to 
dependable, unbiased news and social media content. When they are online, Iraq’s 
top ten most accessed websites in 2016 are YouTube, Google.iq, Facebook, Google​
.­com, Yahoo, Xendan​.­org (a news website), Dwarozh​.­net, Nrttv​.­com, Blogspot, and 
Twitter (Alexa 2016). ­These sites show an interest in social networking, news con-
sumption, blogging, and using the internet for finding information.
­There is some debate surrounding ­whether the internet and social media 
have been fundamental tools in Iraq’s internal strug­gles. Specifically, the mass 
demonstrations that traversed the ­Middle East in early 2011 emphasized the dis-
tinctive power of digital social media tools, modern information communication 
technologies (ICTs), and networks. The influences of ­these technologies spread 
worldwide, affecting developed and developing countries. The uprisings in the 
­Middle East and North Africa known as the “Arab Spring” initially signaled a 
change of authoritarian regimes and the promise of democracy, especially in Libya, 
Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, and Yemen.
Iraq also experienced a series of protests against the government, though they 
predated the Arab Spring by at least a year. The ­people, including the country’s 
Sunni, Shia, and Kurdish populations, demanded basic social ser­vices, utilities, and 
access to education. In 2011, they used Facebook to coordinate protests on February 
25, also known as the “Day of Anger.” Despite the fact that the Arab Spring pointed 
to novel, innovative uses of mass online communication, it ultimately did not suc-
ceed in its po­liti­cal goals. In Iraq, social media sites ­were not a major influencer or 
catalyst in the protests, despite their use as an organ­izing tool. Overall, the Arab 
Spring did not have a major effect on Iraq, which was also complicated by the 
country’s attempted transition to democracy and the ­battle against terrorist groups 
such as Al Qaeda.
Despite some correlation between social media and the Arab Spring in Iraq, so-
cial media nonetheless plays an impor­tant role in communication and self-­
expression, especially among Iraq’s younger population. Iraqis have ­adopted a 
variety of international social media platforms. As of 2015, Iraqis preferred Face-
book (97.15 ­percent), Twitter (1.67 ­percent), Google+ (0.78 ­percent), Pinterest 
(0.16 ­percent), YouTube (0.15 ­percent), Tumblr (0.07 ­percent), and StumbleUpon 
(0.01 ­percent), and ­there are a number of other sites with a small Iraqi user base as 
well (StatsMonkey 2015). The top Facebook accounts in Iraq are Kadim al Sihir 
(1957–), a musician whose net worth is around $10 million, with over 12 million 
followers; and the Barbie Beauty Center, with over 8 million followers (Socialbakers 
2016). No detailed information currently exists for Iraqi top app preferences.
The conflict in Iraq has caused internet and social media connectivity to be un-
reliable. At times, government blocks or heavy censorship have also affected access. 
In spite of the challenges to staying connected, Iraqis have become ­adept at iden-
tifying new communications channels. For example, ­after a terrorist organ­
ization known as the Islamic State or Daesh usurped territory in Iraq and Syria 
in June 2014, the Iraqi government experimented with internet blocking. Their 

IRAQ
141
policies attempted to ­counter the group’s avid use of social media for recruitment, 
financing, and for spreading its radical ideology, rather than blocking patriotic 
Iraqi citizens ­wholesale. However, the blocks affected all users, especially ­those on 
Facebook and Twitter.
Immediately, the Iraqis responded by downloading Firechat, a peer-­to-­peer mesh 
networking app that can communicate through Wi-­Fi, Bluetooth, and radio recep-
tors embedded in most smartphones and does not require an internet connection. 
On June 13, 2014, Iraqi internet protocol (IP) addresses had downloaded the app 
6,600 times. By late June, ­after the terrorist group seized Iraqi territory, Iraqi IPs 
downloaded the app more than 40,000 times in Baghdad alone (Hern 2014). Since 
that time, Firechat has allowed Iraqis to communicate with one another even dur-
ing periods when internet access is limited or non­ex­is­tent. Around the same pe-
riod, and for similar reasons, Iraqis ­adopted the Whisper app, a social media site 
that allows users to post anonymous messages (Sanchez 2014). Some users used it 
to discuss the vio­lence, while ­others used it to ask questions and share secrets with-
out revealing the source of their information.
On the other side of the conflict, Daesh actively uses social media to promote its 
so-­called Islamic State. The group is widely known for its messaging efforts on Twit-
ter, as well as an active propaganda campaign that spans Facebook, YouTube, Just-
Paste.it, blogs, group websites, and a host of other platforms. Daesh is also active 
on the so-­called deep and dark web—­namely, the places that the average user can-
not access ­because they are not indexed by search engines or ­because they need 
users to supply appropriate credentials before they allow access. The group is also 
active on sites and apps that promote security and enhanced encryption, such as 
WhatsApp and more recently, Tele­gram, a site that requires registration and mem-
bership to view most of its channels (Harris 2015).
Daesh’s presence on numerous websites, social media platforms, and apps has 
made it difficult to ­counter. Companies such as Facebook and Twitter actively sus-
pend accounts of the group and its supporters as soon as they are identified. For 
example, from August  2015 to February  2016, Twitter announced it had sus-
pended more than 125,000 Daesh-­supporting accounts (Koh 2016). However, 
suspensions ­were not very effective, as users could create new accounts to con-
tinue spreading propaganda. More recently, the group’s supporters continue to 
switch away from Twitter to sites such as Tele­gram, making it more and more dif-
ficult for the Iraqi government and the international co­ali­tion trying to stop their 
online activities.
Laura M. Steckman and Susan Makosch
See also: Egypt; Iran; Syria; Tunisia; Turkey
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Iraq.” Accessed August 24, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­IQ
BBC. 2016. “Iraq Profile—­Media.” May 2. Accessed January 20, 2017. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​
/­news​/­world​-­middle​-­east​-­14546541

IRELAND
142
Harris, Shane. 2015. “This Is ISIS’s New Favorite App for Secret Messages.” November 16. 
Accessed August 24, 2016. http://­www​.­thedailybeast​.­com​/­articles​/­2015​/­11​/­16​/­this​-­is​
-­isis​-­new​-­favorite​-­app​-­for​-­secret​-­messages​.­html
Hern, Alex. 2014. “Firechat Updates as 40,000 Iraqis Download ‘Mesh’ Chat App in Cen-
sored Baghdad.” June 24. Accessed August 24, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​
/­technology​/­2014​/­jun​/­24​/­firechat​-­updates​-­as​-­40000​-­iraqis​-­download​-­mesh​-­chat​-­app​
-­to​-­get​-­online​-­in​-­censored​-­baghdad
Koh, Yoree. “Twitter Suspended 125,000 ISIS-­Related Accounts in Six Months.” February 5. 
Accessed August 24, 2016. http://­blogs​.­wsj​.­com​/­digits​/­2016​/­02​/­05​/­twitter​-­suspended​
-­125000​-­isis​-­related​-­accounts​-­in​-­six​-­months​/­
Rashid, Saif. 2012. “An Overview on Internet in Iraq.” Accessed August 24, 2016. http://­
www​.­academia​.­edu​/­1952319​/­Internet​_­in​_­Iraq
Sanchez, Nick. 2014. “Iraqis Turn to Whisper App for Anonymous Social Networking.” 
June 18. Accessed August 24, 2016. http://­www​.­newsmax​.­com​/­TheWire​/­iraqis​-­turn​-­to​
-­whisper​-­app​/­2014​/­06​/­18​/­id​/­577811​/­
Socialbakers. 2016. “Iraq Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed August 24, 2016. https://­www​
.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­iraq​/­
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Media Usage Statistics in Iraq.” Ac-
cessed August 24, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­packedcircle​/­21375​-­iraq​-­mobile​
-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
IRELAND
The Republic of Ireland, a country that takes up all but the northern portion of an 
island off the coast of Britain and Wales, has a population of 4.7 million ­people. 
Due to the government’s efforts to increase telecommunications infrastructure and 
attract international businesses, Ireland is heavi­ly connected to the internet and 
boasts among the fastest speeds in Eu­rope. The Irish use a variety of social media 
and networking sites, spending significant amounts of time online. In more recent 
years, Ireland’s privacy laws, considered looser than other Eu­ro­pean countries, have 
allowed international firms to transfer data around the world. The data storage and 
privacy laws have implications for not only Irish users, but also for ­those of other 
nationalities. As such, ­there are signs that Ireland ­will need to revisit its policies 
and practices quickly to bring them more in line with other Eu­ro­pean nations.
In January 2016, most Irish social media users had multiple accounts across dif­
fer­ent platforms and networks. Predominantly, they used Facebook (63 ­percent), 
Skype (47 ­percent), Facebook Messenger (52 ­percent), Viber (42 ­percent), Twitter 
(31 ­percent), LinkedIn (28 ­percent), Google+ (25 ­percent), Snapchat (25 ­percent), 
Instagram (22 ­percent), Pinterest (15 ­percent), Tinder (5 ­percent), Vine (3 ­percent), 
and Tumblr (2 ­percent) (Dyer 2016). Irish users also utilized YouTube; in 2013, more 
than 1.3 million ­people went on the site. ­These preferences are also reflected in 
Ireland’s most viewed websites, which mirror other Eu­ro­pean socie­ties with a high 
social media penetration; ­these include Google.ie, Google​.­com, YouTube, Facebook, 
Twitter, Wikipedia, LinkedIn, Yahoo, Amazon​.­co​.­uk, and Live​.­com (Alexa 2016). 
Clearly, Ireland has a thriving cyberculture, and both social media and the internet 
have become ingrained in the Irish lifestyle.

IRELAND
143
Irish social media users spend a ­great deal of time online. In a survey of Irish 
broadband users, 36 ­percent said they spent more than twenty hours online per 
week; 26 ­percent spent eleven to twelve hours, 24 ­percent spent five to ten hours, 
and 14 ­percent spent fewer than four hours online. ­Those surveyed said that they 
used the internet for multiple reasons, such as emailing, web surfing, social net-
working, online banking, online shopping, watching video, listening to ­music, mak-
ing voice over internet protocol (VOIP) calls, downloading media, and gambling 
online (Krishna 2015). ­These results reflect the attitudes and be­hav­iors of adult us-
ers online.
In Ireland, it is common for ­children as young as age nine to be active online. They 
prefer tablets over smartphones, laptops, and other internet-­enabled devices. On 
their tablets, they not only do schoolwork, but also play games and use apps. In a 
2016 study, data revealed that ­children are not generally aware of internet eti-
quette and safety. According to ­these findings, 54 ­percent claimed that they had 
spoken to at least one stranger online. The most difficult issue that they contended 
with was cyberbullying. Between 24 to 34 ­percent of elementary school students 
admitted that they had experienced it or personally knew someone who had (Zeeko 
2016). Most parents had been unaware that so many ­children faced cyberbullying 
prior to the release of the study. Efforts are underway to teach parents, ­children, 
and educators how to use the internet more safely and how to respond to cyber-
bullying incidents.
Over the last de­cade, the Irish government has pushed to make the country a 
data hub and technology center of Eu­rope. ­These attempts have been successful, 
as international tech firms and companies such as Google, Dell, Airbnb, Facebook, 
Adobe, LinkedIn, Microsoft, and Apple, among ­others, have established headquar-
ters in Ireland to oversee their business in Eu­rope, the ­Middle East, and Africa. 
One reason that the Irish government has been successful at attracting foreign busi-
nesses is that it offers a larger tax break than most other Eu­ro­pean nations. In Ireland, 
international companies pay a 12.5 ­percent tax, versus 23 ­percent in the United 
Kingdom or 33.3 ­percent in France (Mirani 2013). From a financial standpoint, 
­these firms save corporate money; on the other hand, they create jobs for Ireland’s 
young, skilled tech workforce.
Another reason that international companies, especially tech firms, prefer Ire-
land is that the country’s regulations are looser than in the rest of Eu­rope. When 
tech firms have under­gone ­legal challenges in the past, the Irish system has gener-
ally found in their ­favor, even at times when it seemed clear that other Eu­ro­pean 
countries would not have done so. One major complaint, filed by Maximilian 
Schrems (c. 1987–), an Austrian law student, alleged that Facebook and other 
companies ­were using Ireland to transfer his personal information illegally from 
Eu­rope to the United States. By 2013, two of Schrems’s complaints had made it to 
the Irish data protection commissioner (DPC), who deci­ded in ­favor of Facebook. 
Schrems initially dropped his complaint with the DPC, but in 2015, the Eu­ro­pean 
Court of Justice (ECJ) ordered the DPC to address his case—­and that of other con-
sumers of the content (Hunt 2016).

ISRAEL
144
Some analysts speculate that the issue, and the demand for authorities to look 
more closely at corporate data storage and transmission practices in Ireland, came 
about ­because of growing concerns that organ­izations such as the National Secu-
rity Agency (NSA) in the United States ­were using the data to spy on ­people; in-
deed, Schrems definitively stated that ­these revelations ­were what prompted him 
to act (Gibbs 2015). Schrems is moving forward with the case. He has also started 
a class-­action style lawsuit against Facebook in Austria and has submitted com-
plaints with two other Eu­ro­pean courts. The final ruling in Ireland, especially if it 
overturns Ireland’s previous ­legal support to companies such as Google and Face-
book, could have ramifications for all tech firms nationwide.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: France; Germany; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Ireland.” Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­IE
Dyer, Tris. 2016. “Social Media Usage in Ireland 2016.” January 28. Accessed August 28, 
2016. http://­www​.­leadingsocial​.­net​/­blog​/­social​-­media​-­ireland
Gibbs, Samuel. 2015. “Max Schrems Facebook Privacy Complaint to Be Investigated in Ire-
land.” October 20. Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­technology​
/­2015​/­oct​/­20​/­max​-­schrems​-­facebook​-­privacy​-­ireland​-­investigation
Hunt, Gordon. 2016. “New Data Transfer Woes Looming for Tech Companies in Ireland?” 
May 27. Accessed August 28, 2016. https://­www​.­siliconrepublic​.­com​/­enterprise​/­irish​
-­data​-­protection​-­commissioner
Krishna. 2015. “How Irish ­People Spend Their Time Online in 2015.” Accessed August 28, 
2016. https://­www​.­krishna​.­me​/­2015​/­internet​-­and​-­mobile​-­use​-­in​-­ireland​/­
Mirani, Leo. 2013. “The Reason American Tech Firms Like Ireland ­Isn’t Just the Low Taxes.” 
September 13. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­qz​.­com​/­124133​/­the​-­reason​-­american​
-­tech​-­firms​-­like​-­ireland​-­isnt​-­just​-­the​-­low​-­taxes​/­
Zeeko. 2016. “­Every Primary School in Ireland ­Will Get a Digital Copy of the Zeeko Inter-
net Safety Guide!” January 13. Accessed August 28, 2016. http://­zeeko​.­ie​/­uncategorized​/​
­every​-­primary​-­school​-­in​-­ireland​-­will​-­get​-­a​-­digital​-­copy​-­of​-­the​-­zeeko​-­internet​-­safety​
-­guide​/­
ISRAEL
Israel (officially the State of Israel), established in 1948, is located in the ­Middle 
East. In comparison to neighboring countries, Israel enjoys significantly higher in-
ternet penetration rates. In the years 2014–2015, local and global mea­sure­ments 
estimated the internet user population in Israel to be as high as 71–74 ­percent of 
the overall Israeli population, compared to an average of 38.3 ­percent internet users 
in the rest of the ­Middle East. While traditional types of mass media in Israel, such 
as newspapers, tele­vi­sion, and radio, established themselves in close association with 
nationalistic efforts and governmental offices, the internet marks the opening of the 
Israeli communications market to global communication technology and media 

ISRAEL
145
content. Private companies introduced internet connection to Israeli society in the 
early 1990s, and although it is considered a relatively small market in the global 
internet economy, Israel maintains a prominent role in multiple internet arenas, in-
cluding hardware technology improvements, mobile application developments, 
and cybersecurity advancements.
Similarly to its advent in the United States, the internet was first used in the Is-
raeli media market by academic institutions. The Hebrew University and the Weiz-
mann Institution ­were the first to facilitate network connection for scholars arriving 
from the United States in the early 1980s, temporarily connecting them to global 
networks, but at a high cost. In one of the most comprehensive account of internet 
evolution in Israel, John (2008) follows the diffusion of computer networks since 
the 1980s. The arrival of the internet at that time, he argues, is linked with the 
greater Jewish immigration narrative, in which Jewish immigrants returning to 
their homeland (i.e. Jewish academics immigrating to Israel) brought the need for 
internet connection with them. ­These technological pioneers are referred to as “the 
cosmopolitans” in the pro­cesses of internet diffusion in Israel. By 1985, Israel was the 
third country, ­after the United States and the United Kingdom, to attain a state code 
suffix (namely, co.il); however, computer networks ­were open only to academics.
In 1992, with the creation of the first Israeli website (of the Hebrew University), 
the internet became partially available to nonacademic users if they held a license 
authorized by the Israeli Ministry of Communication. In the mid-1990s, newly es-
tablished local internet providers, such as Bezeq International, Cellcom, and Smile, 
extended internet access to the general public. Israelis quickly ­adopted the internet. 
Around 2000, ­there was a spike in usage (from 4.4 ­percent internet users in 1997 
to 20.9 ­percent in 2000) following the implementation of asymmetric digital sub-
scriber line (ADSL) technology. Internet adoption in Israel has continued to rise to 
this day.
In terms of infrastructure, the connection of Israel to global internet networks 
was made pos­si­ble in 1990 by the creation of an underwater cable (EMOS-1) that 
connected Israel to Greece, Turkey, and Italy. Technological advancements in ­later 
years led to the use of faster and broader internet connectivity via fiber optic ca-
bles. ­Today, most Israeli internet traffic passes through cables owned by both do-
mestic and international companies. To gain internet connectivity, Israeli consumers 
have to subscribe to two separate companies—­the ser­vices of both an internet in-
frastructure supplier and an internet ser­vice provider (ISP). Two companies pro-
vide access to the infrastructure: Bezeq and Hot, while multiple companies act as 
ISPs, such as Netvision, Orange, Smile, and Internet Zahav. As of 2014, Israel was 
graded as the fifth-­fastest internet connection in the world in terms of broadband 
transmission, with a connection as fast as 47.7 Mbps.
In addition to being a highly connected country, Israel has produced many in-
fluential digital software products and applications. For example, one of the first 
instant messaging (IM) platforms, ICQ, was developed in 1996 by Mirabilis, an Is-
raeli com­pany, and bought in 1998 by Amer­i­ca Online for $407 million, the high-
est price paid at the time for an Israeli com­pany. This was one of many examples 
of small Israeli companies developing impressive high-­tech abilities that ­were then 

ISRAEL
146
purchased by larger (usually U.S.) companies, such as Waze (bought by Google) 
and LinX (bought by Apple). The Israeli National Cyber Bureau (INCB) estimates 
that around 10 ­percent of all cyberspace transactions around the world involve 
Israeli companies. Experts referring to the state as a “Start-­Up Nation” and the 
“Silicon Wadi” have accurately characterized Israel’s significant contribution to 
global digital media.
When it comes to cyberattacks and data abuse online, Israel is considered to be 
a leading country in terms of cybersecurity, awarded by Eu­ro­pean initiatives with 
a top cyberdefense grade (Benoliel 2014). In fact, Check Point, one of the first and 
leading international data security companies, was established in Israel in 1993. 
Alongside about 250 commercial cybersecurity companies operating in Israel now-
adays, the Israeli prime minister office manage the INCB since 2011. This govern-
mental branch is in charge of advising and advancing national defense initiatives 
in the cyber field. With the goal of defending the Israeli civic cybersphere as well, 
government officials in Israel declared in late 2014 the establishment of a national 
operative cyberdefense authority, designed to work side by side with the INCB. This 
move came about as a result of the high rate of international cyberattacks on Israeli 
users and institutions, estimated by state officials at 1000 attacks per minute.
With regard to mobile phone adoption, Israel holds one of the highest adoption 
rates in the world, second only to Italy. ­Until the mid-1980s, cellular communica-
tion in Israel was used for military and transportation needs (such as aircraft and 
sea craft communications). In 1986, Pelephone established the first public mobile 
phone ser­vice, followed by Cellcom, established in 1994, and Partner in 1998. As 
early as 2002, the number of mobile phone subscribers in Israel surpassed that of 
landline ser­vice subscribers. Only two years ­later, in 2004, Israel had 95.45 mo-
bile phone subscribers for ­every 100 inhabitants—­almost twice as many mobile 
phone subscribers as in the United States (Lemish and Akiba 2005). In 2009, 
91.8 ­percent of Israeli ­house­holds possessed mobile phones, and in 2013, more 
than 9 million cellular phones ­were in use (1 million more than the Israeli popula-
tion), with more than half of the Israeli population owning a smartphone.
Mobile communication, including internet connectivity, in Israel is provided 
­today by five main companies: Pelephone, Cellcom, Partner, HOT, and Golan Tele-
com. Mobile devices are being used for web surfing, checking and sending emails, 
downloading and using applications, logging on to social networking sites, and 
In May 2011, Israeli ­couple Lior Adler (c. 1974–) and Vardit Adler (c. 1976–) named 
their ­daughter Like ­after being inspired by the “like” feature on Facebook. The Face-
book site allows users to click a button to support, or like, another user’s content. 
­After determining that no one ­else in Israel had the name Like, the Adlers deci­ded to 
use it. They felt that the name was modern and original. The ­couple also commented 
that they viewed the name as being similar to the word ahava, which is Hebrew for 
“love,” and that the name would convey how much they loved their ­daughter (BBC 
2011).

ISRAEL
147
utilizing location-­based ser­vices. One of the most popu­lar mobile applications 
used in Israel is WhatsApp, which 92 ­percent of smartphone users downloaded to 
their devices in 2013 (Canetti 2015). Most Israelis use their cell phone to stay 
tuned to the news and communicate with ­family and friends constantly. ­Today, 
Israeli users enjoy multiple social media platforms, most prominently Facebook, 
Twitter, and WhatsApp. In fact, in 2011, Israeli internet users ­were declared rec­ord 
holders for use, with as much as 11.1 hours per month spent on social networking 
sites.
Aside from heavy consumption of international websites and social media, Is-
raeli users also enjoy a variety of local content online. For example, the news web-
site Ynet​.­co​.­il is a popu­lar Israeli site, with 88.3 million views in the last quarter of 
2015; and the news and entertainment site walla​.­co​.­il earned 67.4 million views. 
Israeli mass media outlets, such as radio, newspapers, and tele­vi­sion, also contrib-
ute content to online venues (such as Nana10 of Channel 10), which is consumed 
alongside original web content such as Quickie (2003), Pini (2010), and YouTube 
national stars such as Srutonim. When it comes to e-­commerce, 91 ­percent of Israelis 
shopped online in 2015, and many use the internet for peer-­to-­peer shopping via 
websites like yad2​.­co​.­il, for price comparisons on websites like zap​.­co​.­il, and for 
mobile shopping in applications like Shufersal.
The relatively small population of Israel (around 8 million) is divided into sev-
eral sectors, with each sector exhibiting unique internet adoption patterns and uses. 
For example, the Rus­sian community in Israel is internet savvy, with the website 
ok.ru rated as one of the top ten most visited sites in Israel. In contrast, the Arab 
sector in Israel was much slower to connect to internet ser­vices due to lack of in-
frastructure in Arab cities and villages, as well as lower financial and educational 
resources. ­Today, a digital divide remains in place, with 63.6 ­percent of the Israeli-­
Arab population obtaining access to the internet, compared with 73.9 ­percent of 
Israeli Jews (Ragnedda and Muschert 2013). At the same time, access to the inter-
net has allowed more freedom of expression among Israeli Arabs, a larger consump-
tion of Arab media content online, and a growing presence and involvement in the 
mediated global Arab sphere.
A dif­fer­ent example for sectorial internet adoption in Israel is that of the reli-
gious ultra-­Orthodox, a community that uses enclaved media produced by and for 
them. Initially, many ultra-­Orthodox leaders vocally rejected the internet and even 
saw it as dangerous due to its lack of communal supervision. As a result, this sec-
tor has developed specific means of internet diffusion, which allow ­people to use 
the internet in a religious, supposedly safe way. For instance, many ultra-­Orthodox 
Jewish ­people use “kosher” phones, provided by companies such as Nativ, and 
­“kosher” internet filters, such as Internet Rimon. ­These specialized devices block 
indecent and religiously problematic content and allow the individuals of this sec-
tor to use new media technologies for work and religious purposes (Soffer 2014).
One prominent prob­lem related to mobile devices, the internet, and social me-
dia in Israel is that of language. This seems to be a cross-­sectorial issue in Israel, 
pertaining to all subcommunities. Although En­glish is widely used in Israel, the 
two dominant languages are Hebrew and Arabic, both written from right to left with 

ITALY
148
non-­Latin letters. The Unicode system standard of encoding characters enables us-
ers in Israel to surf the web, use mobile devices, and use social media in their own 
language instead of En­glish.
Ruth Tsuria and Aya Yadlin-­Segal
See also: Greece; Italy; Turkey; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Benoliel, Daniel. 2014. “­Towards a Cybersecurity Policy Model: Israel National Cyber Bu-
reau Case Study.” NCJL & Tech, 16:435.
Canetti, Nurit. 2015. “Israel’s cellphone addiction.” Al-­Monitor, March  19. Accessed 
March  17, 2016. http://­www​.­al​-­monitor​.­com​/­pulse​/­originals​/­2015​/­03​/­israel​-­mobile​
-­phone​-­addiction​-­youngsters​-­whatsapp​-­technology​.­html
Dahan, Michael. 1999. “National Security and Democracy on the Internet in Israel.” Javnost-­
The Public, 6(4): 67–77.
John, Nicholas. 2008. “The Arrival of the Internet in Israel: The Local Diffusion of a Global 
Technology.” PhD dissertation, Hebrew University. Accessed March 25, 2016. http://­
sociothink​.­com​/­njohnphd​.­pdf
Lemish, Dafna, and Cohen, Akiba A. 2005. “On the Gendered Nature of Mobile Phone Cul-
ture in Israel.” Sex Roles, 52(7–8): 511–521.
Mesch, Gustavo S. 2001. “Social Relationships and Internet Use among Adolescents in Is-
rael.” Social Science Quarterly, 82(2): 329–339.
Ragnedda, Massimo, and Muschert, Glenn W. 2013. The Digital Divide: The Internet and So­
cial In­equality in International Perspective. New York: Routledge.
Soffer, Oren. 2014. Mass Communication in Israel: Nationalism, Globalization, and Segmenta­
tion. Oxford, U.K.: Berghahn Books.
ITALY
Italy is a southern Eu­ro­pean country, and a founding member of the Eu­ro­pean 
Union (EU). With 60,656,000 inhabitants (National Institute of Statistics 2016a), 
it is the fourth most populous EU member state, ­after Germany, France, and the 
United Kingdom. Currently, in terms of connectivity, Italy ranks second to last 
among EU countries (Eu­ro­pean Commission, 2016). On the other hand, Italy has 
a high penetration of mobile phone subscriptions (134 ­percent), and a large num-
ber of social media users compared to the ­whole internet user population.
Compared to other EU countries, Italian internet penetration appears to be be-
low average: according to the National Institute of Statistics (Istituto Nazionale di 
Statistica–­ISTAT 2016b), only 60.2 ­percent of Italians (six years old and older) ­were 
internet users in 2015. According to Eu­ro­pean Union (EU) statistics, when only 
considering the population between six and seventy-­four years of age, Italian in-
ternet users reached 68 ­percent, while the EU average was 81 ­percent (Eurostat 
2015). In 2015, ­people using the internet “­every day” ­were 40.3 ­percent, while 
­people using it “one or more times a week” ­were 16.8 ­percent (National Institute 
of Statistics 2016b). Digital inequalities in Italy, at an individual level, appear to be 

ITALY
149
related to age, education, socioeconomic status, geo­graph­i­cal ­factors (i.e. citizens 
living in northern Italy are more connected than ­those living in southern Italy); 
among ­people over fifty-­five years of age, ­there is also a gender gap, which has been 
overcome with the younger generations.
The Agenda Digitale Italiana, promoted by the Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale (AGID), 
a governmental agency devoted to the diffusion of digital technologies in the coun-
try, has set several goals with regard to internet diffusion and to digital skills in order 
to fill the gap between Italy and the other EU countries. For instance, according to 
AGID (2016), in 2014, 23 ­percent of Italian citizens accessed e-­government ser­
vices, while the EU average is 46 ­percent; and 35 ­percent used e-­commerce, while 
the EU average is 63 ­percent.
In 2015, among Italian internet users, 75.9 ­percent used emails, 56.1 ­percent 
accessed at least one social network site, 52.8 ­percent played a game or down-
loaded multimedia files, and 52.5 ­percent read news online (National Institute of 
Statistics 2016b). According to Alexa​.­com, as of January 2016, the most popu­lar 
websites in Italy ­were Google.it, Facebook, YouTube, Google​.­com, Amazon.it, 
and Wikipedia​.­org. The most read online newspaper was the digital version of La 
Repubblica (Repubblica.it). Google is the prevailing search engine, while Bing cov-
ers only a very small share of the market.
With regard to connectivity, the Digital Economy & Society Index (DESI) scores 
concerning Italy are particularly low, putting the country second to last among 
EU countries. More specifically, while broadband coverage appears higher than 
EU countries’ averages, broadband penetration, as well as connection speed, are 
currently not satisfactory (Eu­ro­pean Commission 2016). Mobile phones are wide-
spread in Italy; specifically, mobile subscriptions account for 134 ­percent of the 
population, while mobile phone penetration is 84 ­percent (meaning that several 
Italians own more than one mobile phone subscription); 62 ­percent of the adult 
population owned a smartphone in 2015, and 48 ­percent ­were mobile internet us-
ers (We Are Social 2016). In the same survey, 84 ­percent of mobile connections 
­were prepaid, 16 ­percent ­were postpaid, and 75 ­percent ­were broadband (3G and 
4G); in most Eu­ro­pean countries, prepaid connections prevail (We Are Social 
2016). The average daily use of the internet via mobile phone is two hours ten 
minutes (We Are Social 2016). While 40 ­percent of the Italian population use 
social media through mobile devices, this number is constantly growing.
As of January 2016, the most popu­lar mobile apps among smartphone users thir-
teen years old and over are WhatsApp, Google, Facebook, Skype, Microsoft Out-
look, Instagram, Amazon, and Yahoo (Cosenza 2016). As already mentioned, 
according to ISTAT, 56.1 ­percent of Italian internet users accessed at least one social 
network site in 2015. More specifically, the leading social media platform was Face-
book, which reached 28 million active users per month in June 2016 (Cosenza 
2016). Among them, 52  ­percent ­were male and 48  ­percent ­were female; and 
10 ­percent ­were aged thirteen to nineteen years old, 26 ­percent ­were aged twenty 
to twenty-­nine years old, 23 ­percent ­were aged thirty to thirty-­nine years old, 
21 ­percent ­were aged forty to forty-­nine years old, 12 ­percent ­were aged fifty to 

ITALY
150
fifty-­nine years old, and 8 ­percent ­were sixty years of age or older (We Are Social 
2016). Facebook started spreading in Italy as a “niche” platform, and it witnessed 
its first relevant growth (moving from few hundred thousand users to more than a 
million) during the summer of 2008. Despite the prevalence of users in their twen-
ties and thirties, the number of overall users (and the high penetration of the plat-
form) has turned Facebook into a “mainstream” environment, which represents, for 
a significant number of users, one of the most relevant social media experiences.
The second most popular social media platform in Italy is WhatsApp, followed 
by Facebook Messenger, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, and Skype (We Are Social 
2016). The average daily use of social media is one hour and fifty-­seven minutes, 
accounting for about half of overall internet usage (four hours and five minutes) 
(We Are Social 2016). In 2015, concerning the youn­gest sectors of the population 
(users aged twelve to seventeen years old) 75 ­percent had a Facebook account, 
36 ­percent an Instagram account, and 29 ­percent a Twitter account. In general terms, 
young ­people appear to appreciate Instagram more than the general population. 
Snapchat is also spreading rapidly among younger users, but official data are not 
available (or relevant) yet. Social media platforms are currently used in Italy for a 
variety of purposes.
Besides private citizens, who share content with friends and acquaintances, pol-
iticians, brands, celebrities, and media outlets are increasingly using social media 
to reach their audiences and encourage ­people’s engagement. In this regard, Face-
book is the most used platform due to its popularity, but several forms of profes-
sional use also occur on Twitter (primarily with regard to po­liti­cal communication 
and media outlets) and on Instagram (with a growing share of small-­ or large-­scale 
influencers, such as ­those in the field of fashion, design, and food). ­After de­cades 
of broadcast tele­vi­sion playing a central role in the public debate, especially with 
the influence of Silvio Berlusconi (1936–), tele­vi­sion network tycoon and former 
prime minister, Italian politicians in recent years have started to use the internet 
intensively for po­liti­cal communication, with a special focus on social media. For 
instance, the recent Movimento 5 Stelle (Five Stars Movement), founded in 2009 
by former comedian Beppe Grillo (1948–), used social media and Web 2.0 plat-
forms for organ­izing its activities and spreading its messages. On the other hand, 
current prime minister Matteo Renzi (1975–), along with several ministers and 
The @ sign dates back to sixteenth-­century shorthand. ­Today, it is known as the “at 
sign,” or the “commercial at” in some business circles. However, ­those names have 
come about only recently, with the first electronic usage in 1971. ­Until the symbol 
had an accepted name, ­people around the world had to describe the symbol in order 
to name it. In dif­fer­ent parts of the world, ­people have referred to the “at sign” as the 
“crazy A” (Bosnian), “­little dog” (Rus­sian and Armenian), “monkey’s tail” (Dutch), “spi-
der monkey” (German), “small snail” (Italian), “pig’s tale” or “elephant’s trunk” (Dan-
ish), “worm” (Hungarian), and “strudel” (Hebrew) (Specktor 2014).

ITALY
151
local level authorities, are diffusively using social media, including short live vid-
eos, to communicate with citizens.
Francesca Comunello and Simone Mulargia
See also: France; Germany; Greece; Spain; United Kingdom
Further Reading
Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale (AGID). 2016. “Coalizione per le Competenze Digitali.” Accessed 
July 29, 2016. http://­competenzedigitali​.­agid​.­gov​.­it​/­content​/­cittadini
Cosenza, Vincenzo. 2016. “Vincos.it.” Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­vincos​.­it
European Commission. 2016. “Digital Economy & Society Index (DESI).” Accessed July 29, 
2016. https://­ec​.­europa​.­eu​/­digital​-­single​-­market​/­en​/­desi
Eurostat. 2016. “Internet Use by Individuals.” Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­ec​.­europa​.­eu​
/­eurostat​/­web​/­products​-­datasets​/­​-­​/­tin00028
Ipsos Public Affairs. 2015. “Safer Internet Day Study 2015: I Nativi Digitali Conoscono Ve-
ramente il Loro Ambiente?” Accessed July 29, 2016 http://­images​.­savethechildren​.­it​
/­IT​/­f​/­img​_­pubblicazioni​/­img263​_­b​.­pdf​?­​_­ga​=­1​.­237351299​.­243225816​.­1469802512
National Institute of Statistics (Istituto Nazionale di Statistica–­ISTAT). 2016a. “Indicatori 
demografici.” Accessed July 29, 2016a. http://­www​.­istat​.­it​/­it​/­files​/­2016​/­02​/­Indicatori​
-­demografici​_­2015​.­pdf​?­title​=­Indicatori+demografici++​-­+19​/­feb​/­2016+​-­+Testo+integr
ale+e+nota+metodologica​.­pdf
National Institute of Statistics (Istituto Nazionale di Statistica–­ISTAT). 2016b. “I.Stat: Your 
Direct Access to Italian Statistics.” Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­dati​.­istat​.­it
We Are Social. 2016. “Digital in 2016.” Accessed July 29, 2016. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​
/­wearesocialsg​/­digital​-­in​-­2016

This page intentionally left blank

JAMAICA
Jamaica is located in the Greater Antilles in the Atlantic Ocean, south of Cuba. It is 
the third-­largest Ca­rib­bean island with a population of 2.8 million. ­Until recently, 
it had a low internet penetration rate of 3.1 ­percent due to a mono­poly held by the 
British Cable & Wireless Communication Group from 1988 to 2000. But recorded 
statistics in 2016 showed the penetration rate to be 43.4 ­percent, with 1.2 million 
users (Internet Live Stats 2016). The most popu­lar domestic platform is Facebook, 
followed by Google+, Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, and LinkedIn with users access-
ing the internet several times a day (D&N Research Network 2015).
The liberalization of the industry in 2000 brought about fierce competition, 
bringing major new telecommunication carriers. One of the two leading players was 
Digicel, a new telecom com­pany owned by Irish billionaire Denis O’Brien (1958–), 
which launched in Jamaica in March 2001. It introduced handsets and ser­vices at 
almost half the price of Cable & Wireless. Digicel exceeded its first-­year expecta-
tions in mere months, surpassing the customer base rate of its rival. Flow, the other 
major player, owned by Columbus Communications International, began operat-
ing in 2006. It has invested millions of dollars in its broadband network.
The arrival of ­these carriers had an enormous impact on the social, economic, 
entertainment, and educational system of the island. It led to a rapid growth in 
internet connectivity, which benefited from the installation of a local internet ex-
change point (IXP) in Kingston, the capital. The increased demand for new li-
censes led to phenomenal growth in the number of cellular mobile subscribers 
and the amount of internet penetration.
In 2010, Dekal Wireless, a Jamaican com­pany, was founded, and together with 
technology from Altai Technologies, Hong Kong, they developed Jamaica’s first Su-
perWiFi broadband network, which was realized in 2011. It provided internet 
access to more than half of the population. In a strategic move, Cable & Wireless 
acquired Dekal Wireless at the end of 2014. Furthermore, in 2015, it announced a 
merger with Flow, acquiring 100 ­percent of Columbus International at the cost of 
$1.85 billion. It rebranded itself as LIME, an acronym standing for “Landline, In-
ternet, Mobile, Entertainment.” By 2015, LIME and Flow completed their merger, 
with the goal of maintaining a competitive industry by boosting the country’s in-
ternet penetration rate (Golding 2011).
Customers reaped the benefits, enjoying reduced rates for entry-­level broad-
band packages, faster internet speeds, and a range of new ser­vices. A reduction in 
rates in October 2004 saw prices drop from $66 per month to $45, with a further 
reduction in 2005 to $29.95. This led to a 488 ­percent growth in broadband 
J

JAMAICA
154
subscribers in a short span of time. By 2016, the entry-­level broadband package 
included access to the internet, home phone, and cable TV at $32.95 per month.
The education system benefited from the liberalization as well, as internet ser­
vices ­were introduced into schools. The Ministry of Education and the Universal 
Ser­vice Fund created the Tablets in School (TIS) pi­lot program in 2006, which was 
initiated at the cost of $1.4 billion. It was implemented in 38 educational institutes 
across the island and provided tablets to 24,000 students. It proved highly success-
ful, and in 2016, the initiative was extended to all teacher training colleges (Angus 
2016).
The merger of Flow and LIME in 2015 brought about a slew of internet-­related 
prob­lems, such as dropped calls, ser­vice disruption, overall poor ser­vice quality, 
and billing prob­lems. In addition to infrastructural prob­lems, internet access was 
affected by the stealing of copper cable, ­because it could be sold off to make am-
munition for the illegal arms market (    Jamaica Observer 2015). Internet crime was 
also on the rise with the sending of sexually-explicit messages and photo­graphs using 
mobile phones.
WhatsApp is one of the most popu­lar mobile apps with Jamaicans. In 2014, when 
it introduced its voice over internet protocol (VoIP) ser­vices, mobile users ­were ac-
cessing the network to enjoy ­free calls. The ISPs collectively blocked access to 
WhatsApp, Viber, and Numbuzz. Following a backlash from mobile users, Cable & 
Wireless resolved the issue by signing a deal with Brian Acton (1972–), cofounder 
of WhatsApp, and became the first Ca­rib­bean provider to exclusively offer data 
bundles via its telecommunication companies of Flow and LIME (C&W Communi-
cation 2016).
Cybercrime became even more prevalent in 2013. ­There ­were widespread re-
ports of persons taking photos of schoolgirls and imposing their heads on other 
bodies as a means of blackmail. The level of cybercrime grew rapidly and included 
scamming, electronic fraud, online harassment, cyberstalking, and the posting of 
obscene material. The laws in force ­under the 2010 Cybercrimes Act became out-
dated, and the Jamaican Constabulary Forces ­were unable to prosecute ­people held 
in connection with cybercrimes.
The government established the Communication, Forensic, and Cybercrimes 
Unit (CFCU) to monitor online activity to maintain national security while it was 
updating its data protection legislation (Gunn 2016). Cybercrime escalated to the 
point that governmental ministries, agencies, tertiary institutions, and private in-
stitutions ­were hacked. A focused group consisting of cybersecurity and forensics 
experts, known as the Cyber Incidents Response Team (CIRT), was constituted in 
2014 to monitor Jamaica’s internet activity for warnings or threats (Gunn 2016). 
Further preventive mea­sures ­were taken in 2015 with the launch of the National 
Cyber Security Strategy to strengthen and protect the country’s information and 
communication technology (ICT).
Nadia Ali
See also: China: Hong Kong; Ireland; United Kingdom

JAPAN
155
Further Reading
Angus, Garfield  L. 2016. “Jamaica Information Ser­vice. Tablet in Schools Proj­ect for all 
Teachers Colleges.” Accessed April 15, 2016. http://­jis​.­gov​.­jm​/­tablet​-­in​-­schools​-­project​
-­for​-­all​-­teachers​-­colleges​/­
C&W Communication. 2016. “Cable & Wireless & WhatsApp Sign Partnership.” Ac-
cessed April 13, 2016. http://­www​.­cwc​.­com​/­news​-­and​-­media​/­press​-­releases​/­cable​-­wir​
eless​-­whatsapp​-­sign​-­partnership​.­html
D&N Research Network. 2015. “Jamaica Chamber: Jamaica’s Social Media Usage.” Accessed 
April 11, 2016. http://­jamaicachamber​.­org​.­jm​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2015​/­09​/­Social​-­M​
edia-­Usage​-­Jamaica​-­Insider​-­Sept2015​.­pdf
Golding, Paul. 2011. “Telecommunications in Jamaica: Mono­poly to Liberalized Competi-
tion to Mono­poly (2000–2011).” September 20. Accessed April 14, 2016. http://­www​
.­globdev​.­org​/­files​/­Shanghai%20Proceedings​/­18%20PAPER%20Telecommunica​
tions%20in%20Jamaica%20Sept%202​.­pdf
Gunn, Tomeica. 2016. “Cyber Incident Response Team Fully Equipped and Operational.” 
Accessed April  13, 2016. http://­www​.­jamaicaobserver​.­com​/­news​/­Cyber​-­Incident​
-­Response​-­team​-­fully​-­equipped​-­and​-­operational​_­50027
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Jamaica Internet Users.” Accessed May 4, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­jamaica​/­
Jamaica Observer. 2015. “Scrap Metal for Guns.” June 7. Accessed January 20, 2017. http://
www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/Scrap-metal-for-guns_19086694
Schwab, Klaus. 2014. “World Economic Forum. The Global Competitiveness Report 2014–
2015.” Accessed April 9, 2016. http://­www3​.­weforum​.­org​/­docs​/­WEF​_­Global​Competi​
tivenessReport​_­2014​-­15​.­pdf
JAPAN
Japan is an island country in East Asia with a population of over 126 million ­people. 
Over 114 million ­people, or 90 ­percent of the population, are connected to the 
internet through fiber optics, asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL), commu-
nity antenna tele­vi­sion (CATV, or cable tele­vi­sion), or cable internet, or through a 
mobile network such as WiMAX, making Japa­nese internet users more than 
7 ­percent of the internet users in Asia (Miniwatts 2015). Although they trail ­behind 
South ­Korea and Hong Kong in speed, the Japa­nese enjoy fast connection speeds 
when accessing sites such as Google, YouTube, 2ch, Yahoo, Facebook, and Ama-
zon. The internet is not tightly regulated by the government, leaving it vulnerable 
to security threats such as hacking and drug trafficking. The heavy use of the inter-
net and mobile devices is blamed for the decline of Japa­nese who can properly write 
Kanji, one of the three alphabets of the Japa­nese language. This issue is expected 
to escalate as Japan prepares for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics with faster networks 
and more ­free access points.
In 1996, major companies Nippon Telegraph (also referred to as NTT) and 
­Fujitsu began offering internet ser­vice provider (ISP) ser­vices. Mobile internet 
ser­vice and high-­speed broadband ­were ­later introduced in the late 1990s and 
early 2000s. Fiber to the x (FTTH), fiber optic internet, was introduced in 1999 

JAPAN
156
and saw growth in the early 2000s. In 2008, Japan was the world leader in the 
number of fiber-­connected homes at 13.2 million, followed by the United States at 
just above 6 million (    Jackson 2009). As of 2011, the broadband market share was 
dominated by NTT East and NTT West, followed by cable tele­vi­sion networks and 
Softbank, while the FTTH market was mostly controlled by NTT East and West 
(Sugaya 2012). Mobile internet is also ubiquitous in the island nation.
Japan was the first country where mobile data revenues exceeded voice revenue. 
This trend is expected to continue, as the Japa­nese market is filled with the latest 
smartphones, tablets, and other devices, though it should be noted that mobile in-
ternet was popu­lar in Japan before the introduction of smartphones (Freedom House 
2013). The Japa­nese enjoy surfing the internet at high speeds. In the third quarter 
of 2015, Japan’s average connection speed was 15 Mbps, with a peak average con-
nection speed of 78.4 Mps (Akamai 2015). In early 2013, So-­Net, a Japa­nese ser­
vice provider owned by Sony, launched Nuro, an FTTH ser­vice providing 2 Gbit/s 
internet to certain areas in Japan, which at the time was the world’s fastest ser­vice.
Freedom of speech and the press is respected on the internet, and Japan’s inter-
net status has been reported as “­free” by the Freedom on the Net Report of 2013 
(Freedom House 2013). The Japa­nese internet has been described as self-­regulatory, 
In Japan, passengers on the metro system use mobile devices while in transit. Japan has incor-
porated wireless communications into its culture; in the late 1990s the country became famous 
for the invention of emoji, which means “picture” + “character” in Japa­nese. Emojis have be-
come a worldwide craze, and are in high demand across most social media platforms and chat 
apps. (Phuongphoto​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

JAPAN
157
a stark contrast to other East Asian countries such as China, North ­Korea, and even 
South ­Korea. While po­liti­cal censorship is not directly controlled, an old law that 
banned campaigning before an election caused many bloggers to delete content 
posted before the campaign period for fear of violation. However, this law has been 
repealed in the new day of internet and social media ­under Prime Minister Shinzo 
Abe’s rule (2012–) (Huffington 2013).
Illegal material such as obscene content and child pornography are filtered by 
ISPs on a voluntary basis, and parental filter options may be set up by users. In 
2007, parental filters ­were mandated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Com-
munications; however, groups such as the Japan Internet Providers Association and 
the Movement of Internet Active Users lobbied against them (Aizu 2009). Online 
gaming is also a point of contention due to the potential for child abuse and pos­
si­ble exposure to online gambling. As a result, game developers Gree and DeNA 
Mobage placed caps on online virtual purchases for minors (Freedom House 2013). 
Regarding piracy, illegal transfer of ­music or films is punishable by prison terms 
and large fines.
Cybercrime is increasing in severity, and or­ga­nized crime groups such as the 
Yakuza are expected to become involved in the cybercrime economy. 2ch, which is 
the short name for 2channel, a bulletin board site similar to 4chan in the United 
States and one of the most visited sites in Japan, is often used as a port for illicit 
sales and criminal be­hav­ior due to a policy of user anonymity. Police cracked down 
on a drug trafficking ring ­after a group of ten sold $1.4 million worth of drugs 
through the 2channel site. Criminals have also turned to online shopping sites as 
a way to traffic drugs. Smugglers hacked an online shopping site and used cus-
tomer order information to send illegal substances. The buyers ­were then contacted 
by the smugglers, who said that the wrong package had been shipped and to for-
ward the parcel to another address, fooling naïve shoppers into unknowingly help 
smuggle drugs (Ryall 2014).
The Japa­nese government ­faces serious security threats from hacking both na-
tionally and abroad. Chinese gangs have been accused of hacking into Japa­nese bank 
accounts, and in 2012, nineteen Japa­nese websites ­were attacked during a time of 
increased tensions between Japan and China resulting from a land dispute. For-
eign hacker groups such as the LuckyCat hacker group and Lizard Squad are 
Japa­nese parents are proud of their babies and love to share their photos over social 
media. In early 2016, one ­mother noticed that her baby’s arms resembled a popu­lar 
type of bread sold at local 7-­Elevens. She took a picture of the baby’s arm next to the 
loaf. Other parents copied her to show how their ­children’s arms mea­sured up. The 
“loaf and arm” meme follows several other social media trends to compare babies to 
food. In late 2015, Japa­nese celebrity Masahiro Ehara (c. 1983–) took pictures show-
ing how his kids’ ­faces could look like rice balls. Shortly thereafter, other parents 
copied him and posted cute pictures online. The trend even spread to pets, where 
the phenomenon was called “mochi mochi” ­after the popu­lar rice cake snack.

JAPAN
158
suspected of carry­ing out attacks on Japa­nese websites. In addition, it is suspected 
that the hacker group Anonymous was responsible for shutting down Prime Min-
ister Abe’s personal website in retaliation for resuming ­whale hunting activities in 
the Antarctic (Soble 2015). The Japan Pension Ser­vice has also admitted that hack-
ing resulted in 1.25 million cases of personal data being leaked (Otake 2015). In 
the international forum, Abe has referred to the hacking and theft of intellectual 
property by China while working to create a cybersecurity pact with U.S. presi-
dent Barack Obama (Bennett 2015).
Social media is prevalent in Japan. Social networking and chatting apps are the 
most commonly installed, followed by gaming and video streaming apps (eMar-
keter 2015). ­There are about 25 million Facebook members and Twitter users grew 
from 18 million in 2013 to 22.5 million in 2014, with numbers continuing to rise 
(Bennett 2015). Japan has repeatedly broken the tweet-­per-­second rec­ord, and many 
attribute the popularity of the app to the ease of expressing oneself within Twitter’s 
140-­character limit through the logographic Japa­nese language—in which one char-
acter can represent a complicated word.
While kanji may help the Japa­nese be more expressive on their microblogs, many 
traditionalists are pointing the fin­ger at social media and other technologies for the 
degeneration of the language. It is believed that as ­these technologies make it easy 
for users to generate kanji characters, many are losing the ability to write them by 
hand. A survey by the Agency for Cultural Affairs of the Japa­nese Ministry of Edu-
cation found that two thirds of the respondents believe that they are losing the abil-
ity to hand-­write kanji due to automatic generation (Ghosh 2012).
Social media has had other negative impacts in Japan. During periods of increased 
po­liti­cal tension with other nations such as China and South ­Korea, social media 
has been used as a tool to spread hate speech. While ­free speech is protected in 
Japan, ­there are no antidiscriminatory laws to protect minority groups such as the 
500,000 ethnic Koreans in Japan. Online harassment is often done anonymously 
with harassers taking advantage of forums such as 2ch to make personal attacks. 
Only recently have government bills been proposed, though anti-hate speech laws 
have yet to be passed (Krieger 2015).
On the positive side, social media serves as a connector to help save lives when 
phone contact is impossible. In 2011, when a 9.0-­magnitude earthquake struck 
on the southwestern coast, devastating the country, many ­people turned to social 
media sites such as Facebook and Twitter to reach out to ­family and friends and to 
share their whereabouts. While cell phone networks ­were congested in the after-
math, social media allowed users to send messages and photos to other users in 
Japan and around the world. The Red Cross also took advantage of social media by 
reaching out to non-­Japanese-­speaking residents on Twitter to share emergency in-
formation and the locations of shelters. Many ­others simply used online ser­vices to 
share the severity of the situation with the rest of the world.
The ­future of the internet in Japan is bright. As the country prepares for the up-
coming 2020 Tokyo Olympics, the government has pledged support for network 
technology regarding the launch of 5G connections by 2020. The government also 
has invited hackers for a special drill for the purpose of strengthening the security 

JAPAN
159
of government websites. Japa­nese transportation operators are preparing through 
an initiative to offer increased ­free Wi-­Fi access in train stations and on flights. All 
this ­will make the internet in Japan faster, more accessible, safer, and, to the de-
light of tourists, sometimes even ­free (Hofilena 2014).
Crystal L. Hecht
See also: China; China: Hong Kong; North ­Korea; South ­Korea; United States
Further Reading
Aizu, Izumi. 2009. “Japan.” Accessed December 20, 2015. https://­www​.­giswatch​.­org​/­country​
-­report​/­20​/­japan
Akamai. 2015. “State of the Internet: Asia Pacific Highlights.” October 5. Accessed Decem-
ber 15, 2015. https://­www​.­stateoftheinternet​.­com​/­downloads​/­pdfs​/­2015​-­q3​-­state​-­of​-­the​
-­internet​-­report​-­infographic​-­asia​.­pdf
Bennett, Corey. 2015. “Japa­nese Leader Hits Chinese Hacking in Speech to Congress.” 
April 29. Accessed December 19, 2015. http://­thehill​.­com​/­policy​/­cybersecurity​/­240480​
-­abe​-­to​-­congress​-­no​-­free​-­riders​-­on​-­intellectual​-­property
Bennett, Shea. 2015. “Twitter Japan: 26 Million Users, Rising to 30 Million by 2018.” January 
28. Accessed December  19, 2015. http://­www​.­adweek​.­com​/­socialtimes​/­twitter​-­japan​
-­users​-­growth​/­613663
eMarketer. 2015. “Smartphone App Users in Japan Focus on Communication.” December 
24. Accessed December  30, 2015. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Smartphone​
-­App​-­Users​-­Japan​-­Focus​-­on​-­Communication​/­1013383
Freedom House. 2013. “Freedom on the Net: Japan.” Accessed December 20, 2015. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2013​/­japan
Ghosh, Palash. 2012. “Dire Threat to Culture? Mobile Phones, Email Destroying Penman-
ship.” September 25. Accessed December 10, 2015. http://­www​.­ibtimes​.­com​/­dire​-­threat​
-­culture​-­mobile​-­phones​-­email​-­destroying​-­penmanship​-­795287
Hofilena, John. 2014. “Japan’s Transportation Companies Beefing up Public WiFi Access 
Ahead of 2020 Olympics.” April 28. Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­japandailypress​
.­com​/­japans​-­transportation​-­companies​-­beefing​-­up​-­public​-­wifi​-­access​-­ahead​-­of​-­2020​
-­olympics​-­2847850​/­
Huffington, Arianna. 2013. “Postcard from Japan: Talking Zen, Abenomics, Social Network-
ing, and the Constitution with Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.” May 9. Accessed ­December 
19, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­arianna​-­huffington​/­shinzo​-­abe​-­arianna​-­hu​
ffington​_­b​_­3245338​.­html
Jackson, Mark. 2009. “Top 20 Super Fast Fibre Optic Broadband Countries.” February 13. 
Accessed December 20, 2015. http://­www​.­ispreview​.­co​.­uk​/­news​/­EkFuVEyEEVPvohcBfQ​
.­html
Krieger, Daniel. 2015. “Japan Combats Rise in Hate Speech.” November  30. Accessed 
­December  19, 2015. http://­america​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­articles​/­2015​/­11​/­30​/­japan​-­encoun​
ters​-­rise​-­in​-­hate​-­speech​.­html
Miniwatts Marketing Group. 2015. “Asia Internet Use, Population Data, and Facebook Sta-
tistics.” November 30. Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​
.­com​/­stats3​.­htm#asia
Otake, Tomoko. 2015. “1.25 Million Affected By Japan Pension Ser­vice Hack.” June 1. Ac-
cessed December 15. http://­www​.­japantimes​.­co​.­jp​/­news​/­2015​/­06​/­01​/­national​/­crime​
-­legal​/­japan​-­pension​-­system​-­hacked​-­1​-­25​-­million​-­cases​-­personal​-­data​-­leaked​/­

JAPAN
160
Ryall, Julian. 2014. “Japa­nese Drug Smugglers Use Online Shoppers as Mules.” February 28. 
Accessed December  15, 2015. http://­www​.­scmp​.­com​/­news​/­asia​/­article​/­1437576​
/­japanese​-­drug​-­smugglers​-­use​-­online​-­shoppers​-­mules
Soble, Jonathan. 2015. “Japan Investigating Hacking Attack on Shinzo Abe’s Website.” 
December 10. Accessed December  20, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2015​/­12​/­11​
/­world​/­asia​/­japan​-­hacking​-­shinzo​-­abe​-­whale​-­hunting​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
Sugaya, Minoru. 2012. “Regulation and Competition in the JP Broadband Market.” January 
15. Accessed December  18, 2015. http://­www​.­ptc​.­org​/­ptc12​/­images​/­papers​/­upload​
/­PTC12​_­Broadband%20Policy%20Wkshop​_­Minoru%20Sugaya​.­pdf

KAZAKHSTAN
The Republic of Kazakhstan is a former Soviet state located in Central Asia. Ka-
zakhstan occupies a huge territory (it is the ninth-­largest country in the world) and 
has a relatively small population of 17.7 million ­people (Committee on Statistics 
of Kazakhstan 2016). The Kazakh government is investing in the development of 
internet in the country through the Kazakhtelecom national com­pany. In 2016, the 
internet penetration in Kazakhstan reached 64 ­percent of the population aged six 
to seventy-­four years old. Despite the state investments in the field, the authorities 
exercise heavy control over the internet sphere.
Many Kazakh internet users prefer to access the web via mobile phone. Cur-
rently, ­there are four mobile network operators in Kazakhstan, one of which has 
been providing 4G wireless telecommunications ser­vice since 2002, while all 
­others announced the launch of 4G ser­vice by the end of 2016. Social networks are 
becoming popu­lar among Kazakh internet users, with the Rus­sian VKontakte 
holding the top position with more than 1.9 million local users.
­After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Kazakhstan experienced a ma-
jor economic crisis that resulted in the decline of living standards in the country, it 
was not ­until 2004 when the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) reached the 
level of the pre-­independence era. Since the early 2000s, the country had a rapid 
economic growth (during 2000–2007, its GDP grew by 10 ­percent per year on av-
erage), mainly due to the rise in oil production and high oil prices. Such rapid 
economic growth even prompted some economists and po­liti­cal scientists to raise 
discussions about the “Kazakh Economic Miracle” and the birth of a new “Asian 
Tiger” in the Central Asian region. The drop in oil prices during the 2007–2008 
global financial crisis, and ­later in 2015, slowed down the country’s economy.
A substantial rise in state revenues in the 2000s allowed the state to increase in-
vestments in its infrastructural proj­ects. The Kazakh government, through its na-
tional operator, Kazakhtelecom, has been consistently working on improving 
information and communications technologies in the country. According to offi-
cial calculations, internet penetration in Kazakhstan exceeds 64 ­percent of the pop-
ulation aged six to seventy-­four (Committee on Statistics of Kazakhstan 2015). 
Current estimates demonstrate rapid growth of internet users in the country. Just 
in 2000, the internet was used by 32 ­percent of the population in Kazakhstan.
The internet in Kazakhstan is mostly used for working with emails, searching 
for information, and reading news. In addition, 54 ­percent of users watch or down-
load movies, while 43 ­percent prefer to listen to or download ­music. In 2015, 
63.1 ­percent of Kazakh users accessed the internet through mobile phones, and an 
K

KAZAKHSTAN
162
equal number of users used PCs, while 23.5 ­percent of all users accessed web re-
sources through laptops (Committee on Statistics of Kazakhstan 2015). Google and 
the Rus­sian site Yandex are the two most popu­lar search engines employed by 
Kazakh users. The Kolesa.kz website, which represents an online market for 
Kazakh car sellers and car buyers, is the only locally developed website included 
in the list of the top ten most popu­lar websites among Kazakh users. The growing 
number of Kazakhs who prefer to do online shopping is evidenced by the popular-
ity of Aliexpress, an online retail ser­vice owned by China’s Alibaba Holding Group, 
that is also among the ten most popu­lar websites in Kazakhstan (Shigaeva 2015).
Kazakh users mainly utilize Rus­sian (the country’s official language), as well as 
Kazakh (the state language of Kazakhstan) on the internet. Google Translate added 
the Kazakh language in 2014. The inclusion of Kazakh was supported by the 
WikiBilim Public Foundation, a nonprofit organ­ization that aims at promoting on-
line educational content in the Kazakh language. The first proj­ect of WikiBilim was 
the promotion of Kazakh Wikipedia by improving the amount and quality of its 
material in the Kazakh language. The proj­ect was launched in 2011 and supported 
by the National Welfare Fund “Samruk-­Kazyna.” When the proj­ect was announced, 
­there ­were 7,000 articles in Kazakh on Wikipedia; as of August 2016, this number 
exceeds 216,600 (WikiBilim 2016). Among the other proj­ects sponsored by 
WikiBilim was the creation of the Open Library of Kazakhstan (http://­kitap​.­kz) in 
2012. ­Today, the online library contains more than 4,000 books and audio files in 
the Kazakh language.
During 2011–2014, an annual Freedom of the Net report considered Kazakh-
stan a “partly ­free” country; in 2015, however, the state for the first time was in-
cluded on the list of “not ­free” states (Freedom House 2015). The Freedom House 
report put Kazakhstan in forty-­eighth place out of the sixty-­five countries reviewed 
in the report and noted that the state had blocked pages or entire websites of some 
news outlets. Many of ­those websites ­were blocked for reporting on the participa-
tion of Kazakh fighters in the extremist Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (also known 
as ISIL or Daesh), ­because they are considered propaganda. Among the government 
actions ­were to increase punishments for the dissemination of rumors and for libel 
(a restriction that also applied to online sources), and to ban tools that can hide us-
ers’ internet protocol (IP) addresses.
At the end of 2015, ­there ­were more than 31 million mobile phone users in Ka-
zakhstan (Committee on Statistics of Kazakhstan 2016). The discrepancy between 
this number and the country’s total population can be explained by the fact that 
many ­people prefer to have more than one subscriber identity module (SIM) card 
to take advantage of cheaper on-­net calls (within one mobile network), which also 
explains popularity of dual-­SIM mobile phones in the country.
As of 2016, ­there are four licensed Global System for Mobiles (GSM) mobile net-
work operators in Kazakhstan: Kcell, Beeline, Tele2, and Altel (the last two an-
nounced a merger of their companies in 2015). Of ­these four, only Altel provides 
4G ser­vice, though all the other companies announced that they would launch 4G 
ser­vices in the near ­future. Kcell and Beeline each control 38 ­percent of the mobile 
network market in the country, while the share of the Altel-­Tele-2 is about 24 ­percent 
(Profit 2016).

KAZAKHSTAN
163
Locally developed mobile applications are becoming popu­lar in Kazakhstan. In 
2015, the mobile application of the Kolesa.kz website became the most actively 
used one in the country, with more than 8 million general and 74,000 unique us-
ers. Also included in the top ten ranking are Sajde KZ (an application that notifies 
about the time of Islamic prayers adjusted to the geographic locations of all major 
cities in Kazakhstan); Kiwi.kz’s mobile application that is a video-­sharing website; 
and Tengrinews.kz’s mobile application that provides online news ser­vice (Bai-
ramov 2015).
The Rus­sian site VKontakte is the most popu­lar social network used by Kazakh 
users. In 2015, ­there ­were more than 1.9 million active Kazakh users who posted 
at least one public post/message per month on VKontakte. Instagram is the second 
most popular social network in the country, with more than 1.3 active users; it is 
also the most rapidly growing social network in Kazakhstan. ­Today, Instagram is 
being heavi­ly employed by small business enterprises and cottage industries that 
sell handmade clothing, toys, cookery, and other products, which in many cases 
have no official registration and, consequently, do not pay taxes. Recently, the Tax 
Committee of the Kazakh Finance Ministry issued a statement that it ­will monitor 
Instagram business users and take mea­sures to register them officially and make 
them pay taxes (Koskina 2016). Other social networks include Moy Mir, with 
155,300 users; Facebook, with 125,800 users; and Twitter, with 16,600 users. ­These 
three sites are also popu­lar in Kazakhstan, although the number of their users is 
much smaller than ­those of Vkontakte and Instagram (Sarafannoe Radio 2015). The 
most popu­lar Instagram accounts in Kazakhstan belong to local celebrities. As of 
June 2016, the top Instagram profile, with 1.8 million followers, is for the Kazakh 
producer, actor, and singer Bayan Yessentayeva (1974–). Among the most popu­lar 
Facebook pages with Kazakh users is for professional boxer middleweight cham-
pion Gennady Golovkin (1982–); his page has more than 320,000 followers.
Nurlan Kabdylkhak
See also: Kyrgyzstan; Rus­sia; United States
Further Reading
Bayramov, Badirsha, Torgunakova, Viktoria, Gorozhankin, Konstantin, Martynova, Marina, 
and Musabekova, Ulzhan. 2015. “Ranking Top-30 Mobile Applications of Kazakh-
stan.” Accessed June 10, 2016. http://­forbes​.­kz​/­leader​/­top​-­30​_­mobilnyih​_­prilojeniy​
_­kazahstana​_­2
Committee on Statistics of Kazakhstan. 2015. “Development of Information-­Communication 
Technologies in Kazakhstan in 2010–2014.” Accessed June 10, 2016. http://­www​.­stat​
.­gov​.­kz​/­faces​/­wcnav​_­externalId​/­publicationsCompilations​?­​_­afrLoop​=­383056053590​
87294#%40%3F​_­afrLoop%3D38305605359087294%26​_­adf​.­ctrl​-­state​%3Dgti​
2n9ako​_­74
Committee on Statistics of Kazakhstan. 2016. “Preliminary data for 2015.” Accessed June 10, 
2016. http://­www​.­stat​.­gov​.­kz​/­faces​/­wcnav​_­externalId​/­publicationsCompilations​?­​
_­afrLoop​=­38305605359087294#%40%3F​_­afrLoop%3D38305605359087294%26​
_­adf​.­ctrl​-­state%3Dgti2n9ako​_­74
Freedom House. 2016. “Freedom on the Net 2015.” Accessed June 10, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­freedom​-­net​-­2015

­KENY
164
Profit. 2016. “Tele-2 and Alter: Output in the First Quarter of 2016.” Accessed June 10, 
2016. http://­profit​.­kz​/­news​/­30164​/­Obedinennaya​-­kompaniya​-­Tele2​-­i​-­Altel​-­itogi​-­I​
-­kvartala​-­2016​-­goda​/­
Sarafannoe Radio. 2015. “First ranking of social networks of Kazakhstan.” Accessed June 10, 
2016. http://­sarafannoeradio​.­org​/­analitika​/­297​-­perviy​-­reyting​-­sotsialnih​-­setey​-­kazahs​
tana​.­html
Shigaeva, Darya. 2015. “Internet-­Users of Kazakhstan.” Accessed June 10, 2016. http://­forbes​
.­kz​/­stats​/­internet​-­auditoriya​_­kazahstana​_­portret​_­i​_­predpochteniya​_­polzovatelya
WikiBilim. 2016. “History of WikiBilim.” Accessed June 10, 2016. http://­wikibilim​.­kz​/­index​
.­php​/­about​-­foundation​/­timeline
­KENYA
­Kenya, located in East Africa, is one of the emerging economies on the continent. 
With a population of slightly over 46 million, ­Kenya covers over half a million square 
kilo­meters of land. It gained in­de­pen­dence from British colonial rule in 1963 and 
has enjoyed relative peace since then. However, ethnic tensions and proximity to 
unstable countries such as Somalia and South Sudan threaten its stability. ­Kenya is 
one of the fastest-­growing technology hubs in Africa.
­Kenya has experienced one of the fastest mobile phone and internet penetration 
increases in sub-­Saharan Africa. By the end of 2015, ­Kenya had the highest inter-
net penetration rate in Africa (69.6 ­percent), accounting for nearly 10 ­percent of 
all internet usage on the continent (Internet World Stats 2016). A total of 99 ­percent 
of ­Kenyans accessing the internet do so using a mobile device (Alexander 2013). 
­Toward the end of 2015, the mobile phone penetration rate in ­Kenya stood at 
88.1 ­percent; 97.3 ­percent of ­these subscriptions ­were prepaid (Communications 
Authority of ­Kenya 2016). Almost half of the country’s population had an active 
internet/data subscription. This rapid upward trend in internet penetration may be 
attributed to increased access to low-­cost smartphones and the competitive pricing 
of data bundles by mobile phone subscribers in ­Kenya.
Structural reforms undertaken in the past 20 years have transformed the informa-
tion and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure in ­Kenya, making it an 
attractive destination for high-­tech companies. Global technology ­giants such as 
Facebook, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, and Nokia have all established themselves in ­Kenya 
in recent years, owing to the country’s modernized ICT environment (Alexander 
2013; Bright and Hruby 2015). ­Kenya is now popularly referred to as the “Silicon 
Savanah” due to its rapidly expanding ICT infrastructure, which has spurred inno-
vations such as the M-­Pesa and Ushahidi platforms (Benequista 2015). M-­Pesa is a 
mobile money transfer ser­vice that allows ­people to deposit, send, and receive 
money using their mobile phones. M-­Pesa, Swahili for “cash,” was developed by the 
telecom firm Safaricom ­after noticing that ­people ­were sending each other mobile 
phone airtime instead of cash (Alexander 2013).
The internet-­based crowdsourcing innovation Ushahidi (a Swahili word mean-
ing “witness”) combines the use of geomapping with other mobile-­based technolo-
gies to allow ordinary citizens to document corruption, ­human rights abuses, as 
well as to track crises around the world (Bright and Hruby 2015). Ushahidi was 

­KENY
165
developed by bloggers in ­Kenya and diasporic ­Kenyans to track the spread of vio­
lence during the 2008 unrest that followed the contested presidential election re-
sults in ­Kenya in 2007. Several versions of the platform have since been used in 
countries all over the world to follow a variety of situations, including the earth-
quake crisis in Haiti in 2010 and the parliamentary elections in Egypt in the same 
year (MIT Technology Review 2013).
While Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and Instagram are among the top social net-
working sites in ­Kenya, vari­ous indigenous websites rank in the top ten as well (Al-
exa 2016). Among ­these outlets are The Standard, Daily Nation, and the Star, which 
are largely devoted to national news about politics, business, and entertainment. 
Nevertheless, Facebook remains the single most popu­lar website. A report released 
by Facebook in 2015 indicated that ­there ­were more than 4.5 million monthly ac-
tive Facebook users in ­Kenya, and that 95 ­percent of ­these ­were active on the mo-
bile platform (World Stage 2015). The report further indicated that 2.2 million 
Facebook users ­were active on a daily basis. ­Kenyans, especially young ­people, use 
Facebook as a tool to connect and maintain contact with their friends, families, 
and colleagues, and as an online public sphere through which they discuss issues 
affecting them in their everyday life. Social media platforms such as Facebook and 
Twitter are the main sources of news for young ­people, who rarely pay attention to 
news emanating from the mainstream media outlets. However, the interface between 
mainstream media and social media discussion is evident in many Facebook dis-
cussion groups that have formed to provide digital public spaces where young 
­people question issues represented in the mainstream media. Stories picked up from 
other media outlets and posted in Facebook chat groups often generate much on-
line discussion among the participants, providing a space through which young 
­people not only access and discuss events of the day, but also contest ideologies 
represented in the mainstream media.
As in other parts of Africa, Twitter remains an integral aspect of ­Kenya’s sociopo­
liti­cal environment and is often appropriated by young ­people in galvanizing and 
channeling public discontent, mobilizing for civic action, and creating civil aware-
ness. A report published by Portland Communications in 2012 indicates that 
­Kenyans ­were the second most active Twitter users in Africa, with close to 2.5 mil-
lion tweets posted in ­Kenya in a span of three months; a subsequent report revealed 
that ­Kenya had fallen to fourth place (­behind Egypt, Nigeria, and South Africa), 
though this determination was based on geolocated data, meaning that the data’s 
country of origin had been verified (Portland Communication 2015). The analy­sis 
further indicates that 60 ­percent of Africa’s Twitter users ­were younger (twenty-­one 
to twenty-­nine years old) than the global Twitter average (thirty-­nine years old), 
and that Twitter was mainly used in Africa for social conversations, as a news source, 
and a growing forum for po­liti­cal conversation and activism.
­Kenyans on Twitter, a collective group of Twitter users popularly referred to as 
KOT, is one of the most out­spoken social media groups in Africa. KOT is renowned 
not only for its sharp criticism of the po­liti­cal class in ­Kenya, but also for its Twitter 
wars, popularly referred to as “tweefs,” with social media users in other countries 
in the region. ­Kenyans have also used Twitter to challenge Western media coverage 

­KENY
166
of ­Kenyan issues, particularly ­those that are perceived to have represented ­Kenya 
in unfavorable terms. Recent examples include KOT criticism of the CNN refer-
ence to ­Kenya as a “hotbed of terror” on the eve of U.S. president Barack Obama’s 
(1961–) visit to the country. Using the hashtag #SomeoneTellCNN, ­Kenyans used 
Twitter to ridicule CNNs sensationalism in its reporting about their country. The 
ensuing outcry forced the CNN news channel’s managing director to travel to ­Kenya 
to offer an apology (Mutiga 2015; Tharoor 2015).
While ­Kenya maintains a relatively ­free status in terms of expression via the me-
dia, recent developments have begun threatening this freedom. More than once, 
government officials have called for action against bloggers who post defamatory 
content online. In 2015, several social media users and bloggers critical of the gov-
ernment had been arrested ­under the 2013 ­Kenya Information and Communica-
tions Act (KICA) for the “misuse of licensed telecommunications equipment” 
(Freedom House 2016). A popu­lar ­Kenyan blogger, Robert Alai (n.d.–), has been 
arrested at least four times for content published on his Twitter and Facebook pages. 
In December 2014, he was arrested ­after calling President Uhuru Kenyatta (1961–) 
an “adolescent president” for his ­handling of a terrorist attack that occurred in 
In ­Kenya, in the village of Lanet Umoja, Chief Francis Kariuki uses his cell phone to tweet on 
crime and other local ­matters. The power of social media is demonstrated at all levels in ­Kenya, 
from small villages to the group KOT, ­Kenyans on Twitter, that reaches international audiences 
by challenging Western media coverage of ­Kenyan issues. (AP Photo/Khalil Senosi)

­KENY
167
Mandera County, killing twenty-­eight ­people. Alai’s Twitter account was also sus-
pended for allegedly posting the president’s private mobile phone number, which 
is against Twitter’s user policy (Freedom House 2016).
In 2016, the ­Kenyan government began working on legislation that would es-
tablish how social media should be used, with the understanding that ­people use 
social media platforms to instigate hatred against their enemies. The new law would 
provide rules for taking action against such abuses. The government is taking ­these 
steps in preparation for ­Kenya’s 2017 general election to help prevent the spread of 
hate speech during that period. Dennis Itumbi (c. 1982–), the country’s director of 
digital communication, emphasized that the law is not meant to target bloggers, but 
to protect the public (­Kenya Live 2016).
Abraham Mulwo and Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Nigeria; Somalia; Tanzania
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in ­Kenya.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­KE
Alexander, G. 2013. “­Kenya’s Tech Visionaries Lead the Way.” The Guardian, March 1. Ac-
cessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­world​/­2013​/­sep​/­15​/­kenya​
-­technology​-­visionaries
Benequista, N 2015 “Journalism from the ‘Silicon Savannah’: The Vexed Relationship Be-
tween Nairobi’s Newsmakers and Its ICT4D Community.” Stability: International Jour­
nal of Security & Development, 4(1): 12, 1–16, DOI: http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­5334​/­sta​.­fc
Bright, J., and Hruby, A. 2015. “The Rise of Silicon Savannah and Africa’s Tech Movement.” 
Accessed August  21, 2016. https://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­23​/­the​-­rise​-­of​-­silicon​
-­savannah​-­and​-­africas​-­tech​-­movement​/­
Communications Authority of ­Kenya. 2016. “­Kenya’s Mobile Penetration Hits 88 Per Cent.” 
Accessed August 13, 2016. http://­www​.­ca​.­go​.­ke​/­index​.­php​/­what​-­we​-­do​/­94​-­news​/­366​
-­kenya​-­s​-­mobile​-­penetration​-­hits​-­88​-­per​-­cent+&cd​=­6&hl​=­en&ct​=­clnk&gl​=­us
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: ­Kenya.” Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­kenya
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Internet Usage Stats in Africa.” Accessed August 21, 2016. 
http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats1​.­htm
Jack, W., and Suri, T. 2010. The Economics of M-­Pesa. Accessed April 1, 2016. http://­www​
.­mit​.­edu​/­~tavneet​/­M​-­PESA​.­pdf
­Kenya Live. 2016. “Curbing Social Media Platforms in ­Kenya.” Accessed August 21, 2016. 
https://­kenyalive​.­co​.­ke​/­curbing​-­social​-­media​-­platforms​/­
Meier, P. 2012. “Ushahidi as Liberation Technology.” In Liberation Technology: Social Media 
and the Strug­gle for Democracy, edited by L. Diamond, and M. Platner. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University, 95–109.
MIT Technology Review. 2013. “Com­pany Profile: Ushahidi.” Accessed August 4, 2016. 
http://­www2​.­technologyreview​.­com​/­tr50​/­ushahidi​/­
Mutiga, Murithi. 2015. “CNN Executive Flies to ­Kenya to Apologise for ‘Hotbed of Terror’ 
Claim.” The Guardian, August 14. Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​
.­com​/­world​/­2015​/­aug​/­14​/­cnn​-­kenya​-­apologise​-­obama

KYRGYZSTAN
168
Omanga, D. (2015) “ ‘Chieftaincy’ in the Social Media Space: Community Policing in a Twit-
ter Convened Baraza.” Stability: International Journal of Security & Development, 4(1): 
1–16. http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­5334​/­sta​.­eq
Portland Communications. 2012. “New Research Reveals How Africa Tweets.” Accessed Au-
gust 21, 2016. http://­www​.­portland​-­communications​.­com​/­2012​/­02​/­new​-­research​-­reveals​
-­how​-­africa​-­tweets​/­
Portland Communications. 2015. “How Africa Tweets 2015.” Accessed January 20, 2017. 
http://­portland​-­communications​.­com​/­publications​/­how​-­africa​-­tweets​-­2015​/­
Tharoor, Ishaan. 2015. “­Kenyans Ridicule CNN Report Calling Their Country a Terror Hot-
bed.” Washington Post, July 23. Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​
.­com​/­news​/­worldviews​/­wp​/­2015​/­07​/­23​/­kenyans​-­ridicule​-­cnn​-­report​-­calling​-­their​
-­country​-­a​-­terror​-­hotbed​/­
World Stage. 2015. “Millions in Nigeria and ­Kenya Embrace Facebook Mobile.” Accessed 
August 21, 2016. http://­worldstagegroup​.­com​/­index​.­php​?­active​=­news&newscid​=­24493​
&catid​=­37
KYRGYZSTAN
Kyrgyzstan, officially known as the Kyrgyz Republic, is a small, landlocked nation 
located in the northeastern part of Central Asia. Kyrgyzstan gained its in­de­pen­
dence from the Soviet Union in 1991, but it remains firmly in the Rus­sian sphere of 
influence. Following its in­de­pen­dence, Kyrgyzstan implemented a number of large-­
scale proj­ects focused on establishing internet communications networks around 
the country and expanding ­these networks for users. Despite ­these efforts, internet 
usage in Kyrgyzstan still remains well below the world average, although the num-
ber of internet users is rapidly growing. Internet use in Kyrgyzstan is mainly enter-
tainment based, as evidenced by the significant use of social media in the country, 
with limited po­liti­cal and social activism taking place over the web. Partially ­because 
of this trend, internet users face few restrictions on web content in comparison to 
their neighbors, such as Kazakhstan and China. The ­future of internet in Kyrgyz-
stan ­will focus primarily on building broadband infrastructure and expanding in-
ternet usage throughout the country.
Internet use in Kyrgyzstan expanded rapidly in the early-­ to mid-2000s. The 
number of internet users, defined as the number of individuals who can access the 
internet at home via any device or connection, increased from approximately 51,000 
in 2000 to nearly 2 million in 2015, a near-­fortyfold increase (Internet Live Stats 
2016). Nevertheless, internet penetration is still low by global standards, reaching 
just 32.5 ­percent in 2015 (Internet Live Stats 2016). ­There is a significant digital 
divide between urban and rural areas, and few locations outside the major cities 
have access to broadband internet. Two-­thirds of internet users are concentrated in 
central cities, with 41 ­percent in the capital city of Bishkek alone (M-­Vector Con-
sulting Agency 2012).
Young ­people, unsurprisingly, make up the largest group of internet users. Con-
sequently, internet use in Kyrgyzstan focuses heavi­ly on entertainment, as noted 
previously, with social media websites being among the most widely visited in the 
country. Popu­lar social media platforms include a mix of Western, Rus­sian, and 

KYRGYZSTAN
169
local websites; foreign social media sites have become increasingly popu­lar in re-
cent years. ­Until recently, international websites—­websites that do not use the local 
“.kg” domain name—­could be accessed only by paying an additional fee, leading to 
a proliferation of local social media platforms. Although fixed-­line internet ser­vices 
still charge fees for accessing international websites, most mobile internet plans al-
low ­free access to foreign social media websites such as Facebook and Odnoklass-
niki (meaning “classmates” in Rus­sian), a Russia-­based social media network. As a 
result, Facebook and Rus­sian social media websites such as Odnoklassniki, Moi 
Mir (“My World”), and VKontakte (“In Contact”) have come to dominate the social 
media landscape.
Mobile internet has become the most widely used means of accessing the inter-
net in Kyrgyzstan, due in part to the low broadband penetration rate and compara-
tively high cost of broadband internet. According to a 2012 report, 77 ­percent of 
internet users use mobile internet, compared to only 29 ­percent who use the inter-
net at home (M-­Vector Consulting Agency 2012). Cybercafés, historically one of 
the most popu­lar means of accessing the internet, have declined in popularity as 
more and more individuals turn to mobile internet as their primary means to access 
the web. This gradual shift from cybercafés to mobile internet is pos­si­ble due to the 
increasing spread of mobile internet networks and decreasing cost of mobile inter-
net ser­vices.
Broadband internet is unavailable to most of Kyrgyzstan’s citizens due to lack of 
infrastructure. As of 2016, ­there is a major proj­ect underway, the Trans-­Asia-­Europe 
Fiber Optic Line, with the purpose of increasing broadband internet in the country. 
The 27,000-­kilometer-­long optical fiber line began in October 1998 and ­will con-
nect Shanghai, China, to Frankfurt, Germany (United Nations 2014). Kyrgyzstan 
completed its portion of the fiber optic line in 2010, but the proj­ect is still not 
complete.
Currently, broadband internet is available mainly in Bishkek, with some limited 
coverage in the provinces provided by the state-­run Kyrgyztelecom. Mobile internet 
providers have been significantly more successful in their bid to expand mobile 
internet throughout the country, with a projected coverage of 90 ­percent of the 
populated territory. Mobile phone penetration surpassed 128 ­percent in 2014 (ITU 
2016).
As mobile internet coverage expands throughout the country, the price of mo-
bile internet has decreased, becoming more affordable for citizens. As of April 2016, 
Beeline (www​.­beeline​.­kg), one of the largest mobile internet providers in the coun-
try, provides a 2-­GB plan for subscribers that costs as ­little as $6.50 per month, with 
­free access to Facebook and Odnoklassniki, two of the most popu­lar social media 
platforms in the country. Megacom, another large internet provider, offers an un-
limited internet plan for $8.75 per month (www​.­megacom​.­kg). In contrast, broad-
band internet can easily range from $14–­$70 per month for limited access and up 
to $84 for unlimited download (Freedom House 2015; United Nations 2014).
Despite the decreasing cost of mobile internet, the internet is still considered a 
luxury good and is consistently available primarily for wealthier citizens. As of 2015, 
the average monthly wage in the country was approximately $195, with salaries 

KYRGYZSTAN
170
often significantly lower in the provinces. To combat the high cost of internet access 
and increase the pool of internet users in the country, Kyrgyztelecom, the largest 
broadband internet com­pany in Kyrgyzstan, launched ­free Wi-­Fi zones in Bishkek 
in October 2012, expanding to sixteen hotspots around the country as of 2015 
(United Nations 2014; Freedom House 2015).
The telecommunications sector in Kyrgyzstan is relatively liberal compared with 
other countries in the region. Nevertheless, the state-­run Kyrgyztelecom dominates 
the market for internet access; the three other top-­tier internet ser­vice providers 
(ISPs) are privately owned. Kyrgyzstan is heavi­ly reliant on the neighboring coun-
tries of Kazakhstan and Rus­sia for access to international websites. Three of the four 
top-­tier ISPs in Kyrgyzstan are linked to the internet via Kazakhstan; the fourth is 
linked through Rus­sia.
Internet use in Kyrgyzstan was rated as “partly ­free” in 2015 according to Free-
dom House’s Freedom on the Net. While freedom of internet use has improved since 
President Kurmanbek Bakiyev (1949–) was removed from power in 2010, new re-
strictions have raised concerns about the ­future of internet freedom in Kyrgyzstan. 
Since February 2014, subscriber identity module (SIM) cards have been required to 
be registered to their ­owners, limiting the ability of citizens to use information and 
communications technology anonymously. In the same year, the government in-
structed internet and mobile ser­vice providers to store information about their 
subscribers for up to three years and to grant authorities access to communications 
networks. ­These and other new laws tightening freedom of speech on the internet 
have worsened internet freedom in the country and led to fears of increasing pros-
ecution and self-­censorship.
ISPs in Kyrgyzstan also suffer from “upstream filtering” (the blocking of content 
by a third party) due to their reliance on internet bandwidth from Kazakhstan and 
Rus­sia. The Kyrgyzstani government itself does not place any restrictions on access-
ing social media and blogging platforms. However, websites that are blocked for 
domestic users in Kazakhstan and Rus­sia, such as the popu­lar blogging platform 
LiveJournal, ­were historically also blocked for broadband users in Kyrgyzstan, al-
though steps have been taken recently to resolve this issue with positive results 
(OpenNet Initiative 2010).
Despite relative freedom in social media content, the government has made an 
effort to block and filter some po­liti­cal and social content. However, the govern-
ment mandate to block “extremist” content and content that incites “national ha-
tred” has been inconsistently administered. Limited government attention to 
po­liti­cally sensitive material on the internet may be due to Kyrgyzstan’s lack of a 
developed blogosphere and digital activism. Tele­vi­sion remains the primary me-
dium through which citizens seek out information about politics, and few websites 
or blogs exist that are dedicated to po­liti­cal or social issues (Chapman and Gerber, 
2016).
That is not to say, however, that individuals have not been targeted for posting 
incendiary information online. In a well-­known case, journalist Dayirbek Orun-
bekov (n.d.) was charged for “knowingly disseminating false information regard-
ing the commission of crimes” in 2012 for writing an online article accusing the 

KYRGYZSTAN
171
government of inciting ethnic strife in the southern part of the country in 2010 
(Freedom House 2015). This case was ­later dropped due to lack of evidence.
Hannah S. Chapman
See also: China; Germany; Kazakhstan; Rus­sia
Further Reading
Chapman, Hannah S., and Gerber, Theodore P. “Soft Power and the Media: Rus­sia’s Media 
Strategy in the Near Abroad.” Presented at the American Po­liti­cal Science Association 
2016 Annual Conference, Philadelphia, PA, September 2016.
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Kyrgyzstan.” Freedom House. Accessed 
April 20, 2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­kyrgyzstan
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2016. “Mobile-­Cellular Subscriptions per 
100 Inhabitants.” Explore Key ICT Statistics. Accessed May 1, 2016. http://­www​.­itu​.­int​
/­net4​/­itu​-­d​/­icteye​/­
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Kyrgyzstan Internet Users.” Accessed May 1, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­kyrgyzstan​/­
M​-­vector Consulting Agency. 2012. “Issledovanie povedenija i vosprijatija media auditorii.” 
Исследование поведения и восприятия медиа аудитории 2012 г. (2-­я волна) 
[Media Consumption & Consumer Perceptions Baseline Survey 2012 (2nd Wave)].”
OpenNet Initiative. 2010. “Country Profile: Kyrgyzstan.” Accessed April 29, 2016. http://­
opennet​.­net​/­research​/­profiles​/­kyrgyzstan
United Nations. 2014. “An In-­Depth Study of Broadband Infrastructure in North and 
Central Asia.” United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
(ESCAP) Working Paper Series. Accessed May  1, 2016. http://­www​.­unescap​.­org​
/­resources​/­depth​-­study​-­broadband​-­infrastructure​-­north​-­and​-­central​-­asia

This page intentionally left blank

LIBYA
Libya is a Mediterranean country located in northern Africa that has a population 
of 6.33 million. It is one of the countries that experienced revolution during the 
so-­called Arab Spring of 2011 along with its neighbors, Egypt and Tunisia. The civil 
war and the revolution of 2011 are impor­tant ­factors in the usage of internet in 
Libya ­because of the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi’s (1942–2011) authoritarian 
government. In 2016, Libya had 1.335 million internet users, with a penetration 
rate of 21.1 ­percent. Although the country has a relatively low penetration rate, 
the number of internet users increased by 9.9 ­percent in 2016, which ranked it as 
the fifteenth country in the world in terms of internet usage growth (Internet Live 
Stats 2016). Desktop and laptop computers ­were the main source of web traffic, at 
89 ­percent of internet users, while mobile phones and tablets ­were 11 ­percent. As 
of 2014, ­there ­were 10.2 million active mobile subscriptions in Libya. Of ­these 
subscriptions, 96 ­percent ­were prepaid, while only 4 ­percent utilized a postpaid 
subscription. Half of mobile subscriptions ­were capable of using 3G connec-
tions. However, only 23  ­percent of ­these mobile subscribers use their mobile 
phones to connect to the internet (We Are Social 2014).
Before the civil war of 2011, the internet was extremely censored and ser­vices 
­were quite poor, resulting in low internet speed and penetration rates. Since it was 
forbidden to establish new corporations without permission from the national in-
telligence ser­vices, the only internet ser­vice provider (ISP) before the civil war was 
the state-­owned mono­poly, Libya Telecom & Technology (LTT). ­After the revolution, 
many companies started to provide internet ser­vice (mainly satellite internet) 
throughout the country. According to Akamai’s State of the Internet report, in the 
first quarter of 2014, Libya had the slowest connection speed in the world, at 0.5 
Mbps. A more recent report by Akamai, covering the third quarter of 2015, stated 
that Libya and Yemen ­were still the only countries with an average connection speed 
below 1.0 Mbps. However, the same report also indicated that the government of 
Libya announced that “broadband connectivity ­will play an integral role in the re-
building of its economy.” In order to achieve that, Libya started building a fiber 
optic network to increase its ser­vice quality (Akamai 2015).
Social media platforms are commonly used in Libya. In 2014, 1.86 million ­people 
­were actively using social media, and 1.44 million users ­were using social media 
on their mobile phones; however, ­these statistics suggest that ­these numbers do 
not reflect unique users (We Are Social 2014). Facebook is the most popu­lar social 
media platform and the most visited website in Libya. Google, YouTube, and Ins-
tagram fall just ­behind Facebook in terms of visits. Twitter, on the other hand, is 
L

LIBYA
174
less popu­lar in Libya; it is the seventh most visited website, just ­after Opensooq​
.­com, an e-­shopping website popu­lar throughout the Arab world (SimilarWeb 
2016).
Internet cafés ­were also very popu­lar places in Libya. In 2002, Libya had the 
third-­highest number of internet cafés among the Arab countries, with 700 (Warf 
and Vincent 2007). Internet cafés are widely used in Libya for dif­fer­ent reasons. 
Teen­agers, for example, commonly use internet cafés to browse pornographic con-
tent. Before the revolution of 2011, many activists and bloggers ­were arrested and 
tortured for po­liti­cal reasons. Therefore, dissident writers used internet cafés to pub-
lish their work anonymously (Mesrati 2013). However, the popularity and num-
ber of internet cafés decreased with the new connection alternatives that arose ­after 
the revolution.
Currently, Libya’s freedom on the net is considered “partly ­free,” in contrast with 
what it had been ­under Gaddafi’s government. It is reported that internet in Libya 
was very open between the revolution of 2011 and the year 2015. The first po­liti­
cal censorship ­after the revolution was the blocking of Alwasat, a news website, in 
February 2015 due to antigovernment statements (Freedom House 2015). On the 
other hand, the Libyan government has always tried to censor pornographic 
content, including during the more open period from 2011 to 2015 mentioned 
previously.
Social media played an impor­tant role in the organ­ization of protests that drove 
the country to civil war in 2011. ­People commonly used social media platforms 
like Facebook, Twitter, and vari­ous instant messaging (IM) platforms to communi-
cate during the protests. Viral videos and photos also caused the protests to ad-
vance and inspired more ­people to take to the streets, just as the photos of 
Mohammed Bouazizi’s (1984–2011) self-­immolation did in Tunisia, which showed 
police vio­lence, and the famous v-­log of Asmaa Mahfouz (1985–) did in Egypt, 
which invited ­people to protest. When the wave of Arab Spring revolution extended 
to Libya, Gaddafi’s government responded harshly to the uprising. Before the pro-
tests began, Gaddafi predicted that they would spread through Libya via the inter-
net. He also gave a speech about the internet and the Tunisian protests in which he 
used the term “Kleenex” (Gaddafi was known for using unique names) instead of 
the Wikileaks website:
Even you, my Tunisian ­brothers. You may be reading this Kleenex and empty talk on 
the Internet. This Internet, which any demented person, any drunk can get drunk 
and write in, do you believe it? The Internet is like a vacuum cleaner, it can suck 
anything. Any useless person; any liar; any drunkard; anyone ­under the influence; 
anyone high on drugs; can talk on the internet, and you read what he writes and you 
believe it. This is talk which is for ­free. ­Shall we become the victims of “Facebook” 
and “Kleenex” and “YouTube”! ­Shall we become victims to tools they created so that 
they can laugh at our moods? (Hounshell 2011)
Social media not only helped the organ­ization of the protests, but it also facili-
tated international support when ­people around the world used Twitter and Face-
book for the purpose of solidarity with the revolutionaries in Libya during the 

LIBYA
175
protests. This was characteristic of all the movements that took place during the 
Arab Spring. The protesters wrote En­glish words such as “Freedom” on the walls 
or used them as a banner in the protests, and pictures of ­those writings reached 
the outside world with the help of social media (Gilmore 2012, 8).
Ugur Dulger
See also: Egypt; Tunisia; Turkey; Yemen
Further Reading
Akamai. 2015. “State of the Internet.” Accessed July 12, 2016. https://­www​.­akamai​.­com​/­us​
/­en​/­multimedia​/­documents​/­report​/­q3​-­2015​-­soti​-­connectivity​-­final​.­pdf
Castells, Manuel. 2012. Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age. 
Cornwall, U.K.: Polity Press.
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Libya.” Accessed July 12, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­libya
Gilmore, Eamon. 2012. “Demo­cratisation and New Media.” Irish Studies in International Af­
fairs, 23: 5–12.
Hounshell, Blake. 2011. “Qaddafi Mourns Tunisian Dictator, Rips Wikileaks.” January 17. 
Accessed July 12, 2016. http://­foreignpolicy​.­com​/­2011​/­01​/­17​/­qaddafi​-­mourns​-­tunisian​
-­dictator​-­rips​-­wikileaks​/­
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Internet Users by Country.” Accessed July 12, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​-­by​-­country​/­
Mesrati, Mohamed. 2013. “Bayou and Laila (Libya).” In Writing Revolution: The Voices from 
Tunis to Damascus, edited by Layla Al-­Zubaidi, Matthew Cassel, and Nemonie Craven 
Roderick. Cornwall, U.K.: I. B. Tauris & Co. Ltd, 66–91.
SimilarWeb. 2016. “Website Ranking: Top 50 Sites in Libya for All Categories.” Accessed 
July 12, 2016. https://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​/­country​/­libya.
Warf, Barney, and Vincent, Peter. 2007. “Multiple Geographies of Arab Internet.” Area, 
83–96.
We Are Social. 2014. “Digital Landscape: ­Middle East, North Africa, & Turkey.” Accessed 
August 5, 2016. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­wearesocialsg​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­in​-­the​
-­middle​-­east​-­north​-­africa​-­turkey.

This page intentionally left blank

MALAYSIA
Malaysia is located in Southeast Asia, bordered by Thailand to the north and the 
Malacca Straits to the south. Within the region, Malaysia ranks only ­behind Singa-
pore for having the highest social media penetration; its penetration rate is around 
65 ­percent. Around 67 ­percent of the population is online, equating to slightly over 
20 million of its 30 million ­people. The country’s social media users are very savvy. 
They utilize rich images and language and are often knowledgeable about dif­fer­ent 
technologies and platforms. The most accessed websites include Google, Facebook, 
YouTube, Yahoo, Google​.­co​.­my, Blogspot, Life​.­com​.­tw, Maybank, Wikipedia, and 
Lazada (Alexa 2015). The most cited reasons for Malaysians accessing the internet 
are communications and chatting; additional reasons include searching/researching, 
blogging, banking, and shopping. En­glish is the most common social media lan-
guage, with Malay, Chinese, and some Hindi; the language choice on social media 
corresponds to the site and user community.
Facebook is the premier social media platform for Malaysians. It is where the 
­people go to converse and exchange views on impor­tant socioeconomic and po­liti­
cal issues online. It is also a space where ­people can discuss challenging topics and 
engage a wide audience. Malaysia’s Facebook demographics show that the platform 
is most popu­lar with men aged twenty-­five to thirty-­four, and that local platform 
users are 55.8 ­percent men and 44.2 ­percent ­women (Allin1 Social 2015). ­After 
Facebook, Malaysians utilize a number of social media platforms, including We-
Chat, YouTube, WhatsApp, Google+, Facebook Messenger, and Twitter. Smaller 
numbers of Malaysians are on South ­Korea’s KakaoTalk. WeChat claims to have a 
95 ­percent mobile phone penetration in the country since mid-2015 (Digital News 
Asia 2015). Its user base primarily consists of youths aged sixteen to thirty-­four, 
who say that they want to be reachable at all times. This population group makes 
up approximately 80 ­percent of all WeChat users in Malaysia (Gomez 2014). Line, 
a Japa­nese app with chat and shopping capabilities, has over 10 million registered 
users in Malaysia (Line 2014). ­These high numbers are not surprising, given that 
many Malaysians carry more than one mobile phone on which to conduct work 
and personal business, and sometimes may choose to use a phone based on its plan 
or its connection to a network with coverage in the area where they are calling.
In general, Malaysians prefer chat applications and playing games on their tab-
let and mobile devices. The top ­free downloads on Google Play are WhatsApp Mes-
senger, WeChat, Facebook Messenger, Facebook, and 武林至尊（全球公測, or chen 
yaoyi), a kung fu/extreme martial arts gaming app. The most popu­lar paid 
apps are League of Stickman-­Samurai, XPERIA Minnie Mouse, Minecraft, 
M

MALAYSIA
178
Flightradar24, and iQuran (AppAnnie 2015). For iOS devices, the data is similar, 
with Line taking the spot of the kung fu game in the ­free app category. For paid 
apps, the data shows that Malaysians care about the style and content of their so-
cial media messaging. For example, the top apps are Grindr Xtra, Text and Emoji for 
SMS + Text­ing, Pimp My Text PRO, Blog Touch Pro for Blogspot, and the GPS Phone 
Tracker for iPhones (AppAnnie 2015). Viber and Skype, other chat apps, appear in 
lower places on the lists.
Malaysians love to use emojis to express their opinions and feelings online. Ac-
cording to one recent analy­sis on emoji use in social media, Malaysia’s preferred 
emojis are hand gestures, with the thumbs up sign being a par­tic­u­lar favorite, fol-
lowed by images that have to do with being female, funny, transportation, and farm 
animals, mainly pigs and rams (SwiftKey 2015). According to the report, Malaysia 
uses the most expressive emojis ­because its social media contains the widest vari-
ety of symbols. Some noteworthy pieces of analy­sis indicate that Malaysia uses sleepy 
­faces more than two times more than other countries, and soccer balls more than 
three times the rate of other countries (SwiftKey 2015). ­These findings suggest that 
Malaysians discuss sleep and soccer online considerably more than any other 
nation.
­There is a serious side to social media and internet usage in Malaysia, however. 
The country has laws against spreading false information and malicious rumors, 
particularly ­those that constitute libel, the making of false claims or accusations 
through the media. ­These laws extended to the internet and social media in 1998 
In Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, during the 6th World Islamic Economic Forum (WIEF), an em-
ployee of PERNEC, a telecommunications and IT com­pany, poses next to a new WiFi router. 
Malaysia has one of the highest social media and internet penetration rates in Southeast Asia, 
ranking ­behind only Singapore. (Dinictis​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

MALAYSIA
179
with the Communications and Multimedia Act. Online enforcement typically in-
cludes identifying problematic messages or websites, contacting the platform or 
website owner and requesting removal of the information that violates the law. The 
big social media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, complied with around 
three-­quarters of the removal requests in 2014. In 2015, the Malaysian Communi-
cations and Multimedia Commission (MCMC) met with platform representatives in or-
der to ensure continued cooperation and adherence to Malaysian law. From the 
government’s perspective, illegal web content must be deleted quickly, and when 
deemed necessary, the responsible authors could be punished through the judicial 
system.
Some Malaysians viewed the MCMC’s efforts as trying to enforce stricter censor-
ship on social media and the internet. They also saw it as a potential means for the 
government to cover up corruption, which is one of the long-­standing concerns of 
the public. Government actions often play into this perception, as the government’s 
response to online criticism is usually to tighten controls on internet speech. Dur-
ing 2015, ­there was increasing correlation between opinions voiced on social media 
and government calls to crack down on the internet. In July 2015, for example, the 
MCMC blocked the Sarawak Report, a local news portal hosted in Britain, for alleg-
ing that the country’s prime minister, Najib Razak (1953–), received kickbacks 
from an investment fund. The site’s reporting relied on documents obtained through 
the Wall Street Journal (Middleton 2015). Although the claims have not been sub-
stantiated, critics argue that the site did not violate the law ­because it was not 
spreading false information, but rather using accepted reporting techniques to ex-
pose pos­si­ble corruption.
­After the Sarawak Report incident, another controversy arose in August 2015 
when the government blocked websites about the Bersih 4.0 rally, an event where 
Malaysians gathered to demonstrate against embedded corruption in the govern-
ment. Bersih, which refers to the idea of sweeping or cleaning up, has been a mul-
tiyear effort to remove allegedly corrupt officials and graft. The movement, which 
relied on social media and the internet to spread information about its cause, was 
blocked online, reinforcing the ­people’s frustration that internet censorship prevents 
po­liti­cal reform and anticorruption initiatives. According to the police, however, 
the protest was illegal. Despite the questions regarding its legality, the protesters 
continued to or­ga­nize and prepare. The movement deemed social media of signifi-
cant importance and had its own app developed, known as Prime Kini. Protesters 
­were also considering using FireChat, a messaging app that does not rely on Wi-­Fi 
to transmit and receive messages, which became popu­lar during Hong Kong’s Um-
brella Movement in 2014. The group uses the hashtag #Bersih across other plat-
forms as well. By August 2015, more than 27,000 ­people had used the hashtag as 
the movement geared up to protest (Malaysian Insider 2015).
In addition to using social media as a popu­lar platform to promote domestic re-
forms, Malaysians have used social media to form and convey a sense of unity. This 
online Malaysian identity was evident throughout 2014 in the wake of national trag-
edy and distress. In March 2014, Malaysian Airlines Flight MH370, bound from 
Malaysia to China, dis­appeared off the radar. The missing plane and passengers cre-
ated an international search and received high levels of media coverage that 

MALAYSIA
180
increased when debris from the plane and some passenger belongings washed up 
on eastern African shores. The search was called off in January 2017, which led 
to #mh370 becoming one of the top trending hashtags. The Malaysian govern-
ment has offered a reward for private searches that can locate the dis­appeared 
flight, so it is likely the topic ­will continue to be discussed, and it ­will spike if any 
further discoveries are made. In July 2014, Malaysia Airlines suffered another dev-
astating incident. Flight MH17 took off from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur on 
July 17, and partway into its journey, the plane broke up over the Ukraine, killing 
298 ­people. In the wake of ­these tragedies, Malaysians started using the hashtags 
#staystrong and #prayforMH370 on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter to convey 
support for the victims’ families and to encourage Malaysians not to lose faith (Mo-
lander and Edenert 2014). Within the country, ­these hashtags went viral and 
showed the world that Malaysians ­will come together and show unity even in the 
most difficult situations.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Indonesia; Japan; South ­Korea; Thailand; Ukraine; United Kingdom
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Malaysia.” Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­MY
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Malaysia.” Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​/­country​_­stats​/­malaysia
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” Accessed September 5, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­malaysia​/­overall​/­
Digital News Asia. 2015. “WeChat Hits 549mil Global Users, Claims 95% Penetration in 
Malaysia.” May 29. Accessed September 4, 2015. https://­www​.­digitalnewsasia​.­com​
/­mobility​/­wechat​-­hits​-­549mil​-­global​-­users​-­claims​-­95pc​-­penetration​-­in​-­malaysia
Gomez, Jennifer, 2014. “Malaysian Youngsters Just Want to WeChat.” November 19. Ac-
cessed September  5, 2015. http://­www​.­themalaysianinsider​.­com​/­malaysia​/­article​
/­malaysian​-­youngsters​-­just​-­want​-­to​-­wechat
Line Malaysia. 2014. “10 Million Users in Malaysia.” March 20. Accessed September 4, 2015. 
https://­www​.­facebook​.­com​/­433965876655984​/­posts​/­715158931870009​/­
Malaysian Insider. 2015. “27,000 Tweets on #Bersih 4 in the Past Month, Says Politweeet.” 
August 27. Accessed September 4, 2015. http://­www​.­themalaysianinsider​.­com​/­malaysia​
/­article​/­27000​-­tweets​-­on​-­bersih​-­4​-­in​-­past​-­month​-­says​-­politweet
Middleton, Rachel. 2015. “Malaysia Blocks UK-­Based Portal for Breaching Internet Law.” 
July 21. Accessed September 4, 2015. http://­www​.­ibtimes​.­co​.­uk​/­malaysia​-­blocks​-­uk​
-­based​-­portal​-­breaching​-­internet​-­law​-­1511768
Molander, Agnes, and Nässlin Eidenert, Kim. 2014. “Radiotystnad Resulterar i Fullt Kaos 
En Studie om Malaysia Airlines Kriskommunikation.” Uppsala: Uppsala Universitet. 
Accessed September  5, 2015. http://­www​.­diva​-­portal​.­org​/­smash​/­get​/­diva2:786335​
/­FULLTEXT01​.­pdf
SwiftKey. 2015. “SwiftKey Emoji Report.” April 2015. Accessed June 5, 2015. http://­www​
.­aargauerzeitung​.­ch​/­asset​_­document​/­i​/­129067827​/­download

MEXICO
181
MEXICO
Mexico is the largest Spanish-­speaking country in the world. It is located in North 
Amer­i­ca, just south of the United States, with coasts on both the Pacific and the 
Atlantic oceans. Its population is 127 million. The internet has strong roots in 
Mexico, ­going back at least two de­cades. Similar to the United States, the first net-
works ­were built for academic and research institutions. The first use of a networked 
system in Mexico was in 1987, when the Monterrey Institute of Technology and 
Continuing Studies connected to the University of Texas at San Antonio. The 
first permanent connection was built in 1987, and by the mid-1990s, public inter-
net ser­vice in Mexico was firmly established (Cassinelli and Fernández 2007b). 
Since then, the internet has spread, and ­today, Mexico is one of the most con-
nected nations in Latin Amer­i­ca.
Internet penetration in Mexico has almost doubled since 2007, when about 
24 ­percent of the population had access (AMIPCI 2015; Cassinelli and Fernández 
2007a). By 2014, ­there ­were over 50 million internet users, or approximately 
44.4 ­percent. In 2015, the majority of ­these users ­were ­under thirty-­five years old, 
with thirteen to eighteen-­year-­olds being the largest age group, at 26 ­percent of 
internet users (AMIPCI 2015). This statistic has not changed much in the past sev-
eral years; in 2007, only 17 ­percent of internet users ­were over the age of thirty-­
five, and the proportion of users younger than eigh­teen years old was 25 ­percent 
(Cassinelli and Fernández 2007a). In general, the age distribution was about even.
While penetration across the nation was about 10 to 15 ­percent in each region, 
the southern states had slightly less penetration and the central region, due to the 
presence of the nation’s capital, had more penetration. As more Mexicans are gain-
ing access to the internet, they are also spending more time online. In 2015, the 
average time using the internet was six hours and eleven minutes a day, which was 
twenty-­four minutes longer than the previous year. Average use of the internet was 
about the same regardless of the day of the week; however, Sundays saw slightly 
less internet use. In 2015, 84 ­percent of internet users said that they usually access 
the internet from home. Other locations, which ­were used about half as much, in-
clude work, school, stores, and cybercafés. Mexicans primarily connected to the 
internet using ­either private or public Wi-­Fi connections; only about a quarter of 
the time ­were they using mobile data plans (AMIPCI 2015). The ten most com-
monly visited websites in 2015 ­were Google​.­com​.­mx, Facebook, YouTube, Google, 
Live, Yahoo, Amazon, Wikipedia, MSN, and Twitter (Alexa 2015).
The most common device used to access the internet in 2015 was the laptop. 
The next most common device was the smartphone, followed by the PC. Mobile 
phones not compatible with apps, tablets, and gaming consoles ­were used only a 
third of the time or less (AMIPCI 2015). While the majority of smartphone users 
owned Android devices, which are common throughout Latin Amer­i­ca, Mexico had 
one of the highest rates of iPhone users in 2015. A total of 74 ­percent of smart-
phone users owned an Android and 26 ­percent owned an iPhone. Apple devices 
­were even more common among tablet ­owners, with 37 ­percent owning an iPad 
and only 59  ­percent owning an Android (ComScore 2015). While Mexicans 

MEXICO
182
primarily used their smartphones to make calls, the next most common usage was 
to surf the web (AMIPCI 2015).
In 2015, the most common app downloaded for all smartphones was WhatsApp 
Messenger. The next five most popu­lar ­free apps downloaded by Android users ­were 
Facebook Messenger, Facebook, Automatic Call Storer, CM Security Antivirus Ap-
pLock, and Moto Traffic Race. The next five most popu­lar ­free apps downloaded 
by iPhone users ­were Snapchat, Facebook Messenger, Facebook, YouTube, and In-
stagram. Interestingly, iPad ­owners tended to have completely dif­fer­ent prefer-
ences of the types of ­free apps that they downloaded to their tablet. The top ­free 
apps downloaded ­were all entertainment related: Disney Infinity: Toy Box 3.0, ­Hotel 
Transylvania 2, Doodle Jump SpongeBob SquarePants, FIFA 16 Ultimate Team, and 
Netflix (AppAnnie 2015).
Mexicans love social media. In Latin Amer­i­ca, they are second only to Brazil in 
unique visitors to social media websites per month. In 2014, Mexico had nearly 
25 million unique monthly visitors to social media websites, and 4 ­percent growth 
was seen between April 2013 and April 2014 (ComScore 2014). The primary rea-
son that Mexicans use the internet is to access social media. The rate of social me-
dia penetration among Mexicans who have internet access is over 90  ­percent 
(AMIPCI 2015; ComScore 2015). Of ­those who did not use social media, over half 
of them made that decision ­because they wanted to protect their personal informa-
tion. Nevertheless, the primary reason for being online is to use social media web-
sites; in 2015, 85 ­percent of internet users ­were on social media, compared with 
78 ­percent and 73 ­percent, respectively, of ­people online to look up information or 
check their email. Studies have shown that engagement with social media is higher 
when the content includes one or more photo­graphs. Mexican social media users 
are primarily young; 65 ­percent are younger than thirty-­five years old (ComScore 
2014). The most common social media websites are international platforms, in-
cluding Facebook, Google+, Twitter, Instagram, and Linkedin (We Are Social 2015).
Facebook is the most popu­lar social media website in Latin Amer­i­ca, and this is 
the case in Mexico as well. A total of 44.4 million Facebook users are Mexicans, 
which makes Mexico the fifth-­leading country to utilize the website, ­behind the 
United States, India, Brazil, and Indonesia (Mexico News Daily 2015). This marks 
a significant increase in users over the past several years. In 2007, of the 57 ­percent 
of internet users who said they had a personal webpage, 34 ­percent of them said 
Pokémon Go, an augmented real­ity game played via a smartphone app, launched in 
select locations in July 2016. Within two months of its release, the app, now known 
as the most viral one of all time, had earned more than $500 million and had more 
user activity than Twitter and Facebook (Perez 2016). The game’s Latin Amer­i­ca re-
lease occurred in early August, to coincide with the 2016 Summer Olympics in Brazil. 
Since then, it has become routine in Mexico for thousands of locals to visit Mexico 
City’s Chapultepec Park on the weekends, bringing their entire families to capture 
the virtual creatures.

MEXICO
183
they utilized MySpace, compared with only 4 ­percent who used Facebook (Cassi-
nelli and Fernández 2007a). Mexicans use Facebook primarily for accessing news 
and media, which comprised 43 ­percent of their usage pattern in 2014. Other popu­
lar categories ­were entertainment (17 ­percent), publishers (14 ­percent), and food/
beverage (9 ­percent) (ComScore 2014).
Blogging is also a common activity among Mexican internet users. Most Mexi-
can blogs are hosted on Blogspot, which was the eleventh most popular website in 
Mexico. In a survey conducted by the International Center for Journalists, bloggers 
with more professional content reported using Blogger and WordPress, while ­those 
who kept personal blogs tend to use Posterous and Tumblr (Sierra n.d.). Fashion, 
health, and lifestyle topics are some of the most popu­lar subjects for blogs. In 
2014, one of the most frequently visited fashion blogs was Moda Capital (http://­
www​.­modacapital​-­blog​.­com​/­), a blog started by Gaby Gómez (1985–) in 2009. 
She is from Mexico City and blogs in both Spanish and En­glish. In 2013, she gave 
an interview to Glamour magazine, during which she stated that her favorite social 
media was Twitter ­because it lets you learn about what is happening the moment 
it occurs. At the time, she reported having 145,000 visitors a month (Glamour 
2013).
On the other hand, blogging can be more serious—­and even dangerous. In 2011, 
Mexican drug cartels started targeting bloggers who used this type of social media 
to publish journalist pieces that ­were critical of the cartels. Several violent murders 
­were committed in 2011 as warnings to other bloggers who might want to speak 
out against them. The drug cartels have always targeted journalists, but in 2011, 
this focus shifted to ­those who wrote online. In September of that year, two blog-
gers ­were found hanging from an overpass in Nuevo Laredo. A sign that accompa-
nied the bodies was signed with a “Z,” indicating that the murders ­were perpetrated 
by the Zetas drug cartel (Flock 2011). In another incident, a ­woman was found 
decapitated next to her computer, with a note blaming her death on her blogging 
practices (Espatko 2011). As recently as the end of 2014, ­there have been numer-
ous reports of similar murders of activist bloggers.
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Argentina; Brazil; Chile; Cuba; India; Indonesia; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Mexico.” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­MX
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” Accessed September 27, 2015. https://­
www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­mexico​/­​?­date​=­2015​-­09​-­27
Asociación Mexicana de Internet (AMIPCI). 2015. “11º Estudio Sobre los Hábitos de los 
Usuarios de Internet en México 2015.” Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­amipci​
.­org​.­mx​/­images​/­AMIPCI​_­HABITOS​_­DEL​_­INTERNAUTA​_­MEXICANO​_­2015​.­pdf
Cassinelli, Andrés, and Fernández, Javier. 2007a. “Mexico: Internet Access and Usage Pat-
terns.” Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­cs​.­stanford​.­edu​/­people​/­eroberts​/­cs181​
/­projects​/­2006​-­07​/­latin​-­america​/­mexicoAccess​.­html

MONGOLIA
184
Cassinelli, Andrés, and Fernández, Javier. 2007b. “Mexico: It’s Not Too Late to Catch Up.” 
Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­cs​.­stanford​.­edu​/­people​/­eroberts​/­cs181​/­projects​
/­2006​-­07​/­latin​-­america​/­mexicoIntro​.­html
ComScore. 2014. “The State of Social Media in Mexico,” August 1. Accessed September 29, 
2015. http://­www​.­comscore​.­com​/­Insights​/­Blog​/­The​-­State​-­of​-­Social​-­Media​-­in​-­Mexico
ComScore. 2015. “IMS Mobile in LatAm Research Study.” April 20. Accessed September 27, 
2015. https://­www​.­comscore​.­com​/­Insights​/­Presentations​-­and​-­Whitepapers​/­2015​/­com​
Score​-­IMS​-­Mobile​-­in​-­LatAm​-­Research​-­Study
Epatko, Larisa. 2011. “Mexican Drug Cartels’ New Target: Bloggers.” October 13. Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­pbs​.­org​/­newshour​/­rundown​/­mexico​-­bloggers​/­
Flock, Elizabeth. 2011. “Mexican Bloggers’ Bodies Disemboweled, Hung from Bridge.” 
September 15. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­blogs​
/­blogpost​/­post​/­mexican​-­bloggers​-­bodies​-­disemboweled​-­hung​-­from​-­bridge​/­2011​/­09​/­15​
/­gIQAfs6vUK​_­blog​.­html
Glamour. 2013. “Te Presentamos a Gaby Gómez, Embajadora de Glamour Girl Goes on Air 
by Lacoste.” May 8. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­glamour​.­mx​/­magazine​/​
articulos​/­glamour​-­girl​-­lacoste​-­perfumes​-­concurso​-­moda​-­capital​/­1465
Mexico Daily News. 2015. “Mexicans Are Social, Internet Study Finds.” August 22. Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­mexiconewsdaily​.­com​/­news​/­mexicans​-­are​-­social​-­internet​
-­study​-­finds​/­
Sierra, Jorge Luis. n.d. “Results of a Survey of Mexican Journalists and Bloggers.” Accessed 
September 29, 2015. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­and​-­mobile​
-­security​-­mexican​-­journalists​-­and​-­bloggers
We Are Social. 2015. “Digital in the Amer­i­cas.” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­
wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2014​/­06​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­americas​/­
MONGOLIA
Mongolia is a Central Asian landlocked country bordered by China to the south 
and Rus­sia to the north. Ulaanbaatar (UB), the capital and largest city, is home to 
about 45 ­percent of the country’s population of about 3 million ­people. Almost 
60 ­percent of the UB population is ­under age 35, now consisting of a mix of city 
and rural-­bred young residents, making Mongolia one of the youn­gest countries in 
the world in terms of its citizens.
Before 1990, Mongolia was a socialist country and a satellite of the Soviet Union. 
Western cultural and linguistic trends ­were considered a cruel weapon of cap­i­tal­ist 
ideology and ­were strictly banned by the ruling communist party—­the Mongolian 
­People’s Revolutionary Party (MPRP), which ruled from 1921 to 1990. The Rus­sian 
language and culture ­were the only prevalent foreign ele­ments in Mongolia. The 
communist authorities replaced the classic Mongolian Uyghur script with the Cy-
rillic alphabet in 1941, and Cyrillic Mongolian remains the official orthography 
(Rossabi 2005).
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Mongolia transformed from a social-
ist regime into a democracy, embracing a free-­market economy in 1990. The au-
thorities of communist Mongolia resigned without confrontation in 1990, marking 
the end of the seventy-­year period of communist rule. This was the beginning of the 
new social, po­liti­cal, and economic order for the newly demo­cratic nation. Mongolia 

MONGOLIA
185
opened up to the outside world, 
and new technology, media, com-
puter, cable TV, urban radio sta-
tions, and the internet started 
circulating quickly across the na-
tion. Mongolia witnessed major 
changes in its social, cultural, and 
linguistic lifestyle. Mongolians 
began getting heavi­ly involved 
with internet, computer, and mo-
bile phones in the context of their 
daily practices, including text 
messaging, chatting, surfing the 
web, playing video games, listen-
ing to ­music, and watching mov-
ies (Marsh 2009).
En­glish and other languages, 
such as Japa­nese, Korean, Chi-
nese, German, French, Spanish, 
Italian, and Turkish, have re-
placed Rus­sian as Mongolians 
have become more connected to 
the world via the internet. Many 
of ­these languages are taught at 
all levels of Mongolian schools; 
at the national level, the country 
has been trying to attract quality 
English-­language teachers from 
abroad. It is also reforming how 
its university teaching programs 
train instructors to provide ex-
emplary teaching of all languages 
offered in Mongolian schools at 
the elementary, secondary, and tertiary levels (Munkhbat and Lkhagva 2015). The 
growth of English-­language education, in par­tic­u­lar, has also transferred to the pro-
fessional realm, where most jobs require proficient English-­language skills and fre-
quently require job applicants to interview in En­glish (Dovchin 2014).
­Today, internet penetration is 43 ­percent, reaching about 1.3 million ­people, 
which is relatively high considering the small and dispersed population and the 
public’s level of socioeconomic development. Social media such as Facebook, Twit-
ter, and YouTube have soared in popularity, with data from late 2015 showing equal 
numbers of Facebook and internet users (about 1.3 million each). ­There are also 
many locally popu­lar news sites, such as olloo.mn, sonin.mn, zaluu​.­com, and news.
mn, for local and global news written in Cyrillic Mongolian by the sites’ editors 
and journalists.
Buryat, an eight-­year-­old Mongolian boy, speaks on 
a mobile phone. When Mongolia’s socialist regime 
ended in the early 1990s, the country opened itself 
up to the rest of the world, a move that included ac-
cess to new communications technologies such as 
the internet. Due to the opened economy, youths such 
as Buryat have the ability to communicate world-
wide on phones and online. (Alexander Podshivalov​/
Dreamstime​.­com)

MONGOLIA
186
Popu­lar sites such as asuult​.­net, hantulga​.­com, and tsahim​.­net are specifically 
devoted to young Mongolians, who socialize online and discuss their favorite top-
ics, including popu­lar ­music, sports, computer games, and blogging. As a result, 
many young Mongolians are engaging with a range of linguistic, cultural, and lit-
eracy materials that have implications for Mongolian language and culture, new 
postsocialist identities, and diverse literacy practices (Dovchin et al. 2016).
One of the most common digital orthographies in Mongolia is Roman Mongo-
lian, instead of standard Cyrillic Mongolian, due to its con­ve­nience for keyboard 
use. Many computers in Mongolia lack Cyrillic Mongolian fonts and require spe-
cific device and technology support (Billé 2010). However, many Mongolians have 
expressed their strong preference to use Cyrillic Mongolian orthography, and thus, 
information technology (IT) support companies and retail stores have started in-
stalling Cyrillic Mongolian as a prerequisite font for computers in Mongolia. As a 
result, many Mongolians started using the Cyrillic Mongolian font more frequently 
in recent years. In 2013, Google began providing Mongolian-­language support to 
its search engine. Basic Mongolian translation appeared in Google Translate ­later 
the same year.
Mongolia’s social media users utilize Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube to express 
themselves. Online users have become highly skilled and digitally literate users of 
social media, which forms a power­ful space for user access to worldwide activities. 
They create varied global and local discourses that are appropriate and meaningful 
in their par­tic­u­lar contexts (Leppänen et al. 2015).
En­glish and other foreign languages are also becoming significant in the digital 
daily lives of Mongolians. Online users seem to increasingly integrate varied lin-
guistic and cultural resources within their daily lives online, which redefines the 
role of En­glish and other foreign languages in relation to their existing online so-
cial relationships. Mongolians innovatively use En­glish by not only mixing it with 
local languages, but also with other multiple texts with both local and global me-
dia content. Their digital literacy practices on social media often involve linguistic 
creativity, with users recontextualizing available signs and linguistic resources to 
create their own versions of digital literacy (Dovchin, Sultana, and Pennycook 2015). 
For example, the mixture of internet-­related terms and Mongolian expressions is a 
common practice: “Chatlii!”—­a combination of the En­glish root word chat and the 
Mongolian suffix –­lii [let’s], has a local meaning: “Let’s chat!” ­There are many Face-
book default features such as “share,” “like,” and “tag,” that have been deeply re-
contextualized and used by Mongolians as part of their local language. ­These 
Facebook linguistic features are mixed with Mongolian linguistic features to create 
local sayings, such as “Minii zurgiig ‘like’ khiigeechee!” (‘Why ­don’t you ‘like’ my 
photo?’); inserting the Facebook term like into a Mongolian sentence, such as “Ene 
zurgiig shareleed uguuch!” (‘Please share this photo!’); and mixing the Facebook share 
feature with the Mongolian phrase “–­leed uguuch” (“please”). Further examples can 
be found in Dovchin (2016a, 2016b).
Meanwhile, foreign-­language adoption and language mixing have caused some 
Mongolian officials and social organ­izations to question ­whether foreign influences, 
particularly ­those derived from the growing influx of digital media, ­will lead to the 
deterioration of the Mongolian language. The ideology of “linguistic dystopia” has 

MONGOLIA
187
become a concern for some Mongolians, and in fact it led to the passage of the 2015 
Law on the Mongolian Language. Article 21.7.9 of this legislation states that the 
“National Council of the Language Policy of the President ­shall take control over 
the implementation of adherence of the standards of the Mongolian language by 
media organ­izations” (Globe International 2016).
Though it remains unknown how this law may affect the internet, ­there is a fear 
that the global influences on social media use that have led to the intermixing of 
languages threaten Mongolian language and culture. This sentiment was addressed 
in a “Letter to the Committee of the Comprehensive National Development Strat-
egy of Mongolia, Mongolian Parliament, 2007,” written by a group of well-­respected, 
highly educated Mongolians (Zuunii Medee, 2008). One of the main points of this 
letter was the importance of preserving “language purity,” or protecting the Mon-
golian culture from erosion due to exposure to outside languages and influence. 
For the ­people who support “language purity,” ­there are also many who believe in 
the right to express themselves and use language to redefine their identity and place 
in the world.
For digital users, ­these new ways to communicate and play with language are a 
way of adapting to globalization, as the world has opened up to them since the fall 
of the Soviet Union in 1991, an era when Mongolia had less contact with non-­
Russian-­speaking nations. The emergence of unconventional digital language 
practices in Mongolia has only been presumed, rather than analytically examined 
by scholars, educational researchers, and language policy makers. This is a con-
cern for Mongolia ­because digital media practices of online users in Mongolia are 
rapidly evolving as Mongolia is steadily connecting with the rest of the world through 
personal contacts and international business agreements.
To keep up with ­these changes, the country is examining and updating its focus 
on foreign-­language acquisition and how it educates teachers. Taking advantage of 
digital users’ language preferences and usage, as well as considering the impact that 
language dynamic may have on Mongolia and in other sociolinguistic ideological 
contexts, could profoundly and positively affect language and social media educa-
tion in the country (Dovchin 2015, 2016a, 2016b).
Sender Dovchin
See also: China; North ­Korea; Rus­sia; South ­Korea; Turkey
Further Reading
Billé, Franck. 2010. “Sounds and Scripts of Modernity: Language Ideologies and Practices 
in Con­temporary Mongolia.” Inner Asia, 12(2), 231–252.
Dovchin, Sender. 2014. “The Linguscape of Urban Youth Culture in Mongolia.” PhD dis-
sertation, University of Technology, Sydney.
Dovchin, Sender. 2015. “Language, Multiple Authenticities, and Social Media: The Online 
Language Practices of University Students in Mongolia.” Journal of Sociolinguistics 19(4), 
437–459.
Dovchin, Sender. 2016a. “The Ordinariness of Youth Linguascapes in Mongolia.” Interna­
tional Journal of Multilingualism. http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1080​/­14790718​.­2016​.­1155592.
Dovchin, Sender. 2016b. “The Translocal En­glish in the Linguascape of Popu­lar ­Music in 
Mongolia.” World En­glishes. http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1111​/­weng​.­12189

MOROCCO
188
Dovchin, Sender, Sultana, Shaila, and Pennycook, Alastair. 2015. “Relocalizing the Trans-
lingual Practices of Young Adults in Mongolia and Bangladesh.” Translation and Trans­
languaging in Multilingual Contexts, 1(1), 4–26.
Dovchin, Sender, Sultana, Shaila, and Pennycook, Alastair. 2016. “Unequal Translingual 
En­glishes in the Asian peripheries.” Asian En­glishes. http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­1080​/­13488678​
.­2016​.­1171673.
Globe International Center. 2016. Media Freedom Report 2015. Beijing: UNESCO.
Leppänen, Sirpa, Spindler Møller, Janus, Rørbeck Nørreby, Thomas, Stæhr, Andreas, and 
Kytölä, Samu. 2015. “Authenticity, Normativity, and Social Media.” Discourse, Context, & 
Media, 8, 1–5.
Marsh, Peter. 2009. The Horse-­Head Fiddle and the Cosmopolitan Reimagination of Tradition in 
Mongolia. New York: Routledge.
Munkhbat, Bulgantsetseg, and Lkhagva, Enkhbayar. 2015. “Implementation of a New Cur-
riculum for the En­glish Teacher Program at the National University of Education in 
Mongolia.” 10th East Asia International Symposium on Teacher Education, Nagoya, Japan.
Rossabi, Morris. 2005. Modern Mongolia: Fromkhans to Commissars to Cap­i­tal­ists. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
Zuunii Medee. 2008. June, number 259/2707. Accessed January 17, 2017. http://dusal.
blogmn.net/14798/yndesnii-ba-tsogts-gesen-aguulga-uguilegdej-baina.html
MOROCCO
Morocco, a North African country, is made up of roughly 34.8 million ­people. Since 
2011, internet penetration has increased by 10 ­percent. Compared to the rest of 
the African continent, Morocco is one of the most active countries on the internet. 
­There are approximately 20 million users in the country, with an internet penetration 
of 57.6 ­percent (Internet Live Stats 2016). Social media has become increasingly 
popu­lar in the country, especially with Moroccan youth. While social media is 
used for social communications, it also has helped further develop the job market 
and increase the small business and restaurant online presence to multiple audi-
ences. In addition, Moroccan activists have adapted social media platforms to act 
as a tool to protest government censorship and question the monarchy’s authority, 
even ­going as far as to declare a social media revolution in response to a ban on 
apps providing ­free voice over internet protocol (VoIP) ser­vices. Blogging has also 
become very popu­lar in the country, and maintaining a well-­written blog can lead 
to recognition. For example, Synergie Media celebrates Moroccan bloggers ­every 
year with the renowned Maroc Blog Awards.
Social media has become increasingly popu­lar with Moroccan youth. The average 
age range for social media users in Morocco is fifteen to twenty-­nine years old. In 
many countries around the world, social media has been utilized as a power­ful tool 
to fight censorship and ­human rights violations. This can be seen in recent antigov-
ernment protests in Tunisia and Egypt. Not only have the youths of Morocco turned 
to Facebook and YouTube to express themselves, but they also have become avid 
bloggers who share details about their personal stories, emotions, and lifestyles. 
Some bloggers have also shared critiques and opinions of the government and 
monarchy, despite the fact that they could face government persecution. It is esti-
mated that ­there are about 30,000 blogs in Morocco. Popu­lar Moroccan bloggers 

MOROCCO
189
living outside the country use their expat status to speak more critically of their 
former home. Moroccan expats also encourage their fellow countrymen to speak 
openly and encourage Moroccan leaders to increase freedom of expression and 
freedom of press to allow the public an outlet without fear of reprisal (Haug 2011).
To celebrate the Moroccan bloggers for their creativity and ingenuity, Synergie 
Media, a communications agency that specializes in social media, created the Maroc 
Blog Awards, also known as the Morocco Blog Awards. Thousands of blogs enter 
each year to win the twenty coveted awards. It gives bloggers the opportunity to 
distinguish themselves by the quality of their blogs and the impact on their readers. 
The Maroc Blog Awards has the reputation of being one of the most prominent 
competitions in the ­Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. Its primary pur-
pose is to promote opportunities for Morocco’s digital market and to support web 
content creators in their efforts to cultivate creative and innovative writing (Maroc 
Web Awards 2016).
In Morocco, the most used social media network is Facebook; around 98.6 ­percent 
of Morocco’s internet users have an account, while other social media networks are 
utilized by fewer than 1 ­percent of active internet users (StatsMonkey 2015). De-
spite this high number, some experts believe that this statistic may not be accurate, 
arguing that Moroccans have multiple Facebook profiles. Taking this into account, 
the final calculations may be distorted, but they give researchers a good indicator of 
which social media platforms Moroccans use on a regular basis (Haug 2011). Aside 
from Facebook, LinkedIn is another popu­lar social media network in Morocco.
Both Facebook and LinkedIn have helped advance the Moroccan job market and 
economy significantly. Many restaurants and small businesses use Facebook to mar-
ket their ser­vices and products to an online audience. Customers and clients are 
able to access news and leave feedback on the site. Local Moroccan businesses and 
individuals also take advantage of the tools and ser­vices offered by LinkedIn. By 
using LinkedIn, many Moroccans have access to job opportunities posted on the 
social media platform, and they can develop online networks to help them profes-
sionally. Small businesses are able to build their brand and online presence on Linke-
dIn and gain access to a larger pool of job applicants (Elotmani 2014).
In January 2016, Morocco’s three telecommunication ser­vice providers, Maroc 
Telecom, Meditel, and Inwi, banned any social media networks that provide ­free 
mobile internet calls. Morocco’s Agence Nationale de Reglementation des Telecom-
munications (ANRT), or Telecommunications Regulatory National Agency, is tar-
geting VoIP, which allows users to make ­free calls over wireless connections. Mobile 
apps, such as Viber, Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp, and Skype, are no longer 
available to Moroccans. According to ANRT, the mobile apps providing ­free mo-
bile internet calls do not have the authorized licenses to offer ­these ser­vices, nor 
do they follow the guidelines stipulated for the country’s telecommunications mar-
ket and regulations. While it is not yet illegal to use VoIP ser­vices, the ANRT regu-
lations do limit app usage in the country. Experts are unsure of the immediate impact 
that this ban is having on the economy. It is believed that while the three telecom-
munication providers are trying to be more competitive, it could tentatively be a 
setback for the country’s movement ­toward becoming a modern, developed state 
in the twenty-­first ­century (Egyptian Streets 2016).

MOROCCO
190
The decision to ban ­these mobile apps was made without letting Moroccan con-
sumers know about it first. The beauty of VoIPs was their ability to communicate 
with ­people around the world without accruing expensive charges from local tele-
com ser­vice providers. As global social media providers grew, consumers around 
the world had access to new and improved ser­vices, such as ­free calls over the in-
ternet. VoIP gave Moroccans and Moroccan expats the ability to communicate with 
friends and families around the world without the fear of having to pay an expen-
sive bill. The sudden cutoff by the three major telecommunication ser­vice provid-
ers angered many consumers. In fact, ­there was a call for a social media revolution 
to fight the strict VoIP regulation that was implemented in January 2016. This VoIP 
regulation deeply affects low-­income Moroccans working in the farming and con-
struction sectors.
Social media activists and columnists have stated that this maneuver by local tele-
com ser­vice providers to compel consumers to pay for calls is denying Moroccans 
their basic right to communication (Bendraoui 2016). The founder of Th3profes-
sional, Amine Raghib (c. 1986–), condemned the actions of the telecom providers 
on his Th3professional blog and his official Facebook page. In a series of statements, 
Raghib told his followers to protest against the three telecom providers. First, he 
told the followers to “unlike” the telecom’s social media pages. Next, they ­were to 
boycott all events hosted by the three telecom companies. This would ultimately 
lead to an unidentified Moroccan consumer filing a lawsuit against the ARNT for 
what the public viewed as an illegal action. Since ­these events, the telecom provid-
ers have lost tens of thousands of followers on their official social media pages 
(    Jabrane 2016). The “unlike” campaign and the lawsuit appear to have worked; in 
October 2016, some users discovered that the block had been removed, though 
the ARNT did not make an official announcement.
Morocco has a history of persecuting journalists and activists that question the 
authority of the country’s monarchy or its laws. The government immediately shut 
down any po­liti­cal dissidence. As the online community grew in Morocco, it was 
only natu­ral for individuals to explore and use the internet as a new public forum. 
Activists began to use dif­fer­ent social media channels to air their grievances or try 
to spark a social revolution. In 2007, for instance, YouTube was banned for two 
weeks for publishing videos that ­were critical of the Moroccan king, Mohammed IV 
(1963–). The following year marked the appearance of more Moroccan activists on 
social media.
Moroccan activists are continuing their fight for a prodemo­cratic government 
through online platforms and addressing new audiences in Morocco and around 
the world (Global Voices 2016). By 2012, the threats against social media activists 
significantly increased as more bloggers and social media users ­were arrested, al-
legedly for violating the press law and the country’s sacred values. While the Mo-
roccan government has arrested and continues to arrest online activists, the final 
sentences are often reduced or pardoned outright upon public outcry (York 2012).
Karen Ames
See also: Algeria; Egypt; Libya; Tunisia

MOZAMBIQUE
191
Further Reading
Bendraoui, Mounia. 2016. “The VoIP Ban in Morocco and Its Impact on the Economy.” 
April  2. Accessed April  4, 2016. http://­www​.­howwemadeitinafrica​.­com​/­voip​-­ban​
-­morocco​-­impact​-­economy​/­
Cashmore, Pete. 2007. “YouTube Banned in Morocco.” May 26. Accessed April 4, 2016. 
http://­mashable​.­com​/­2007​/­05​/­26​/­youtube​-­maroc​/­#​_­eM1Z6kLpsqB
Egyptian Streets. 2016. “Morocco Bans Whatsapp, Skype, Viber, and Other Ser­vices Pro-
viding Mobile Internet Calls.” January 8. Accessed April 4, 2016. http://­egyptianstreets​
.­com​/­2016​/­01​/­08​/­morocco​-­blocks​-­whatsapp​-­skype​-­viber​-­and​-­other​-­services​-­providing​
-­mobile​-­internet​-­calls​/­
Elotmani, Fazine Meziane. 2014. “The Positive Impact of Social Media on Morocco’s Job-­
Market.” July 4. Accessed April 3, 2016. http://­www​.­moroccoworldnews​.­com​/­2014​/­07​/​
133904​/­the​-­positive​-­impact​-­of​-­social​-­media​-­on​-­moroccos​-­job​-­market​/­
Global Voices. 2016. “[Timeline] Morocco: Po­liti­cal Repression in the Era of Social 
Media.” January 26. Accessed April 5, 2016. https://­advox​.­globalvoices​.­org​/­2016​/­01​
/­27​/­timeline​-­morocco​-­political​-­repression​-­in​-­the​-­era​-­of​-­social​-­media​/­
Haug, Astrid. 2011. “Moroccan Youth Take on Social Media.” February 7. Accessed April 2, 
2016. https://­www​.­mediasupport​.­org​/­moroccan​-­youth​-­take​-­on​-­social​-­media​/­
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Morocco Internet Users.” Accessed April  2, 2016. www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­morocco​/­
Jabrane, Ezzoubeir. 2016. “Social Media Revolution Against Moroccan Telecom Providers.” 
February 27. Accessed April 5, 2016. http://­www​.­moroccoworldnews​.­com​/­2016​/­02​/​
180834​/­social​-­media​-­revolution​-­against​-­moroccan​-­telecom​-­providers​/­
Maroc Web Awards. 2016. “C’est Quoi les Maroc Web Awards?” Accessed on April 3, 2016. 
http://­marocwebawards​.­com​/­
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Morocco Social Media Usage Statistics Using Mobile.” Accessed April 3, 
2016. http://­www​.­moroccoworldnews​.­com​/­2016​/­01​/­176915​/­morocco​-­whatsapp​-­with​
-­viber​-­facetime​-­skype​/­
York, Jillian. 2012. “Moroccan Activist’s Arrest Signals Crackdown on Speech.” February 15. 
Accessed April 5, 2016. https://­www​.­eff​.­org​/­deeplinks​/­2012​/­02​/­moroccan​-­activists​
-­arrest​-­signals​-­crackdown​-­speech
Zerhouni, Hicham. 2016. “Morocco, Whatsapp, with Viber, FaceTime, & Skype.” January 6. 
Accessed April 4, 2016. http://­www​.­moroccoworldnews​.­com​/­2016​/­01​/­176915​/­morocco​
-­whatsapp​-­with​-­viber​-­facetime​-­skype​/­
MOZAMBIQUE
Mozambique, officially known as the Republic of Mozambique, is a country in 
Southeast Africa with a population of 26.4 million ­people (as of 2016), of which 
51 ­percent are female, 55 ­percent are below 19 years of age, and almost 68 ­percent 
live in rural areas. Its capital is Maputo City, which is where most technological 
investments are based, as all three mobile telephone companies’ headquarters lo-
cated ­there. It is one of the poorest countries in the world, with one of the lowest 
internet penetration rates, and yet it is considered one of the fastest-­growing econ-
omies in the world.
The growth of the information and communication technology (ICT) sector in 
Mozambique has accelerated rapidly over the past four years, driven by economic 

MOZAMBIQUE
192
development trends (i.e. newly discovered minerals, effective government reforms, 
foreign aid, and capital investments). This occurrence has accelerated the growth 
of mobile phone usage, internet usage, and network infrastructure development. 
Mobile penetration in 2012 was 48 ­percent, and in 2014, it had already reached 
77 ­percent. Internet penetration in 2014 was low at 5.9 ­percent, while Facebook 
usage was 4.7 ­percent, encompassing a ­little over a million ­people, based on the 
population at that time.
Mozambique has three mobile operators: Mcel (with the most subscribers), Vod-
acom, and Movitel. All of them offer 3G connectivity and cover most areas of the 
country. In 2015, Facebook and Mcel launched Internet​.­org (­later renamed ­Free 
Basics by Facebook), an application that gives all Mcel subscribers ­free access to 
Facebook and selected internet sites. This proj­ect is accelerating the growth of mo-
bile internet and Facebook usage. From 2010 to 2012, the number of mobile 
phone subscribers increased about 11 ­percent, while the number of fixed telephony 
subscribers decreased 0.08 ­percent.
Radio still has the best penetration of any other device/technology in Mozam-
bique, at above 53 ­percent penetration. In 2012, the country had ten state-­run ra-
dio stations and eighty private stations that broadcast in more than twenty 
languages. ­Because of the number of stations, radio permeates almost the entire 
country and can reach ­every audience, including the illiterate portion of the popu-
lation, which is around 49 ­percent. For ­these reasons, radio became the primary 
medium through which the population received news. However, tele­vi­sion is start-
ing to replace the radio for news consumption, especially in urban areas.
Mozambique-­based users rely on foreign social media, as ­there is no local in-
vestment in the development of locally based social media applications. They are 
most active on Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram, YouTube, Google Plus, and Twit-
ter. Facebook and WhatsApp are the fastest-­growing social media platforms in 
Mozambique.
Facebook is also largely used for many social activities. For example, in 2014, a 
local rapper, Edson da Luz (1984–), known as Azagaia, took to Facebook to crowd-
fund for his brain tumor operation in India, where he was successful in both gath-
ering the amount of money that he needed. Local ­free speech has also been affected 
by Facebook and social media. In one example, a local journalism website called 
Canal de Moçambique, which criticized government policies, had its internet pro-
tocol (IP) blocked and the website was taken offline. The site operators responded 
by creating a Facebook page and started using the page to disseminate their articles. 
In 2015 and 2016, Mozambique had been affected by a military-­political tension 
between the ruling party, Frelimo, and the main opposition party, Renamo. Although 
the government was able to contain the spread of rumors via national tele­vi­sion 
and radio stations, on Facebook, new anonymous profiles (such as Unay Cambuna) 
started reporting on the clashes between government forces and Renamo’s military 
forces in the central regions of Mozambique. Many users took to Facebook to get real-­
time knowledge of the ­actual situation, which was viewed as an “undeclared war.”
In addition, many nonprofit organ­izations have used Facebook to prevent the 
spread of rumors. In 2014, ­there was a rumor that Mozambique had cases of Ebola, 

MOZAMBIQUE
193
and the United Nations International ­Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF) and 
the Ministry of Health mainly controlled it via Facebook.
WhatsApp is widely used due to its ease of use and its group functionalities. In 
2016, an anonymous source called all Mozambicans to come out and protest against 
the government due to the current military-­political tension and international debt 
crisis. The message went viral in a single day, mainly via WhatsApp and Facebook, 
and this prompted the government to deploy antiriot police in Maputo City and 
many businesses closed for the day of the protest. In the end, no protest was held.
The e-­Government Strategy, approved in 2006, was conceived specifically to sup-
port the second phase, from 2006 to 2011, of Mozambique’s public-­sector reform. 
The reform intended for the government to achieve decentralization and improve 
ser­vice delivery in addition to improving institutional and ­human capacity. GovNet 
is a key contributor to the successful implementation of the e-­Government Strategy 
­because it constitutes the technological foundation for all other components. This 
success has led to many government institutions offering basic ser­vices via their 
own websites. Specifically, all key government ministries now have websites, and 
all legislation is now online.
On August 28, 2015, the government of Mozambique approved a new piece of 
legislation (Ministerial Decree no, 18/2015) that demanded subscriber identity mod-
ule (SIM) card registration for all cell phone users in Mozambique. The law was in 
response to a series of riots in Mozambique that the government said had been 
coordinated by mobile phone via short message ser­vice (SMS). In 2016, almost 
1 million SIM cards ­were switched off by the three mobile operators in Mozam-
bique following the failure of mobile phone ­owners to register their SIM cards. 
Currently, it is against the law to have a functional cell phone with a valid local 
SIM card that is not registered. The government knows the name, address, and 
contacts of ­every national cell phone user in Mozambique.
The internet still has a low penetration in Mozambique, and among the com-
mon reasons for the nonuse or infrequent use of the technology are the costs as-
sociated with using the internet, slow connectivity speeds and lack of local language 
content and support. House­holds with internet access tend to use mobile handsets 
to get connected, instead of a personal computer or a laptop. The share of internet 
users with an email address in Mozambique is above 60 ­percent—­higher than the 
share of internet users who have signed up for a social networking application.
Local mobile operators have also launched the usage of mobile money, with 
Vodacom using the “M-­pesa” since 2013, and Mcel using the “mKesh” since 2011. 
Mobile money programs are designed to allow ­people to bank and perform finan-
cial transactions online. The effort is designed to increase commerce and financial 
inclusion. ­There is an increased usage of ­these new paying modalities and huge mar-
keting campaigns by the mobile operators to push the usage of their mobile money 
for day-­to-­day transactions.
Mozambique had its first Digital Marketing workshop in 2016, led by a Portu-
guese digital specialist, and one of the key outcomes was that Mozambique usage of 
digital (social networking, websites, and related digital) tools is growing at a fast rate, 
and many companies are now shifting from their standard one-­way communication 

MYANMAR
194
to two-­way communication, as digital communications and the internet offer new 
tools for companies to connect with their customers.
For many youths and adolescents, the internet is Facebook in Mozambique. For 
many businesses, the internet offers a cost-­effective solution to ­counter the current 
debt crisis, and for the government, the internet offers new possibilities to increase 
the qualities of their public ser­vices. The internet ­will definitely see a huge increase 
in adoption, with more initiatives like ­Free Basics, but the call for more local lan-
guage content and support is crucial for the growth in rural areas.
Claudio Fauvrelle
See also: Botswana; ­Kenya; South Africa; Zimbabwe
Further Reading
AllAfrica. 2016. “Mozambique: Phone Companies Disconnect a Million Clients.” Accessed 
July 4, 2016. http://­allafrica​.­com​/­stories​/­201603040272​.­html
Business Insider. 2015. “The 13 Fastest-­Growing Economies in the World.” Accessed July 1, 
2016. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­world​-­bank​-­fast​-­growing​-­global​-­economies​
-­2015​-­6
Facebook. 2016. “Audience Insights Page Statistics.” Accessed July 1, 2016. https://­www​
.­facebook​.­com​/­ads​/­audience​-­insights​/­interests​?­act​=­169522799804337&age​=­18​
-­&country​=­MZ
INCM. 2015. “Boletim da Repùblica, Decreto no. 18/2015.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­
www​.­incm​.­gov​.­mz​/­documents​/­10157​/­343078​/­decreto%20no18​-­2015​.­pdf
Instituto Nacional de Estatistica. 2014. “Estatísticas dos Transportes e Comunicações.” Ac-
cessed July 1, 2016. http://­www​.­ine​.­gov​.­mz
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Mozambique Internet Stats.” Accessed July 1, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­africa​.­htm#mz
Mabila, Francisco. 2013. “Understanding What Is Happening in ICT in Mozambique.” Policy 
Paper 10, 2013. Accessed July 1, 2016. http://­www​.­researchictafrica​.­net​/­publications​/​
Evidence​_­for​_­ICT​_­Policy​_­Action​/­Policy​_­Paper​_­10​_­​-­​_­Understanding​_­what​_­is​
_­happening​_­in​_­ICT​_­in​_­Mozambique​.­pdf
Socialbakers. 2016. “Mozambique Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed July 1, 2016. http://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­mozambique​/­
MYANMAR
Myanmar, sometimes referred to as Burma for historical po­liti­cal reasons, is a South-
east Asian nation located to the west of Thailand. It has one of the lowest internet 
penetration rates in the world, and yet it is poised to have some of the highest in-
ternet growth rates over the coming years. In mid-2015, Myanmar’s internet pen-
etration was approximately 5 ­percent of its population of 54 million. The majority 
of the country’s internet users access the web via mobile phone. Myanmar-­based 
users rely on both foreign and domestic social media. They are pres­ent on Face-
book, Twitter, and YouTube, with growing user bases on Viber, WhatsApp, Line, 
WeChat, BeeTalk, and Tango. MySQUAR is the country’s most used domestic plat-
form, and ­there are several ­others emerging as potential competition in Myanmar’s 

MYANMAR
195
predominantly Burmese-­language environment. Exact numbers of users on ­these 
platforms are difficult to ascertain.
Myanmar was one of the most closed-­off countries of the world ­until its transi-
tion to democracy in 2011 and 2012. As part of that transition, the government 
deci­ded to modernize some of its infrastructure to include its outdated telecom-
munications systems. The pro­cess included reducing the costs of accessing the sys-
tem, which consisted of lowered prices for mobile phones, internet access, and 
installation. Before the policy to lower device and access costs went into effect, in-
ternet installation cost around $500, with a $70 monthly fee. For mobile phone 
users, subscriber identity module (SIM) card costs dropped from $3,000 to $500 
in 2011; by 2012, the costs had dropped to $200 (Aung 2013). In early 2013, the 
government started sponsoring SIM card lotteries. Winners could purchase SIM 
cards for around $2. The price reduction was one piece of the plan to upgrade Myan-
mar’s telecommunications. The price reduction came as a relief to the average 
­family that earned around $82 per month, and especially to families who earned 
less than $200 annually (Heinrich 2014).
As for infrastructure, the government issued contracts in 2013 to two foreign 
firms, Norwegian Telenor and Qatar’s Ooredoo, with the express purpose of mod-
ernizing cellular and mobile communications within the country. Previously, the 
Myanmar Posts and Telecommunications monopolized the mobile industry. ­Because 
of domestic corruption and remnants of the dictatorship, the agency was in­effec­
tive. Without competition, prices remained exorbitant and ser­vice was dismal. With 
the influx of the new contracts, Myanmar’s mobile phone access and social media 
usage are poised to explode. Some estimates predict that 80 ­percent of the population 
will have internet access by the end of 2016; more conservative estimates suggest 
that 50 ­percent of the population ­will have access by 2019 (Heinrich 2014).
The availability of devices and the development of new Burmese-­language plat-
forms ­will certainly lead to a growth in the number of online users and reconnect 
Myanmar’s ­people to ­others worldwide. Viber is Myanmar’s most active chat app, 
with approximately 5 million registered users (Kham 2015). In a 2014 survey of 
social media application usage, 79 ­percent reported using Viber, while 27 ­percent 
reported using, or also using, Facebook (OnDevice 2014).
One of the biggest obstacles for Myanmar is using their language font online. 
Most devices and applications accept En­glish and other Latin alphabet–­based lan-
guages with ease. However, Burmese-­language fonts and keyboards are difficult to 
install and unwieldly to use without the requisite site and device support. ­There is 
­little notable language support at pres­ent, though this dilemma is slowly being re-
solved. One com­pany paying attention to Myanmar’s internet needs is Google. 
Google started to provide Burmese-­language support to its search engine in 2013. 
Basic Burmese translation appeared in Google Translate in late 2014, and language 
support to Gmail started in mid-2015. Other companies interested in capturing 
Myanmar’s market share, which could range from online shopping to advertising, 
are likely to follow suit.
One entrepreneur has also deci­ded to tackle the difficulty ­people in Myanmar 
have using their language online. Rita Nguyen (c. 1977–), a Vietnamese-­Canadian 

MYANMAR
196
­woman, aims to offer Myanmar social media in its own language. The challenge 
with the Burmese language is that it uses a Sanskrit-­derived script that requires spe-
cial keyboards and keyboard layouts. Noting that a potential market existed for a 
Burmese-­language social media platform, Nguyen worked with a team to create 
MySQUAR. MySQUAR is a social media platform with a built-in chat application 
called MyChat, which had a user base of approximately 700,000 ­people in mid-
2015. The platform’s overall success led to a $2.5 million investment and started 
trading shares on Britain’s Alternative Investment Market in order to increase rev-
enue (Stewart-­Smith 2015). As more ­people in Myanmar have access to the inter-
net and a choice of social media applications, MySQUAR has the potential to expand 
quickly into one of Myanmar’s premier platforms.
MySQUAR was not the only local app inspired by Myanmar’s lack of native-­
language social media outlets. Entrepreneurs have developed several additional 
noteworthy apps, many of which imitate the well-­known foreign platforms. Doe 
Myanmar is a local version of Facebook, designed to connect friends, share con-
tent, and build an online community. Hush is a platform where users can share 
content and messages anonymously. It was likely inspired by Myanmar’s decades-­
long censorship and fear of government reprisal for open criticism. Pyaw Kyi is an-
other app similar to Hush. Momo Lay is a blogging site that allows users to control 
not only their writings, but also the advertisements and banners appearing on the 
page. Currently ­under development is Pwar, which ­will also share features with sites 
such as Doe Myanmar and Facebook (Kham 2015). As market demand grows, 
Myanmar is likely to see additional apps develop to meet user demand.
Myanmar’s social media users utilize Facebook somewhat differently than in other 
parts of Southeast Asia and the world. For many years, it was one of the only plat-
forms available in Myanmar. However, while ­there is some social interaction and 
use of its chat features, Facebook is used in Myanmar less for social engagement 
and community building than as a news feed (Huq 2014). In fact, the most popu­
lar pages in Myanmar are 7Day News Journal, Eleven Media Group, and the 
Irrawaddy’s Burmese-­language news page (Socialbakers 2015).
Facebook also has a dark side in Myanmar. During times of high interethnic ten-
sion between the Buddhist majority and Rakhine Muslims, Facebook has been 
utilized to spread rumors and hate speech. Often disguised as news, the rumors 
have incited conflict and vio­lence. For example, in March 2014, Facebook users 
reported a nongovernmental organ­ization (NGO) worker for throwing the Myan-
mar flag on the floor, out the win­dow, or somehow other­wise disposing of it. Al-
though the facts ­were unclear, rumors raced online ­until a mob confronted the NGO 
worker, causing her to flee. An eleven-­year-­old girl died at the scene, with at least 
a dozen ­others reported to have died ­later due to injury (DiCerto 2014). In the 
town of Sittwe in July 2014, a rumor appeared online that two Muslim men raped 
a Buddhist ­woman. Following a similar mob mentality, fighting ensued. Two died 
and at least a dozen more ­were injured (DiCerto 2014). Although ­these allegations 
­were not true, the statements that appeared online caused tremendous social dam-
age. Facebook, of course, was not the cause of ­these incidents; however, its use as 

MYANMAR
197
a conduit indicates that social media can influence ­people’s be­hav­ior and have a 
negative societal impact when derogatory and inflammatory speech go unchecked.
Myanmar has a number of hacker groups that claim to profess elite cyber 
skills. Popu­lar hacking groups include Myanmar Noob Hackers, Myanmar Black 
Hats, Blink Hacker Group, Myanmar Hacker UniTeam, and Myanmar Hacker 
Warriors. Most of ­these groups use Facebook and blogs to communicate about 
their achievements, which usually consist of using denial of ser­vice (DoS) and 
distributed denial of ser­vice (DDoS) to prevent the targeted websites from func-
tioning. Other hacking efforts include such a group gaining access to a website 
and then posting a message to declare both that the site was hacked and which 
group hacked it. Screenshots of the hack ­will often appear on the group’s Face-
book page or blog as proof shortly thereafter.
A Buddhist monk uses his cellphone during a meditation at Shwedagon Pagoda, the most sa-
cred Buddhist shrine in Myanmar. ­Until very recently, only a small, wealthy segment of Myan-
mar’s population could even dream of accessing the internet. Since Myanmar’s move to adopt 
demo­cratic governance in 2012, domestic reforms have expanded the telecommunications in-
frastructure, making it more common for non-­elites to obtain internet access. (Antonella865​/
Dreamstime​.­com)

MYANMAR
198
Myanmar’s hackers tend to choose the websites they target based on the sites’ 
geographic locations and current the current sociopo­liti­cal situation within the sites’ 
home country. It is not uncommon for Myanmar’s hackers to target Bangladeshi 
websites or to respond to an attack that Bangladesh’s hackers initiated against them. 
Often, the conflict is over an issue such as the Rohingya ethnic group, a Muslim 
minority pres­ent in Myanmar and Bangladesh. Neither country accepts the Rohingya 
as their own citizens, so the tensions that exist in real life sometimes ­bubble over 
onto the internet. Less frequently, Myanmar hackers enter a hacking contest with 
Indian users, or more rarely, enter temporary hacking alliances, such as joining the 
Malaysian hackers against Bangladesh.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Bangladesh; India; Malaysia; United Kingdom
Further Reading
Aung, San Yamin. 2013. “Burma to Hand out ­Free Temporary SIM Cards to SEA Games 
Participants.” October 26. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­irrawaddy​.­org​/­burma​/​
burma​-­hand​-­free​-­temporary​-­sim​-­cards​-­sea​-­games​-­participants​.­html
DiCerto, Bridget. 2014. “In Newly Liberated Myanmar, Hatred Spreads on Facebook.” 
August 8. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­globalpost​.­com​/­dispatch​/­news​/­regions​/​
asia​-­pacific​/­myanmar​/­140804​/­newly​-­liberated​-­myanmar​-­hatred​-­spreads​-­facebook
Ferrie, Jared. 2013. “In Myanmar, Cheap SIM Card Draw May Herald Telecoms Revolu-
tion.” April 24. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2013​/­04​/­24​
/­us​-­myanmar​-­telecoms​-­draw​-­idUSBRE93N1AX20130424
Heinrich, Erik. 2014. “Asia’s least-­developed telecom market ­will soon become the world’s 
fastest growing.” September 18. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­fortune​.­com​/­2014​/​
09​/­18​/­asia​-­myanmar​-­burma​-­telecommunications​-­market​/­
Huq, Md Mushfiqul. 2014. “Rita Nguyen: The ­Woman ­Behind Myanmar’s Social Media Rev-
olution.” December  9. Accessed August  20, 2015. http://­sdasia​.­co​/­2014​/­12​/­09​/­rita​
-­nguyen​-­woman​-­behind​-­myanmars​-­social​-­media​-­revolution​/­
Kham, Aung. 2015. “Rival of Social Apps in Myanmar?” June 8. Accessed August 20, 2015. 
http://­myanmar​-­entrepreneur​.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­08​/­rival​-­of​-­social​-­apps​-­in​-­myanmar​/­
OnDevice Research. 2014. “Myanmar: The Final Frontier for the Mobile Internet.” June 23. 
Accessed September  1, 2014. https://­ondeviceresearch​.­com​/­blog​/­myanmar​-­mobile​
-­internet​-­report
Socialbakers. 2015. “Myanmar Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­myanmar​/­
Stewart​-­Smith, Hana. 2015. “MySQUAR, Orchard Funding Join AIM, Sophos Begins Full 
Trading (ALLIPO).” July 1. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­morningstar​.­co​.­uk​
/­uk​/­news​/­AN​_­1435743173459573100​/­mysquar​-­orchard​-­funding​-­join​-­aim​-­sophos​
-­begins​-­full​-­trading​-(allipo)​.­aspx

NAMIBIA
Namibia is a country on the southwestern coast of the African continent with a 
population of 2.1 million, according to the 2011 census (Namibia Statistics Agency 
2016). Namibia is sparsely populated over a vast geo­graph­i­cal area of 824,292 
square kilo­meters (CIA World Factbook 2015). This vast space demands a good 
communication infrastructure, which is why the country has invested in high-­
quality infrastructure. Statista (2015) and the World Bank (2016b) rank Namibia 
fourth on the African continent in their ranking of countries with the best infra-
structure. This infrastructural environment affects the country’s networked readi-
ness positively, allowing it to rank 99 out of 139 countries in the world, and seventh 
overall in Africa (WEC 2016).
In spite of its relatively good standing on the vari­ous indexes and its competi-
tive advantage regarding the first pillar of network readiness—­political and regula-
tory environment, where Namibia ranked thirty-­first in the world and fourth in 
Africa (WEC 2016)—­this success has not translated into ­actual access to and usage 
of the internet. The discrepancy is partly due to the high cost of digital ser­vices, which 
translates into limited access and low internet penetration (WEC 2016). Broadband 
internet has a particularly low uptake in Namibia as a result, with subscriptions 
standing only at 1.76 ­percent in 2014. The country’s fixed telephone subscriptions 
stood at a mere 7.78 ­percent, a drop from 7.97 ­percent the year before (World 
Bank 2016a). In stark contrast, mobile cellular subscriptions per 100 ­people ­were 
at 114 around the same period. However, not all ­these mobile subscribers have 
smartphones, so they do not all have internet access. Overall, the tally of internet 
users in Namibia mea­sured through number of ­people with access to the internet 
at home, at work, or in public, stood at 14.8 per 100 ­people in 2014 (World Bank 
2016a), although other sources put internet penetration at 17.1 ­percent (Bud-
deComm 2016).
The startling contrast between access to fixed telephone and fixed broadband 
internet on one hand and mobile cellular subscriptions on the other hand is a trend 
on the African continent. For example, Pew Research Center (2015) established that 
two-­thirds or more ­people in South Africa, Nigeria, Ghana, Senegal, Tanzania, 
­Kenya, and Uganda own cell phones, although only a few of ­those own internet-­
enabled smartphones. This has led to some to claim that sub-­Saharan Africa has 
skipped the landline development stage, jumping straight into the digital age 
through the proliferation of mobile phone networks (Pew Research Center 2015). 
Therefore, the growth of and access to internet in Africa in general and Namibia in 
par­tic­u­lar has gone hand in hand with growth in cellular phone subscriptions. 
N

NAMIBIA
200
Research carried out in Namibia and ten other African countries that sought to 
explain why internet has gone mobile established that generally, “mobile internet 
requires fewer ICT skills and financial resources, and does not rely on electricity at 
home, compared to computer or laptop and fixed-­internet access” (Stork, Calan-
dro, and Gillwald 2013, 4). Thus unlike the first wave of internet adoption that 
was facilitated by access to fixed telephony, the second wave that is typical of 
Africa and Namibia relies on the use of mobile phones. In Namibia, about half of 
internet users reported to have first accessed it on mobile phones (Stork, Calan-
dro, and Gillwald 2013).
The penetration of internet in Namibia is still low by international standards. 
For example, Nordic countries average more than 95 ­percent of internet users, with 
Iceland topping the world with 100 ­percent of internet penetration—­a far cry from 
Namibia. Nonetheless, internet use in Namibia has grown steadily over the years, 
with internet users more than quadrupling from an estimated 90,349 users in 2006 
to 392,181 in 2016, the latter representing 15.6 ­percent of the population (Inter-
net Live Stats 2016). The local media metrics, however, put (broadband) internet 
access in Namibia at 23 ­percent in 2014, which was a 6 ­percent increase from the 
previous year (IPPR 2014). In comparison, mobile internet access in the country at 
that time was much higher, at 30.7 ­percent, which was mea­sured in terms of the 
number of users with mobile handsets capable of browsing the internet (Stork and 
Calandro 2014, 215). This is almost the same as South Africa, the highest-­ranked 
country in Africa, where 34 ­percent of mobile subscribers own smartphones (Pew 
Research Center 2015). With initiatives such as the recent “oSmartPhona” road-
show campaign by the Namibia’s biggest mobile telecommunications operator, 
Mobile Telecommunications Corporation (MTC), which sought to promote access 
to smartphones by selling them at discounted prices of roughly $30 (Nakashole 
2016), the use of internet through mobile phones in Namibia is set to continue 
growing.
What is the relationship between this trend of internet access through mobile 
phones and the use of social media? Research from emerging economies says that 
internet usage is highly associated with social media use. According to Pew Research 
Center (2016), “[I]nternet users in emerging and developing countries are more 
likely to use social media compared with ­those in the developed world.” This is 
possibly ­because all popu­lar social media sites have mobile apps, so accessing them 
is more con­ve­nient than accessing the sites via web browsers. In Namibia, mobile 
network operators also offer dedicated data for specific social media apps, which 
could be a ­factor. The most popu­lar social media site is Facebook, with a 
93.23 ­percent share of users (StatsMonkey 2016). Other social media sites used 
are Instagram, Twitter, YouTube, Snapchat, LinkedIn, Pinterest, and Tumblr. Accord-
ing to Peters, Winschiers-­Theophilus, and Mennecke (2015, 4), “Namibians also 
have a relatively high Facebook adoption rate in comparison to other African coun-
tries.” In 2013, over 10 ­percent of the population was on Facebook, with a large 
percentage in the age group of eigh­teen to thirty-­five years old (IPPR 2014), a fig-
ure that ­will have increased since the original survey. Also popu­lar are chatting apps 
such as WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger due to their high social interactivity.

NAMIBIA
201
How do Namibians use social media? The most popu­lar social media site, Face-
book, is used for both content consumption, such as keeping up to date with news 
or entertainment like videos and pictures of events or personalities; and content 
generation, like uploading content, sharing views, and sharing content from one 
platform to another. Namibians, like all other social media users, also utilize the 
site to connect with friends and ­family. In addition, social media has become a 
prominent tool for civic engagement. In the past two years, social media has been 
the tool of choice for youth activism, whereby prominent youth leaders use Face-
book to spark movements and galvanize and or­ga­nize their followers. They share 
information about their activities, report back to their “constituencies,” so to speak, 
and use it as a logistical tool support the planning of events such as protests.
An example of this phenomenon is a Namibian youth-­led movement called Af-
firmative Repositioning that uses its Facebook page and Twitter account to plan 
demonstrations, communicate information on its events, and or­ga­nize actions with 
its members/followers. One can sometimes see more activism online than offline. 
Po­liti­cal parties also use social media sites to reach out to the electorate, while citi-
zens use them to debate con­temporary issues related to elections and society (IPPR 
2014). Public institutions like government offices and institutions of higher learn-
ing use them to access their audience, and po­liti­cal leaders also use them to com-
municate with the masses. For instance, the current president of Namibia, Hage 
Gottfried Geingob (1941–), has Facebook and Twitter accounts that he uses to com-
municate frequently with citizens about the activities of his office, such as his 
speeches and public statements or ­matters of policy.
In addition, social media is used for educational purposes, such as to support 
university students’ collaborative and networked learning (Haipinge 2013). Stu-
dents and teachers, especially in higher education, use platforms such as Facebook 
and WhatsApp to engage beyond the face-­to-­face contexts and support e-­learning.
As for entertainment, social media is a power­ful tool in the country, whereby 
during national entertainment events such as annual ­music awards, broadcasting 
companies stream events live on YouTube. Short videos giving sneak peeks and pic-
tures highlighting ­these events are also posted on Instagram, Facebook, and Snap-
chat (Kawela 2016). The use of Twitter hashtags during key events or to promote 
discussions or ­causes is also common. Other examples indicative of the entertain-
ment use of social media is the following of celebrity fan pages. Socialbakers​.­com 
(2016) ranks a celebrity Facebook page of a Namibian model, Behati Prinsloo 
(1989–), as the most liked page in Namibia, with 603,797 fans; and the third-­most-­
liked page belongs to another local celebrity, Dillish Mathews (1990–), a winner of 
the tele­vi­sion show Big ­Brother Africa.
Other uses of social media include promoting ­causes, marketing, publishing of 
news by media ­houses, and public relations activities by public institutions. For 
example, a cheetah conservation Facebook page is the second most popular page, 
followed by a marketing page for a popu­lar Namibian beer. Newspapers, a mobile 
network com­pany, and a radio station are also among the top 10 pages.
Regarding user be­hav­ior, Peters et al. (2015) found that Namibian Facebook 
users behaved distinctively differently online from their offline be­hav­ior. For 

NAMIBIA
202
example, they find it easier to discuss and post information on Facebook that 
they consider taboo or uncomfortable in their offline lives. This is corroborated 
by Haipinge (2013), who found that users of social media maintained two sepa-
rate conceptions of real­ity between their online and offline activities. ­There is also a 
high degree of naïveté among Namibian social media users regarding issues of 
privacy, as shown through research findings that users share intimate informa-
tion about themselves or falsely believe that they have substantial control over in-
formation that they share online (Haipinge 2016; Peters et al. 2015). This reporting 
indicates that as the use of the internet and social media increase, that does not 
necessarily include knowledge about how to use ­these tools safely.
The ­future of the internet and social media in Namibia is bright; access and use 
have continued to increase as growth rates over the last few years have shown an 
upward trend. Online access gives citizens more opportunities to make their voices 
heard, offers enhanced access to information, and assists with marketing—­all with 
the potential for informed decision making and enhanced demo­cratic participation. 
At the same time, the growth in internet and social media use also calls for more 
education on the safe and responsible use of ­these platforms. The fast pace at which 
social media has grown in the country has caught the ­legal environment and po­
liti­cal leadership off guard. Indicative of this is the call by politicians to tighten laws 
in order to control social media use by the public that they perceive as abusive and 
careless (Shinovene 2014).
In this regard, improving the ­legal framework to deal with and regulate the use of 
the internet in ways that are on par with international standards is another priority. 
This concern does not mean that citizens’ use of social media should be stifled, 
however, given the huge benefits that ­these sites offer for freedom of speech, gov-
ernment transparency, and promoting business. At the same time, when a country’s 
laws are not responsive to the fast-­paced developments in technology, challenges 
­will naturally arise.
Erkkie Haipinge
See also: Finland; Iceland; ­Kenya; Nigeria; South Africa
Further Reading
BuddeComm. 2016. “Namibia: Telecoms, Mobile and Broadband—­Statistics and Analyses.” 
Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­budde​.­com​.­au​/­Research​/­Namibia​-­Telecoms​
-­Mobile​-­and​-­Broadband​-­Statistics​-­and​-­Analyses
CIA World Factbook. 2015. “Namibia.” Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­cia​.­gov​
/­library​/­publications​/­the​-­world​-­factbook​/­geos​/­wa​.­html
Haipinge, Erkkie. 2013. “Conceptions of Social Media and its Role in Supporting Networked 
Learning: A Global South Perspective through Student Teachers in Namibia.” Accessed 
August 21, 2016. http://­jultika​.­oulu​.­fi​/­files​/­nbnfioulu​-­201306051490​.­pdf
Haipinge, Erkkie. 2016. “Social media in educational contexts: Implications for critical media 
literacy and ethical challenges for teachers and educational institutions in Namibia.” 
Namibia CPD Journal for Educators, 1(1): 102—111​.
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Namibia Internet Users.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­namibia​/­

NAMIBIA
203
Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR). 2014. “Social Media and Namibian Elections: Is 
Namibian Politics Keeping up with the Times?” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​
.­ippr​.­org​.­na​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­ElectionWatch5%20web​.­pdf
Kawela, M. 2016. “NAMAs 2016: The Social Media Experience.” May 6. Accessed August 21, 
2016. http://­www​.­namibian​.­com​.­na​/­index​.­php​?­page​=­archive​-­read&id​=­150448
Nakashole, N. 2016. “MTC Takes Smartphones to Low-­Income Areas,” July 1. Accessed August 
21, 2016. http://­www​.­namibian​.­com​.­na​/­index​.­php​?­page​=­archive​-­read&id​=­152617
Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA). 2011. “Namibia 2011 Population & Housing Census 
Main Report.” Accessed August  21, 2016. http://­cms​.­my​.­na​/­assets​/­documents​
/­p19dmn58guram30ttun89rdrp1​.­pdf
Peters, A. N., Winschiers-­Theophilus, H., and Mennecke, B.E. (2015). “Cultural Influences 
on Facebook Practices: A Comparative Study of College Students in Namibia and 
the United States.” Computers in ­Human Be­hav­ior, 49: 259–271. doi: 10.1016/j.chb​
.2015​.02.065
Pew Research Center. 2015. “Cell Phones in Africa: Communication Lifeline—­Text­ing Most 
Common Activity, but Mobile Money Popu­lar in Several Countries.” Accessed August 
21, 2016. http://­www​.­pewglobal​.­org​/­files​/­2015​/­04​/­Pew​-­Research​-­Center​-­Africa​-­Cell​
-­Phone​-­Report​-­FINAL​-­April​-­15​-­2015​.­pdf
Pew Research Center. 2016. “Smartphone Owner­ship and Internet Usage Continues to 
Climb in Emerging Economies.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://www.pewglobal.
org/2016/02/22/smartphone​-ownership​-and​-internet​-usage​-continues​-to​-climb​-in​
-emerging​-economies/
Shinovene, I. 2014. “MPs Want Law to Control Social Media,” May 6. Accessed August 21, 
2016. http://www.namibian.com.na/index.php?id=122886&page=archive-­read
Socialbakers​.­com. 2016. “Facebook Pages Stats in Namibia.” Accessed August 21, 2016. 
https://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­namibia​/­
Statista. 2015. “Ranking of Countries with Best Infrastructure in 2015.” Accessed August 21, 
2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­264753​/­ranking​-­of​-­countries​-­according​-­to​-­the​
-­general​-­quality​-­of​-­infrastructure​/­
StatsMonkey. 2016. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Media Usage Statistics in Namibia.” 
Accessed August 21, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21423​-­namibia​-­mobile​
-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
Stork, C., and Calandro, E. 2014. “Internet Gone Mobile in Namibia.” In ICT pathways to 
poverty reduction: Empirical Evidence from East and Southern Africa, edited by E. Adera, 
T. Waema, J. May, O. Mascarenhas, and K. Diga. Practical Action Publishing Ltd. In-
ternational Development Research Centre, 205–226. http://­dx​.­doi​.­org​/­10​.­3362​
/­9781780448152​.­009
Stork, C., Calandro, E., and Gillwald, A. 2013. “Internet ­Going Mobile: Internet Access and 
Usage in 11 African Countries.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­www​.­researchictafrica​
.­net​/­publications​/­Evidence​_­for​_­ICT​_­Policy​_­Action​/­Policy​_­Paper​_­14​_­​-­​_­Under​stand​
ing​_­Internet​_­Going​_­Mobile​.­pdf
World Bank. 2016a. “Connectivity Indicators.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­data​
.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2​?­locations​=­NA
World Bank. 2016b. “International LPI Global Ranking.” Accessed August 21, 2016. http://­
lpi​.­worldbank​.­org​/­international​/­global​?­sort​=­asc&order​=­Infrastructure
World Economic Forum (WEC). 2016. “Networked Readiness Index.” Accessed August 
21, 2016. http://­reports​.­weforum​.­org​/­global​-­information​-­technology​-­report​-­2016​/­net​
worked​-­readiness​-­index​/­

NEPAL
204
NEPAL
Nepal is a country in South Asia, bordered by India and China and geo­graph­i­cally 
most well known for the Himalayan Mountains. Nepal has gone through a number 
of po­liti­cal upheavals in its recent past. In 2008, it held its first elections in nine 
years; however, the country’s instability has continued. A new constitution was en-
acted in September 2015 ­after seven years of controversy and deliberation. The 
recent po­liti­cal situation and Nepal’s par­tic­u­lar geography have affected telecom-
munications infrastructure; however, Nepal has seen substantial growth in mobile 
usage. In addition, Nepal experienced a devastating earthquake on April 25, 2015, 
which became known as the Gorkha Earthquake. This catastrophe led to an unpre­
ce­dented global social media response, assisting multiple efforts to recover from 
the disaster.
While the earthquake slowed the development of telecommunications infrastruc-
ture in the country, Nepal has managed to move forward. Nepal Telecom (NT), the 
state-­owned telecommunications com­pany, built the majority of the country’s in-
frastructure and provides coverage for internet, mobile, and landline phones. The 
com­pany held a mono­poly ­until about ten years ago, when Ncell, the country’s other 
major provider, began offering ser­vices. Currently, ­these two companies represent 
over 90 ­percent of the total market, with four other smaller companies represent-
ing the remaining share (Himalayan Times 2015a; 2015b). Infrastructure in Nepal 
is also affected by the numerous mountainous regions.
At the end of November 2015, the internet penetration rate in Nepal grew to 
over 44 ­percent (Kathmandu Post 2015). This was a 10 ­percent increase from the 
previous year, and numbers have been growing rapidly since the introduction of 
3G ser­vice in 2010. Mobile usage in par­tic­u­lar represents the fastest-­growing sec-
tor. The government formally ­adopted a National Broadband Policy in April 2015, 
aiming to continue and expand on this growth. Internet penetration has been further 
encouraged by the dropping prices and increased availability of mobile handheld 
devices. Generally, internet users skew ­toward urban areas, such as Kathmandu. 
Many rural and mountainous areas in the country still have spotty, limited, or no 
internet connection. With a total population in Nepal of about 28 million, internet 
access is still unavailable to 17 million ­people (Kathmandu Post 2015). The Nepal 
Wireless Networking Proj­ect is a well-­known nonprofit in the country, founded in 
2003, that works to connect rural villages wirelessly ­because of the difficulties in 
building infrastructure in ­these regions. Over the past ten years, they have been 
able to connect 175 villages in Nepal to the internet (Nepal Wireless 2016).
Mobile phone costs have been decreasing, with smartphones now available for 
about $45. An unlimited internet subscription through Ncell ­will cost an additional 
$8 per month for the slower connection and 1 GB of data (Ncell 2016). While ­these 
are certainly very low prices by U.S. standards, they are significant in Nepal, where 
the average yearly income per person in 2014 was $730 (World Bank 2016). Ncell 
also offers a ­couple of unique internet packages to its customers: one is a Facebook-­
only subscription; the other two are for unlimited access to Twitter and Wikipedia. 
­These two packages are ­free for any Ncell customer and allow subscribers to use 
Twitter and Wikipedia without accruing any data charges.

NEPAL
205
Given that one of the largest internet providers in Nepal takes special notice of 
Facebook, the fact that it is the number one website in Nepal is hardly surprising 
(Alexa Internet 2016). Twitter is not far ­behind in seventh place. Other popu­lar 
websites include Google and YouTube. For Nepali-­created websites, ­those listed in 
the top twenty are all news sites, the most popu­lar being Onlinekhabar, a Nepali-­
language website for national news. Eight other Nepali news sites are also among 
the top twenty websites used in Nepal.
Many languages in South Asia face challenges ­because of the lack of language 
support for characters that are not in a Latin script. Nepali, the language of Nepal, 
receives some benefits from being written in the same script as Hindi, which is a 
major global language. This alphabet, known as Devanagari, is used by a number 
of languages in South Asia. For this reason, some strides have been made in mak-
ing it functional for online applications. While many ­people in Nepal use English-­
language social media and web applications, Nepali-­language materials are also 
available. ­There are many Nepali-­language news websites, for example.
Within Facebook itself, the most popu­lar pages are similar to rankings for web-
sites generally. The Facebook page with the largest audience in Nepal is “Facebook 
for ­Every Phone,” designed for the Facebook app. Five of the top Facebook pages 
are news-­related, in both En­glish and Nepali (Socialbakers 2016). eKantipur, a 
Nepali Army medics transport and treat the wounded at Tribhuvan International Airport on 
April 29, 2015, ­after the country experienced a massive earthquake. ­People from around the 
world used social media to solicit money and support for the country immediately ­after the 
disaster struck, creating a virtual support network that translated into ­actual goods and ser­
vices aimed at aiding the Nepali ­people. (Mumbaiphoto​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

NEPAL
206
Nepali and En­glish news site, and BBC Nepali come in at number two and number 
three, with 1,666,955 fans and 1,659,769 fans, respectively as of April 2016. Other 
top ten Facebook pages in Nepal are pages for Nepali singers Udit Narayan (1955–), 
Anju Panta (1977–), and Muna Thapa Magar (n.d.–); a page for Bollywood News, 
and a page for a Nepali radio station, Radio Kantipur.
Increasingly, global events are reflected online and on social media. On April 25, 
2015, Nepal experienced a devastating earthquake mea­sur­ing 7.8 on the Richter 
scale that killed over 8,000 ­people and left hundreds of thousands homeless. So-
cial media played a particularly impactful role in the aftermath, through monetary 
donations, crisis mapping, helping to locate missing ­people, and helping to get the 
appropriate assistance to where it was most needed. Internet was still available 
through mobile phones in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, and it was 
used extensively to assist in recovery and aid.
When reports of the disaster began coming in through Facebook and Twitter in 
the immediate aftermath of the quake, both telecommunications companies at-
tempted to reign in and direct the flood of information. Facebook activated its 
Safety Check tool, a tool that contacts users near affected areas during crises and 
asks them to send status updates to their friends and ­family. In addition to the 
official moves by Facebook, a number of new groups ­were created in the aftermath 
of the quake. Many of ­these ­were used to or­ga­nize aid and monetary donations to 
affected areas. Twitter attempted to focus all the vari­ous threads being used by pro-
moting #NepalQuakeRelief as the hashtag for all relevant communications. Also, 
numerous official and ad hoc groups sought funding through social media in the 
form of Facebook groups and pages, crowdfunding sources such as IndieGogo, and 
official humanitarian groups seeking funds through vari­ous channels. Google 
launched Person Finder, an open-­source database available in multiple languages. 
It allows users to input data about missing ­people and to update information about 
someone who has been found. Google encouraged nonprofits to also use the data-
base within their own websites in order to centralize missing persons information.
About one week ­after the earthquake, the Nepalese government’s National Emer-
gency Operation Center set up its own Twitter ­handle, @NEoCOfficial. The ac-
count gave impor­tant information and advice about accessing clean ­water, aid 
received from vari­ous humanitarian organ­izations and other groups, road and travel 
information, and official statistics about deaths and injuries. As of April 2016, the 
account had over 15,000 followers. Kathmandu Living Labs, a Nepali-­based non-
profit organ­ization, launched Quakemap​.­org immediately following the earthquake. 
This crisis-­mapping website helped connect resources and aid with exactly what 
was needed in specific places. Anyone could access the site, state damages, and re-
quest specific items or aid. In turn, both ad hoc and official aid groups could re-
port on aid that was delivered. The Nepalese Army even used this site.
OpenStreetMap events ­were held across the globe in response to the Nepal earth-
quake. OpenStreetMap is a freely available mapping tool that allows anyone to edit 
the maps. The events focused on filling in impor­tant geographic data in Nepal so 
that relief efforts would be able to get to the areas that they ­were needed more 
efficiently.

NEPAL
207
Code for Nepal was another organ­ization that worked on crisis-­mapping tools 
to help direct aid efforts ­after the earthquake. In addition, they focused on low-­
tech solutions by creating and sharing a Google doc on social media to provide in-
formation about food, shelter, ­water, and medical assistance.
Two Nepali-­based groups, the Rapid Response Team and Sankalpa, created their 
own text­ing apps in response to the disaster. The Rapid Response Team used text­
ing and phone calls to connect ­people with missing ­family and friends. Sankalpa 
used a technology provided by SparrowSMS, a Nepali-­based com­pany, to or­ga­nize 
emergency relief through a text­ing app, and compiled their data with Twitter and 
Facebook messages into a relief map showing where specific aid was needed.
Karen Stoll Farrell
See also: Bangladesh; India; Pakistan
Further Reading
Alexa Internet, Inc. 2016. “Top Sites in Nepal.” Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­NP
Dey, Sushmi. 2015. “Nepal Earthquake: Govt Using Social Media to Connect and Provide 
Relief.” April 28. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­timesofindia​.­indiatimes​.­com​/­india​
/­Nepal​-­earthquake​-­Govt​-­using​-­social​-­media​-­to​-­connect​-­and​-­provide​-­relief​
/­articleshow​/­47076269​.­cms
Himalayan Times. 2015a. “Country’s Telephone Penetration Crossed 100pc: Telecom Regu-
lator 2015.” July 29. Accessed April 19, 2016. http://­thehimalayantimes​.­com​/­business​/
countrys​-­telephone​-­penetration​-­crossed​-­100pc​-­telecom​-­regulator​/­
Himalayan Times. 2015b. “NT Top Telecom Ser­vice Provider.” June 17. Accessed April 19, 
2016. https://­thehimalayantimes​.­com​/­business​/­nt​-­top​-­telecom​-­service​-­provider​/­
Kathmandu Post. 2015. “Over 11 Million Nepalis Have Access to Internet.” November 29. 
Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­kathmandupost​.­ekantipur​.­com​/­news​/­2015​-­11​-­29​/
over​-­11​-­million​-­nepalis​-­have​-­access​-­to​-­internet​.­html
Nepal Wireless. 2016. “Nepal Wireless.” Accessed April 19, 2016. http://­www​.­nepalwireless​
.­net​/­
Sinha, Shreeya. 2015. “3 Ways Nepalis Are Using Crowdsourcing to Aid in Quake Relief.” 
May 1. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2015​/­05​/­02​/­world​/­asia​
/­3​-­ways​-­nepalis​-­are​-­using​-­crowdsourcing​-­to​-­aid​-­in​-­quake​-­relief​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
Socialbakers. 2016. “Facebook Stats for Fans in Nepal.” Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­local​/­nepal​/­
Venkatraman, Janane. 2015. “Social Media Pitches in for Nepal Quake Aftermath.” April 26. 
Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­thehindu​.­com​/­news​/­national​/­social​-­media​
-­pitches​-­in​-­for​-­nepal​-­quake​-­aftermath​/­article7143425​.­ece
World Bank. 2016. “Data—­Nepal—­GNI.” Accessed April 19, 2016. http://­data​.­worldbank​
.­org​/­country​/­nepal
Zraik, Karen. 2015. “Google and Facebook Help Nepal Earthquake Survivors and Contacts 
Connect.” April 27. Accessed February 22, 2016. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2015​/­04​/­28​/
world​/­asia​/­google​-­and​-­facebook​-­help​-­nepal​-­earthquake​-­survivors​-­and​-­contacts​
-­connect​.­html​?­​_­r​=­1

NIGERIA
208
NIGERIA
Nigeria is a nation in West Africa, located along the Atlantic coast just north of the 
Gulf of Guinea. With 181 million ­people, Nigeria is the most populous country in 
the continent of Africa and the eighth most populous country in the world. As of 
late 2015, ­there ­were 97.21 million mobile internet users, equaling 53.7 ­percent 
of its population. This is a significant increase from 2013, when only 38 ­percent of 
the population used the internet. All popu­lar social media apps in Nigeria are 
foreign-­based. Given that En­glish is the country’s official language, foreign-­based 
apps are well integrated into Nigerian society. Internet users in Nigeria are active, 
according to an assessment of app usage in November 2015, on Facebook, Whats­
App, Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Instagram, BlackBerry Messenger, Twitter, 
Skype, Truecaller, and Hushed. Internet users are active across Android, Win­dows, 
and iOS smartphone platforms (Matuluko 2015).
The first attempt to introduce the internet in Nigeria was made through the Re-
gional Informatics Networks for Africa proj­ect in 1995, sponsored by the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO). Then, the 
Nigeria Internet Group was formed as a nonprofit, nongovernmental organ­ization 
(NGO) with the primary aim and objective of promoting and facilitating access to 
the internet in Nigeria (Nairaland 2015). Three years earlier, in 1992, the govern-
ment of Nigeria established the Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC) to 
serve as the in­de­pen­dent national regulatory authority responsible for managing 
telecommunications ser­vices throughout the country.
According to the NCC, in September 2015, 97.06 million mobile web users ­were 
on Global System for Mobile (GSM) networks and 151,816 users on Code Divi-
sion Multiple Access (CDMA) networks (Premium Times 2015). CDMA and GSM 
are shorthand references to the two major radio systems used in mobile phones, 
with CDMA mainly used in the United States and GSM used globally (Segan 2015). 
Telecommunications operators that serve Nigeria are based ­there, including Globa-
com, Airtel Nigeria, Etisalat Nigeria, Multi-­Links, and Visafone, with the exception 
of MTN Nigeria, Africa’s largest mobile network, which is based in South Africa. 
MTN Nigeria had 41.84 million subscribers and ranked first among the telecom 
operators. Globacom was second, with 21.89 million subscribers on its network. 
Airtel Nigeria followed, with 17.73 million internet users, and Etisalat Nigeria had 
15.59 million customers browsing the web. The CDMA operators ­were Multi-­Links 
and Visafone. Visafone had a total of 151,530 internet users, and Multi-­Links had 
286 internet users in September (Premium Times 2015).
Although Nigeria has a high number of internet users, the ­actual penetration of 
individual users is less than what the numbers indicate. An average Nigerian uses 
around two subscriber identity module (SIM) cards to cut costs and benefit from 
the many low-­cost deals available in the market. According to a survey by MTN in 
2013, the rate of multi-­SIMming in the Nigerian market is around 40 ­percent 
(Hatt et al. 2014). When a web user takes on more than two SIM cards for a single 
phone or has two phones with one SIM card in each phone, this counts as two 
internet users; so ­these statistics do not accurately portray the number of users in 
Nigeria.

NIGERIA
209
Since 2011, NCC has required telecommunication companies to verify the iden-
tity of their subscribers through SIM card registration in order to identify and re-
duce the amount of criminal activity conducted via mobile networks. The verification 
pro­cess can include submitting photo­graphs, official documents, and even biomet-
ric data. Other African countries have enacted similar policies to fight cybercrime, 
in par­tic­u­lar to prevent online fraud and reduce support for terrorism. Despite the 
efforts to prevent criminal activities facilitated by mobile phone usage, successful 
implementation is a challenge for telecommunications companies. Throughout 
Nigeria, it is pos­si­ble to obtain SIM cards from unregistered vendors who do not 
have the necessary instruments to rec­ord biometric information from ­those who 
purchase SIM cards. In 2015, NCC imposed penalties on telecommunications com-
panies that operate in Nigeria for ­those who ­were not able to register all SIM cards, 
including MTN Nigeria, Globacom, Etisalat, and Airtel. The most extensive fine was 
levied on MTN Nigeria, which was ordered to pay $5.2 billion for failing to dis-
connect 5.1 million unregistered SIM cards before the August and September dead-
lines (Tshabalala 2015). Although it is not easy for telecommunications companies 
to be certain that all SIM card vendors register the cards, Nigeria continues to pe-
nalize telecommunications companies as per the SIM card registration law.
Affordability for internet usage continues to be a challenge for a vast majority of 
Nigerians. In 2014, fixed-­line broadband subscriptions cost an average of 39 ­percent 
of average income, while subscriptions for mobile broadband packages ­were about 
13 ­percent of average income. In 2010, about 80 ­percent of Nigerians earned $2 
or less per day—­about $730 per year—­which is just over half of the 2012 national 
average income of $1,440 (Alliance for Affordable Internet 2014).
Population demographics in Nigeria are also linked to in­equality among mobile 
phone users throughout the country. Nigeria’s population in urban and rural areas 
is split roughly in half, but mobile penetration is much lower outside cities. The 
north-­south divide within the country also pres­ents mobile in­equality. The south-
ern regions, including major metropolises such as Lagos, are well ahead of their 
northern counter­parts in terms of ­house­hold access to mobile phones.
Expanding coverage to rural areas is also a complex issue. Geographic terrain, 
vast distances, lack of electricity, poor road access, and continued security threats 
are all challenges to investment in rural coverage. Nevertheless, NCC has set a goal 
of nationwide internet coverage by 2017 (Hatt et al. 2014).
To provide lower-­cost internet access, several initiatives are in currently in pro­
gress. In a joint partnership to provide web access to users throughout Nigeria, Op-
era Software, makers of the Opera Mini mobile browser, Naij​.­com, a Nigerian 
news and entertainment portal, and MTN Nigeria created a ser­vice that provides 
web users with ­free access to the internet for 1 million days. Beginning in June 2015, 
MTN offered ­free mobile internet through Opera’s Sponsored Web Pass to more 
than 140 million subscribers. The Web Pass was to be given to the first 40,000 us-
ers who sign up each day. Each internet user ­will be offered 10 MB that can be used 
only with the Opera Mini browser. They can return to claim another Web Pass ­after 
two days (Aderibigbe 2015). The 10 MB limit provides ample data to read news 
and check email. For ­those who live in rural areas and do not have regular access 

NIGERIA
210
to internet-­based information, this creates an opportunity for them to stay in touch 
with the world around them.
In late 2015, two additional low-­cost internet access plans ­were offered through 
a partnership among DataWind, Airtel, Intel, and an entrepreneurial fund from Mi-
crosoft. This partnership planned to offer low-­cost tablets and smartphones. Da-
taWind’s Intel-­based devices ­were to be bundled with ­free internet access through 
its existing partnership with Airtel (Stock­house 2014). Through an entrepreneur-
ial fund, Microsoft was to select companies to receive cash awards, along with ­free 
technology and mentorship from Microsoft to scale solutions that help close the 
digital divide. The goal was to fund internet access in Nigeria by assisting compa-
nies that have a well-­developed plan to expand affordable internet access (Aginam 
2015). By bringing lower-­cost internet access throughout Nigeria, both plans are 
helping to broaden usage throughout the country.
A study conducted by Ericsson (2015) identified local data usage across the web 
and its customers’ satisfaction. The results of the study detail how Nigerian Erics-
son subscribers view their access to the internet. According to ­these findings, 
57 ­percent of Nigeria’s eighteen-­ to twenty-­four years old wanted to watch tele­vi­
sion and video content at their con­ve­nience, while 67 ­percent wanted easy access 
to video content across all devices. Further, 50 ­percent of the time that Nigerians 
spent watching video was on laptops and smartphones. However, only 36 ­percent 
of Nigerian consumers ­were satisfied with finding content online that suited their 
viewing habits and preferences. Streaming issues and download speeds ­were the 
two most impor­tant ­factors affecting the satisfaction of ­those watching video con-
tent online. Only 30 ­percent of Nigerians ­were satisfied with streaming over the 
internet. Consumer usage of on-­demand streaming ser­vices affects the 27 ­percent 
of Nigerian consumers who stream videos on a weekly basis. More than 50 ­percent 
of the Nigerians interviewed for the study thought that mobile video on-­demand 
(M-­VOD) and IPTV ­Triple Play ­were attractive ser­vices and ­were open to subscrib-
ing. 72 ­percent believed that mobile operators should provide M-­VOD, and mo-
bile ser­vice providers and operators should offer IPTV ser­vices (Ericsson 2015).
Internet users in Nigeria are active on Facebook. In June 2015, Facebook recorded 
that Nigeria had 15 million users. Nigeria, as Africa’s most populous nation and, 
along with ­Kenya, one of the most developed countries in Africa, is seen as an impor­
tant entry point on a continent of nearly 1 billion ­people. Internet users in Nigeria 
use Facebook primarily to follow shopping, banking, news, and Nigerian celebri-
ties. The ten most popu­lar Facebook pages as of December 2015 ­were as follows:
	
1.	 Kaymu, an online shopping community launched in 2012 that connects buyers 
and sellers
	
2.	 Mayor Boss (1986–), a Nigerian rapper, singer, songwriter, and video producer 
based in Eu­rope
	
3.	 GTBank, a Nigerian multinational financial institution based in Lagos that offers on-
line/internet banking
	
4.	 MTN Nigeria
	
5.	 P-­Square—­The official page for a Nigerian R&B duo composed of identical twin 
­brothers Peter Okoye and Paul Okoye (1981–).
	
6​.­	 Naij​.­com

NIGERIA
211
	
7​.­	 Pastor E. A. Adeboye (1942–), a Nigerian pastor who is the appointed General 
Overseer of Redeemed Christian Church of God Pastor
	
8.	 Information Nigeria, a Nigerian information portal
	
9.	 Omotola Jalade Ekeinde, Member of the Order of the Federal Republic (MFR) (1978–), 
a Nigerian actress, singer, philanthropist, and former model from Lagos
	 10.	 Goodluck Jonathan (1957–), the former president and vice president of Nigeria 
and former governor of Bayelsa State
Nigeria is also well known for its dark side online, with email scams regularly 
falling into junk mail folders. In 2014, nearly one-­fifth of online advance fee scams 
originated in Nigeria (Engber 2014). In the United States, Nigerian scams deceived 
Americans into handing over large sums of money in “get-­rich-­quick” schemes or 
advance-­fee ploys that asked them to make an advance deposit before supposedly 
receiving millions of dollars in their personal accounts. Although the United States 
has cracked down on Nigerian scammers, in 2011, the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation (FBI) received nearly 30,000 complaints. In another version of the scam, a 
stranger contacts a potential victim, gets to know the person, and professes love. 
When the scammer has ensnared the victim, money is requested. In 2012, the FBI 
received over 4,000 of ­these complaints; victims lost more than $55 million. Other 
typical scams involve phony lottery winnings, job offers, and inheritance notices 
(Eichelberger 2014).
As a result, the government of Nigeria incorporated section 419 into Chapter 34 
of its criminal code. Throughout the world, “Nigerian 419” is a moniker for an 
advance-­fee scam. Penalties for data theft and online fraud include seven years im-
prisonment or a fine amounting to approximately $35,000. The law increased the 
punishment to fourteen-­year prison sentences for convictions in scams that caused 
physical damage or harm, and the penalty became even steeper, up to life in prison, 
when loss of life resulted. Lesser offences, such as hacking government infrastructure, 
result in ten-­year sentences. Nigeria’s sentencing reforms show that it recognizes 
the severity of cybercrime and is actively working to combat it (Oxford 2014).
Nigeria’s Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) has the respon-
sibility of tracking down scammers throughout Nigeria. The country’s cybercrime 
law also penalizes internet café ­owners who knowingly allow their premises to be 
Chris Messina (1981–) used the first hashtag on August 23, 2007, when he posted 
on Twitter, “how do you feel about using # (pound) for groups. As in #barcamp [msg]?” 
The idea was to implement the hashtag across the web, not just for Twitter. The pound 
sign made more sense for this purpose than other symbols ­because it was easy to type 
on the phones available in 2007. Twitter initially resisted using hashtags, but they 
eventually caught on with the users of this and other social media platforms. Mes-
sina, a former Google employee and involved in a number of start-­ups and open-­
source proj­ects, joined Twitter in 2006. His Twitter account has more than 77,000 
followers. ­Today, hashtags are impor­tant for social and po­liti­cal activism both online 
and off-­line around world, exemplified by 2014’s #UmbrellaRevolution in Hong Kong 
to 2015’s #NigeriaDecides to combat electoral irregularities and corruption.

NIGERIA
212
used for committing a crime. To promote this law, EFCC has publicized its efforts 
and now bans browsing the internet at night in public spaces. The organ­ization 
has been highly vis­i­ble through raids on cybercafés in urban areas and has made 
some high-­profile arrests (Wanjiku 2015). In December 2015, the EFCC teamed 
up with Italian police to arrest sixty-­two ­people from Nigeria and Cameroon sus-
pected of being members of a cybercriminal organ­ization responsible for frauds 
committed against small-­ and medium-­scale enterprises across the world. EFCC 
tracked down the fugitives in their homes in Lagos (AllAfrica 2015).
Anthony Ortiz
See also: Cameroon; ­Kenya; South Africa; United States
Further Reading
Aderibigbe, Niyi. 2015. “For the Next 9,999 Days, Nigerians ­Will Have Access to ­Free In-
ternet.” Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­venturesafrica​.­com​/­for​-­the​-­next​-­9999​-­days​
-­nigerians​-­will​-­have​-­access​-­to​-­free​-­internet​/­
Nigerian scammers use phishing emails to deceive unsuspecting email users to hand over their 
money. One of the more popu­lar scams is to claim to be a Nigerian prince who needs interna-
tional bank account access to deposit funds, promising to share a percentage with the account 
holder, while ­really siphoning existing money from the account. The Nigerian government has 
intensified efforts to thwart ­these scammers ­because they violate the law, and tarnish the coun-
try’s reputation globally. ( Just One Film/Getty Images)

NIGERIA
213
Aginam, Emeka. 2015. “Nigeria: Firms to Get Microsoft Seed Fund to Improve Access to 
Affordable Internet.” November 18. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­allafrica​.­com​/
stories​/­201511191447​.­html
AllAfrica. 2015. “Nigeria: EFCC, Italian Police Arrest 62 Suspected Internet Fraudsters.” 
November 19. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­allafrica​.­com​/­stories​/­201511191586​
.­html
Alliance for Affordable Internet. 2014. “Nigeria: How Africa’s Largest Economy if Prioritis-
ing Affordable Internet.” April. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­a4ai​.­org​/­wp​-­content​/​
uploads​/­2014​/­04​/­Nigeria​-­Case​-­Study​-­Final​.­pdf
Eichelberger, Erika. 2014. “What I Learned Hanging out With Nigerian Email Scammers.” 
March 20. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­www​.­motherjones​.­com​/­politics​/­2014​/​
03​/­what​-­i​-­learned​-­from​-­nigerian​-­scammers
Engber, Daniel. 2014. “Who Made That Nigerian Scam?” January 3. Accessed December 17, 
2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2014​/­01​/­05​/­magazine​/­who​-­made​-­that​-­nigerian​-­scam​
.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
Ericsson. 2015. “TV and Media in Nigeria. How Changing Consumer Needs Are Creating a 
New Media Landscape.” September. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­www​.­ericsson​
.­com​/­res​/­region​_­RSSA​/­rssa​_­news​/­pdf​/­TV​-­and​-­Media​-­Report​-­Nigeria​-­2015​.­pdf
Hatt, Tim, Sharma, Akanksha, and Arese Lucini, Barbara. 2014. “Country Overview: Nige-
ria.” June. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­draft​-­content​.­gsmaintelligence​.­com​/­AR​/​
assets​/­4161587​/­GSMA​_­M4D​_­Impact​_­Country​_­Overview​_­Nigeria​.­pdf
Matuluko, Muyiwa. 2015. “The Most Popu­lar Apps on ­Every Nigerian Smartphone.” Novem-
ber 6. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­techpoint​.­ng​/­2015​/­11​/­06​/­popular​-­apps​-­in​
-­nigeria​-­smartphone​/­
Nairaland. 2015. “History of the Internet in Nigeria.” April 7. Accessed August 1, 2016. 
http://­www​.­nairaland​.­com​/­2241209​/­history​-­internet​-­nigeria
Oxford, Adam. 2014. “New Nigerian Law Means Seven Years for Cybercrime.” November 5. 
Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­www​.­zdnet​.­com​/­article​/­new​-­nigerian​-­law​-­means​
-­seven​-­years​-­for​-­cybercrime​/­
Premium Times. 2015. “Nigeria Internet Users Increase to 97 Million—­NCC.” December 1. 
Accessed December  17, 2015. http://­www​.­premiumtimesng​.­com​/­news​/­headlines​/​
192485​-­nigeria​-­internet​-­users​-­increase​-­to​-­97​-­million​-­ncc​.­html
Segan, Sascha. 2015. “CDMA vs. GSM: What’s the Difference?” February 6. Accessed August 
1, 2016. http://­www​.­pcmag​.­com​/­article2​/­0,2817,2407896,00​.­asp
Stockhouse. 2015. “DataWind Partners with Intel to Launch Low-­Cost Internet-­Enabled 
Devices in Nigeria.” December 14. Accessed December 17, 2015. http://­www​.­stockhouse​
.­com​/­news​/­press​-­releases​/­2015​/­12​/­14​/­datawind​-­partners​-­with​-­intel​-­to​-­launch​-­low​
-­cost​-­internet​-­enabled​-­devices​-­in#Mh3UT8k8kAy5Zm1d​.­99
Strydom, TJ. 2015. “Facebook Rakes in Users in Nigeria and ­Kenya, Eyes Rest of Africa.” 
September  10. Accessed December  17, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­us​
-­facebook​-­africa​-­idUSKCN0RA17L20150910#StZsTQYbac4JBoyJ​.­97
Tshabalala, Sibusiso. 2015. “Nigeria Is Fining MTN $1,000 per Illegal SIM Card Even Though 
Customers Generate Just $5 a Month.” October 26. Accessed December 17, 2015. 
http://­qz​.­com​/­533041​/­africas​-­largest​-­mobile​-­network​-­is​-­being​-­fined​-­5​-­2​-­billion​-­for​
-­flouting​-­nigerias​-­sim​-­card​-­rules​/­
Wanjiku, Rebecca. “The Story ­Behind the Nigerian Phishing Scam.” Accessed December 17, 
2015. http://­www​.­pcworld​.­com​/­article​/­192664​/­the​_­story​_­behind​_­the​_­nigerian​_­phishing​
_­scam​.­html

NORTH ­KOREA
214
NORTH ­KOREA
North ­Korea is an Asian country that shares a border with China and South ­Korea 
in the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula. Since the end of the Korean War 
(1950–1953), a demilitarized zone has existed between North and South ­Korea; 
no one from ­either country is allowed in this area, and guards are posted to pre-
vent travel in ­either direction. Internationally, North ­Korea is known for its totali-
tarian government and complete state control over most communication flowing 
to or from the country. Therefore, analyzing technology use in North ­Korea is an 
extremely difficult endeavor, as information that is shared by the country is most 
often propaganda delivered by the government and, therefore, unreliable. For this 
reason, the number of devices in North ­Korea that are connected to the internet is 
difficult to determine. However, considering that in 2014, ­there ­were only 1,024 
internet protocol (IP) addresses in the ­whole country, which is composed of ap-
proximately 25 million ­people, it is unlikely that ­there are many connected de-
vices. A national network, or intranet, is available to some citizens, but ­there are 
usually severe limitations on how it can be used. Essentially, all contact with the 
outside world is restricted by the North Korean government.
Cell phones are available in North ­Korea, but they cannot be used to access the 
internet. Not all North Koreans own a cell phone, but estimates fall around 2 mil-
lion cell phones in the country. This number may be misleading, however, as elite 
North Koreans sometimes buy a new phone, which can be cheaper than adding 
minutes to a current cell phone (Kim and Lee 2014). ­Those elites who do use cell 
phones use them in similar ways as the rest of the world: to set up work meetings, 
arrange dinner plans, take pictures, and share ­music. They just cannot use them to 
access the internet (Lee 2013).
While North Koreans do not have ­free access to the internet, this same restric-
tion is not true for visitors to the country. On January 18, 2013, foreigners ­were 
allowed, for the first time, to bring mobile phones into the country. They could 
access the internet by purchasing a local subscriber identity module (SIM) card, 
which was offered only to foreigners. The SIM card would work with the 3G net-
work provided by Koryolink and was available in select North Korean cities. Ko-
ryolink is a joint venture between the Egyptian telecommunications com­pany 
Orascom and the North Korean government. It is the only wireless network avail-
able in the country. Koryolink first made 3G technology available in 2008, but they 
did so without offering a data plan. North Koreans can only use this ser­vice to make 
phone calls, and all international calls are prohibited (BBC 2013; Lee 2013).
With the introduction of ­these foreigner-­only SIM cards, visitors to the country 
could access the internet and make international phone calls. However, this could 
be a costly enterprise. According to journalist Jean Lee (c. 1973–), a foreign cor-
respondent and expert on North ­Korea, in 2013 ­these SIM cards cost about $70 to 
purchase. In addition to purchasing the SIM card, ­there was an activation fee of 
$75. Moreover, international phone call rates varied wildly, depending on the coun-
try: calls to Switzerland ­were reasonable, at forty-­three cents a minute, but phone 
calls to the United States cost $8 a minute. Lee broadcast what was very likely the 
first tweet sent over the internet from North ­Korea on February 25, 2013: “Hello 

NORTH ­KOREA
215
world from comms center in (hash)Pyongyang.” Dennis Rodman also famously 
tweeted from North ­Korea during his 2013 visit: “I come in peace. I love the ­people 
of North ­Korea!” (Lee 2013).
As of mid-2015, foreigners ­were still allowed access to the internet through Ko-
ryolink. This freedom has allowed them to post to social media websites like Face-
book, Twitter, and Instagram. While ­these posts have not been numerous, they have 
caused the North Korean government to suspend access to ­these websites occa-
sionally. During the summer of 2015, for instance, Instagram ser­vice was interrupted 
by messages in En­glish and Korean stating that the website was blocked due to 
harmful content. Ser­vice resumed a week ­later. However, the government has never 
officially acknowledged the ban (AP 2015). More recently, however, in April 2016, 
the government has changed its stance ­toward foreign social media platforms; it 
has announced an official ban of Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, and all South Ko-
rean websites. Foreigners are not exempt from the ban.
On the street in Pyongyang, North ­Korea, a young ­woman is holding a cell phone. While mo-
bile penetration is on the rise in North ­Korea, citizens are not allowed to use the internet; there-
fore, the only cell phones that can connect to the web are ­those that use a special SIM card 
granted to foreigner visitors that allow access to the country’s only wireless network. (Linqong​
/­Dreamstime​.­com)

NORTH ­KOREA
216
While the North Korean ­people do not have access to the same internet as the 
rest of the world, some citizens, such as elites and university professionals, do have 
access to a national intranet known as Kwangmyong, meaning “bright.” It is a closed 
network only available in North ­Korea containing solely government-­sanctioned 
content. ­People largely use this system to disseminate information, rather than to 
access social media sites (Kim and Lee 2014). Nevertheless, ­there are some instances 
of social networking via Kwangmyong. In 2013, Lee shared photos of an unnamed 
social network available on the intranet. She said the website was not much more 
than a message board where ­people posted birthday greetings (Dewey 2013).
Interestingly, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un (1983–) has identified science 
and technology as ­matters of national importance, which has resulted in broader 
use of laptops and tablets, even though they are devices created specifically for North 
Korean consumption (Lee 2013). However, owning a computer requires permis-
sion from the government and may cost as much as three months’ salary (Kim and 
Lee 2014). In 2012, the experience of browsing the Kwangmyong was very dif­fer­
ent from surfing the internet in the rest of the world. For example, to access the 
national intranet, citizens used the North Korean operating system, Red Star. When 
users logged on at the sole cybercafé in the capital of Pyongyang, a message ap-
peared stating the importance of the operating system aligning with the core val-
ues of the country. The computer’s calendar did not display the current year, but 
rather the number of years since Kim Il-­Sung (1912–1994) was born; the current 
North Korean state was founded upon his philosophies. One striking difference in 
the North Korean experience occurred whenever a user came across the name of 
North Korean leader Kim Jong-un. The programming code was written so that his 
name appeared slightly larger than any of the other words on the page. The web-
sites available on Kwangmyong ­were limited to state-­run news ser­vices, bulletin 
boards, and chat ser­vices (Khazan 2012; Lee 2012).
The Red Star operating system uses a web browser called Naenara, which is an 
adapted version of Firefox. Robert Hansen (n.d.–), vice president of WhiteHat Labs 
at WhiteHat Security, examined a version of this North Korean browser early in 
2015 and made several in­ter­est­ing observations. His first impression was that the 
browser seemed very old. In order to navigate to a specific website, for example, 
the user had to type in the IP address. The browser treated the ­whole country like 
a medium-­sized business network instead of a national network. All email was 
routed through a single Uniform Resource Locator (URL). He also found evidence 
that suggested that the entire network may have been run through a proxy server 
(Hansen 2015).
In addition, all crash reports, news feeds, and email route through a central URL. 
This function allows North ­Korea to control all the content on the national intranet 
tightly. In fact, ­every aspect of technology found in the country—­right down to the 
hardware—is regulated by the government. This makes it very difficult for users to 
access anything that the authorities have not sanctioned. In 2013, Lee stated that 
North Koreans seem proud of their national intranet and do not display any signs 
of subversive use of the system (Dewey 2013).

NORTH ­KOREA
217
Nevertheless, North Korean defectors have shared stories about the dif­fer­ent ways 
that media have passed through North ­Korea’s tight security. While it is very risky, 
some North Koreans have acquired Chinese cell phones, which are smuggled across 
the border. ­These phones generally work on the Chinese network within about six 
miles of the border between the two countries, allowing users access to outside in-
ternet and international calling; however, using technology in this fashion is very 
risky. The penalties can include forced relocation to a detention center or po­liti­cal 
prison camp. South Korean tele­vi­sion has been smuggled across the border via uni-
versal serial bus (USB) drives attached to balloons. The balloons float across the 
border and despite lacking internet access, the computers that North Koreans use 
can play the USB drives. ­These drives can contain anything from South Korean soap 
operas to Wikipedia in Korean (Lee 2012).
While the average North Korean does not have access to the social media that is 
popu­lar in much of the world, sectors of the government have utilized ­these media 
outlets. While some of the accounts have never been verified, it appears as though 
the country of North ­Korea has a webpage, a Twitter account, a Facebook page, 
and a YouTube account. The website www​.­korea​-­dpr​.­com has been around since 
2000 and appears to be an official national website. Rumors have suggested that 
the monthly bud­get for the web team was only $100 a month. Therefore, it did 
not come as much of a surprise when a cheap blogging template was used in 2012 
to redesign the website. This occurrence attracted international attention ­because 
the redesigned website template cost $15 and was cut-­and-­pasted ­wholesale, uncus-
tomized, onto the site. In light of the attention, ­people reading the site uncovered 
the fact that it is actually published by the ­Korea Friendship Association. Inciden-
tally, the group claimed this was the first North Korean website on the internet (Ack-
erman 2012; Khetani 2012).
The other social media attributed to the North Korean government carry some 
version of the name uriminzokkiri, which means “our nation,” or “on our own as 
a nation” (Chen 2010; Williams 2010). In July 2010, @uriminzok joined Twitter. 
As of 2012, this account had not been officially connected with the North Korean 
government, but the Twitter feed, which has been updated often, is filled with posi-
tive and inspiring impressions of life and politics in North ­Korea. As of September 
27, 2015, this Twitter account had produced 16,200 tweets, had 18,700 follow-
ers, and followed four other entities: DPRK News Ser­vice, Pyongyang DPRK, 
TrDPR NggP Duy, and an Austin-­based investor, Jimmy Dushku (c. 1989–). On 
August 10, the South Korean government banned this account. South ­Korea has 
been known to block websites sympathetic to North ­Korea, as the two countries 
are still technically at war (Williams 2010).
The Facebook account with the username uriminzokkiri was the source of some 
ridicule when it first opened. Upon its creation, some social media consumers sug-
gested that it appeared unprofessional and pointed out how the user had utilized 
some Facebook profile settings incorrectly. This account owner interacts differently 
with the public than the user of the Twitter account, which suggested that they are 
not connected (Chen 2010; Williams 2010). The YouTube channel of the same 

NORTH ­KOREA
218
name, uriminzokkiri, has also garnered much attention. The channel was created 
on July 14, 2010, and, as of September 27, 2015, had 12,018 subscribers and 
12,983,545 views. It was also being regularly updated. The videos posted to this 
YouTube channel are numerous and largely come from the Korean Central Tele­vi­
sion feed (Taylor 2012; Williams 2010).
In 2013, some of ­these social media accounts ­were hacked by Anonymous, the 
hacker activist group that protects its members’ identity ­under the guise of Guy 
Fawkes. This group left a message on @uriminzok’s Twitter feed with a pig snout 
and Mickey Mouse drawn on a picture of Kim Jong-un (Kim and Lee 2014). North 
­Korea has experienced other hacking attacks that have resulted in a partial or com-
plete shutdown of its internet. One of ­these instances may have occurred at the 
end of 2014, right ­after Sony Entertainment was hacked. North ­Korea had con-
demned Sony’s movie, The Interview, a film that took a satirical view of the regime, 
so it seemed like a logical suspect in the attack. North ­Korea denied responsibility 
but expressed satisfaction with the hack. Shortly thereafter, North ­Korea’s internet 
shut down temporarily; however, the prob­lem was never definitively connected to 
a cyberattack (AP 2015).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: China; Egypt; South ­Korea; United States
Further Reading
Ackerman, Spencer. 2012. “North ­Korea’s Cheerleaders Spent a Whole $15 Making Their 
Website.” April 18. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­wired​.­com​/­2012​/­04​/​
north​-­korea​-­website​/­
Associated Press (AP). 2015. “North ­Korea Instagram Access Appears to Resume.” June 25. 
Accessed September  27, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­25​/­north​
-­korea​-­instagram​_­n​_­7662300​.­html
Chen, Adrian. 2010. “North ­Korea Only Has 65 Friends on Facebook and Is Gay,” August 20. 
Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­gawker​.­com​/­5617946​/­north​-­korea​-­has​-­only​-­65​
-­friends​-­on​-­facebook​-­and​-­is​-­gay
Dewey, Caitlin. 2013. “A Rare Glimpse of North ­Korea’s Version of Facebook,” March 13. 
Accessed September 28, 2015. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­news​/­worldviews​/­wp​/​
2013​/­03​/­13​/­a​-­rare​-­glimpse​-­of​-­north​-­koreas​-­version​-­of​-­facebook​/­
Hansen, Robert. 2015. “North ­Korea’s Naenara Web Browser: It’s Weirder Than We Thought.” 
Accessed September 28, 2015. https://­blog​.­whitehatsec​.­com​/­north​-­koreas​-­naenara​-­web​
-­browser​-­its​-­weirder​-­than​-­we​-­thought​/­
Khazan, Olga. 2012. “What It’s Like to Use the Internet in North ­Korea,” December 11. 
Accessed September 28, 2015. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­news​/­worldviews​/­wp​
/­2012​/­12​/­11​/­what​-­its​-­like​-­to​-­use​-­the​-­internet​-­in​-­north​-­korea​/­
Khetani, Sanya. 2012. “North ­Korea Spent Just $15 on the Redesign of Their Official Web-
site,” April 19. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­north​
-­korea​-­spent​-­just​-­15​-­to​-­redesign​-­their​-­official​-­website​-­2012​-­4
Kim, Tong-­Hyung, and Lee, Youkyung. 2014. “Look at How Bizarre North ­Korea’s ‘Inter-
net’ Is.” December 23. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​
/­a​-­look​-­at​-­north​-­koreas​-­tightly​-­controlled​-­internet​-­services​-­2014​-­12

NORTH ­KOREA
219
Lee, David. 2012. “North ­Korea: On the Net in World’s Most Secretive Nation.” Decem-
ber 10. Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­technology​-­20445632
Lee, Jean H. 2013. “North ­Korea’s Twitter Activity Offers a Real-­Time Glimpse into Life in 
Pyongyang.” February 28. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​
.­com​/­2013​/­02​/­28​/­north​-­koreas​-­twitter​-­acti​_­n​_­2781720​.­html
Taylor, Adam. 2012. “13 of the Strangest Videos Uploaded to North ­Korea’s Official You-
Tube Channel.” July 9. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​
/­north​-­koreas​-­official​-­youtube​-­channel​-­the​-­13​-­strangest​-­videos​-­2012​-­7
Williams, Martyn. 2010. “South Begins Blocking North Korean Twitter Account.” August 20. 
Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2010​/­08​/­20​/­urnidgns8
52573c40069388000257785000b​-­idUS56724690620100820

This page intentionally left blank

PAKISTAN
Pakistan is a South Asian country nestled between India to its south and Af­ghan­i­
stan and Iran to its north and west. It is the sixth most populous country in the 
world, with a population of over 200 million. Internet usage in the country is still 
quite low, although recent increases in availability of internet and of mobile phones 
have led to dramatic growth. ­There is still limited availability beyond urban cen-
ters. Social media usage is growing, and Urdu script fonts also have made the in-
ternet more available in the country. Censorship issues continue to affect the country, 
most recently through the potential approval of a cybercrime bill.
Along with many of its Asian counter­parts, Pakistan initially established access 
to the internet in the mid-1990s. Ser­vices ­were offered by the government-­owned 
Pakistan Telecommunications Com­pany Ltd. (PTCL). Dial-up internet speed did 
not increase to 56 Kbps ­until 1998, and the first broadband connection type, digital 
subscriber line (DSL), became available in the country in 2001 (ISPAK 2014). By 
the mid-2000s, over 100 internet ser­vice providers ­were available to consumers. 
Overwhelmingly, internet access, especially broadband access, has been centered 
around Pakistan’s three major cities: Karachi, Lahore, and Islamabad.
The overall internet penetration rate in Pakistan is still low at 15 ­percent in 2016. 
However, the rate is clearly on an upward trend, given that Pakistan’s internet pen-
etration rate in 2015 was only 3 ­percent (Press Information Department 2016). This 
increase is at least partially attributable to the launch of 3G/4G ser­vices in Paki-
stan’s major urban centers. In addition, as with other countries in the region, mo-
bile usage is on the rise, and the availability of wireless internet has increased the 
penetration rate. This trend is clear, as evidenced by the fact that the number of 
mobile broadband subscribers grew an estimated 100 ­percent from 2014 to 2015 
(BuddeComm 2015). While mobile broadband is having some effect on the avail-
ability of internet in poorer and more rural communities, usage is still heavi­ly bi-
ased ­toward the ­middle and upper classes and to major urban centers.
One other ­factor affecting internet usage among Pakistan’s population is language. 
While Punjabi is the most widely spoken language in Pakistan, Urdu and En­glish 
are the country’s official languages. Urdu uses a Perso-­Arabic script, and for many 
years, ­there was no support for this script online. For example, Google did not re-
lease its first version of an Urdu script font ­until late 2014 (Google 2014). The 
availability of online fonts for Urdu plays a role in how much of the country’s popu-
lation is able to access and communicate in the online world. Since Urdu and Pun-
jabi fonts have been made available only recently, ­people used to transliterate their 
language into Roman characters to communicate online. ­There is no standardized 
P

PAKISTAN
222
transliteration system, and many sounds and letters do not have an equivalent in 
the Roman alphabet, which created a wide array of spelling variations in transliter-
ated online writing.
Fi­nally, overall low literacy rates also affect the rate at which internet usage ­will 
grow in Pakistan. United Nations International ­Children’s Emergency Fund (UNI-
CEF) estimates give an adult literacy rate of 55 ­percent as of 2013 (UNICEF 2015); 
however, the literacy rate for ­women is even lower. Men comprise approximately 
69.5 ­percent of the literate population over the age of fifteen, with ­women at only 
42.7 ­percent (UNESCO 2016). As with other accessibility issues, literacy is higher 
in urban centers, with the rural poor at a disadvantage. As the internet becomes 
available to more of the population in Pakistan, literacy ­will need to improve in 
order to make it accessible to the entire population.
The top two websites in Pakistan belong to the globally recognized Google (Al-
exa 2016). The first spot belongs to Pakistan’s version of the site (Google​.­com​.­pk), 
which allows Urdu text, while the U.S.-­based Google​.­com comes in second. Another 
well-­known internet portal, Yahoo, is the fourth most used website in Pakistan, 
while Microsoft’s search portal, Live​.­com, is in ninth place. The Pakistan-­specific 
search portal, HamariWeb, sits in sixteenth place. News sites are a well-­represented 
category in the top twenty websites for Pakistan. Urdupoint​.­com ranks sixth, Ja-
vedch​.­com ranks thirteenth, Express.pk ranks ­fourteenth, and DailyPakistan​.­com​
.­pk ranks nineteenth. All four of ­these news sites are Urdu-­language sites with 
country-­specific news and entertainment sections. The encyclopedic information 
site, Wikipedia, places eighth.
A number of social media sites are also in the top twenty sites for Pakistan, with 
Facebook ranking as the third most used website. YouTube comes right ­behind, at 
number four. Another video publishing site, Daily Motion, is the eleventh most 
used website in Pakistan. LinkedIn ranks at number twelve, while the blogging sites 
Blogspot and Blogger are seventh and eigh­teenth, respectively. The social media site, 
Twitter, is also in the top twenty, at number nine.
Rounding out the top twenty most popu­lar websites in Pakistan are Onclickads​
.­net, ranking fifteenth, Alibaba​.­com at seventeen, and Kat.cr coming in at number 
twenty. Onclickads is an advertising site where users are often sent when they click 
an ad on a webpage. Alibaba is a site for small businesses to sell their products 
­wholesale to other companies around the globe. Fi­nally, Kat.cr is a peer-­to-­peer file 
sharing, or BitTorrent site, that has moved its internet ser­vice provider (ISP) loca-
tion to multiple countries over time, from Somalia to Costa Rica, as many govern-
ments crack down on file sharing. Some countries, such as the United States and 
Portugal, have blocked or banned the site, as have Google Chrome and Mozilla 
Firefox.
Most of the top ten Facebook pages in Pakistan belong to broad news and en-
tertainment sites. The most popu­lar page, however, belongs to Atif Aslam (1983–), 
a con­temporary Pakistani actor and musician. The second most popu­lar page is for 
PTV Sports, a Pakistani channel with coverage of sports both within the country 
and internationally. Coming in third is Zindagi Gulzar Hai (Life Is a Garden), a very 
popu­lar Pakistani soap opera that aired from 2012 to 2013 and achieved global 

PAKISTAN
223
recognition when it aired in India, in eleven Arab countries ­after being dubbed into 
Arabic, and in some Eu­ro­pean countries. Other popu­lar Facebook pages are for 
ARY News, UrduMaza Network, Express News, Samaa TV, and Waqt News, all news 
sites that publish ­either primarily or solely in Urdu and are based in Pakistan. The 
rest of the top ten are Waymu.pk, an online shopping site based in Pakistan, and 
Allama Iqbal, a page is hosted by an organ­ization based in Toronto, Ontario, called 
the International Iqbal Society. The name Allama Iqbal refers to Sir Muhammed Iqbal 
(1877–1938), a highly regarded poet and politician in India. The Facebook page 
posts cultural, religious, and literary material and uses En­glish, Urdu, and Persian. 
Facebook’s Internet​.­org program also became available in Pakistan in May 2015 
(Dawn​.­com 2015), offering ­free limited internet access throughout the country. 
Facebook intends for the program to give internet connectivity to ­those who could 
not other­wise access it; however, it has been criticized ­because of limits to the in-
ternet sites that are available to subscribers (Khan 2015). The program does not 
offer full internet access, but instead allows access only to a small subset of partici-
pating websites, including Facebook, Wikipedia, Dictionary​.­com, ESPN, Accu-
weather, and a few ­others.
Pakistan has been criticized for a number of other censorship issues beyond the 
limitations of Internet​.­org. Over the years, via the Pakistan Telecommunications Act, 
the government has blocked a variety of websites, generally for ­either national se-
curity reasons or offensive content, although it has not always given exact reasons 
for ­doing so. YouTube, for example, was blocked for nearly four years ­until Google 
created a country-­specific version of the site in early 2016 that blocks objection-
able content and allows the Pakistani government to request further blocks as 
needed (    Junaidi 2016). Fi­nally, the Prevention of Electronic Crimes bill was passed 
in August 2016 (­Reuters 2016). This bill has censorship critics concerned ­because 
it could criminalize speech that is critical of the government or religion, as well as 
other speech considered benign (Khan 2016).
Karen Stoll Farrell
See also: Bangladesh; India; Nepal; Saudi Arabia; Somalia; United States
Further Reading
Alexa Internet, Inc. 2016. “Top Sites in Pakistan.” Accessed June 4, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­PK
BuddeComm. 2015. “Pakistan—­Broadband Market, Internet Ser­vices, and Forecasts.” Ac-
cessed June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­budde​.­com​.­au​/­Research​/­Pakistan​-­Broadband​-­Market​
-­Internet​-­Services​-­and​-­Forecasts​.­html
Dawn​.­com. 2015. “Facebook Provides ­Free Internet Access to Pakistani Citizens.” May 29. 
Accessed June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­dawn​.­com​/­news​/­1184763
Esfahbod, Behdad. 2014. “ ‘I Can Get Another If I Break It’: Announcing Noto Nastaliq 
Urdu.” November 10. Accessed June 5, 2016. https://­developers​.­googleblog​.­com​/­2014​
/­11​/­i​-­can​-­get​-­another​-­if​-­i​-­break​-­it​.­html​?­utm​_­campaign​=­noto​-­urdu​-­1114&utm​_­source​
=­jabran​.­me
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Pakistan 2015.” Accessed June 3, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­pakistan

PARAGUAY
224
Internet Ser­vice Providers Association of Pakistan (ISPAK). 2014. “History of Internet in 
Pakistan.” Accessed June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­ispak​.­pk​/­internet​_­pakistan​.­php
Junaidi, Ikram. 2016. “YouTube Returns to Pakistan.” January 19. Accessed June 3, 2016. 
http://­www​.­dawn​.­com​/­news​/­1233960
Khan, Arzak. 2015. “Internet​.­org Risks the Web’s ­Future in Pakistan.” June 22. Accessed 
June 3, 2016. http://­america​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­opinions​/­2015​/­6​/­internetorg​-­risks​-­the​-­webs​
-­future​-­in​-­pakistan​.­html
Khan, Raza. 2016. “Controversial Cyber Crime Bill Approved by NA.” April 13. Accessed 
June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­dawn​.­com​/­news​/­1251853
Press Information Department. 2016. “PR No. 102: Minister for IT, Anusha Rahman Ad-
dresses the UNESCO Mobile Learning Week Policy Forum Islamabad: March 13, 2016.” 
March 13. Accessed June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­pid​.­gov​.­pk​/­​?­p​=­16345
Rafique, Jabran. 2014. “Quick Overview of Google Noto Nastaleeq Urdu Web Font.” 
November 11. Accessed June 5, 2016. http://­jabran​.­me​/­articles​/­google​-­noto​-­nastale​
eq​-­urdu​-­web​-­font​/­
­Reuters. 2016. “Pakistan Passes Controversial Cyber-­Crime Law.” August 12. Accessed 
December 14, 2016. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­us​-­pakistan​-­internet​-­idUSKC​
N10N0ST
Socialbakers. 2016. “Pakistan Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed June 4, 2016. http://­www​
.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­pakistan
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO). 2016. “Adult 
Female Functional Literacy Programme (AFFLP).” September 1. Accessed December 14, 
2016. http://­www​.­unesco​.­org​/­uil​/­litbase​/­​?­menu​=­4&programme​=­63
United Nations International ­Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF). 2015. “The State of 
the World’s ­Children—­Statistical ­Tables.” Accessed August 14, 2016. http://­www​.­data​
.­unicef​.­org​/­corecode​/­uploads​/­document6​/­uploaded​_­pdfs​/­corecode​/­SOWC​_­2015​
_­Summary​_­and​_­Tables​-­final​_­214​.­pdf
PARAGUAY
Paraguay is a small, landlocked country in the ­middle of South Amer­i­ca. It is bor-
dered to the north by Brazil and Bolivia and to the south by Argentina. In 2012, about 
half the population was bilingual in Spanish and the local native language, Guar-
aní; another 40 ­percent of the population was comprised of monolingual Guaraní 
speakers, whereas only 6 ­percent of the population was monolingual in Spanish 
(Grazzi and Vergara 2012). In 2014, the population of Paraguay was about 6.7 mil-
lion. Internet penetration in the country has risen in the past few years, from about 
30 ­percent in 2012 to just over 40 ­percent in 2015; however, Paraguay is still one 
of the least-­connected nations in South Amer­i­ca (World Bank 2015). One poten-
tial reason could be the fact that internet access in Paraguay is prohibitively expen-
sive. In 2015, a low-­range income was only about $500 a month, while a 
connection of 10 Mbps could cost users as much as $146 a month (Young 2015). 
Therefore, internet users in Paraguay tend to be members of the upper class, who 
can afford such an expense.
Another potential reason for low internet penetration is language. Most of the 
internet is in En­glish, Spanish, and Chinese; therefore, a digital divide exists for 
­those Paraguayans who only speak Guaraní. Studies have shown that language has 

PARAGUAY
225
played a ­factor in decision making about technology in Paraguay (Grazzi and 
Vergara 2012). However, Google does offer its search engine in Guaraní.
Of ­those Paraguayans who do have internet access, the number of active social 
media users in 2014 numbered around 2.2 million (We Are Social 2014). Twitter 
is a popu­lar social media website with 400,000 users, which represents a growth 
rate of 13 ­percent over the past few years (Abad 2015). The most popu­lar social 
network in the country is Facebook (Alexa 2015). From 2012 to 2015, the number 
of Facebook users doubled, from 1.29 million to 2.6 million (Abad 2015; Internet 
World Stats n.d.). A third of ­these users are located in the nation’s capital, Asun-
ción, and by far, the predominant age group is eighteen-­ to twenty-­four-­year-­olds, 
with 35 ­percent penetration (Abad 2015). The most popu­lar Facebook page in 
Paraguay is Ramón Torres Psicólogo, with 3,389,600 fans (Socialbakers 2015). 
Torres (n.d.–) is a relationship therapist who has published a book entitled El 
Amor, Así de ­Simple y Así de Complicado (Love: Simply Complex), which is available 
in Kindle format on Amazon. Other popu­lar websites visited by Paraguayan inter-
net users include Google​.­com.py, YouTube, Google, Amazon, Abc​.­com​.­py (news), 
Live, Paraguay (news), Wikipedia, Última Hora (news), Twitter, Yahoo, and Blogspot 
(Alexa 2015).
The number of active mobile subscriptions in 2014 was 7.3 million (We Are So-
cial 2014). As this number exceeded the population of the country, it suggests that 
having multiple mobile devices was common. Android mobiles ­were by far the most 
popu­lar type of cell phone. In 2014, they dominated the market at 74.5 ­percent, 
while iOS, the operating system on Apple devices, accounted for only 9.8 ­percent 
of the mobile device market (eMarketer 2014). The most popu­lar ­free apps down-
loaded for Android devices ­were WhatsApp Messenger, Facebook, Facebook Mes-
senger, Instagram, and CM Security Antivirus App Lock. The top ­free apps 
downloaded by iPhone users ­were Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp Messenger, 
Facebook, Snapchat, and Spotify (­music) (AppAnnie 2015).
Facebook introduced Internet​.­org to Paraguay in an attempt to increase internet 
penetration in 2013 (Rey 2015). Internet​.­org is a comprehensive proj­ect that aims 
to bring internet to the ­whole world, aiming to collaborate with local partners to 
eradicate obstacles to internet access in vari­ous countries. Internet​.­org identifies sev-
eral reasons why two-­thirds of the world’s population is not connected. Some of 
­these are relevant to Paraguay, such as expensive ser­vices, lack of network infrastruc-
ture, and language barriers. Internet​.­org has provided a ­free version of the internet 
to certain areas of the world with low penetration rates (Internet​.­org 2015). Para-
guay, along with Zambia, Senegal, the Philippines, and fifteen other countries, is 
one of ­these areas (Russell 2015). The ­free version that Internet​.­org offers does not 
require a data plan, which means that users can access it via their cell phones 
­whether or not they have a plan. However, the number of websites that they can 
visit with this ­free access is limited to just a handful, such as Facebook, Wikipedia, 
and a few local news and weather websites. According to an informal paper released 
by Facebook in March 2014, the Internet​.­org initiative in Paraguay had already led 
to an increase of more than 50 ­percent in daily data usage, as well as a 50 ­percent 
increase in the number of Paraguayans using the internet (Internet​.­org 2014).

PARAGUAY
226
However, Internet​.­org has also received some harsh criticism. Some have sug-
gested that rather than broadening ­people’s experiences, Facebook is acting as a 
gatekeeper, deciding for internet users what their experience should be (Young 
2015; Russell 2015). In Paraguay, some users of Internet​.­org’s ­free internet ser­vice 
have been frustrated by its limitations on internet access. One response to this has 
been the development of software known as the “Facebook tunnel.” Matías In-
saurralde (n.d.–) created the software, which can grant users the ability to access 
other websites through the ­free internet provided by Internet​.­org. It utilizes Face-
book’s chat ser­vice as a virtual tunnel that links the user to the rest of the internet. 
The Internet​.­org user connects with a friend via the chat ser­vice, and through that 
connection, can visit any website that is available through the friend’s internet ser­
vice (Young 2015).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Argentina; Mexico; Philippines; Senegal
Further Reading
Abad, Daniela. 2015. “Estadísticas de Facebook y Twitter en Paraguay.” March 18. Accessed 
September 30, 2015. https://­www​.­latamclick​.­com​/­estadisticas​-­de​-­facebook​-­y​-­twitter​-­en​
-­paraguay​-­2015​/­
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Paraguay.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/​
topsites​/­countries​/­PY
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” Accessed September 28, 2015 https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­paraguay
eMarketer. 2014. “Smartphone Users in Latin Amer­i­ca Reaching for Android Devices.” 
February 19. Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Smart​
phone​-­Users​-­Latin​-­America​-­Reaching​-­Android​-­Devices​/­1010619
Grazzi, Matteo, and Vergara, Sebastián. 2012. “ICT in Developing Countries: Are Lan-
guage Barriers Relevant? Evidence from Paraguay.” Information Economics and Policy, 
24:161–171.
Internet​.­org. 2014. “Connecting the World from the Sky,” March 28. Accessed September 28, 
2015. https://press.internet.org/2014/03/28/connecting-­the-­world-­from-­the-­sky
Internet​.­org. 2015. “Who We Are.” Accessed September 28, 2015. https://­internet​.­org​/­about
Internet World Stats. n.d. “South Amer­i­ca.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­www​
.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­south​.­htm
Emojis, wildly popu­lar images that can be used on social media platforms, have be-
come a communications tool for worldwide diplomacy. ­After the Colombian flag 
was used in tweets during the 2016 FIFA Football World Cup qualifiers, the country’s 
officials started using the flag emoji in communications with other Central American 
nations to promote regional cooperation and security. Social media for the presi-
dency of Paraguay almost always starts with an emoji when one of its tweets contains 
a link to a report, agenda, or other official po­liti­cal document intended for public 
consumption (Twidiplomacy n.d.)

PERU
227
Rey, Patricia. 2015. “Internet​.­org Llega a Panama y Apunta a Cuba.” April 10. BN Amer­i­
cas. Accessed December 14, 2016. http://­www​.­bnamericas​.­com​/­es​/­news​/­tecnologia​
/­internetorg​-­llega​-­a​-­panama​-­y​-­apunta​-­a​-­cuba
Russell, Jon. 2015. “­After Internet​.­org Backlash, Facebook Opens Portal to Court More Op-
erators,” July 27. Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­27​
/­facebook​-­internet​-­org​-­one
Socialbakers. 2015. “Paraguay Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed September 28, 2015. 
http://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­paraguay
We Are Social. 2014. “Digital in the Amer­i­cas,” June 10. Accessed September 28, 2015. 
http://­wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2014​/­06​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­americas
World Bank. 2015. “World Development Indicators.” Accessed September 28, 2015. http://­
databank​.­worldbank​.­org​/­data​/­reports​.­aspx​?­source​=­2&country​=­PRY&series​=­&period​=­
Young, Nora. 2015. “A Tunnel to (Internet) Freedom,” April 16. Accessed September 28, 
2015. http://­www​.­cbc​.­ca​/­radio​/­spark​/­282​-­dot​-­internet​-­dot​-­ethics​-­dot​-­sucks​-­and​-­more​
-­1​.­3035630​/­a​-­tunnel​-­to​-­internet​-­freedom​-­1​.­3035651
PERU
Peru is located in the western half of Latin Amer­i­ca, bordered by Ec­ua­dor, Chile, 
Bolivia, Colombia, and Brazil. As of 2014, it had the seventh largest digital popu-
lation in the region. In Peru, internet users accessed news sites most frequently, 
but ultimately spent the majority of their time online on social media sites (García 
2014). Peruvians’ favorite social media platforms ­were Facebook, YouTube, and 
Twitter, with some Peruvians branching out to LinkedIn, Google+, Instagram, 
Pinterest, WhatsApp, and other sites. Peruvians who use social media tended to 
manage accounts on three to six dif­fer­ent platforms, with few utilizing more than 
six.
The com­pany GfK Perú (2015) produced a detailed report about Peru’s digital 
population. Its research concluded that around 50 ­percent of urbanites and 46 ­percent 
of rural populations accessed the internet. Peru’s internet users consisted of 29 
percent fifteen- to twenty-four-year-olds, 28 percent twenty-five- to thirty-four-
year-olds, 21 percent thirty-five- to forty-four-year-olds, 14 percent forty-five- to 
fifty-four-year-olds, and 8 percent fifty-five-year-olds and older (Statista 2015). 
Including all age ranges, Peru’s top ten websites in 2015, listed in descending or-
der, ­were Facebook, YouTube, Google​.­com.pe, Google, Live​.­com, Yahoo, Amazon, 
Wikipedia, MSN, and Elcomercio.pe (Alexa 2015). Facebook was not only the 
most popu­lar website accessed, it was also the country’s most popu­lar social media 
platform. At the end of 2014, approximately 14 million of Peru’s 31 million inhab-
itants, or 45 ­percent, had accessed the site (Trome 2015).
Peru’s Facebook demographics mirrored ­those of ­people who access the internet, 
but on a slightly smaller scale. Of the almost 8 million men and 7 million ­women 
with Facebook accounts, 40 ­percent ­were ­under age twenty-­four, 32 ­percent ­were 
between twenty-­five and thirty-­four, and 16 ­percent ­were between thirty-­five and 
forty-­four. A total of 56 ­percent of Facebook users resided in Lima, 5 ­percent in 
Arequipa, and 5  ­percent in Trujillo (Rodríguez 2015). Other accounts did not 
specify a location or provide geocoding capabilities to rec­ord the user’s location. 

PERU
228
More than half of all users accessed the platform from both a computer and a 
mobile phone. Most users chose Google Chrome as the best browser to access 
Facebook.
Twitter usage split almost evenly between Lima, other urban areas, and the prov-
inces, meaning that it likely connected more loosely defined communities that 
participated in more diverse conversations than they do on Facebook. By the end 
of 2015, approximately 4 million Peruvians participated on Twitter, producing an 
average of 280,000 tweets daily, or more than 11,000 tweets per hour (Quantico 
Trends 2015). One of the more fun, nationalistic Twitter campaigns challenged lo-
cal communities to take pride in their culture by tweeting about what makes them 
unique, including the hashtag #MásPeruanoQue [More Peruvian Than]. Respon-
dents used the phrase to start their messages by describing how they ­were more 
Peruvian. Most responses included colorful images of food and locals, and often 
contained meme-­inspired humor.
Peruvian tweeters ­were passionate about social and po­liti­cal ­causes. Issues taken 
up on Twitter and other social media had a greater chance to be addressed and re-
solved publicly than ­causes advocated in other forums. For example, a concerned 
public ­adopted the hashtag #LeyStalker (Stalker Law) in 2015 to warn other citi-
zens about presidential decree No. 1182, permitting the police to access mobile 
phone global positioning system (GPS) data on any phone without a warrant. The 
decree went even further, requiring phone carriers and other data storage enter-
prises to retain data for at least three years. Police intended to utilize the decree to 
confront social plagues such as corruption, extortion, or blackmail—­all issues en-
demic to Peru. Much of the public, however, believed that police would implement 
the new law to track and harass innocent civilians without cause. The law was taken 
to court for appeal.
Another notable social campaign tackled the prob­lem of wildlife smuggling and 
abuse. Neotropical Primate Conservation, an organ­ization seeking to abolish all 
wildlife mistreatment, launched a public education campaign on traditional and 
social media to inform the ­people about the dangers and consequences of wildlife 
trafficking. The campaign encouraged ­people to report all observed abuses and cre-
ated several social media spaces where witnesses could submit information anony-
mously. ­After incidents ­were brought to their attention, the organ­ization turned 
them over to the government for review and action. A long-­term objective of this 
program was to map the trafficking networks across Peru, as ­little data exist about 
how local poachers operate.
While Facebook helped to promote awareness of some ­causes, it also had a down-
side. Some Peruvian communities have high crime rates and limited authorities to 
investigate and reduce overall crime in an area. ­After a neighbor’s scare over a break-
in that resulted in police releasing the perpetrator prior to trial, one Peruvian 
­woman created a Facebook page called “Chapa tu choro” (Catch your thief). The 
page encouraged Peruvians to take ­matters into their own hands (i.e. vigilantism) 
instead of relying on the police. Peruvian Facebook users resonated with the 
sentiment, and more than 100 similar pages appeared (BBC 2015). However, some 

PERU
229
of the pages took a more violent approach, advocating that criminals be injured or 
killed immediately when apprehended, without waiting for a trial.
Promoting vigilantism and vio­lence pres­ents additional potential prob­lems for 
Peruvian society, especially if smaller crimes lead to hom­i­cides and assaults. Face-
book, while not responsible for page content, can be used to spread hate speech 
and extreme sentiments. The copycat sites have started posting gruesome videos 
and slogans, indicating that even though ­there are few such sites, this new phe-
nomenon may be more serious and long lasting than the typical Facebook fad. The 
use of social media for malignant purposes is not limited to Peru; other nations, 
such as Germany, Myanmar, Ukraine, and the United States have had to deal with 
hate-­speech incidents on the site.
Peruvians tended to prefer established international social media platforms. How-
ever, in spite of this preference, a small number of Peruvians sought to design niche 
networks. For example, the Council of Science, Technology, and Technological In-
novation (Concytec) produced a unique new platform in 2015. ACTIvanet found a 
niche in connecting Peruvian scientists with investors and entrepreneurs across the 
globe. The platform offered users a way to learn about new technologies, create 
communities of interest, and investigate new potential sources of funding for scien-
tific research. The site connected to Facebook, allowing account registration with 
a Facebook account and some additional personal information. A driving force 
­behind the network’s development was the desire to encourage local innovation 
and technological advancement. ACTIvanet was a new endeavor with no interna-
tional equivalent or competition.
Peru’s app preferences somewhat mirror ­those of other Latin American nations. 
On Google Play, for example, the top five ­free apps ­were WhatsApp, Facebook Mes-
senger, Facebook, DU Battery Saver, and Hola Launcher. The top five paid apps ­were 
Minecraft: Pocket Edition, Mono­poly, Quizduell Premium, Geometry Dash, and 
XPERIA Donald Duck. ­These preferences almost exactly matched ­those in Venezu-
ela. In contrast, Peru’s iOS preferences differed from ­those of its neighboring coun-
tries. The top ­free apps ­were WhatsApp, Facebook Messenger, Facebook, YouCam 
Perfect, and the game Apensar. The paid apps ­were Geometry Dash, SFind for Spo-
tify, FACIE, Minecraft: Pocket Edition, and the Cut the Rope game (AppAnnie 2015). 
­These app preferences suggest that Peruvians value messaging and games, adding a 
­little diversity by choosing apps that improved their social networking experiences.
Another similarity that Peruvians have with other Latin American populations 
is their love for memes. In Peru, creating and sharing memes has become an impor­
tant part of social media and national cyberculture. Most Peruvian memes con-
tained humor, but also a hint of biting ruthlessness and social criticism that poked 
fun at celebrity scandals. Many memes poke fun at farándula (celebrities), such as 
Figueroa. A famous meme from 2014 developed when model Milett Figueroa 
(1992–) stole a man away from his girlfriend. Online, pictures of Figueroa gave 
her the sarcastic nickname “Candy,” mocking her for being less than sweet in or-
chestrating the breakup. The name stuck, and most Peruvians now refer to her as 
“Candy” rather than by her real name (Fernandez Coraza 2015). The deeper the 

PHILIPPINES
230
scandal, the more likely it is that related memes ­will flourish across Peruvian social 
media. Other Latin American nations, including Argentina, Ec­ua­dor, and Venezuela, 
also produce prolific memes.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Argentina; Ec­ua­dor; Germany; Myanmar; Ukraine; United States; Venezuela
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Peru.” Accessed September 14, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­PE
AppAnnie. 2015. “iOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 14, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­peru​/­​?­device​=­iphone
BBC Trending. 2015. “The Facebook Vigilantes Catching Thieves—­and Punishing Them.” 
September 14. Accessed September 15, 2015. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­blogs​-­trending​
-­34224196
Fernandez Coraza, Arnold. 2015. “Memes and Peruvian Wit Claim Cuzco’s Social Media.” 
January 6. Accessed September 14, 2015. http://­www​.­cuzcoeats​.­com​/­2015​/­01​/­memes​
-­and​-­peruvian​-­wit​-­claim​-­cuzcos​-­social​-­media​/­
García, Marco. 2014. “Futuro Digital Perú 2015.” Accessed September 14, 2015. http://­www​
.­comscore​.­com​/­lat​/­Prensa​-­y​-­Eventos​/­Presentaciones​-­y​-­libros​-­blancos​/­2015​/­Peru​
-­2015​-­Digital​-­Future​-­in​-­Focus
GfK Perú. 2015. “Uso de Internet en el Perú.” May 14. Accessed September 14, 2015. 
http://­es​.­slideshare​.­net​/­GfKPeru​/­gfk​-­per​-­uso​-­de​-­internet​-­en​-­el​-­per​-­abril​-­2015
Quantico Trends. 2015. “Infografía de Twitter en Perú.” January 31. Accessed September 14, 
2015. http://­www​.­quanticotrends​.­com​/­usuarios​-­de​-­twitter​-­2015​/­
Rodríguez, Gustavo. 2015. “Algunas Cifras de Facebook en Perú a Julio del 2015.” August 
31. Accessed September 14, 2015. http://­www​.­hashtag​.­pe​/­2015​/­08​/­31​/­algunas​-­cifras​
-­de​-­facebook​-­en​-­peru​-­a​-­julio​-­del​-­2015​/­
Statista. 2015. “Distribution of Internet Users in Peru as of 1st Quarter 2015, By Age Group.” 
Accessed December 14, 2016. https://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­446468​/­age​-­distribution​
-­internet​-­users​-­peru​/­
Trome. 2015. “Facebook: Seis Datos sobre el Impacto de esta Red Social en Perú.” January 
20. Accessed September 11, 2015. http://­trome​.­pe​/­redes​-­sociales​/­facebook​-­seis​-­datos​
-­sobre​-­impacto​-­esta​-­red​-­social​-­peru​-­2036797
PHILIPPINES
The Philippines is an archipelagic nation in the Pacific Ocean consisting of more 
than 7,000 islands. It lies north of Indonesia and east of Vietnam. Culturally, the 
Philippines has integrated emerging technologies such as social media and apps into 
what has become a permanent, digital component to its con­temporary society. This 
phenomenon has paralleled that which is occurring in Southeast Asian nations. Ap-
proximately 100 million ­people live in the Philippines, around 44 million of whom 
have access to the internet, with 90 ­percent or more having at least one active so-
cial media account (Revesencio 2015). The country used to be the short message 
ser­vice (SMS), or text­ing, capital of the world; ­today, it has established a reputation 
as an active, global social media hub.

PHILIPPINES
231
Filipinos use multiple social media and chatting platforms. Overwhelmingly, Fili-
pinos have a strong presence on Facebook, where they connect to close friends 
and ­family and make new friends online. In fact, Filipinos are often ranked the 
number one population worldwide in terms of their commitment to using Face-
book. In addition to Facebook, Filipinos engage on Google+, Pinterest, Reddit, 
StumbleUpon, Tumblr, Twitter, YouTube, Instagram, Viber, Skype, Yahoo Messen-
ger, WeChat, Line, WhatsApp, Kakaotalk, and LinkedIn. Filipinos’ top ten accessed 
sites confirmed their interest in social media; the sites ­were Facebook, Google, 
Google​.­com.ph, YouTube, Yahoo, abs​-­cbnnews​.­com, Gmanetwork, Amazon, Twit-
ter, and Blogspot (Alexa 2015). Blogging was not as popu­lar as in other Asian na-
tions, such as Indonesia and China. However, more Filipinos have begun initiating 
blogs in addition to their usual social media channels.
Filipinos love Facebook to the extent that many reacted negatively to a Harvard 
study on usage of the site in their country. The title, “The Unintelligent Facebook 
Users,” shocked Filipinos, who then criticized and even rejected its findings. The 
researcher, a Filipino-­American psy­chol­ogy student at Harvard, concluded that Fil-
ipinos online ­were not as cultured as most of the rest of the world, that they ­were 
not prepared to implement the necessary ­legal guidelines and etiquette standards, 
and that most of them functioned online at a lower intellectual level, with less emo-
tion, decency, and awareness than other nationalities (Green and Pagulayan 2014). 
The paper used several case studies to back up ­these findings. In one example, the 
author posted a picture of an unhealthy child with the caption “­Don’t Like Before 
You Read the Article.” That picture pointed to an article, but users reportedly shared 
the photo 85,000 times, while the article was shared fewer than 10,000 times. The 
picture alone received 90 ­percent more “likes” than the article, presumably ­because 
users did not read it (Green and Pagulayan 2014). However, though the psy­chol­
ogy experiments led to the study’s main conclusions, they did not prove that Fili-
pinos who used Facebook ­were somehow less ready to participate in a globalized 
social media environment. Instead, the assertions caused ­great discomfort domes-
tically and challenged local Filipinos to think about how foreigners perceived their 
interactions online.
The study’s conclusions also ignored the Philippines strict cybercrime laws. In 
2012, the government proposed the Cybercrime Prevention Act. Among the out-
lawed offenses ­were identity theft, child pornography, cyberbullying, cybersquat-
ting, illegal access to and use of online data, and defamation. The law was 
controversial; many Filipinos responded negatively on social media, with many users 
In 2014, Time magazine analyzed over 400,000 Instagram photos labeled “selfies” and 
developed a list of the top 100 “selfie capitals of the world.” The ­actual selfie capital, 
in first place, is Makati City, along with Pasig in the Philippines. The rest of the top 
ten, in order, ­were Manhattan; Miami, Florida; Anaheim and Santa Ana, California; 
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia; Tel Aviv, Israel; Manchester, ­England; Milan, Italy; Cebu City, 
Philippines; and George Town, Malaysia (Wilson 2014).

PHILIPPINES
232
utilizing the #notocybercrimelaw hashtag. As a result, the law was suspended and 
readdressed. It remained controversial ­until 2014, when the Supreme Court upheld 
the law, dropping only a handful of its provisions. The defamation provision re-
mained, with the stipulation that only the original poster could receive a punishment 
for insulting statements, and that ­others who liked or other­wise supported the orig-
inal post ­were not liable. The Filipinos responded with another hashtag, #NonLi-
belousTweet. The court’s decision also infuriated several hacker groups, including 
Anonymous, which deci­ded to deface government websites in protest.
In contrast to the Harvard study, an international, social media–­focused study 
determined that Filipinos ­were extremely interactive and social online. The study, 
conducted by UM, a division of IPG Mediabrands, concluded that Filipinos spend 
an average of fifty-­three hours a week socializing online, with their main goals be-
ing maintaining friendships, starting new acquaintances, entertaining themselves, 
trading stories, and feeling more closely connected (Locsin 2014). By engaging on-
line, Filipinos met some of their core personal, professional, spiritual, and cultural 
needs, such as creating strong support networks online and offline. In addition to 
uncovering the reasons why Filipinos socialize online, the study offered insights 
on some of their main issues and concerns. Privacy protection was a major issue in 
In response to the Philippines’ highly controversial Cybercrime Prevention Act, multiple activ-
ist groups, such as the Philippine Internet Freedom Alliance, Bayan Muna, Piston, and Gabri-
ela, staged a ­silent protest near the Supreme Court in Manila. The public responded to the law 
on social media, particularly on Twitter, to express its outrage at many of the law’s provisions. 
Worldwide governments are trying to prevent illegal activities on the internet; ­because the me-
dium is still relatively new, fighting online crime has some inherent po­liti­cal, social, and cul-
tural challenges. (Hrlumanog​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

PHILIPPINES
233
the nation, with ­people saying that they hesitated before sharing personal informa-
tion (Locsin 2014). This study showed Filipinos to be not only internet-­savvy, but 
also caring, sharing, and concerned about the well-­being of the ­people in their 
networks.
Social media demographics on the Philippines revealed that the average social 
media user was a young man. Younger users tended to prefer interacting and sharing 
online. For example, 42 ­percent of internet users ­were fifteen to twenty-­four years 
old, 33 ­percent ­were twenty-­five to thirty-­four years old, 16 ­percent ­were thirty-­five 
to forty-­four, and 9 ­percent ­were over forty-­five (Leet Digital 2015). Additional re-
search on social media also showed that 56 ­percent of users ­were male (OnDevice 
2014). ­Because internet penetration remained relatively low, the potential exists 
that ­these demographics could shift as more ­people gain access to the internet.
The Philippines has achieved some unique benchmarks for its digital culture. 
The country’s social media users have earned acclaim as the population that spends 
the most time on the internet ­every day, more than in any other country. The aver-
age laptop user spent 6.3 hours online daily, whereas the mobile user was online 
3.3 hours each day (Revesencio 2015). ­These statistics ­were collected based on 
device, and they did not determine how many ­people use both laptops and mobile 
internet access. Interestingly, it was pos­si­ble that some Filipinos spent up to 9.6 
hours online per day, combining their time on a laptop and a mobile device.
Social applications played an impor­tant role in the Philippines. Each month, 
around one-­third of mobile phone users downloaded at least six apps (OnDevice 
2014). In September 2015, the top ­free Google Play apps included Clash of Clans, 
Facebook Messenger, SHAREit, and Twitter. The top paid apps ­were League of 
Stickman-­Samurai, Minecraft: Pocket Edition, EvoCreo, Xperia Daisy Duck, and 
Poweramp. The iOS top ­free apps ­were Google Street View, Facebook Messenger, 
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, Viber, Magic Piano by Smule, Spotify, and 
­Free ­Music Play—­Mp3 Player. The top paid apps ­were Emoji Keypad, NBA 2K15, 
Flightradar 24, Instant Street View, Afterlight, Plague Inc., Grindr Xtra, Crystal—­
Block Ads, Real Steel, and Cake Mania Celebrity Chef (AppAnnie 2015).
Apps also contributed to a geo­graph­i­cally specific emerging trend in the Philip-
pines. The country is often at risk for natu­ral disaster, particularly typhoons due to 
its location in the Pacific Ocean. ­After Typhoon Haiyan hit the country in late 2014, 
technology companies rushed to create apps to help ­people understand weather 
risks. RaincheckPH and iTyphoon ­were two apps released around this time to en-
sure that Filipinos with internet access had the ability to learn quickly about po-
tential weather threats. The Filipino government also deci­ded to use technology to 
warn its ­people and enacted laws requiring mobile ser­vice providers to send SMS 
warnings of impending storms throughout the network. Typhoons and other natu­
ral disasters are impossible to prevent, but their affects can be mitigated with the 
proper warning systems in place. The increased availability of weather apps and 
legally required messaging ­will ensure that ­every person with a laptop or mobile 
phone can receive advance warnings and up-­to-­date information.
The Philippines has one of the most robust and vibrant online communities. In 
spite of ­these colorful, fast-­paced channels of communication, one major obstacle 
has plagued the country: its internet speed is rated as one of the slowest in the 

POLAND
234
world. In the country, the average speed is 3.64 Mbps. Of all Asian nations, the 
Philippines ranked number twenty-­one of twenty-­two, with the slowest spot belong-
ing to Af­ghan­i­stan, at 2.52 Mbps (Philstar 2015). To put this speed in perspective, 
­until January 2015, the U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) set the 
minimum recommended bandwidth for streaming audio or video was 4 Mbps, 
though this speed usually became problematic with high-­definition video or when 
the system handled two or more devices. However, the FCC updated this guide-
line to 25 Mbps for downloads and 3 Mbps for uploads, in order to reflect changes 
in quality and demand for streaming audio and video. In the Philippines, the aver-
age download speed continued to reflect around half of even the outdated FCC 
standard.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Af­ghan­i­stan; China; Indonesia; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Philippines.” Accessed September 20, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­topsites​/­countries​/­PH
AppAnnie. 2015. “iOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 22, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­philipines​/­overall​/­​?­device​=­iphone
Green, Rhodora, and Pagulayan, Ruel. 2014. “Harvard: Pinoy Facebook Users Are Among 
the Most Unintelligent ­People.” November 11. Accessed September 21, 2015. http://­
www​.­thephilippinepride​.­com​/­harvard​-­study​-­finds​-­80​-­13​-­of​-­filipino​-­facebook​-­users​
-­are​-­dumb​/­
Leet Digital. 2015. “Philippines Social Media and Internet Statistics.” July 10. Accessed 
September 21, 2015. http://­ph​.­leetdigital​.­com​/­marketing​/­philippines​-­social​-­media​-­and​
-­internet​-­statistics​-­2015
Locsin, Joel. 2014. “Pinoys Lead the World in Social Media Engagement—­Study.” June 30. 
Accessed September  21, 2015. http://­www​.­gmanetwork​.­com​/­news​/­story​/­367983​/​
scitech​/­technology​/­pinoys​-­lead​-­the​-­world​-­in​-­social​-­media​-­engagement​-­study
OnDevice Research. 2014. “The Philippines Mobile Internet Crowd: Young, Affluent, and 
Growing.” July 8. Accessed September 21, 2015. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­OnDevice​/​
philippines​-­mobile​-­internet​-­trends
Philstar. 2015. “If Philippines Joined an Internet Speed Race.” [Infographic] August 25. Ac-
cessed September  21, 2015. http://­www​.­philstar​.­com​/­news​-­feature​/­2015​/­08​/­25​/​
1492054​/­infographic​-­if​-­philippines​-­joined​-­internet​-­speed​-­race
Revesencio, Jonha. 2015. “Philippines: A Digital Lifestyle Capital in the Making?” May 4. 
Accessed September  21, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­jonha​-­revesencio​/​
philippines​-­a​-­digital​-­lif​_­1​_­b​_­7199924​.­html
POLAND
In 2016, Poland, a country located in Eastern Eu­rope, was ranked tenth in the world 
in internet connection speed, at 10.6 Mbps. This rate is not only significantly higher 
than the global average of 5.1 Mbps, but also a huge jump from the 2.6 Mbps that 
earned it the nineteenth spot in 2013. With a total net population of 38.6 million 

POLAND
235
­people in the country, the internet penetration is 67 ­percent, which is significantly 
higher than its social media penetration rate of 36 ­percent. While Poles are not avid 
users of social media sites, they are on an upward trend in the country. Poles have 
access to a variable mix of international and local social media providers, such as 
Facebook, Google+, Nasza-­Klasa (nk.pl), Twitter, LinkedIn, GoldenLine, and Fotka. 
Within three years, Facebook and Google+ users have steadily grown to surpass 
the local favorite, Nasza-­Klasa. Twitter, LinkedIn, and GoldenLine are also slowly 
gaining in popularity, while Blip and Fotka have closed down or lost traction 
within Poland. Polish entrepreneurs are also successfully integrating social media 
into marketing strategies for their companies. Brand24 is a prime example of a Pol-
ish start-up that heavi­ly uses social media in its business practices while main-
taining a dominant presence on the internet.
In 2006, Nasza-­Klasa was founded in Wroclaw, Poland. Most ­people refer to 
Nasza-­Klasa, often shortened to nk.pl, as the Polish version of Facebook, while some 
­people call it the Polish counterpart of Classmates​.­com. Nasza-­Klasa allows students 
and alumni to connect or reconnect with classmates from their alma mater. In 2009, 
Nasza-­Klasa reached the height of its popularity in Poland, where at least 86 ­percent 
of its users lived. At the same time, the social media provider was also popu­lar in 
Norway, ranking fifth in that northern Eu­ro­pean country (Mohsin 2009). As Face-
book steadily grew in popularity, the number of active users on Nasza-­Klasa dropped 
nearly 40 ­percent. During this decline, Forticom bought the struggling Nasza-­Klasa. 
To maintain its relevance as a social media provider to its remaining 5 million ac-
tive users, Nasza-­Klasa installed a newsfeed similar to Facebook and integrated a 
microblog known as Sledzik. Nasza-­Klasa also added a feature where companies 
can promote products and advertisements (Kijuc 2014).
Other local social providers that have fallen out of ­favor of the Polish popula-
tion are Blip and Fotka, the Polish counter­parts for Twitter and Hi5. Blip was 
founded in 2007. Its sole purpose as a social media provider was to be a user-­
friendly microblog. Initially, it grew in popularity with the help of famous Polish 
celebrity accounts, much like the instant popularity that Twitter enjoyed in the 
United States with Hollywood celebrities. Despite the fact that Blip transmitted 10 
million messages, the number of user accounts grew slowly (Kotowski 2009). Blip 
ultimately closed in 2013 as Twitter became the Poles’ primary choice for microb-
logging (Kijuc 2014). Established in 2001, Fotka is the one of the oldest social 
media platforms in Poland. One of the first features introduced by Fotka was up-
loading photos for users to “like” or leave commentary. Eventually, it branched out 
to include other forms of entertainment, such as online games. In 2014, Fotka re-
corded the lowest membership rate since its conception with 600,000 active users. 
It is predicted to continue on this downward trend. As more Poles create long-­
distance friendships, it becomes harder for them to connect with new friends in 
dif­fer­ent countries on a local provider. Despite Fotka’s commitment to its remaining 
active users, it is quickly losing its appeal and could potentially close down like 
Blip (Wirtualnemedia 2014).
While Poles spend approximately four hours and twenty-­five minutes each day 
on a PC or tablet, they use their mobile phones on the internet for an average of 

POLAND
236
only one hour and seventeen minutes. Since January 2015, a 6 ­percent growth of 
internet users was documented in data collected by We Are Social (Kemp 2016). 
Poland continues to improve internet availability and accessibility to its citizens 
across the country. In December 2015, Satellite Solutions Worldwide bought two 
additional subsidiaries in Poland—­AVC Solutions and Hetan Technologies. ­These 
recent acquisitions ­will allow an even faster internet speed to more than 5 million 
homes in the country. More than a third of Poland’s users get a broadband speed of 
only about 2 Mbps, which is significantly lower than the country’s average internet 
connection speed of 10.6 Mbps. To bring ­these homes up to date, Satellite Solu-
tions Worldwide plans to offer Poles faster ser­vice through wireless internet via sat-
ellite (Sharecast 2015).
Poles spend, on average, up to of 4.5 hours online, with about 1.2 of ­those hours 
spent on social media (Kemp 2016). The Polish population has a wide mix of so-
cial media providers to choose from, including Polish counter­parts to popu­lar in-
ternational providers such as Facebook and Twitter. As global social media providers 
create multiple platforms for international connectivity and worldwide visibility, it 
has become harder for local social media providers, such as Nasza-­Klasa, Blip, and 
Fotka, to compete with international platforms that feature global values and con­
temporary trends.
The primary use of social media in Poland is to stay connected with friends or 
to reconnect with old acquaintances. However, that is changing with its integra-
tion into the business industry. With the growing popularity of LinkedIn and 
GoldenLine in the country, recruiters are turning to social media to find ­future 
employees and develop com­pany branding. Founded in 2005, GoldenLine is Po-
land’s biggest business social networking platform that is similar to LinkedIn. Us-
ers are able to connect with business contacts, discover new clients, and search for 
jobs. The development and functionality of GoldenLine is changing the trend of 
job recruitment in Poland. Companies and employers are seeing a shift from tradi-
tional job searching to a more passive approach that allows applicants to submit 
their résumés online. With an analy­sis of the applicants’ experience, skills, and ref-
erences available for review, recruiters may use the resulting reports to find the 
right candidate. Employers also use GoldenLine to build the desired image for the 
com­pany as well as market branding concepts. More than 6,000 recruiters in 
Poland use GoldenLine to find international and local talent for Polish companies 
(Viluckyte 2015).
Before the introduction of the start-up culture in Poland, small and medium-­
sized businesses in the restaurant and hospitality industries utilized social media 
to market their ser­vices to an online audience. Initially, many ­people did not per-
ceive social networks as a practical method for business strategies or marketing. In 
recent years, tech start-­ups and Polish entrepreneurs have truly taken advantage of 
social media marketing. ­After merging social media strategies into their marketing 
approach, many Polish tech start-­ups have launched successfully. Some experts be-
lieve that social media is integral to the beginnings of any start-up. Social media 
allows new businesses to gain more visibility with an online community and market 

POLAND
237
their products more creatively and efficiently. Through social media, start-­ups can 
keep in touch with their clientele, as well as establish new relationships with poten-
tial clients.
One par­tic­u­lar start-up that integrated social media into its business plan is 
Brand24 (Kijuc 2014), founded in Wroclaw, Poland, in 2011. The start-up takes a 
unique approach to social media. While some companies utilize social media in 
their marketing and advertising strategies, Brand24 fully incorporates the internet 
and social media into its business. Brand24’s customers use the com­pany’s tools to 
monitor and analyze anything that mentions their brand, products, or ser­vices on-
line. Brand24 collects and archives all data regarding a specific brand for review. 
While ­there are other global monitoring companies on the internet, Brand24 dom-
inated the online space and obtained international recognition. The start-up has a 
second headquarters in New York City and clients in multiple countries, such as 
China, Indonesia, and the United Kingdom.
Not only does Brand24 monitor social networks, such as Facebook and Twitter, 
but it also utilizes YouTube to celebrate new clientele. For its video recognizing IKEA 
as a new client, Brand24 amassed 70,000 views. Some experts believe this is a 
distinguishing ­factor for the com­pany. Creating and posting a video brought more 
attention to the newfound relationship than a typical press release (Kijuc 2014). 
Brand24 also is working with Michelle Obama on one of her educational proj­ects 
targeting Generation Z, the fourteen-­ to nineteen-­year-­old age bracket. The initia-
tive is geared ­toward motivating students to pursue higher education ­after high 
school. The First Lady approached the com­pany to support the campaign and fa-
cilitate online conversations with participants (Goldman 2015).
Karen Ames
See also: China; Germany; Indonesia; United Kingdom; United States
Further Reading
Goldman, Stefania. 2015. “Brand24 to Cooperate with the White House.” December 2. Ac-
cessed May 4, 2016. https://­itkey​.­media​/­brand24​-­to​-­cooperate​-­with​-­the​-­white​-­house​/­
Kemp, Simon. 2016. “Digital in 2016: We Are Social’s Compendium of Global Digital, So-
cial, and Mobile Data, Trends, and Statistics.” January 27. Accessed May 2, 2016. http://­
wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Kijuc, Dominika. 2014. “#Poland: Interview with Social Media Experts.” March 24. Accessed 
December 26, 2015. http://­news​.­bitspiration​.­com​/­news​/­people​/­poland​-­interview​-­with​
-­social​-­media​-­experts​-­3​/­
Kotowski, Daniel. 2009. “Sławy na Blipie Drogą do Sukcesu?” July 17. Accessed December 
27, 2015. http://­di​.­com​.­pl​/­slawy​-­na​-­blipie​-­droga​-­do​-­sukcesu​-­27579
Mohsin, Saleha. 2009. “Hey, Amer­i­ca, We Have Our Own Facebooks.” July 15. Accessed 
December 27, 2015. http://­www​.­businessweek​.­com​/­globalbiz​/­content​/­jul2009​/­gb2009​
0715​_­921142​.­htm
Sharecast. 2015. “Satellite Solutions Expands Poland Broadband Business.” December 21. 
Accessed December  26, 2015. http://­www​.­sharecast​.­com​/­news​/­satellite​-­solutions​
-­expands​-­poland​-­broadband​-­business​/­23753971​.­html

POLAND
238
Vilukyte, Aurelija. 2015. “How Recruitment Is Adapting to Social Media in Poland.” 
September, 18. Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­www​.­candarine​.­com​/­blog​/­how​
-­recruitment​-­is​-­adapting​-­to​-­social​-­media​-­in​-­poland​/­
Wirtualnamedia. 2014. “Fotka.pl Rekordowo Traci Użytkowników, ale Wciąż Mocno Ich 
Angażuje,” December 18. Accessed December 27, 2015. http://­www​.­wirtualnemedia​
.­pl​/­artykul​/­fotka​-­pl​-­rekordowo​-­traci​-­uzytkownikow​-­ale​-­wciaz​-­mocno​-­ich​-­angazuje

QATAR
The State of Qatar is a small country in the Arabian Peninsula, located between 
Africa and Asia. As of December 2014, its internet penetration rate was 91.9 ­percent 
of 2.2 million ­people, the third highest in the ­Middle East (Internet World Stats 
2015). In 2013, 89 ­percent of the country’s internet users accessed the web via 
smartphone (Northwestern University of Qatar 2014). Persons aged twenty-­five to 
fifty-­four years old represent 70 ­percent of the population, and the median age is 
32.6. Non-­Qataris (mainly expatriate workers) comprise 90 ­percent of the popula-
tion. ­Because the overwhelming majority of ­these workers are men, less than one-­
quarter of the country’s inhabitants are ­women (IndexMundi 2014).
­After deposing his ­father in a bloodless coup in 1995, Qatar’s then-­ruler, Emir 
Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani (1952–), launched the pan-­Arab satellite news net-
work Al-­Jazeera in 1996. He also ushered in a new constitution in 2003, which 
protected privacy and guaranteed freedom of expression. In 2013, Hamad trans-
ferred power to his 33-­year-­old son, Tamim (1980–). The move marked the culmi-
nation of a de­cade of rapid development, during which Qatar, which shares a 
massive natu­ral gas field with Iran, became the world’s wealthiest country, with an 
estimated per-­capita gross domestic product (GDP) of $143,400 in 2014 (CIA 
World Factbook 2015).
State-­owned Qatar Telecom (since renamed Ooredoo) had a mono­poly on the 
internet market in Qatar prior to 2013 (Alqudsi-­ghabra et al. 2011). Nine internet 
ser­vice providers (ISPs) currently are licensed in the country (allISPs, 2015). Infra-
structure improvements have featured prominently in Qatar’s preparations for play-
ing host to soccer’s World Cup in 2022, with information technology (IT) at the 
forefront. The government is working to expand the country’s fiber-­to-­the-­home 
network, increase access to universal high-­speed broadband, install two new sub-
marine cables for enhanced international connectivity, and extend ­free Wi-­Fi ser­
vice across the country (ictQATAR 2013).
Qatar is the second most wired country in the ­Middle East (­after Saudi Arabia), 
and in 2002, it became the first in the region to adopt asymmetric digital subscriber 
line (ADSL) internet. In 2011, 98 ­percent of primary-­ and secondary-­schoolchildren 
in Qatar had access to the internet (The Peninsula 2011). In 2013, 67 ­percent of 
Qatar-­citizen internet users utilized social networking sites, spending 3.9 hours per 
day on them. Among non-­Qataris, 77 ­percent of Arab-­expatriate internet users 
utilized social networking sites, spending 2.9 hours per day on them; the figures 
for Asian expatriates ­were even higher (80 ­percent and 3.2 hours per day), and for 
Q

QATAR
240
Western expatriates, the usage was at 85 ­percent and 2.8 hours per day (ictQATAR 
2013).
Regarding social media applications, 88 ­percent of Qatari residents—­the Arab 
world’s fourth-­highest percentage—­use Facebook. Among Qatari-­citizen internet 
users, however, Facebook penetration is 65 ­percent. Qatari citizens are more likely 
to use Twitter (65 ­percent) and Instagram (48 ­percent) than are non-­Qatari resi-
dents of the country (33 ­percent and 8 ­percent, respectively). Further, 94 ­percent 
of Qatari citizens use Arabic when accessing the internet, but 56 ­percent also are 
able to engage online in En­glish, and 10 ­percent of residents use Google+ (North-
western University of Qatar 2014).
Perhaps owing to its wealth, Qatar experienced ­little of the po­liti­cal upheaval 
that roiled the ­Middle East following the 2010–2012 “Arab Spring” uprisings. Nev-
ertheless, and in spite of the 2003 constitution’s guarantees, the Qatari government 
closely monitors residents’ online and offline be­hav­iors and punishes dissent. Or­
ga­nized opposition to the government is banned, and po­liti­cal parties are illegal.
Internet usage in Qatar is governed by Decree Law No. 34, a telecommunica-
tions law passed in 2006. It criminalizes, with fines and imprisonment for up to 
one year, using “a telecommunications network . . . ​for the purposes of disturbing, 
irritating or offending any persons” (Alqudsi-­ghabra et al. 2011). The U.S. State 
Hamad International Airport in Doha, Qatar, offers travelers computer kiosks with amenities 
such as internet access. Qatar has one of the highest internet penetration rates in the ­Middle 
East, and aims to connect more ­people through continuous government infrastructure improve-
ment programs. (9darek​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

QATAR
241
Department has criticized Qatar for restricting civil liberties and reported that the 
government censors the internet through a proxy server that monitors websites, 
email, and chat rooms. Pornography, sites containing po­liti­cal criticism of the Ara-
bian Peninsula countries, and material deemed offensive to Islam are blocked. Gay 
and lesbian content, reproductive health information, and sites offering tools for 
enhancing privacy or evading controls also are filtered. ­Because of the strict regula-
tions, journalists practice self-­censorship when reporting on the government, the 
ruling ­family, and Islam (OpenNet Initiative 2009). Officials at the Communica-
tions Regulatory Authority and the Ministry of Information and Communications 
Technology have denied censoring the internet and insisted that ISPs are respon-
sible for ensuring that subscribers comply with the 2006 law (Kovessy 2015).
In 2011, Qatari citizen Muhammad Rashid al-­Ajami aka Muhammad ibn al-­
Dheeb (c.1985–) was arrested for criticizing the country’s leaders in a poem titled 
“Tunisian Jasmine.” It read in part, “We are all Tunisia, in the face of the repressive 
elite.” While studying in Cairo in 2010, al-­Ajami recited the poem at a private gath-
ering with friends, one of whom uploaded a video of the recitation to YouTube. He 
was sentenced to life in prison in 2012 for inciting an overthrow of the regime, but 
his punishment was reduced on appeal to fifteen years in 2013. International ­human 
rights groups criticized the case, with Amnesty International calling for his uncon-
ditional release (Bollier 2013). In March 2016, Emir Tamim bin Hamad pardoned 
al-­Ajami, and he was released from prison.
In 2015, ­Human Rights Watch urged Qatar to remove “loosely worded provi-
sions penalizing criticism of Qatar or neighboring governments” from a draft me-
dia law that has been pending since 2012. The legislation eliminates criminal 
penalties for media law violations, but Article 53 prohibits publishing or broad-
casting information that would “throw relations between the state and the Arab 
and friendly states into confusion” or “abuse the regime or offend the ruling ­family 
or cause serious harm to the national or higher interests of the state.” Violators 
would be fined up to $275,000.
Qatar residents generally ­were positive about the internet’s benefits, according 
to a 2013 survey. For 79 ­percent of the respondents, the internet was the first place 
that they went for information; 60 ­percent agreed with the statement “­People like 
you can better understand the nature of power­ful institutions”; 58 ­percent con-
curred that the internet enabled ­people to “have more influence on society”; and 
57 ­percent believed that it allowed them to “have more say about public issues” 
(Northwestern University of Qatar 2014).
In light of the well-­known monitoring and filtering of the internet in Qatar—­
illustrated by a “technical issue” at Ooredoo that resulted in the temporary block-
ing of several popu­lar websites that made headline news (Kovessy 2015)—­some 
survey responses appear naïve or reflective of a desire to avoid controversy. For ex-
ample, 60 ­percent of respondents agreed that “it is okay for ­people to express their 
ideas on the internet even if they are unpop­u­lar”; 54 ­percent admitted feeling com-
fortable “saying what I think on public issues”; and 46 ­percent said it was “safe to 
say what­ever one thinks about public issues.” Only 38 ­percent worried that power­
ful institutions ­were checking their online activities. Tellingly, in this conservative 

QATAR
242
society, 60 ­percent of Qatar citizens agreed that “the internet should be more tightly 
regulated in Qatar” (Northwestern University of Qatar 2014).
Mark A. Caudill
See also: Saudi Arabia; United Arab Emirates
Further Reading
allISPs. 2015. “List of ISPs in Qatar.” Accessed November 23, 2015. http://­222​.­allisps​.­com​/​
en​/­offers​/­QATAR
Alqudsi​-­ghabra, Taghreed M., Al-­Bannai, Talal, and Al-­Bahrani, Mohammad. 2011. “The 
Internet in the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council (AGCC): Vehicle of Change.” Interna­
tional Journal of Internet Science, 6(1): 44–67.
Arab Social Media Report. 2014. “Twitter in the Arab Region.” March. Accessed October 27, 
2015. http://­www​.­arabsocialmediareport​.­com​/­Twitter​/­LineChart​.­aspx​?­&PriMenuID​
=­18&CatID​=­25&mnu​=­Cat
Bollier, Sam. 2013. “Qatari Poet’s Sentence Reduced to 15 Years.” February 25. Al Jazeera. 
Accessed November 23, 2015. http://­www​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­news​/­middleeast​/­2013​/­02​
/­20132251151345579​.­html
CIA World Factbook. 2015. “Qatar.” Accessed November 20, 2015. https://­www​.­cia​.­gov​/​
library​/­publications​/­the​-­world​-­factbook​/­geos​/­qa​.­html
Democracy Now. 2015. “Life Sentence for Qatari Poet Reduced to 15 Years.” February 26. 
Accessed April 10, 2016. http://­www​.­democracynow​.­org​/­2013​/­2​/­26​/­headlines#2269
Dennis, Everette E., Martin, Justin D., and Wood, Robb. 2014. “Media Use in the ­Middle 
East: An Eight-­Nation Survey.” Northwestern University in Qatar. Accessed November 
20, 2015. https://­www​.­scribd​.­com​/­fullscreen​/­148423818​?­access​_­key​=­key​-­hhrnkzjb​
5s6ns9vu3md&allow​_­share​=­true&view​_­mode​=­scroll
GO​-­Gulf. 2013. “Smartphone Usage in the ­Middle East—­Statistics and Trends.” October 2. 
Accessed November 20, 2015. http://­www​.­go​-­gulf​.­ae​/­blog​/­smartphone​-­middle​-­east​/­
­Human Rights Watch. 2016. “Qatar: Events of 2015.” Accessed April 10, 2016. https://­www​
.­hrw​.­org​/­world​-­report​/­2016​/­country​-­chapters​/­qatar#5b498e
Hume, Tim, and Elwazer, Schams. 2016. “Qatari Poet Accused of Insulting Emir Freed ­After 
4 Years, U.N. Says.” CNN. Accessed April 10, 2016. http://­edition​.­cnn​.­com​/­2016​/­03​/​
16​/­middleeast​/­qatar​-­poet​-­released​/­index​.­html
ictQATAR. 2013. “Qatar’s ICT Landscape 2013.” Accessed November 20, 2015. http://­www​
.­ictqatar​.­qa​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­documents​/­Qatar%20ICT%20Landscape​_­EN​.­pdf
Internet World Stats. 2014. “Internet Usage in the ­Middle East.” December 31. Accessed 
October 27, 2015. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats5​.­htm#me
Kovessy, Peter. 2015. “Several Popu­lar Websites Temporarily Blocked in Qatar.” February 11, 
2015. Doha News. Accessed November 23, 2015. http://­dohanews​.­co​/­popular​-­websites​
-­temporarily​-­blocked​-­qatar​/­
Northwestern University of Qatar. 2013. Media Use in the ­Middle East, 2013. Accessed 
October 27, 2015. http://menamediasurvey.northwestern.edu/
OpenNet Initiative. 2009. “Internet Filtering in Qatar,” August 6. Accessed October 27, 
2015. https://­opennet​.­net​/­sites​/­opennet​.­net​/­files​/­ONI​_­Qatar​_­2009​.­pdf
Reyaee, Sulaiman, and Ahmed, Aquil. 2015. “Growth Pattern of Social Media Usage in Arab 
Gulf States: An Analytical Study,” April 14. Accessed October 27, 2015. http://­dx​.­doi​
.­org​/­10​.­4236​/­sn​.­2015​.­42003
The Peninsula. 2011. “e-­class.” October  15. Accessed November  20, 2015. http://­
thepeninsulaqatar​.­com​/­news​/­qatar​/­169224​/­e​-­class

ROMANIA
Romania is a country located in southeastern Eu­rope, with a geo­graph­i­cal size of 
238,391 square kilo­meters and a population of 19.8 million in 2015. The country 
has been a Eu­ro­pean Union (EU) member since 2007. Set in a traditional competi-
tion with the United States and Japan in the area of information and communica-
tion technologies (ICT), the Eu­ro­pean Union has been making serious efforts to 
become a world leader in the field. To this end, it has sponsored multiple programs 
and strategies that support and stimulate investment, research and development 
(R&D), and innovation in ICT. Digital Agenda, one of ­these initiatives, aims at bring-
ing Eu­rope out of the economic crisis that it has recently experienced and back on 
track to a smart, sustainable, and inclusive society; its general objective is to bring 
durable economic and social benefits, thanks to the digital single market based on 
fast and ultra-­fast internet and interoperable applications. ­These strategies have been 
adapted and ­adopted in the twenty-­eight member states, including Romania, and 
have imprinted on them a clear positive trend in ICT.
Some Romanian strengths in the ICT sector include a ­great interest and major 
accomplishments in cybersecurity (e.g. Bitdefender, a “visionary” endpoint protec-
tion platform, according to Gartner; and Roboscan, an advanced truck/plane scan-
ning system designed and developed by a team of specialists at MBTechnology), 
functional online procurement/payment platforms at the governmental level (e.g. 
www​.­e​-­licitatie​.­ro, www​.­ghiseul​.­ro, and www​.­seap​.­ro), the presence of strong na-
tional and multinational ICT companies, and a well-­developed ICT infrastructure 
in major cities, which is progressing in terms of wireless internet access in public 
spaces. In terms of electricity consumption, Romania is truly a green country: in 
2014, the electricity generated from renewable sources (like hydroenergy, biomass, 
solar energy, wind energy and geothermal energy) represented 41.7 ­percent of gross 
electricity consumption (Eurostat 2014).
In Romania, 52 ­percent of individuals aged sixteen to seventy-­four years old 
(more than 10 million ­people) use the internet regularly (on a daily or weekly ba-
sis), while 32 ­percent of the Romanian population has never used the internet (Eu­
ro­pean Commission 2015). Further, 68  ­percent of Romanian ­house­holds have 
internet access. Most connections (90 ­percent) are broadband, but ­there is a signifi-
cant gap between urban and rural areas. Inhabitants in rural areas do not subscribe 
to internet access due to the costs of the necessary ser­vice or equipment, which are 
perceived as high, although prices are falling, especially for 3-­in-1 packages (fixed 
internet data connection, cable TV, and landline). They access internet using mainly 
mobile phones and tablets (Stanca 2015). Internet is used mainly for sending/
R

ROMANIA
244
receiving emails, finding information about goods and ser­vices, reading newspa-
pers online, posting messages on online social platforms, searching for tourist 
ser­vices, and creating a website. Only around 10 ­percent of individuals aged sixteen 
to seventy-­four use the internet for ordering goods or ser­vices, interacting with pub-
lic authorities, or internet banking.
More than half of Romanians ­today have a personal subscription to one of the 
main four mobile operators. One of four Romanians use a prepaid card for mobile 
telephony. Mobility is also encouraged by high 3G (96 ­percent) and 4G (25 ­percent) 
coverage, as well as the recent but rapidly developing Long-­Term Evolution (LTE) 
coverage, which ­causes the migration of increasingly tech-­savvy consumers from 
wired access to mobile phones (Digi24 2015).
The penetration rate of smartphones among the population of Romania has ex-
ploded in recent years, currently reaching about 40 ­percent; the average download 
speed has doubled in recent years. The consumption of mobile data is similar, with 
32 ­percent of Romanians using the internet on mobile devices as soon as they wake 
up (Ziarul Financiar 2015). However, low purchasing power, demographic struc-
ture of the population, and the low level of digital literacy of the older population 
translate into a still-­reduced rate of mobile internet penetration.
Regarding digital skills, 85 ­percent of Romanians have low or no ICT skills, com-
pared with the Eu­ro­pean average of 47 ­percent. Therefore, steps have been taken 
to promote e-­inclusion, which ­will allow greater penetration of ICT in the daily 
life of citizens. Since 2005, ICT has been compulsory for all specializations and 
qualifications in theoretical and vocational high schools. Also, a mandatory exam 
that certifies the ICT skills of Romanian high school gradu­ates has been in place 
since 2009. Meanwhile, over 70 ­percent of universities have implemented an e-­
learning platform, and most libraries (especially in rural areas) are equipped with 
computers.
Between 2005 and 2015, Romanians have been embracing social media with en-
thusiasm. As a result, in July 2016, ­there ­were 8.5 million Facebook users, which 
represent 42.5 ­percent of the population and 88 ­percent of all internet users (Face-
brands 2016). The strong attraction to Facebook has transformed it into a second 
internet. Other social network sites used are WhatsApp, Twitter, YouTube, Insta-
gram, and LinkedIn (Mediafax 2016). The cohesion and empathy expressed by citi-
zens on social media increased considerably ­after a fire raged through Collectiv, a 
nightclub in Bucharest, killing 64 ­people and injuring 147 (Colectiv 2015); this 
unfortunate event caused mass anger against the government, its poor enforcement 
of safety regulations, and its tolerance of corruption. Social media is now used in a 
more conscious manner by its aficionados, who are convinced by the real power of 
expression and action that this media provides, and is also used in a more profes-
sional way by public institutions and private organ­izations.
Even ­after the pressure of the civic solidarity expressed by Romanians during the 
last several years, the presence of public institutions on social online platforms 
remains unremarkable. Most institutions have developed a type of unidirectional 
communication that reports information but does not give citizens the capacity to 
provide comments and feedback in real time. The e-­Government ser­vices generally 

ROMANIA
245
satisfied users who appreciate the results of interaction with the administration, 
such as the usefulness of information, the ease of finding that information, ease of 
use, and the transparency of ser­vices provided (Georgescu and Popescul 2014). 
The main e-­Government pro­cesses by the city halls that have moved into the vir-
tual environment include the following: “payment transactions of debts to the lo-
cal public administration; filling in forms; searching for documents (functioning 
certificates, of taxi companies ­etc.); booking city hall ser­vices (hearings, marriages 
­etc.)”; information delivery; and discussions with citizens (Popescul 2012, 239).
Despite having a presence on Web 2.0, the city halls are not putting enough ef-
fort into using the web to interact with citizens. This shortfall most likely comes 
from the lack of competition in the environment where they operate, as competi-
tion often drives innovation and interaction (Popescul 2012). City hall has tried a 
number of initiatives, such as having a YouTube channel and creating web content 
accessible on mobile devices, but ­these strategies have not yet been integrated into 
a municipal strategy to improve relations with the population at large (Popescul 
2012). The role of social network sites was understood better by supporters of cer-
tain poltical parties than by the parties themselves (Tasențe 2014). Interaction with 
candidates online in a colloquial manner is now pos­si­ble, and offers the potential 
to provoke discussion and elicit reactions. ­These media have the power to attract 
young ­people to express their opinions.
Since 2004, blogging in Romania has grown in popularity, becoming one of the 
most common formats for self-­expression and communications in social media. 
A series of studies show the rise of Romania’s blogging phenomenon and the ef-
fects that blogs can have on their readers (Tomiuc and Stan 2015). By 2014, ac-
cording to the Zelist Monitor, blogging activity reached over 92,000 blogs, with 
18.5 million posts and over 15.7 million comments (Zelist 2016). A total of 
56 ­percent of Romanians read blogs, which cover an extensive area of subjects: 
personal interest, entertainment, politics, tourism, news, sports, education, eco-
nomics, new media and technology, environment, ­music, film, lifestyle, and other 
diverse subjects (Tomiuc and Stan 2015).
The main reason for students’ social media use is to foster social interaction with 
old or new friends, as social relationships with other persons are universal ­human 
needs critical to the psychological well-­being of individuals, and ­these needs are 
very well addressed by social media. Other reasons for use that students mentioned, 
In mid-2015, Swiftkey, a social media app developer, released a two-­part report on 
emoji use around the world. Their findings for Eastern Eu­rope revealed that ­there 
are varying preferences concerning the most popu­lar emoji. Croatian-­, Hungarian-­, 
and Serbian-­language users utilized more hearts than any other emoji, while Czech, 
Romanian, and Slovakian users preferred smiley ­faces. Additional results showed that 
Hungarians tend to avoid the thumbs-up emoji, while most of the other languages 
steer away from sad or strange ­faces. Swiftkey’s reports analyzed over a billion posts 
using emoji to produce ­these results (Swiftkey 2015, 11–13).

ROMANIA
246
in descending order of importance, ­were listening to ­music, seeking out academic 
information, passing time when idle or bored, education, reading posts/comments, 
playing games, looking for new friends, shopping, expression of opinions, fighting 
loneliness, surveillance/knowledge about ­others, and self-­promotion. Even if the 
entertaining aspects prevail, the academic reasons are also very well represented as 
­many students seek out school-­related information in social media frequently; also, 
they often use social media for educational purposes (Georgescu and Popescul 
2016). ­There is a difference in students’ preferences for one media site or another. 
The uncontestable Romanian students’ favorite is Facebook (checked hourly), fol-
lowed by YouTube (for listening to ­music, watching entertainment videos, and 
watching educational videos). Blogs and Wikipedia are read regularly, and a few 
students use them for posting, commenting, and editing. Instagram is used by al-
most half of students. A few students occasionally use podcasting, Twitter, ­Really 
­Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds, Flickr, LinkedIn, or MySpace.
Three-­quarters of the companies in Romania use social networks to promote 
business, and Facebook is the number one platform for communication in social 
media, as revealed in a study by EY Romania. Although the number of users is 
growing, the presence and actions of brands in social media has somehow stabi-
lized since 2015. Facebook is preferred by 92 ­percent of companies; 44 ­percent 
have social media initiatives at the marketing level; and 21 ­percent have a social 
media strategy integrated into the global com­pany strategy (Badea 2015). Their 
actions include company/brand campaigns on blogs, campaigns by video blog-
gers, Facebook pages/campaigns, Instagram/Twitter/LinkedIn/Google+/Snap-
chat/Tumblr/Flickr accounts, and the initiation or support of events in the 
blogosphere, especially with video bloggers. Banks are becoming more of an online 
presence and invest in social media, primarily to launch specific ser­vices to reach 
consumers.
Daniela Popescul
See also: Germany; Greece; Hungary; Italy
Further Reading
Badea, D. 2016. “74% Dintre Companiile din România Se Promovează Pe Rețele de Social-
izare, în Special pe Facebook (studiu).” February 24. Accessed June 2, 2016. http://­
www​.­agerpres​.­ro​/­economie​/­2016​/­02​/­24​/­74​-­dintre​-­companiile​-­din​-­romania​-­se​
-­promoveaza​-­pe​-­retele​-­de​-­socializare​-­in​-­special​-­pe​-­facebook​-­studiu—12​-­14​-­22
Bitdefender. “Digi24. 2015. Studiu de Piaţă: Ce Operatori de Telefonie Mobilă Apreciază 
Românii în Prezent.” June 9. Accessed June 23, 2016. http://­www​.­digi24​.­ro​/­Stiri​/­Digi24​/​
Actualitate​/­Stiri​/­Studiu+de+piata+Ce+operatori+de+telefonie+mobila+apreciaza​+roman
European Commission. 2015. “Digital Agenda Scoreboard Key Indicators.” Accessed 
March 22, 2016. http://­digital​-­agenda​-­data​.­eu​/­datasets​/­digital​_­agenda​_­scoreboard​_­key​
_­indicators​/­visualizations
Eurostat. n.d. “Your Key to Eu­ro­pean Statistics.” Accessed June 9, 2016. http://­ec​.­europa​
.­eu​/­eurostat.
Facebrands. 2016. “Date demografice Facebook Romania.” July 26. Accessed August 30, 
2016 http://­www​.­facebrands​.­ro​/­demografice​.­html.

RUSSIA
247
Georgescu, M., and Popescul, D. 2014. “The Uncertainty of Using Web 2.0 Technologies in 
E-­Government Development. Romania’s Case.” Procedia Economics and Finance, 15: 
769–776.
Georgescu, M., and Popescul, D. 2016. “Students in Social Media: Be­hav­ior, Expectations, 
and Views.” Proceedings of the IE 2015 Conference, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
Idea Connection. 2009. “Roboscan.” Accessed August 30, 2016. https://­www​.­ideaconnection​
.­com​/­invention​-­success​/­ROBOSCAN​-­00062​.­html
Mediafax. 2016. “Peste Jumătate Dintre Liderii Companiilor, Prezenţi pe Reţele de Social-
izare: România Este o ţară Care Are o Cultură de Leadership ce Poartă încă Amprenta 
Tranziţiei.” April 14. Accessed June 13, 2016. http://­www​.­mediafax​.­ro​/­economic​/­peste​
-­jumatate​-­dintre​-­liderii​-­companiilor​-­prezenti​-­pe​-­retele​-­de​-­socializare​-­romania​-­este​-­o​
-­tara​-­care​-­are​-­o​-­cultura​-­de​-­leadership​-­ce​-­poarta​-­inca​-­amprenta​-­tranzitiei​-­15251951
Popescul, Daniela. 2012. “Pro­cess Innovation in the Romanian Public Administration: Ob-
servations and Recommendations,” Lucrări Ştiinţifice. Seria Agronomie, 55: 239–243.
Stanca, A. 2015. “Peste 10 Milioane de Români au Acces la Internet. Care Este Profilul Uti-
lizatorului Din Mediul Rural.” March 5. Accessed June 22, 2016. http://­www​.­gandul​
.­info​/­it​-­c​/­peste​-­10​-­milioane​-­de​-­romani​-­au​-­acces​-­la​-­internet​-­care​-­este​-­profilul​
-­utilizatorului​-­din​-­mediul​-­rural​-­13936734
Tasențe, T. 2015. “The Electoral Campaign Through Social Media. Case Study—2014 Presi-
dential Elections in Romania.” Sfera Politicii, XXIII, 1(183): 92–104.
Tomiuc, A., and Stan, O. 2015. “The Fashion Blogosphere in Romania. Fashionscape and 
Fashion Bloggers.” Postmodern Openings, 6 (1): 161–174.
Zelist. http://­www​.­zelist​.­ro​/­
Ziarul Financiar. 2015. “Aplicaţiile Mobile au Devenit o Normalitate. Peste 30% Din Români 
Folosesc Internetul pe Mobil Imediat ce se Trezesc.” April 22. Accessed July 27, 2016. 
http://­www​.­zf​.­ro​/­business​-­hi​-­tech​/­aplicatiile​-­mobile​-­au​-­devenit​-­o​-­normalitate​-­peste​
-­30​-­din​-­romani​-­folosesc​-­internetul​-­pe​-­mobil​-­imediat​-­ce​-­se​-­trezesc​-­14135443
RUSSIA
Russia, or the Rus­sian Federation (RF), emerged from the ruins of the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), or the Soviet Union. ­After the USSR’s first 
and last president, Mikhail Gorbachev (1931–), publicly resigned his office on 
December 25, 1991, the RF ended up as the world’s largest country mea­sured by 
geography—­just over 17 million square kilo­meters, stretching from Eastern Eu­rope 
to the Pacific Ocean—­with a population of between 144 and 146 million as of 2016 
(World Bank 2015; Rus­sian Federal Ser­vice of State Statistics n.d.). Geo­graph­i­cally, 
RF is nearly twice the size of the United States. The RF also inherited the USSR’s 
dilapidated industrial, transportation, institutional, and technological infrastructure. 
The development of information technology (IT), from mass media to telephony 
to the Rus­sian Internet (RuNet) and social media, has ­shaped RF’s social and po­
liti­cal history from Boris Yeltsin (1931–2007) through Dmitry Medvedev (1965–) 
to current RF president Vladimir Putin (1952–). ­Whether the internet ­will provide 
an ave­nue for liberal democracy or greater centralized federal authority in Rus­sia 
remains to be seen (Gorham 2014; Greene 2014).
The USSR’s quiet dissolution surprised Western analysts, but nearly all of them 
acknowledge the importance of media. It had a vast nuclear arsenal, extensive 

RUSSIA
248
store­houses of chemical and biological weapons with the requisite delivery mecha-
nisms, and more than 5 million soldiers, along with additional Commissariat of 
State Security (KGB) and interior ministry battalions. The USSR was a near-­peer to 
the United States in military and technological capabilities. It also had an astound-
ing number of soldiers and police at its disposal. However, ­these forces never ex-
perienced a major mutiny, nor ­were they employed to stave off the collapse. 
Surprisingly, the USSR dis­appeared quietly (Kotkin 2001). By contrast, civil wars in 
the post-­Soviet space occurred in nominally in­de­pen­dent nation states ­after the 
collapse of the USSR, the dynamics of which ­were ­shaped to a large degree by the 
explosion of in­de­pen­dent mass print and tele­vi­sion media (Beissinger 2002). Since 
Putin’s surprising ascension to the presidency on December 31, 1999, mass media in 
general, and the RuNet in par­tic­u­lar, have provided ave­nues for dissent and repres-
sion as RF finds its way from Soviet po­liti­cal life (McFaul 2001). RF’s IT infrastruc-
ture is new, but the visions for its use have roots in the USSR.
Like the space industry, the USSR’s IT sector emerged immediately ­after World 
War II. However, unlike the space race, which the USSR won over the United States 
with Yuri Gagarin’s (1934–1968) trip around the Earth aboard the Vostok 1 on April 12, 
1961, the Soviet Union lost the IT race. Theoretically and chronologically, both the 
USSR and the United States shared the same point of departure. Through economic 
exchanges during World War II, Soviet economic planners and mathematicians en-
countered the ideas of the ­father of modern IT, Norbert Wiener (1894–1964), the 
son of a Rus­sian Jewish émigré. During World War II, Wiener developed mathe-
matical theories and techniques for controlling chance in support of U.S. war­time 
military proj­ects on fire control, cryptology, and basic military command and control. 
In 1948, Wiener codified them by coining the term cyber from the ancient Greek 
for “govern” ­because he saw the potential for digitized information structuring and 
dissemination to govern the world beyond the military (Weiner 1965, 11–12).
Soviet researchers and academics quietly reinvented Wiener’s pioneering field 
­after the death of Joseph Stalin (1878–1953). Privately, the Soviet/Ukrainian math-
ematician Viktor Glushkov (1923–1982), who became aware of Wiener’s ideas while 
on an exchange in the United States, developed his concept of cybernetics. Then 
in 1962, he publicly extended cybernetics to the Soviet context in an article for the 
Literary Gazette entitled “Cybernetics, Pro­gress, and the ­Future.” Economic plan-
ners found the possibility of obtaining reliable and timely information about 
Soviet production and consumption essential for accurate planning purposes. 
For po­liti­cal reasons, however, the Soviet Union never developed any digital net-
work comparable to the U.S. military’s Advanced Research Proj­ects Agency Network 
(ARPANET), whose foundational infrastructure originated in 1950s automated air 
defense systems designed to detect Soviet nuclear intercontinental ballistic mis-
sile (ICBM) attacks and which laid the groundwork for the modern internet 
through the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s (Gerovitch 2002; Peters 2016).
The con­temporary Rus­sian government inherited the Soviet dilemma that ­free 
access to information posed: namely, the possibility that the freedom, social jus-
tice, and economic growth that it might promote could undermine po­liti­cal security, 
order, and stability in the country. Rus­sia has unevenly pursued both strategies since 

RUSSIA
249
2000. Roughly speaking, President Putin, who headed the Rus­sian government from 
2000 to 2008 and, ­after a constitutionally mandated break, again from 2012 to the 
pres­ent, regards IT development as a national security concern. By contrast, Presi-
dent Medvedev promoted IT research and development as a source of economic 
development during his term in office from 2008 to 2012.
This distinction between Putin’s and Medvedev’s policy preferences, however, 
should not be drawn too sharply. Putin’s now-­famous lament that he “­really regret-
ted that the Soviet Union had lost its position in Eastern Eu­rope” prob­ably reflects 
the USSR’s loss of legitimate authority, which could have checked much of the vio­
lence that erupted throughout the former Soviet Union in the 1990s (Putin 2000, 
80). What is less well remembered is that Putin also understood, at least theoreti-
cally, that “a position built on walls and dividers,” which the internet undermines, 
“cannot last” (Putin 2000, 80). ­These tensions have ­shaped popu­lar Rus­sian use of 
the internet.
Putin’s national security staff has consistently emphasized the national security 
dimension of IT and information. As early as September 9, 2000, this princi­ple was 
codified in the “Rus­sian Federation’s Doctrine of Information Security.” The Rus­
sian government reiterated the primacy of security in the IT and information realms 
in the “Development Strategy of an Information Society in the Rus­sian Federation,” 
released on February 7, 2008. The role of information security and an emphasis 
on cyber-­sovereignty are part of the broader “National Security Strategy of the Rus­
sian Federation to 2020,” published on May 12, 2009.
The RF government has expressed its national security concerns particularly in 
relation to Ukraine’s “Orange Revolution” in 2004. In this uprising, Ukrainian citi-
zens used social media to or­ga­nize public protests against the Party of Region’s 
candidate, Viktor Yanukovych (1950–), who they thought had won a rigged presi-
dential election. RF still publicly claims that foreign governments ­were somehow 
­behind the protests. ­There are also reports that Rus­sian security services, or ­people 
acting on behalf of the security services, launched cyberattacks against the Esto-
nian government and financial websites in April 2007 and against Georgian web-
sites immediately preceding the Georgian War in August  2008. Since RF’s 
annexation of Crimea in February 2014, social media sites have been a significant 
component of news, propaganda, and government messaging in Kyiv (Kiev) and 
Moscow. Despite evidence of Rus­sian cyber-­offenses, this national security policy 
has tended to be conservative and defensive (Greene 2014).
Alongside the national security dimension of IT and digital media, RF has also 
pursued internet growth for economic development, freedom, and justice. During 
his presidency from 2008 to 2012, Medvedev promoted this line of development 
with his September 10, 2009, pamphlet “Go Rus­sia!” This document proposed a 
series of mea­sures to stimulate IT innovation, including e-­governance, education 
programs, the development of a national grid of supercomputers, and Skolkovo, a 
600-­acre plot of land in Moscow’s western suburbs. The innovation hub in Skolkovo 
was intended to be “something on the lines of Silicon Valley” (Appell 2015). Med-
vedev reiterated his commitment to IT and information development in his “Ad-
dress to the Federal Assembly” on November 12, 2009. At first, the Skolkovo 

RUSSIA
250
initiative was successful. The Medvedev government negotiated a partnership be-
tween Skolkovo and the Mas­sa­chu­setts Institute of Technology (MIT); Cisco Sys-
tems provided a $100 million investment; and the number of tech companies grew 
from 332 in 2011, to 793 by 2012, and more than 1,000 in 2013 (Appell 2015). 
Since the first months of 2014, however, growth has stalled (Appell 2015).
Between ­these two broad policy agendas, Rus­sian IT and digital technologies have 
thrived. In the summer of 2003, Rus­sians eigh­teen years of age and older who used 
the internet daily comprised 3 ­percent of the population, or 3.1 million users. As 
of fall 2015, 63.9 million Rus­sians eigh­teen years of age or older used the internet 
daily (FOM 2015). The rate of growth has slowed since the summer of 2014, prob­
ably due to market saturation and infrastructure limitations in rural Rus­sia (FOM 
2015). The percentage and number of Rus­sians eigh­teen years of age or older 
who use the internet weekly or monthly has grown even more than daily usage, to 
74.4 million users and 78.2 million users, respectively (FOM 2015). The internet 
penetration rate as a percentage of the 78.2 million monthly users, according to re-
gion, is as follows: (1) the Central region, including Moscow—28.4 ­percent; (2) the 
Trans-­Volga region—19.6 ­percent; (3) the Southern and North-­Caucasus regions 
(combined)—15.8 ­percent; (4) the Siberian region—12.9 ­percent; (5) the North-
west region, including Saint Petersburg—10.8  ­percent; (6) the Ural re-
gion—8.3 ­percent; and (7) the Far Eastern region—4.2 ­percent (FOM 2015).
Rus­sia’s internet backbone enables ­these penetration rates. Data available from 
Rus­sian and Eu­ro­pean internet exchange point (IXP) websites (i.e. euro​-­ix​.­net and 
ix.ru) as of December 2015 indicate that seventeen cities host IXPs: Moscow, Saint 
Petersburg, Yekaterinburg, Yaroslavl, Ulyanovsk, Krasnodar, Saratov, Perm, Omsk, 
Krasnoyarsk, Nizhniy Novgorod, Rostov-­on-­Don, Stavropol, Samara, Kazan, Novo-
sibirsk, and Vladivostok. IXPs are centralized hubs that route data from PCs through 
internet ser­vice provider (ISP) networks of varying size or autonomous systems 
(ASs) around the world (Wilson 2015). Skolkovo’s results may be mixed, but the 
Rus­sian government ­under President Medvedev certainly expanded Rus­sia’s internet 
infrastructure, which was a precondition for its current internet penetration rates.
RF’s internet audience consumes a vast array of foreign and domestic online re-
sources, many of which have mobile apps. Given differences in language and al-
phabet, foreign social media and internet platforms have interwoven themselves 
with indigenous offerings. As of late 2015, Rus­sia’s top ten websites ­were Yandex.
ru, Vkontakte (VK), Google.ru, Mail.ru, YouTube, Google​.­com, Odnaklassniki (OK), 
Facebook, Aliexpress​.­com, and Avito.ru (Alexa​.­com). Yandex is the most popu­lar 
search engine in the RuNet, while VK and OK are the most popu­lar social network-
ing platforms. Aliexpress is an online merchant site, and Avito is a Rus­sian equiva-
lent of Craigs­list. Rus­sian news sites, the blogging platform LiveJournal, Instagram, 
eBay, and Twitter all fall somewhere in the top twenty-­five websites in the RuNet 
(Alexa​.­com). Worldwide, Yandex and VK come in at twenty and twenty-­one, re-
spectively, in terms of frequency of use (Alexa​.­com).
­These platforms and ser­vices are owned by a small number of Rus­sian IT and 
media companies. According to an early 2014 ratings list, Yandex was Rus­sia’s larg-
est internet com­pany; as Google did ­until recently, the com­pany has developed 

RUSSIA
251
numerous ser­vices and search tools ­under one name (Forbes Rus­sia 2014). The 
Mail.ru Group, which owns VK, OK, Mail.ru, and the instant messaging ser­vices 
Agent Mail.ru and ICQ (an Israeli-­developed messaging ser­vice ­later bought by the 
Mail.ru group), is the second largest. The fifth com­pany on the list, Rambler&Co, 
owns Rus­sia’s second search engine, Rambler, the popu­lar news sites Lenta.ru and 
Gazeta.ru, and the impor­tant blogging platform LiveJournal. LiveJournal, which is 
sometimes rendered as its Rus­sian abbreviation ZhZh (short for zhivoi zhurnal), was 
developed in the United States and bought by Rambler&Co in 2007. Interestingly, 
­because the servers for Facebook, Twitter, LiveJournal, and Instagram are located 
outside RF, the Rus­sian government ­faces limits on monitoring and censoring their 
users, which include the opposition blogger Alexei Navalny (1976–), as well as the 
president of the Republic of Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov (1976–).
­After Rus­sia’s major cities experienced social media–­organized protests against 
President Putin’s reelection in December 2011, media coverage in Eu­rope and North 
Amer­i­ca became focused on the Rus­sian government’s filtering and censoring poli-
cies. Since the February 2014 annexation of Crimea, the media have added “infor-
mation warfare” to the list of the Rus­sian government’s strategies of repression and 
manipulation. This critical coverage is not surprising ­because Rus­sia’s government 
aspires to maintain the ability to monitor internet traffic and even shut off sections 
or specific pages of the RuNet (Diebert et al. 2008; Wilson 2015).
Yandex, a Rus­sian IT com­pany, operates the largest search engine in Rus­sia, with both Rus­sian 
and En­glish language search capabilities. Launched in 1997 when the internet was fairly new in 
Rus­sia, Yandex.ru created its domain name from the En­glish phrase Yet Another iNDEXer. Over 
time, it has grown to become Rus­sia’s most popu­lar website. (Raluca Tudor​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

RUSSIA
252
To some extent, this impulse for surveillance and control is rooted in genuine 
law enforcement attempts to fight cybercrime, which is a serious prob­lem through-
out the former Soviet Union. Between 2012 and 2015, this criminal activity origi-
nating in Rus­sia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and some Baltic states caused financial 
damages that exceeded $790 million, $509 million of which was stolen outside 
the bound­aries of the former Soviet Union (Stoyanov 2015). However real and 
legitimate this threat from the internet may be, the Rus­sian government also exe-
cutes po­liti­cally motivated internet outages of po­liti­cal and social dissidents. In 
Eu­rope and North Amer­i­ca, the best-­known victims of such actions are prob­ably 
the nationalist Kremlin critic and blogger Alexei Navalny (1976–), and the per­for­
mance art group Pussy Riot; the socialist activist Sergei Udal’tsov (1977–) is often 
forgotten, as he is serving a jail sentence for allegedly using vio­lence against police 
during the May 2012 protests in Moscow against Putin’s inauguration (Greene 
2014).
Neither censorship and repression nor 2011’s protests tell the ­whole story of the 
Rus­sian internet and social media, however. One of the first po­liti­cal scandals to 
occur in Rus­sia occurred in the midst of uncontrollable fires in the rural areas around 
Moscow from late July to early August 2010. As a result of a complex and poorly 
understood relationship between the federal and local governments, rural institu-
tions ­were unprepared to fight the fires. The damage to government and private 
property was im­mense, and some regions lost significant crop harvests. In response 
to this emergency, a LiveJournal blogger with the user name “top-­lap” posted a long, 
profanity-­laden letter on August 1, 2010, criticizing then–­Prime Minister Putin and 
the central government for not rooting out local corruption. Then top-­lap alleged 
that the inability of local authorities to locate, much less use, firefighting equip-
ment was the cause of the property damage (top-­lap 2010). This post prob­ably 
would have remained unread in the vast sea of LiveJournal pages had a semi-­
independent radio station, Echo of Moscow, not reposted the letter to its website. 
From then on, it drew so many views and became enough of a scandal for Putin to 
take the unpre­ce­dented step of answering the blogger with a letter that Echo of 
Moscow also posted on its site. ­After noting the difficulties that record-­high tem-
peratures posed to the government, Putin answered the “surprisingly open and di-
rect” author of the post that he “on the ­whole agreed with [his] remarks” about 
local po­liti­cal corruption (Putin 2010).
Rus­sia employs hundreds, perhaps even thousands, of ­people for “internet research,” 
where they write a daily quota of blogs and other social media posts that attack 
world leaders and po­liti­cal ideals that do not promote pro-­Russian sentiment. ­These 
troll farms, sometimes referred to in the press as “troll armies,” keep blogs on Live-
Journal, a site that at one time was used heavi­ly by Western bloggers and has since 
become popu­lar in Rus­sia. They also post to forums, vKontakte, Twitter, YouTube, 
Facebook, and Instagram, among other platforms, to promote pro-­Russian govern-
ment messages (Chen 2015).

RUSSIA
253
Since 2010, RF’s policy ­toward internet-­based or internet-­facilitated dissent has 
been less conciliatory. During Putin’s presidential campaign from December 2011 
­until his election in March 2012, the government used internet censorship and 
surveillance together with traditional police tactics to control the “Moscow Spring,” 
a term that deliberately echoes the more familiar “Arab Spring” uprisings from 2010 
to 2012 in the ­Middle East, and describes the public protests in Moscow against the 
results of parliamentary and presidential elections in late 2011 and mid-2012, re-
spectively. Although its digital organizers deliberately linked their movement to the 
uprisings in the ­Middle East, the use of LiveJournal, Facebook, forums, TVRain’s 
YouTube channel, and VK for po­liti­cal organ­ization had originated with a national-
ist movement protesting the portion of the state bud­get assigned to subsidies for the 
North Caucasus. The radical nature of the Moscow Spring activist po­liti­cal demands 
is still ­under dispute, but demographically and geo­graph­i­cally, the movement did 
not extend very far outside the cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg. The govern-
ment’s ability to shape media has certainly fostered vast support for Rus­sia’s annexa-
tion of Crimea. However, much of that support likely comes from Putin’s rural base 
that, ­until February 2014, did not have the same digital access as the Muscovites.
Sean Gillen
See also: Estonia; Georgia; Israel; Ukraine; United States
Further Reading
Alexa​.­com. 2016. “Top Sites in Rus­sia.” Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/
topsites​/­countries​/­RU
Appell, James. 2015. “The Short Life and Speedy Death of Rus­sia’s Silicon Valley.” Foreign 
Policy, May 6. Accessed July 30, 2016, http://­foreignpolicy​.­com​/­2015​/­05​/­06​/­the​-­short​
-­life​-­and​-­speedy​-­death​-­of​-­russias​-­silicon​-­valley​-­medvedev​-­go​-­russia​-­skolkovo​/­
Beissinger, Mark. 2002. Nationalist Mobilization and the Collapse of the Soviet State. Cambridge, 
U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Deibert, Ronald, Palfrey, John, Rohozinski, Rafal, and Zittrain, Jonathan (Eds.). 2008. Access 
Denied: The Practice and Policy of Global Internet Filtering. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forbes Rus­sia. 2014. “10 krupneishikh internet-­kompanii Rossii: Reiting Forbes.” Forbes, 
February 27. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­forbes​.­ru​/­reitingi​-­photogallery​/­251148​
-­10​-­krupneishikh​-­internet​-­kompanii​-­rossii​-­reiting​-­forbes​/­photo​/­1
Fond Obshchestvennoe Mnenie (FOM). 2015. “Internet v Rossii: Analiticheskii Biulleten’ 
Demo.” Accessed July  3, 2016. http://­fom​.­ru​/­uploads​/­files​/­Бюллетень​_­Интернет​_­в​
_­Россиию​_­Выпуск​_­51​.­​_­Осень​_­2015​_­​-­​_­демо​.­pdf
Gerovitch, Slava. 2002. From Newspeak to Cyber Speak: A History of Soviet Cybernetics. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gorham, Michael S. 2014. ­After Newspeak: Language Culture and Politics in Rus­sia from Gor­
bachev to Putin. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Greene, Samuel. 2014. Moscow in Movement: Power and Opposition in Putin’s Rus­sia. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kotkin, Stephen. 2001. Armageddon Averted: The Soviet Collapse, 1970–2000. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
McFaul, Michael. 2001. Rus­sia’s Unfinished Revolution: Po­liti­cal Change from Gorbachev to 
Putin. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

RUSSIA
254
Peters, Benjamin. 2016. How Not to Network a Nation: The Uneasy History of the Soviet Inter­
net. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Putin, Vladimir. 2000. First Person: An Astonishingly Frank Self-­Portrait by Rus­sia’s President. 
Translated by Catherine A. Fitzpatrick. New York: Public Affairs Reports.
Putin, Vladimir. 2010. “Vladimir Putin: Otvet.” Ekho Moskvy, August 4. Accessed July 30, 
2016. http://­echo​.­msk​.­ru​/­doc​/­700728​-­echo​.­html
Russian Federal Ser­vice of State Statistics. n.d. “Rus­sian Federal Ser­vice of State Statistics.” 
Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­www​.­gks​.­ru​/­wps​/­wcm​/­connect​/­rosstat​_­main​/­rosstat​/­ru​
/­statistics​/­population​/­demography​/­#
Stoyanov, Ruslan. 2015. “Rus­sian Financial Cybercrime: How It Works.” Kaspersky Lab’s 
SecureList, November  19. Accessed July  20, 2016. https://­securelist​.­com​/­analysis​
/­publications​/­72782​/­russian​-­financial​-­cybercrime​-­how​-­it​-­works​/­
top​-­lap. 2010. “Znaete pochemu gorim?” August 1. Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­top​-­lap​
.­livejournal​.­com​/­1963​.­html
Wiener, Norbert. 1965. Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and Machine 
Worlds, 2nd ed. (orig. 1948). Cambridge: MIT University Press.
Wilson, Steven Lloyd. 2015. “How to Control the Internet: Comparative Po­liti­cal Implica-
tions of the Internet’s Engineering.” First Monday, 20(2). Accessed July 30, 2016. http://­
journals​.­uic​.­edu​/­ojs​/­index​.­php​/­fm​/­article​/­view​/­5228​/­4204
World Bank. 2015. “Population Total.” Accessed December 21, 2015. http://­data​.­worldbank​
.­org​/­indicator​/­SP​.­POP​.­TOTL

SAUDI ARABIA
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is the largest country in the Arabian Peninsula, lo-
cated between Africa and Asia. As of December 2014, its internet penetration rate 
was 65.9 ­percent of its population of 28 million, the eighth highest internet pen-
etration rate in the ­Middle East (Internet World Stats 2015). A total of 65 ­percent 
of the country’s internet users access the web via smartphone (Nielsen 2014), 
70 ­percent of the population is ­under thirty (Black 2013), and 29 ­percent actively 
use social media (Fraij 2015). In 2014, Saudi Arabia had the world’s highest Twit-
ter penetration, at 60 ­percent of the country’s internet users. It also accounted for 
over 40 ­percent of the active Twitter users among the 22 Arab countries, plus Iran, 
Israel, and Turkey, and the Saudis produced 47 ­percent of all tweets in the region 
(Arab Social Media Report 2014).
In a 2015 survey of approximately 3 million Saudis aged eigh­teen to twenty-­five 
years old, the most popu­lar social media platforms ­were WhatsApp (used by 
22 ­percent of the respondents), Facebook (21 ­percent), and Twitter (19 ­percent). 
That same year, Saudi Arabia accounted for more than 90 million daily YouTube 
views, placing it among the world’s top countries for viewership. Half of Saudi You-
Tube users are ­women (Fraij 2015). In 2009, a local com­pany estimated that two-­
thirds of Saudi internet users ­were ­women (Alqudsi-­ghabra, Al-­Bannai, and 
Al-­Bahrani 2011). At least 300,000 Saudis subscribe to UTURN, a domestic social 
media com­pany airing a variety of shows on YouTube (The Economist 2014). A 
total of 90 ­percent of Saudi internet users interact via Arabic, 8 ­percent use En­
glish, and the remainder communicate in French or other languages (Fraij 2015).
Saudi Arabia’s deeply conservative culture pres­ents unique challenges in the in-
formation technology (IT) context. The government enforces an austere version of 
Sunni Islam, with which many citizens identify. Restrictions on Saudis’ ability to 
communicate freely ­were evident in 2010, when the government blocked Black-
Berry’s then-­popular messaging ser­vice (Ahmed 2013). Many users migrated to so-
cial media, which provided “virtual” freedom of association and assembly (Black 
2013). Twitter experienced a 39.94 ­percent increase in its Saudi market share dur-
ing 2012–2013 (Reyaee and Ahmed 2015). Perhaps not coincidentally, Saudi bil-
lionaire Prince Alwaleed bin Talal (1955–) was one of Twitter’s largest investors, 
controlling a $300 million stake (Ahmed 2013).
Po­liti­cal parties are illegal in Saudi Arabia; activism can result in arrest, and 
self-­censorship is common among journalists (OpenNet Initiative 2009). The 
state-­owned Saudi Telecom Com­pany, created in 1988, is the primary provider of 
S

SAUDI ARABIA
256
telecommunications ser­vices. Twenty-­five internet ser­vice providers operate ­under 
licenses granted by the Ministry of Culture and Information’s Communications and 
Information Technology Commission. All of them access the internet through the 
same centralized state portal (Faris 2013). The King Abdulaziz City for Science and 
Technology (KACST) monitors internet content and imposes censorship, denying 
access to websites containing materials deemed objectionable on moral, po­liti­cal, 
or security grounds. In 2005, a KACST official said that the majority of blocked 
websites ­were pornographic and that over 90 ­percent of Saudi internet users had 
attempted to access blocked websites. KACST relies on citizens to help identify sites 
to be blocked (OpenNet Initiative 2009).
In 2008, Saudi Arabia implemented a law, Royal Decree No. M/17, governing 
the use of IT. It imposed fines and imprisonment for website operators who advo-
cate or support terrorism. It also criminalized other cybercrimes, including finan-
cial fraud, invasion of privacy, and the distribution of pornography or other materials 
contrary to the country’s laws or religious values and social standards (OpenNet 
Initiative 2009). A number of Saudis and foreigners have been prosecuted ­under 
this law.
In 2014, a 24-­year-­old gay Saudi man was arrested for tweets he sent to other 
gay Twitter users. Saudi Arabia’s religious police, the Commission for the Promo-
tion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice (CPVPV), entrapped the man by arrang-
ing for an undercover investigator to meet him ­after agreeing on Twitter to a date 
with him. ­After arresting the man, the CPVPV reportedly found several “indecent” 
and “homosexual” images on his phone. The authorities sought the death penalty, 
but the man pleaded guilty and was sentenced to three years in prison and 450 
lashes administered over fifteen sessions (Williams 2014). Also in 2014, a Saudi 
court, citing the 2008 law, sentenced ­human rights activist Fowzan al-­Harbi (1978–) 
to seven years in prison for disseminating information “harmful to public order” 
(The Economist 2014).
The internet is contested space in Saudi Arabia. The government uses it to mon-
itor public opinion and sources of dissent. In 2016, the special court for terrorism 
sentenced an unidentified Saudi to 10 years in prison for using Twitter to “call for 
protests and spread chaos to release detainees that are held for security and terror-
ism charges” (Agence France Presse 2016). In 2014, ­Human Rights Watch reported 
that authorities in Qatif, an eastern governorate with a high concentration of mi-
nority Shia Muslims, ­were employing spyware (The Economist 2014). In 2013, a 
Saudi judicial official warned citizens abroad that they, too, could be punished for 
violating the country’s cyber laws (Malouf 2013). Government and clerical figures 
regularly complement official tele­vi­sion broadcasts and mosque sermons with so-
cial media messaging aimed at reinforcing the country’s conservative po­liti­cal and 
religious orthodoxy. Saudi Arabia’s se­nior religious authority, Abdul Aziz al-­Sheikh 
(1941–), described Twitter users as “a bunch of clowns” and accused them of using 
the application “to corrupt values and to spread lies and rumors” (Perlov and 
Guzansky 2014).
Liberal activists have used the internet to call for improving the status of ­women 
and minorities. While promoting greater participation by ­women and youth within 

SAUDI ARABIA
257
existing power structures, they have stopped short of explic­itly demanding the im-
plementation of democracy. Radical Saudi clerics, propagators of anti-­Western, 
anti-­Shia, and anti-­Semitic views, are among the country’s most popu­lar internet 
personalities. Three leading preachers, Salman al-­Ouda (1955–), Muhammad al-­
Arifi (1970–), and Ahmed al-­Shugairi (1973–), boast 5–7 million social media fol-
lowers each (Perlov and Guzansky 2014).
As for ordinary Saudis, a 2013 Saudi survey indicated that while only 8 ­percent 
used the internet for po­liti­cal purposes, 20 ­percent of citizens relied on it for read-
ing and watching religious content (Perlov and Guzansky 2014). Matchmaking is 
another popu­lar online activity in a country that maintains strict gender segrega-
tion in public spaces. In 2014, a female Saudi Twitter user described meeting her 
husband through the application, noting that her ­mother—­who, along with her 
­brothers, actively monitored her account—­approved of the arrangement. Surpris-
ingly, the CPVPV has sanctioned such practices, with its former head, Sheikh Ahmed 
bin Qassim al-­Ghamdi (n.d.–), characterizing social media as “one of the permis-
sible means to be used in all legitimate ­matters in the lives of ­people, ­whether they 
are men or ­women” (Al-­Hayat 2014).
Mark A. Caudill
See also: Qatar; Syria; United Arab Emirates
A woman kneels on the ground in Riyadh in March 2011, while surrounded by police who had 
been deployed to deal with protests calling for demo­cratic reforms. Saudi Arabia’s restrictive 
policies extend to the internet and, while citizens rarely use it for po­liti­cal purposes, it serves 
as a tool for the government to track public opinion and identify po­liti­cal dissenters. In 2016, 
an unidentified Saudi was sentenced to 10 years in prison for using Twitter to call for protests. 
(AP Photo/Hassan Ammar)

SENEGAL
258
Further Reading
Agence France Presse, 2016. “Saudi Gets 10 Years for Twitter ‘Terrorism’ Support.” February 
2. Accessed March 4, 2016. https://­www​.­dailystar​.­com​.­lb​/­News​/­Middle​-­East​/­2016​/­Feb​
-­02​/­335245​-­saudi​-­gets​-­10​-­years​-­for​-­twitter​-­terrorism​-­support​.­ashx
Ahmed, Qanta. 2013. “Saudi Arabia’s Strug­gles with Social Media: Twitter Clowns and Face-
book Fatwas.” April 11. Accessed October 21, 2015. http://­www​.­theblaze​.­com​/­contrib​
utions​/­saudi​-­arabias​-­struggles​-­with​-­social​-­media​-­twitter​-­clowns​-­and​-­facebook​-­fatwas​/­
Al​-­Hayat. 2014. “Social Media Plays a Matchmaking Role in Saudi Arabia.” March 9. Ac-
cessed October  21, 2015. http://­www​.­al​-­monitor​.­com​/­pulse​/­culture2014​/­03​/­social​
-­media​-­saudi​-­breaking​-­barriers​.­html
Alqudsi​-­ghabra, Taghreed M., Al-­Bannai, Talal and Al-­Bahrani, Mohammad. 2011. “The In-
ternet in the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council (AGCC): Vehicle of Change.” Interna­
tional Journal of Internet Science, 6(1): 44–67.
Arab Social Media Report, 2014. “Twitter in the Arab Region.” March. Accessed October 27, 
2015. http://­www​.­arabsocialmediareport​.­com​/­Twitter​/­LineChart​.­aspx​?­&PriMenuID​
=­18&CatID​=­25&mnu​=­Cat
Black, Ian. 2013. “Saudi Digital Generation Takes on Twitter, YouTube . . . ​and Authorities.” 
December 17. Accessed October 21, 2015. http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­world​/­2013​/
dec​/­17​/­saudi​-­arabia​-­digital​-­twitter​-­social​-­media​-­islam
Faris, David. 2013. Dissent and Revolution in a Digital Age: Social Media, Blogging, and Activ­
ism in Egypt, p. 17. London: Taurus.
Fraij, Ibrahim. 2015. “The State of Saudi Arabia Social Media.” February 22. Accessed 
October 21, 2015. https://­linkedin​.­com​/­pulse​/­state​-­saudi​-­arabia​-­social​-­media​-­ibrahim​
Internet World Stats. 2014. “Internet Usage in the ­Middle East.” December 31. Accessed 
October 27, 2015. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats5​.­htm#me
Malouf, Alex. 2013. “Big ­Brother and Social Media in Saudi Arabia.” October 24. Accessed 
October 21, 2015. http://www.yourmiddleeast.com/features/big-brother​-and​-social​
-media​-in-saudi-arabia_18928
Nielsen. 2014. “Smartphones Dominate the Saudi Market.” June 17. Accessed January 29, 
2017. http://­www​.­nielsen​.­com​/­sa​/­en​/­press​-­room​/­2014​/­smartphones​-­driving​-­mobile​
-­sales​-­in​-­saudi​-­arabia​.­html
OpenNet Initiative. 2009. “Internet Filtering in Saudi Arabia.” August 6. Accessed October 
27, 2015. https://­opennet​.­net​/­sites​/­opennet​.­net​/­files​/­ONI​_­SaudiArabia​_­2009​.­pdf
Perlov, Orit, and Guzansky, Yoel. 2014. “The Social Media Discourse in Saudi Arabia: The 
Conservative and Radical Camps Are the Dominant Voices.” February 5. Accessed 
October 21, 2015. http://­www​.­inss​.­org​.­il​/­index​.­aspx​?­id​=­4538&articleid​=­6563
Reyaee, Sulaiman, and Ahmed, Aquil. 2015. “Growth Pattern of Social Media Usage in Arab 
Gulf States: An Analytical Study.” April 14. Accessed October 27, 2015. http://­dx​.­doi​
.­org​/­10​.­4236​/­sn​.­2015​.­42003
The Economist. 2014. “Social Media in Saudi Arabia: A Virtual Revolution.” September 13. 
Accessed October 21, 2015. http://­www​.­economist​.­com​/­node​/­21617064​/­print
Williams, Steve. 2014. “Saudi Arabia Is Using Social Media to Entrap LGBTs.” July 31. Ac-
cessed October  21, 2015. http://­www​.­care2​.­com​/­causes​/​saudi​-­arabia​-­is​-­using​-­social​
-­media​-­to​-­entrap​-­lgbts​.­html
SENEGAL
Senegal is a West African nation bordered by Mauritania, Mali, Guinea, Guinea-­
Bissau, and almost bisected by the Gambia. It had approximately 14 million ­people 

SENEGAL
259
at the end of 2014, with an estimated 3 million of ­those having regular internet 
access. The country also has a unique relationship with the internet, in that it ranked 
as the top African nation in terms of internet gross domestic product (iGDP), mean-
ing that transactions over the internet contributed more to the country’s total 
economy than for any other country on the continent. In Senegal, internet sales 
and ser­vices comprised around 3.3 ­percent of national GDP (McKinsey & Co. 
2013). As the internet expands in Africa and Senegal, more ­people ­will conduct 
business, both personal and corporate, online. Senegal’s current internet and social 
media usage ­will adapt as the country experiences higher levels of internet use and 
penetration.
In Senegal, as in many parts of the world, social media is becoming a part of 
everyday life, especially in urban areas. The ­people split their social media prefer-
ences between the well-­known international platforms and other platforms built 
specifically for African users. Recent statistics showed Senegal’s social media users 
visited Facebook (57 ­percent), YouTube (24 ­percent), Google+ (23 ­percent), Twit-
ter (16 ­percent), FaceDakar (7 ­percent), Eskimi (5 ­percent), 2Go (5 ­percent), biNu 
(3 ­percent), Twoo (2 ­percent), Hi5 (2 ­percent), and Mxit (1 ­percent) (Southwood 
2014). Although Facebook was the most popu­lar site, it is clear that interest in Face-
book is lower in Senegal than in other countries ­because ­there are many social 
media alternatives. On Facebook, the top pages belong to Seneweb, Orange, Tigo 
Senegal, Expresso Senegal, and Samsung Senegal (Allin1 Social 2015). Three of 
­these sites represented telecommunications and ser­vice providers; the ­others are 
Seneweb, a news portal, and Expresso Senegal, a local business.
In June 2015, Facebook launched a new initiative designed to attract a wider 
market share in Senegal and provide basic internet ser­vices to areas that have re-
mained disconnected. Senegal was one of thirteen countries throughout Africa, Asia, 
and Latin Amer­i­ca where Facebook launched the new effort. The program, called 
Internet​.­org, was intended to bring ­free ser­vices to Tigo subscriber identity mod-
ule (SIM) cardholders, and it started by offering information and apps direct from 
sources such as AccuWeather, BBC News, Bing, UNICEF, Wattpad, Wikipedia, 
Dakaractu, Senjob, and Facebook itself (Linington 2015). Support and content 
was available in French; En­glish and the Wolof language ­were not supported. Face-
book chose Senegal and the other locations ­because the lack of internet access 
corresponded to the price and amount of data and devices. Through this effort, 
Internet​.­org offered a cheaper alternative and greater accessibility to the internet.
Senegal’s popu­lar apps indicated that the ­people use apps for communication, 
for practical ways to improve their lives, and for entertainment. The top Microsoft 
Win­dows phone apps in the ­free category ­were Podcasts, Viber, Facebook, Imo.
im, and Facebook Messenger; the top paid apps ­were Fruit Ninja, iStunt 2, SIMS 
Medieval, ­Free ­Music Downloader Pro, and Photo Private & Lock and Local Pro. 
The top ­free iOS apps ­were WhatsApp, Viber, YouTube, Facebook, and Facebook 
Messenger. The top paid iOS apps ­were Smart Alarm Clock, Salat-­Comment Prier, 
Fitness Point Pro, Scanner Pro, and ­Temple Run: Oz (AppAnnie 2015). ­There was 
no data available from Google Play or the Amazon app store.
Senegal has started to develop its own platforms and forums. Mivasocial is a 
new, emerging social platform in Africa. Founded in 2013, the site’s purpose is to 

SENEGAL
260
promote Africans online and to connect Africans to each other via deeper, richer 
communication. The site differs from more traditional social media in that it com-
bines the popu­lar pieces of other platforms, such as photo sharing, with a mean-
ingful way for ­people to collaborate. As of mid-2015, Mivasocial offered tools to 
chat, view African events in real time, share videos and photos, create communi-
ties within the site, access apps, coordinate real-­time actions, and promote per-
sonal and corporate brands. Over time, the site has added classified ads, a directory, 
and an online shopping feature (Mivasocial 2015). Local forums create additional 
opportunities to form hobby-­specific communities or create spaces for specific types 
of discussion. One of Senegal’s more active forums belonged to Orange, the tele-
communications firm based in Paris, France, with worldwide operations. The com­
pany operated forums tailored to the countries where it operates. The Senegal-­specific 
page, for instance, allowed ­people in Senegal to discuss local culture and current 
issues in French.
Senegal’s access to the World Wide Web has not yet matured enough to produce 
definitive data on top websites. However, the nation’s most popu­lar search terms 
over a one-­year period functioned as a proxy mea­sure to gauge popu­lar websites. 
From September 2014 to September 2015, Senegal’s most searched terms, in order, 
­were “Facebook,” “YouTube,” “Google,” “Senegal,” “Dakar,” “Telecharger,” and “Se-
neweb” (Google Trends 2015). ­These terms verified the data and statistics available 
on Senegalese social media platforms and apps—­most ­people who use social media 
used Facebook, YouTube, and Google ser­vices, though a smaller percentage of the 
population preferred other platforms.
Social media and the Senegalese preference for chatting online have led to an 
innovation in the language of communication. French, Senegal’s official language, 
and En­glish are common languages online. However, despite French being the of-
ficial national language, ­there are approximately thirty-­eight languages spoken in 
the country. The most widely spoken native language is Wolof, which arrived in 
Senegal during the mid-­fourteenth ­century as the Wolof kingdom expanded and 
absorbed existing African communities. This expansion of Wolof domination oc-
curred well before Eu­ro­pe­ans established colonies on the continent and led to a 
large Wolof-­speaking majority in Senegal when the national borders ­were eventu-
ally established. Wolof has been difficult to use on social media ­because its orthog-
raphy (i.e. spelling conventions) was never standardized. To use Wolof in social 
media, ­people are mixing it with French, including French-­influenced spellings. It 
is also popu­lar to mix in some Arabic and to use En­glish interjections such as “cool” 
and “awesome.” The Wolof language has taken on a new identity as a means of com-
municating on social media, and it ­will most likely develop its own shorthand 
forms and elite speak (e.g. leetspeak or eleet) as more ­people decide to use it.
Social media has helped to shape Senegalese politics. Cheikh Fall (n.d.–), a noted 
Senegalese blogger and social activist, designed Sunu2012 as an election monitor-
ing site to provide coverage of the 2012 presidential elections. Fall became con-
cerned when the incumbent president, Abdoulaye Wade (1926–), tried to reinterpret 
the country’s constitution in order to run for a third term in office. Sunu means 
“our” in Wolof, and the site intended to unite the ­people’s voices during the election. 

SENEGAL
261
One of the coverage efforts included the hashtag #sunu2012. Sunu2012 spread the 
news of Wade’s controversial run, which was downplayed in the media (Napolitano 
2013). In addition, other candidates utilized the site to disseminate information 
about their campaigns. Wade eventually lost the election. The site’s success led to 
a broader effort to influence and improve Senegalese society.
As a spinoff, Fall designed Sunucause (“Our cause,” with the primary hashtag 
#sunucause) to focus on the use of social media to identify and address social con-
cerns across the country. Its core objective was to raise awareness, and funding 
when needed, to resolve issues that the government could not, or chose not, to 
address. Fall’s third effort is to engage other Senegalese citizens through social me-
dia directly. This effort, called Kebetu, or “to twitter,” allows ­people to participate 
in actualizing social and po­liti­cal change through soft power, or through peaceful 
means. The effort had grown on Twitter as of September 2015 and managed its own 
hashtag, #kebetu.
Fall and some of his followers did not limit their activism to issues affecting only 
Senegal. In 2014, Senegal’s Twitter activists advocated for international support to 
halt the spread of Ebola in Africa. As the disease spread across Sierra Leone, Libe-
ria, and Guinea, activists worried about the suffering in ­these neighboring coun-
tries and feared that the deadly disease would devastate their nation as well. Through 
hashtags such as #SenStopEbola (Senegal Stop Ebola) and #GiveUSTheSerum, Sen-
egalese activists rallied and advocated online (Demey 2014). They also dissemi-
nated their messages on both Facebook and Twitter to reach a wider, more diverse 
audience. Fall’s group has tackled other domestic issues, such as helping ­children 
with rare diseases and arranging charity concerts to help flood victims.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Cameroon; France; Nigeria; Paraguay
Further Reading
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Senegal.” Accessed September 18, 2015. http://­
www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​-­statistics​/­countries​/­senegal
AppAnnie. 2015. “iOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 18, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­senegal​/­overall​/­​?­device​=­iphone
Demy, Juliette. 2014. “Sénégal: Les Blogueurs Mobilisés contre Ebola.” September 15. Ac-
cessed September  19, 2015. http://­www​.­lejdd​.­fr​/­International​/­Afrique​/­Senegal​-­les​
-­blogueurs​-­mobilises​-­contre​-­Ebola​-­687442
Google Trends. 2015. “Explore Topics.” Accessed September 19, 2015. https://­www​.­google​
.­com.­gi​/­trends​/­explore#geo​=­SN&date​=­today%2012​-­m&cmpt​=­q&tz​=­Etc​%2F​
GMT%2B4
Linington, Darryl. 2015. “Facebook Takes Internet​.­org to Senegal.” June 5. Accessed Sep-
tember 16, 2015. http://­www​.­itnewsafrica​.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­facebook​-­takes​-­internet​-­org​-­to​
-­senegal​/­
McKinsey & Co. 2015. “Lions Go Digital: The Internet’s Transformative Potential in Africa.” 
November. Accessed September 18, 2015. http://­www​.­mckinsey​.­com​/­insights​/­high​
_­tech​_­telecoms​_­internet​/­lions​_­go​_­digital​_­the​_­internets​_­transformative​_­potential​_­in​
_­africa

SINGAPORE
262
Mivasocial. 2015. “The Social Network of Sénégal!” Accessed September 18, 2015. http://­
senegal​.­mivasocial​.­com​/­
Napolitano, Antonella. 2013. “Senegal’s ‘Soft Revolution’ Makes Change in Digital Space.” 
June 25. Accessed September 18, 2015. http://­techpresident​.­com​/­news​/­wegov​/­24087​
/­senegals​-­%E2%80%9Csoft​-­revolution%E2%80%9D​-­makes​-­change​-­digital​-­space
Southwood, Russell. 2014. “Social Media in Africa: Who’s Leading the Way?” October 4. 
Accessed December 18, 2016. https://­businesstech​.­co​.­za​/­news​/­internet​/­70279​/­social​
-­media​-­in​-­africa​-­whos​-­leading​-­the​-­way//­
SINGAPORE
With a strong economy and a small geographic area, Singapore, a city-­state on the 
Malay Peninsula in Southeast Asia, is also a well-­connected country with one of 
the world’s highest internet penetration rates. Singapore’s diverse population allows 
it to host a multicultural society that serves at the forefront of technological ad-
vances and closely aligns with the latest global and regional internet trends (Tey 
2015). The number of internet users in Singapore reflects this makeup. As of late 
2015, Singapore had 8.2 million web subscriptions. With a population of 5.26 mil-
lion, including a nonresident population—­students, foreign workers, and their 
dependents—of 1.46 million, Singapore’s internet penetration is 155 ­percent. In 
early 2015 and late 2014, Singapore had similar totals for web subscriptions with 
8.1 million. Internet users in Singapore are active on foreign-­based apps, includ-
ing Facebook, Facebook Messenger, Google+, Instagram, LINE, LinkedIn, Pandora, 
Snapchat, Skype, Twitter, WeChat, and WhatsApp mainly across Android and iOS 
smartphone platforms (AppAnnie 2015; Statista 2015).
Singapore gained access to the internet before most countries in the region. Its 
debut as a full-­fledged member of the international networking community came 
in 1987, when the National University of Singapore (NUS) established a 4.8-­kbps 
BITNET link to the City University of New York (CUNY) (Tan 2001). BITNET, the 
“­Because It’s Time” network, began in the United States in 1981 when CUNY and 
Yale University started using a leased telephone cir­cuit for communications between 
accounts on their mainframe computers (BITNET n.d.). Through BITNET, ­those 
who had been using the internal campus email ser­vice, including NUS, which was 
mainly based on the existing IBM mainframes, could realize the benefits of inter-
national email. By 1990, NUS and Prince­ton University established a 64-­kbps in-
ternet link called NUSNET to make NUS the home of the first internet site in 
Singapore and the region. NUSNET was subsequently launched in 1991 by Dr. Tay 
Eng Soon (1940–1993), the then–­se­nior minister of state for education, as a cam-
puswide network with full internet connectivity. By 1994, SingTel established Sing-
net, Singapore’s first internet access ser­vice provider (Tan 2001).
In 2014, Singapore’s mobile subscriber base was split among three mobile ser­
vice providers, Singtel, M1, and StarHub, for prepaid and postpaid subscription 
plans. For prepaid subscription plans, Singtel had 4.09 million mobile subscribers 
(making up 50.6 ­percent of the subscriber base), M1 had 1.85 mobile subscrib-
ers (22.8 ­percent), and StarHub had 2.15 mobile subscribers (26.6 ­percent). 

SINGAPORE
263
For postpaid subscription plans, Singtel had 2.26 million mobile subscribers 
(48.3 ­percent), M1 had 1.15 mobile subscribers (24.5 ­percent), and StarHub had 
1.28 mobile subscribers (27.3 ­percent) (Eu 2015). In the fourth quarter of 2014, 
54 ­percent of multidevice users owned two devices, 29 ­percent owned three de-
vices, and 17 ­percent owned at least four (Louisse 2015).
Singapore has one of the fastest peak internet and average internet connection 
speeds in the world. In the second quarter of 2015, Singapore’s peak internet con-
nection speed was 108.3 Mbps, the fastest in the world, which marked a 12 ­percent 
increase from the first quarter of 2015. For average internet connection speed, Singa-
pore ranked ­fourteenth in the world, with 12.7 Mbps. Throughout the city-­state, 
50 ­percent of its population surfs the web at speeds above 10 Mbps. This data on 
peak connection speeds provide insight into the peak speeds that web users can 
likely expect from their internet connections while in Singapore (­Today Online 
2015).
Nationwide outdoor ser­vice coverage for 4G cellular networks in the first quar-
ter of 2016 is 99 to 100 ­percent for each of the three mobile ser­vice providers: Sing-
tel, M1, and StarHub. Outdoor 4G mobile ser­vice coverage is the ability of a 
cellular network to achieve a minimum signal strength of at least –109 dBm (this 
Commuters on the Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) in Singapore use cell phones to check their email, 
instant message with friends, or follow celebrities on Facebook. The country boasts one of the 
highest internet penetration rates in the world, with one of the fastest internet speeds. ( Junpinzon/​
Dreamstime​.­com)

SINGAPORE
264
is an abbreviation for the power ratio in decibels of the mea­sured power refer-
enced to 1 mW). For Singtel, nationwide outdoor 4G mobile ser­vice coverage is 
99.89 ­percent. For M1, coverage is 99.36 ­percent, and for StarHub, coverage 
is 99.43 ­percent (IDA 2016).
In the fourth quarter of 2015, 64 ­percent of the population had an active ac-
count with any social network. The most popu­lar social network was WhatsApp, 
with a 46 ­percent penetration rate. Facebook had a 43 ­percent penetration rate, 
Facebook Messenger had 26 ­percent, Instagram had 18 ­percent, Google+ had 
14 ­percent, LINE had 14 ­percent, LinkedIn had 14 ­percent, Skype had 13 ­percent, 
Twitter had 13 ­percent, and WeChat had a 12 ­percent (Statista 2015). Of ­these so-
cial networking apps, all originate from the United States, with the exceptions of 
WeChat, from China, and LINE, from South ­Korea and Japan.
Web users in Singapore are active on Facebook. In November 2015, Facebook 
recorded that it has 3.6 million users in Singapore. Web users in Singapore pri-
marily use Facebook to follow Singaporean celebrities. The ten most popu­lar Face-
book pages, as of December 2015, are (Socialbakers 2015):
	
1.	 Joseph Prince (1963–), the se­nior pastor of New Creation Church in Singapore
	
2.	 Aaron Aziz (1976–), a Singaporean actor
	
3.	 Tila Tequila (1981–), an American tele­vi­sion personality who was born in 
Singapore
	
4.	 Jose Cuervo, a brand of tequila
	
5.	 林俊傑 J. J. Lin (1981–), a Singaporean singer based in Taiwan
	
6.	 Singapore Airlines, the flag carrier airline of Singapore
	
7.	 ONE Championship, a Singapore-­based mixed martial arts promotion
	
8.	 Willy Foo (n.d.–), a Singaporean photographer, marketer, and technopreneur
	
9.	 Tenashar (1989–), a Singaporean DJ and ­model
	 10.	 VR-­Zone, a news publication reporting on trends in PC and mobile gadgets
According to a 2014 survey, nearly nine out of ten Singaporeans have access to 
a smartphone. When asked about their smartphone use over the last seven days, 
email usage is more common than social networks, with 58 ­percent having used 
their phones for email and 54 ­percent using their phones for social networks. From 
2013 to 2014, for smartphones, weekly short message ser­vice (SMS) usage declined 
8 ­percent, while instant messaging (IM) usage increased 9 ­percent (Deloitte 2015).
With regular smartphone access across Singapore, the Singapore–­Mas­sa­chu­setts 
Institute of Technology (MIT) Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART) runs 
a proj­ect called the MIT Senseable City Lab, with the goal of improving urban life 
in Singapore. By tapping into real-­time information about the city-­state, the proj­
ect aims to use collected data to enable Singaporeans to “make day-­to-­day decisions 
based on their environment—­creating a feedback loop between ­people, their ac-
tions and their city—­while si­mul­ta­neously contributing to the data they are col-
lecting” (Senthilingham 2015). The proj­ect aims to use this feedback to improve 
­factors “influencing daily life, from overcrowding and traffic jams to temperature 
control and taxi availability” (Senthilingham 2015). One example of how this data 
can improve the quality of life for Singaporeans is by tracking phones to under-
stand, and alleviate, crowding in the city-­state (Senthilingam 2015).

SINGAPORE
265
Singapore has strict regulations to manage media published on the internet. In 
a country that ranks 153 out of 180 on the Reporters Without Borders 2015 World 
Press Freedom Index, Singapore’s internet rules follow this regulatory pattern. In 
2013, the Media Development Authority (MDA) established regulations to “demand 
that all websites concerned with the news be licensed, and that each put down a 
performance-­bond of 50,000 Singapore dollars. Any content deemed to be in breach 
of standards would have to be removed within twenty-­four hours of being noti-
fied” (F.C. 2013). This licensing framework affects “every­thing that could be called 
a Singapore news program, as defined by two criteria: (1) the news program re-
ports an average of one article or more about Singapore’s news and current affairs, 
per week, over a period of two months; and (2) the content of the news program 
reaches at least 50,000 unique IP addresses from within Singapore” (F.C. 2013). 
According to the MDA, a Singapore news program includes “any programme to con-
tain any news, intelligence, report of occurrence, or any ­matter of public interest, 
about any social, economic, po­liti­cal, cultural, artistic, sporting, scientific, or any 
other aspect of Singapore,” though the law excludes content and programs that the 
government produces (F.C. 2013).
Singapore’s web regulations also extend to Facebook. In September 2015, Ello 
Ed Mundsel Bello (c. 1988–), a 28 year-­old nonresident Filipino who worked as a 
nurse at a local hospital, was convicted of one count ­under the Sedition Act for 
promoting feelings of ill ­will and hostility ­after making negative remarks about Sin-
gaporeans in a Facebook post. The judge in the case stated that Singapore would 
not condone any act that poses a threat to the city-­state’s social stability and secu-
rity. As a result of his conviction, Bello was sentenced to four months in prison 
(Chelvan 2015).
Anthony Ortiz
See also: China; Japan; Malaysia; South ­Korea; Taiwan
Further Reading
AppAnnie. 2015. “Top App Charts.” December 28. Accessed December 28, 2015. https://­
www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­singapore​/­
BITNET. n.d. “A Brief History of BITNET.” Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­bit​.­net
Chelvan, Vanessa Paige. 2015. “4 months’ jail for Filipino Who Made Xenophobic Remarks 
Against Singaporeans.” September 21. Accessed August 1, 2016. http://­www​.­channel​
newsasia​.­com​/­news​/­singapore​/­4​-­months​-­jail​-­for​/­2140908​.­html
Deloitte. 2015. “Mobile Multiplies Global Mobile Consumer Survey.” Accessed December 28, 
2015. 
http://­www2​.­deloitte​.­com​/­content​/­dam​/­Deloitte​/­sg​/­Documents​/­technology​
-­media​-­telecommunications​/­sg​-­tmt​-­global​-­mobile​-­consumer​-­survey​-­noexp​.­pdf
Eu, Goh Thean. 2015. “Singapore Telcos: Winners and Losers in 2014.” April 9. Accessed 
December 28, 2015. https://­www​.­digitalnewsasia​.­com​/­mobile​-­telco​/­singapore​-­telcos​
-­winners​-­and​-­losers​-­in​-­2014
F​.­C. 2013. “Two Steps Back.” June 5. Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­www​.­economist​
.­com​/­blogs​/­banyan​/­2013​/­06​/­regulating​-­singapores​-­internet
Info​-­communications Development Authority of Singapore (IDA). 2016. “4G Mobile Ser­
vice Coverage in Q1 2016.” Accessed August 1, 2016. https://­www​.­ida​.­gov​.­sg​/­Tech​

SOMALIA
266
-­Scene​-­News​/­Facts​-­and​-­Figures​/­4G​-­Service​-­Monitoring​/­4G​-­Mobile​-­Service​-­Coverage​
-­in​-­Q1​-­2016
Louisse, Donna. 2015. “Japan, Taiwan, and Singapore Top in Multi-­Device Users in APAC: 
Appier.” January 29. Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­e27​.­co​/­japan​-­taiwan​-­singapore​
-­top​-­multi​-­device​-­users​-­apac​-­appier​-­20150129​/­
Senthilingam, Meera. 2015. “How Smartphones Are Improving City Life in Singapore.” 
June 24. Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­24​/­tech​/­big​-­data​
-­urban​-­life​-­singapore​/­
Socialbakers. 2015. “Singapore Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed December 28, 2015. 
http://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­singapore​/­
Statista. 2015. “Penetration of Leading Social Networks in Singapore as of 4th Quarter 2014.” 
Accessed August 1, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­284466​/­singapore​-­social​
-­network​-­penetration​/­
Tan, Bernard. 2001. “The Origins of the Internet in Singapore.” Accessed December 28, 
2015. http://­www​.­physics​.­nus​.­edu​.­sg​/­~phytanb​/­bitnet4​.­htm
Tey, Yvonne. 2015. “The State of Social Media in Singapore.” August 20. Accessed December 
28, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​/­talk​/­state​-­social​-­singapore
­Today Online. 2015. “Singapore Tops Global Survey in Peak Internet Connection Speed.” 
September 27. Accessed December 28, 2015. http://­www​.­todayonline​.­com​/­singapore​/​
singapore​-­tops​-­global​-­survey​-­peak​-­connection​-­speed
SOMALIA
The Federal Republic of Somalia, an African nation long steeped in conflict 
throughout the twentieth and twenty-­first centuries, has an extremely weak infra-
structure, which makes conducting field research in Somalia extremely challeng-
ing. Furthermore, ­there are separatists regions, such as Puntland and Somaliland, 
with variations in media access and restrictions that are difficult to assess. Access 
to complete data on all types of media usage is virtually impossible; thus, the data 
given ­here come from available sources that, as a composite, pres­ent as accurate a 
portrayal of the country as pos­si­ble.
Somalia, despite its long-­standing vio­lence and lack of governmental authority 
since the collapse of the long and divisive rule of the regime of Siad Barre (1919–
1995), has developed a technologically advanced and competitively priced telecom-
munications industry in urban areas relative to that of other African nations. The 
regime came to power following a military coup in 1969 and held power ­until Barre’s 
forced departure in 1990. Following his ouster, clan rivalries within Somalia 
deteriorated to an all-­out civil war that has yet to be fully quelled. Islamist militant 
groups and other clans still vie for power and control of vari­ous segments of the 
country, though a federal government has been in place since August 2012.
Mobile-­phone usage has been on the rise in Somalia due to an expanding tele-
communications sector, increased competition in media and telecom ser­vices, re-
duced cost of ser­vices, a growing private-­sector wireless-­based communication 
infrastructure, and reduced government ability to regulate the telecom industry (Im-
migration and Refugee Board of Canada 2015). Mobile-­cellular ser­vices that pro-
vide wireless internet access, banking access, and money exchange ser­vices, which 
are not available in many African countries, are available in some parts of Somalia. 

SOMALIA
267
­These ser­vices developed from entrepreneurial ventures by Somalis, with backing 
from large international firms, in a time of collapsed federal infrastructure and non­
ex­is­tent government regulation. ­These market-­developed ser­vices have wide adop-
tion among Somalis and give them the possibility of utilizing communication 
ser­vices that might be unexpected in a nation facing so many recent setbacks and 
vio­lence.
Roughly 70 ­percent of Somalis have access to some type of mobile device, and 
mobile-­cellular companies in Somalia provide some of the cheapest rates for tele-
communications ser­vices in all of Africa (BBG 2013b). Mobile-­cellular ser­vices are 
used to access and share news. According to one source, “The majority of Somalis 
(65.6 ­percent) access news at least once per day” (BBG 2013b). More than a quar-
ter of Somalis shares news with their ­family and social networks ­either daily or most 
days (BBG 2013b). Younger, more educated, and urban populations are more likely 
to access and share news more frequently than older (aged fifty-­five years old and 
more), less educated, and rural populations. However, despite its access to mobile-­
cellular technology, Somalia has one of the lowest literacy rates in the world, at 
roughly 38 ­percent (UNESCO 2016). The consequences of this low literacy level 
shape both which media are used and how they are used, the importance of vari­
ous media to Somali society, and how this expanded mobile-­cellular access is be-
ing utilized by the population.
Coupled with a long-­standing oral tradition of information sharing, Somalia’s 
high illiteracy rate results in the dominance of radio in the media. Radio delivers 
news to the illiterate, requires ­little infrastructure maintenance to disseminate mes-
sages over ­great distances, and uses cheap receivers; in addition, mobile-­cellular 
technologies can be used to broadcast radio channels. ­These ­factors make this me-
dium extremely well suited to a country such as Somalia. Past survey data in So-
malia demonstrates that increased access to mobile-­cellular technology has 
strengthened radio’s appeal; “The use of radio on mobile has increased dramati-
cally with 56 ­percent of the respondents listening to radio on mobile in the 2011–
2012 and 62 ­percent in 2013” (African Union/United Nations Information Support 
Team 2014). Tele­vi­sion viewership is limited to urban areas and to ­those who can 
afford permanent domestic residences, electricity, satellite dishes, and cable con-
nections. Newspapers have only limited demand due to the illiteracy rates, wide-
spread poverty, and restrictions of newspaper transportation (African Union/United 
Nations Information Support Team 2014). Due to the population’s economic and 
social makeup, radio is likely to remain the dominant media for some time (BBC 
World Trust 2011).
­There is also a clear divide between urban and rural Somalia in media use and 
adoption. Specifically, the expansion of internet, mobile-­cellular use for access to 
internet ser­vices, and the ability to access and utilize social media channels are avail-
able only to a small, albeit growing, subset of the urban Somali population. The 
result is an expanding digital divide between urban and rural populations in a na-
tion whose citizens are already disparate.
The internet penetration for Somalia, as of 2015, was roughly 1.7 ­percent of the 
population, while the average penetration across the rest of Africa is 28.6 ­percent 
(Internet Live Stats 2016). The national population of just over 11 million features 

SOMALIA
268
a staggering estimate of 10.8 million ­people with no access to the internet; thus, 
Somalia ranks among the very bottom in terms of internet usage, with only Bu-
rundi, Timor-­Leste, and Eritrea having lower percentages in the world (Real Time 
Statistics Proj­ect 2016). However, for ­those populations living in urban areas, in-
ternet and social media usage are expanding in Somalia, despite the prob­lems with 
infrastructure, vio­lence, education, and access.
Although the numbers for internet access are extremely low, they are actually 
representative of a continual improvement in internet access for the urban popula-
tion over the past de­cade and are likely to increase in ­future years. While only a 
small percentage of the population has access to the internet, that percentage has 
been steadily growing since 2012, with increasing numbers of internet cafés in ur-
ban areas.
The roughly 200,000 Somalis with direct access to the internet are mostly con-
centrated in large urban areas, where users have a relatively fast and inexpensive 
internet connection; however, survey data shows that despite not having direct 
access to the internet, Somalis in rural areas are able to gain access to online con-
tent through mobile device sharing (BBG 2013b). Mobile cellular subscription 
has risen from just over half a million ­people in 2010 to well over 5.5 million as 
of 2015 (Statista 2015). A 2006 Somali Telecommunication Association report 
showed 234 internet cafés in Somalia, with the total number growing at 15.6 ­percent 
per year. That number ­today (though unverifiable) is believed to be significantly 
higher, especially in urban areas such as Mogadishu. The African Union/United 
Nations Information Support Team (2014), conducting surveys over recent years 
in Mogadishu, showed that over half of the respondents claim to have used the 
internet in the last six months, and over 40 ­percent claimed to have used the inter-
net in the past week.
Facebook is by far the most utilized social media platform in Somalia, with pages 
such as BBC Somalia and VOA Somalia drawing over 160,000 local fans each, and 
current local Somalia users at over 204,000 (Socialbakers 2016). Over 29 ­percent 
of the population reports having interacted with Facebook in the most recent sur-
vey data (BBG 2013a), while Twitter, Snapchat, and other social media platforms 
are expanding. The majority of Facebook users in Somalia are younger and pre-
dominantly male, though the United Nations has specifically aimed some recent 
efforts at correcting such gender in­equality in media and in media usage (UNDP 
2012). While a sizeable gender gap does exist, Somalis with access to the internet 
use Facebook and other social media extensively (BBC News 2014). Reports on 
Facebook usage show dramatic increases in the presence of Somalis on the Face-
book platform over the past years. This high usage of the social media platform 
holds true for ­those Somalis living in diaspora, serving to reconnect Somalis who 
have been separated geo­graph­i­cally from one another.
It is estimated that over 1 million Somalis live outside Somalia, which has cre-
ated large diaspora communities (BBC World Ser­vice Trust 2011). The internet has 
helped unite many of the diaspora with ­those living in Somalia, particularly through 
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, blogs, and targeted Somali websites. Sur-
veys of social media usage among Somali students in Malaysia revealed that the 

SOMALIA
269
majority of them (more than three-­quarters) extensively ­adopted Facebook and 
reported it as their first preference among social media sites (Ruslan and Dhaha 
2012). Twitter has also become increasingly utilized by Somalis in diaspora to link 
with one another, in addition to having conversations with and creating networks 
with ­others living in Somalia.
A number of activist movements, such as #Dontbuydeath, have been launched 
on social media platforms by Somalis in an attempt to encourage infrastructure in-
vestment and development rather than exodus among Somalis wealthy enough to 
make such a choice. Many news websites specifically target a diaspora audience to 
keep them informed of events in the country (BBC World Trust 2011). ­These web-
sites attempt to dispel the notion that the only solution for young, educated Somalis 
is to leave their country for the West. ­Others living in Somali cities such as 
Mogadishu have taken to new social media platforms to promote Somalia as a vi-
brant place that is about more than just vio­lence. For instance, ­after the success of 
Snapchat’s Nairobi Day in ­Kenya on May 26, 2015, Somalis have utilized Snapchat 
to show their country in its best light. Young Somali activists post videos and pic-
tures of beaches in Mogadishu, their ­family life, and the beautiful places in Soma-
lia (Al Jazeera 2016). ­These activists claim that global media have portrayed Somalia 
negatively to the world; they are using social media to show a more ­human side of 
what it ­really means to be Somali.
Unfortunately, in some areas of Somalia, the vio­lence is very real, and the ex-
pansion of internet ser­vices and mobile availability has been met with re­sis­tance 
by radical Islamists. ­These militants have attempted to ban internet access in their 
spheres of control and pressured providers to terminate ser­vice. Although the So-
mali government seems to embrace social media, as seen in the government’s us-
age of Facebook, Twitter, and Tumblr, it still ­faces criticism for its inability to maintain 
mobile ser­vices and ­counter militant bans on internet access (Freedom House 2015).
Despite the continued vio­lence, infrastructure prob­lems, and threats of militant 
disruption with minimal government protections, one in four Somalis still has ac-
cess to the Internet at least once a week (BBG 2013b). Furthermore, as wireless 
technologies increase and their costs come down, their proliferation seems inevi-
table in places like Somalia, whose citizens, even in the face of significant hard-
ship, have seen an exponential increase in wireless advancement and internet 
connectivity compared to past years.
Skye Cooley and Emily Belle Damm
See also: Egypt; Ethiopia; ­Kenya; Malaysia; Timor-­Leste; Yemen
Further Reading
African Union/United Nations Information Support Team. 2014. “Somalia Media Mapping 
Report.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­somali​-­media​.­so​/­wp​-­content​/­uploads​/­2014​/­05​
/­2014​_­05​_­01​_­Somali​-­Media​-­Mapping​-­Report​.­pdf
Al Jazeera. 2016. “Somalia in a Snapchat, More Than Just Vio­lence.” Accessed August 1, 
2016. http://­www​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­indepth​/­features​/­2016​/­06​/­somalia​-­snapchat​-­violence​
-­160614133403700​.­html

SOUTH AFRICA
270
BBC. 2015. “The Somali ­Woman Who’s Become a Global Star on Instagram.” Accessed 
June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­blogs​-­trending​-­31504423
BBC News. 2014. “Somalia Profile—­Media.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/​
news​/­world​-­africa​-­14094550
BBC World Ser­vice Trust. 2011. “An Analy­sis of the Somali Media Environment.” Accessed 
June 20, 2016. http://­downloads​.­bbc​.­co​.­uk​/­rmhttp​/­mediaaction​/­pdf​/­AnAnalysisOfTh
eSomaliMediaEnvironment​.­pdf
Broadcasting Board of Governors (BBG). 2013a. “Global Hotspots: Media Use in Mali and 
Somalia.” Accessed June 20, 2016. https://­www​.­bbg​.­gov​/­wp​-­content​/­media​/­2013​/­11​/​
Gallup​-­Somalia​-­and​-­Mali​-­briefing​.­pdf
Broadcasting Board of Governors (BBG). 2013b. “Media Use in Somalia 2013.” Accessed 
June 20, 2016. https://­www​.­bbg​.­gov​/­wp​-­content​/­media​/­2013​/­11​/­gallup​-­somalia​-­brief​
.­pdf
Freedom House. 2015. “Somalia.” Accessed June 20, 2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/​
freedom​-­press​/­2015​/­somalia
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 2015. “Somalia: Prevalence of Cell Phones and 
Internet Cafes in Mogadishu, Including the Ability to Use Cell Phones for Financial 
Transfers (2012–­February 2015).” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­refworld​.­org​/​
docid​/­550c35904​.­html
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Somalia Internet Users.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​
.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​/­somalia​/­
Internet World Stats. 2015. “Africa Internet Stats Users Facebook and 2015 Population Sta-
tistics.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­africa​.­htm
Socialbakers. 2016. “Facebook Stats for Fans in Somalia.” Accessed August 1, 2016. https://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­local​/­somalia​/­page​-­1​-­2
Statistia. 2015. “Number of Mobile Cellular Subscriptions in Somalia from 2000–2014.” 
Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­501103​/­number​-­of​-­mobile​
-­cellular​-­subscriptions​-­in​-­somalia​/­
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2012. “Gender Equality and ­Women’s 
Empowerment.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­so​.­undp​.­org​/­content​/­somalia​/­en​/​
home​/­operations​/­projects​/­environment​_­and​_­energy​/­gender​-­equality​-­and​-­women​-­s​
-­empowerment​-­project​-­​.­html
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO). 2016. “So-
malia Distance Education and Literacy.” Accessed June 20, 2016. http://­www​.­unesco​
.­org​/­uil​/­litbase​/­​?­menu​=­13&country​=­SO&programme​=­100
SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa is Africa’s largest and most developed economy. However, within the 
country, this dominance has not translated into mass access to cheap, accessible, 
and fast internet connections. Surveys show that smaller countries on the continent 
have faster internet speeds than South Africa. Nevertheless, mobile technology is 
bridging the digital divide in the country, significantly affecting the tenor and tone of 
po­liti­cal debates, but prohibitive costs (mostly for poor, black South Africans) result 
in very uneven access to online media. Most voters, especially the working class 
and the poor, still access the po­liti­cal realm via offline media and through forms 
of mass mobilization. Increasingly, the government, ruling party, and opposition 

SOUTH AFRICA
271
groupings are cognizant of the power of social media, and disputes in the public 
sphere are increasingly fought over or settled online.
The most recent statistics for internet penetration (collected in 2014) show that 
48.7 ­percent, or nearly half, of South African ­house­holds had at least one member 
who used the internet, ­either at home, a workplace, a place of study, or internet 
cafés. About one-­fifth (20.9 ­percent) of ­house­holds owned one or more computers. 
Significantly, 41.3 ­percent access the internet using mobile devices. Broken down 
by access, however, only 10.9 ­percent access the internet at home, 15.6 ­percent ac-
cess the internet at work, and 9.7 ­percent access the internet at cafés or educational 
facilities. Internet access at home is highest in urban or metropolitan areas, particu-
larly in the Western Cape (23.8 ­percent) and Gauteng (17.3 ­percent) provinces, the 
two economic hubs; and lowest in rural provinces like Limpopo (2.3 ­percent) and 
North West (3.3 ­percent). An in­ter­est­ing statistic is that in rural areas, mobile de-
vices have a major impact on internet access, in that only 2.4 ­percent, 2.8 ­percent, 
and 2.9 ­percent of ­house­holds have access to the internet at home, at work, and 
elsewhere, respectively, but more than a quarter (26.8 ­percent) obtained access 
through mobile devices (South African Statistical Ser­vice 2014).
Social media use has gradually increased among South Africans. By 2015, nearly 
11.8 million South Africans had accounts on Facebook (a 25 ­percent growth on the 
previous year), while the number of Twitter users have increased to 6.6 million, 
up 20 ­percent. Instagram (1.1 million) is favored by celebrities and sports stars 
and shows the strongest growth (65 ­percent). A local app, Mxit, was ­doing well 
(4.9 million users) ­until it was overtaken by WhatsApp (GCIS 2015), though Mxit 
was still predicted to fare well in India (Caulderwood 2014).
A major ­factor affecting social media or internet use is cost. South Africa ranks 
among the most expensive in the world for the cost of broadband. In an index mea­
sur­ing cost per Mbps, the country ranked in sixty-­second place out of sixty-­two 
nations. In the same index, South Africa was fifty-­seventh out of sixty-­two in terms 
of relative cost of broadband internet in relation to its gross domestic product (GDP) 
(MyBroadBand​.­com 2015). But mobile internet is not the panacea that it was made 
out to be: South Africans spend on average 24.7 ­percent of their income on mobile 
ser­vices, which is high compared to other parts of the world (Sanchez 2016).
­Under apartheid (1948–1994), a po­liti­cal system based on forced racial segre-
gation, telecommunications was a mono­poly of a state com­pany, Telkom, and phone 
access was skewed around racial lines. The first internet link via an email was con-
nected in 1988 at Rhodes University in the Eastern Cape, and the first commercial 
internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) ­were established in 1993. Two years ­later, in 1995, 
the co.za country domain was awarded to South Africa.
In 1994, South Africa held its first demo­cratic elections, bringing apartheid to 
an end officially. Around the same time, two local operators, Vodacom and MTM, 
established the first cellular ser­vices in South Africa in 1994. The postapartheid 
government pledged that by 2030, all South Africans would have access to the 
internet.
The South African government has been accused of using the internet to spy on 
its citizens. Comparisons are made to the United States, where the National Security 

SOUTH AFRICA
272
Agency (NSA) routinely breaks the law. Case law and legislation are too weak about 
what the government can and cannot do. All mobile phone users in South Africa are 
required to register their subscriber identity module (SIM) cards ­under the terms of 
the Regulation of Interception of Communications and Provision of Communication-­
Related Information (RICA) Act, enacted in 2003. While consumer groups praise 
RICA’s role in complicating fraud and cell-­phone theft, a nongovernmental organ­
ization (NGO) called Right2Know detailed case studies and examples of govern-
ment spying and harassing of activists groups (Right2Know 2016).
As in other locations, public debate is driven increasingly by social media con-
troversies on hot topics like sexism, xenophobia, and homophobia, but especially 
racism and hate speech. ­These controversies are usually characterized by emotion, 
outrage, and reducing complex social and po­liti­cal prob­lems to individual virtues 
and manners. More recently, black participation on social media has increased, re-
versing the earlier monopolies that whites held in ­these media. In the United States, 
this phenomenon is called “black Twitter.” A similar grouping is identified in South 
Africa.
In one of the most mediated instances, in January 2016 (which coincided with 
South Africa’s annual summer season), a white real estate agent in Kwazulu-­Natal 
province named Penny Sparrow (1947–) posted on Facebook that black beachgo-
ers ­were “monkeys” and “littered the beaches on New Year’s Eve.” Sparrow was 
skewered by Twitter users, who not only called out her racism, but made her phone 
number and address public. ­Others created emojis and threatened to take her to 
the country’s ­Human Rights Commission. Sparrow was eventually forced to retreat 
from social media. In other instances, racist outbursts by newspaper columnists, 
government employees, or tele­vi­sion newscasters have led to them losing their jobs 
­after they ­were amplified on social media.
More significantly, however, has been the use of social media and mobile phones 
in protests and electoral politics. The ruling African National Congress (ANC) has 
been slow to adapt to social media; the party leader and the country’s president, 
Jacob Zuma (1942–), hardly tweets at all, and the party is hostile to social media 
when it is not treating Twitter and Facebook as bulletin boards for announcements 
and promotions. At one point, the ANC announced that it would submit some of 
Social media offer an opportunity for the everyday person to become famous. One 
unusual star ­rose to prominence in South Africa in 2015. Born in 2013, Oratilwe 
Hlongwane (c. 2013–) learned to DJ before he could talk. His parents credited his 
talents to an iPad, which they used to start teaching him with educational software. 
Once he got ahold of his ­father’s DJ equipment, Oratilwe started playing with the 
buttons ­until he created a rhythm, and he even figured out how to use the knobs to 
create sound effects. ­After gaining 25,000 fans from an uploaded cell phone video 
that his parents uploaded to Facebook, Oratilwe occasionally plays at shopping malls 
and small events. His ­music and sound effects, along with his age, astonish the crowds 
who gather to watch him (Macias 2015).

SOUTH AFRICA
273
its public representatives to dis-
ciplinary procedures for discuss-
ing party business on Facebook. 
However, smaller parties have 
been more successful. The Demo­
cratic Alliance (DA) is the second 
largest party in Parliament; it 
controls the biggest cities. It was 
the first to open Facebook and 
Twitter accounts, and it ­shaped 
which debates trended or what 
formed the bases of online po­
liti­cal disputes. However, since 
2013, a smaller, insurgent party, 
the Economic Freedom Front 
has also proved to be a creative 
force online.
Outsider po­liti­cal parties, so-
cial movements, and nongovern-
mental organ­izations (NGOs) 
agitating around secondary edu-
cation, housing, electricity, and 
gender rights see a social media 
and internet presence as central 
to any media or advocacy cam-
paign. However, it was university students who during much of 2015 reshaped the 
relationship between protest and social media.
While ­there has been long-­simmering discontent over tuition fees, insufficient 
government support for students, and outsourcing of ser­vices (mostly on black-­
majority campuses), dissatisfaction over colonial and apartheid symbols boiled over 
into protest in March 2015. At the University of Cape Town, a historically white 
campus, a group mostly comprised of black students protested the presence of a 
statue of Cecil John Rhodes (1853–1902), a late nineteenth century British colo-
nial figure associated with land theft and vio­lence against blacks. The movement 
against Rhodes’s statue was encapsulated in the hashtag #RhodesMustFall. The 
hashtag translated into on-­the-­ground activism, and its supporters eventually iden-
tified themselves by it (this tactic was not unique, however, as they ­were mimicking 
developments elsewhere, most notably the rise of #BlackLivesMatter in the United 
States). When the University of Cape Town sought an interdiction against the pro-
testing students, one of the parties identified in the suit was #FeesMustFall.
Social media accounts run by students began to set the news agenda about the 
protests, as mainstream media failed to keep up. Online student journalists pro-
vided updates on the protests as they developed, interviewed their colleagues (post-
ing videos on social media like Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, and Instagram), and 
used apps like Dropbox for “alternative education,” posting links ­there to PDFs of 
A student protester demonstrates outside Parlia-
ment in Cape Town, South Africa, on October 26, 
2016. #FMF, or #FeesMustFall, originated in response 
to an announced tuition hike, and gained momentum 
over multiple online platforms, resulting in a real-­
world movement for ­free higher education and better 
governance. (AP Photo/Schalk van Zuydam)

SOUTH ­KOREA
274
articles that usually ­were only accessible ­behind a paywall or through library 
ser­vices.
The student protests coincided with the emergence of online-­only news media 
in South Africa. An older site, Daily Maverick, had excelled with its coverage of the 
police massacre of thirty-­four striking mine workers in August 2012, while a sec-
ond, Daily Vox, openly identified with the students. Smaller regional sites like 
GroundUp, which grew out of earlier social movements focusing on health and edu-
cation politics, also have emerged as reliable alternatives to mainstream South 
African media.
Over time, the movement combined opposition to colonial symbols with 
curriculum reform and changes to the mostly white university faculty. Similar 
protests took place at other campuses and ­were exclusively identified with 
hashtags (e.g. #TransformWits [at Wits University] and #RhodesSoWhite [at 
Rhodes University]). ­Later, the movement took on the strug­gle for ­free public 
higher education (#FeesMustFall) and protesting the national government’s per­
for­mance (#NationalShutdown). President Zuma eventually met with university 
vice chancellors in October; eventually, he declared that ­there would be no public 
tuition hikes in 2016.
Sean Jacobs
See also: India; ­Kenya; Nigeria; United States
Further Reading
Caulderwood, Kathleen. 2014. “­Here’s Why Mxit, A New Messaging System, ­Will Over-
take WhatsApp, BBM and WeChat in India.” January 30. Accessed August 25, 2016. 
http://­www​.­ibtimes​.­com​/­heres​-­why​-­mxit​-­new​-­messaging​-­system​-­will​-­overtake​
-­whatsapp​-­bbm​-­wechat​-­india​-­1551941
Government Communications and Information Systems (GCIS). 2015. South Africa Year­
book. Government Printer. Accessed December 27, 2016. http://­www​.­gcis​.­gov​.­za​/­content​
/­resourcecentre​/­sa​-­info​/­yearbook2014​-­15
Jacobs, Sean, and Wasserman, Herman. 2015. “The Day Mainstream Media Became Old in 
South Africa.” November 25. Accessed August 25, 2016. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​
.­com​/­news​/­monkey​-­cage​/­wp​/­2015​/­11​/­25​/­the​-­day​-­mainstream​-­media​-­became​-­old​-­in​
-­south​-­africa​/­
MyBroadBand​.­co​.­za. 2014. “The History of Internet Access in South Africa.” November 30. 
Accessed August  25, 2016. http://­mybroadband​.­co​.­za​/­news​/­internet​/­114645​-­the​
-­history​-­of​-­internet​-­access​-­in​-­south​-­africa​.­html
MyBroadBand​.­co​.­za. 2015. “South Africans Are Getting Nailed over Broadband Prices.” 
March  5. Accessed August  25, 2016. http://­mybroadband​.­co​.­za​/­news​/­broadband​
/­119516​-­south​-­africans​-­are​-­getting​-­nailed​-­over​-­broadband​-­prices​.­html
South African Statistical Ser­vice. 2014. General House­hold Survey. Government Printer.
SOUTH ­KOREA
Once torn apart by the Korean War, South ­Korea (officially the Republic of ­Korea) 
is now a democracy with a gross domestic product (GDP) that ranks among the 

SOUTH ­KOREA
275
top countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-­operation and Development 
(OECD). Located in East Asia, the peninsular country is bordered by the Demo­
cratic ­People’s Republic of ­Korea to the north and surrounded by the Yellow Sea 
and the Sea of Japan (also known as the East Sea).
Home to over 50 million ­people, the Republic of ­Korea rightfully boasts that 
it is one of the most connected countries in the world, with over 92 ­percent of 
the population reportedly connected to the internet in the first quarter of 2015 
(Miniwatts 2015). The South Korean broadband market is also one of the world’s 
most heavi­ly penetrated, with almost 20 million subscribing to broadband ser­vice 
(KISA 2015). The capital, Seoul, has often been called the bandwidth capital of the 
world. In addition to the highly saturated market, South Korean connection speeds 
are some of the fastest in the world. With an average connection speed of 20.5 
Mbps and average peak connection speed of 86.6 Mbps, South Koreans enjoy con-
nection speeds well above the global average connection speed of 5.1 Mbps and 
average peak connection speed of 32.2 Mbps (Akamai 2015). ­There are several 
internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) in South ­Korea, but the main three, KT Corp, 
SKBroadband, and LGU+, own most of the market share.
South ­Korea’s high penetration rate of the internet and lightning-­fast speeds can 
be accredited to several ­factors, including government planning, market competi-
tion, and population density. As the country moved from an industrial economy to 
an information economy, the government provided support by launching a ten-­year 
infrastructure proj­ect starting in 1995 to make internet access available across the 
country. ­There ­were also no heavy regulations that would have created barriers for 
new ISPs entering the market. As a result, the spread and upgrade of the internet 
in South ­Korea was enhanced due to healthy competition between ISPs in the pri-
vate sector. The ease of structure development also played a key role, as building 
the necessary infrastructure was comparatively less costly than other nations ­because 
83 ­percent of South ­Korea’s population lives in urban areas (Braun 2014).
With a highly connected population enjoying fast connection rates at low cost, 
it is no won­der that South Korean life is heavi­ly mobile integrated. Home to the 
technology conglomerates LG and Samsung, the variety of smartphones available 
is wide-­ranging, and young Koreans are known for changing their mobile phones 
on a yearly basis in an effort to keep up with the latest technology. Data ser­vice is 
also considerably cheaper than ser­vice in the United States. On average, Koreans 
pay about half the price that New Yorkers pay for 25 Mbps (Kehl 2014). South Ko-
reans use their smartphones for daily communication, banking, payment, food 
delivery, and transportation. University students use their smartphones to book seats 
in the overcrowded study libraries or to listen to K-­pop, a form of pop ­music that 
arose in South ­Korea in the 1990s, through one of the many streaming ­music sub-
scription ser­vices.
One app that has had the most commercial success in South ­Korea is KakaoTalk, 
an online messaging application that has essentially replaced costly text messag-
ing. While it is mainly a messaging ser­vice that serves over 100 million users (with 
5 billion messages sent daily), it now has integrated social gaming, online shop-
ping, a taxi-­hailing ser­vice, video-­chatting, and personal blogging into the platform 

SOUTH ­KOREA
276
(Acuña 2013). While ser­vices like WeChat and Line dominate other Asian markets, 
KakaoTalk rules the South Korean market, with reported revenues of $319 million 
in 2014 (Mac 2015). Users can purchase emoticons or emojis to send in one-­on-­
one or group messages, get messages from their favorite brands about sales and 
styles, buy coffee gift certificates or other pres­ents to send through messages, and 
then pay for ­those ser­vices with KakaoPay, a credit card, or by adding the fee to 
their phone bill. Many of the games in the app have a virallike quality, as users are 
urged, or sometimes required, to send messages to friends in order to gain more 
lives or unlock levels.
Facebook has enjoyed huge success in the South Korean market. With a reported 
16 million members, the site has a market penetration of 32.6 ­percent (Miniwatts 
2015). This success came ­after a ­battle with Cyworld, which was the main social 
networking platform ­until about 2011. Run by SK, Cyworld users accepted each 
other’s “friend” requests and could then post on each other’s journal entries, photos, 
or “walls.” Unfortunately, Cyworld failed to gain success outside of South ­Korea, and 
with the increasing need to connect with a global audience for social and business 
purposes, the local-­oriented ser­vice could not keep up with global heavyweights 
such as Facebook and Twitter. Another cause for Cyworld’s downfall was its failure 
to create a mobile-­friendly platform, a certain death sentence in a society where 
A smartphone features the logo of KakaoTalk, the most successful messaging app in South 
­Korea. The app has not only replaced text messaging, but has grown to include additional ser­
vices such as in-­app games, shopping, blogging, and taxi-­hailing. The app is starting to gain 
more popularity across Asia, competing with WhatsApp and Line. (AP Photo/Hye Soo Nah)

SOUTH ­KOREA
277
almost every­thing is done through a smartphone. Conversely, according to Business 
­Korea (2013), 90 ­percent of Facebook users in South ­Korea connect through their 
mobile phones.
Although a Western com­pany has beat out its Korean competitor in the world 
of social media, one area that remains almost impenetrable is web searching. While 
Google does have a presence in South ­Korea, Naver, a search engine run by NHN 
Corp, held 77 ­percent of the market in 2013. The second runner-up was Daum, 
holding 20 ­percent of the market share, while Google trailed with less than 5 ­percent 
(Return On Now 2015). Google’s failure to seize market share in South ­Korea may 
be due largely to its late arrival, but it also fails to fulfill South Koreans’ desire for a 
portal page. Naver, a portal site like Yahoo, has a landing page that highlights the 
latest news from outlets all over the web. It also provides ser­vices such as a multi-
language dictionary, specialized message boards known as “cafés,” a blogging plat-
form, online comics called webtoons, and a ser­vice called Ji-­shik, whose name 
translates as “knowledge” in Korean and is a platform where users can post any 
question and get responses from ­people all over the web.
YouTube has seen consistent growth in South ­Korea since its Korean-­language 
ser­vice launched in 2008. South Korean viewers enjoy streaming videos from their 
mobile phones, and local users create channels for gaming, cooking, and makeup 
tutorials. Local users also have the chance to gain global attention, just as the mu-
sician Psy became famous worldwide when his song “Gangnam Style” reached 1 
billion YouTube views in 2012 (Bahk 2015).
South Koreans also enjoy a local video-­streaming ser­vice called AfreecaTV. Un-
like YouTube videos that are prerecorded and often edited, AfreecaTV broadcasts 
live, user-­streamed videos. Comments on “per­for­mances” from viewers are displayed 
in a live feed, with the “broadcaster” often replying to viewer comments and re-
quests and sending thanks and shout-­outs to viewers who send star balloons to pay 
for the plea­sure of viewing the stream. ­These star balloons are a serious source of 
income for many broadcasters, with top earners making a lot of money ­after Afree-
caTV’s 40 ­percent cut. Some of the popu­lar broadcasts of the several hundred thou-
sand streams aired monthly include drinking broadcasts, study broadcasts, and 
dancing broadcasts. The most famous of ­these are mokbang, or eating broadcasts. 
A result of the South Korean communal food culture mixed with the growing num-
ber of one-­person ­house­holds, mokbang videos allow viewers to tune into a live-­
stream of gorging and gluttony, where ­people talk to the audience while enjoying 
tremendous amounts of food. Viewers rejoice at the sight of broadcasters scooping 
South Koreans watch more videos online than any other nation. A total of 95.9 ­percent 
of South Koreans watch at least one video online per week, with many viewers watch-
ing more than one program. Following the South Koreans are the Spanish, at 
92 ­percent digital video viewer penetration. The top five nations with the highest 
online video viewing percentages are rounded out by Italy, at 91 ­percent; Mexico, at 
90.1 ­percent; and China, at 89.6 ­percent (Edelman 2015).

SOUTH ­KOREA
278
copious amounts of food into their mouths, describing each delicious bite over the 
course of the meal. Many of ­these videos are ­later posted on YouTube as well, so 
­those who missed out on the live feed of chewing can catch up ­later. Top-­earning 
mokbang stars have reported making up to $9,000 a month—or even £1,000 per 
broadcast—­and many of them consider eating on camera their profession (The Ob-
servers 2014; Stanton 2015).
More successful than the social networking and user-­created entertainment 
genres combined is gambling. Mobile gaming spending is an estimated $1.3 billion, 
making South ­Korea one of the top three spenders in Asia (Grubb 2015). Even 
more successful are multiplayer games, such as League of Legends. Despite the 
abundance of high-­speed wireless internet, PC rooms and internet cafés are still 
quite popu­lar. Groups of friends gather in PC rooms to connect through games and 
eat ramen, a major social activity for young men. The activity is so popu­lar that in-
ternet addiction camps have been created to deal with ­those who cannot curb their 
appetite for online gaming.
Online shopping is also a major source of revenue. South Koreans regularly shop 
online for food products, cosmetics, shoes, and handbags. In October 2015, yearly 
online sales had already reached $4.24 billion, with about $2 billion of that figure 
specifically from purchases made through smartphones, tablets, and other mo-
bile devices (Yonhap News 2015). Popu­lar online shopping sites include GMarket, 
11street, Emart, and Coupang.
With high connectivity must come some regulation, but South ­Korea has some 
very serious restrictions regarding their neighbors to the north. It is estimated that 
sixty-­five sites considered sympathetic to North ­Korea have been banned through 
internet protocol (IP) blocking, and as a result, a large number of websites may be 
inaccessible due to shared hosting (Yoon 2010). In the realm of social media, South 
­Korea has blocked the Twitter account operated by the North Korean government. 
Expressing pro–­North Korean sentiment can also get South Korean citizens in seri-
ous trou­ble; for instance, a Demo­cratic ­Labor Party activist was sentenced to one 
year in prison for comments regarding North ­Korea on the party’s website (Baek 
2002). In 2011, prosecutors charged a man for using social media to praise North 
­Korea and share media clips, a serious violation of South ­Korea’s National Security 
Law (Kim 2011). Police have blocked foreign sites, social media accounts, and 
online communities, and also have deleted material, ostensibly in the name of na-
tional security (Park 2014).
Censorship does not end with talk about North ­Korea. Content can be blocked 
if it falls into one of the categories of obscenity, gambling, illegal food and medicine, 
violating other’s rights, and violating other laws and regulations. If a site has been 
blocked, users are redirected to a warning that the government has blocked the site. 
In 2008, the ­Korea Communications Standards Commission replaced the Informa-
tion and Communication Ethics Committee to manage internet censorship. They 
are responsible for deleting 23,000 Korean webpages and blocking another 63,000 
in 2013 (S.C.S. 2014). Made up of members appointed by the president, the agency 
has come ­under fire for possibly curbing ­free speech. Surveillance is also a point 
of contention in South ­Korea, with ISPs being accused of turning over user data 
without requiring warrants. The mobile messaging app KakaoTalk saw many users 

SOUTH ­KOREA
279
abandon it for foreign-­based applications when they turned over user data in com-
pliance with government ­orders.
The government also has created regulations for monitoring ­children’s activity on 
the internet. Online gaming is banned from midnight to 6 a.m. for ­children ­under 
sixteen, requiring users to enter their government ID numbers to prove their age. 
This proved disastrous for a 15-­year-­old who was locked out of Starcraft II for a ­daytime 
competition in France in 2012 that ran ­after midnight in South ­Korea; when he logged 
back in with his parent’s ID number, he had lost the match and a chance at the compe-
tition’s major monetary prizes (S.C.S. 2014). In April 2015, a law was passed requiring 
all smartphones sold to ­those eigh­teen and ­under be equipped with a specific app so 
their parents could monitor their social media activity. The app was meant to protect 
­children from cyberbullying, pornography, and other damaging material. However, 
just six months ­later, the app was pulled from the market ­after an internet watchdog 
group discovered serious security concerns in an analy­sis of the app (AP 2015).
Hacking, especially from North ­Korea, is a serious threat to internet security in 
South ­Korea. The National Intelligence Ser­vice has pointed the fin­ger at its north-
ern neighbor for attacks on banks, government agencies, military institutions, TV 
broadcasters, and websites. South ­Korea believes that North ­Korea is ­running a spe-
cial cyberwarfare unit and has blamed Pyongyang for attacks on the Seoul metro 
system and a nuclear power plant operator, ­Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power (AFP 
2015). It is suspected that North ­Korea orchestrated a 2013 cyberattack that wreaked 
havoc for a few hours when many automatic teller machines (ATMs), payment ter-
minals, and mobile banking ser­vices ­were temporarily inaccessible ­after the attack 
took two banks and three tele­vi­sion stations temporarily offline (Branigan 2013).
Crystal L. Hecht
See also: China; Japan; North ­Korea; United States
Further Reading
Acuña, Abel. 2013. “Why Is Mobile Gaming So Popu­lar in South ­Korea?” October 19. Ac-
cessed December 20, 2015. http://­venturebeat​.­com​/­2013​/­10​/­19​/­why​-­is​-­mobile​-­gaming​
-­so​-­popular​-­in​-­south​-­korea​/­
AFP. 2015. “North ­Korea Suspected of Hacking Seoul Subway Operator: MP.” October 5. 
Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­securityweek​.­com​/­north​-­korea​-­suspected​
-­hacking​-­seoul​-­subway​-­operator​-­mp
Akamai. 2015. “State of the Internet: Asia Pacific Highlights.” October 5. Accessed December 
15, 2015. https://­www​.­stateoftheinternet​.­com​/­downloads​/­pdfs​/­2015​-­q3​-­state​-­of​-­the​
-­internet​-­report​-­infographic​-­asia​.­pdf
Associated Press (AP). 2015. “S. ­Korea Pulls Plug on Child Monitoring App.” November 2. 
Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­koreatimesus​.­com​/­s​-­korea​-­pulls​-­plug​-­on​
-­child​-­monitoring​-­app​/­
Baek, Gi-­cheol. 2002. “내가 유별난가요? 사회가 이상한가요?” October 6. Accessed December 
15, 2015. http://­legacy​.­www​.­hani​.­co​.­kr​/­section​-­005000000​/­2002​/­10​/­0050000002​002​
10062252297​.­html
Bahk, Eun-ji. 2015. “YouTube Sees ‘Tremendous’ Growth in S. ­Korea.” May 19. Accessed 
December 19, 2015. http://­www​.­koreatimesus​.­com​/­youtube​-­sees​-­tremendous​-­growth​
-­potential​-­in​-­s​-­korea​/­

SOUTH ­KOREA
280
Branigan, Tania. 2013. “South ­Korea on Alert for Cyber-­attacks ­After Major Network Goes 
Down.” March 20. Accessed December 10, 2015. http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­world​
/­2013​/­mar​/­20​/­south​-­korea​-­under​-­cyber​-­attack
Braun, Andrew. 2014. “Why Does South ­Korea Have the Fastest Internet?” October 20. Ac-
cessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­idgconnect​.­com​/­abstract​/­8960​/­why​-­does​-­south​
-­korea​-­have​-­fastest​-­internet
Business ­Korea. 2013. “90 ­Percent of Facebook Users in ­Korea Connect on Their Mobile 
Phones.” August 15. Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­businesskorea​.­co​.­kr​
/­english​/­news​/­ict​/­1272​-­connections​-­facebook​-­90​-­facebook​-­users​-­korea​-­connect​-­their​
-­mobile​-­phones
Freedom House. 2014. “Freedom on the Net in 2014.” Accessed December 10, 2015. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2014​/­south​-­korea
Grubb, Jeff. 2015. “China, Japan, and South ­Korea Lead Massive $14B Mobile Gaming Busi-
ness in Asia.” November 5. Accessed December 5, 2015. http://­venturebeat​.­com​/­2015​
/­11​/­05​/­asian​-­mobile​-­gamers​-­are​-­young​-­and​-­spending​-­tons​-­of​-­cash​/­
Kehl, Danielle. 2014. “New Yorkers Get Worse Internet Ser­vice than ­People in Bucharest.” 
November 21. Accessed December 5, 2015. http://­www​.­slate​.­com​/­blogs​/­future​_­tense​
/­2014​/­11​/­21​/­cost​_­of​_­connectivity​_­study​_­2014​_­americans​_­pay​_­more​_­for​_­slower​
_­internet​_­access​.­html
Kim, Eun-­jung. 2011. “S. Korean Man Indicted for Pro-­Pyongyang Postings on Internet, 
Twitter.” January 10. Accessed December 5, 2015. http://­english​.­yonhapnews​.­co​.­kr​
/­news​/­2011​/­01​/­10​/­36​/­0200000000AEN20110110007200315F​.­HTML
KISA. 2015. “Broadband Subscribers.” September. Accessed December 20, 2015. http://­isis​
.­kisa​.­or​.­kr​/­eng​/­sub01​/­​?­pageId​=­010400
Mac, Ryan. 2015. “How KakaoTalk’s Billionare Creator Ignited a Global Messaging War.” 
March 2. Accessed December 1, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­ryanmac​/­2015​/­03​
/­02​/­kakaotalk​-­billionaire​-­brian​-­kim​-­mobile​-­messaging​-­global​-­competition​/­
Miniwatts Marketing Group. 2015. “Asia Internet Use, Population Data, and Facebook Sta-
tistics.” November 30. Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​
.­com​/­stats3​.­htm#asia
Park, Hong-du. 2014. “박근혜 정부 1년 ‘국가보안법 위반 사범’ 대폭 증가. ” February 19. Ac-
cessed December 15, 2015. http://­bigstory​.­ap​.­org​/­article​/­c61a87e602af44df8c98bf73
d47ac788​/­apnewsbreak​-­south​-­korea​-­pulls​-­plug​-­child​-­monitoring​-­app
Return On Now. 2015. “2015 Search Engine Market Share by Country.” Accessed December 
20, 2015. http://­returnonnow​.­com​/­internet​-­marketing​-­resources​/­2015​-­search​-­engine​
-­market​-­share​-­by​-­country​/­
S​.­C​.­S. 2014. “The Economist Explains Why South ­Korea Is ­Really An Internet Dinosaur.” 
February  10. Accessed November  11, 2015. http://­www​.­economist​.­com​/­blogs​
/­economist​-­explains​/­2014​/­02​/­economist​-­explains​-­3
Stanton, Jenny. 2015. “The Skinny Korean 14-­Year-­Old Who Makes £1,000 a Night by Gorg-
ing on Fast Food on Webcam—­While Thousands of Fans Watch.” August 19. Ac-
cessed December 15, 2015. http://­www​.­dailymail​.­co​.­uk​/­news​/­article​-­3203221​/­Skinny​
-­Korean​-­14​-­wanted​-­company​-­ate​-­dinner​-­makes​-­1​-­000​-­night​-­gorging​-­fast​-­food​
-­webcam​-­thousands​-­fans​-­watch​.­html
The Observers. 2014. “The New South Korean Craze for Live-­stream Eating.” March 14. 
Accessed December 10, 2015. http://­observers​.­france24​.­com​/­en​/­20140314​-­south​-­korea​
-­mokbang​-­trend​-­eating
Yonhap News. 2015. “S. Korean Retail Sales Hit 10-­Month High in October.” December 1. 
Accessed December 15, 2015. http://­english​.­yonhapnews​.­co​.­kr​/­news​/­2015​/­12​/­01​/­020​
0000000AEN20151201003300320​.­html

SPAIN
281
Yoon, Sangwon. 2010. “North ­Korea Uses Twitter, YouTube for Propaganda Offensive.” 
August 17. Accessed December 5, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­2010​/­08​/­16​
/­north​-­korea​-­twitter​-­propa​_­n​_­682920​.­html
SPAIN
Spain, located on the southwest peninsula of the Eu­ro­pean continent and north of 
the Mediterranean Sea, has a robust social media environment that demonstrates 
entrepreneurship and innovation. The Spanish enjoy utilizing foreign and domes-
tically produced platforms and share a national pastime of watching online videos. 
As of January 2015, Spain had more than 23 million internet users out of a 47.7 
million population, or about 48 ­percent. Of ­these internet users, at least 17 million 
claimed to use social media actively, with an overwhelming 90 ­percent having reg-
istered Facebook accounts (OBS 2015). The Spanish also have presences on Twit-
ter, Google+, Instagram, WhatsApp, Tumblr, and Pinterest. Spain’s dating population 
prefers using the Badoo and Lovoo apps to meet ­people. An examination of national 
social media demographics indicated that more men than ­women use Facebook, 
whereas ­women participate in higher numbers on Instagram and Pinterest; of all 
social media users, the most prevalent age group is the sixteen-­ to twenty-­four-­
year-­old category.
Facebook is Spain’s most popu­lar social media platform, and the app is one of 
the country’s most downloaded programs. Facebook users reportedly access the site 
to “like” content such as a post or photo, read news stories, share photos, com-
ment on their friends’ posts, and chat with their contacts (OBS 2015). Profession-
als create profiles on LinkedIn, often in addition to their Facebook accounts, to 
maintain some distinction between friends and colleagues.
Facebook was not always Spain’s key social media platform or networking site. 
In 2006, Tuenti launched in Spain in response to Facebook and Hi5, a social net-
working site based out of San Francisco that around 2007 was second only to 
MySpace. To differentiate the platform from its competitors, Tuenti promised to 
guarantee user privacy and not share information about individuals or aggregate 
data. Users could join Tuenti only through a personal invitation, and each user re-
ceived only ten invitations to pass on to friends and ­family. However, around 2009, 
Facebook’s global popularity and ease of sharing information caused it to overtake 
Some historians are finding a new niche on Twitter. Using their knowledge of ­peoples’ 
lives from major events in the past, such as the Spanish Civil War and the American 
Revolution, ­these fans tweet as if ­those events ­were unfolding in real time. One of 
the first historic role-­play accounts is an anonymous Twitter user play acting as 
Antonio Hernández (1907–1992), a policeman from Murcia, Spain, who spent four 
and a half years as a German prisoner during World War II (1941–1945). The pur-
pose of such accounts is to share knowledge, or in this specific case, to shed light on 
the fates of 9,000 Spaniards captured by German forces (Noticias Cuatro 2015).

SPAIN
282
Tuenti in popularity. In 2013 and 2014, the site still ranked in the top 25 on Spain’s 
most accessed website list, but by 2015, it no longer appeared even within the top 
200. While releases such as Tuenti Móvil (Mobile) and Tuenti Local, similar to Four-
square, a search-­and-­discovery app, helped modernize the brand, the app has con-
tinued to lose members. Instead of continuing to focus on the social media market, 
Tuenti is concentrating on its mobile phone division and looks to expand in Latin 
Amer­i­ca.
In addition to Tuenti, Spain has a presence on a multitude of platforms for pur-
poses ranging from chatting to shopping and news aggregation, where sites collect 
data on news pertaining to specific themes. In Spain, the main science and tech-
nology news aggregators are Divúlgame and Barrapunto; microblogging post ag-
gregators are Divoblogger and Bitáconas; general news aggregators are Menéame 
and the Huffington Post in Spanish; and specialized aggregators, which allow career-­
specific communities and hobbyists such as automobile enthusiasts, include 
Feedly and Flipboard.
Spain’s popu­lar websites provide a glimpse into the preferences of the country’s 
user base. Its top ten accessed websites ­were Google España, Google, Facebook, 
YouTube, Amazon España, Twitter, Live, Yahoo, Wikipedia, and Marca, a sports 
news site (Alexa 2015). ­These sites indicate that the ­people frequently use Google 
for online searches, prefer globally recognized social media platforms, and spend 
time online reading the news. The top ­free apps on GooglePlay confirmed that the 
Spanish like social media, as the top five platforms are WhatsApp, Facebook, Google 
Photos, Facebook Messenger, and the 360 Security Antivirus Boost, an app dedi-
cated to removing viruses, such as ­those that could infect a phone through social 
media and internet use. The paid apps showed another dimension to the Spanish 
social media user. ­These apps included games and entertainment, such as Mine-
craft Pocket Edition, Geometry Dash, Runtastic ­Running Pro, Farming Simulator 
16, and Flightradar24 to track flights (AppAnnie 2015). From ­these app prefer-
ences, Spain enjoyed online chatting, sharing photos, improving their math skills, 
and working on physical fitness.
Eu­ro­pean internet laws are often stricter than in other parts of the world, in-
cluding the United States and Asia. In 2014, the Spanish government enacted a 
law that topped the copyright concerns of Belgium, France, and Germany against 
news aggregator sites. The law, which went into effect January 2015, required all 
Spanish publishing sites to charge aggregator sites, such as Google, for using their 
content. Refusing to levy the fee would result in a fine of around $750,000. Google 
responded by removing all Spanish publishers in its news section and dismantling 
its local aggregators. The result was that Spanish publishers received significantly 
fewer hits, with estimations that their sites received a two-­thirds reduction, equat-
ing to a huge drop in online circulation. Other sites remained cautious about link-
ing to Spanish publishers, ­because even the tiniest excerpt from a news story 
required that site to compensate the publisher.
For advocates of internet freedom, the Spanish government’s decision could have 
additional consequences. Though Google and similar sites ­were not banned ­under 
the new law, their ability to point users to relevant information has diminished. 

SPAIN
283
Google and other news aggregators do not receive income from pointing ­people to 
sites matched by user search queries, and they believed that it was not a good busi-
ness model to capitulate to paying the fees imposed by the Spanish government. 
Some internet users in Spain and other parts of Eu­rope speculated that the new 
trend to impose fines and other charges restricted the availability of internet con-
tent. They also speculated that the next step would be to curb content on social 
media sites, such as YouTube, by levying similar fee structures. Internet freedom in 
Spain could be in jeopardy if the law is expanded ­because it is likely that many 
sites ­will follow Google’s example and refuse to serve the affected areas.
YouTube is the most popu­lar video-­sharing site in Spain. ­Because Spanish users 
visit the site around 20 million times a month, its popularity has transformed how 
users interact with it. For individuals with camera skills, the current trend is to cre-
ate homemade videos and post them to an original YouTube channel. Successful 
channels attract subscribers, and sometimes advertisers, and once a channel has 
several million subscribers and views, the person controlling the channel can earn 
between €2000 and €3000 a month. Examples of Spain’s successful YouTubers 
are MangelRogel, Abi Power, ElRubiusOMG, and LokoOfLucky (León 2014). This 
YouTube phenomenon is transforming the lives of its users and creating an indus-
try of locally produced content that is posted on the web for mass consumption.
A second way in which Spain’s YouTuber phenomenon is changing the way that 
­people think about media is that it directly influences the country’s businesses. Many 
­people, particularly from the millennial generation and younger, no longer spend 
much time watching tele­vi­sion. On the rare occasions that they do, members of 
this generation are more likely to watch using a smartphone rather than a tele­vi­
sion set, and might not be viewing from a traditional location like a living room. 
Stations such as Spain’s Antena 3TV adapted to the demand for YouTube by alter-
ing their business models. Antena 3TV created its own YouTube channel, where 
­people can access programming and now operates through traditional tele­vi­sion 
and electronic platforms.
Other stations, such as Telecinco, sued YouTube for copyright infringement 
­because users had uploaded its content. However, a judge ruled that YouTube could 
not be held responsible for what its users upload, at least in Spain, but the site was 
obligated to remove content that ­violated intellectual property laws. As YouTube 
has continued to rise in popularity, many businesses, not only tele­vi­sion compa-
nies, have chosen to establish official channels on the site, advertise, or both in or-
der to engage larger segments of Spain’s population.
Spain does hold one unique claim to fame in the use of internet communica-
tions. In 2011, one Spanish town started relying on Twitter to enable communica-
tion between the local government and town residents. Jun, a small town located 
north of Granada, developed its own Twitter account ­because its mayor, José Anto-
nio Rodríguez Salas, advocated that technology was the key to improving relation-
ships between the government and the population. The town then convinced its 
citizens to create their own accounts and then verified that each account belonged 
to an ­actual resident. Next, the government instructed the townspeople to use 
Twitter to report any issues or complaints in order to resolve them. If the report 

SURINAME
284
required the involvement of other government employees, such as a representative 
from maintenance or sanitation, the government’s initial response to the message 
included that employee’s Twitter ­handle, along with the hashtag #JunSeMueve, or 
“Jun gets moving” (Powers and Roy 2015). The inclusion of the hashtag signaled 
that a public promise has been made to resolve the prob­lem or address the griev-
ance. When the required action was completed, ­there was a follow-up message, 
sometimes with photos, to confirm that the original issue had been resolved. For 
the town’s verified 3,500 residents, the system functions well; the media even oc-
casionally refers to the town as “Jun 2.0” for having successfully integrated Twitter 
and new technologies into its operations. This unique model has received atten-
tion from the news media, and ­there also has been academic interest in Jun’s in-
novative use of social media.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: France; Germany; United Kingdom; Venezuela
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Spain.” Accessed August 18, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­ES
AppAnnie. 2015. “GooglePlay Top App Matrix.” Accessed August 18, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­matrix​/­overall​/­​?­date​=­2015​-­08​-­18
León, Pablo. 2014. “The Rise of Spain’s YouTubers.” November 21. Accessed August 20, 
2015. http://­elpais​.­com​/­m​/­elpais​/­2014​/­11​/­19​/­inenglish​/­1416406298​_­035188​.­html
Martínez, Jesús. 2014. “Tuenti contra Tuenti: De ‘Startup’ de Nombre Filial de Telefónica.” 
November 9. Accessed August 18, 2015. http://­www​.­elconfidencial​.­com​/­tecnologia​
/­2014​-­11​-­09​/­tuenti​-­contra​-­tuenti​_­440005​/­
NERA Economic Consulting. 2015. “Impacto del Nuevo Artículo 32.2 de la Ley de Propie-
dad Intelectual Informe para la Asociación Española de Editoriales de Publicaciones 
Periódicas (AEEPP).” July 8. Accessed August 16, 2015. http://­www​.­aeepp​.­com​/­pdf​
/­InformeNera​.­pdf
OBS Business School. 2015. “España Aumenta el Número de Usuarios Activos en Redes 
Sociales en 2014 y Llega a los 17 Millones.” January 25. Accessed August 16, 2015. 
http://­www​.­obs​-­edu​.­com​/­noticias​/­estudio​-­obs​/­espana​-­aumenta​-­el​-­numero​-­de​-­usuarios​
-­activos​-­en​-­redes​-­sociales​-­en​-­2014​-­y​-­llega​-­los​-­17​-­millones​/­
Powers, William, and Roy, Deb. 2015. “The Incredible Jun: A Town that Runs on Social 
Media,” April 20. Accessed August 16, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­william​
-­powers​/­jun​-­twitter​-­social​-­media​_­b​_­7102780​.­html
Vara, Vauhini. 2014. “Spain versus the Internet.” December 13. Accessed August 19, 2105. 
http://­www​.­newyorker​.­com​/­business​/­currency​/­spain​-­versus​-­internet
SURINAME
Suriname is a country in the northeastern region of South Amer­i­ca, surrounded by 
Guyana, French Guiana, Brazil, and the Atlantic Ocean. A former Dutch colony, it 
has an extremely diverse population due to the colonial period’s reliance on import-
ing African and Indonesian, specifically Javanese, workers to support agriculture 

SURINAME
285
and the extraction of mineral wealth. Technology has developed at a slower rate 
than in other parts of Latin Amer­i­ca ­because of Suriname’s small population and 
lack of major cities beyond the capital, Paramaribo. As technology has become 
more impor­tant, the Surinamese have used social media for many reasons, includ-
ing communicating with friends and ­family. Po­liti­cal parties also have harnessed 
the power of social media during elections to address the major issues that affect 
their constituents.
Relatively few studies exist about Suriname’s social media demographics. From 
the information that is available, in 2015 Suriname had around 250,000 internet 
users, of whom more than 200,000 had Facebook accounts and fewer than 20,000 
­were active on LinkedIn and Twitter (van Charante, 2015a). The country’s total pop-
ulation hovered around 540,000 at that time, with 122 ­percent having mobile 
phones. In other words, 22 ­percent of ­people in Spain had more than one mobile 
phone or subscriber identity module (SIM) card; similar to other countries such as 
neighboring Brazil, where ­people maintain multiple phones, they are often split be-
tween business and personal use, or between ser­vice providers to call areas where 
­those carriers offer coverage. With the amount of phones in use, Surinamese ac-
cess the internet primarily via mobile phone.
Suriname is a Facebook country. While local users have experimented with vari­
ous other platforms in the past, from 2010 onward, the Surinamese have been 
dedicated Facebook aficionados. Approximately 200,000 Surinamese have Face-
book accounts, which was around 40 ­percent of the population (van Charante 
2015b). The top Facebook pages belonged to Starnieuws, Dagblad Suriname, Mc-
Donald’s Suriname, Surinam Airways, GFC Nieuws, Digicel Suriname, Pizza Hut 
Suriname, KFC, KLM Suriname, and Europcar (Allin1 Social 2015). From ­these 
favorites, the Surinamese preferred Facebook pages that supported local news cov-
erage, transportation, and fast food brands.
According to a Surinamese social media specialist, YouTube has always been 
popu­lar in the country. However, in the past, slow connection speeds prevented 
high levels of online video consumption. Prior to the expansion of mobile phone 
access and ser­vices, a five-­minute video could take up to thirty minutes to buffer, 
which took time and accrued charges for the data connection (van Charante 2015b). 
With the rise of high-­speed mobile access, however, more Surinamese are viewing 
YouTube videos. In fact, one of the top apps in 2015 is from PewDiePie, a Swedish 
vlogger (video blogger) whose account was the first to have more than 10 billion 
views. Suriname’s top websites for late 2015 reflected this renewed preference for 
YouTube, which led the list, followed by Facebook, Google.sr, Google, Live​.­com, 
Amazon, Yahoo, Msn, Starnieuws, Xvideos, and Alibaba (SimilarWeb 2015). ­These 
sites reconfirmed the impression that Surinamese are avid online news consumers.
Twitter did not appear on the list of top sites accessed; it is not a favorite app 
­because it has few Surinamese users. The platform has never been popu­lar, due in 
part to the lack of businesses and local ­people who engage on the site. One of the 
major reasons that Surinamese use social media was to connect with friends and 
­family, which they can already do successfully over Facebook, so switching to Twit-
ter did not make sense culturally. In Suriname, Twitter still appears to be a primary 

SURINAME
286
medium to communicate internationally rather than internally. If more Surinam-
ese choose to interact on the platform and can initiate exchanges of information in 
the ­future, more ­people ­will likely view it as another communication channel.
In contrast to Twitter, Instagram has gained ground in the country. The platform’s 
Surinamese users ­were primarily youths who wanted to share images with friends 
and ­family. Instagram was the second fastest growing social media platform in 2015 
­after YouTube (van Charante 2015b). Sharing images through platforms like Insta-
gram is likely to take hold within Suriname’s growing tourism industry. Although 
the sector remains small, Suriname has started exploring its potential to expand its 
hospitality and ser­vices to attract more tourists. Instagram reaches a wide interna-
tional audience and can allow the government and tourism companies to promote 
the country without investing exorbitant sums of money up front.
Other social media outlets besides Instagram have the opportunity to gain ad-
ditional Surinamese users. Telesur, one of the country’s primary mobile phone ser­
vice providers, started offering data packages featuring connections to specific chat 
apps. In one of its 2015 packages, Telesur offered special data and tariffs for mo-
bile internet plans that accessed WhatsApp, Facebook, Google+, Twitter, LinkedIn, 
and the Chinese platform QQ. Digicel, another Surinamese phone carrier, created 
a similar plan to provide ­free access to WhatsApp, Facebook, Instagram, and Twit-
ter for its 4G customers. ­There are also small numbers of Surinamese on Pinterest, 
Reddit, StumbleUpon, and Tumblr—­all sites that could gain a larger local user base 
given the right incentives.
Suriname does have a site to promote local activities to local ­people. Social Su-
riname is a Dutch-­language social networking megasite, meaning that it has mul-
tiple internal means of promoting events and information to its users. The site’s main 
purpose is to allow the Surinamese to discover more about their country and its 
culture; to do so, it features information on noteworthy items ranging from large 
events and festivals to smaller social gatherings. The site also contains a section 
where users can post and establish their own pages. They can also find happenings 
to attend in person and connect with other users. Some of the site’s content is avail-
able to the public, while other portions are password protected.
App usage has started rising in Suriname ­because of mobile phone usage and 
increasingly faster connection speeds. Most popu­lar apps have entertainment value, 
though chat apps have also seen a surge in popularity. For example, Suriname’s top 
­free iOS apps ­were iMP3 Pro, WhatsApp, FIFA 16 Ultimate Team, Facebook, and 
­Free ­Music–Music Streamer. The top paid apps ­were PewDiePie: Legend of the 
Brofist, FunBridge Quiz Bundle, ­Grand Theft Auto III, Mono­poly, and Thief Alert 
(AppAnnie 2015). ­Little data exist on popu­lar apps for Android or other phone 
types. More information ­will become available as social media takes greater hold 
over the country and becomes more frequently used and easily accessible.
Social media plays a role in Surinamese politics as well. Most parties have their 
own pages, and social media has proved that it can influence voters, particularly 
new voters, to participate in the electoral pro­cess. In 2015, Suriname experienced 
its first social media–­influenced election. Historically, voting in the country has oc-
curred along ethnic lines, isolating younger voters who did not feel the need to 
participate. During the 2015 election, parties earned gains in their support base by 

SURINAME
287
developing colorful Facebook pages. With this strategy, they engaged younger vot-
ers to follow campaigns and learn about the major issues. Around 26,000 ­people 
used social media to engage in the election, which was more ­people than Suriname 
has on Twitter and LinkedIn. The National Demo­cratic Party, the victorious party 
in the 2015 elections, gained 9,000 followers prior to the elections. Two other po­
liti­cal contenders, the Party for Democracy and Development Through Unity and 
the Progressive Reform Party, received 5,000 and 4,200 ­people providing “likes” or 
other support, respectively (Times of Suriname 2015).
One issue during the elections was to elect more ­women to po­liti­cal posts, as 
­women have traditionally not been involved in Surinamese politics. During the 2015 
elections, a campaign to promote ­women in politics called “Ook Zij” (They Too), 
used all communications channels, including tele­vi­sion, radio, social media, and 
billboards; ­these campaigns received support from Surinamese organ­izations, as well 
as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Dutch embassy, and 
other international supporters. As a result, ­women’s repre­sen­ta­tion increased from 
9.8 ­percent in 2010 to 33 ­percent in 2015 (UNDP 2015). Social media, while not 
the sole cause of a higher number of ­women being elected to office, was an impor­
tant contributing ­factor.
Social media’s role in society has evolved in Suriname. In early September 2015, 
the government raised tariffs, and ultimately the prices, of basic goods. As the prices 
of fuel, electricity, and ­water ­rose quickly, more than 110,000 Facebook users, or 
about half of all Facebook users in the country, went online to express their dis-
content (Radio10 2015). This episode marked the first time that Surinamese had 
ever protested the government online, en masse. The issue sparked debate that 
rolled over from social media into traditional media, demonstrating how social me-
dia has gained ground in the country as impor­tant communications media.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Brazil; Colombia; Indonesia; Venezuela
Further Reading
Allin1 Social. 2015. “Facebook Statistics for Suriname.” Accessed September 24, 2015. 
http://­www​.­allin1social​.­com​/­facebook​-­statistics​/­countries​/­suriname​?­page​=­1&period​
=­six​_­months
AppAnnie. 2015. “Top iOS Charts.” Accessed September 25, 2015. https://­www​.­appannie​
.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­suriname​/­​?­device​=­iphone
Radio10. 2015. “Surinamers Uitten Kritiek op Tariefsaanpassingen Massaal op Sociale 
Media.” September 3. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­radio10​.­sr​/­nieuws​
/­surinamers​-­uitten​-­kritiek​-­op​-­tariefsaanpassingen​-­massaal​-­op​-­sociale​-­media​/­45572
SimilarWeb. 2015. “Website Rankings: Top 50 Sites in Suriname for All Categories.” Ac-
cessed September 25, 2015. http://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​/­country​/­suriname
Times of Suriname. 2015. “Belangstelling voor Politiek via Sociale Media nog Gering.” 
February 4. Accessed September 25, 2015. http://­www​.­surinametimes​.­com​/­belang​
stelling​-­voor​-­politiek​-­via​-­sociale​-­media​-­nog​-­gering​/­
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). 2015. “Suriname: Boosting ­Women 
Participation in Parliament District by District.” September 16. Accessed September 
26, 2015. http://­www​.­latinamerica​.­undp​.­org​/­content​/­rblac​/­en​/­home​/­ourwork​/­womenem​

SYRIA
288
powerment​/­successstories​/­suriname—boosting​-­women​-­participation​-­in​-­parliament​
-­district​-­by​.­html
Van Charante, Jean-­Luc. 2015a. “Interne Communicatie en Social Media in Suriname.” 
April 27. Accessed September 23, 2015. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­JeanlucCharante​
/­spang​-­power​-­pointinterne​-­communicatiesocial​-­media​-­2015
Van Charante, Jean-­Luc. 2015b. “Social Media in Suriname: Join the Twitter Bandwagon” 
February  12. Accessed September 23, 2015. https://­www​.­linkedin​.­com​/­pulse​/­social​
-­media​-­suriname​-­join​-­twitter​-­bandwagon​-­jean​-­luc​-­van​-­charante​?­trk​=­pulse​-­det​-­nav​_­art
SYRIA
Syria, a ­Middle Eastern nation surrounded by Turkey, Iraq, Lebanon, Israel, and 
Jordan, has around 18 million ­people, though the number is decreasing rapidly as 
­people flee internal conflict between the government, a terrorist insurgency, and 
international military forces. Since 2011, the Syrian strug­gle has been defined as 
one of the most socially arbitrated in history, with online social media playing a 
significant part, though the multiyear conflict has real-­world ramifications, both 
online and offline. The Syrian government, its opponents, terrorist combatants, citi-
zens, and activists all have used the internet and social media to report on the coun-
try’s sectarian and terrorism crises, underscoring the high humanitarian costs 
associated with the continued conflict and instability.
The Arab Spring uprisings of 2011 ­were a sequence of demonstrations that 
sprung up across the ­Middle East. They concentrated on unfair and cruel govern-
ments that controlled ­those nations and ­were fueled by the ­people’s refusal to en-
dure their governments’ torments. ­These uprisings have openly contested numerous 
regimes with repressive policies, including ­those of Libya, Egypt, Tunisia, and, of 
course, Syria. Social media sites such as Skype, Facebook, Twitter, and other com-
munications channels such as short message ser­vice (SMS) and multimedia mes-
saging ser­vice (MMS), played an essential role in connecting and promoting ­these 
demonstrations; their use was particularly significant since Syria’s president, Bashar 
al-­Assad (1965–), maintains tight control over the internet, allowing only 30,000 
­people to have access when it was introduced in 2000 and keeping user numbers 
low, and then imposing strict censorship laws that retaliated vigorously against on-
line policy violators (Freedom on the Net 2012). When the government eased re-
strictions on some websites in 2011, demonstrations ­were or­ga­nized with the 
support of social interactive websites, with Twitter and Facebook being the most 
prevalent. ­These websites allowed demonstrators to spread news of uprisings at a 
pace that would have been unattainable without social media.
Syria, a country that had a technological development culture prior to the Arab 
Spring, scheduled its first major protest over Facebook. The “Day of Rage” was in-
tended to have a similar effect as Egypt’s and Iraq’s “Day of Anger,” but only a 
dozen ­people showed up for the first event. However, more ­people joined in ­later 
events; tens of thousands reportedly protested in the streets of Damascus, the capi-
tal, on March 29, 2011 (Sutter 2011). The Facebook page, also called “Days of Rage,” 
which was an organ­izing force in the protests, has been removed from the site.

SYRIA
289
As of 2014, approximately 5.86 million Syrians used the internet, about 
26 ­percent of the population at that time. For ­those who accessed the internet, 
95 ­percent used computers and 5 ­percent used mobile phones. A total of 12.5 mil-
lion mobile phone subscriptions existed, all but 9 ­percent prepaid (We Are Social 
2014). Mobile phones with internet capabilities have reportedly been on the rise, 
though the exact change in penetration rates is unconfirmed. According to a 2015 
survey, Syrian social media users reported 98 ­percent usage of WhatsApp, 97 ­percent 
of Facebook, 36 ­percent of Google+, 14 ­percent of Twitter, 12 ­percent of YouTube, 
and 1 ­percent of Instagram (Arab Social Media 2015). In the same survey, 49 ­percent 
reported WhatsApp as their most preferred social media app, and 47 ­percent re-
ported Facebook as their favorite.
­These numbers are reflective of the small number of Syrians who are already on-
line (hence the high penetration rates). However, they do not conclusively show 
how many Syrians actually use ­these platforms. Note that ­there have been no up-
dates to Syrian social media statistics in 2016 due to the ongoing sectarian conflict 
that intensified in 2014 when the so-­called Islamic State, or Daesh, illegally usurped 
Syrian lands and brought in thousands of foreign fighters to fight for its radical, 
militant beliefs.
The use of social media in the country and throughout the conflict since 2011 
has led Syria to being called the “First Social Media War” or the “First YouTube War” 
­because it seemed like ­every faction, citizen, and combatant had its own social me-
dia channel, network, and followers (Van Bulck 2012). Anything that happens in 
Syria can be recorded or photographed and immediately uploaded online. It is not 
uncommon to find videos and pictures online of the conflicts’ casualties or towns 
that have been devastated.
Daesh has used the internet and social media in Syria to promote the destruc-
tion of the Syrian state and support a violent jihad, or Islamic holy war, against the 
state and its ­people, including Muslims and non-­Muslims. ­These terrorist insur-
gents in Syria and Iraq use all types of social networking sites and file-­sharing plat-
forms. The most significant of ­these are Tumblr, justPaste.it, kik, PalTalk, viper, 
Ask.fm, Instagram, and WhatsApp. Onion routers (sites that use layers of encrypted 
communications) like TOR are used to protect internet protocol (IP) address 
locations.
Twitter also plays an impor­tant role in communication, though the com­pany ac-
tively removes accounts, once identified, that promote terrorism. Daesh’s tweets 
often include embedded pictures, text, and links to other platforms to disperse the 
group’s propaganda locally and abroad. ­Because the terrorists use so many dif­fer­
ent platforms, encrypt their messages, disguise their locations, jump from platform 
to platform with ease, and use cross-­platform dissemination techniques, they have 
shown an unusual adeptness and prowess in spreading their pro-­violence, intoler-
ant philosophy online. ­There are presently no good estimates of how many insur-
gents in Syria use the internet and social media.
In response to the multiyear civil war and the ongoing terrorist threat, many Syr-
ians are attempting to flee the country, often heading to neighboring countries or 
Eu­rope. Due to the numbers of refugees trying to escape the vio­lence, ­there has 

SYRIA
290
been an upsurge in research on how Syrian refugees use social media to flee the 
country. According to ­these reports, refugees consider their phones more valuable 
than food or shelter. To communicate, they use WhatsApp and Viber; for naviga-
tion, they use Google Maps. They follow unfolding events and read communiqués 
from friends and ­family on Facebook, Twitter, and specific news channel apps. 
When necessary, they use translation tools and buy subscriber identity module (SIM) 
cards for their phones (Gillespie et al. 2016). The main advantages of mobile phones 
are that they are compact and portable. They also have disadvantages, however, in 
that some of the information that they can access may not be reliable or privacy 
protected.
Some Syrian refugees have received assistance through social media. For exam-
ple, in late 2015, a Norwegian activist posted a picture online that he took in Bei-
rut, Lebanon. In the picture, a desolate-­looking man was carry­ing a small child over 
his shoulder while selling pens on the street. Once the photo went online, ­people 
wanted to offer assistance. ­After a social media manhunt to identify the vendor us-
ing the hashtag #BuyPens, he was identified as Abdul (c. 1980), and within twenty-­
four hours, the campaign had raised $80,000 to support him and his ­children 
(Abdelaziz 2015). Some Syrian parents are trying to attract Western Pokémon Go 
During an interview with The Associated Press in November 2011, Syrian refugee Abdul Halim 
al-­Attar and his ­daughter, Reem, look at the picture that touched the world through the hashtag 
#BuyPens, and raised $80,000 to support their ­family. Taken in Beirut, Lebanon, the photo 
shows a desolate looking al-­Attar with Reem asleep on his shoulder while he attempted to sell 
pens to passing motorists. ­After the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings, in which social media was 
instrumental, refugees have been fleeing the resulting civil war. (AP Photo/Hussein Malla)

SYRIA
291
players to assist ­children in war-­torn areas. They take photos of their ­children hold-
ing pictures of Pokémon characters with slogans seeking help and then post them 
online (Graham-­Harrison 2016). Another effort, #IamSyrian, asks Syrians to tell 
their stories online to make their plights vis­i­ble outside the country. Internation-
ally, citizens of countries in the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, and ­others 
have started promoting the #RefugeesWelcome hashtag to indicate that they would 
like to support, in some fashion, the rising numbers of Syrians fleeing the coun-
try’s internal crisis.
For ­those Syrians who cannot escape the fighting or who promote civil action to 
stop the bloodshed, social media sites continue to play a prominent role in their 
activities. Online activists in Syria have asked ­people around the world and com-
panies such as Google to color their avatars, profile pictures, and log­os red in 
May 2016. The campaign, called “Aleppo Is Burning,” asked supporters to use the 
color red to raise awareness about the fighting in Aleppo and show solidarity with 
the Syrian ­people (Al Arabiya 2016). ­These types of social media and social net-
working campaigns can be expected to continue while Syrians strug­gle to survive 
the devastation of war.
Laura M. Steckman and Susan Makosch
See also: Canada; Egypt; Iraq; Libya; Tunisia
Further Reading
Abdelaziz, Salma. 2015. “Social Media Finds Syrian Refugee, Provides Dad a New Start.” 
August 31. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2015​/­08​/­28​/­middleeast​
/­social​-­media​-­and​-­syrian​-­refugee​/­
Al Arabiya. 2016. “As Aleppo Bleeds, Social Media Switches to Red Pictures.” May 1. Ac-
cessed August 27, 2016. http://­english​.­alarabiya​.­net​/­en​/­media​/­digital​/­2016​/­05​/­01​/­As​
-­Aleppo​-­bleeds​-­social​-­media​-­users​-­switch​-­to​-­red​-­pictures​.­html
Arab Social Media Influencers Summit. 2015. “Arab Social Media Report.” Accessed Au-
gust 27, 2016. http://­dmc​.­ae​/­img​/­pdf​/­white​-­papers​/­ArabSocialMediaReport​-­2015​.­pdf
Freedom on the Net. 2012. “Syria.” Accessed August 27, 2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​
/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2012​/­syria
Gillespie, Marie, et al. 2016. “Mapping Refugee Media Journeys: Smartphones and Social 
Media Networks. May 13. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­open​.­ac​.­uk​/­ccig​/­sites​
/­www​.­open​.­ac​.­uk​.­ccig​/­files​/­Mapping%20Refugee%20Media%20Journeys%2016%20
May%20FIN%20MG​_­0​.­pdf
Graham​-­Harrison, Emma. 2016. “Syrian Campaigners Use Pokémon Go to Ask World to 
Save ­Children.” July 21. Accessed August 27, 2016. https://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​
/­world​/­2016​/­jul​/­21​/­campaign​-­pokemon​-­go​-­craze​-­attention​-­syrian​-­conflict
Sutter, John D. 2011. “Syria Tests Internet Freedom Theory.” March 30. Accessed August 27, 
2016. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2011​/­TECH​/­innovation​/­03​/­30​/­syria​.­internet​.­revolution​/­
Van Bulck, Magali. 2012. “Syrië is eerste ‘YouTube-­oorlog.’ ” January 20. Accessed August 27, 
2016. http://­www​.­knack​.­be​/­nieuws​/­wereld​/­syrie​-­is​-­eerste​-­youtube​-­oorlog​/­article​-­normal​
-­46906​.­html
We Are Social. 2014. “Digital Landscape: ­Middle East, North Africa, & Turkey.” Accessed 
August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­wearesocialsg​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­in​-­the​
-­middle​-­east​-­north​-­africa​-­turkey

This page intentionally left blank

TAIWAN
Taiwan, or its official name, the Republic of China (ROC), is an island nation off 
the coast of mainland China in East Asia. Taiwan is committed to continuing its 
development of information technology (IT) infrastructure, positioning itself as one 
of the leading high-­tech centers in the Asia-­Pacific. It has one of the higher inter-
net penetration rates on the globe, falling within the top thirty-­five worldwide as 
of December 31, 2013 (Internet World Stats 2013). Over 75 ­percent of Taiwanese 
report having experience using the internet, primarily through personal comput-
ers, although mobile phone internet access has recently grown with over 63 ­percent 
of Taiwanese now utilizing mobile phones to access the internet (TWNIC 2014). 
Taiwanese internet users rely on both foreign and domestic search engines and 
social media. They are on Facebook, Google, YouTube, and Yahoo, along with Tai-
wanese news, entertainment, and community portals such as Ettoday, Udn, Ruten, 
Ltn, and Buzzhand. While Facebook was the number one website in 2011, by 
February 2016, Line had become the favorite app for Taiwanese smartphone users 
beating out not just Facebook, but WeChat and Instagram (China Post 2011; Tai-
pei Times 2016). Line’s popularity reflects the shift ­toward mobile phone access 
where users increasingly utilize phones to connect with friends, play online games, 
find news and information, and watch videos. Mobile phone use ­will likely con-
tinue growing; in 2016, nearly nine in ten Taiwanese had a smartphone (eMarketer 
2016).
While only formally recognized as a country by 22 nations, Taiwan has been an 
in­de­pen­dent nation, practically speaking, since 1950 following the ROC’s loss of 
mainland China to the ­People’s Republic of China (PRC) during the Chinese civil 
war. Mainland China still views Taiwan as a renegade province and tensions be-
tween the two governments exist, albeit to a lesser extent ­today than during the 
1990s. In order to combat its diplomatic isolation, Taiwan strives to be an essential 
regional trading partner and a top producer of computer technology and IT. In ­doing 
so, Taiwan established the National Communications Commission (NCC) in 2006 
to help Taiwan continue to modernize its economy and telecommunication infra-
structure. Taiwan’s commitment to developing an advanced network and informa-
tion society can be seen by the 2014 Network Readiness Rating rankings placing 
Taiwan ­fourteenth worldwide (Ministry of Economic Affairs, Department of Invest-
ment Ser­vices 2016). Overall, Taiwan remains at the vanguard of both high-­tech 
manufacturing and as a technology-­driven economy.
Internet usage in Taiwan has increased significantly from 2003, when only 
60 ­percent of the population accessed the internet, to the pres­ent, where over 
T

TAIWAN
294
three-­quarters of citizens reported that they did so. In fact, over 50 ­percent of Tai-
wanese ­children ­under the age of twelve already reported having used the internet 
(TWNIC 2014). In May 2016, top internet websites visited by Taiwanese ­were 
Pixnet​.­net, Google, Facebook, YouTube, Ettoday, Yahoo, and Gamer. Taiwan’s in-
digenous social media sites have fared well with the public. Wretch.cc, a site that 
allows blogging and contains functionality to share photos and videos, took the 
second spot in the top ten; and Gamer​.­com​.­tw, which connects gamers, and Eyny​
.­com, an online discussion forum, placed at sixth and eighth, respectively (Simi-
larweb 2016; Alexa 2016).
While internet use is widespread, the popularity of internet gaming ­causes con-
cern that it may lead to what researchers call internet addiction. In one of the most 
severe examples of the prob­lem, a thirty-­two-­year-­old gamer was found dead at a 
Taiwanese internet café ­after a three-­day gaming session in 2015 (Griffiths 2015). 
While this type of case is rare, internet addiction has become such an issue that in 
one Taiwanese ­children’s hospital, two-­thirds of patients ­were diagnosed with “in-
ternet overdose” (Wu and Chung 2016), a condition where a person spends so 
much time online that he or she cannot unplug from the internet and digital de-
vices, and it can lead to sickness, withdrawal symptoms, and even more serious 
conditions. To address the prob­lem in 2015, Taiwan became the first nation in the 
world to create a law addressing internet addiction, banning smartphone and tab-
let use by ­children ­under two years of age (Crook 2016). With ­today’s increase of 
smartphone use, typical internet addicts are now less likely to be teen­agers binging 
in internet cafés and more likely to be individuals in their twenties checking their 
phones for social network updates (Crook 2016).
Like internet gaming, social media sites are popu­lar in Taiwan. The Taiwanese 
use social media sites to keep tabs on their friends, pass the time, share news, and 
relax, and they use instant messaging (IM) ser­vices to text and share photos. Of 
­those who use social networks, 30.49 ­percent of them reported spending between 
thirty minutes to an hour each day, while 25.58 ­percent of them spend less than 
half an hour on social networks (TWNIC 2014). Social media sites have become 
an impor­tant part of the daily lives of not just computer users, but also of smart-
phone ­owners. Popu­lar social networking apps and websites include Facebook, In-
stagram, WooTalk, BeeTalk, and Line (AppAnnie 2016).
The increase of social networking platforms has prompted Taiwan’s po­liti­cal lead-
ers to cultivate their own web presence as well. For instance, former Taiwanese 
president Ma Ying-­jeou (1950–) launched his official Facebook page on January 28, 
2011, stating that he “should not be absent from the global trend” (China Post 
2011). Since 2008, social media has helped Taiwanese politicians to disseminate 
information and make themselves more vis­i­ble in the mass media (Chia Shin-­lin 
2011).
In addition to using the internet for accessing search engines, social media, and 
gaming sites, Taiwanese use the internet for shopping. Clothes and accessories are 
the most frequently purchased items through online shopping, with daily essen-
tials taking second. Other items purchased include books, magazines, and writing 
tools, cross-­cultural competence (3C) information tools, and food/drink (TWNIC 

TAIWAN
295
2014). The top three largest ecommerce sites are PCHome, Momoshop, and Ra-
kuten Ichiba Taiwan. Social networks such as Facebook, Twitter, and Plurk, a Tai-
wanese social network platform, are used to drive ecommerce traffic by providing 
sharable links to ecommerce sites (Mehra 2016).
Hand in hand with the growth of smartphone use is an increase in app down-
loads. One study found that 62.19 ­percent of smartphone users have downloaded 
at least one app, with 24.42 ­percent reporting to have downloaded eleven to twenty, 
and 10.91 ­percent having downloaded between twenty-­one and thirty apps (TWNIC 
2014). Social media apps are the most frequently downloaded, while games are sec-
ond. Although Taiwan represents a growing source of revenue for app makers, 
only 11.14  ­percent of smartphone users have paid to download apps, and 
49.24 ­percent reported that they are unwilling to do so. Of ­those willing to pay for 
apps, approximately 30 ­percent are willing to pay between 1 cent and $4 (TWNIC 
2014). While the popularity of apps changes frequently, as of May 2016, the most 
popu­lar ­free app from Google Play was Tank Commando, a real-­time strategy game 
published by Taiwan Kuro Times. The most popu­lar ­free iOS app was Chronos Gate, 
a game combining role playing and Match-3 gaming styles. Clash of Kings, a U.S.-­
developed real-­time strategy game, was the top paid app in for both iOS and Google 
Play. While gaming apps are popu­lar, so are social networking apps, with Line and 
Facebook both falling within the top ten ­free apps for Android and iOS users alike 
(AppAnnie 2016). As of 2015, the majority of Taiwanese smartphones used Google’s 
Android operating system.
Taiwan’s tenuous po­liti­cal situation vis-­à-­vis the mainland Chinese government 
and its focus on developing a networked, technology-­driven economy has raised 
considerable concern from Taiwanese leaders over hacking and cybersecurity. Tai-
wan has found itself the victim of considerable hacking, with attacks originating 
from mainland China and ostensibly supported by the Chinese government. Ac-
cording to FireEye Inc., a U.S.-­based data security firm, Taiwan was the most-­
targeted country for hacking attempts in the Asia-­Pacific region during the first 
half of 2014 (Gold and Wu 2015). Taiwanese vice premier Chang San-­cheng (1954–) 
has stated that Taiwan has been the victim of cyberattacks from the Chinese gov-
ernment, and that “Chinese cyberattacks have not been deterred by the calming of 
cross-­strait relations as Beijing wishes to know what we are ­doing and our modes 
of thought, especially during negotiations” (Li-­hua and Chung 2016). He explained 
In parts of Asia, job seekers use Twitter in an unusual way to apply for jobs. Since 
2011, certain Asian markets (most notably in China) ask applicants to submit their 
entire résumés in 140 characters or less using its local version of Twitter, Sina Weibo. 
The shortened résumé format is called a microrésumé. Shortly ­after some employers 
started accepting the micro format, more than 20,000 microrésumés appeared on 
the platform (Tan 2011). Apart from Asia, this résumé format is not yet a globally 
accepted way to seek or be selected for a job.

TAIWAN
296
that ­these attacks tend to come in two ways: ­either through denial of ser­vice (DOS) 
attacks designed to crash specific websites or through backdoor hacking that en-
ables the theft of sensitive information. Taiwanese leaders believe that China 
regularly uses Taiwan as a testing ground for its most advanced hacking attempts. 
However, the Chinese government has vehemently denied ­these accusations.
To help combat ­these attacks, the Taiwanese government has expressed interest 
in participating in the U.S. joint antihacking drill known as Cyber Storm. Vice Pre-
mier Chang (1954–) warned that ­there is the potential for hackers to use Taiwan 
as a back door into U.S. systems (Gold and Wu 2015). In addition to more tradi-
tional hacking, Taiwan has recently experienced a tsunami of criticism from Chi-
nese netizens. Following the election of Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-­wen (1956–), 
in January 2016, Chinese mainlanders flooded the president-­elect’s Facebook page 
with tens of thousands of pro-­China comments while criticizing Tsai and her party’s 
position on Taiwanese in­de­pen­dence (Didi 2016).
Robert Hinck
See also: China; Japan; South ­Korea; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Website Ranking.” Accessed August 1, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites​
/­countries​/­TW
AppAnnie. 2016. “Top App Charts.” Accessed July 14, 2006. https://­www​.­appannie​.­com​/­
Bray, David. 2015. “Taiwan and the Internet of Every­thing.” April 9. Accessed May 22, 2016. 
http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­david​-­a​-­bray​/­taiwan​-­and​-­the​-­internet​-­o​_­b​_­7034420​
.­html
Chia​-­shin Lin, Lue. 2011. “Social Media Politics: the Experience of Taiwanese Politicians.” The 
Fifth Annual PhD Student Conference in Journalism and Communication Studies, 164–178.
China Post. 2011. “Facebook Named No. 1 in Taiwan’s Top 100 Sites List.” March 8. Ac-
cessed May 22, 2016. http://­www​.­chinapost​.­com​.­tw​/­taiwan​/­national​/­national​-­news​
/­2011​/­03​/­08​/­293799​/­Facebook​-­named​.­htm
Crook, Steven. 2016. “Too Much of a Good ­Thing.” February 1. Accessed July 25, 2016. 
http://­www​.­taiwantoday​.­tw​/­ct​.­asp​?­xItem​=­241186&ctNode​=­2235&mp​=­9
eMarketer. 2015. “Mobile Phones Are Top Internet Access Point in Taiwan.” November 16. 
Accessed July 25, 2016. http://­www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Mobile​-­Phones​-­Top​-­Internet​
-­Access​-­Point​-­Taiwan​/­1013233
Gold, Michael, and Wu, J. R. 2015. “Taiwan Seeks Stronger Cyber Security Ties with U.S. 
to ­Counter China Threat.” March  30. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­us​-­taiwan​
-­cybersecurity​-­idUSKBN0MQ11V20150330
Grlffiths, Mark. 2015. “Gaming to Death: What Turns a Hobby into a Health Hazard?” Janu-
ary  21. Accessed July  25, 2016. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2015​/­01​/­21​/­opinion​/­gaming​
-­addiction​-­risks​/­
Internet World Stats. 2013. “Top 50 Countries with the Highest Internet Penetration Rates—
2013.” December 31. Accessed May 22, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​
/­top25​.­htm
Li​-­hua, Chung, and Chung, Jake. 2016. “Chinese Hackers Prowling Taiwan’s Systems: 
Chang.” May 15. Accessed May 22, 2016. http://­www​.­taipeitimes​.­com​/­News​/­taiwan​
/­archives​/­2016​/­05​/­15​/­2003646307

TANZANIA
297
Mehra, Gagan. 2016. “Ecommerce in Taiwan: Thriving Market, Huge Mobile.” May 12. Ac-
cessed July 25, 2016. http://­www​.­practicalecommerce​.­com​/­articles​/­122958​-­Ecommerce​
-­in​-­Taiwan​-­Thriving​-­Market​-­Huge​-­Mobile
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Department of Investment Ser­vices, ROC. 2016. “Why Tai-
wan: Complete Infrastructure.” Accessed May 22, 2016. http://­investtaiwan​.­nat​.­gov​.­tw​
/­eng​/­show​.­jsp​?­ID​=­422
Ministry of Transportation and Communications, ROC. “Seamless Networks, Happy Life: 
Bringing Broadband and Modern Intelligent Life to ­Every House­hold.” Accessed May 22, 
2016. https://­www​.­motc​.­gov​.­tw​/­en​/­home​.­jsp​?­id​=­253&parentpath​=­0,150,250
SimilarWeb. 2016. “Website Ranking.” Accessed July 14, 2006. https://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​
/­country​/­taiwan
Taipei Times. 2016. “Poll Shows Line Is Most Popu­lar Social Platform.” February 4. Ac-
cessed July 25, 2016. http://­www​.­taipeitimes​.­com​/­News​/­taiwan​/­archives​/­2016​/­02​/­04​
/­2003638815
Taiwan Network Information Center. 2014. “A Survey on Broadband Internet Usage in Tai-
wan: A Summary Report May 2014.” Accessed May 22, 2016. http://­www​.­twnic​.­net​
.­tw​/­download​/­200307​/­20140820d​.­pdf
Tang, Didi. 2016. “Chinese ­People Are Flooding the Internet with a Campaign Against Tai-
wan.” January 21. Accessed May 22, 2016. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­chinese​
-­people​-­are​-­flooding​-­the​-­internet​-­with​-­a​-­campaign​-­against​-­taiwan​-­2016​-­1
Wu, Hsin-­tien, and Chung, Jake. 2016. “Internet Addiction Making ­Children Sick, Doctor 
Says.” June 20. Accessed July 25, 2016. http://­www​.­taipeitimes​.­com​/­News​/­taiwan​
/­archives​/­2016​/­06​/­20​/­2003649058
TANZANIA
Tanzania is located on the east coast of Africa, along the shore of the Indian Ocean. 
It is officially known as the United Republic of Tanzania. Tanzania is bordered by 
­Kenya and Uganda to the north; the Indian Ocean to the east; Zambia, Mozam-
bique, and Malawi to the south; and the Demo­cratic Republic of Congo, Burundi, 
and Rwanda to the west. Although the country has more than 120 ethnic groups 
with diverse languages and cultures, Swahili is spoken as the main language and is 
the first language of most urban and semiurban dwellers. Tanzania has a relatively 
low internet penetration percentage. Of a population of 55.1 million, Tanzania has 
only 2.9 million internet users (5.3 ­percent), 0.1 ­percent of total world internet 
users (3.4 billion) (Internet Live Stats 2016). Nevertheless, ­there has been a sig-
nificant growth of internet users over the years, from 0.1  ­percent (2000) to 
2.9 ­percent (2010), and from 3.2 ­percent (2011) to 5.3 ­percent (2016). This is 
largely due to advancement in technology and an improvement in the digital di-
vide worldwide.
Tanzania’s information and communication technology (ICT) development has 
gone through vari­ous phases and has faced some challenges, such as lack of com-
munication networks, high technological illiteracy level, lack of power/energy, ex-
treme poverty, and lack of government initiatives and support (Tedre, Ngumbuke, 
and Kemppainen 2010). However, lately Tanzania has experienced huge advance-
ment in ICT in dif­fer­ent social and economic domains, such as communication, 

TANZANIA
298
industry, journalism and mass media, commerce, and entertainment (Kafyulilo 
2011). This advancement has, in part, been made pos­si­ble through China’s tech-
nology industry, which provides access to affordable mobile devices.
­Until the mid-2000s, the majority of Tanzanians did not own any kind of cell-
phones and their mobile communication depended on calling booths commonly 
known as vibanda vya simu. Mobile telephone ser­vices ­were available mostly in ur-
ban areas, and only a few ser­vice providers ­were licensed to operate in the country. 
To access the internet, the majority of Tanzanians depended on cybercafés, which 
provided poor broadband ser­vice, in most cases with a speed of only 1 mps (Biz-
tech Africa 2012). Many Tanzanians ­today, particularly young ­people, own some 
form of digital device such as a smartphone, tablet, laptop, or other form of digital 
technology. The Chinese technology industry has given the majority of Tanzanians 
access to affordable, multifunctional mobile phones. To date, calling booths have 
become a ­thing of the past, while mobile communication has become the easiest 
and cheapest mode of communication in the country. Smartphones and other digi-
tal devices are available at affordable rates, which has increased technology literacy 
and bridged the digital divide in the country.
In addition to the availability of affordable mobile phones, the number of Global 
System for Mobile Communications (GSM) ser­vice providers have noticeably in-
creased. Before 2003, the Tanzania Communications Commission (TCC) had the 
sole authority to license operations of telephone communications, including data 
communication ser­vices like internet bandwidth (Tanzania Ministry of Communi-
cations and Transport 2003). Due to TCC’s strict and unfriendly policy, ­there ­were 
only about six companies that provided telecommunication ser­vices in the coun-
try ­until 2005. In 2003, the TCC was merged with the Tanzanian Broadcasting 
Commission (TBC) and the Tanzania Communications Regulatory Authority (TCRA) 
was formed. In 2006, TCRA amended its telecommunications policy, and more cel-
lular phone companies ­were licensed to operate in Tanzania. That brought about 
competition for subscribers and led to improvement in and affordable accessibility 
of telecommunication ser­vices. ­Today, telephone towers can be seen everywhere, 
and even the most rural parts of the country have one or more ser­vice providers 
accessible. In 2010, the SEACOM and the EASSy undersea fiber cable system proj­ects 
­were implemented, which brought affordable high-­speed internet (up to 4.2 mps) 
connectivity in the country.
To date, mobile telephone ser­vice operators are the primary providers of inter-
net ser­vice and have contributed to revolutionizing accessibility of internet ser­vices 
in the country. GSM internet is now provided by all the ser­vice providers. Subscrip-
tions are available in daily, weekly, and monthly data bundles, which give subscrib-
ers choices depending on their needs and income levels. For instance, Vodacome, 
the country’s largest ser­vice provider, provides the internet bundles ranging from 
$0.50 for up to 700 Mb per day, $3.50 for up to 2.048 Mb per week, and $12 for 
up to 8.192 Mb per month. This has given an opportunity to the majority of Tan-
zanians, especially the youth, to spend much of their time switching from one 
online platform to another, performing a range of online multitasks like watch-
ing videos and movies, playing ­music, playing online games, social networking, 
blogging, and web browsing (Lubua 2015).

TANZANIA
299
Tanzania, as in most parts of the world, has experienced a tremendous growth 
in online social networking. ­There are few Tanzanian-­based social networks; there-
fore, the majority of Tanzanian internet users have been relying on the foreign so-
cial network sites such as Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp, Tango, Viber, Google Plus, 
and YouTube. The few Tanzanian-­based social networks are solely used for sharing 
information and discussing ­matters of national interest. While the foreign social 
media sites have been used for the same purpose, most Tanzanians use them mainly 
for entertainment and connecting with other global social network users.
Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram, and Twitter are some of the most used of all 
foreign social networks. While most ­people use Instagram to share pictures and fol-
low updates by vari­ous celebrities in the country, they also use Facebook as a source 
of news, as well as for other social interactions and entertainment. Likewise, they 
mainly use WhatsApp for multimedia messaging ser­vices (MMS), due to its easy 
use of local phone numbers. Since most mobile phone operators provide poor 
MMS ser­vices, WhatsApp fills that gap in ser­vice. WhatsApp enables ­people to share 
pictures, audios, short videos, and files. Many ­people also join WhatsApp groups 
in which they discuss many issues of common interest. Many ­people also use Whats­
App and other platforms to communicate with their friends and loved ones out-
side Tanzania.
­There are several Tanzanian local online networking sites, although most of them 
take the form of forums. ­These include the country’s most popu­lar JamiiForums 
and MwanaHalisi Forum. On ­these sites, ­people can post new topics, and other 
­people can comment and “like” the posts similar to Facebook. In fact, ­these two 
forums have been the country’s top way to share information about ­matters of na-
tional interest. Most of the country’s popu­lar politicians and leaders have subscribed 
to ­these social networks; several times, they have used the platforms to communi-
cate impor­tant information to the community and to respond to accusations di-
rected ­toward them. ­These forums have been the main source of domestic and 
foreign breaking news, and they have done a better job of communicating than 
many formal news outlets.
During the 2015 general elections, Tanzanians used social networks to commu-
nicate results, announce events, and spread propaganda. While the news outlets 
­were reluctant to report some incidents, ­people shared information about them 
freely online, without being censored. This created national tension, and the gov-
ernment worried that ­people might riot due to the information that they ­were 
learning.
Since ­these events, internet censorship in Tanzania has been on the rise. Although 
­there is no explicit government control of access to the internet and what ­people 
can share on social media, ­there have been unacceptable levels of monitoring and 
unnecessary police interventions in what ­people share and publish on the internet. 
In 2015, the Cybercrimes Act was signed into law. This act forbids sharing online 
any “confidential” government document, even when the document is believed to 
have national interest. The law also requires that all internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) 
divulge the personal data of their subscribers to law enforcement on demand. Crit-
ics charged that ­these and other requirements of the law infringe upon freedom of 
speech and threaten ­people’s freedom to use social media in Tanzania. Just a few 

TANZANIA
300
months ­after the law was passed, a few individuals ­were arrested and charged with 
insulting the president and publishing false information online. This has resulted 
in self-­censorship by the majority of Tanzanians, in that they decide to limit the 
amount and type of information that they publish online. Due to the effects of the 
Cybercrimes Act, by 2016, Tanzania’s civil liberties ranking had decreased, though 
technically only by one point from 2015 to 2016 according to Freedom House 
(2015, 2016). However, observers and activists now consider Tanzania a country 
with high internet censorship (Freedom House 2016).
Filipo Lubua
See also: ­Kenya; Mozambique; Somalia; Zimbabwe
Further Reading
Ali, L. October 12, 2011. “The Digital Revolution in Sub-­Saharan Africa.” Al Jazeera. Ac-
cessed July 31, 2016. http://­english​.­aljazeera​.­net​/­indepth​/­features​/­2011​/­10​/­20111010​
8635691462​.­html
Communications Technologies Policy. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania: Ministry of Communica-
tions and Transport.
Custer, C. 2012. “Chinese Mobile Phones Hold a Big Chunk of East African Market, But 
That’s Not a Good ­Thing.” TECHNASIA. Accessed August  1, 2016. https://­www​
.­techinasia​.­com​/­chinese​-­mobile​-­phones​-­hold​-­big​-­chunk​-­east​-­african​-­market​-­good
Fortune of Africa. 2016. “Tanzania ICT Sector Profile.” Accessed August 2, 2016. http://­
fortuneofafrica​.­com​/­tanzania​/­ict​-­sector​-­profile​/­
Freedom House. 2013. “Freedom of the Press: Tanzania.” Accessed August 2. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­press​/­2013​/­tanzania
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom of the Press: Tanzania.” Accessed January 18, 2017. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­press​/­2015​/­tanzania
Freedom House. 2016. “Freedom in the World: Tanzania.” Accessed August 7, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­world​/­2016​/­tanzania
Hesselmark, O., and Engvall, A. 2005. “Internet for Every­one in African GSM Networks.” 
Stockholm: Scanbi-­Invest HB.
Lubua, F. 2015. “Exploring the Opportunities for Integrating New Digital Technologies in 
Tanzania’s Classrooms.” International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Re­
search, 14(2): 131–150.
Sambira, J. 2013. “Mobile Youth Drive Change. Africa Renewal.” May. Accessed July 31, 2016. 
http://­www​.­un​.­org​/­africarenewal​/­magazine​/­may​-­2013​/­africa%E2%80%99​smobile​
-­youth​-­drive​-­change
Tedre, M., Ngumbuke, F., and Kemppainen, J. 2010. “Infrastructure, ­Human Capacity, and 
High Hopes: A De­cade of Development of eLearning in a Tanzanian HEI.” RUSC: Re­
vista de Universidad y Sociedad del Conocimiento, 7(1).
U.S. Department of State Bureau of Democracy, ­Human Rights and ­Labor. 2012. “Country 
Reports on ­Human Rights Practices for 2012: Tanzania.” Accessed July 31, 2016. 
http://­www​.­state​.­gov​/­j​/­drl​/­rls​/­hrrpt​/­2012humanrightsreport​/­index​.­htm​?­year​
=­2012&dlid​=­204176#wrapper
The Citizen. 2015. “­Things You ­Didn’t Know About New Cyber Law.” April 7. http://­www​
.­thecitizen​.­co​.­tz​/­News​/­national​/­New​-­cyber​-­law​-­​/­​-­​/­1840392​/­2677970​/­​-­​/­jb198e​/­​-­​/­index​
.­html

THAILAND
301
THAILAND
More than 68 million ­people reside in Thailand, a country located in Southeast Asia. 
The country’s current internet penetration is 56 ­percent, which is significantly higher 
than the 37 ­percent reported in 2015. In one year, the number of active internet 
users increased by about 19 percentage points, or a gain of approximately 12.9 mil-
lion new internet users. Largely due to the rural population’s lack of access to the 
internet, most active internet users are concentrated in urban city centers, such as 
Phuket, Chiang Mai, and Bangkok. To improve Thailand’s internet presence, the 
Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (MICT) has created a se-
ries of pi­lot proj­ects to develop the country’s online presence. While ­these plans 
may push Thailand into becoming the digital leader in Asia, the censorship im-
posed on the internet and social media community by the Thai government may 
stop the country from having a dominant presence online.
Before 2006, Thailand had only one internet gateway to serve the country’s en-
tire population. It has since opened up considerably, with over 100 internet ser­
vice providers (ISPs) providing access to the internet, with the top two internet 
providers operated by Chulalongkorn University and King Mongkut’s Institute of 
Technology (Bangkok Post 2015). In May 2016, thirty-­four cable TV operators from 
multiple provinces, such as Phetchabun, Chon Buri, and Ubon Ratchathani, sub-
mitted a joint application to provide internet ser­vices. Once approved by the Thai-
land’s National Broadcasting and Telecommunications Commission, companies 
initially plan to sell to preexisting cable customers to create a new revenue stream 
(Hawkes 2016).
­After Indonesia, Thailand’s smartphone market is the second largest in South-
east Asia. In 2015, nearly 22 million units ­were sold within the country, and about 
half of the Thai population uses a smartphone (Leesa-­Nguansuk 2016). ­Because of 
the eco­nom­ical con­ve­nience of smartphones being available to the average Thai, 
mobile phone users have easy access to social media apps. The regular use of social 
media apps has allowed global social media providers dominate the Thais’ online 
environment. Of the social media platforms available, Thais use Facebook, Google+, 
Instagram, Line (also known as Line Up Messenger), and Twitter the most. Mobile 
users also spend about three hours and fifty-­three minutes on their phone perus-
ing the internet and social media platforms (Kemp 2016).
While Facebook and Twitter are the main choices for Thailand in terms of social 
networking sites, Thais use the Line app for instant messaging (IM). Created in 
South ­Korea and launched in Japan in 2011, the Line messaging app quickly grew 
in popularity among the Thai population, which boasts nearly 33 million monthly 
active users. The Line app not only allows Thais to communicate with one another, 
but also allows users to take photos, play games, and download third-­party apps 
to enrich the user’s experience (Orsini 2015). To remain competitive with other 
global social media providers in Thailand, Line opened a research and development 
division in Bangkok. With locally recruited engineers, Line is developing a num-
ber of products and ser­vices specifically for the Thai market in 2016 (Quigley 2015).
With a digital economy master plan and a series of pi­lot proj­ects, MICT plans to 
develop Thailand’s online presence in the hope of steering the country ­toward 

THAILAND
302
becoming the digital hub in Southeast Asia. One of MICT’s pi­lot proj­ects is to de-
velop an e-­commerce platform by helping small and medium-­sized businesses 
establish an online presence. In order to sustain the e-­commerce proj­ect, MICT 
plans to work with the Commerce Ministry to develop an e-­payment platform. 
­These two proj­ects ­will allow the government to verify and monitor online busi-
nesses and merchants (Phuket Gazette 2015).
Another pi­lot proj­ect ­will be e-­education. MICT plans to have high-­speed inter-
net available to ­every village in Thailand. This would allow remote rural areas to 
connect with the rest of Thailand and allow schools in the countryside to utilize 
the internet for educational purposes. MICT hoped to have this par­tic­u­lar proj­ect 
completed by the end of 2016 (Phuket Gazette 2015). However, that goal appears 
to have been shifted to 2017 to ensure that 79,000 villages all receive the fast in-
ternet connectivity. Geo­graph­i­cally, Thailand lies at the heart of the Asian market 
and has the eighth fastest internet speed in Asia (Bangkok Post 2015). The country 
is an ideal location for multinational companies to establish a central base to gain 
a foothold in the Asian market. MICT plans to transform the cities of Phuket and 
Chiang Mai into smart cities, in the hope of attracting tech start-­ups. It is believed 
that this decision ­will move Thailand in the direction of becoming ASEAN’s digital 
hub (Phuket Gazette 2015).
 Prior to 2006, the Thai government monitored internet traffic on a single gate-
way. The primary reason for monitoring was to block pornography, pornographic-­
related material, and gambling, all of which are illegal in Thailand. In 2007, the 
Computer-­related Crimes Act (CCA) was written specifically to target internet us-
ers and online freedom. The CCA allows MICT to block online content that is seen 
as a threat to national security, as well as that which violates public morals and or-
der. From 2006 ­until 2013, the Thai state blocked tens of thousands of social 
media pages and websites. YouTube, a popu­lar global video-­sharing platform, was 
blocked multiple times during this period for airing videos that ­were considered 
offensive to the Thai state. The computer-­related crime law also allowed the state 
to prosecute and imprison ­people for sentences up to five years ­because of their 
online opinions and activities that are critical or insulting of the Thai monarch and 
government, a direct violation of the Thai morals and public order (Talcoth 2015).
A coup d’etat in May 2014, in which the Thai military removed Prime Minister 
Yingluck Shinawatra (1967–), only tightened internet censorship. General Prayuth 
Chan-­o-­cha (1954–), also known as the Commander of the Royal Thai Army, de-
clared martial law. Following this coup d’etat, fourteen progovernment and anti-
government TV networks shut down and nearly 3,000 unlicensed radio stations 
­were closed. The military set up a special committee for the purpose of monitoring 
the social media community and summoning internet ser­vice providers to discuss the 
censorship. The CCA is currently ­under revision, but ­there is no inclination if the law 
­will become stricter or more lax with regard to internet users critical of the Thai 
monarchy and government (Pitman 2014).
The Thai government continues to limit the information available to Thai inter-
net users, even ­going as far as reaching out to international providers in order to 
remove content. The Thai government applauds as well as utilizes Twitter’s country 

THAILAND
303
withheld content tool (Gilbert 2015: Twitter 2016). While Twitter re­spects users’ 
freedom of expression, it also re­spects the local laws of the countries in which it 
operates. If content does not violate Twitter rules, it cannot be removed. However, 
if a tweet violates a country’s content restrictions, a government/law enforcement 
agency representative can request that its content be withheld. If the request is ap-
proved, Twitter users in Thailand would not be able to view the tweet (Twitter 2016). 
A similar situation applied with Facebook: from July 2014 to December 2014, the 
Thai Computer Security Incident Response Team (CERT) or the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs reported all content that it found offensive or in violation of national law to 
Facebook. In response to ­these requests, Facebook restricted access to thirty pieces 
of content that ­violated local laws prohibiting slander and condemnations of the 
Thai monarchy (Siam Voices 2015). The amount of content that officials have re-
quested to be removed from Facebook has been increasing. In 2013, no requests 
­were made; of the thirty requests made at the end of 2014, only five had been 
made prior to July.
Chiranuch Premchaiporn (n.d.), director of Prachatai’s website, stands in front of the crimi-
nal court in Bangkok, Thailand, in May 2012. She had been sentenced ­under the 2007 Com-
puter Crimes Act to an eight-­month suspended sentence for not acting quickly enough in 
removing posts that ­were deemed insulting to Thailand’s royalty. Since Premchaiporn’s convic-
tion, and the 2014 military coup d’etat, the government has only increased internet censor-
ship, which includes reaching out to international providers, such as Twitter and Facebook, to 
remove content. The government also plans to consolidate all of Thailand’s internet gateways 
into one system, which would make monitoring internet traffic easier. (AP Photo/Apichart 
Weerawong)

THAILAND
304
MICT also developed a plan to revert Thailand to a one-­internet gateway. Con-
solidating all of Thailand’s internet gateways into one system would allow the gov-
ernment to monitor internet traffic easily. This program, approved in August 2015, 
was reminiscent of China’s ­Great Firewall system. In China, the government has 
placed the internet ­under the strictest government control in the world. In Octo-
ber 2015, however, Deputy Prime Minister Somkid Jatusripitak (1953–) announced 
that the one-internet gateway plan had been halted. ­There ­were concerns that in-
ternet speeds would plummet, which not only would hurt Thai online business, 
but also sidetrack plans to make Thailand the digital hub of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). However, some ­people do not believe that this 
announcement from the deputy prime minister means the end of the one-­internet 
gateway. They think that the plan was originally scrapped ­because of the poor re-
ception it received from the public, but once the Thai ­people forget about the plan, 
the government may execute it at a ­later date (­Reuters 2015).
Karen Ames
See also: China; Indonesia; Myanmar; Singapore
Further Reading
Bangkok Post. 2015. “Thailand Internet 8th Fastest in Asia.” May 21. Accessed December 9, 
2015. http://­www​.­bangkokpost​.­com​/­tech​/­local​-­news​/­568859​/­thailand​-­internet​-­8th​
-­fastest​-­in​-­asia
Hawkes, Rebecca. 2016. “Thai Cable Operators Seek Broadband Internet Licenses.” May 10. 
Accessed May 13, 2016. http://­www​.­rapidtvnews​.­com​/­2016051042812​/­thai​-­cable​
-­operators​-­seek​-­broadband​-­internet​-­licenses​.­html#axzz48m2CTzul
Kemp, Simon. 2016. “Digital in 2016: We Are Social’s Compendium of Global Digital, So-
cial, and Mobile Data, Trends, and Statistics.” January 27. Accessed May 2, 2016. http://­
wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Leesa​-­Nguansuk, Suchit. 2016. “Smartphone Market ­Will Be Stale Following Rapid Growth.” 
January 26. Accessed May 11, 2016. http://­www​.­bangkokpost​.­com​/­tech​/­local​-­news​
/­839728​/­smartphone​-­market​-­will​-­be​-­stale​-­following​-­rapid​-­growth
Phuket Gazette. 2015. “ICT Considers Developing ‘Smart’ Phuket.” September 15. Ac-
cessed December 11, 2015. http://­www​.­phuketgazette​.­net​/­phuket​-­news​/­ICT​-­considers​
-­developing​-­smart​-­Phuket​/­61957
Pitman, Todd. 2014. “Thailand Imposes Media Censorship as Military Coup Begins.” May 22. 
Accessed December 7, 2015. http://­www​.­ctvnews​.­ca​/­world​/­thailand​-­imposes​-­media​
-­censorship​-­as​-­military​-­coup​-­begins​-­1​.­1832916
­Reuters. 2015. “Thailand Scraps Unpop­u­lar Internet ‘­Great Firewall’ Plan.” October 15. Ac-
cessed December 10, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­us​-­thailand​-­internet​-­idUS​
KC​N0S916I20151015
Siam Voices. 2015. “Thailand: Facebook Content Removal Requests Rise Sharply ­Under 
Junta.” March 16. Accessed May 6, 2016. https://­asiancorrespondent​.­com​/­2015​/­03​
/­thailand​-­facebook​-­content​-­removal​-­requests​/­
Talcoth, Roberth. 2015. “Thailand’s Social Media Battleground.” March 26. Accessed De-
cember 7, 2015. http://­asiapacific​.­anu​.­edu​.­au​/­newmandala​/­2015​/­03​/­26​/­thailands​-­social​
-­media​-­battleground​/­
Twitter. 2015. “Country Withheld Content.” Accessed December 11, 2015. https://­support​
.­twitter​.­com​/­articles​/­20169222​?­lang​=­en#

TIMOR-­LESTE (EAST TIMOR)
305
TIMOR​-­LESTE (EAST TIMOR)
The territory of Timor-­Leste (East Timor) occupies the eastern half of Timor, the 
easternmost island of the Sunda archipelago in Southeast Asia. Timor-­Leste became 
an in­de­pen­dent nation in 2002 ­after close to 500 years of Portuguese colonial ad-
ministration, 24 years of Indonesian military occupation (1975–1999), and 3 years 
of a United Nations transitional administration.
As one of the newest nations in the world, Timor-­Leste is also one of the least 
eco­nom­ically developed, and yet it has one of the fastest growing economies due 
to the exploitation of petroleum deposits. However, two-­thirds of Timorese live a 
life devoted to subsistence farming (Timor-­Leste, National Statistics Directorate 
2010) and over a third (37.4 ­percent) live on less than $1.25 a day in purchasing 
power parity terms (World Bank 2012). The currency used is U.S. dollars, which 
has the positive effect of stability, but the negative effect of keeping prices much 
higher than in neighboring countries.
According to preliminary results of the latest national government census (Timor-­
Leste, National Statistics Directorate 2015) the total population is 1.17 million as 
of July 2015. Approximately 55 ­percent of the population is nineteen years old or 
­under (Timor-­Leste, National Statistics Directorate 2010, 12). Literacy rates for 
Timor-­Leste are low (58.3 ­percent): Half of all ­women and more than 40 ­percent 
of men in Timor-­Leste are illiterate (UNICEF, 2016). However, literacy rates are 
higher among the younger generation, reflecting stability and better education sys-
tems (UNFPA Timor-­Leste 2016).
The Timorese constitution establishes two co-­official languages: Tetum (the in-
digenous lingua franca) and Portuguese; in addition, it values the use and develop-
ment of its other thirty-­two national languages, including dialects (census 2010). 
En­glish and Bahasa Indonesia are also recognized as working languages. Tetum is 
the most used language, followed by Indonesian, Portuguese, and fi­nally En­glish. 
Tetum is largely a spoken language, and attempts to standardize its written form 
are far from complete. While many Timorese also speak Indonesian, levels of flu-
ency vary substantially between spoken and written ability. This language diversity 
affects the ability to communicate fluently in any single language and has an obvi-
ous impact on the way in which Timorese ­people communicate and interact through 
telecommunications systems, the internet, and social media platforms.
The diverse language ecol­ogy of Timor-­Leste pres­ents a challenge for internet 
usage for the majority of citizens. Devices do not offer the option of Tetum-­language 
support, so most Timorese use ­either Indonesian, Portuguese, or En­glish. Tetum-­
language support in applications is almost non­ex­is­tent, with even Google.tl using 
Portuguese as its search engine language (as well as Indonesian and En­glish) rather 
than Tetum.
In 2002, the government of Timor-­Leste granted a fifteen-­year exclusive tele-
communications license to Timor Telcom, a subsidiary of Portugal’s Telecom. Due 
to this mono­poly, the telecommunications sector had some of the highest ser­vice 
rates in the world for the first ten years of in­de­pen­dence. This made internet access 
prohibitively expensive, and therefore inaccessible, for the majority of ­people. A 
network of civil society organ­izations set up its own in­de­pen­dent V-­Sat infrastruc-
ture to be able to access more affordable internet in the capital, Dili, but in par­tic­u­lar 

TIMOR-­LESTE (EAST TIMOR)
306
also in the rural districts. Limited V-­Sat internet bandwidth ser­vice fees could run 
to over $1,000 monthly, but they ­were still considerably cheaper than accessing the 
internet through the only ser­vice provider in the country, Timor Telcom.
In 2012, in order to liberalize the telecommunications sector in the country and 
make it more competitive, the Timorese government issued additional licenses to 
two new telecommunications operators: PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia Interna-
tional (Telin), from Indonesia; and Viettel Global Investment JSC (Telemor), from 
Vietnam. This diversification, as well as a more competitive telecommunications 
sector, greatly reduced the costs of mobile subscriptions and provided greater ­free 
internet access in Timor-­Leste, with mobile customers increasing from 11.9 ­percent 
in 2008 to 57.4 ­percent in 2013 (UNESCO 2015). According to BuddeComm 
(2015), the mobile market in Timor-­Leste has grown much more, to around 
90 ­percent in June 2015. Quoting Timor-­Leste’s General Directorate of Statistics, 
TeleGeography (2015) reported a total of 1.25 million mobile customers in Timor-­
Leste in mid-2015, including 145,085 3G network users. Further, the Population 
and House­hold Census 2015 included questions related to ICT access in the coun-
try, such as the number of ­house­holds having mobile cellular telephone(s), 
­house­holds having personal computer(s), ­house­holds accessing the internet from 
home, ­house­holds accessing the internet from elsewhere other than home, and 
­house­holds without access to the internet. The complete results of the official cen-
sus, including the ICT indicators, have not yet been published, however. Timor 
Telcom reported 620,204 subscribers, including 7,592 3G users; Telemor reported 
470,730 subscribers, including 87,493 3G users; and Telkomcel reported 160,000 
subscribers, including 50,000 3G users (TeleGeography 2015).
Notwithstanding the high growth level of mobile phone subscriptions, data from 
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the World Bank, and the United 
National Population Division report that internet usage in Timor-­Leste in 2016 
remains very low, with only 14,030 internet users, a penetration rate of only 
1.2 ­percent (Internet Live Stats 2016). This low number is based on the ITU defini-
tion of internet users as ­those who have access to the internet, with no financial 
barrier preventing usage. The majority of the 145,085 Timorese internet users who 
have 3G access, as reported by TeleGeography (2015), can access the internet only 
through extremely limited ­free ser­vices. This access is primarily from promotional 
mobile phone credit recharges, which include a limited amount of ­free data, or by 
using ­free Wi-­Fi hot spots at the branch offices of telecommunications providers 
and other key locations such as at the shopping mall in Dili or at selected restau-
rants, cafés, and organ­izations. Despite the liberalization of the telecommunications 
sector in 2012 and the subsequent rapid increase of mobile phone subscriptions, 
with limited access to the internet, most Timorese are still unable to afford such 
access and rely almost exclusively on ­free access provided by the ser­vice providers 
and other third parties.
Timor-­Leste social media consumers predominantly use Facebook as the net-
work platform for social engagement and interaction, as well as for more public 
po­liti­cal and community purposes, including the sharing of news and information. 
Statistics for social media usage of social network platforms in Timor-­Leste report 

TIMOR-­LESTE (EAST TIMOR)
307
that 94.91 ­percent of consumers use Facebook, followed by 4.04 ­percent using 
Twitter and the remaining consumers using other social media networks and plat-
forms (StatsMonkey 2015). Some 85 ­percent of all Facebook users in Timor-­Leste 
are between thirteen and twenty-­nine years of age, compared to only 15 ­percent 
above thirty years of age (ASEANUp 2015).
In terms of media and information access, the main sources of information for 
the majority of Timorese come from analog broadcasting (radio and tele­vi­sion), with 
over 95 ­percent penetration rates in the country, with the next most significant 
source of information being newspapers, and then local leaders (Niner et al. 2015). 
Despite a pluralistic media landscape, with more than twenty news media organ­
izations in the country (including printed and online newspapers, state and private 
tele­vi­sion stations, and community radio stations), most of ­these fall into the cat-
egory of traditional media (newspapers, radio, and tele­vi­sion); however, ­there has 
been a modest but growing trend in investment on online content.
The majority of the media broadcasts and publishes in the Tetum language, with 
limited content in Portuguese and Indonesian. ­There is one local online newspaper, 
The Dili Weekly (www​.­thediliweekly​.­com), which publishes news in both En­glish 
and Tetum, and SAPO Timor-­Leste (www​.­sapo​.­tl), a subsidiary of the Portugal Tele-
com Group, which provides a news ser­vice in Tetum and Portuguese.
Sara Niner and Emanuel Braz
See also: Australia; Indonesia; Vietnam
Further Reading
ASEANUp. 2015. “Southeast Asia Digital in 2015.” Accessed April 27, 2016. http://­aseanup​
.­com​/­southeast​-­asia​-­digital​-­social​-­mobile​-­2015​/­
BuddeComm. 2015. “Timor Leste (East Timor)—­Telecoms, Mobile, and Internet.” Accessed 
April 27, 2016. http://­www​.­budde​.­com​.­au​/­Research​/­Timor​-­Leste​-­East​-­Timor​-­Telecoms​
-­Mobile​-­and​-­Internet​.­html
Internet Live Stats. 2016. “Internet Users by Country (2016).” Accessed April 27, 2016. 
http://­www​.­internetlivestats​.­com​/­internet​-­users​-­by​-­country​/­
Niner, Sara, Wigglesworth, Ann, dos Santos, Abel Boavida, Tilman, Mateus, and Arunacha-
lam, Dharmalingam. 2013. “REPORT: PyD Baseline Study—­Attitudes & perceptions of 
gender and masculinities of youth in Timor-­Leste.” Dili, Timor-­Leste: Paz y Desarrollo 
(PyD).
StatsMonkey. 2015. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Media Usage Statistics in Timor-­Leste.” 
Accessed April 27, 2016. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­packedcircle​/­21483​-­timor​-­leste​
-­mobile​-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
TeleGeography. 2015. “Mobile Subscribers Reach 1.25m at Mid-2015.” September 2015. 
Accessed April 27, 2016. https://­www​.­telegeography​.­com​/­products​/­commsupdate​
/­articles​/­2015​/­09​/­10​/­mobile​-­subscribers​-­reach​-­1​-­25m​-­at​-­mid​-­2015​/­
Timor​-­Leste, National Statistics Directorate. 2010. Population and Housing Census 2010. Dili:, 
Ministry of Finance.
Timor-­Leste, National Statistics Directorate. 2015. Population and Housing Census 2015: Pre­
liminary Results. Dili: Ministry of Finance.
UNFPA Timor-­Leste. 2016. “Timor-­Leste.” Accessed May 3, 2016. http://­countryoffice​.­unfpa​
.­org​/­timor​-­leste​/­2009​/­11​/­02​/­1482​/­timor​-­leste​_­democratic​_­republic​_­of​/­

TUNISIA
308
United Nations International ­Children’s Emergency Fund (UNICEF). 2016. “At a Glance: 
Timor-­Leste-­Statistics.” Accessed May 3, 2016. http://­www​.­unicef​.­org​/­infobycountry​
/­Timorleste​_­statistics​.­html
United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organ­ization (UNESCO). 2015. 
UNESCO Science Report: ­Towards 2030. New York: UNESCO Publishing.
UNMIT United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-­Leste. 2011. Timor-­Leste Communica­
tion and Media Survey. Accessed January 18, 2017. https://­unmit​.­unmissions​.­org​/­Portals​
/­UNMIT​/­Media​_­Survey​_­Report​_­CPIO​_­FINAL​_­ENG​.­pdf
World Bank. 2012. World Development Indicators 2012. Accessed February 2014. http://­data​
.­worldbank​.­org​/­data​-­catalog​/­world​-­development​-­indicators
TUNISIA
Tunisia is a small country in North Africa located southwest of Italy, along the coast 
between Libya and Algeria. Much of the early development of the internet in Tuni-
sia occurred ­under the regime of Zine el Abidine Ben Ali (1936–), which the Tuni-
sian military removed on January 14, 2011, as part of a series of popu­lar uprisings 
throughout the ­Middle East commonly known as the “Arab Spring.” As such, the 
internet in Tunisia is widely considered to be ­going through a transformational pro­
cess ­after democ­ratization. Many ­legal reforms have been undertaken since the 
overthrow of the earlier authoritative regime to increase citizens’ abilities to com-
municate freely and privately. However, as much of Tunisia’s infrastructure was orig-
inally designed to help monitor po­liti­cal opposition, existing laws and structures 
(alongside a need to protect against attacks on officials) continue to affect the de-
velopment of the internet in Tunisia.
Historically, the Tunisian government and its vari­ous agencies have been wary 
of the internet as a means of communication. While Ben Ali recognized the impor-
tance of developing telecommunications infrastructure to strengthen Tunisia’s econ-
omy, ­there ­were efforts to limit the social and po­liti­cal ramifications of new media. 
At the time of the country’s official public opening to the internet in 1996, the ICT 
sector was seen as a potentially power­ful mechanism for economic development. 
Both national policy makers and international development agencies saw Tunisia’s 
relatively small and young population as being particularly able to profit from a 
stronger telecommunications sector and encouraged investment into building stron-
ger infrastructures to develop businesses that worked within the digital economy, 
as well as providing proj­ects that could attract investment in Tunisia. In addition, 
many summits on the issue of the global digital divide between the developed and 
developing worlds have been held in Tunis, such as the World Summit on the In-
formation Society in 2005 and the African Internet Summit in 2015.
Much of Tunisia’s planned growth in ICT infrastructure came ­under fire for ex-
cluding voices from the po­liti­cal opposition, especially in the early phases of de-
velopment. The regime would frequently remove or censor bloggers suspected of 
supporting the opposition to Ben Ali, and the government blocked video-­sharing 
sites entirely. ­There ­were also incidents of Facebook users’ login information being 
intercepted and organ­izations’ internal emails scrambled.

TUNISIA
309
­Until recently, the state-­owned Tunisie Télécom held an effective mono­poly over 
internet ser­vice in Tunisia due to its owner­ship of the ICT infrastructure and the 
need for broadband subscribers to use the com­pany’s phone lines to transfer data. 
Authorities largely used Tunisie Télécom’s mono­poly as a means of restricting citi-
zens’ access to the internet through high prices for international communications. 
Access has been especially restricted in the countryside, which depends on 3G mo-
bile phone networks for internet access, given the lack of extensive broadband 
infrastructure.
Private companies and state-­led initiatives have provided more diverse ways for 
Tunisians to access the internet. Currently, ­there are three major telecommunica-
tions providers in Tunisia: Tunisie Telecom, Ooredoo, and Orange Tunisie. Recent 
infrastructural proj­ects have focused on laying cables between Tunisia and Eu­rope 
to increase connection speeds from Tunisia and position the country as a hub for 
telecommunications across Africa. Plans to reform investment laws in the hope of 
financing more infrastructural proj­ects in the interior had been prepared prior to 
the 2011 Arab Spring revolution, but since then, other po­liti­cal concerns, such as 
the reconciliation pro­cess, have sidetracked them.
In spite of efforts to bring other telecommunications companies such as Orange 
Tunisie and Ooredoo into competition for customers, Tunisie Télécom continues to 
provide coverage to most of the country. ­Because of this dominant position and 
previous ties to state censorship, many Tunisians suspect that the com­pany may help 
the country’s rulers filter information coming into the country and disrupt po­liti­cal 
communications, ­either now or in the ­future. Furthermore, the scarcity of infra-
structure to provide high-­speed internet to many parts of Tunisia has encouraged 
corporations to limit access to bandwidth-­intensive activities, such as voice over 
internet protocol (VoIP) ser­vices (e.g. programs that allow users to make telephone 
calls). According to companies and state officials, the restrictions are intended to 
build the demand for telephone use, but the restrictions are reminiscent of cen-
sorship for many, as civic groups often use ­these technologies to coordinate activi-
ties, advocate for policies, and especially target international communications.
Following the removal of Ben Ali, subsequent elected governments have made 
efforts to create ­legal protections for ­free access to information online. Article 24 of 
Tunisia’s new constitution, ­adopted in January 2014, gives the state the responsi-
bility of protecting rights to private communication and personal data except in 
cases of national security or criminal activity.
Nevertheless, ­there are still two major ways in which government agencies can 
use existing laws to monitor internet activity. First, laws originating ­under Ben Ali’s 
regime continue to be in effect, allowing government agencies to monitor private 
communications. Many of the laws governing internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) ­were 
originally developed to assist in the monitoring of preinternet telecommunications 
infrastructure. Notable among ­these laws is a prohibition on the encryption of tele-
communications and the requirement of purchasers of subscriber identity module 
(SIM) cards to provide identification that can be used to monitor their online ac-
tivities. As SIM cards are increasingly the predominant means by which many 

TUNISIA
310
Tunisians access the internet, ­these requirements maintain the infrastructure that 
the regime previously used to monitor activities.
In addition, the structure of ISP regulation and security laws may be used to en-
courage nongovernmental censorship of content and allow covert surveillance. Laws 
originating in the late 1990s placed ­legal liabilities on ISPs that distributed illicit 
content, including criticism of the regime as well as pornography and criminal ac-
tivity. As a result, the structure of Tunisian ISPs allowed for blocking content critical 
of the government without direct involvement by the authorities. Security regula-
tions also played a role in allowing Ben Ali’s government to monitor online activity. 
As data provided to the state and media publications ­were not covered by privacy 
protections, private messages and posts could potentially be vis­i­ble to officials, 
undermining bloggers’ ability to post freely.
Second, intermittent states of emergency have made it difficult to create consis-
tent ­legal protections for internet use. In a state of emergency, authorities are per-
mitted to monitor activity suspected of undermining national security, including 
online communications. In addition, protections on privacy can be lifted temporarily 
to monitor potential terrorist activity. Attacks on government ministers, tourists, and 
members of the military have caused several declarations of a state of emergency, 
making it difficult for users to be aware of their rights on a continual basis and al-
lowing officials to remove Facebook pages that may fuel vio­lence or extreme views.
Just days before voting in a new constitution, members of Tunisia’s Constitutional Assembly 
are seen ­here attending a session on January 23, 2014. Article 24 of the new constitution pro-
vides for the right to private communication and personal data. However, pre-­existing laws allow 
government agencies to monitor internet activity, such as activity associated with media pub-
lications, which are not covered by privacy protections, and can undermine a blogger’s ability 
to post freely. (AP Photo/Hassene Dridi)

TUNISIA
311
­These attacks and efforts to prevent them have also incentivized the creation 
of bodies such as the Technical Agency for Telecommunications (ATT, or l’Agence 
Tunisienne des Télécommunications) in 2013. This agency, sometimes referred to 
as the Tunisian equivalent of the National Security Agency (NSA), provides techni-
cal support for investigations, but it also has often been criticized for preventing 
suspects from receiving a fair trial ­because defendants are not allowed to challenge 
any evidence that ATT provides at trial. Many similar internet governance agen-
cies formed ­under Ben Ali’s regime continue to wield significant power over the 
operation and regulation of the internet. However, this control has been gradually 
reduced in recent years. One example of this development is the Tunisian Internet 
Agency (ATI, Agence Tunisienne d’Internet), which used to filter most internet traf-
fic in Tunisia through its servers to monitor communications and censor material. 
The ATI’s mission changed drastically following the revolution, but the institution 
continued to be seen as a tool of censorship by many bloggers. In 2013, the ATI 
began to allow ISPs to circumvent state-­run servers.
As of 2014, approximately 46 ­percent of Tunisians used the internet (World Bank 
2014). Internet usage grew rapidly during the first de­cade of the twenty-­first ­century 
and has continued to rise steadily since that time. Although a minority subscribe 
to fixed broadband lines, most Tunisian internet subscriptions are purchased 
through mobile plans or universal serial bus (USB) keys that can be reloaded as 
needed. At the time of writing, a typical 3G USB key cost the equivalent of $20.50, 
with a monthly subscription cost of approximately $13 (Freedom House 2015). 
­These subscriptions are often criticized for being beyond the financial means of most 
Tunisians and with antiquated or non­ex­is­tent infrastructure in many rural areas of 
the country’s interior. High-­speed mobile internet access is concentrated primarily 
in major coastal cities, while major interior areas frequently have significantly slower 
connections.
As for social media use, the majority of Tunisians online choose Facebook over 
other major platforms. This preference largely follows the pattern of social media 
elsewhere in the Arab world, but ­there is considerably less penetration of Twitter 
in Tunisia than elsewhere in the region. With about half of the country able to ac-
cess the internet in 2014, 42.1 ­percent of the internet-­using population had Face-
book accounts, compared to just 4.2 ­percent with LinkedIn accounts and 0.3 ­percent 
with Twitter accounts (Arab Social Media Report 2014).
The vast majority of social media activity in which Tunisians take part is held in 
French, with a smaller amount in En­glish and Arabic. ­There are several reasons for 
this situation. A major reason is the heavy influence of the French language on Tu-
nisian society, especially among more affluent members of society who are more 
likely to have access to the internet. Although no longer an official language of gov-
ernment as it was prior to in­de­pen­dence, French remains an impor­tant language 
in the country, both due to continuing trade ties with French-­speaking countries 
and the social prestige associated with the language.
Furthermore, many content creators may choose to use French for search en-
gine optimization (SEO). Search engines often fail to return accurate results from 
text in the Arabic script, as short vowels and other diacritical marks are often used 

TUNISIA
312
inconsistently in practice. The right-­to-­left reading of Arabic also can create chal-
lenges for coding content on websites using programming languages or interfaces 
that ­were designed only for a left-­to-­right alphabet. In addition, using French can 
allow ­these individuals to engage a broader audience and gather a wider following 
among Tunisians living abroad, who often follow Tunisian politics and news very 
closely.
As Tunisia was one of the first countries to erupt into protests during the Arab 
Spring of 2011, ­there is significant debate about the role of the internet in promot-
ing the unrest ­there. ­Those who see the internet as an integral ­factor in the fall of 
the regime point to the abundance of po­liti­cal writers online, the ability of gather-
ing protests to or­ga­nize and spread through social media, and the fact that the re-
gime shut down the internet shortly ­after the protests started as a means to prevent 
the use of the internet in the protests. ­These ­factors hint at the potential for the 
internet to galvanize protest activity. However, many other observers writing in the 
years following 2011 have argued that the internet at best took a back seat to of-
fline civil society organ­izations, and that the protests themselves ­were not as clearly 
planned as they might have been if they ­really had been coordinated online.
Tyler Overfelt
See also: Algeria; France; Libya
Further Reading
Arab Social Media Report. 2014. “Citizen Engagement and Public Ser­vices in the Arab World: 
The Potential of Social Media.” Accessed May 19, 2016. http://­www​.­mbrsg​.­ae​/­getatt​
achment​/­e9ea2ac8​-­13dd​-­4cd7​-­9104​-­b8f1f405cab3​/­Citizen​-­Engagement​-­and​-­Public​
-­Services​-­in​-­the​-­Arab​.­aspx
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Tunisia.” Accessed April 16, 2016. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­tunisia
Privacy International. 2016. “State of Surveillance in Tunisia.” Accessed April 16, 2016. 
https://­www​.­privacyinternational​.­org​/­node​/­743
Scola, Nancy. 2011. “Why Tunisia Is Not a Social-­Media Revolution.” The American Prospect, 
January 21. Accessed May 19, 2016. http://­prospect​.­org​/­article​/­why​-­tunisia​-­not​-­social​
-­media​-­revolution​-­0
Shirayanagi, Kouichi. 2015. “Five Years ­After Revolution, Internet Censorship Is Creeping 
Back into Tunisia.” December 1. Accessed May 19, 2016. http://­motherboard​.­vice​.­com​
/­read​/­five​-­years​-­after​-­revolution​-­internet​-­censorship​-­is​-­creeping​-­back​-­into​-­tunisia
World Bank. 2014. “World Development Indicators—­Tunisia—­Internet Users per 100 
­people.” Accessed May 19, 2016. http://­data​.­worldbank​.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2​
?­locations​=­TN&name​_­desc​=­true
Wagner, Ben. 2012. “Push-­Button Autocracy in Tunisia: Analysing the Role of Internet In-
frastructure, Institutions, and International Markets in Creating a Tunisian Censorship 
Regime.” Telecommunications Policy. 36, 6.

TURKEY
313
TURKEY
Turkey is a geo­graph­i­cally, culturally, and po­liti­cally diverse nation located at the 
crossroads between the Eu­ro­pean and Asian continents. While the nation is pre-
dominantly Muslim, it is also home to a sizeable Orthodox Christian and Jewish 
community. Though the population is often tense and fragmented, a religious and 
ethnic diversity remains somewhat in Turkey from the ruins of the Ottoman Empire. 
Turkey straddles several impor­tant waterways and is neighbor to Bulgaria, Greece, 
Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iraq, Iran, and Syria, making it a geopo­liti­cally 
impor­tant and strategic country. Its internet culture is vibrant and thriving, with 
numerous local online endeavors. Turkey’s online environment, while prosperous, 
is also a highly politicized and contested space. In recent years, it has become a 
hotbed of contention between the ruling Justice and Development Party; the Gülen 
Movement, a global religious organ­ization led by Fetullah Gülen (1941–), and left-
ist oppositional factions. Social networking sites, such as Twitter and Facebook, now 
figure prominently in debates on national security, unity, and oppositional po­liti­cal 
activism. Censorship and an air of suspicion of social networking sites feature prom-
inently in official national rhe­toric amid domestic and international po­liti­cal chal-
lenges to the ruling government.
As of 2016, Turkey’s internet penetration rate is 58 ­percent of the total popula-
tion. This is a marked increase from the past de­cade (Turkey’s internet penetration 
rate was a mere 18 ­percent in 2006). In 2013, the Turkish Statistical Institiute re-
ported that approximately 53.9 ­percent of all internet users in Turkey ­were male 
and 39.8 ­percent female. In addition to the prevalence of internet cafés, which line 
the busy streets of Istanbul and the city centers of most cities and towns in Turkey, 
the International Telecommunications Union reports that 49.1 of Turkey’s popula-
tion have access to the internet at home.
A variety of localized online and digital ser­vices remain popu­lar among the urban 
and semiurban populations of Turkey. For example, Yemeksepeti​.­com, meaning “food 
basket” is an im­mensely popu­lar one-­stop shop for ordering food online. This ser­
vice is completely ­free to users and provides a centralized platform for ordering 
food from nearby restaurants. In addition, the smartphone application BiTaksi, 
meaning “a taxi,” allows users to request a taxicab using geolocating software, as 
the Uber app does.
With just over half of Turkey’s population using the internet, Turkey’s social me-
dia environment continues to grow and remain active (Doğramaci and Radcliffe 
2015). ­There are 39 million monthly Facebook users in Turkey, and of that num-
ber, 85 ­percent access Facebook through mobile devices (Daily Sabah 2015). Glob-
ally, Turkey ranks fourth in percentage of the population with Facebook accounts. 
However, while data may indicate a high penetration of Facebook usage through 
mobile devices, only 34 ­percent of the population has access to mobile broadband 
ser­vice (Doğramaci and Radcliffe 2015). Private businesses, sports teams, and pol-
iticians all maintain active and public social media profiles. The Facebook pages of 
Turkish Airlines, the Galatasary soccer team, and President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
(1954–) are among the most followed in the country (Socialbakers 2015).

TURKEY
314
Social media usage in Turkey has often been characterized as an outlet for shar-
ing and finding news, particularly in light of a general mistrust of mainstream me-
dia platforms. Given the historically tight controls that both the military and 
government have had on media outlets amid military coups and during an aggres-
sive neoliberalization pro­cess beginning in the 1990s, this distrust is not surprising. 
During the Gezi Park protests of 2013, for example, Facebook and Twitter became 
key outlets for distributing videos, photos, and updates of the unfolding events. 
­These platforms not only served as a way to quickly coordinate gatherings and medi-
cal attention for activists affected by police intervention, but also countered main-
stream media blackouts and government-­imposed censorship. Indeed, social media 
in Turkey has become a source for bypassing traditional sources of news and high-
lighting the growing dissatisfaction with Erdoğan and his ruling Justice and Devel-
opment Party.
Beginning in December 2013, for example, recordings and other official docu-
ments began emerging that linked prominent government ministers, businesspeo-
ple, and Erdoğan, who was then prime minister, to money transfers to an Ira­nian 
businessman, Reza Zarrab (1983–). In addition to exposing Turkey’s violation of 
international sanctions against Iran, the documents and recordings posted by the 
Twitter ­handle @HARAMZADELER333 exposed other instances of nepotism, cro-
nyism, and money laundering between government officials and progovernment 
businessmen (Pamuk and Tattersall 2014). While the corruption scandal was 
In Istanbul, thousands of ­people protested the government’s decision to censor the internet in 
May 2011. Many governments in and around the ­Middle East feared the wave of government-­
toppling protests that occurred in early 2011, ­later known as the Arab Spring. (Evren Kalinbacak​/​
Dreamstime​.­com)

TURKEY
315
purported by official channels to be an attempt by the Gülen religious organ­ization 
(led by a former Justice and Development Party ally) to undermine the govern-
ment, what followed was a massive Twitter ­battle between online activists and the 
government of Turkey. Following the corruption scandal, Twitter was blocked 
across the country, purportedly due to privacy and security concerns. The largest 
blackout came in early 2014, when access to Twitter was blocked for about two 
weeks (Özbilen and Coşkun 2014).
The government frequently cites concerns for security and national unity as a 
main reason for blocking access to social media platforms. YouTube, for example, 
was blocked for several years ­after a video emerged that apparently insulted the 
founder of the modern Turkish Republic, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (1881–1938). Re-
flecting the constitutional protection of the image and likeness of Atatürk, Internet 
Law 5651 (originally passed in 2007) gives the state the authority to shut down 
websites for distributing material related to child abuse, obscenity, or insulting 
Atatürk. In 2014, amid the corruption scandal and Twitter ­battles, the law was 
expanded to allow the state to shut down websites without a court order if the web-
site was seen a threat to national security or privacy (­Human Rights Watch 2014). 
Though this portion of the law was subsequently overturned by the Eu­ro­pean Digi-
tal Rights Initiative (    Jarvinen 2014), other recent court rulings potentially limit 
the types of personal material that can be circulated and possessed online.
While ­there remains debate over the authority and legality of the state to shut 
down websites, the official discourse of the Turkish government frames the online 
world as a threat to the integrity and unity of the entire country. President Erdoğan 
and the ruling Justice and Development Party, though perhaps legally constrained 
for the time being, frame online media as a forum in which foreign and domestic 
conspirators are attempting to weaken Turkey’s economic and po­liti­cal growth 
(Tüfekçi 2014). This discourse of fear and mistrust marks attempts by the ruling 
government to contend and stifle a growing opposition that views Erdoğan and his 
cabinet as antidemo­cratic.
The ongoing crisis in Syria, po­liti­cal instability in the southeastern corners of 
the country, and the presence of Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), also known 
as Daesh, cells within the country further underscore a tenuous po­liti­cal environ-
ment that sees online media, such as Facebook and Twitter, as active threats to the 
sovereignty and stability of Turkey. Thus, while Turkey’s online presence remains 
vibrant in both the business and po­liti­cal world, looming and ongoing crises have 
created a highly politicized and unstable online culture.
Caitlin Miles
See also: Georgia; Greece; Iran; Iraq; Syria
Further Reading
Corke, Susan, Finkel, Andrew, Kramer, David J., Robbins, Carla Anne, and Schenkkan, Nate. 
2014. “Democracy in Crisis: Corruption, Media, and Power in Turkey.” Freedom House. 
Accessed January 19, 2017. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­Turkey%20Re​
port%20​-­%20Feb%203,%202014​.­pdf

TURKEY
316
Daily Sabah. 2015. “39 Million Log on to Facebook in Turkey Daily.” September 7. Accessed 
March 30, 2016. http://­www​.­dailysabah​.­com​/­life​/­2015​/­09​/­07​/­39​-­million​-­log​-­on​-­to​-­face​
book​-­in​-­turkey​-­daily
Doğramacı, Esra, and Radcliffe, Damian. 2015. “How Turkey Uses Social Media.” Digital 
News Report—­Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. Accessed March 30, 2016. 
http://­www​.­digitalnewsreport​.­org​/­essays​/­2015​/­how​-­turkey​-­uses​-­social​-­media​/­
­Human Rights Watch. 2014. “Turkey: Internet Freedom, Rights in Sharp Decline.” September 
2. Accessed April  18, 2015. http://­www​.­hrw​.­org​/­news​/­2014​/­09​/­02​/­turkey​-­internet​
-­freedom​-­rights​-­sharp​-­decline
Jarvinen, H. 2014. “Turkey: Constitutional Court Overturns Internet Law Amendment.” 
Eu­ro­pean Digital Rights Initiative. Accessed January 2015. https://­edri​.­org​/­turkey​
constitutional court-­overturns-­internet-­law-­amendment/
Özbilen, Özge, and Coşkun, Orhan. 2014. “Turkey Lifts Twitter Ban ­After Court Ruling.” 
­Reuters, April 3. Accessed May 15, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2014​/­04​/­03​
/­us​-­turkey​-­twitter​-­idUSBREA320E120140403
Pamuk, Humeyra, and Tattersall, Nick. 2014. “Leaked Documents Purport to Reveal Turk-
ish Graft Allegations.” ­Reuters, March 14. Accessed March 30, 2016. http://­www​.­reuters​
.­com​/­article​/­us​-­turkey​-­corruption​-­idUSBREA2D1F420140314
Socialbakers. 2015. “Turkey Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed March 30, 2016. http://­
www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­turkey​/­
Tüfekçi, Zeynep. 2014. “Every­one Is Getting Turkey’s Twitter Block Wrong.” Medium, 
March 23. Accessed April 18, 2015. https://­medium​.­com​/­message​/­everyone​-­is​-­getting​
-­turkeys​-­twitter​-­block​-­wrong​-­cb596ce5f27
Turkish Statistical Institute. 2013. “Information And Communication Technology (ict) Usage 
Survey on House­holds And Individuals, 2013.” Accessed January 19, 2017. http://­www​
.­turkstat​.­gov​.­tr​/­PreHaberBultenleri​.­do​?­id​=­13569
Turkish Telecommunications Authority. 2013. “Information about the Regulations of the 
Content of the Internet.” Accessed January 2015. http://­www​.­tib​.­gov​.­tr​/­en​/­en​-­menu​
-­47information​_­about​_­the​_­regulations​_­of​_­the​_­content​_­of​_­the​_­internet​.­html
World Bank. 2014. “Internet Users.” Accessed January 6, 2015. http://­data​.­worldbank​
.­org​/­indicator​/­IT​.­NET​.­USER​.­P2
Yeşil, Bilge. 2014. “Press Censorship in Turkey: Networks of State Power, Commercial Pres-
sures, and Self-­censorship.” Communication, Culture, and Critique, 7: 154–173.

UKRAINE
Ukraine is a former Soviet state located in Eastern Eu­rope. It is bordered in the north 
by Rus­sia, Belarus, and Poland, and in the south by the Black Sea, Moldova, and 
Romania. Internet usage in Ukraine has grown exponentially over the last decade, 
from only a few ­percent of the population to roughly half ­today. Having been 
largely built in the last de­cade, its internet infrastructure is modern, and access is 
affordable, but it is much more readily available in urban areas than rural ones. 
Despite some troubling individual incidents, the internet in Ukraine is largely ­free 
of censorship and state control. In 2013 and 2014, the Euromaidan protests show-
cased an impressive use of social media, while the ensuing conflict with breakaway 
Eastern regions, the Crimea, and Rus­sia has resulted in a simmering information 
war between Rus­sia and the new Ukrainian regime.
Over 400 internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) are currently operating in Ukraine, 
which is a relatively high number compared to other similar states, indicating a low 
level of centralized control of the country’s networks (Freedom House 2015). The 
largest ISP is Ukrtelecom, which was controlled by the state ­until it was privatized 
in 2011. Ukrtelecom controls most of the physical infrastructure of the internet in 
Ukraine, but the com­pany leases it openly to other telecommunications compa-
nies, with no evidence of the economic strong-­arming that might follow in the wake 
of infrastructural mono­poly. The connection of the Ukrainian internet to interna-
tional networks is not centralized ­either, with large ISPs maintaining their own 
international lines. Most domestic ISPs interconnect at the Ukrainian Internet Ex-
change (UA-­IX), while at least eight regional internet exchanges provide substantial 
interconnection at the subnational level. Internet exchanges are large facilities full 
of servers where dif­fer­ent ISPs connect their networks. The quantity of Ukraine’s 
internet exchanges, along with the multiple redundant trunk lines out of the coun-
try, indicate a robust and fault-­tolerant network infrastructure.
Typical of the post-­Soviet world, internet connectivity skipped several genera-
tions of technology ­because the rollout of ser­vices took place ­later than in the early-­
adopting Western countries. Wired broadband subscriptions connect only 15 ­percent 
of ­house­holds, while most connectivity is accomplished with mobile broadband 
connections via both smartphones and wireless universal serial bus (USB) mo-
dems that connect directly to the cellular networks (ITU 2015). Unlike the West-
ern world, in which ser­vice is generally purchased on a monthly basis with caps 
that incur overage charges, ­these ser­vices in Ukraine are usually paid for up front, 
per byte. While the urban parts of Ukraine have very high levels of internet access 
through cellular networks, rural areas lag significantly, representing a substantial 
digital divide.
U

UKRAINE
318
A number of dif­fer­ent polls have sought to assess the proportion of Ukrainians 
who regularly use the internet, with a general consensus of about 50 ­percent of the 
population. While this is lower than the near universal use of the internet in the 
western world, it represents a substantial increase from the approximately 5 ­percent 
who regularly used the internet a de­cade ago (ITU 2015).
Social media is widely used in Ukraine. The most heavi­ly trafficked website, other 
than Google, is Vkontakte (known colloquially as VK and translates literally from 
Rus­sian as “in contact”), a Russian-­owned and -­operated social media site that is 
very similar to Facebook, even to the extent that it originally had almost identically 
formatted pages. The primary blogging platform is LiveJournal, which although 
originating in the United States, was wholly bought out by SuP Media, a Rus­sian 
media com­pany, in 2012.
VK and LiveJournal are also the primary social media and blogging platforms in 
Rus­sia and several other post-­Soviet countries. Both companies are controlled by 
individuals with extensive ties to the regime of Rus­sian president Vladimir Putin, sug-
gesting to many critics that ­there is a troubling potential for Rus­sian censorship, both 
of their own social media sites and ­those in neighboring countries like Ukraine.
In terms of Western social media outlets, both Facebook and Twitter enjoy grow-
ing popularity in Ukraine. Facebook use has grown quickly, to some 3 million 
users by 2013, but this is only a fraction of the Ukrainian user base boasted by VK. 
Twitter has a smaller but faster-­growing footprint, with a few hundred thousand 
users, though its user base in Ukraine has been growing exponentially over the last 
several years (Freedom House 2015).
The use of the internet for po­liti­cal organ­ization in Ukraine first gained promi-
nence during the Orange Revolution of 2005, when it was used extensively by the 
leadership of the opposition. The explosive growth of internet usage in the ensu-
ing de­cade led to its widespread use during the Euromaidan protests of 2013 to 
2014, especially in the context of social media. Usage of Twitter increased steadily 
over the several months of mass protest and, during the three-­day climax of vio­
lence when the regime fell in February 2014, a steady stream of firsthand video 
and imagery from the center of Kiev flooded social media sites (Onuch 2014).
While international monitors characterize Ukraine as being near the top of the 
list of countries in terms of internet freedom, some troublesome incidents have oc-
curred in recent years. Several citizens and journalists have been arrested for pur-
portedly committing anti-­Ukrainian activities online, and some received prison 
terms. In April 2015, state security seized the servers of about 30,000 websites ­after 
an ISP refused to comply with ­orders to shut down certain pro-­Russian sites 
(Poludenko-­Young 2015). An uproar ensued, however, and in response, state se-
curity quickly backtracked and ser­vices ­were restored. While the incident itself was 
discouraging, it did reveal that even if Ukraine’s regime had the desire to do so, it 
lacked the technical expertise to censor the internet with anything approaching a 
malicious subtlety.
In the wake of the Ukrainian Civil War, the breakaway eastern republics have 
experienced similarly clumsy attempts at censorship and regulation by the nom-
inal power holders in ­those territories. For instance, in Donetsk, rebel forces 

UKRAINE
319
announced that ISPs would be required to turn over user data, although none did, 
and ­there is no evidence that the militants have the technical capacity to force them 
to comply (Freedom House 2015). The breakaway republics have also seen a sharp 
rise in intimidation of online communities and posters. Vio­lence, kidnapping, and 
indefinite detention have become common tools used in the breakaway regions 
against ­those who post anti-­Russian materials online.
This is partial evidence of a simmering information war that has developed be-
tween Ukraine and Rus­sia. Rus­sia has deployed a number of dedicated “astroturf-
ing” companies assigned to produce content online in support of pro-­Russian groups 
in Ukraine, making them appear to be grass-­roots organ­izations and masking their 
connection to Rus­sia. Some have gone as far as masquerading as native Ukrainian 
sites (Euromaidan Press 2014). In addition, cyberattacks between groups have in-
creased in number, with several reported instances of website hijackings (includ-
ing of a Ukrainian tele­vi­sion channel’s YouTube feed) and of propaganda targeted 
explic­itly at the cell phones of Ukrainian soldiers on the battlefield (Freedom House 
2015).
Of par­tic­u­lar note is the situation in the Crimea. When seized by Rus­sian forces 
in March 2014, the internet was quickly shut down in the region as the Rus­sians 
seized local Ukrtelecom buildings (Miller 2014). This was pos­si­ble ­because while 
the region had very high levels of internet access, its connection to the web was 
entirely routed through the Simferopol internet exchange point (IXP). Seizure of 
the facilities controlling that line was accomplished in the first twenty-­four hours, 
along with the seizure of tele­vi­sion and radio stations (Pizzi 2015). While the outage 
lasted only a few hours initially, evidence has mounted that Rus­sia has significantly 
censored po­liti­cal information available online to the Crimea (Giles 2016).
Ukraine as a ­whole has a comparatively modern and growing internet infrastruc-
ture, with widespread usage of social media and blogging platforms by the public. In 
relative terms, the country exhibits minimal levels of mass censorship, surveillance, 
and actions taken against normal citizens using the internet. However, the po­liti­cal 
fallout of revolution, invasion, and civil war has taken its toll, with growing reper-
cussions for ­those who post materials unfriendly ­toward the ruling powers of their 
par­tic­u­lar region of the country. Despite the ­great deal of positive news about the 
internet in Ukraine, the dark side may perhaps be an ominous warning of the vul-
nerability of internet users to state repression during times of crisis.
Steven Lloyd Wilson
See also: Georgia; Kazakhstan; Romania; Rus­sia
Further Reading
Euromaidan Press. 2014. “Kremlin’s Propagandists Created a Network of Pseudo-­Ukrainian 
Internet News Portals.” November 13. Accessed July 19, 2016. http://­euromaidanpress​
.­com​/­2014​/­11​/­13​/­kremlins​-­propagandists​-­created​-­a​-­network​-­of​-­pseudo​-­ukrainian​
-­internet​-­news​-­portals​-­in​-­russia​/­
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net: Ukraine Country Report.” Accessed July 19, 
2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­ukraine

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
320
Giles, Keir. 2016. “Rus­sia’s ‘New’ Tools for Confronting the West: Continuity and Innova-
tion in Moscow’s Exercise of Power.” Chatham House, March. Accessed July 19, 2016. 
https://­www​.­chathamhouse​.­org​/­sites​/­files​/­chathamhouse​/­publications​/­research​/­2016​
-­03​-­21​-­russias​-­new​-­tools​-­giles​.­pdf
International Telecommunication Union (ITU). 2015. “ICT Facts and Figures 2015.” Ac-
cessed July 19, 2016. https://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­en​/­ITU​-­D​/­Statistics​/­Documents​/­facts​/​ICT​
FactsFigures2015​.­pdf
Miller, Christopher. 2014. “Ukrtelekom Says Internet, Phone Connections Interrupted Be-
tween Crimea and Rest of Ukraine.” March 1. Accessed July 19, 2016. http://­www​
.­kyivpost​.­com​/­article​/­content​/­ukraine​/­ukrtelekom​-­says​-­internet​-­phone​-­connections​
-­cut​-­between​-­crimea​-­and​-­rest​-­of​-­ukraine​-­337992​.­html
Onuch, Olga. 2014. “Social Networks and Social Media in Ukrainian ‘Euromaidan’ Protests.” 
Washington Post, January 2. Accessed July 19, 2016. https://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​
/­news​/­monkey​-­cage​/­wp​/­2014​/­01​/­02​/­social​-­networks​-­and​-­social​-­media​-­in​-­ukrainian​
-­euromaidan​-­protests​-­2​/­
Pizzi, Michael. 2015. “Could Rus­sia ­Really Cut the Internet?” Al Jazeera Amer­i­ca, October 26. 
Accessed July 19, 2016. http://­america​.­aljazeera​.­com​/­articles​/­2015​/­10​/­26​/­could​-­russia​
-­really​-­cut​-­the​-­internet​.­html
Poludenko​-­Young, Anna. 2015. “Ukraine’s Security Ser­vice Takes Down 30,000 Websites 
to Fight ‘Pro-­Russian Propaganda.’ ” Global Voices, April 28. Accessed July 19, 2016. 
https://­globalvoices​.­org​/­2015​/­04​/­28​/­ukraine​-­censorship​-­russia​-­propaganda​-­hosting​/­
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is a federation of seven quasi-­independent emir-
ates in the Arabian Peninsula, located between Africa and Asia. Its broadband mar-
ket is the most advanced globally, and the country’s fiber-­to-­the-­home (FttH) 
penetration rate—­over 70 ­percent—is the world’s highest (BuddeComm 2015). The 
UAE’s internet penetration rate was 93.2 ­percent, the second highest in the ­Middle 
East (Internet World Stats 2015), and 50 ­percent of UAE residents access the inter-
net via mobile phones. The average per-­capita daily internet use is over 5 hours for 
PC and tablet users and 3.75 hours for mobile phone users (Global Media Insight 
2015). Persons aged twenty-­five to fifty-­four years old represent 61 ­percent of the 
population, and the median age is 30.3. Non-­Emiratis (mainly expatriate workers) 
comprise 85 ­percent of the 9.45 million total population, 85.5 ­percent of which 
reside in urban areas (CIA World Factbook 2015).
When Friendster turned down Google’s offer to purchase the social media site in 2003, 
Google deci­ded to create its own platform. The site opened on January 24, 2004, 
and was named Orkut ­after its proj­ect man­ag­er, Orkut Büyükkökten (1975–), who 
was of Turkish decent. ­After the platform’s initial launch, three countries banned it 
outright. The governments of Iran, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates 
(UAE) refused to allow access to the site on the grounds that the new platform was 
unethical and contained security flaws (Echovme 2014).

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
321
The UAE’s mobile penetration rate reached 200 ­percent in 2010 (Belic 2010), 
and ­there are 7,270,000 active mobile internet users (DubaiMonsters 2015). In 
2013, 73.8 ­percent of the population had smartphones (Wissing 2014). The coun-
try’s FttH providers are Emirates Integrated Telecommunications Com­pany, also 
known as du (headquartered in Dubai) and Emirates Telecommunications Corpo-
ration, also known as Etisalat (in Abu Dhabi, the capital and largest emirate). 
Etisalat, 60 ­percent of which is owned by the UAE government, is the seventeenth 
largest mobile network operator in the world, with more than 150 million custom-
ers in Africa, Asia, and the ­Middle East (George-­Cosh 2011). Residents use their 
mobile devices to watch videos (45 ­percent), play games (33 ­percent), and use bank-
ing ser­vices (31 ­percent). Internet access also is available via asymmetric digital 
subscriber line (ADSL), cable modem, and mobile broadband (BuddeComm 2015).
Social media use is pervasive in the UAE. In 2014, Facebook (93 ­percent), 
Google+ (80 ­percent), YouTube (77 ­percent), and Twitter (70 ­percent) ­were the most 
popu­lar applications among residents (Wissing 2014). Facebook’s dominance is re-
flected by a 2015 survey in which 74 ­percent of respondents identified the appli-
cation as their social media channel of choice (Kapur 2014). In 2011, more than 
85 ­percent of Facebook users in the UAE interacted in En­glish, approximately 
10 ­percent in Arabic, and the remainder in other languages (Alqudsi-­ghabra et al. 
2011). In 2012, 44 ­percent of UAE users accessed social networks during work 
hours, with access peaking ­after work between 6 p.m. and 8 p.m. (Interactive ­Middle 
East 2012).
Tech-­savvy Emiratis and expatriates ­were early and enthusiastic adopters of new 
social media platforms. In 2007, rapidly growing Twitter use in the UAE prompted 
the government to block the site on the grounds that it constituted a gender-­mixing 
dating site. At the same time, ham-­fisted censors blocked searches for chicken breast 
­recipes and Middlesex University (Wissing 2014). Federal authorities since have 
taken a more sophisticated approach to information technology (IT). Following the 
success of Dubai’s pioneering Internet City (1999) and Media City (2000), the UAE 
launched a Smart Government initiative encompassing nationwide infrastructure 
improvements to enable smart grids and smart homes (Wissing 2014). Masdar City, 
a new smart city currently ­under construction near Abu Dhabi, is emblematic of 
the authorities’ current embrace of IT (BuddeComm 2015).
Nevertheless, the government continues to filter the internet and to monitor 
and occasionally block other media. A website creator convicted in 2007 by a 
court in Ras al-­Khayma emirate of defaming a public official was fined and sen-
tenced to a year in prison (Alqudsi-­ghabra et al. 2011). In 2012, the UAE strength-
ened its 2006 cybercrime law, giving the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority 
(TRA), an executive agency reporting to the Cabinet, broad power to monitor 
internet use in the country. The TRA compiles lists of websites to be blocked and 
relies on Etisalat and du to ensure that subscribers comply with the Authority’s 
Internet Access Management (IAM) policy. Per the IAM policy, sites are blocked 
if they contain material that (1) conflicts with UAE ethics and morals, including 
nudity and dating; (2) expresses hatred of religions; (3) conflicts with UAE laws; 
(4) allows or helps users to access blocked content; (5) directly or indirectly poses 

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
322
a risk to users (e.g. phishing, malware); (6) is related to gambling; or (7) promotes 
the manufacture, production, or use of illegal drugs (Reporters Without Borders 
2014).
Voice over internet protocol (VoIP) ser­vices ­were blocked by the TRA prior to 
2010, when the government allowed Etisalat and du to provide internet telephony 
(Namatalla 2010). Skype, Viber, and FaceTime, though blocked, intermittently are 
available. In a 2014 statement, the TRA confirmed the illegality of VoIP ser­vices 
other than ­those provided by Etisalat and du. Facetime is not included in Apple 
devices sold in the UAE. Following WhatsApp’s 2014 announcement that it planned 
to launch a VoIP ser­vice, users of the channel in the Emirates reportedly experi-
enced uneven functionality (Bui 2014).
UAE leaders see the Muslim Brotherhood (MB) as the country’s biggest threat, 
and they argue that internet regulation is necessary to combat Islamic extremism. 
In 2013, the government arrested, tried, and imprisoned ninety-­four members of 
al-­Islah—an UAE-­based MB affiliate—on terrorism charges (Wissing 2014). ­Human 
rights activists, however, contend that the restrictions unduly restrict civil rights, 
including ­free speech (Freedom House 2015). Also in 2013, an Asian man got ar-
rested and jailed on defamation charges ­after posting cell-­phone video of a UAE 
motorist using his headdress cord to beat an Indian van driver following a minor 
traffic altercation in Dubai (Al Arabiya 2013). In another widely publicized case 
The Emirates Telecommunications Corporation, also called Etisalat, has its main tower in Dubai. 
The com­pany is the seventeenth largest mobile phone operator in the world, allowing ­people 
in Africa, Asia, and the ­Middle East to operate their smartphones and access the internet. (AP 
Photo/Kamran Jebreili)

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
323
from the same year, a U.S. citizen was convicted of defamation for posting a You-
Tube video depicting a fictitious Dubai military school that trained students to throw 
sandals, use headdress cords as weapons, and tweet their fellow fighters. Sentenced 
to one year in prison, the American served approximately nine months before he 
was released (Wissing 2014).
The UAE likely ­will exhibit continued ambivalence concerning the promise and 
perils of IT. Se­nior leaders, including Abu Dhabi Crown Prince Mohammad bin 
Zayid (1961–), regularly use Twitter to promote their initiatives and share infor-
mation. Foreign Minister Abdullah bin Zayid (1972–), who reportedly has 800,000 
followers, sparked a spontaneous national event in November 2013 ­after tweeting 
his desire to see “the UAE flag on top of ­every ­house.” Meanwhile, the director gen-
eral of the Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research has expressed con-
cern about the internet’s effect on national identity. “We see more time being spent 
on social media, weakening ­family ties,” he told a journalist in 2014, adding he 
feared that it “may change social norms and values” (Wissing 2014).
Mark A. Caudill
See also: Iraq; Qatar; Saudi Arabia
Further Reading
Al Arabiya. 2013. “UAE Man Beating Driver Makes Headlines in Gulf.” July 18. Accessed 
November  30, 2015. http://­english​.­alarabiya​.­net​/­en​/­media​/­2013​/­07​/­18​/­UAE​-­man​
-­beating​-­driver​-­makes​-­headlines​-­in​-­Gulf​.­html
Alqudsi​-­ghabra, Taghreed M., Al-­Bannai, Talal, and Al-­Bahrani, Mohammad. 2011. “The 
Internet in the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council (AGCC): Vehicle of Change.” Interna­
tional Journal of Internet Science, 6(1), 44–67.
Arab Social Media Report. 2014. “Twitter in the Arab Region.” March. Accessed October 27, 
2015. http://­www​.­arabsocialmediareport​.­com​/­Twitter​/­LineChart​.­aspx​?­&PriMenuID​
=­18&CatID​=­25&mnu​=­Cat
Belic, Dusan. 2010. “UAE Hits 200% Mobile Penetration Rate.” January 3. Cellular News. 
Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­www​.­intomobile​.­com​/­2010​/­01​/­03​/­uae​-­hits​-­200​
-­mobile​-­penetration​-­rate​/­
BuddeComm. 2015. “United Arab Emirates—­Broadband, Internet, and Digital Media 
Market—­Overview, Statistics, and Forecasts.” Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­
budde​.­com​.­au​/­Research​/­United​-­Arab​-­Emirates​-­Broadband​-­Internet​-­and​-­Digital​-­Media​
-­Market​-­Overview​-­Statistics​-­and​-­Forecasts​.­html
Bui, Joey. 2015. “Skype Ban Tightens in the UAE.” February 7. The Gazelle. Accessed No-
vember 30, 2015. http://­www​.­thegazelle​.­org​/­issue​/­55​/­news​/­skype​/­
CIA World Factbook. 2015. “United Arab Emirates.” Accessed November 30, 2015. https://­
www​.­cia​.­gov​/­library​/­publications​/­the​-­world​-­factbook​/­geos​/­ae​.­html
DubaiMonsters. 2015. “United Arab Emirates Internet, Social, and Mobile Stats 2015.” Ac-
cessed November  30, 2015. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­lukhachdem1​/­united​-­arab​
-­emirates​-­internet​-­social​-­and​-­mobile​-­statistics​-­2015
Freedom House. 2015. “United Arab Emirates: Stop the Charade and Release Activists Con-
victed at the Mass UAE 94 Trial.” March 3. Accessed November 30, 2015. https://­
freedomhouse​.­org​/­article​/­united​-­arab​-­emirates​-­stop​-­charade​-­and​-­release​-­activists​
-­convicted​-­mass​-­uae​-­94​-­trial

UNITED KINGDOM
324
George​-­Cosh, David. 2011. “Foreign Interests Help Etisalat Beat Forecasts.” February 10. 
The National. Accessed November  30, 2015. http://­www​.­thenational​.­ae​/­business​
/­telecoms​/­foreign​-­interests​-­help​-­etisalat​-­beat​-­forecasts
Internet World Stats. 2014. “Internet Usage in the ­Middle East.” December 31. Accessed 
October 27, 2015. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats5​.­htm#me
Kapur, Shuchita. 2014. “Social Media: What UAE Residents Like and Why.” March 19. Ac-
cessed January 19, 2017. http://­www​.­emirates247​.­com​/­business​/­social​-­media​-­what​-­uae​
-­residents​-­like​-­and​-­why​-­2014​-­03​-­19​-­1​.­542154
Namatalla, Ahmed. 2010. “Four Companies to Get VoIP in the UAE.” March 15. Gulf News. 
Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­gulfnews​.­com​/­business​/­sectors​/­telecoms​/­four​
-­companies​-­to​-­get​-­voip​-­in​-­the​-­uae​-­1​.­597911
OpenNet Initiative. 2009. “Internet Filtering in the United Arab Emirates.” August 6. 
Accessed November 30, 2015. https://­opennet​.­net​/­sites​/­opennet​.­net​/­files​/­ONI​_­UAE​
_­2009​.­pdf
Reporters Without Borders. 2014. “Enemies of the Internet: United Arab Emirates: Track-
ing ‘Cyber-­criminals.’ ” March 11. Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­12mars​.­rsf​.­org​
/­2014​-­en​/­2014​/­03​/­11united​-­arab​-­emirates​-­tracking​-­cyber​-­criminals​/­
Seksek, Tariq. 2012. “White Paper: Social Media in #KSA and the #UAE.” February 21. In-
teractive ­Middle East. Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­interactiveme​.­com​/­2012​
/­02​/­white​-­paper​-­social​-­media​-­in​-­ksa​-­and​-­the​-­uae​/­
Wissing, Douglas. 2014. “Genie Uncorked: Social Media in the UAE.” August 5. Huffington 
Post. Accessed November 30, 2015. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­douglas​-­a​-­wissing​
/­genie​-­uncorked​-­social​-­med​_­b​_­5440160​.­html
UNITED KINGDOM
The United Kingdom of ­Great Britain and Northern Ireland includes ­England, 
Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland. An island nation in northwestern Eu­rope, 
it is commonly known as the United Kingdom (U.K.) or Britain. With a total pop-
ulation of 64.91 million ­people living within its borders, the internet penetration 
accounts for 92 ­percent of the population. A major contributing ­factor for the United 
Kingdom’s high internet penetration is the development of its superfast 4G network. 
Every­thing Everywhere (EE) Limited, a mobile network operator com­pany and in-
ternet ser­vice provider (ISP), increased its broadband speed to give the United 
Kingdom one of the fastest and most reliable networks in the world. The superfast 
broadband is easily accessible to populations in the more rural and remote areas of 
the country, thus boosting the internet penetration. With the arrival of a superfast 
4G network, internet users have increased their online activity on vari­ous social 
media platforms. The United Kingdom also capitalized on the fast broadband by 
creating apps specifically for tourism in the country.
For U.K. internet users, social media is not the most popu­lar internet activity. 
On a daily basis, internet users spend an average of three hours and forty-­seven 
minutes on the internet using a PC or tablet. About one hour and twenty-­nine min-
utes of that time is used for social media (Kemp 2016). Internet users are able to 
do their everyday internet activities on their mobile phones, such as navigate the 
internet faster, read daily news, watch high-­definition (HD) videos without buffer-
ing, and share large files and high-­resolution pictures in seconds (Woollaston 2013).

UNITED KINGDOM
325
Widely used by the United Kingdom’s active internet population, Google’s web-
sites and apps averaged about 46 million unique visitors in March 2015. Google’s 
search engine dominates the market, with 39.6 million unique visitors compared 
to other global search engines, such as Bing (17.3 million visitors) and Yahoo Search 
(14 million visitors). During the same monthlong period, Google was followed 
closely by Facebook’s websites and apps, with 41 million visitors, and the BBC’s 
websites and apps, with 40 million visitors. Even though Google has more users, 
­people tend to spend more time using Facebook (Edge 2015).
Nearly 90 ­percent of the teen and young adult generation, specifically users in 
the sixteen-­ to twenty-­four-­year-­old age bracket, own a smartphone. While older 
generations, such as the fifty-­five-­ to sixty-­four-­year-­old bracket, are slowly joining 
the smartphone revolution, the younger generations are more apt to use their mo-
bile phone instead of a computer to access the internet and social media platforms 
(Ofcom 2015). Social media penetration accounts for 59 ­percent of the country’s 
population. Over a three-­year period, ­there has been a 66 ­percent increase of inter-
net users on social media platforms (Kemp 2016). Teens and millennials are diver-
sifying their use of social media platforms in the United Kingdom. The most used 
social media platform is Facebook, followed by the instant messenger apps Face-
book Messenger and WhatsApp (Edge 2015). About 47 ­percent of U.K. active us-
ers have accounts on Facebook, which is nearly twice that of other global social 
media platforms, such as Twitter, LinkedIn, and Google+. Facebook users that fall 
within the twenty-­four to thirty-­four-­year-­old age range account for nearly 30 ­percent 
of traffic on the social media network. About half of ­people in the eighteen-­ to 
twenty-­four-­year-­old demographic have incorporated Facebook into their morn-
ing routine (White 2016).
While Facebook is widely used in the country, other global social media net-
works are slowly growing in popularity (eMarketer 2015). Twitter has about 
13 million active users in the United Kingdom. Nearly half of Twitter’s users access 
the microblogging network once a day using mobile phones rather than comput-
ers or tablets. About 37 ­percent of the United Kingdom’s youth, specifically in the 
eleven-­ to sixteen-­year-­old age bracket, use Twitter once a week. In the United 
Kingdom, Instagram has about 14 million users, and nearly 90 ­percent of its active 
users are ­under the age of thirty-­five, while 38.4 ­percent fall into the sixteen-­ to 
OMG, the social media abbreviation for the explicative “Oh my God,” did not origi-
nate on social media. The first known use of OMG was in a letter from Lord John 
Arbuthnot Fisher (1841–1920), a British navy admiral, to Winston Churchill (1874–
1965), British statesman and ­later prime minister. The letter, written at the end of 
Fisher’s naval ­career, expressed his distaste over newspaper headlines that bolstered 
the German fleet’s reputation. He believed that Britain had a far superior fleet and 
could defeat the Germans in less than a few minutes. The OMG appeared at the end of 
the letter when mentioning the creation of a new order of knighthood. Fisher’s OMG 
differed from the OMG in social media just slightly, however. His version, which is 
spelled out ­after the acronym in the letter, stood for “Oh! My God!” (Nuwer 2012).

UNITED KINGDOM
326
twenty-­four-­year-­old age range. Many businesses and brands utilize the social me-
dia platform to create interest for new products in dif­fer­ent target demographics 
(White 2016).
In efforts to be more competitive in the United Kingdom and around the world, 
EE increased its mobile web speed from 3G and 4G speeds to a superfast 4G broad-
band, which is double the average networking speed. Initially, the com­pany of-
fered the superfast 4G ser­vice to twelve cities in vari­ous parts of the United Kingdom 
before expanding to more areas of the country. At the time of its release in 2013, 
EE boasted faster networking speeds than the United States and Japan, as well as a 
broadband speed comparable to the most wired nation in the world, South ­Korea 
(Woollaston 2013). In early 2016, the United Kingdom ranked fourth globally in 
connection speed. The country has a current connection speed of 13 Mbps, 
which is significantly higher than the global average of only 5.1 Mbps. However, 
it still falls ­behind Japan (15 Mbps), Hong Kong (15.8 Mbps), and South ­Korea 
(20.5 Mbps). The United Kingdom has become one of the world’s fastest countries 
online since the installation of the superfast 4G network (Kemp 2016).
Communication network companies like EE, O2, Three, and Vodafone continue 
to expand the 4G networks and ser­vice to make the internet more accessible and 
easy for every­one in the United Kingdom. As much as 87 ­percent of the U.K popula-
tion is currently covered by the 4G network. By 2017, the development of the super-
fast 4G technology ­will be accessible by 98 ­percent of the country. This percentage 
is a target goal not only for mobile phones, but also fixed-­line broadband for homes 
and businesses. Based on the 2017 target goal for communication network com-
panies, it is predicted that the time spent online ­will double for British internet us-
ers within the next de­cade. As more ­people spend more time online, many active 
users believe that the benefits ­will increase as well. Six of ­every ten adults in the 
country use the internet to keep in touch with friends and ­family. Nearly two-­thirds 
of online adult users utilize the internet to read the news, research products and 
ser­vices, and keep themselves informed about a variety of issues (Ofcom 2015).
The United Kingdom uses superfast 4G to its advantage for tourism. EE brokered 
many international 4G contracts with overseas networks to give tourists and busi-
ness travelers easy access to broadband connections while in the United Kingdom. 
The first overseas network to sign with EE was AT&T, a U.S.-­based ser­vice provider. 
EE provided AT&T customers with an easy way to stay connected in the United 
Kingdom. EE representatives explained that tourists want a fast, easy, and reliable 
experience while abroad. ­Whether it is finding local landmarks, navigating through 
unfamiliar cities, or purchasing tickets to local tours or events, EE provides tour-
ists with a mobile network that makes traveling easier throughout the United King-
dom. Several cities in the United Kingdom have taken advantage of the superfast 
network by creating apps specifically for tourism. On the City of London’s website, 
for instance, ­there is a webpage for tourists to find and use apps and social media 
pages created specifically for London tourism. Tourists may download apps that pro-
vide audio-­guided tours, locate city ser­vices or rest stops, create itineraries for easy 
planning, or enhance their experience with an interactive game that shares informa-
tion about dif­fer­ent exhibits, such as the Tower of London (City of London 2016).

UNITED KINGDOM
327
Access to high-­speed broadband has been transformational, both socially and 
eco­nom­ically, for ­people living in rural areas of the United Kingdom. The imple-
mentation of Wi-­Fi kiosks in select locations has been widely popu­lar with both 
locals and tourists. To help grow tourism, some local governments have created 
broadband proj­ects to deliver world-­class connectivity to more remote areas. Many 
hope that ­these plans ­will entice tourists to explore more off-­the-­map places and, 
consequently, develop economic growth in ­these areas from the tourism boost. By 
2020, the Scottish Rural Development Programme (SRDP) aims to make ­every 
rural community digitally connected, as well as help businesses meet their needs 
and the needs of their customers. Some believe that SRDP’s plans ­will result in 
community solutions to establish and develop tourism and tourist-­friendly busi-
nesses throughout rural Scotland (Highlands and Islands Enterprise 2015).
Karen Ames
See also: China: Hong Kong; Japan; South ­Korea; United States
Further Reading
City of London. 2016. “Social Media and Apps.” Accessed March 11, 2016. https://­www​
.­cityoflondon​.­gov​.­uk​/­about​-­the​-­city​/­about​-­us​/­Pages​/­social​-­media​.­aspx
Edge, Abigail. 2015. “Digital Habits in the UK: Social Media, Mobile Apps, and Online 
News.” August 12. Accessed March 5, 2016. www​.­themediabriefing​.­com​/­article​/­digital​
-­habits​-­in​-­the​-­uk​-­social​-­media​-­mobile​-­apps​-­and​-­online​-­news
eMarketer. 2015. “Young Mobile Users Drive UK Social Media Usage: Social Networking 
Popu­lar Among Teens and Millennials.” October 29. Accessed March 7, 2016. http://­
www​.­emarketer​.­com​/­Article​/­Young​-­Mobile​-­Users​-­Drive​-­UK​-­Social​-­Media​-­Usage​
/­1013163
Highlands and Islands Enterprise. 2015. “Broadband Help for Rural Communities.” Au-
gust 24. Accessed March 11, 2016. http://­www​.­hie​.­co​.­uk​/­about​-­hie​/­news​-­and​-­media​
/­archive​/­broadband​-­help​-­for​-­rural​-­communities​.­html#sthash​.­V3PQH8zl​.­dpbs
Kemp, Simon. 2016. “Digital in 2016: We Are Social’s Compendium of Global Digital, So-
cial, and Mobile Data, Trends, and Statistics.” January 27. Accessed March 7, 2016. 
http://­wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Newton, Thomas. 2013. “EE’s Special Relationship with AT&T ­Will See UK Travellers 4G 
Speeds Abroad.” December 17. Accessed March 11, 2016. https://­recombu​.­com​/­mobile​
/­article​/­ees​-­special​-­relationship​-­with​-­att​-­will​-­see​-­uk​-­travellers​-­getting​-­4g​-­speeds​
-­abroad​_­M19876​.­html
Ofcom. 2015. “The UK Is Now a Smartphone Society.” August 6. Accessed March 8, 2016. 
http://­media​.­ofcom​.­org​.­uk​/­news​/­2015​/­cmr​-­uk​-­2015​/­
Thomas, Daniel. 2015. “EE’s Superfast 4G Data Traffic Surpasses 3G for The First Time.” 
May 13. Accessed March 10, 2016. http://­www​.­ft​.­com​/­cms​/­s​/­0​/­f158b2c2​-­f96f​-­11e4​
-­ae65​-­00144feab7de​.­html#axzz43azUOcrv
White, Jules. 2016. “Social Media Statistics in the UK.” February 2. Accessed May 12, 2016. 
http://­www​.­thelasthurdle​.­co​.­uk​/­social​-­media​-­statistics​-­in​-­the​-­uk​-­for​-­2015​/­
Woollaston, Victoria. 2013. “Superfast 4G Broadband That ­Will Double Web Speeds to 
Hit 12 UK Cities Including London and Glasgow Tomorrow.” July 3. Accessed March 
10, 2016. www​.­dailymail​.­co​.­uk​/­sciencetech​/­article​-­2354694​/­Superfast​-­4G​-­broadband​
-­DOUBLE​-­web​-­speeds​-­hit​-­12​-­UK​-­cities​-­including​-­London​-­Glasgow​-­tomorrow​.­html

UNITED STATES
328
UNITED STATES
The United States of Amer­i­ca, the largest country in North Amer­i­ca in terms of both 
land area and population, is nestled between Canada and Mexico and has a popu-
lation of about 323 million ­people. While Asia has nearly half the world’s internet 
users, North Amer­i­ca’s internet penetration rate is higher than anywhere ­else 
(89 ­percent) (Internet World Stats 2016). Despite this fact, the United States barely 
ranks in the top thirty countries in terms of penetration. In 2013, while more than 
84 ­percent of the U.S. population had available connections to the internet, the pen-
etration rate of the world’s top four countries or territories for internet penetration 
(namely, the Falkland Islands, Iceland, Bermuda, and Norway) all had rates of 
95 ­percent or higher (Internet World Stats 2013). Much of the world’s popu­lar 
social media websites originate from and became popu­lar in the United States. As 
a result, social media use and popularity has shifted quite a bit since the inception 
of many of ­these sites. In addition, one of the youn­gest generations, ­today’s teen­
agers, have grown up never knowing a time without social media; therefore, their 
interactions with social media sometimes differ greatly from ­those of the older 
generations.
In January 2016, over 282 million ­people in the United States ­were active inter-
net users, which indicated some growth over the past few years (We Are Social 
2016). Historically, the most active user demographic has been eighteen-­ to 
Two young American girls sit together viewing social media. In the United States, the younger 
generations are among the most tech-­savvy and spend significant amounts of time online. (Rui 
Matos​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

UNITED STATES
329
twenty-­nine-­year-­olds, with 70  ­percent penetration in 2000 and 96  ­percent in 
2015 (Perrin and Duggan 2015). Nevertheless, adoption rates have been faster 
among adults aged sixty-­five and older; in 2000, internet penetration among this 
group was only 14 ­percent, but in 2015, well over half (58 ­percent) ­were using the 
internet (Perrin and Duggan 2015). While 85 ­percent of adults in the United States 
in 2016 owned some type of cell phone, smartphone penetration among adults was 
only 57 ­percent. Meanwhile, 72 ­percent of adults owned desktop or laptop comput-
ers, and 35 ­percent owned a tablet. Most web traffic in the United States occurs via 
computer, averaging daily use of just over four hours; time spent on the internet 
with a mobile phone was on average slightly less than two hours, accounting for 
just 27 ­percent of web traffic (We Are Social 2016).
A common perception in the United States is that the iPhone is more ubiqui-
tous than the Android phone; however, a recent Nielsen study showed that in the 
third quarter of 2015, more than half of smartphone users ­were using Google’s An-
droid operating system (52.6 ­percent), while only 42.7 ­percent of smartphones 
­were utilizing Apple’s iOS (Beres 2015). This inaccurate perception may be derived 
in part from the fact that the average number of iPhone and Android users is much 
closer in the United States than it is worldwide: in 2015, 82.8 ­percent of the total 
smartphone market share was dominated by Android, while iOS controlled only 
13.9 ­percent (Beres 2015).
Google Chromebooks have recently outpaced Apple iPads in schools (Taylor 
2015); however, over the course of several years, millions of iPads have been inte-
grated into the U.S. classroom, which may account for some of the choices made 
when downloading ­free iOS apps. In August 2016, the top ­free app for iOS was 
the mobile game Flip Diving; however, iTunes U (an app featuring ­free educational 
videos) and the ­free version of Pages (a word-­processing app), Numbers (a spread-
sheet app), and Keynote (a pre­sen­ta­tion app) ­were also among the top ten most 
downloaded apps (AppAnnie 2016b). Remind, a ­free messaging app that allows 
con­ve­nient communication among teachers, students, and parents, was the six-
teenth most commonly downloaded ­free app. Snapchat ranked ninth, Google 
Maps ranked tenth, Facebook Messenger ranked eleventh, Facebook ranked twelfth, 
Instagram ranked thirteenth, and YouTube ranked ­fourteenth (AppAnnie 2016b). 
In contrast, Facebook Messenger, Facebook, and Snapchat ­were the top three down-
loaded ­free apps for the Android platform (AppAnnie 2016a). Other ­free apps in 
the top ten for Android included Pokémon Go (a location-­based augmented real­ity 
game introduced in mid-2016), Instagram, Pandora Radio, WhatsApp Messenger, 
and Remind (AppAnnie 2016a).
The websites with the most traffic from the United States are Google, Facebook, 
YouTube, Amazon, Yahoo, Wikipedia, eBay, Twitter, Reddit, and Netflix (Alexa 
2016). Facebook has a 72 ­percent penetration rate of adult internet users in the 
United States, a rate that has not changed much in the past few years. The biggest 
demographic group of Facebook users consists of adults aged eigh­teen to twenty-­
nine years old; 89 ­percent of internet users in this category use Facebook, which 
comprises 29 ­percent total active users (Duggan 2015; We Are Social 2016). In ­every 
age group, ­there ­were more female users than male (We Are Social 2016). Of 

UNITED STATES
330
current social media in the United States, Facebook has one of the largest propor-
tions of users over the age of forty-­five (Williams 2014). While the majority of in-
ternet users in the United States have Facebook profiles, less than half consider 
themselves to be active users (Williams 2014), which suggests a downward trend 
for the social media site. However, the way that Facebook is used has changed 
over the years to a more passive rather than an active tool. Many users simply browse 
through friends’ posts for news, photos, or entertainment. The social media web-
site is often used as a tool for organ­izing groups or outings, such as recreation-­
league sports and ­family reunions. Lately, many small businesses are utilizing 
Facebook to advertise their stores rather than creating their own websites.
YouTube, the second most popular social media website in the United States, 
has evolved over the years as well. Launched in 2005, it was originally a video-­
sharing website, which provided a platform for users to share homemade videos 
over the internet. As it grew in popularity and methods of monetizing usage be-
came more ­viable, corporate media, especially the ­music industry, began adding 
content. YouTube still has a large user base that utilizes the website to watch ­music 
videos. In December 2015, the two most visited channels had been Justin Bieber, 
with over 650 million views from the previous month, and Adele, with over 540 
million views from the previous month (Statista 2016b). Private citizens began to 
produce videos specifically for public consumption, many of whom ­were able to 
make a living as YouTube stars.
In the United States, possibly the most famous of ­these YouTube personalities is 
Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg (1989–), better known as PewDiePie. He is a Swedish video 
gamer who has more subscribers than some mainstream pop stars and has made 
$12 million by posting videos of him playing video games (Forbes 2015). His 
YouTube account, @pewdiepie, is the first channel ever to have more than 10 bil-
lion views and also has the most subscribers, at 39 million and counting. The sta-
tistic of 10 billion views is significant ­because ­there are fewer than 8 billion ­people 
on the planet; ­these numbers mean that the equivalent of 120 ­percent of the plan-
et’s population watches the videos that he posts to the channel. Some successful 
YouTube channels offer original programming with serialized stories. YouTube Red 
is a channel that highlights some of the content produced by its top creators. As of 
July 2015, video was being uploaded at rates of over 400 hours a minute (Statista 
2016b). ­Because of his online popularity, PewDiePie has his own YouTube Red 
series called Scare PewDiePie and may star in a tele­vi­sion show based on his suc-
cess, but details of the proj­ect are scarce (TMZ 2015).
Pinterest analyzed its users’ pins to see if ­there ­were any patterns emerging throughout 
the week. The results showed that each day had a most popu­lar category. On Monday, 
users pinned items about fitness and health. On Tuesdays, they preferred images related 
to technology. On Wednesday, users tended to cite inspirational quotes. Thursdays 
saw more pins in the fashion category. Fridays ended the workweek with humor and 
comics. On Saturday, users pinned more travel-­related images than on any other day. 
Fi­nally, on Sundays, users preferred images related to food and crafts (Pinterest 2014).

UNITED STATES
331
A website similar to some of the newer uses of YouTube was launched in 2011. 
Called Twitch.tv, it is part of the growing e-­sports phenomenon of watching video-
gamers compete. The website offered a live-­streaming ser­vice that provided a plat-
form for internet viewing of video game competitions, as well as individual gaming. 
Twitch offered the monetization of content in much the same way as YouTube. In 
2014, the website had about 45 million monthly viewers and, while not ranked 
highly in terms of internet traffic, if mea­sured in terms of bandwidth use, Twitch’s 
traffic was higher than Netflix, Hulu, and Facebook (Bean 2014). One unfortunate 
aspect of Twitch streaming, however, is the sexism found in the chat win­dows. As 
some female gamers broadcast their streams, the chat logs fill up with sexist com-
ments. In general, female gamers face gender discrimination on a regular basis, and 
Twitch has proved to reflect this real­ity on occasion. Some female gamers take ad-
vantage of this sexism by adjusting the camera ­angles to show off more of their bod-
ies to encourage bigger monetary donations, but in most other instances, despite 
moderating tools, the prob­lem of chat toxicity persists.
Twitter is the third most popular social networking website in the United States. 
It is more popu­lar ­there than in most other places in the world (22 ­percent of visitors 
originate in the United States) (Alexa 2016). While Twitter has recently been strug-
gling to maintain growth and the com­pany saw its stock price fall in early 2016, 
Twitter nonetheless continues to be an impor­tant social networking site in the 
United States. The hashtag (#), a method of organ­izing similar topics and themes, 
was pop­u­lar­ized by Twitter. The unique 140-­character limit made succinct messag-
ing essential. The hashtag has since spread to other social media and is even used to 
identify vari­ous social movements, such as #BlackLivesMatter, a group dedicated to 
erasing racial discrimination and in­equality; and #IceBucketChallenge, which raises 
awareness of and money to fight the disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Twitter is used in a variety of ways by corporations and individuals alike. Per-
sonal and com­pany branding is a popu­lar use of the site. ­People use Twitter to fol-
low opinions in real time during live coverage of po­liti­cal or sporting events, as 
exemplified during the 2016 presidential election, where media outlets, support-
ers, and opposition actively consumed and engaged with candidate Donald Trump’s 
account. Often, breaking news hits Twitter first and is ­later disseminated to other 
media outlets. Remarkably, while most ­people in the United States are aware of 
Twitter, less than a quarter of adult internet users have Twitter accounts. Interest-
ingly, while the digital divide in the United States usually means that African-­
Americans are less likely to use the internet than white Americans, the opposite is 
true of Twitter. In 2013, only 16 ­percent of white internet users utilized Twitter, 
whereas 22 ­percent of African-­American internet users utilized Twitter (Smith 2014). 
While this gap is shrinking, African-­Americans continue to lead in proportional use 
of the social media website.
The younger generations in the United States tend to have higher social media 
penetration rates; however, one of the youn­gest demographic categories, teen­agers, 
often illustrates unique social media usage. According to a 2015 Pew Research 
study (Lenhart 2015), of internet users aged thirteen to seventeen years old, 
92 ­percent say that they used the internet ­every day. While over half of ­these teens 
went online several times a day, and 12 ­percent went online at least once a day, 

UNITED STATES
332
24 ­percent of teens who used the internet ­every day said that they are “almost con-
stantly” online. African-­American and Hispanic teens reported being online “almost 
constantly” at higher rates (34 and 32 ­percent, respectively) than white teens 
(19 ­percent). This phenomenon is largely due to the prevalence of smartphones and 
other mobile devices, which ­were once possessed mainly by adults but are now 
ubiquitous even among young teen­agers. A total of 75 ­percent of teens ­either own or 
have access to a smartphone; 85 ­percent of African-­American teens own a smart-
phone, while only 71 ­percent white and Hispanic teens have one. Access to desktops 
and laptops is more common among teen­agers from the United States (87 ­percent) 
than many other countries in the world. More than half of teens have access to a 
tablet; while girls and teens from wealthier families are more likely to have tablets, 
­there seemed to be no difference in tablet usage along racial or ethnic lines.
Additional findings of the 2015 Pew Research Study (Lenhart 2015) suggest that 
girls are more likely to use social media sites than boys, who prefer playing video-
games (which may not have as many social networking functions, but nevertheless 
encourage online social interaction). Boys are more likely to use Facebook, while 
girls are more likely to use Instagram. The study also found a correlation between 
social media use and socioeconomic status: teens from lower socioeconomic 
­house­holds (less than $50,000 a year) are more likely to use Facebook, and teens 
from more affluent ­house­holds are more likely to use Snapchat.
However, use of social media does not necessarily correlate to popularity or per-
ceived importance. While 71 ­percent of teens reported using Facebook in 2015 
(Lenhart 2015), the world’s most popu­lar social media site has rapidly been falling 
out of ­favor with this age group. In 2012, 42 ­percent of teens using social media 
identified Facebook as their preferred social media, with 27 ­percent identifying Twit-
ter and 12 ­percent identifying Instagram as most impor­tant (Statista 2016a). Snap-
chat did not even rank in that list; however, just three years ­later, in the spring of 
2016, more than a quarter of all teenage social media users (28 ­percent) identified 
it as their most preferred social media site. Almost the same percentage of users 
preferred Instagram (27 ­percent), and the tally for both Twitter and Facebook us-
ers had fallen (18 ­percent and 17 ­percent, respectively) (Statista 2016a). In January 
2016, only 8 ­percent of all Facebook users in the United States ­were younger than 
nineteen (We Are Social 2016).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: Canada; Iceland; Mexico; United Kingdom
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in United States.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­US
AppAnnie. 2016a. “Top Apps on Google Play, United States, Overall, Aug 26, 2016.” Ac-
cessed August 27, 2016. https://­www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­united​-­states​
/­overall​/­
AppAnnie. 2016b. “Top Apps on iOS Store, United States, Overall, Aug 26, 2016.” Ac-
cessed August 27, 2016. https://­www​.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­united​-­states​/­overall​
/­iphone​/­

UZBEKISTAN
333
Bean, Daniel. 2014. “What the Heck Is Twitch, and Why Does Google Think It’s Worth $1 
Billion? [UPDATE: Amazon Bought Twitch].” Yahoo! Tech. Accessed August 27, 2016. 
https://­www​.­yahoo​.­com​/­tech​/­what​-­the​-­heck​-­is​-­twitch​-­and​-­why​-­does​-­google​-­think​-­its​
-­86224528319​.­html
Beres, Damon. 2015. “Sorry, Fanboys: Android Still More Popu­lar Than iOS in U.S.” Huff­
ington Post. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­entry​/­android​
-­more​-­popular​-­than​-­ios​_­us​_­5678203be4b06fa6887de2e7
Duggan, Maeve. 2015. “The Demographics of Social Media Users.” Pew Research Center. Ac-
cessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­pewinternet​.­org​/­2015​/­08​/­19​/­the​-­demographics​
-­of​-­social​-­media​-­users​/­
Forbes. 2015. “The World’s Top-­Earning YouTube Stars 2015.” Accessed August 27, 2016. 
http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­pictures​/­geeg45egklg​/­1​-­pewdiepie​-­12​-­millio​/­#29ff88871c96
Internet World Stats. 2013. “Top 50 Countries with the Highest Internet Penetration Rates—
2013.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­top25​.­htm
Internet World Stats. 2016. “Internet Usage Statistics: The Internet Big Picture.” http://­www​
.­internetworldstats​.­com​/­stats​.­htm
Lenhart, Amanda. 2015. “Teen, Social Media, and Technology Overview 2015.” Pew Re-
search Center. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­pewinternet​.­org​/­files​/­2015​/­04​/­PI​
_­TeensandTech​_­Update2015​_­0409151​.­pdf
Perrin, Andrew, and Duggan, Maeve. 2015. “Americans’ Internet Access: 2000–2015.” http://­
www​.­pewinternet​.­org​/­2015​/­06​/­26​/­americans​-­internet​-­access​-­2000​-­2015​/­
Smith, Aaron. 2014. “African Americans and Technology Use: A Demographic Portrait.” 
Pew Research Center. http://­www​.­pewinternet​.­org​/­2014​/­01​/­06​/­african​-­americans​-­and​
-­technology​-­use​/­
Statista. 2016a. “Most Popu­lar Social Networks of Teen­agers in the United States from Fall 
2012 to Spring 2016.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​
/­250172​/­social​-­network​-­usage​-­of​-­us​-­teens​-­and​-­young​-­adults​/­
Statista. 2016b. “Statistics and Facts About YouTube.” Accessed August 27, 2016. https://­
www​.­statista​.­com​/­topics​/­2019​/­youtube​/­
Taylor, Harriet. 2015. “Google’s Chromebooks Make up Half of US Classroom Devices Sold.” 
CNBC. Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­www​.­cnbc​.­com​/­2015​/­12​/­03​/­googles​-­chrome​
books​-­make​-­up​-­half​-­of​-­us​-­classroom​-­devices​.­html
TMZ. 2015. “Hey Bros—­I’m in Hollywood.” September 10. Accessed September 10, 2015. 
http://­www​.­tmz​.­com​/­2015​/­09​/­10​/­pewdiepie​-­cutie​-­marzia​-­youtube​-­gamer​-­arrives​-­lax​/­
We Are Social. 2016. “Special Reports: Digital in 2016.” Accessed August 27, 2016. http://­
wearesocial​.­com​/­uk​/­special​-­reports​/­digital​-­in​-­2016
Williams, Rhiannon. 2014. “Facebook ­Isn’t ­Dying. It’s Just Changing.” The Telegraph. http://­
www​.­telegraph​.­co​.­uk​/­technology​/­facebook​/­11252782​/­Facebook​-­isnt​-­dying​.­​-­Its​-­just​
-­changing​.­html
UZBEKISTAN
Uzbekistan, a former Soviet state, is located in central Asia. It is bordered in the 
north by Kazakhstan, in the west by Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, and in the south 
by Turkmenistan and Af­ghan­i­stan. It is one of the poorest countries in the world, 
ruled by one of the more brutal regimes—­a dictatorship that has not seen a change 
of power since the Soviet Union fell twenty-­five years ago. Its rec­ord of internet 
use is one of rapid growth over the last several years, driven by foreign invest-
ment in its telecommunications sector, but it nevertheless remains one of the 

UZBEKISTAN
334
least-­connected countries in the world. In addition, the regime has implemented a 
wide variety of repressive mea­sures, ensuring that freedom of speech is nearly as 
hampered on the internet as it is in the physical real­ity of Uzbekistan. Prospects for 
improvement on that front are dim, even as the infrastructure of connectivity has 
gradually improved.
The telecommunications infrastructure of Uzbekistan is the largely ancient and 
deteriorating technology constructed during the Soviet era. Despite being the most 
populous country in Central Asia, with a population of some 30 million ­people, 
­there are fewer than 2 million landlines in the entire country (ITU 2015). Wired 
broadband connections number only around 200,000 and are almost entirely con-
centrated in the capital, Tashkent (ITU 2015). On the other hand, like many other 
developing states, Uzbekistan’s infrastructure has skipped several generations of 
technology and gone straight to mobile devices. As of 2014, ­there ­were nearly eighty 
mobile phone subscriptions in the country per hundred ­people (ITU 2015). While 
mobile phones are nearly ubiquitous, that has not translated into mobile internet 
access, as ­there are only about a half million mobile broadband subscriptions in the 
country (ITU 2015).
That does not mean, however, that Uzbeks do not use the internet. On the con-
trary, some 43 ­percent of the Uzbek population reports regularly using the internet 
(ITU 2015). But connectivity is very slow and limited on average. For example, as 
recently as 2012, even at the most expensive ­hotels catering to foreigners visiting 
Tashkent, internet speeds topped out at around 15 Kbps, which is on par with dial-
up modem connections from a generation ago in the developed world (Silk 2012).
The situation has improved gradually over the last few years, though, with sub-
scriptions promising 256 KBps bandwidth costing $4 per month, and megabit 
access starting at $27.50 per month (Ruddy 2014). However, ­these ser­vices are 
available only in limited urban areas and are simply far beyond the bud­get of most 
of the population. When last mea­sured in 2003, two-­thirds of Uzbeks lived on less 
than $2 per day. This represents a significant digital divide, with internet users 
largely concentrated in cities. Rural areas are among the poorest in the world, and 
many areas cannot even count on reliable electricity ser­vice, let alone wireless 
ser­vice.
In addition, Uzbekistan suffers from major bottlenecks in accessing the internet 
outside its borders. It is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world 
(that is, it is entirely surrounded by countries that are themselves landlocked). This 
geographic isolation from the spider web of suboceanic fiber-­optic lines, in con-
junction with the generally mountainous terrain, has contributed to the paucity of 
connections to the outside world. Micro­wave transmission systems connect the Uz-
bek network to other central Asian states, including Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. 
However, international network traffic relies on Uzbekistan’s connection to the 
Trans-­Asia-­Europe Line, which was completed in 1998 and has maximum band-
width that is dwarfed by modern standards. That traffic routes through a single in-
ternet exchange in Moscow. In total, Uzbekistan has only 7.8 Gbps of international 
bandwidth available, which is roughly equivalent to that of a large apartment com-
plex in the developed world (Ruddy 2014).

UZBEKISTAN
335
The government announced plans in 2013 to borrow $108 million in order to 
expand the country’s network infrastructure and greatly increase the available in-
ternational bandwidth to some 100 Gbps, but ­little pro­gress has been evident 
(Ruddy 2014). The network inside Uzbekistan has been given much higher devel-
opment priority, with investment from Rus­sian, Japa­nese, and South Korean tele-
communications companies, which has led to a major expansion in the connectivity 
of universities and government facilities (Ruddy 2014). ­These form the backbone 
of the Uzbek domestic intranet (called ZiyoNET), which by law requires all inter-
net connections to route through ZiyoNET rather than connecting directly to the 
international internet (Freedom House 2015). This makes censorship and control 
of the internet a much easier technical task for the government than it is for many 
countries.
While technically several dozen private internet ser­vice providers (ISPs) operate 
in Uzbekistan, in real­ity the state-­controlled Uztelecom has a virtual mono­poly. It 
has state-­granted exclusivity over all international gateways. Although in 2003, the 
regime announced its intent to privatize Uztelecom, that pro­cess has not yet mate-
rialized (Ruddy 2014).
Government censorship is widespread, with a large number of international sites 
blocked entirely by Uztelecom. ­These sites include Amnesty International, Free-
dom House, ­Human Rights Watch, Radio ­Free Eu­rope, the BBC, and Voice of Amer­
i­ca. In addition, ­there is systematic blocking of the websites of any international 
groups of Uzbek expatriates living abroad that focus on ­human rights or po­liti­cal 
opposition (Freedom House 2015).
Domestically, censorship is even more heavy-­handed, with strict laws regulating 
what individuals can post online. The government passed its most recent antiblog-
ger law in September 2014, in advance of elections held in December and March, 
as part of its general strategy of rigging ­those elections. In a pattern of repressing 
any dissidence, ­whether in traditional media or on the internet, arrests of bloggers 
has become a common occurrence (CPJ 2015). The new law requires ordinary Uz-
beks to remove “untrue posts” if requested to do so by the government and uses 
intentionally vague verbiage such that the government has carte blanche to censor 
and arrest at ­will (Kendzior 2015). This has resulted in high levels of self-­censorship 
in Uzbekistan as ­people aim to steer clear of any dangerous topics.
Interestingly, Uzbekistan has not yet blocked access to most Western social me-
dia, including Twitter and Facebook, although it has done so with the Russian-­
controlled Live Journal blogging platform. Twitter popularity in the country spiked 
in 2013 when Gulnara Karimova (1972–), the eldest ­daughter of President Islam 
Karimov (1938–2016), used it to post details about the presidential ­family and cor-
ruption in the security ser­vices (Freedom House 2015). Google is the most visited 
site from within Uzbekistan, followed by Mail.ru (a Russian-­based email and por-
tal), Facebook, and YouTube (Alexa 2015). The Rus­sian social networking sites of 
Odnoklassniki and Vkontakte are also among the most visited sites in Uzbekistan. 
However, Uzbekistan has begun introducing domestically created alternatives to 
many of ­these websites, such as the YouTube clone Utube.uz and a Twitter clone 
called Bamboo. ­These developments may hint at long-­term plans to introduce 

UZBEKISTAN
336
alternatives that can be domestically controlled before blocking the foreign ser­
vices altogether (Freedom House 2015).
In 2014, opposition groups launched a new Facebook page called Qorqmaymiz, 
which means “We are not afraid” in Uzbek. The group had accumulated some 
12,000 members by the summer of 2015, which is an impressive number by Uz-
bek standards given the dangerous levels of repression and the low engagement of 
the population in general with social media. The site contains discussion and criti-
cism of the government and encourages users to post pictures of themselves with 
signs saying “Qorqmayman,” meaning “I am not afraid,” which is itself a prosecut-
able offense (Kendzior 2015). The fact remains, however, that Uzbekistan’s regime 
could easily block access to Facebook but it has not, which suggests that the re-
gime values being able to monitor the activities of dissident groups like Qorqmay-
miz more than it feels any threat from their existence.
The story of the internet in Uzbekistan is one of censorship and violent repres-
sion, mirroring the nonelectronic experience of the country. Its infrastructure is 
wholly inadequate compared to modern network standards. Even what does exist 
is largely unaffordable to the bulk of its population, especially ­those living outside 
urban centers. While signs of infrastructural pro­gress have advanced over the last 
few years, the possibility of modern and universal access to the internet remains at 
best years in the ­future. Despite the encouraging emergence of grass-­roots move-
ments like Qorqmaymiz, ­these initiatives remain small, rare, and vulnerable to 
blocking by the government.
Steven Lloyd Wilson
See also: Af­ghan­i­stan; Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Rus­sia
Further Reading
Alexa. 2016. “Top Sites in Uzbekistan.” Accessed March 25, 2016. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­UZ
Committee to Protect Journalists. 2015. “Attacks on the Press.” Accessed March 25, 2016. 
https://­www​.­cpj​.­org​/­2015​/­04​/­attacks​-­on​-­the​-­press​.­php
Freedom House. 2015. “Freedom on the Net 2015: Uzbekistan Country Report.” Accessed 
March 25, 2016. https://­freedomhouse​.­org​/­report​/­freedom​-­net​/­2015​/­uzbekistan
International Telecommunications Union (ITU). 2015. “World Telecommunications Indi-
cators Database.” Accessed March 25, 2016. http://­www​.­itu​.­int​/­en​/­ITU​-­D​/­Statistics​
/­Pages​/­stat​/­default​.­aspx
Kendzior, Sarah. 2015. “ ‘We Are Not Afraid’: Inside an Uzbek Internet rebellion.” Foreign 
Policy, July 14. Accessed March 25, 2016. http://­foreignpolicy​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­14​/­we​-­are​
-­not​-­afraid​-­uzbekistan​-­qorqmaymiz​/­
Ruddy, Michael, and Ozdemir, Esra. 2014. “Broadband Infrastructure in North and Central 
Asia,” United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. http://­
www​.­unescap​.­org​/­sites​/­default​/­files​/­Broadband%20Infrastructure%20in%20North%20
and%20Central%20Asia%20FINAL%20​_­English​.­pdf
Silk Proj­ect. 2012. “The Condition of the Internet in Uzbekistan.” Accessed March 25, 2016. 
http://­www​.­silkproject​.­org​/­internetinuzbekistan​.­htm

VENEZUELA
Venezuela lies in northern South Amer­i­ca. Colombia borders the country to the 
west, with Guyana to the east and Brazil to the south. In terms of social media, 
Venezuela’s involvement is on the rise. Estimates place the social media–­using pop-
ulation at around 10 million, which is about a third of the 31 million ­people resid-
ing in the country. Regionally, Venezuela comprises about 6 ­percent of Latin Amer­i­ca’s 
online population. The largest population segment online is men, primarily ­those 
aged twenty-­five years old and younger; this national statistic mirrors that of Face-
book’s Venezuelan demographic, where the largest population is men aged eigh­
teen to twenty-­four years old. With ­these age groups and other demographics, 
Venezuela’s social media has come to play a growing role in national politics and 
domestic economic prob­lems.
Venezuela’s social media users primarily congregate on Facebook. Fewer are pres­
ent on Twitter, though ­those who use Twitter tend to use the ser­vice to exchange 
messages about politics more so than on any other platform. Approximately 
68 ­percent of the country’s social media population who use mobile phones for ac-
cess have Facebook accounts, in contrast to the 30 ­percent who are on Twitter. 
Other platforms attracted less than 1 ­percent of the population, though ­there ­were 
Venezuelans on Pinterest, Google+, YouTube, Tumblr, and StumbleUpon (StatsMon-
key 2015b). The numbers are slightly dif­fer­ent for desktop users, though the same 
trends are apparent. Desktop users overwhelmingly access Facebook, at 85 ­percent, 
while 13 ­percent use Twitter and 1 ­percent or less use Pinterest, Tumblr, Reddit, 
Google+, StumbleUpon, YouTube, LinkedIn, and Rus­sia’s vKontakte (StatsMonkey 
2015a). Tuenti, a platform that originated in Spain and then expanded to the Latin 
American market, arrived in Venezuela in 2013. Venezuelan users have also ap-
peared on Taringa!, Ask.fm, Scribd, and Badoo.
Venezuelans use a variety of apps, typically ­those that facilitate ease of using so-
cial media or permit gaming. On Google Play, the top ­free apps are WhatsApp 
Messenger, BBM, Facebook Messenger, Hola Laucher, and Instagram. The top paid 
apps are Minecraft: Pocket Edition, Mono­poly, Quizduell Premium, Xperia Donald 
Duck, and Geometry Dash. For iOS systems, the top ­free apps are WhatsApp Mes-
senger, Movistar, Instagram, ­Free ­Music Mp3 Player, and Facebook Messenger. 
Popu­lar paid apps included 1Passe Pro Password Man­ag­er, Quien Quiere Ser Mil­
lonario?, Where’s My ­Water?, Angry Birds, and Fruit Ninja (AppAnnie 2015). Face-
book has enabled Venezuelans to access its chat app more easily; for the United 
States, Canada, Peru, and Venezuela, it is no longer necessary to have a Facebook 
account to use the chat function.
V

VENEZUELA
338
The country’s most accessed websites differed slightly from the preferred list of 
apps. The top websites ­were Google​.­co​.­ve, Facebook, YouTube, Google, Merc-
adolibre, Live​.­com, Twitter, Lapatilla, Amazon, and Banesconline (Alexa 2015). 
From ­these sites, Venezuelans liked to search on Google; log in to Facebook, Twit-
ter, and YouTube; and shop on Mercadolibre and Amazon.
Venezuela has several unique social media platforms and apps. Poderopedia, for 
instance, is a “who’s who” of Latin Amer­i­ca. On the site, profiles are created on 
­people, companies, and ­others that influence the lives of everyday ­people, and links 
them together to show their relationships. The site is similar to Wikipedia, in that 
registered users can contribute and help build the profiles. It also emulates aspects 
of Klout, in that it tries to determine how influential ­these profiles are and how 
they are interrelated. Poderopedia is available in Venezuela, Chile, and Colombia 
(Poderopedia 2015). Another local app is Dilo Aquí, created by Transparencía Ven-
ezuela, which allows ­people to report incidents of corruption, ­whether witnessed 
or experienced, through their mobile phones. An additional social media tool of 
note is Octopusocial, a tool developed in Venezuela to assist with consolidating an 
identity or brand across social media platforms. The tool also incorporates Bit.ly, 
Klout, and ­Really ­Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds. Venezuelans have created social 
media tools that meet their social and cultural needs, and as ­those needs become 
clearer, entrepreneurs ­will produce apps with a specific Venezuelan flavor.
Social media in Venezuela often challenges the relationship between the govern-
ment and the ­people. The government wants to maintain control over social me-
dia, limiting the extent to which ­people can voice their thoughts openly online. 
Indeed, the government already has implemented censorship policies with other 
media and legally can arrest ­people who do not comply. At the same time, though, 
the ­people want to have an outlet where they can voice their concerns and discuss 
areas where the country needs to improve. ­These contradictory visions for social 
media create tensions that worsen when the government further restricts social me-
dia speech. At the same time, ­those who are brave speak out more when the gov-
ernment emphasizes the need for control and censorship. While Venezuelans do 
not have the right to ­free speech, they do want to preserve their ­human rights, which 
include exposing corruption and ­human rights abuses.
The Venezuelan government has always been skeptical of social networking plat-
forms and websites. To curb unwanted outside influences, the government blocks 
controversial websites and has even gone so far as to arrest ­people who post criti-
cisms of the government. Suspicions that users of Facebook and Twitter are spying 
on the country’s domestic activities are not new. In fact, the Venezuelan govern-
ment decried Cuba’s U.S.-­designed social media system, ZunZuneo, for being il-
legal and immoral. Venezuela pushed member states of the Bolivarian Alliance for 
the ­Peoples of Our Amer­i­ca to denounce the Cuban version of Twitter and pro-
moted the idea that the United States was using it to collect data about Cuban citi-
zens (BBC Monitoring 2014). The outcry intensified against U.S. access to Cuban 
digital media ­because Venezuela keeps all of its sensitive big data, including gov-
ernment databases and intelligence rec­ords, on servers located outside Havana 

VENEZUELA
339
(Forelle et al. 2015). In addition to concerns over potential foreign access, the fact 
that the platforms themselves sell data on their users and the content that they post 
have further worried the national government ­because it believes that ­these plat-
forms have compromised Venezuela’s privacy.
The government has worked to ­counter ­these websites and platforms by offer-
ing new, government-­sponsored social media tools. The new system, named “Red 
Patria” or “Homeland Network,” launched in May 2015. The system contained six 
tools intended to replace the popu­lar international platforms growing in prominence 
domestically. The tools include Nido (which means “nest” in Spanish), a Facebook-­
like platform; Colibrí (“hummingbird”) to replace WhatsApp, Condor to replace 
Tweetdeck; Cardenalita (“­little cardinal”) to replace Twitter; Golondrinas (“swal-
lows”) to function as national cloud storage; and Mochuelo (“small owl”). Mochuelo 
has two functions: one to allow citizens to report events as they unfold, and the 
other to work as a sort of crowd-­mapping or crowd-­sourcing application so that 
responders can visualize and assess reported incidents (Gobierno 2015).
While the government has developed alternatives to popu­lar international plat-
forms, it has also used the same platforms that it seeks to restrict to further its own 
goals. Venezuelan politicians, for example, have some of the most followed Twitter 
accounts in the world. Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro (1962–) actively uses 
Twitter to promote his po­liti­cal agenda. He retweets, and sometimes posts, mes-
sages that promote Venezuelan nationalism and attack U.S. policies. Hashtags that 
he has used include #VivaVenezuela, #ObamaYankeeGoHome, and #ObamaAppeal-
TheExecutiveOrder. At the same time as some politicians utilize social media to 
propel their agendas, the Venezuelan attorney general announced that a bill was 
forthcoming in 2015 to regulate social media. Censorship laws already exist, and 
police have the authority to arrest social media users who speak out against the 
government, but the forthcoming law intends to impose additional restrictions on 
social media speech.
Twitter is another platform used to shape the ­people’s po­liti­cal opinions. In a 2015 
study examining sampled Twitter accounts from Venezuelan politicians, po­liti­cal 
opposition members, and regular citizens, the researchers found conclusive evi-
dence that Venezuelans from all categories used bots to increase their social media 
clout and reach. The content from Venezuelan politicians was retweeted, though bots 
accounted for only 10 ­percent of the politicians’ retweeted messages (Forelle et al. 
2015). That 10 ­percent, while relatively small, did account for some increased 
nationalistic po­liti­cal sentiment and for the spreading of information regarding po­
liti­cal events. Although bots ­were not pervasive across the country’s social media, 
the small number of bots could be significant with the country’s low levels of Twit-
ter penetration.
The other side to the challenges of media repression and access to social media is 
that the ­people want to have a voice, and they try to exercise that voice over social 
media. The Venezuelan economy, despite having the largest oil reserves in the 
world, has not been kind to the ­people. They suffer from the energy crisis that has 
wrecked Venezuela since 2013 and has created shortages of food and medicine. To 

VENEZUELA
340
connect the ­people with the places that have the resources they seek, some ­people 
are turning to social media. When a pharmacy is found to have supplies in stock, 
customers go to Twitter to spread the word. When ­people lack food, they also use 
Twitter to indicate where the need exists. In this way, Twitter connects ­people who 
have resources with ­those who do not. ­There are also sites for bartering items that 
are in surplus for ­those that are scarce. ­There are two apps where ­people turn to get 
supplies to meet their needs. Akiztá contains information about the availability of 
medical supplies, while Abastéceme advertises where to find staple foods.
While the ­people strive to make ends meet, Venezuela’s opposition uses social 
media to promote po­liti­cal change. Videos and messages showing vio­lence against 
the opposition in 2014 have spread on Facebook and Twitter. The hashtag #SOS-
Venezuela, created internally, implored the world to intervene and stop the oppres-
sion. However, while the vio­lence was real, many of the images and videos used in 
the campaign ­were faked. The Venezuelan and international media exacerbated 
the issue by using the fake pictures in news coverage without checking them for 
Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro (1962–) speaks before the Non-­Aligned Movement’s open-
ing ceremony in September 2016. Maduro uses social media, especially Twitter, to promote his 
anti-­United States policies and Venezuelan nationalism. His messages and anti-­U.S. hashtags 
have gained a large audience, making him one of the most followed ­people in the world. (Ognjen 
Stevanovic​/­Dreamstime​.­com)

VENEZUELA
341
reliability and authenticity. The discovery of fake material weakened the online 
campaigns to curb the vio­lence. In addition, it provided the government with re-
newed justifications to censor social media. Although the fake pictures damaged 
the opposition’s position, the group continues organ­izing protests nonetheless. It 
utilizes hashtags to announce participation or advertise for additional support as it 
stages protests. For example, the February 2015 protests used #12F, #YoSalgoEl12F 
(“I go on 12 F”), and #YoSalgoPor (“I go on behalf of”).
One issue unites the masses and Venezuelan politicians on social media: foreign 
interference. While Venezuelans use social media to speak out against some 
government-­crafted economic and po­liti­cal policies, they are also wary of foreigners 
meddling in their affairs. Venezuelans have accused some news outlets via Twitter (in 
par­tic­u­lar, the U.S. network CNN) of purposefully trying to destabilize the nation. To 
bring CNN’s flawed reports to light, social media users created the hashtags #CNNmi-
ente (“CNN lies”) and #CNNVzSeLaRespeta (“CNN must re­spect Venezuela”). ­These 
hashtags united the ­people’s voices as they criticized CNN and other news organ­
izations for spreading falsified, unverified information about the country’s state of 
affairs. In August 2015, CNN reported widespread looting in the city of Maracay. 
According to subsequent news, ­there was actually no looting in the area. CNN admit-
ted that the report was incorrect and apologized to the Venezuelan ­people for the 
error that led to inaccurate reporting. President Maduro and Tareck El Aissami 
(1974–), governor of the state of Aragua (which contains Maracay), avidly rebuffed 
CNN (Telesurtv 2015). The ­people, also outraged that international media had con-
tributed to diminishing Venezuela’s reputation, turned to social media to redress the 
damage to Venezuela’s reputation and show that the reports did not reflect real­ity.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Argentina; Chile; Colombia; Cuba; Peru; Spain; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Venezuela.” Accessed September 12, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­VE
AppAnnie. 2015. “iOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 12, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­venezuela​/­​?­device​=­iphone
BBC Monitoring. 2014. “Venezuela Slams US-­Developed Cuban Social Media Network.” 
April 21. Accessed September 13, 2015. http://­search​.­proquest​.­com​.­ezproxy​.­library​.­wisc​
.­edu​/­docview​/­1517903269​?­accountid​=­465
Forelle, Michelle, Howard, Phil, Monroy-­Hernández, Andrés, and Savage, Saiph. 2015. “Po­
liti­cal Bots and the Manipulation of Public Opinion in Venezuela.” July 25. Accessed 
September 12, 2015. http://­arxiv​.­org​/­ftp​/­arxiv​/­papers​/­1507​/­1507​.­07109​.­pdf
Gobierno Bolivariano de Venezuela. 2015. “RedPatria” [Blog]. Accessed September 10, 2015. 
http://­redpatria​.­cenditel​.­gob​.­ve​/­
Poderopedia. 2015. “Poderopedia.” Accessed September 10, 2015. http://­www​.­poderopedia​
.­org​/­ve​/­
StatsMonkey. 2015a. “Desktop Facebook, Twitter, Social Network Usage Statistics in Ven-
ezuela.” Accessed September 10, 2015. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21733​
-­venezuela​-­desktop​-­social​-­network​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php

VIETNAM
342
StatsMonkey. 2015b. “Mobile Facebook, Twitter, Social Network Usage Statistics in Vene-
zuela.” Accessed September  10, 2015. https://­www​.­statsmonkey​.­com​/­table​/­21499​
-­venezuela​-­mobile​-­social​-­media​-­usage​-­statistics​-­2015​.­php
Telesurtv. 2015. “#CNNmiente es Tendencia Tras Campaña Criminal Contra Venezuel.” Au-
gust 8. Accessed September 13, 2015. http://­www​.­telesurtv​.­net​/­news​/­CNNmiente​-­es​
-­tendencia​-­tras​-­campana​-­criminal​-­contra​-­Venezuela​-­20150808​-­0002​.­html.
VIETNAM
Vietnam is a Southeast Asian country on the Indochina Peninsula with a popula-
tion of 93.5 million. It is bordered to the north by China, to the east by the South 
China Sea, and to the west by Laos and Cambodia. At the end of the Vietnam War 
in 1975, North and South Vietnam unified ­under a communist government. Im-
poverished and po­liti­cally isolated for many years afterward, Vietnam has since im-
proved its situation by developing global po­liti­cal relations and now also enjoys a 
thriving economy with a robust technology sector.
Even though two-­thirds of the population still lives in rural areas, by the end of 
2013, internet penetration had reached 39 ­percent, with over 36 million internet 
users. The average time spent online using a computer or a laptop was four hours 
and thirty-­seven minutes (We Are Social 2014). By 2015, 81 ­percent of internet 
users between the ages of sixteen and twenty-­four ­were ­going online ­every day. 
However, older age groups ­were less likely to use the internet as much, with only 
about two-­thirds of twenty-­five-­ to forty-­four-­year-­olds and about half of forty-­five 
and older connecting ­every day (Statista 2015). When ­these users ­were online, 
they ­were most likely to visit Cốc Cốc, Google, Facebook, YouTube, Google​.­com.
vn, Webretho, Vnexpress, Zing, 24h​.­com​.­vn, and Doisongphapluat (Alexa 2015). 
Examining this data makes it very clear that while Facebook may be the most 
popu­lar social networking platform, Viet­nam­ese internet users value their regional 
websites.
As of 2013, ­there ­were 134,066,000 active mobile subscriptions in the country. 
This statistic suggests that mobile phone users had multiple subscriptions. A total 
of 89 ­percent of mobile phone subscribers had prepaid accounts. While the aver-
age user spent four hours and thirty-­seven minutes accessing the internet from a 
desktop or laptop, cell phone ­owners ­were spending only one hour and forty-­three 
minutes a day accessing the internet with their mobile devices. It is not surprising, 
then that smartphone penetration was only 20 ­percent. Overwhelmingly, ­those who 
had smartphones ­were using them to look up local information or research a prod-
uct. At the end of 2013, 60 ­percent of smartphone users reported having made a 
purchase with their phone (We Are Social 2014). In 2015, ­there was so much com-
petition to provide users with smartphones that data was ­really cheap; the best data 
plans offered one gigabyte for just $3 (Hookway 2015). The apps that smartphone 
and tablet users downloaded most often demonstrate their preference for locally 
developed platforms. The top five most downloaded ­free apps for the iPhone in 2015 
­were Zalo (a chat app), Zing MP3 (a ­music app), Facebook Messenger, Facebook, and 
Than Bài Online (a gaming app). The top five most downloaded ­free apps for the 

VIETNAM
343
Android ­were similar: Facebook, Zalo, Facebook Messenger, Zing, and WiFi Mast 
Key (AppAnnie 2015).
The average time that internet users spent on social media each day was two 
hours and twenty-­three minutes at the end of 2013. At that time, Facebook, the 
most popu­lar social networking website, had a penetration rate of 22 ­percent, with 
over 20 million active users (We Are Social 2014). By 2015, the number was closer 
to 30 million and was rivaled only by Zalo, a messaging app that is used primarily 
in Vietnam. Other social media websites that ­were popu­lar in Vietnam included 
Google+ and Twitter.
In the past, Vietnam has practiced censorship with ­those websites that it deems 
critical of the government, which has included some international ­human rights 
organ­izations and, at times, has briefly blocked Facebook in an attempt to control 
social media messages critical of the government. A few years ago, in an attempt to 
divert ­people’s attention from the unrestricted atmosphere that existed on Facebook, 
the government introduced Go.vn. This was supposed to be the Viet­nam­ese ver-
sion of Facebook; however, the requirements for registering proved to be too restric-
tive. Users had to provide their real names and their government-­issued identification 
number. Preference for Facebook rapidly overtook the Viet­nam­ese version. How-
ever, the government has softened its stance on Facebook; in January 2015, Prime 
Minister Nguyen Tan Dung (1949–) publically mentioned how Facebook can ben-
efit small business ­owners. Since that announcement, even some cabinet members 
have become Facebook members (Hookway 2015). The Viet­nam­ese government 
Well-­known dissident and blogger, Le Quoc Quan (1971–), works in his office in Hanoi, Viet-
nam, on September 28, 2012. Historically, Vietnam has practiced censorship of content that was 
deemed critical of the government and included arrests, intimidation, and prison sentences for 
bloggers like Quan. However, Vietnam’s government does not possess the resources neces-
sary to control the flow of internet traffic and, in recent years, has become more supportive 
of social media, even encouraging its use in ways that benefit economic growth. (AP Photo/
Na Son Nguyen)

VIETNAM
344
does not have the resources to control the flow of internet traffic in the same way as 
other countries that practice censorship, like China. Of late, the government has 
been changing its opinion on social media and has been encouraging its use ­because 
of the potential benefits it has for economic growth (Economist 2015).
This change of opinion regarding social media has allowed Viet­nam­ese users to 
do more than just chat or catch up with friends; in 2015, they used social media 
sites to protest the removal of very old trees that decorated Vietnam’s capital, Hanoi. 
In March, at least 500 of ­these trees ­were removed as part of the first stage of a city 
proj­ect to replace the trees with younger va­ri­e­ties. Online speculation suggested 
that ­those trees ­were ­going to be sold off for timber. The proj­ect was begun with-
out consulting the public, who turned to Facebook to express their dis­plea­sure. A 
campaign to stop the felling began, and within twenty-­four hours, it had garnered 
20,000 supporters. Hanoi’s city leaders halted the proj­ect and ­later called for an 
investigation into it (Economist 2015).
Vietnam has a booming internet start-up scene, with many companies hoping 
to compete with the likes of Google and Facebook. While many of ­these endeavors 
inevitably lead to failure, some of them have become incredibly successful and are 
proving to be fierce competition for their Western counter­parts. This success is 
reflected in the patterns of Viet­nam­ese social media users. An example of one of 
­these successful stories is Cốc Cốc, a Russian-­Vietnamese endeavor that launched 
at the end of 2012 in direct competition with Google. Its name means “knock 
knock” in Viet­nam­ese, and its creators believed that the search engine stood a 
competitive chance against Google for language reasons. While Google is very 
popu­lar in Vietnam, it does not have a local office, which puts it at a disadvantage. 
Cốc Cốc, on the other hand, has on-­site employees who understand the local lan-
guage and culture. They also have the benefit of local knowledge, which can be 
used to make their search results more relevant to users. ­These advantages have paid 
off; ­toward the end of 2015,Cốc Cốc ranked as the most visited website in the 
country (Alexa 2015). Some Viet­nam­ese voice concerns over ­whether Cốc Cốc 
would censor search results on behalf of the government if requested; however, this 
fear does not seem to have affected the website’s popularity (AP 2013).
Zalo is a relatively new app introduced to the market in 2012. It is a chat app 
that competes with other popu­lar messaging apps in the region, such as Line, We-
Chat, Viber, and WhatsApp. ­After the app launched, it took off a ­little slowly but 
quickly gained momentum. By January 2013, it had fewer than 1 million users; 
however, by the end of that year, it was already the second most ­popular chat app 
in the country, with 7 million users. By May 2015, Zalo had 30 million registered 
users, and 400 million messages ­were being exchanged ­every day. At that time, the 
app was the most downloaded messaging app for both iPhone and Android users. 
As of late 2015, Zalo was the only Southeast Asia–­based chat app to gain such popu-
larity in its home market (Do 2015).
Another successful start-up, Webtretho, ranked as the sixth most popular web-
site in Vietnam ­toward the end of 2015. A forum with a bulletin board format, it is 
the largest online community of ­women in Vietnam. The name means “youthful 
web” in Viet­nam­ese and it had more than 1 million users at the end of 2013. The 

VIETNAM
345
success of the website has led to the launch of several other websites that have an 
e-­commerce focus and target specific products: LamDieu is a cosmetics website, 
Beyeu sells baby products, and Foreva focuses on fashion and intimates (Do 2013b). 
An in­ter­est­ing note regarding Webtretho is that one of the most sought-­after topics 
on the forum is adultery (Do 2013a).
While the tech industry and internet users in Vietnam may be growing quickly, 
the country’s infrastructure for providing internet ser­vices has had prob­lems during 
2015 due to several breakdowns. While the country is working on improving this 
system, Vietnam’s only way to access the internet at the moment is through the Asia 
Amer­i­ca Gateway, a cable built in 2009 to connect Southeast Asia with the United 
States. It is a 20,000-­kilometer-­long cable that is submerged in the ocean. This ca-
ble system provides Viet­nam­ese internet users with average speeds ranging from 
160 Kbps to 3.2 Mbps, which makes it the slowest internet in the Southeast Asia 
and Oceania region (Thanh Nien News 2015; Vietnam Briefing 2015). However, 
the rapidly growing number of internet users taxes this single entry point. In addi-
tion, 2015 saw three instances of breakdowns in the cables. While ­these break-
downs ­were being repaired, the ­whole country experienced an enormous slowdown 
of internet ser­vice (Vietnam Briefing 2015). An in­ter­est­ing note is that some of 
­these breakages have been due to sharks mistaking the cables for food and biting 
them (Hooton 2015).
Marilyn J. Andrews
See also: China; Malaysia; Philippines; Thailand; United States
Further Reading
Alexa. 2015. “Top Sites in Vietnam.” Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­VN
AppAnnie. 2015. “IOS Top App Charts.” Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­ios​/­top​/­vietnam​/­​?­device​=­iphone
Associated Press (AP). 2013. “Knock Knock, ­We’re Coming to Get You, Google! Vietnam 
Start-up Challenges Global Search ­Giant ­Because It ­Doesn’t Get Nuances of Local Lan-
guage.” May 15, 2013. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­dailymail​.­co​.­uk​/­news​
/­article​-­2324775​/­Coc​-­Coc​-­Vietnam​-­start​-­challenges​-­Google​-­doesnt​-­nuances​-­local​
-­language​.­html
Do, Anh-­Minh. 2013a. “10 Startups in Vietnam That Have Reached over 1 Million Users.” 
November 29. Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​/­million​-­user​
-­startups​-­vietnam​/­
Do, Anh-­Minh. 2013b. “Proj­ect Lana Sheds Jobs, Refocuses on Beyeu and Webtretho.” 
December 16. Accessed September  29, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​/­project​
-­lana​-­a​-­new​-­beginning​/­
Do, Anh-­Minh. 2015. “Vietnam’s Chat App Zalo Challenges Facebook with 30 Million Reg-
istered Users.” May 20. Accessed September 29, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​
/­zalo​-­30​-­million​-­registered​-­users​-­vietnam​/­
Hookway, James. 2015. “Five ­Things About the Internet in Vietnam.” June 12. Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­blogs​.­wsj​.­com​/­briefly​/­2015​/­06​/­12​/­5​-­five​-­things​-­about​-­the​
-­internet​-­in​-­vietnam​/­

VIETNAM
346
Hooton, Christopher. 2015. “Sharks Are Eating the Internet in Vietnam.” January 2015. 
Accessed September  29, 2015. http://­www​.­independent​.­co​.­uk​/­life​-­style​/­gadgets​-­and​
-­tech​/­news​/­sharks​-­are​-­eating​-­the​-­internet​-­in​-­vietnam​-­9962747​.­html
Statista. 2015. “Daily Internet Usage Rate in Vietnam in 2014, By Age Group.” Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­348252​/­daily​-­internet​-­usage​-­age​
-­group​-­vietnam​/­
Thanh Nien News. 2015. “Vietnam’s Mobile Internet Speed Ranks Lowest in Southeast Asia: 
Report.” September 3. Accessed September 30, 2015. http://­www​.­thanhniennews​.­com​
/­tech​/­vietnams​-­mobile​-­internet​-­speed​-­ranks​-­lowest​-­in​-­southeast​-­asia​-­report​-­50938​
.­html
The Economist. 2015. “If a Tree Falls . . . ​Online, ­Will the Communist Party Hear Anything?” 
April 18. Accessed September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­economist​.­com​/­news​/­asia​/­21648​
706​-­online​-­will​-­communist​-­party​-­hear​-­anything​-­if​-­tree​-­falls
Vietnam Briefing. 2015. “Vietnam’s Internet Infrastructure Improving.” July 1. Accessed 
September 29, 2015. http://­www​.­vietnam​-­briefing​.­com​/­news​/­vietnam​-­internet​-­infrastruc​
ture​.­html​/­
We Are Social. 2014. “2014 Asia-­Pacific Digital Overview.” January 23. Accessed September 
29, 2015. http://­wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2014​/­01​/­social​-­digital​-­mobile​-­apac​-­2014​/­

YEMEN
Yemen, located on the southernmost coast of the Arabian Peninsula, has the lowest 
internet penetration in the ­Middle East. As of January 2015, the country had ap-
proximately 5 million internet users out of a population of over 25 million. Ap-
proximately 1.5 million had registered on Facebook and 128,000 on Twitter (BBC 
2015). In a late 2014 telephone survey of social media users, Yemenis’ preferred 
social media platforms ­were Facebook, WhatsApp, YouTube, Google+, and Insta-
gram. Less than 1 ­percent of the ­people surveyed indicated that they used Linke-
dIn, making it one of the country’s least popular platforms; despite the lack in 
popularity, however, Yemenis are the second most active ­Middle Eastern users on 
the site, right ­behind Lebanon (TNS 2015). Yemenis have social presences in smaller 
numbers on other platforms; the platforms that they frequent depend on the is-
sues being discussed and the community that has formed ­there. ­There is no evi-
dence that Yemenis have produced apps aimed solely at their domestic market; 
instead, they prefer to communicate through established platforms.
Yemen’s low percentages of social media users correlate with high levels of pov-
erty and lack of telecommunications infrastructure in the country, which are in part a 
result of internal conflict. Since 2001, Yemen’s government has dealt with a number 
of groups and issues that threaten stability. For example, ­after the terrorist attacks of 
September 2001 shook the world, the Yemeni government cracked down on Mus-
lim clerics promoting radical ideologies, particularly ­those attached to Al Qaeda. 
The government also was contending with a Houthi-­backed, or Zaydi Shia Muslim–­
backed, insurgency in the north; that group, though it faced setbacks for over a 
de­cade, seized the capital in September 2014. ­After forcing President Abdrabbuh 
Mansour Hadi (1945–) to flee, the Houthis have slowly expanded their territorial 
control. Yemen’s precarious po­liti­cal situation, along with severe resource shortages 
(with the lack of access to ­water being the most extreme), contributes to the non­
ex­is­tent state-­sponsored efforts to improve the telecommunications infrastructure. 
Thus, Yemen’s social media user base is not expected to increase dramatically and 
likely ­will increase only if private companies develop the requisite infrastructure.
However, despite the difficulties inherent in Yemenis getting online, data on us-
ers who can access the internet showed that they sought to improve their devices’ 
per­for­mance and security through downloads. For users preferring to browse, the 
highest level of interest was in reading the news and looking at social media. For 
example, Yemenis’ top ten ­free apps downloaded through GooglePlay ­were the 
WhatsApp Messenger, LEO Privacy Guard, SOMA Messenger, Opera Mini web 
browser, Facebook, DU Speed Booster, 360 Security, Clean Master (Boost and 
Y

YEMEN
348
AppLock), and the UC Browser. The top paid app was Minecraft: Pocket Edition 
(AppAnnie 2015). The top ten websites accessed in Yemen ­were Google, Facebook, 
YouTube, Twitter, Blogspot, Muhitelyemen, Yahoo, Sabanews, Yemen​.­net​.­ye, and 
Kooora (Alexa 2015).
Yemen first gained a presence on the ­Middle East’s social media scene during the 
Arab Spring uprisings throughout the region. In December 2010, Tunisia’s Mohamed 
Bouazizi (1984–2011) immolated himself in protest ­after Tunisian government of-
ficials confiscated his street vendor wares and subjected him to harassment and 
humiliation. His plight, and subsequent suicide, prompted ­people across the Arab 
world to protest repressive governments. The activity in Tunisia inspired many Ye-
menis to protest in solidarity. Although Yemen’s domestic efforts differed from ­those 
in Tunisia, citizens in both countries wanted to stop government oppression. Ye-
men’s protests initially revolved around poor economic conditions, corruption, and 
high unemployment rates. ­Later, as the peaceful protests incurred violent responses 
from the government and security forces, Yemenis demonstrated for their rights and 
against institutions that inflicted vio­lence on the ­people. By November 2011, Pres-
ident Ali Abdullah Saleh (1942–) stepped down, to be succeeded by Hadi. Popu­lar 
protests, with social media playing a small role, contributed to the ­people’s victory.
Social media played a small but impor­tant role in Yemen’s Arab Spring. During 
the protests, the Yemenis ­were the first Arab group to rely on hashtags as part of the 
wider protest movement. The hashtag #Yemen became one of the impor­tant chan-
nels of communication, allowing protestors to publicize events and solicit mass par-
ticipation. In February 2011, Yemenis arranged the first major protest against the 
Saleh regime. #Feb3, a date predating the protests that led to the overthrow of Egyp-
tian president Hosni Mubarak, informed the Yemeni ­people about the plans at-
tached to the protests. Subsequent protests often had hashtags reflecting the date of 
the protest, particularly when organizers wanted to ensure high numbers of partici-
pants. Protests occurred continually, and only major events received dated hashtags.
The phenomenon of Yemenis utilizing hashtags is significant ­because they devel-
oped campaigns that attracted popu­lar attention despite having a negligible percent-
age of ­people with access to the internet. In 2011, 2 ­percent or less of the population 
had access. What this meant was that, while creative and resourceful, social media 
did not account for the level of popu­lar support. While it helped publicize events, 
other communications channels must have spread the messages appearing on so-
cial media platforms. Specifically, several more traditional techniques ­were used to 
communicate about the protests, including painting signs and distributing printed 
materials. One creative outlet was the baking of words such as irhal, the Arabic 
word for “go,” into loaves of bread to signal that protesting was imminent.
Yemen’s most popu­lar social media user is Tawakkol Karman (1979–), a jour-
nalist, politician, and ­women’s rights activist. On Twitter, Karman has more than 
double the amount of followers as the Mareb Press, a Yemeni media outlet that held 
the account with the second highest number of subscribers in 2015. On Facebook, 
she had almost 3 million followers, with the second most popular account be-
longing to Dr. Hassan Al Amri (1970–), a Saudi Arabian native with 1.7 million 
followers (Socialbakers Statistics, 2015). She also has her own website to share news 
and speeches in both Arabic and En­glish at www​.­tawakkolkarman​.­net.

YEMEN
349
In 2011, Karman was the first Arab ­woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. 
Her work focused on fighting vio­lence ­toward ­women and the promotion of ­women’s 
rights more generally in the wake of Yemeni’s po­liti­cal turmoil and instability. In 
2005, she founded ­Women Journalists Without Chains, an organ­ization focused 
on documenting and reporting cases of ­human rights abuses against journalists. 
By 2007, Karman or­ga­nized weekly protests in Sana’a, Yemen’s capital, to promote 
government reform and advocate for more ­human rights protections. Once the Arab 
Spring started in 2011, Karman effectively rolled her protests into the activities of 
the Arab Spring protestors who ­were calling for po­liti­cal reform and the ousting of 
Yemen’s in­effec­tive leadership. With her name attached to ­these protests, Karman 
met with United Nations (UN) representatives to support a UN resolution against 
Saleh and the vio­lence that his regime was inflicting against the protestors.
Karman’s activism has not always been without cost, as she has been jailed mul-
tiple times for speaking out against the regime and for supporting ­women’s rights. 
Despite the challenges levied against her, she continues to advocate for nonviolent 
re­sis­tance and ­human rights in Yemen through speeches that reach a wider audi-
ence and through social media outlets. ­Because of her prominence on social me-
dia and her activism, Karman continues to be one of the most power­ful ­women in 
Yemen ­today.
In addition to individual efforts such as Karman’s, Yemen boasts a grass-­roots 
in­de­pen­dent media collective called Support Yemen. The group’s goals are to use 
media, especially video, to highlight and publicize the strug­gles occurring within 
Yemen. Using videos and social media, especially on YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, 
and the official website at supportyemen​.­org, the group allows volunteers across 
the country to document life in Yemen and immediately share their productions 
worldwide. One of Support Yemen’s most popu­lar videos, entitled “Happy Yemen,” 
featured Yemeni youth lip-­syncing to Pharrell William’s song “Happy.” The official 
version earned almost a million views through mid-2015 and seemed to be conta-
gious, as more Yemenis in dif­fer­ent cities created and uploaded similar content. The 
purpose of the videos was to show that Yemenis, despite sometimes-­dire circum-
stances and ­great adversity, remained optimistic about their ­future. The “Happy Ye-
men” official video appeared on the group’s website alongside other videos, many 
of which take a more serious approach to publicizing Yemen’s internal conditions.
Support Yemen’s most impor­tant internet dissemination strategy relied, and con-
tinues to rely, on the use of a primary hashtag. #SupportYemen, and the shortened 
version #SY, spread news and content, such as the aforementioned videos, as an 
alternative to mainstream news. Yemen’s news often focuses on major po­liti­cal events 
and does not cover the attitudes and actions of local ­people, nor does it always ex-
pose the social and economic realities in the country. The hashtags allow ­people to 
follow ­these issues in one place, as well as across social media platforms. In order 
to reach beyond Yemen’s population, Support Yemen and its hashtags can be found 
on additional platforms, including Vimeo, LinkedIn, and ScoopNest, and are fur-
ther shared by international blogs that promote peace.
Laura M. Steckman
See also: Egypt; Iran; Saudi Arabia; Tunisia; United Arab Emirates

YEMEN
350
Further Reading
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Top Sites in Yemen.” Accessed August 11, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​.­com​
/­topsites​/­countries​/­YE
AppAnnie. 2015. “Google Play Top App Charts.” Accessed August 11, 2015. https://­www​
.­appannie​.­com​/­apps​/­google​-­play​/­top​/­yemen​/­
BBC News. 2015. “Yemen—­Media Profile.” January 23. Accessed August 1, 2015. http://­
www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­middle​-­east​-­14704901
Lynch, Mark. 2012. The Arab Uprising: The Unfinished Revolutions of the New ­Middle East. 
New York: PublicAffairs.
Socialbakers Statistics. 2015. “Yemen Facebook Page Statistics.” Accessed August 2, 2015. 
https://­www​.­socialbakers​.­com​/­statistics​/­facebook​/­pages​/­total​/­yemen​/­
Support Yemen. 2015. [Website]. Accessed August 14, 2015. http://­supportyemen​.­org
Tawakkol Karman. 2015. “Tawakkol Karman: 2011 Nobel Peace Prize Laureale [sic].” Ac-
cessed August 16, 2015. http://­www​.­tawakkolkarman​.­net
TNS. 2015. Arab Social Media Report. Accessed August 1, 2015. http://­www​.­wpp​.­com​
/­govtpractice​/­~​/­media​/­wppgov​/­files​/­arabsocialmediareport​-­2015​.­pdf

ZIMBABWE
Zimbabwe, a landlocked country located in southern Africa bordering South Af-
rica, Botswana, Zambia, and Mozambique, attained its in­de­pen­dence from British 
colonial rule in 1980. Half of the country’s 12 million ­people have internet access, 
according to the Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimba-
bwe (POTRAZ 2015), ­a remarkable feat given that the country was home to just 
50,000 internet users fifteen years ago. The ubiquity of mobile phones has been a 
welcome development among the nation’s citizens, the majority of whom access 
the internet through cell phones. Both urban and rural dwellers use social media 
religiously, with WhatsApp, Facebook, and increasingly YouTube the most com-
monly used platforms. Twitter is a favorite among the nation’s leading po­liti­cal fig-
ures, journalists, and po­liti­cal activists.
Zimbabwe’s social media use is not restricted to the elite (Mutsvairo 2016). Some 
domestic workers and ­cattle herders earning as ­little as $100 a month have been 
known to post pictures or publishing po­liti­cal commentary on WhatsApp or Face-
book. With En­glish as its official language in addition to the local Shona and Nde-
bele vernaculars, along with several other local languages, it is not surprising that 
much digital communication in the country is conducted in En­glish. On a compara-
tive basis, digital illiteracy, which is considered a hindrance to technological devel-
opment in some parts of Africa, is not as big a concern in Zimbabwe, which is 
believed to have the highest literacy rate in Africa (Makaripe 2015).
It is partly thanks to Zimbabweans fleeing the economic and po­liti­cal crisis, which 
began in 2000 when the country launched its agrarian reforms, that the country’s 
digital transformation is gaining ground. Take, for example, the country’s innovative 
mobile payment system, EcoCash, which is the brainchild of Zimbabwean telecom 
mogul Strive Masiyiwa (1961–), whose Econet Wireless Zimbabwe is the country’s 
largest provider of telecommunications ser­vices. With Zimbabwe’s economy vir-
tually on its knees, the country is dependent on millions of its citizens living 
abroad to inject remittances into the economy. Close to $1 billion is estimated to 
have been poured into the economy courtesy of diaspora remittances in 2015 
alone (Makaranyika 2015). Given the hardships facing the country, EcoCash, with 
over 4 million subscribers, has come in handy for needy Zimbabweans seeking fi-
nancial assistance from relatives abroad. But Masiyiwa’s road to recognition has 
been rocky. The government of President Robert Mugabe (1924–) was initially re-
luctant to give Masiyiwa a license ­until the Supreme Court made a timely interven-
tion in 1995, paving the way for the businessman to set up his business empire. To 
this day, Masiyiwa has just a handful of friends within the country’s po­liti­cal 
Z

ZIMBABWE
352
establishment ­because many perceive him to be the main face ­behind the Move-
ment for Demo­cratic Change, which since its formation in 1999 has provided 
formidable opposition to President Mugabe’s 36-­year rule. Masiyiwa has been ac-
cused of funding the opposition, much to the bemusement of officials from Mugabe’s 
ZANU PF party. Like other Zimbabwean businesspeople, he is active on social 
media, even though he avoids direct attacks against the country’s ruling elite.
In a country where dissenting voices have traditionally been silenced, the pres-
ence of social media is giving a new voice to activists opposed to Mugabe’s rule. Its 
growing influence has become a potent symbol of citizen empowerment and 
po­liti­cal participation among the nation’s citizens. It also is fast becoming an alter-
native source of news, which essentially is a huge paradigm shift given Zimbabweans’ 
reliance on state media, whose reporting is often biased against Mugabe’s opponents. It 
was almost unthinkable to accept, and impossible to foresee, that the Herald, a 
newpaper owned and regulated by the state that has previously demonstrated un-
wavering support for President Mugabe, now publishes public criticism of the gov-
ernment and its leader. The newspaper’s Facebook page also attracts both positive 
and negative comments about the 93-­year-­old leader. While it’s not clear ­whether 
Mugabe follows social media, many Zimbabweans ­will agree that social media, for 
the first time, has given them the ability to appeal directly to politicians, which may 
include Mugabe himself. Perhaps one piece of evidence that the president knows 
what is being said on social media is the fact that he has publicly threatened to use 
Chinese-­made technology to block social media in Zimbabwe, further underlining 
the perceived threat posed by digital activism to his 36-­year uninterrupted rule. 
Social media bans have already been imposed in a few African countries, including 
the Demo­cratic Republic of Congo and Uganda.
Even though Zimbabwe has a stand-­alone information and communications 
technology (ICT) ministry, it must be noted that the ruling party is very skeptical 
about technology. The infamous “Baba Jukwa” Facebook page, which gained noto-
riety for sharing state secrets on social media Wikileaks-­style, left ZANU PF officials 
bewildered ­going into the 2013 elections. In a social media first for Zimbabwe, the 
Facebook blogger published mobile phone numbers of government officials, en-
couraging their constituents to call them and demand good governance. More re-
cently, digitally based citizen movements, including the #ThisFlag campaign, which 
was initiated by a local clergyman, have also gathered momentum. The #ThisFlag 
movement calls upon Zimbabweans to use Facebook and other social media plat-
forms to vent their anger against misrule and to speak out against corruption while 
draping the Zimbabwean flag around their necks. The government has responded 
by accusing the Eu­ro­pean Union and the United States of financially supporting the 
campaign in a bid to destabilize the country.
Better still, the social media explosion has undoubtedly created a market for citi-
zen journalists in the country by providing indispensible platforms for technology-­
savvy journalists and activists to report eyewitness accounts and share stories with 
remarkable speed, further bypassing media restrictions. One must agree with the 
argument of Norwegian scholar Terje Skjerdal (2015) that the potential impact of 
citizen journalism and social media depends on its sociopo­liti­cal context within a 

ZIMBABWE
353
country or community. While Zimbabwe has a history of restricting media coverage, 
especially of its elections, a social media ban appears highly unlikely.
While the po­liti­cal use of social media is widespread in Zimbabwe, other ­people 
choose to stay out of politics for fear of reprisals. On a few occasions, ­people di-
rectly criticizing President Mugabe on social media have been arrested, even though 
it is fair to point out that the courts have freed them. Memes and po­liti­cal jokes 
easily find their way into the Zimbabwean blogosphere. It is the ­free Wi-­Fi zones 
offered by internet providers such as Zolspot (which offers thirty minutes of ­free 
internet surfing) that make it pos­si­ble for the majority of Zimbabwe’s urban dwell-
ers to gain internet access. You only need to pay the equivalent of 50 U.S. cents for 
just 8 MB of data. Masiyiwa’s Econet charges exorbitant $1, $2, and $6 for its daily, 
weekly, and monthly social bundles, respectively. In a struggling economy such as 
Zimbabwe’s, ­these prices are quite high.
Long-­suffering Zimbabweans see hope in social media. They believe that online 
movements are giving them a voice for the first time, even though so far, it appears 
as if no one is listening. Mugabe, who has been criticized on social media for his 
love for foreign travel, is not paying heed as he continues to globetrot across the 
world. But unlike fifteen or twenty years ago, precise details of his trips are easily 
shared on social media, thanks to flight-­tracking websites such as Flight Radar 24.
Zimbabweans in Harare gather around a cell phone to read about the famous Facebook blog-
ger, Baba Jukwa, in July 2013. In a country where dissident voices have historically been si-
lenced, social media users find hope in messages posted by critics of the country’s po­liti­cal 
climate. Baba Jukwa first gained notoriety when he posted state secrets just before the 2013 
elections. (AP Photo/Tsvangirayi Mukwzhi)

ZIMBABWE
354
The presence of online activism is certainly encouraging, even though ­there is a 
danger of efforts being superseded by “clicktivism,” as more and more activists turn 
to the internet in the hope of achieving po­liti­cal and social change. Social media sites 
are not just giving the activists a voice, as Mugabe’s supporters frequently chime in 
during online conversations. While the president’s opponents clearly feel empow-
ered, Mugabe also sees social media as a power­ful tool to galvanize support since 
anyone can use such platforms.
The true potential of social media ­will be realized only once the country’s econ-
omy starts to perform. With the current economic upheavals hogging the limelight, 
it is very much a luxury to be on social media. Being ­there is not every­one’s top 
priority, however, as hunger and starvation are tormenting rural Zimbabwe. In spite 
of ­these quagmires, though, social media has refreshingly transformed ­people’s lives 
in Zimbabwe, making it pos­si­ble for them to communicate and seek alternative 
sources of news easily. Several formal and informal businesses are now resorting to 
social media to market their products and ser­vices.
Bruce Mutsvairo
See also: Botswana; Mozambique; South Africa; United States
Further Reading
Gambanga, Nigel. 2015. “Looking for Wifi Locally, ­Here Are the Hotspots.” Accessed 
June  2, 2016. http://­www​.­techzim​.­co​.­zw​/­2015​/­06​/­looking​-­for​-­wifi​-­locally​-­here​-­are​
-­the​-­hotspots​/­#​.­V1XicecrLnU
Makaranyika, Memory. 2016. “Nearly Half of Foreign Inflows into Zimbabwe Are Remit-
tances.” Accessed June 3, 2016. http://­www​.­bdlive​.­co​.­za​/­africa​/­africanbusiness​/­2016​/­02​
/­04​/­nearly​-­half​-­of​-­foreign​-­inflows​-­into​-­zimbabwe​-­are​-­remittances
Makaripe, Tendai. 2015. “Zim Teachers Among Lowest Paid In the Region.” Accessed June 3, 
2016. http://­www​.­financialgazette​.­co​.­zw​/­zim​-­teachers​-­among​-­lowest​-­paid​-­in​-­the​-­region​/­
Mutsvairo, Bruce (Ed.). 2016. Digital Activism in the Social Media Era: Critical Reflections on 
Emerging Trends in Sub-­Saharan Africa. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
POTRAZ Quarterly Reports. 2005. Accessed May 25, 2016. http://­www​.­potraz​.­gov​.­zw​/­index​
.­php​/­categorylinks​/­120​-­quarterly​-­reports
Skjerdal, Terje. 2015. “Why the Arab Spring Never Came to Ethiopia.” In Perspectives on Par­
ticipatory Politics and Citizen Journalism in a Networked Africa: A Connected Continent ed-
ited by B. Mutsvairo. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

Bibliography
Aamoth, Doug. 2011. “A Brief History of Skype.” May 10. Accessed September 26, 2015 
http://­techland​.­time​.­com​/­2011​/­05​/­10​/­a​-­brief​-­history​-­of​-­skype​/­
Ahmad, Irfan. 2014. “Bye, Bye, Orkut: Google Says Goodbye to Its 1st Social Network on 
30th September #Infographic.” September 27. Accessed August 25, 2015. http://­www​
.­digitalinformationworld​.­com​/­2014​/­09​/­Google​-­Says​-­Goodbye​-­to​-­its​-­1st​-­Social​
-­Network​-­infographic​.­html
Akamai. 2016. State of the Internet: Q1 2016 Report. Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­www​
.­akamai​.­com​/­us​/­en​/­multimedia​/­documents​/­state​-­of​-­the​-­internet​/­akamai​-­state​-­of​-­the​
-­internet​-­report​-­q1​-­2016​.­pdf
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Bbm​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­bbm​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Blogspot​.­com​.­” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­blogspot​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Draugiem.lv.” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­draugiem​.­lv
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Frype​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­frype​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Line.me.” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­siteinfo​/­line​.­me
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Messenger​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­
www​.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­messenger​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Mixi.jp.” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­alexa​
.­com​/­siteinfo​/­mixi​.­jp
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Pinterest​.­com​.­” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­pinterest​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Reddit​.­com​.­” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­reddit​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Renren​.­com​.­” Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­renren​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Skype​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­skype​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Twitter​.­com​.­” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­twitter​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Viadeo​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­viadeo​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Viber​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­viber​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: WhatsApp​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­
www​.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­whatsapp​.­com

Bibliography
356
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: WordPress​.­com​.­” Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­
www​.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­wordpress​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “Site Overview: Xing​.­com​.­” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­siteinfo​/­xing​.­com
Alexa​.­com. 2015. “The Top 500 Sites on the Web.” Accessed September 20, 2015. http://­www​
.­alexa​.­com​/­topsites
Amberber, Emmanuel. 2013. “[Infographic] The Internet of Africa.” December 2. Accessed 
July 31, 2016. https://­yourstory​.­com​/­2013​/­12​/­internet​-­africa​/­
Angwin, Julia. 2009. Stealing MySpace: The ­Battle to Control the Most Popu­lar Website in Amer­
i­ca. New York: Random House.
Ariss, Jesse. 2015. “10 Years of BBM.” July 27. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­blogs​
.­blackberry​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­10​-­years​-­of​-­bbm​/­
Arrington, Michael. 2006. “Odeo Releases Twttr.” July 15. Accessed September 20, 2015. 
http://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2006​/­07​/­15​/­is​-­twttr​-­interesting
Arrington, Michael. 2009. “Friendster Valued at Just $26.4 Million in Sale.” December 15. 
Accessed September 20, 2015. http://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2009​/­12​/­15​/­friendster​-­valued​-­at​
-­just​-­26​-­4​-­million​-­in​-­sale
Associated Press. 2016. “Google Buys YouTube for $1.65 Billion.” October 10. NBC News. 
Accessed September 17, 2016. http://­www​.­nbcnews​.­com​/­id​/­15196982​/­ns​/­business​-­us​
_­business​/­t​/­google​-­buys​-­youtube​-­billion​/­#​.­V92BGJgrLIU
AT&T. 1999. “SBC and Prodigy Announce Alliance.” November 22. Accessed August 27, 
2015. http://­www​.­att​.­com​/­gen​/­press​-­room​?­pid​=­4800&cdvn​=­news&newsarticleid​
=­7168&mapcode​=­corporate
Avalaunch Media. 2013. “The Complete History of Social Media.” April 15. Accessed August 
13, 2015. http://­avalaunchmedia​.­com​/­history​-­of​-­social​-­media​/­Main​.­html
Banks, Michael. 2008. On the Way to the Web: The Secret History of the Internet and Its Found­
ers. New York: Springer.
Barboza, David. 2014. “A Popu­lar Chinese Social Networking App Blazes Its Own Path.” 
January 21. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­cnbc​.­com​/­2014​/­01​/­21​/­a​-­popular​
-­chinese​-­social​-­networking​-­app​-­blazes​-­its​-­own​-­path​.­html
Barnett, Brian. 2015. “Flickr Pro is Back, and It’s Selling Quality over Quantity.” July 25. 
Accessed September  27, 2015. http://­www​.­wired​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­flickr​-­pro​-­1​-­tb​-­full​
-­resolution​-­photo​-­storage​/­
Bartle, Richard. 1990. “Early MUD History.” November 15. Accessed August 26, 2015. 
http://­mud​.­co​.­uk​/­richard​/­mudhist​.­htm
BBC. 2011. “Facebook Inspires Israeli ­Couple to Name Baby ‘Like.’ ” May 16. Accessed 
August 30, 2015. http://­www​.­bbc​.­com​/­news​/­world​-­middle​-­east​-­13417930
Berners​-­Lee, Tim, and Mark Fischetti. 1999. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and Ultimate 
Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor. San Francisco: HarperCollins Publishers.
BBC News. 2005. “EBay to Buy Skype in $2.6bn deal.” September 12. Accessed September 26, 
2015. http://­news​.­bbc​.­co​.­uk​/­2​/­hi​/­business​/­4237338​.­stm
Becker, Tyler. 2015. “The 9 Major Social Networks Broken Down by Age.” April 9. Accessed 
July 6, 2016. https://­socialmediaweek​.­org​/­blog​/­2015​/­04​/­9​-­major​-­social​-­networks​-­age​/­
Berners​-­Lee, Tim and Fischetti, Mark. 1999. Weaving the Web: The Original Design and 
Ultimate Destiny of the World Wide Web by Its Inventor. San Francisco: HarperCollins 
Publishers.
Blogger. n.d. “The Story of Blogger.” Accessed September 27, 2015. https://­www​.­blogger​.­com​
/­about

Bibliography
357
Bloomberg. 2014. “WhatsApp’s Founder Goes from Food Stamps to Billionaire.” February 
20. Accessed September 24, 2015. http://­www​.­bloomberg​.­com​/­news​/­articles​/­2014​-­02​
-­20​/­whatsapp​-­s​-­founder​-­goes​-­from​-­food​-­stamps​-­to​-­billionaire
Bloomberg. 2015. “Executive Profile: Xueling Li.” Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​
.­bloomberg​.­com​/­research​/­stocks​/­people​/­person​.­asp​?­personId​=­222965354&ticker​=­YY
Boyd, Danah M. 2008. “Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship.” Journal of 
Computer-­Mediated Communication, 13(1): 210–230.
Budiu, Raluca. 2013. “Mobile: Native Apps, Web Apps, and Hybrid Apps.” Accessed July 4, 
2016. https://­www​.­nngroup​.­com​/­articles​/­mobile​-­native​-­apps​/­
Campbell, Todd. 2002. “The First E-­mail Message: Who Sent It and What It Said.” Accessed 
August 20, 2015. http://­www​.­cs​.­umd​.­edu​/­class​/­spring2002​/­cmsc434​-­0101​/­MUIseum​
/­applications​/­firstemail​.­html
Carlson, David. 2009. “The Online Timeline: CompuServe.” Accessed August 26, 2015. 
http://­iml​.­jou​.­ufl​.­edu​/­carlson​/­history​/­compuserve​.­htm
Carlson, Nicholas. 2012. “Inside Pinterest: An Overnight Success Four Years in the Mak-
ing.” May 1. Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­inside​
-­pinterest​-­an​-­overnight​-­success​-­four​-­years​-­in​-­the​-­making​-­2012​-­4
Cavender, Sasha. 1998. “Legends.” October 5. Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​
.­com​/­asap​/­1998​/­1005​/­126​.­html
Chao, Loretta. 2011. “Renren Changes Key User Figure Before IPO.” April 29. Accessed 
September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­SB10001424052748704729304576
286903217555660#ixzz1KqsoJPb8
Chase, Chris. 2014. “Germany’s World Cup Rout of Brazil Was the Most Tweeted Event 
in History.” July 9. Accessed September 8, 2016. https://­ftw​.­usatoday​.­com​/­2014​/­07​
/­germany​-­brazil​-­most​-­tweeted​-­event​-­history​-­miley​-­cyrus
Chen, Adrian. 2015. “The Agency.” June 2. Accessed September 8, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​
.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­07​/­magazine​/­the​-­agency​.­html​?­​_­r​=­0
Chernova, Yuliya. 2015. “The Back Story of Meerket: A Side Proj­ect That Took Off.” March 4. 
Accessed September 13, 2016. http://­blogs​.­wsj​.­com​/­venturecapital​/­2015​/­03​/­04​/­the​
-­back​-­story​-­of​-­meerkat​-­a​-­side​-­project​-­that​-­took​-­off​/­
Choudhury, Saheli Roy. 2016. “Tencent Overtakes Alibaba as China’s Most Valuable Tech 
Com­pany.” August 18. CNBC. Accessed September 17, 2016. http://www.cnbc.com/​
2016/08/17/tencent-­overtakes-­alibaba-­as-­chinas-­most-­valuable-­tech-­company-­as-­
wechat-­owner-­posts-­strong-­results.html
Classmates​.­com. 2015. “About Classmates.” Accessed August  20, 2015. http://­www​
.­classmates​.­com​/­siteui​/­about
Colao, J. J. 2014. “The Inside Story of Snapchat: The World’s Hottest App or a $3 Billion 
Disappearing Act?” January 6. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​
/­sites​/­jjcolao​/­2014​/­01​/­06​/­the​-­inside​-­story​-­of​-­snapchat​-­the​-­worlds​-­hottest​-­app​-­or​-­a​-­3​
-­billion​-­disappearing​-­act
CompuServ. 2015. “About CompuServ.” Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­webcenters​
.­netscape​.­compuserve​.­com​/­menu​/­about​.­jsp
Cosenza, Vincenzo. 2016. “World Map of Social Networks.” Accessed July 6, 2016. http://­
vincos​.­it​/­world​-­map​-­of​-­social​-­networks​/­
CrunchBase. 2015. “Draugiem.” Accessed September 26, 2015. https://­www​.­crunchbase​
.­com​/­organization​/­draugiem
CrunchBase. 2015. “Victor Koo.” Accessed September 19, 2015. https://­www​.­crunchbase​
.­com​/­person​/­victor​-­koo

Bibliography
358
CrunchBase. 2015. “Xing.” Accessed September 26, 2015. https://­www​.­crunchbase​.­com​
/­organization​/­xing
Cutler, Kim-­Mai. 2013. “Facebook Barely Poked Snapchat, Active Usage Data Shows.” 
March 8. Accessed September 19, 2015. https://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2013​/­03​/­08​/­facebook​
-­snapchat​/­
Devereux, Eoin, ed. 2007. Media Studies: Key Issues and Debates. Los Angeles: Sage 
Publications.
DiChristopher, Tom. 2015. “Verizon Closes AOL Acquisition.” June 23. Accessed August 30, 
2015. http://­www​.­cnbc​.­com​/­2015​/­06​/­23​/­verizon​-­closes​-­aol​-­acquisition​.­html
Doll, Jen. 2011. “R.I.P., Friendster, the Social Media Site of Our Relative Youth.” April 26. 
Accessed August 12, 2015. http://­www​.­villagevoice​.­com​/­news​/­rip​-­friendster​-­the​-­social​
-­media​-­site​-­of​-­our​-­relative​-­youth​-­6666000
Echovme. 2014. “5 Quick Facts About Orkut You Never Knew!” September 30. Accessed 
September 8, 2015. http://­www​.­echovme​.­in​/­blog​/­5​-­quick​-­facts​-­about​-­orkut​-­you​-­never​
-­knew​/­
Edelman. 2015. “Social Media Use in South ­Korea 2015.” June 29. Accessed September 5, 
2015. http://­www​.­slideshare​.­net​/­EdelmanAPAC​/­social​-­media​-­in​-­south​-­korea​-­2015
Edwards, Benj. 2014. “Where Online Ser­vices Go When They Die: Rebuilding Prodigy, One 
Screen at a Time.” July 12. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​.­theatlantic​.­com​
/­technology​/­archive​/­2014​/­07​/­where​-­online​-­services​-­go​-­when​-­they​-­die​/­374099
Eordogh, Fruzsina. 2016. “Making Sense of YouTube’s ­Great Demonetization Controversy 
of 2016.” September 2. Forbes. Accessed September 17, 2016. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​
/­sites​/­fruzsinaeordogh​/­2016​/­09​/­02​/­making​-­sense​-­of​-­youtubes​-­great​-­demonetization​
-­controversy​-­of​-­2016​/­#4207505b5b0d
Erdbrink, Thomas. 2013. “Iran Bars Social Media Again ­After a Day.” September 17. Ac-
cessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2013​/­09​/­18​/­world​/­middleeast​
/­facebook​-­and​-­twitter​-­blocked​-­again​-­in​-­iran​-­after​-­respite​.­html
Facebook. 2016. “Thank You! Messenger.” July 20. Facebook Newsroom. Accessed Septem-
ber 17, 2016. http://­newsroom​.­fb​.­com​/­news​/­2016​/­07​/­thank​-­you​-­messenger​/­
Fitzpatrick, Laura. 2010. “Brief History of YouTube.” May 31. Accessed September 27, 2015. 
http://­content​.­time​.­com​/­time​/­magazine​/­article​/­0,9171,1990787,00​.­html
Flannery, Russell. 2012. “Land of the Large: Youku, Tudou Merger Latest in China’s Web 
Consolidation.” March 12. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​
/­russellflannery​/­2012​/­03​/­12​/­land​-­of​-­the​-­large​-­youku​-­tudou​-­merger​-­latest​-­in​-­chinas​
-­web​-­consolidation
Gagne, Ken, and Matt Lake. 2009. “CompuServe, Prodigy et al.: What Web 2.0 Can Learn 
from Online 1.0.” July 15. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​.­computerworld​.­com​
/­article​/­2526547​/­networking​/­compuserve—prodigy​-­et​-­al—what​-­web​-­2​-­0​-­can​-­learn​
-­from​-­online​-­1​-­0​.­html
Geron, Tomio. 2012. “YY​.­com: China’s Unique Real-­Time Voice and Video Ser­vice with a 
Virtual Goods Twist.” June 11. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​
/­sites​/­tomiogeron​/­2012​/­06​/­11​/­yy​-­com​-­chinas​-­unique​-­real​-­time​-­voice​-­and​-­video​
-­service​-­with​-­a​-­virtual​-­goods​-­twist
Giampietro, Marina. 2013. “Twenty Years of a ­Free, Open Web.” April 30. Accessed August 27, 
2015. http://­home​.­web​.­cern​.­ch​/­about​/­updates​/­2013​/­04​/­twenty​-­years​-­free​-­open​-­web
Global Web Index. 2015. “Social Networking Motivations.” Accessed July 31, 2016. http://­
www​.­globalwebindex​.­net​/­blog​/­top​-­10​-­reasons​-­for​-­using​-­social​-­media
Gonzalez, Sean. 1995. “Prodigy.” February 21. PC Magazine.14(4), 152, 175.

Bibliography
359
Google Blog. 2011. “Introducing the Google+ Proj­ect: Real-­life Sharing, Rethought for the 
Web.” June 28. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­googleblog​.­blogspot​.­com​/­2011​
/­06​/­introducing​-­google​-­project​-­real​-­life​.­html
Green, Hank. 2015. “A De­cade ­Later, YouTube Remains a Mystery, Especially to Itself.” 
February 23. Accessed September 27, 2015. https://­medium​.­com​/­@hankgreen​/­a​-­decade​
-­later​-­youtube​-­remains​-­a​-­mystery​-­especially​-­to​-­itself​-­80a1c38feeaf
Griffin, Andrew. 2015. “China’s ­great firewall gets higher: Tools to evade surveillance and 
site bans are blocked as Chinese internet censors tighten grip.” January 30. Accessed 
August  30, 2015. http://­www​.­independent​.­co​.­uk​/­life​-­style​/­gadgets​-­and​-­tech​/­news​
/­chinas​-­great​-­firewall​-­gets​-­higher​-­tools​-­to​-­evade​-­surveillance​-­and​-­site​-­bans​-­are​
-­blocked​-­as​-­chinese​-­internet​-­censors​-­tighten​-­grip​-­10013537​.­html
Griggs, Brandon, and Heather Kelly. 2013. “23 Key Moments from Twitter History.” 
September 16. Accessed September 20, 2015. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2013​/­09​/­13​/­tech​
/­social​-­media​/­twitter​-­key​-­moments
Hafner, Katie, and Matthew Lyon. 1996. Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins of the In­
ternet. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Hamburger, Ellis. 2014. “Facebook Poke Is Dead . . . ​and So Is Facebook Camera.” May 9. 
Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­theverge​.­com​/­2014​/­5​/­9​/­5700732​/­facebook​
-­poke​-­is​-­dead​-­and​-­so​-­is​-­facebook​-­camera
Hoffman, Reid. 2013. “LinkedIn Turns 10: Celebrating 10 Years of Relationships That 
­Matter.” May 5. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­blog​.­linkedin​.­com​/­2013​/­05​/­05​
/­linkedin​-­turns​-­10​/­
Huffington Post. 2012. “World’s First Website, Created by Tim Berners-­Lee in 1991, Is Still 
Up and ­Running on 21st Birthday.” August 6. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­huffingtonpost​.­com​/­2012​/­08​/­06​/­worlds​-­first​-­website​_­n​_­1747476​.­html
Indexmundi. 2014. “Telephones—­Mobile Cellular Per Capita.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­
www​.­indexmundi​.­com​/­g​/­r​.­aspx​?­v​=­4010
Interlat. 2015. “6 Redes Sociales que No Imaginabas que Existían.” June 23. Accessed 
September 8, 2015. http://­www​.­interlat​.­co​/­redes​-­sociales​-­curiosas​/­
Jacob, Mark, and Stephan Benzkofer. 2013. “10 ­Things You Might Not Know About Social 
Media.” September 29. Accessed August 26, 2015. http://­articles​.­chicagotribune​.­com​
/­2013​-­09​-­29​/­opinion​/­ct​-­perspec​-­0929​-­things​-­20130929​_­1​_­social​-­media​-­10​-­things​
-­boston​-­bombing​-­suspect
Jones, Steve. 2003. Encyclopedia of New Media: An Essential Reference to Communication and 
Technology. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Jucha, Nicolas. 2012. “QQ—­China’s Instant Messenger.” January 9. Accessed September 24, 
2015. http://­gbtimes​.­com​/­world​/­qq​-­chinas​-­instant​-­messenger
Kan, Michael. 2010. “China’s Top IM Client QQ Goes International.” December 15. Accessed 
September 24, 2015. http://­www​.­pcworld​.­com​/­article​/­213750​/­article​.­html
Kaplan, Andreas M., and Michael Haenlein. 2010. “Users of the World, Unite? The Chal-
lenges and Opportunities of Social Media.” Business Horizons 53: 59–68.
Kelly, Heather. 2015. “Google+ Is Getting Dismantled.” July 27. Accessed September 26, 
2015. http://­money​.­cnn​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­27​/­technology​/­google​-­plus​-­youtube​/­
Kemp, Simon. 2015. “Global Digital Statshot: August 2015.” August 3. Accessed August 12, 
2015. http://­wearesocial​.­net​/­blog​/­2015​/­08​/­global​-­statshot​-­august​-­2015
Kim, Chang-­Ran. 2014. “Japan’s Rakuten Buys Chat App Viber for $900 Million to Expand 
Digital Empire.” February 14. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​
/­article​/­2014​/­02​/­14​/­us​-­rakuten​-­viber​-­idUSBREA1D07M20140214

Bibliography
360
Koh, Yoree. 2015. “Twitter Mulls Expanding Size of Tweets Past 140 Characters.” September 
29. Accessed September 30, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­twitter​-­mulls​-­expanding​
-­size​-­of​-­tweets​-­1443554128
Konrad, Alex. 2014. “Snapchat Billionaires Protect Their Stakes by Settling with Ousted 
Cofounder Reggie Brown.” September 9. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​
.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­alexkonrad​/­2014​/­09​/­09​/­snapchat​-­settles​-­cofounder​-­lawsuit
Lee, Emma. 2013. “Baidu’s BBS Ser­vice Tieba Shifts to Mobile Social Networking ­After An-
nouncing 1 Billion Users on 10th Anniversary.” December 4. Accessed September 19, 
2015. http://­technode​.­com​/­2013​/­12​/­04​/­baidus​-­bbs​-­service​-­tieba​-­shifts​-­to​-­mobile​-­social​
-­networking​-­after​-­announcing​-­1​-­billion​-­users​-­on​-­10th​-­anniversary
Leung, Rebecca. 2003. “In Search of the Past: Reunion Web Site Brings Together School-
mates.” May 5. Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­www​.­cbsnews​.­com​/­news​/­in​-­search​-­of​
-­the​-­past​-­05​-­05​-­2003
Levy, Oren. 2015. “All the World Loves Social Media But Many Love Their Local Networks 
Best.” May 28. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­entrepreneur​.­com​/­article​/­246485
Lievrouw, Leah A., and Sonia Livingston, eds. 2006. Handbook of New Media: Social Shaping 
and Social Consequences of ICT, Updated Student Edition. London: Sage Publications.
LinkedIn. 2015. “About LinkedIn.” Accessed September 26, 2015. https://­press​.­linkedin​
.­com​/­about​-­linkedin
Loyd, Beth. 2009. “At Least 140 Killed in Uighur Riots in China.” July 6. Accessed September 
19, 2015. http://­abcnews​.­go​.­com​/­International​/­story​?­id​=­8010018&page​=­1
Lubov. 2015. “Top Social Networks in Rus­sia: Latest Numbers and Trends.” January 20. 
Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­russiansearchtips​.­com​/­2015​/­01​/­top​-­social​
-­networks​-­russia​-­latest​-­numbers​-­trends​/­
Lynch, Kevin. 2015. “Asian Star LUHAN Sets the Rec­ord for the Most Comments on a Weibo 
Post.” January 15. Accessed August 30, 2015. http://­www​.­guinnessworldrecords​.­com​
/­news​/­2014​/­8​/­chinese​-­star​-­luhan​-­sets​-­the​-­record​-­for​-­most​-­comments​-­on​-­a​-­weibo​
-­post​-­59720​/­
Macale, Sherilynn. 2011. “A Rundown of Reddit’s History and Community [Infographic].” 
October 14. Accessed September 25, 2015. http://­thenextweb​.­com​/­socialmedia​/­2011​
/­10​/­14​/­a​-­rundown​-­of​-­reddits​-­history​-­and​-­community​-­infographic​/­
Macias, Amanda. 2015. “This 2-­Year-­Old Disc Jockey Is Being a Phenomenon in South 
Africa.” April 11. Accessed September 8, 2015. http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­this​-­2​
-­year​-­old​-­disc​-­jockey​-­is​-­becoming​-­a​-­phenomenon​-­in​-­south​-­africa​-­2015​-­4
MacMillian, Douglas. 2015. “Snapchat Charges 99 Cents to Replay Disappearing Messages.” 
September 15. Accessed October 25, 2016. http://­blogs​.­wsj​.­com​/­digits​/­2015​/­09​/­15​
/­snapchat​-­charges​-­99​-­cents​-­to​-­replay​-­disappearing​-­messages
Madrigal, Alexis C. 2014. “AMA: How a Weird Internet ­Thing Became a Mainstream De-
light.” January 4. Accessed September 24, 2015. http://­www​.­theatlantic​.­com​/­technology​
/­archive​/­2014​/­01​/­ama​-­how​-­a​-­weird​-­internet​-­thing​-­became​-­a​-­mainstream​-­delight​
/­282860
Matchar, Emily. 2015. “The Tweeting Potholes of Panama.” June 12. Accessed Septem-
ber 8, 2015. http://­www​.­smithsonianmag​.­com​/­innovation​/­tweeting​-­potholes​-­panama​
-­180955507​/­​?­no​-­ist
McIntosh, Neil. 2003. “Google Buys Blogger Webser­vice.” February 18. Accessed Septem-
ber 27, 2015. http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­business​/­2003​/­feb​/­18​/­digitalmedia​.­citynews
Metz, Cade. 2016. “Forget Apple vs. the FBI: WhatsApp Just Switched on Encryption for a 
Billion ­People.” April 5. Wired. Accessed September 17, 2016. https://­www​.­wired​.­com​
/­2016​/­04​/­forget​-­apple​-­vs​-­fbi​-­whatsapp​-­just​-­switched​-­encryption​-­billion​-­people​/­

Bibliography
361
Meeuf, Kate. 2014. “Regional Use of Social Networking Tools.” Accessed September 26, 
2015. http://­repository​.­cmu​.­edu​/­cgi​/­viewcontent​.­cgi​?­article​=­1818&context​=­sei
Miller, Stephen. 2010. “Founding Prodigy Chief Created Online Ser­vices for Consumers.” 
January 13. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­SB1263351188​
60527243
Mitchell, Dan. 2011. “Skype’s Long History of ­Owners and Also-­Rans: At an End?” May 11. 
Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­fortune​.­com​/­2011​/­05​/­11​/­skypes​-­long​-­history​-­of​
-­owners​-­and​-­also​-­rans​-­at​-­an​-­end​/­
Moore, Malcolm. 2010. “Youku Founder Victor Koo Believes Only China Can Help His 
Com­pany Grow, Make Money, and Even Beat Piracy.” December 14. Accessed Septem-
ber  19, 2015. http://­www​.­telegraph​.­co​.­uk​/­finance​/­china​-­business​/­8201764​/­Youku​
-­founder​-­Victor​-­Koo​-­believes​-­only​-­China​-­can​-­help​-­his​-­company​-­grow​-­make​-­money​
-­and​-­even​-­beat​-­piracy​.­html
Moreau, Elise. n.d. “10 Internationally Popu­lar Social Networks ­You’ve Never Heard of Be-
fore.” Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­webtrends​.­about​.­com​/­od​/­Social​-­Networking​
/­tp​/­10​-­Internationally​-­Popular​-­Social​-­Networks​-­Youve​-­Never​-­Heard​-­of​-­Before​.­htm
Mouton, Andre. 2013. “­Don’t Blame Yahoo for Flickr’s Decline.” May 27. Accessed Septem-
ber 27, 2015. http://­www​.­usatoday​.­com​/­story​/­tech​/­2013​/­05​/­27​/­minyanville​-­flickr​
-­yahoo​/­2363285​/­
Nabila. 2014. “Infographic: 25 Fast Facts on Big Data.” October 29. Accessed September 3, 
2015. http://­bigdataanalytics​.­my​/­infographic​-­25​-­fast​-­facts​-­on​-­big​-­data​-­2​/­
New York Times. 2001. “Com­pany News; SBC Communications Seeks to Acquire All of Prod-
igy.” September 22. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2001​/­09​/­22​
/­business​/­company​-­news​-­sbc​-­communications​-­seeks​-­to​-­acquire​-­all​-­of​-­prodigy​.­html
Noticias Cuatro. 2015. “Un Prisionero Español Tuitea ‘en Tiempo Real’ desde el Campo de 
Concentracion Nazi.” January 24. Accessed September 8, 2015. http://­www​.­cuatro​.­com​
/­noticias​/­sociedad​/­Twitter​-­prisionero​-­campo​_­de​_­concentracion​-­Mauthausen​-­nazismo​
_­0​_­1929375106​.­html
Nusca, Andrew. 2015. “Pinterest CEO Ben Silbermann: ­We’re Not a Social Network.” 
July 13. Accessed September 24, 2015. http://­fortune​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­13​/­pinterest​-­ceo​
-­ben​-­silbermann
Nuwer, Rachel. 2012. “The First Use of OMG was a 1917 Letter to Winston Churchill.” 
November 27. Accessed September 5, 2015. http://­www​.­smithsonianmag​.­com​/­smart​
-­news​/­the​-­first​-­use​-­of​-­omg​-­was​-­in​-­a​-­1917​-­letter​-­to​-­winston​-­churchill​-­145636383​/­​
?­no​-­ist
O’Luanaigh, Cian. 2014. “World Wide Web Born at CERN 25 years ago.” March 12. Ac-
cessed August 27, 2015. http://­home​.­web​.­cern​.­ch​/­about​/­updates​/­2014​/­03​/­world​-­wide​
-­web​-­born​-­cern​-­25​-­years​-­ago
Olson, Parmy. 2013. “Free-­Calling App Viber Jumps to Desktop, Hits 200 Million Users.” 
May 7. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­parmyolson​/­2013​
/­05​/­07​/­free​-­calling​-­app​-­viber​-­jumps​-­to​-­desktop​-­hits​-­200​-­million​-­users
Oregon State University. “Randal Conrads: Acad­emy of Distinguished Engineers—2003.” 
Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­engineering​.­oregonstate​.­edu​/­randal​-­conrads​-­2003​
-­academy​-­distinguished​-­engineers
Oshkalo, Anna. 2014. “Odnoklassniki.ru Rebrands into OK.” August 17. Accessed September 
26, 2015. http://­www​.­russiansearchtips​.­com​/­2014​/­08​/­odnoklassniki​-­ru​-­rebrands​-­ok​
/­#more​-­2619
Oxford Dictionaries. 2015. “Selfie Stick, Concern Troll, and Bae: New Words Added to 
OxfordDictionaries​.­com​.­” May  29. Accessed September  5, 2015. http://­blog​

Bibliography
362
.­oxforddictionaries​.­com​/­2015​/­05​/­selfie​-­stick​-­concern​-­troll​-­bae​-­new​-­words​-­oxford​
dictionaries​-­com​/­
Parfeni, Lucian. 2011. “Flickr Boasts 6 Billion Photo Uploads.” August 5. Accessed Sep-
tember  27, 2015. http://­news​.­softpedia​.­com​/­news​/­Flickr​-­Boasts​-­6​-­Billion​-­Photo​
-­Uploads​-­215380​.­shtml
Parke, Phoebe. 2016. “How Many ­People Use Social Media in Africa?” January 14. Ac-
cessed July  13, 2016. http://­www​.­cnn​.­com​/­2016​/­01​/­13​/­africa​/­africa​-­social​-­media​
-­consumption​/­
Perez, Sarah. 2016. “Pokémon Go Becomes the Fastest Game Ever to Hit $500 Million in 
Revenue.” September 8. Accessed September 9, 2016. https://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2016​/­09​
/­08​/­pokemon​-­go​-­becomes​-­the​-­fastest​-­game​-­to​-­ever​-­hit​-­500​-­million​-­in​-­revenue​/­
Peterson, Kim. 2004. “No. 2 Internet Ser­vice Provider Buying Classmates Online.” October 
26. Accessed August  20, 2015. http://­community​.­seattletimes​.­nwsource​.­com​/­archive​/­​
?­date​=­20041026&slug​=­classmates26
Phillips, Sarah. 2007. “A Brief History of Facebook.” July 25. Accessed September 20, 2015. 
http://­www​.­theguardian​.­com​/­technology​/­2007​/­jul​/­25​/­media​.­newmedia
Pierce, David. 2015. “Twitter’s Periscope App Lets You Livestream Your World.” March 26. 
Accessed September 13, 2016. https://­www​.­wired​.­com​/­2015​/­03​/­periscope​/­
Pinterest. 2014. “Pin Trends of the Week.” May 15. Accessed September 6, 2015. https://­
blog​.­pinterest​.­com​/­en​/­pin​-­trends​-­week
Raice, Shayndi, and Spencer E. Ante. 2012. “Insta-­Rich: $1 Billion for Instagram.” April 10. 
Accessed September 27, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­SB100014240527023038
15404577333840377381670
Rapoza, Kenneth. 2011. “China’s Weibos vs US’s Twitter: And the Winner Is?” May 17. Ac-
cessed August 31, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­kenrapoza​/­2011​/­05​/­17​/­chinas​
-­weibos​-­vs​-­uss​-­twitter​-­and​-­the​-­winner​-­is
Reid, T. R., and Brit Hume. 1991. “Censorship Issue Logs on at Online Bulletin Board.” No-
vember 3. Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­articles​.­chicagotribune​.­com​/­1991​-­11​-­03​
/­business​/­9104080864​_­1​_­semitic​-­anti​-­semitic​-­prodigy
­Reuters. 2014. “Rus­sia’s Mail.Ru Buys Remaining Stake in Vkontakte for $1.5 Bln.” Septem-
ber 16. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2014​/­09​/­16​/­russia​
-­mailru​-­group​-­vkontakte​-­idUSL6N0RH28K20140916
Rivlin, Gary. 2006. “Wallflower at the Web Party.” October 15. Accessed September 20, 
2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2006​/­10​/­15​/­business​/­yourmoney​/­15friend​.­html​?­​_­r​
=­2&
Rosenberg, P. J. 2012. “Sparks Has Been Removed from the List of Search Entries on Google+.” 
November  27. Accessed September  26, 2015. https://­plus​.­google​.­com​/­+GooglePlus​
Daily​/­posts​/­5z7VHfKng2b
Rothman, Lily. 2015. “A Brief Guide to the Tumultuous 30-­Year History of AOL.” May 22. 
Accessed August 30, 2015. http://­time​.­com​/­3857628​/­aol​-­1985​-­history
Russell, Jon. 2014. “Twitter Is Opening an Office in Indonesia, One of the World’s Top 
Social Media Hotspots.” August 29. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­thenextweb​.­com​
/­twitter​/­2014​/­08​/­29​/­twitter​-­opening​-­office​-­indonesia​-­one​-­worlds​-­top​-­social​-­media​
-­hotspots​/­
Sabrina. 2013. “The Story of China’s Biggest Social Network: Qzone.” September 13. Ac-
cessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­chinainternetwatch​.­com​/­3346​/­tencent​-­qzone
Saito, Mari. 2012. “Born from Japan Disasters, Line App Sets Sights on U.S., China.” August 
16. Accessed September 24, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2012​/­08​/­16​/­japan​
-­app​-­line​-­idUSL2E8JD0PZ20120816

Bibliography
363
Sakawee, Saiyai. 2013. “Can Viber ­Really Compete with Asia Apps Like Line and Kakao 
Talk?” November  22. Accessed September  19, 2015. https://­www​.­techinasia​.­com​
/­founding​-­story​-­viber​-­live​-­blog
Sandberg, Jared. 1997. “WorldCom Agrees to Acquire CompuServe for $1.2 Billion.” Sep-
tember 8. Accessed August 26, 2015. http://­www​.­wsj​.­com​/­articles​/­SB873513339130​
901000
Satariano, Adam. 2014. “WhatsApp’s Founder Goes from Food Stamps to Billionaire.” Feb-
ruary 20. Accessed September 20, 2015. http://­www​.­bloomberg​.­com​/­news​/­articles​
/­2014​-­02​-­20​/­whatsapp​-­s​-­founder​-­goes​-­from​-­food​-­stamps​-­to​-­billionaire
Savitz, Eric. 2012. “5 ­Things You Need to Know About Chinese Social Media.” October 25. 
Accessed September 19. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­ciocentral​/­2012​/­10​/­25​/­5​-­things​
-­you​-­need​-­to​-­know​-­about​-­chinese​-­social​-­media
Sengupta, Somini, Nicole Perlroth, and Jenna Wortham. 2012. “­Behind Instagram’s Suc-
cess, Networking the Old Way.” April 12. Accessed September 24, 2015, http://­www​
.­nytimes​.­com​/­2012​/­04​/­14​/­technology​/­instagram​-­founders​-­were​-­helped​-­by​-­bay​-­area​
-­connections​.­html
Shah, Saqib. “Twitter for Sale? Upcoming Board Meeting ­Will Shape Com­pany’s ­Future.” 
September 6. Accessed September 14, 2016. http://­www​.­digitaltrends​.­com​/­social​-­media​
/­twitter​-­board​-­meeting​-­takeover​/­
Sheikh, Mahnoor. 2015. “The Cost of Internet: How Does Pakistan Compare to the Rest of 
the World?” October 1. Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­propakistani​.­pk​/­2015​/­10​/­01​/­the​
-­cost​-­of​-­internet​-­how​-­does​-­pakistan​-­compare​-­to​-­the​-­rest​-­of​-­the​-­world
Shontell, Alyson. 2014. “How a Guy Who Had His Jaw Wired Shut for Three Months Used 
the Experience to Build a $200 Million Startup.” March 27. Accessed August 20, 2015. 
http://­www​.­businessinsider​.­com​/­how​-­klout​-­sold​-­for​-­200​-­million​-­2014​-­3
Shu, Catherine. 2014. “Japa­nese Internet ­Giant Rakuten Acquires Viber for $900M.” Feb-
ruary 13. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2014​/­02​/­13​/­japanese​
-­internet​-­giant​-­rakuten​-­acquires​-­viber​-­for​-­900m
Smith, Craig. 2015. “By the Numbers: 40 Amazing Weibo Statistics.” August 14. Accessed 
October 25, 2016. http://­expandedramblings​.­com​/­index​.­php​/­weibo​-­user​-­statistics
Soble, Jonathan. 2014. “ ‘Monster Strike’ Gives Former Social Media ­Giant Mixi a Second 
Act.” December 28. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2014​/­12​
/­29​/­business​/­international​/­monster​-­strike​-­gives​-­former​-­social​-­media​-­giant​-­mixi​-­a​
-­second​-­act​.­html
Solomon, Brian. 2014. “From Alibaba to Weibo: Your A-­Z Guide to China’s Hottest Internet 
IPOs.” March 19. Accessed August 31, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­briansolomon​
/­2014​/­03​/­19​/­from​-­alibaba​-­to​-­weibo​-­your​-­a​-­z​-­guide​-­to​-­chinas​-­hottest​-­internet​-­ipos
Sorensen, Chris. 2009. “Canada Pension Plan Buys Skype Stake.” September 2. Accessed 
September 26, 2015. http://­www​.­thestar​.­com​/­business​/­2009​/­09​/­02​/­canada​_­pension​
_­plan​_­buys​_­skype​_­stake​.­html
Specktor, Brandon. 2014. “Weird Facts About 5 Punctuation Marks You See Everywhere.” 
December 18. Accessed September 6, 2015. http://­www​.­rd​.­com​/­slideshows​/­punctuation​
-­mark​-­facts​/­view​-­all​/­
Statista. 2016. “Leading Social Networks Worldwide as of September 2016, Ranked by Num-
ber of Active Users (in Millions).” Accessed September 17, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​
.­com​/­statistics​/­272014​/­global​-­social​-­networks​-­ranked​-­by​-­number​-­of​-­users​/­
Statista. 2016. “Number of Apps Available in Leading App Stores as of June 2016.” Accessed 
July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­276623​/­number​-­of​-­apps​-­available​-­in​
-­leading​-­app​-­stores​/­

Bibliography
364
Statista. 2016. “Number of Available Apps in the Apple App Store from July 2008 to 
June 2016.” Accessed July 4, 2016. http://­www​.­statista​.­com​/­statistics​/­263795​/­number​
-­of​-­available​-­apps​-­in​-­the​-­apple​-­app​-­store​/­
Stempel, Jonathan. 2014. “Google, Viacom ­Settle Landmark YouTube Lawsuit.” March 18. 
­Reuters. Accessed September  17, 2016. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­us​-­google​
-­viacom​-­lawsuit​-­idUSBREA2H11220140318
StumbleUpon. 2015. “What Is StumbleUpon?” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­www​
.­stumbleupon​.­com​/­about​/­
Swiftkey. 2015. “Emoji Report Part II: Which Is the Most Popu­lar Emoji in Your Language.” 
June 4. Accessed July 20, 2015. http://­swiftkey​.­com​/­en​/­blog​/­emoji​-­report​-­part​-­ii​-­which​
-­is​-­most​-­popular​-­emoji​-­in​-­your​-­language​/­
Tabuchi, Hiroko. 2011. “Facebook Wins Relatively Few Friends in Japan.” January 9. Ac-
cessed September  26, 2015. http://­www​.­nytimes​.­com​/­2011​/­01​/­10​/­technology​
/­10facebook​.­html​?­scp​=­1&sq​=­Mixi&st​=­cse
Takada, Kazunori. 2012. “Youku to Buy Tudou, Creating China Online Video ­Giant.” 
March 12. Accessed September 19, 2015. http://­www​.­reuters​.­com​/­article​/­2012​/­03​/­12​
/­youku​-­tudou​-­idUSL4E8EC3K320120312
Talbot, Matthew. 2015. “Looking Back at the Last 10 Years of BBM.” July 30. Accessed Sep-
tember 26, 2015. http://­blogs​.­blackberry​.­com​/­2015​/­07​/­looking​-­back​-­at​-­the​-­last​-­10​
-­years​-­of​-­bbm​/­
Tan, Francis. 2011. “140-­Character Micro-­resumes Change Job Applications in China.” 
May 26. Accessed September 8, 2015. http://­thenextweb​.­com​/­asia​/­2011​/­05​/­26​/­140​
-­character​-­micro​-­resumes​-­change​-­job​-­applications​-­in​-­china​/­
Tass. 2013. “Publishing Private Information of Rus­sian Social Network Users Without Con-
sent to Become Illegal.” August 20. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­tass​.­ru​/­en​/­russia​
/­699283
Terdiman, Daniel. 2004. “Photo Site a Hit with Bloggers.” December 9. Accessed Septem-
ber 26, 2015. http://­archive​.­wired​.­com​/­culture​/­lifestyle​/­news​/­2004​/­12​/­65958
Thompson, Cadie. 2015. “The 15 Defining Tech Moments of 2015.” December 18. Accessed 
September 13, 2016. http://­www​.­techinsider​.­io​/­the​-­15​-­biggest​-­tech​-­events​-­of​-­2015​-­12​
/­#apple​-­gets​-­into​-­wearables​-­with​-­its​-­watch​-­1
Timmer, John. 2010. “Classmates​.­com ­Settles Suit over Misleading Emails.” March 15. Ac-
cessed August 20, 2015. http://­arstechnica​.­com​/­tech​-­policy​/­2010​/­03​/­classmatescom​
-­settles​-­suit​-­over​-­misleading​-­e​-­mails
TMZ. 2015. “Hey Bros—­I’m in Hollywood.” September 10. Accessed September 10, 2015. 
http://­www​.­tmz​.­com​/­2015​/­09​/­10​/­pewdiepie​-­cutie​-­marzia​-­youtube​-­gamer​-­arrives​-­lax​/­
Tomlinson, Ray. “Frequently Made ­Mistakes.” Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­openmap​
.­bbn​.­com​/­~tomlinso​/­ray​/­mistakes​.­html
Tomlinson, Ray. “The First Network Email.” Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­openmap​.­bbn​
.­com​/­~tomlinso​/­ray​/­firstemailframe​.­html
Toor, Amar. 2014. “Pavel Durov Claims He Was Abruptly Fired from the Site He Created, 
Rising Fears of a Crackdown on Dissent.” April 22. Accessed September 26, 2015. 
http://­www​.­theverge​.­com​/­2014​/­4​/­22​/­5638980​/­russias​-­largest​-­social​-­network​-­is​
-­under​-­the​-­control​-­of​-­putins​-­allies
Truong, Alice. 2015. “The State of Internet Connectivity Around the World.” December 7. 
Accessed July 5, 2016. https://­www​.­weforum​.­org​/­agenda​/­2015​/­12​/­the​-­state​-­of​-­internet​
-­connectivity​-­around​-­the​-­world​/­
Tuchinsky, Peter. 2016. “Social Media App Usage Down Across the Globe.” June 2. Accessed 
July 31, 2016. https://­www​.­similarweb​.­com​/­blog​/­social​-­media​-­usage

Bibliography
365
Tweney, Dylan. 2009. “Sept. 24, 1979: First Online Ser­vice for Consumers Debuts.” 
September 24. Accessed August 24, 2015. http://­www​.­wired​.­com​/­2009​/­09​/­0924​com-
puserve​-­launches
Twidiplomacy. n.d. “Emoji Diplomacy—­A New Diplomatic Sign Language.” Accessed Sep-
tember 10, 2016. http://­twiplomacy​.­com​/­blog​/­emoji​-­diplomacy​-­a​-­new​-­diplomatic​-­sign​
-­language​/­
Twitter​.­com. 2015. “Twitter Usage/Company Facts.” Accessed September 27, 2015. https://­
about​.­twitter​.­com​/­company
United Nations. 2015. “World Population Prospects: Key Findings and Advance ­Tables.” 
Accessed September  26, 2015. http://­esa​.­un​.­org​/­unpd​/­wpp​/­Publications​/­Files​/­Key​
_­Findings​_­WPP​_­2015​.­pdf
Viadeo. 2014. “Notre histoire.” Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­corporate​.­viadeo​.­com​
/­qui​-­sommes​-­nous​/­historique​/­
Viadeo. 2014. “Viadeo Continues to Grow: 65 Million Members Worldwide, including 25 
Million in China.” December 11. Accessed September 26, 2015. http://­corporate​.­viadeo​
.­com​/­en​/­2014​/­12​/­11​/­viadeo​-­continues​-­to​-­grow​-­65​-­million​-­members​-­worldwide​
-­including​-­25​-­million​-­in​-­china​/­
Wagstaff, Keith. 2014. “The Internet and the World Wide Web Are Not the Same ­Thing.” 
March 12. Accessed August 20, 2015. http://­www​.­nbcnews​.­com​/­tech​/­internet​/­internet​
-­world​-­wide​-­web​-­are​-­not​-­same​-­thing​-­n51011
Ward, George F. 2016. “Social Media in Africa—­A Growing Force.” Institute for Defense Analy­
sis Africa Watch 11: 5–7.
Washington Post. 2010. “25 Years of AOL: A Timeline.” May 23. Accessed August 30, 2015. 
http://­www​.­washingtonpost​.­com​/­wp​-­dyn​/­content​/­article​/­2010​/­05​/­23​/­AR2010​
052303551​.­html
­Waters, Darren. 2007. “Web 2.0 Won­ders: StumbleUpon.” March 29. Accessed Septem-
ber 26, 2015. http://­news​.­bbc​.­co​.­uk​/­2​/­hi​/­technology​/­6506055​.­stm
­Waters, John. 2010. The Every­thing Guide to Social Media: All You Need to Know About Par­
ticipating in ­Today’s Most Popu­lar Online Communities. Avon, MA: F+W Media, Inc.
Wauters, Robin. 2009. “China Blocks Access to Twitter, Facebook ­After Riots.” July 7. Ac-
cessed September 19, 2015. http://­techcrunch​.­com​/­2009​/­07​/­07​/­china​-­blocks​-­access​-­to​
-­twitter​-­facebook​-­after​-­riots
Web3Schools​.­com. 2015. “HTML Introduction.” Accessed August 27, 2015. http://­www​
.­w3schools​.­com​/­html​/­html​_­intro​.­asp
Weiser, Mark. 1991. “The Computer for the 21st ­Century.” Accessed July 5, 2016. http://­
www​.­ubiq​.­com​/­hypertext​/­weiser​/­SciAmDraft3​.­html
Welch, Chris. 2016. “Twitter’s New, Longer Tweets Are Coming September 19th.” Septem-
ber 12. The Verge. Accessed September 17, 2016. http://­www​.­theverge​.­com​/­2016​/­9​/­12​
/­12891562​/­twitter​-­tweets​-­140​-­characters​-­expand​-­photos
Wilson, Chris. 2014. “The Selfiest Cities in the World: TIME’s Definitive Ranking. March 10. 
Accessed September 21, 2015. http://­time​.­com​/­selfies​-­cities​-­world​-­rankings​/­
Wong, Julia. 2015. “Selfie-­Incrimination: SFPD Surveils Instagram.” August 5. Accessed Sep-
tember 9, 2015. http://­www​.­sfweekly​.­com​/­sanfrancisco​/­san​-­francisco​-­news​-­instagram​
-­facebook​-­sfpd​-­surveillance​/­Content​?­oid​=­3906541
Woolley, Suzanne. 2015. “How Did Every­one Get Addicted to Trivia Crack?” January 12. 
Accessed August 30, 2015. http://­www​.­bloomberg​.­com​/­news​/­articles​/­2015​-­01​-­12​/­trivia​
-­crack​-­game​-­hooks​-­millions​-­of​-­american​-­players
WordPress​.­com. 2015. “A Live Look at Activity Across WordPress​.­com​.­” Accessed Septem-
ber 27, 2015. https://­wordpress​.­com​/­activity​/­

Bibliography
366
Xing. 2015. “Xing Is the Social Network for Business Professionals.” Accessed September 26, 
2015. https://­corporate​.­xing​.­com​/­english​/­company​/­
Young, Doug. 2015. “Youku Tudou Eyes Overhaul in Pursuit of Re­spect.” August 10. Ac-
cessed September  27, 2015. http://­www​.­forbes​.­com​/­sites​/­dougyoung​/­2015​/­08​/­10​
/­youku​-­tudou​-­eyes​-­overhaul​-­in​-­pursuit​-­of​-­respect​/­
Zijlma, Anouk. 2015. “Facts About Africa.” August 5. Accessed July 13, 2016. http://­goafrica​
.­about​.­com​/­od​/­africatraveltips​/­a​/­africafacts​.­htm

About the Editors and Contributors
Editors
Laura M. Steckman has multiple master’s degrees and earned her PhD in history from the 
University of Wisconsin–­Madison. She has received Fulbright-­Hays and Foreign Area and 
Language Studies funding to study Asian and Latin American languages abroad and con-
ducted research in Asia on a Boren fellowship. She has worked as an Asia-­focused media 
analyst and currently is a social scientist with research interests in digital humanities, in-
cluding how ­people, culture, and language intersect to influence the development and use 
of emerging technologies. She currently holds an honorary fellowship with the University 
of Wisconsin–­Madison’s Center for Southeast Asian Studies.
Marilyn J. Andrews earned her PhD in mass communication from the University of 
Wisconsin–­Madison. She also holds master’s degrees in cultural anthropology and educa-
tion. Her previous research includes examining how the Mapuche ­people of South Amer­
i­ca utilize the internet as a tool of self-­representation to foster national identity, and how 
that usage reflects traditional understandings of socioterritorial identity. In addition to ex-
ploring indigenous identity expressions online, her current research interests include so-
cial media around the world and organic multicultural communities that form in online 
environments. She is a member of the National Co­ali­tion of Interdependent Scholars.
Contributors
Nadia Ali was born in London and now resides in the Ca­rib­bean. She is a freelance writer 
who has contributed to other encyclopedias published by ABC-­CLIO. She is also an author 
in her own right. You may contact her at nadiafreelancewriter@yahoo.com.
Karen Ames received a master of arts degree in Southeast Asian studies from the Univer-
sity of Wisconsin–­Madison. She currently utilizes vari­ous social media platforms to develop 
and maintain an online community for refugee youths wanting to make connections and 
pursue higher education in the United States.
Zoe-­Charis Belenioti is a PhD candidate at Aristotle University in Thessaloniki, Greece. 
Her research interests include social media marketing and branding within nonprofit organ­
izations (NPOs), social media users’ be­hav­ior, and the marketing and management of NPOs.
Lina Benabdallah is a doctoral candidate of international relations at the University of Flor-
ida. Her current research focuses on China’s rise and China-­Africa relations. She is a Ful-
bright alumna and holds an MA in po­liti­cal science from the University of Florida.

About the Editors and Contributors
368
Emanuel Braz, PhD, is an honorary fellow at Victoria University in Melbourne, Australia. 
He is an expert in media and strategic communications and a se­nior con­sul­tant in the sec-
tor in Timor-­Leste. He is also the publisher of The Dili Weekly newspaper.
Mark A. Caudill was a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Analyst during 1990–2004 
and a U.S. Department of State Foreign Ser­vice Officer during 2005–2014. Author of Twi­
light in the Kingdom: Understanding the Saudis, he speaks Arabic and holds an MA in Islamic 
Studies from Middlesex University, London.
Hannah S. Chapman is a PhD candidate in po­liti­cal science at the University of Wisconsin–­
Madison. Her dissertation, “Technologies of Participatory Governance in Putin’s Rus­sia,” 
examines the role of information communication technology (ICT) in bolstering support 
for authoritarian regimes. Chapman’s fields of interest include comparative politics, post-­
Soviet politics, and po­liti­cal be­hav­ior.
Wallace Chuma, PhD, a se­nior lecturer at the Centre for Film and Media Studies, Univer-
sity of Cape Town, South Africa, has worked as a journalist and editor in Zimbabwe, Bo-
tswana, and as an Alfred Friendly Press Fellow in the United States. His research areas 
include media policy, media and transition in southern Africa, and po­liti­cal economy of 
the media.
Francesca Comunello, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of Humanities, 
Lumsa University, Rome. Her research and publications focus on the intersections between 
digital technology and society. This includes research on network theories, digitally medi-
ated social relations, social media, mobile communication, digital communication and natu­
ral disasters, and digital inequalities.
Skye Cooley, PhD, is a professor in the Department of Communication at Mississippi 
State University. He holds degrees in international relations, international studies, po­liti­cal 
communication, and earned his doctorate in mass communication at the University of Ala-
bama. He holds certifications of accreditation in public relations and peacekeeping 
operations.
Emily Belle Damm is a Shackouls Honor College undergraduate student researcher at Mis-
sissippi State University, where she studies communication (focusing on public relations 
and broadcasting) and math. Her research interests include public relations crisis commu-
nication, narrative analy­sis, and international studies.
Jonathan Dixon is a WSD-­Handa fellow at the CSIS Pacific Forum, where he focuses on 
Chinese nationalism and irredentism. His research has been published in Nationalities Pa­
pers and Comparative Strategy. He received a BA in po­liti­cal science and Asian studies from 
Furman University in Greenville, South Carolina, and an MA in international politics from 
American University.
Sender Dovchin is a postdoctoral associate at the University of Technology, Sydney. She 
has completed her PhD degree in language education and her MA degree in TESOL. Her 
research interests include the sociolinguistics of media globalization in Asia. She has au-
thored articles in multiple international peer-­reviewed journals, such as the Journal of So­
ciolinguistics and International Journal of Multilingualism.

About the Editors and Contributors
369
Ugur Dulger graduated from international relations at Ege University in 2016 and is cur-
rently attending an MS program in sociology at ­Middle East Technical University. His field 
of study focuses mainly on digital culture, social media, and the internet.
Sarah El-­Shaarawi is the managing editor of the journal Arab Media & Society. She has writ-
ten for Foreign Policy, Newsweek, and the Cairo Review of Global Affairs, among other publi-
cations. She holds an MA in international affairs from the New School.
Karen Stoll Farrell is head of the Area Studies Department at Indiana University Libraries, 
Bloomington, and Librarian for South and Southeast Asian Studies. She is a coeditor of Head­
ing East: Security, Trade, and Environment Between India and Southeast Asia. Her research in-
terests include web archives and access issues for international materials.
Claudio Fauvrelle, having a degree in ICT engineering, has ten years of experience work-
ing in the area of digital communications in Mozambique as a webmaster, online editor, 
graphic designer, social media expert, video and multimedia editor, and external commu-
nications and public advocate. Currently, he is the digital communication officer at UNI-
CEF Mozambique.
Solen Feyissa is a PhD candidate in learning technologies in the Department of Curricu-
lum and Instruction at the University of Minnesota. His research and teaching interests focus 
on the affordances of information communication technology (ICT) for education in low-­
income communities and the use and nonuse of technology in learning spaces.
Jeff Gagnon is a PhD candidate at the University of Toronto’s Centre for Drama, Theatre, 
and Per­for­mance Studies and is a former digital literacy educator. He is currently writing 
his dissertation, which deals with the per­for­mance of protest, public space, and the use of 
digital communications technologies.
Sean Gillen received a doctorate in modern Rus­sian and Eu­ro­pean social, intellectual, and 
po­liti­cal history at the University of Wisconsin–­Madison in 2012. Since then, he has worked 
as a media analyst. He publishes on Rus­sian affairs and is currently a visiting researcher at 
Georgetown University’s Department of History.
Erkkie Haipinge is a lecturer of educational technology and project-­based learning at the 
University of Namibia. He holds a master of education degree from the University of Oulu, 
Finland. His research focus is social media and its role in teaching and learning. He has 
published articles on students’ social media use.
John G. Hall is a writer and researcher living and working in western North Carolina. His 
professional interests include African American history and culture. Hall is also director of 
FamilyTree Alternative ­Family Ser­vices, Inc., a ­human ser­vices agency that supports indi-
viduals with disabilities and their families.
Crystal L. Hecht, a New Jersey native, has spent the last eight years living and working 
abroad. While obtaining her master’s degree in applied linguistics from ­Korea University, 
her research focused on language on the internet, mobile learning, and phonological ac-
quisition. She is currently assistant professor of creative integrated studies at Daegu Uni-
versity, South ­Korea.

About the Editors and Contributors
370
Robert Hinck is a doctoral candidate and Vision 2020 fellow at Texas A&M University. His 
research explores the role of media, narratives, and argumentation strategies in international 
relations. He has interned in the Technology and Public Policy program at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies and the Car­ter Center’s China program.
Sean Jacobs is associate professor of international affairs at The New School in New York 
City. He has held fellowships at Harvard, The New School, and New York University and is 
a former Commonwealth and Fulbright scholar. Sean is the founder and editor of the web-
site Africa Is a Country (http://africasacountry.com/).
Nurlan Kabdylkhak has a master’s degree in international area studies and po­liti­cal sci-
ence. He is an in­de­pen­dent scholar working on the issues of politics and history of Central 
Asia.
Filipo Lubua hails from Tanzania. He is a novelist, poet, foreign language instructor, and 
instructional technologist. He is currently a doctoral student in the instructional technol-
ogy program at Ohio University, and his main research interests are academic entrepreneur-
ship in instructional technology, computer-­assisted language learning, and learning 
management systems (LMSs).
Susan Makosch was born in Lebanon and now lives in Florida. She has worked as a se­nior 
cyber Arabic linguistic specialist and as an Arabic media analyst. She is pursuing a master’s 
degree in ­mental health counseling and forensic counseling from Walden University and 
plans to complete her doctorate.
Anamika Megwalu, PhD, MLIS, BS, BA, is a Se­nior Assistant Librarian/Science and Engi-
neering Librarian at San Jose State University. She earned her doctoral degree in Informa-
tion Studies from Long Island University, specializing in online scholarly communication. 
She has published articles in Advances in Librarianship, The Reference Librarian, DisCover, 
and Science & ­Children.
Caitlin Miles is a doctoral student in the Department of Communication at Texas A&M 
University. Her research focuses on ethnography, visual culture, and the rhe­torics of power 
and re­sis­tance. Inspired by the five years she lived in Istanbul, Turkey, she became fasci-
nated with activist and alternative media practices in Turkey.
Simone Mulargia, PhD, postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Communication 
and Social Research (CORIS), Sapienza University of Rome since 2010, has taught new media, 
online journalism, and sociology of communication. His research and publications examine 
the role of digital media in the relationship between culture, technology, and society.
Abraham Mulwo teaches development communication at Moi University and is a visiting 
scholar at United States International University–­Africa. He holds a PhD in communica-
tion and media studies (University of KwaZulu–­Natal, South Africa). He has worked with 
UNESCO/Ministry of Education (­Kenya) and the Centre for AIDS Development, Research, 
and Evaluation (South Africa).
Bruce Mutsvairo studies social media activism in sub-­Saharan Africa at Northumbria Uni-
versity at Newcastle, United Kingdom, where he is also a se­nior lecturer in journalism. He 
completed his PhD at Leiden University, the Netherlands.

About the Editors and Contributors
371
Sara Niner, PhD, is a transdisciplinary researcher and lecturer with the School of Social 
Sciences at Monash University in Australia. She is an expert in the field of gender and de-
velopment with a long-­term interest in ­those issues in the postconflict environment of Timor-­
Leste and is widely published in this field.
Anthony Ortiz is a Southeast Asia specialist with experience in West Africa, where he 
worked as an economist with proj­ects for the Eu­ro­pean Union, the United Nations Devel-
opment Programme, the United States Agency for International Development, and the World 
Bank. He holds a BA in po­liti­cal science and an MA in economics from the University of 
Connecticut, and an MPIA from the University of California, San Diego.
Tyler Overfelt is a gradu­ate student and assistant at George Washington University’s Insti-
tute for ­Middle East Studies. In addition to freelance writing and editing, he focuses his 
studies primarily on the po­liti­cal economy of North African countries.
Daniela Popescul, PhD, is an associate professor at the Universitatea Alexandru Ioan Cuza 
Iași, on the faculty of economics and business administration in the Business Information 
System Department. She is the author of two books on mobile commerce and business, 
one book on information security, and more than 52 scientific papers.
Troels Runge holds an MA in media science from the University of Copenhagen. He has 
worked as a digital con­sul­tant and as a commentator for Danish tele­vi­sion and news media 
on the use of social media in politics. Currently, he is a PhD student at the IT University of 
Copenhagen.
Susana Salgado, PhD, is a researcher and professor of po­liti­cal communication at the In-
stitute of Social Sciences, University of Lisbon. Her main research interests include po­liti­
cal communication, comparative media studies, media and democ­ratization, and Internet 
studies. Her research is currently sponsored by the Portuguese Foundation for Science and 
Technology (IF/01451/2014/CP1239/CT0004).
Hong-­Chi Shiau is professor of communications management and gender studies institute 
at Shih-­Hsin University in Taiwan. He is interested in building a more nuanced understand-
ing of how larger economic and cultural structures reshape East Asian identities. His re-
search explores how using new media transforms the global youth culture.
Andra Siibak, who holds a PhD in media and communication, is professor of media stud-
ies in the Institute of Social Studies at the University of Tartu, Estonia. Her current research 
interests include internet usage practices, new media audiences, and privacy issues. Her 
research proj­ect PUT44 is financed by the Estonian Research Council.
Jeffrey M. Skrysak began his ­career at the U.S. Department of Defense and Naval Re-
search Lab before becoming a private con­sul­tant. He lived in Ec­ua­dor for five years before 
returning to the United States. He is now a practicing attorney in the state of Oregon and 
trea­surer for the Oregon chapter of Mensa.
Georges Bertrand Tamokwé Piaptie is an associate professor of economics at the Uni-
versity of Douala in Cameroon. His research interests focus on digital economics, new in-
stitutional economics, and globalization. He is the executive director of the Group for 
Studies and Research in Theoretical and Applied Economics (GRETA)

About the Editors and Contributors
372
Rhon Teruelle is a postdoctoral research scholar at the University of Calgary’s Department 
of Communication, Media, and Film. He researches the tactics used by grass-­roots organ­
izations, with a par­tic­u­lar focus on social media. Rhon holds a PhD from the Faculty of 
Information at the University of Toronto.
Tamás Tófalvy, PhD, is an assistant professor at Budapest University of Technology and 
Economics, and secretary general of the Association of Hungarian Content Providers. In 
2012–2013, he was a Fulbright fellow at Columbia University’s Gradu­ate School of Jour-
nalism, and in 2011–2012, he was a Rezler fellow at Indiana University Bloomington.
Ruth Tsuria is a PhD candidate in the Department of Communication at Texas A&M Uni-
versity, researching digital religion and gender/sexuality. She received her MA from Copen-
hagen University and her BA from Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Steven  Lloyd Wilson is an assistant professor of po­liti­cal science at the University of 
Nevada–­Reno and served as a research fellow at the Va­ri­e­ties of Democracy proj­ect. His 
research focuses on comparative democ­ratization and how the internet affects authoritarian 
regimes, particularly in the post-­Soviet sphere.
Aya Yadlin-­Segal is a PhD candidate in the Department of Communication at Texas A&M 
University. Her research interests include online culture, identity construction, the flow of 
culture across globalized mediascapes, and Israel-­Iran relations.

Abastéceme, 340
ABC Group, 30
Abe, 158
Abrams, Jonathan, xl
Access to Information (a2i) Programme, 
22
Access to internet. See Internet 
penetration
ACORN (Australian Cybercrime Online 
Reporting Network), 18
Activism. See Social activism
Acton, Brian, xxv, xli, 154
Adbulmunem, Salam, 139
Addiction to internet, 294
Adeboye, E. A., 211
Adidas, 30
Adkimvn, 43
Adler family naming daughter Like, 146
Adobe, Ireland as hub for, 143
ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber line) 
internet, 239
Advanced Research Project Agency 
(ARPA), xi, xxxvii
Advanced Research Projects Agency 
Network (ARPANET), xxxvii, 248
Advance-fee scams, 211
Affirmative Repositioning, 201
Afghan Wireless, 1
Afghanistan, 1–5
“Afghanistan Needs You” campaign, 4
Afghanistan Social Media Awards, 3
AfreecaTV, 277
Africa, xviii–xix. See also specific  
countries
African Coast to Europe (ACE) cable, 34
African National Congress (ANC), 272
Agence Nationale de Reglementation des 
Telecommunications (ANRT, 
Telecommunications Regulatory 
National Agency), 189
L’Agence Tunisienne des Télécommunica-
tions (Technical Agency for Telecom-
munications), 311
Agence Tunisienne d’Internet (Tunisian 
Internet Agency), 311
Agenda Digitale Italiana, 149
AGID (Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale), 149
Airbnb, Ireland as hub for, 143
Airtel, 210
Airtel Nigeria, 208
al-Ajami, Muhammad Rashid, 241
Akiztá, 340
Alai, Robert, 166–167
Alemarah, 2
Aleph, xlii
“Aleppo Is Burning” campaign, 291
Algeria, 5–8
Algeria to the Core, 7
Al-Harbi, Fowzan, 256
Ali, Denny Januar, 131
Alibaba​.com, xlii, 222
Aliexpress, 162, 250
Al-Jazeera, 239
Allama Iqbal, 223
Altai Technologies, 153
Altel, 162
Alwasat, 174
Amazon, 127
Amazon App Store, xvii
America Online (AOL), xxxviii, xxxix, xl, 
xlii, 145
Amharic language, 88
ANC (African National Congress), 272
AndroDumper, 137
Angola, 8–11
Angola Media Libraries Network, 9
Index
Page numbers in bold indicate the location of main entries.

INDEX
374
Anonymous Algeria, 7
ANRT (Agence Nationale de Reglemen-
tation des Telecommunications), 
189
Antihacking drills, 296
AOL, xxxviii, xxxix, xl, xlii, 145
Aparat, 136
Apartheid, 271
App development, 27, 30–31, 132, 196
App Store, xvii
App usage
Afghanistan, 2
Argentina, 12
Brazil, 28–29
Chile, 43
Finland, 93
freemium apps, 31
Germany, 105–106
Ghana, 108
Honduras, 131–132
Iceland, 123
Iran, 137
Italy, 149
Kazakhstan, 163
Malaysia, 177–178
overview of, xvi–xviii
Paraguay, 225
Peru, 229
Philippines, 233
Senegal, 259
South Korea, 275–276
Spain, 282
Suriname, 286
Taiwan, 295
Trivia Crack, 14
United States, 329
Venezuela, 337, 338
Vietnam, 342–343
Yemen, 347–348
See also specific apps
Apple, 143, 329
Apps, types of, xvi
Arab Spring
Algeria, 6
Angola, 10
Egypt, 76
Iraq, 140
Libya, 173, 174
Syria, 288
Tunisia, 308, 312
Yemen, 348
Aranis, Germán Alejandro Garmendia, 43
Argentina, 11–15, 42
Argentine Digital Law (Law 27.078), 13
Argueta, Manlio, 80
al-Arifi, Muhammad, 257
ARPA (Advanced Research Project 
Agency), xi, xxxvii
ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects 
Agency Network), xxxvii, 248
Article 11 (Ecuador), 73
Article 24 of Tunisian constitution, 309, 
310
Article 56 (Colombia), 58
Article 474 (Ecuador), 73
a2i (Access to Information) Programme, 
22
Árukeresö.hu, 119
Aryeetey, Ernest, 109
Asia, xix–xx. See also specific countries
Asia America Gateway cable, 345
“Ask Guðmundur,” 124
Aslam, Atif, 222
Association of Afghan Blog Writers, 2
“Astroturfing” companies, 319
Asymmetric digital subscriber line 
(ADSL) internet, 239
“At sign,” 150
AT&T, 326
Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal, 315
al-Attar, Abdul Halim, 290
Australia, 16–19
Australian Cybercrime Online Reporting 
Network (ACORN), 18
La Autoridad Federal de Tecnologías de la 
Información y las Comunicaciones 
(AFTIC; the Federal Authority of 
Information and Communication 
Technologies), 13
Average internet speed, xii. See also 
Connection speeds
Average peak connection speed, xii, 16
Aziz, Aaron, 250, 264
Azul, 7
Baba Jukwa page, 352, 353
Baidu Tieba, xxxiii
Balloons floating into North Korea, 217

INDEX
375
Bamboo, 335
Bangladesh, 21–24, 198
Bangladesh Telecommunication Regula-
tory Commission (BTRC), 21
Banking, 127, 193
Bar, defined, xxxiii
Barakat, 6–7
Baratikor, xxix
Barbie Beauty Center, 140
Barre, Siad, regime, 266–267
Barrio 18, 116, 117
Bartle, Richard, xxxviii
BBC, 325
BBC Nepali, 206
BBM, xxv
BBN (Bolt Beranek and Newman), xxxvii
Be Mobile, 25
Beck, Ingrid, 14
Beeline, 162, 169
Bello, Ello Ed Mundsel, 265
Ben Ali, Zine el Abidine, 308
Bendelladj, Hamza, 7
Bengali blog blackout of 2013, 23
Berlusconi, Silvio, 150
Berners-Lee, Tim, xxxix
#Bersih, 179
Bersih 4.0 rally Prime Kini, 179
Beyeu, 345
BharatNet, 126
Big data, xiv
Bild-Zeitung, 106
bin Talal, Alwaleed, 255
bin Zayid, Abdullah, 323
bin Zayid, Mohammad, 323
Bing, 325
BiTaksi, 313
Bitcoin, 13–14
Bitdefender, 243
BITNET, 262
Black Lives Matter Toronto (#BLM TO), 
40
“Black Twitter,” 272
BlackBerry Messenger, xxv
BlackBerry World, xvii
#BlackLivesMatter, 331
Blackmail, 154
Le Blanc d’Eyenga (Eyenga’s White Man), 
36
Blindworlds, xxiii
Blip, 235
#BLM TO (Black Lives Matter Toronto), 
40
Blogger, xxxiv, 183, 222
Blogger killings, 23
Blog.hu, 119
Blogs
Algeria, 7
Angola, 10
Bangladesh, 23
Cuba, 62
Iraq, 139
Kenya, 166–167
Mexico, 183
Morocco, 188–189
overview of, xxiv, xxxiv–xxxv
Philippines, 231
Romania, 245, 246
Russia, 252
Uzbekistan, 335
See also Social media/social  
networking
Blogspot, xxxiv, 222
Blue Coat, 77
Bolt Beranek and Newman (BBN), xxxvii
Bookmarking forums, xxxii–xxxiv
Botbol, Hernán, xxxiii, 13–14
Botbol, Matías, xxxiii, 13–14
Botswana, 24–27
Botswana Telecommunications Authority, 
26
Botswana Telecommunications Company 
(BTC), 25
Bouazizi self-immolation, 174, 348
Bouteflika, Abdelaziz, 6
Brand24, 235, 237
Brazil, 27–32
Britain. See United Kingdom
British Cable & Wireless Communication 
Group, 153–154
Bronze soldier relocation, 85–86
Brown, Reggie, xxxii
BTC (Botswana Telecommunications 
Company), 25
BTRC (Bangladesh Telecommunication 
Regulatory Commission), 21
Burma. See Myanmar
#BuyPens, 290
Büyükkökten, Orkut, 320

INDEX
376
CAB (Central African Backbone) project, 
34
Calderon, Juan Carlos, 73
Calling booths (vibanda vya simu), 298
Cameroon, 33–37
Camp, Garrett, xxxiii
CAMTEL, 33–34
Canada, 37–41
Canal de Moçambique, 192
“Candy” nickname, 229
Cardenalita, 339
Cardiopads, 35
La Casa del Encuentro, 14
Case, Stephen, xxxix
Casseroles, 39
Castro, Raúl, 59
Catch your thief (“Chapa tu choro”) 
Facebook page, 228
Catster, xxiii
Cavazanni, Maximo, 14
CB Simulator, xxiii, xxxviii
CBBS (Computer Bulletin Board System), 
xxxvii–xxxviii
CBS, xxxviii
CCA (Computer-related Crimes Act, 
2017, Thailand), 302
CCP (Chinese Communist Party). See 
China
CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) 
networks, 208
Cecil John Rhodes statue, 273
Cellcom, 146
CEMAC (Central African Economic and 
Monetary Community), 33
CEMP, 119
Censorship, self, 115, 116, 300, 335.  
See also Government control of 
Internet
Central African Backbone (CAB) project, 
34
Central African Economic and  
Monetary Community (CEMAC),  
33
Los Centros Tecnológicos Comunitarios 
(community centers), 56
CERN (European Organization for 
Nuclear Research), xi, xxxix
CERT (Computer Security Incident 
Response Team), 303
CFCU (Communication, Forensic, and 
Cybercrimes Unit), 154
Chang San-cheng, 295
“Chapa tu choro” (Catch your thief) 
Facebook page, 228
Charlie Hebdo shootings, 98
Check Point, 146
Chen, Joseph, xxix
Children, efforts to protect
Finland, 95
France, 97–98
Ireland, 143
South Korea, 279
Taiwan, 294
The Children That No One Wanted  
(Los hijos que nadie quiso), 62
Chile, 41–45
China, xxix, xli, 45–51, 295–296
China: Hong Kong, xii, xvii, 51–54,  
326
China: Macau, xvii, 54–55
Chinese Communist Party (CCP). See 
China
Chowdhury, Salahuddin Quader, 23
Christensen, Ward, xxxvii
Chromebooks, 329
Chronology of history, xxxvii–xliii
Chronos Gate, 295
Churchill, Winston, letter, 325
Circles, xxvii–xxviii
CIRT (Cyber Incidents Response Team), 
154
CIS (CompuServe Information Service), 
xxxviii
Citizen journalism, 352–353
Citizen Lab, 90
Claro, 42, 72, 115
Clash of Kings, 295
Classmates​.com, xl, xli
Climaco, Cesar Vladimir Montoya, 116
Cloob, 136
CNN, 166, 341
#CNNmiente, 341
#CNNVzSeLaRespeta, 341
Cốc Cốc, 344
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) 
networks, 208
Code for Nepal, 207
Coins for Prita, 133

INDEX
377
Colibrí, 339
Collectiv fire, 244
Colombia, 55–59
Columbus Communications Interna-
tional, 153
Commentary forums, xxxii–xxxiv
Commentators, paid, 48
Commission for the Promotion of Virtue 
and the Prevention of Vice (CPVPV), 
256, 257
Communication, Forensic, and Cyber-
crimes Unit (CFCU), 154
Communications and Multimedia Act 
(1998, Malaysia), 179
Communications Regulation Council 
(Ecuador), 73
Communications Regulatory Authority 
(Qatar), 241
Community centers (Los Centros 
Tecnológicos Comunitarios), 56
CompuServe, xxiii, xxxvii, xxxviii, xl
CompuServe Information Service (CIS), 
xxxviii
Computer Bulletin Board System (CBBS), 
xxxvii–xxxviii
Computer Security Incident Response 
Team (CERT), 303
Computer-related Crimes Act (CCA, 
2017, Thailand), 302
Concytec (Council of Science, Technol-
ogy, and Technological Innovation), 
229
Condor, 339
Connection speeds
defined, xxii
Ghana, 108
Iran, 135
Israel, 145
Italy, 149
Japan, 155, 156
Libya, 173
Pakistan, 221
Philippines, 233–234
Poland, 234, 236
Singapore, 263
South Korea, xii, 275
United Kingdom, 326
Conrads, Randal, xl
Constitution, crowdsourcing of, 124–125
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of 
Excellence, 86
Copains d’avant, 98
Copyright Amendment (Online Infringe-
ment) Bill 2015 (Australia), 17–18
Copyright issues, xlii, 282–283
Correa, Rafael, 73
Corruption, 179, 314–315
Cosenza, Vincenzo, xv
“The cosmopolitans,” 145
Costs, difficulty of measuring, xii–xiii
Council of Science, Technology, and 
Technological Innovation (Concy-
tec), 229
CPVPV (Commission for the Promotion 
of Virtue and the Prevention of 
Vice), 256, 257
Cricket, 23
Crime
El Salvador, 81
Honduras, 116
Malaysia, 179
Saudi Arabia, 256
on social media, 128
wildlife smuggling, 228
See also Cybercrime
Crimea, 319
Crowdsourcing, Iceland constitution, 
124–125
Cuba, 59–63
Cyber Incidents Response Team (CIRT), 
154
“Cyber Security Strategy,” 95
Cyber Storm, 296
Cyberbullying, 143
Cybercafés. See Internet cafés
Cybercrime
Australia, 18
Cameroon, 36
China, 50
Jamaica, 154
Japan, 157–158
Myanmar, 197–198
Nigeria, 211–212
North Korea, 218
Philippines, 231–232
Russia, 249, 252
Saudi Arabia, 256
South Korea, 279

INDEX
378
Cybercrime (continued)
Ukraine, 319
United Arab Emirates, 321
web defacement, 7
See also Hacking; Piracy
Cybercrime Prevention Act (2012, 
Philippines), 231–232
Cybercrimes Act (2010, Jamaica), 154
Cybercrimes Act (2015, Tanzania), 
299–300
“Cybernetics, Progress, and the Future” 
(Glushkov), 248
Cybersecurity
Estonia, 85–86
Finland, 95
Georgia, 104
Ghana, 109
Israel, 146
Romania, 243
Taiwan, 295–296
Cypher (Fernando Sanz), xxxiii, 13–14
Cyrillic Mongolian font, 186
Cyworld, 276–277
Czech Republic, xii
DA (Democratic Alliance), 273
Da Silva Santos, Neymar, Jr., 30
Daesh (Islamic State), 2, 140–141, 162, 
289
Daily Maverick, 274
Daily Motion, 222
Daily Vox, 274
DailyPakistan, 222
Dark web, 141
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research 
Project Agency), xxxvii
Das, Ananta Bijoy, 23
Data hub, Ireland as, 143
Data plans, xii–xiii
DataWind, 210
Date My Single Kid, xxiii
Daum, 277
“Day of Anger,” 140
“Day of Rage,” 288
dBm, 263–264
DC Hayes Associates, xxxvii
DDoS (distributed denial of service) 
attacks, 85
Decree Law No. 34 (2006, Qatar), 240
Deep web, 141
Deep-packet inspection (DPI), 89
Defamation
Colombia, 58
Ecuador, 73
Indonesia, 133
Malaysia, 178–179
Philippines, 231–232
United Arab Emirates, 322–323
Defense Advanced Research Project 
Agency (DARPA), xxxvii
Dekal Wireless, 153
Delfi v. Estonia, 120
Dell, Ireland as hub for, 143
Demilitarized zone, 214
Democratic Alliance (DA), 273
Demographics generally, xv. See also 
specific countries, websites, and apps
Denmark, 65–69
Devanagari, 205
“Development Strategy of an Information 
Society in the Russian Federation,” 
249
DIGI, 118
Digicel, 153, 286
Digikala, 136
Digital Agenda, 243
“Digital Bangladesh by 2021” project,  
22
“Digital India,” 126
Digital literacy
Greece, 111
Mongolia, 186
Namibia, 202
Romania, 244
Zimbabwe, 351
Digital Scoreboard by European 
­Commission, Directorate General  
for Communications Networks, 
Content & Technology  
(DG CONNECT), 111
Digital Signature Act (2000, Estonia),  
83
Digitization of Denmark agreement, 
65–66
Dili Weekly, 307
Dilo Aquí, 338
Directive 5105.15, xxxvii
Distance-learning, 94, 109, 201, 302

INDEX
379
Distributed denial of service (DDoS) 
attacks, 85
Djezzy (Orascom Telecom Algerie), 5–6
Doe Myanmar, 196
Dogster, xxiii
Domestic terrorism, 23
Donetsk, 318–319
#Dontbuydeath, 269
Dorsey, Jack, xxxi, xxxiv, xli
Douban, 49
Doubly landlocked countries, 334
Download speeds, xxii, 76
DPI (deep-packet inspection), 89
Draugiem, xxviii–xxix
Drug cartels, 183
Drug smuggling, 157
du (Emirates Integrated Telecommunica-
tions Company), 321
Durov, Pavel, xxix
Earthquakes, safety check after, 43–44, 206
EASSy cable, 298
East Timor (Timor-Leste), 305–307
Eating broadcasts (mokbang), 277–278
eBay, xxv, 250
Ebola, 192–193, 261
e-Cabinet, 84
EcoCash, 351
e-commerce, 49, 278, 294–295, 302
Econet Wireless Zimbabwe, 351, 353
Economic and Financial Crimes Commis-
sion (EFCC), 211–212
Economic Freedom Front, 273
Ecuador, 42, 71–74
EcuMobil, 61
EcuRed, 61
Education
e-education, 94, 109, 201, 302
Ghana, 109
Jamaica, 154
Mongolia, 187
Namibia, 201
Romania, 244
South Africa, 273–274
Thailand, 302
United States, 329
e-education, 94, 109, 201, 302
EE (Everything Everywhere) Limited, 
324–326
e-Estonia, 83
EFCC (Economic and Financial Crimes 
Commission), 211–212
e-government, 84, 244–245
e-Government Strategy (Mozambique), 
193
Egypt, 74–79, 173, 174
Egyptian Revolution, 75
Ehara, Masahiro, 157
eKantipur, 205–206
Ekeinde, Omotola Jalade, 211
El Aissami, Tareck, 341
“El Hueco Twitter,” 117
El Salvador, 79–82
e-learning, 109, 201, 302
Elections
Honduras, 131
Iran, 137
Japan, 157
Kenya, 167
Russia, 253
South Africa, 272
Tanzania, 299
Uzbekistan, 335
See also Politicians/politics
Electronic Communications Act (2008, 
Ghana), 109
Electronic identity (ID) cards, 83
Electronic Transactions Act (2008, 
Ghana), 109
El-Sisi, Abdel Fatah, 77
Email, Ecuador, 72
Emirates Integrated Telecommunications 
Company (du), 321
Emirates Telecommunications Corpora-
tion (Etisalat), 1, 321, 322
emojis, 156, 178, 226, 245
EMOS-1 (underwater cable), 145
Employment Law Review (2012, France), 
97
Entel, 42
EPRDF (Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary 
Democratic Front), 87–88
Erdogan, Recep Tayyip, 313, 315
e-residency program, 85
Eritrea, xvii
ESAT (Ethiopian Satellite Television 
Service), 89–90
Escobar, Reinaldo, 62

INDEX
380
Espncricinfo​.com, 23
Estonia, 82–87
Ethio Telecom, 88
Ethiopia, 87–91
Ethiopia Higher Education Entrance 
Exam leak, 90
Ethiopian People’s Revolutionary Demo-
cratic Front (EPRDF), 87–88
Ethiopian Satellite Television Service 
(ESAT), 89–90
Etisalat (Emirates Telecommunications 
Corporation), 1, 321, 322
Etisalat Nigeria, 208
Euromaidan protests, 317
Europe, xx. See also specific countries
European Digital Rights Initiative, 315
European Organization for Nuclear 
Research (CERN), xi, xxxix
European Union, 243
“European Union’s Delaware,” 84
“Europe’s Silicon Valley,” 84
Everything Everywhere (EE) Limited, 
324–326
e-voting, 84
Expresso Senegal, 259
Express.pk, 222
Eyenga’s White Man (Le Blanc d’Eyenga), 
36
Eyny​.com, 294
Facebook
Africa, xviii–xix
Bangladesh, 23
Brazil, 29
Canada, 38
Chile, 43
Colombia, 56, 57
Cuba, 60
Daesh (Islamic State) using, 141
Denmark, 66–67, 68
drones and, xiii
Ecuador, 72
Egypt, 77
El Salvador, 81
Estonia, 85
Ethiopia, 89
Finland, 94
France, 98
Georgia, 102
Germany, 104
Ghana, 109
Greece, 112
Hong Kong, 52
Hungary, 119–120
Iceland, 123
India, 128, 129
Indonesia, 130
Instagram bought by, xxxi
Iran, 136–137
Ireland as hub for, 143
Ireland privacy issues, 143–144
Islamic State (Daesh) using, 141
Italy, 149–150
Japan, 158
Kazakhstan, 163
Kenya, 165
Kyrgyzstan, 169
Libya, 173
Malaysia, 177, 179
Maple Spring in Canada, 39–40
Mexico, 182–183
Mongolia, 186
Morocco, 189
Mozambique, 192–193
Myanmar, 195, 196
Namibia, 200–202
Nepal, 204, 205
Nigeria, 210–211
North Korea, 215, 217–218
overview of, xxvii, xli
Pakistan, 222–223
Paraguay, 225, 226
Peru, 227–229
Philippines, 231
Poland, 235
popularity of, xv
Qatar, 240
regional social media and, xxix
Romania, 244, 246
Safety Check, 43–44, 99, 206
Saudi Arabia, 255
Senegal, 259
Singapore, 264
as social media and social networking, 
xiv
Somalia, 268–269
South Africa, 271
South Korea, 276–277

INDEX
381
Spain, 281–282
Suriname, 285
Syria, 125, 289
Taiwan, 293, 295
Tanzania, 299
Thailand, 301, 303
Timor-Leste, 306–307
as top site, 22
Tunisia, 311
Turkey, 313, 314
Ukraine, 318
United Arab Emirates, 321, 322
United Kingdom, 325
United States, 329–330, 332
Uzbekistan, 335, 336
Venezuela, 337, 338
Vietnam, 343–344
WhatsApp purchased by, xxvi
Yemen, 347
See also Internet​.org; Social media/
social networking
Facebook Messenger
Italy, 150
Namibia, 200
overview of, xxv, xlii
Singapore, 264
United Kingdom, 325
“Facebook tunnel,” 226
Facenama, xv, xxvii, xxix–xxx, 135
FaceTime, xxv
Fake pictures, 340
Fall, Cheikh, 260–261
Farghadani, Atena, 135
FCC (U.S. Federal Communications 
Commission), 234
#Feb3, 348
#FeesMustFall, 273
Federal Authority of Information and 
Communication Technologies (La 
Autoridad Federal de Tecnologías de 
la Información y las Comunicacio-
nes), 13
Fernandez, Joe, xxviii
Fernández de Kirchner, Christina, 14–15
Fiber to the home (FTTH), 320
Fiber to the node (FTTN), 16
Fiber to the premises (FTTP), 16
“50 Cent Party,” 48
Figueroa, Milett, 229–230
File sharing, 222
Filters, 135, 157, 170
Fines
Ecuador, 73
Google, 97, 104–105
Indonesia, 133
Nigeria, 209
Qatar, 241
Saudi Arabia, 256
Finland, xii, 93–96
FireChat, 141, 179
“First Social Media War,” 289
Fisher, John Arbuthnot, letter, 325
Fixed-line telephony, 80, 199
Flickr, xxx
Flipkart, 127
Flow, 153
Foo, Willy, 264
Foreva, 345
Forticom, 235
Forum Research, 38
Forums, overview of, xxiv, xxxii–xxxiv
Fotka, 235
14ymedio, 62
France, 96–100
Free Basics by Facebook. See Internet​.org
Free Internet Initiative (Egypt), 75
Freedom 251 smartphone, 126
Freedom of expression, xxii, 29, 58. See 
also Government control of Internet
Freedom of the Net report. See Govern-
ment control of Internet
Freemium apps, 31
Frelimo, 192
French, 311
Friendster, xxiii, xl, xli, xlii, 320
Friis, Janus, xxv
Frype, xxix
FTTH (fiber to the home), 320
FTTN (fiber to the node), 16
FTTP (fiber to the premises), 16
G8, 37
Gaddafi, Muammar, 173, 174
Gambling, 54, 278
Gamer​.com, 294
Gangs, 81, 116–117
Gauthier, Laurent, 39
GDP (gross domestic product), xix

INDEX
382
Geingob, Hage Gottfried, 201
Gemius data, 118
Gender differences in use
Afghanistan, 2
France, 98
generally, xiii
Indonesia, 130
Malaysia, 177
Pakistan, 222
Philippines, 233
Spain, 281
Turkey, 313
United States, 332
Venezuela, 337
video gamers, watching, 331
Génération Numérique survey, 98
Generation Y blog, 62
Generation Z initiative, 237
Georgia, 101–103
Germany, 103–107, 229
Gezi Park protests, 314
GfK Perú report, 227
Ghana, 107–110
Ghazali, Ali, 135
Ghonim, Weal, 76
GiftedMom, 35
#GiveUSTheSerum, 261
Globacom, 208
Global Information Technology report, 
66
Global System for Mobile (GSM) net-
works, 208
Glushkov, Viktor, 248
Gmail, xix–xx, 72, 195
“Go Russia!” pamphlet, 249
GoldenLine, 235, 236
Golden Shield Project, 47
Golden Tweet, 131
Golondrinas, 339
Golovkin, Gennady, 163
Gómez, Gaby, 183
Google
Chromebooks, 329
Cốc Cốc compared, 344
Ecuador, 71
fines against, 97, 104–105
Hungary, 119
India, 127, 128
Ireland as hub for, 143
Kazakhstan, 162
Libya, 173
Mongolia, 186
Myanmar, 195
Pakistan, 222, 223
Paraguay, 225
Person Finder, 206
personal data usage, xx
Project Loon, xiii
purchase of YouTube, xli
South Korea, 277
Spain, 282
as top site, 22
United Kingdom, 325
Uzbekistan, 335
Viacom copyright lawsuit, xlii
See also Orkut
Google Play, xvii
Google Translate, 162, 186, 195
Google+
El Salvador, 81
France, 98
Italy, 150
overview of, xxvii, xxvii–xxviii
Qatar, 240
Singapore, 264
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 247
Gorkha Earthquake, 204, 205, 206–207
Gotze, Mario, 104
Government control of Internet
Algeria, 7
Angola, 10
Bangladesh, 23–24
Botswana, 26
Brazil, 29
China, 47–49
Colombia, 57
Cuba, 59–60
Ecuador, 72, 73
Egypt, 76
Ethiopia, 89–90
Finland, 95
France, 97
Georgia, 102
Hungary, 120
Iceland, 123
India, 128–129
Iran, 134–135
Iraq, 139, 140–141

INDEX
383
Japan, 156–157, 158
Kazakhstan, 162
Kenya, 166–167
Kyrgyzstan, 170
Libya, 173, 174
Morocco, 188, 189–190
Mozambique, 192
North Korea, 214–218
Pakistan, 223
Qatar, 240–241
Russia, 251–252, 253, 319
Saudi Arabia, 255–256
Singapore, 265
South Africa, 271–272
South Korea, 278
Syria, 288
Tanzania, 299–300
Thailand, 302–303
Tunisia, 308, 309–310
Turkey, 313, 314–315
Ukraine, 318, 319
United Arab Emirates, 321–323
Uzbekistan, 334, 335
Venezuela, 338–341
Vietnam, 343–344
Zimbabwe, 353
Go.vn, 343
Grameenphone, 23
“Great Firewall of China,” 47, 51–52, 304
Great Recession, 49
Greece, 110–114
Gross, Alan, 59
Gross domestic product (GDP), xix
GroundUp, 274
Grupo TV Cable accounting, 72
GSM (Global System for Mobile) net-
works, 208
GTBank, 210
Guaraní, 224
Guayaquil, Ecuador, 72
Guðmundur, 124
Guillermo Martinez (n.d) v. Google (2013), 
57
Guinness Book of World Records, 104
H&R Block, xxxviii
Hacking, 7, 157–158. See also 
Cybercrime
Hacking Team, 90
Haenlein, Michael, xiv
HamariWeb, 222
Hamnster, xxiii
Han, Lu, 49
Hangouts, xxv, xxviii
Hansen, Robert, 216
“Happy Yemen,” 349
Harim, 3
Hashtags, 211, 331. See also specific 
hashtages
Hate speech, 158, 196, 229
Hebrew University, 145
Herald (Zimbabwe), 352
Hernández, Antonio, 281
Hernández, Rodil, 81
Hi5, 281
Los hijos que nadie quiso (The Children 
That No One Wanted, blog), 62
Hindi, 127
Historic role plays, 281
Historical chronology, xxxvii–xliii
Hlongwane, Oratilwe, 272
Hoffman, Reid, xxvii
HolaSoyGerman, 43
“Homeland Network,” 339
Honduras, 115–118
Hondutel, 115–116
Hong Kong. See China: Hong Kong
Hotmail, Ecuador, 72
Houthis, 347
HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), 
xxxix
Huffman, Steve, xxxiii
Human search engines in Iceland, 124
Humor, 77–78
Hungarian National Media and Infocom-
munications Authority (Nemzeti 
Média-és Hírközlési Hatóság, 
NMHH), 118
Hungary, 118–121
Hush, 196
Hutchison Telecommunications Ltd., 17
Hybrid apps, xvi
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), 
xxxix
#IAmCharlie, 98
IAM (Internet Access Management) 
policy, 321–322

INDEX
384
#IamSyrian, 291
IBM, xxxviii
ICE Addis, 88
#IceBucketChallenge, 331
Iceland, 123–126
ICQ, xxiv, 145
iGDP (internet gross domestic product), 
xix, 259
IM. See Instant messaging (IM)
IMO, 137
Improving Access to Employment 
Program, 81
INCB (Israeli National Cyber Bureau), 
146
Index.hu, 119
India, 126–130
Indian Language Internet Alliance, 127
Indian Railway website, 127
Indiatimes​.com, 127
Indonesia, 130–134
INEC, Ecuador (Instituto Nacional de 
Estadisticas y Censos), 72
Infolady, xiii, 22
Information Authority (Ecuador), 73
Information hub, Ghana as, 109
Information Network Security Agency 
(INSA, Ethiopia), 89–90
Information Nigeria, 211
Insaurralde, Matías, 226
Instagram
Africa, xix
Canada, 39
Facebook purchase of, xxxi
France, 98
history of, xxxi
Honduras, 116
Iran, 136, 137
Italy, 150
Kazakhstan, 163
Kenya, 165
Libya, 173
North Korea, 215
popularity of, xv
Qatar, 240
Russia, 250
Singapore, 264
South Africa, 271
Suriname, 286
United Kingdom, 325–326
Instant messaging (IM)
Finland, 93
history of, xxiii
Israel, 145
overview of, xxiv–xxvi
See also specific apps
Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y 
Censos (INEC, Ecuador), 72
Intel, 210
Intelligent Apps, 106
International Iqbal Society, 223
International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU), xiii
Internet, defined, xi
Internet Access Management (IAM) 
policy, 321–322
Internet addiction, 294
Internet cafés
China, 46
Cuba, 60
India, 126–127
Kyrgyzstan, 169
Libya, 174
Nigeria, 211–212
Somalia, 268
South Korea, 278
Tanzania, 298
Turkey, 313
Internet chronology, xxxvii–xliii
Internet exchange points (IXP), 250, 319
Internet gross domestic product (iGDP), 
xix, 259
Internet Law 5651 (2007, Turkey), 315
Internet neutrality, 58, 128
Internet of Things (IoT), xiii
Internet penetration
Afghanistan, 1
Algeria, 5
Angola, 9–10
Argentina, 11–12
Australia, 16
Bangladesh, 21–22
Botswana, 25
Brazil, 27
Cameroon, 33, 36
Canada, 37–38
Chile, 41–42
China, 46–47
Colombia, 55–56

INDEX
385
Cuba, 59–60
defined, xiii
Denmark, 65–66
Ecuador, 71
Egypt, 75–76
El Salvador, 80
Estonia, 83–84
Ethiopia, 87
factors affecting, xiii
Finland, 93
France, 96
Georgia, 101
Germany, 103
Ghana, 107–108
Greece, 111, 112
Honduras, 115
Hong Kong, 51
Hungary, 118
Iceland, 123
India, 126
Indonesia, 130
Iran, 134
Iraq, 139
Israel, 144–145, 147
Italy, 148–149
Jamaica, 153
Japan, 155–156
Kazakhstan, 161
Kenya, 164
Kyrgyzstan, 168
Libya, 173
Malaysia, 177
Mexico, 181
Mongolia, 185
Morocco, 188
Mozambique, 192, 193
Myanmar, 194
Namibia, 199, 200
Nepal, 204
Nigeria, 208
North Korea, 214
Pakistan, 221
Paraguay, 224, 225
Philippines, 233
Poland, 235, 236
Qatar, 239, 240
Romania, 243
Russia, 250
Saudi Arabia, 255
Senegal, 259
Singapore, 262
Somalia, 267–268
South Africa, 271
South Korea, 275
Spain, 281
Suriname, 285
Syria, 289
Taiwan, 293–294
Tanzania, 297
Thailand, 301
Timor-Leste, 305
Tunisia, 311
Turkey, 313
Ukraine, 317
United Kingdom, 324
United States, 328, 329
Uzbekistan, 334
Vietnam, 342
Yemen, 347
Zimbabwe, 351
“Internet research,” 252
Internet safety, Ireland, 143
Internet Society, 76
Internet speed, xxii. See also Connection 
speeds
Internet​.org
Argentina, 9
Colombia, 56
India, 128
Mozambique, 192
Pakistan, 223
Paraguay, 225–226
Senegal, 259
INTERRED–CETCOL (Red Nacional de 
Ciencia, Educación y Tecnología), 55
The Interview, 218
Invitel, 118
Inwi, 189
IoT (Internet of Things), xiii
iPads, 329
IPTV Triple Play, 210
Iran, 134–138, 320
Irancell, 137
Iraq, 139–142
Ireland, 142–144
al-Islah, 322
Islamic State (Daesh), 2, 140–141, 162, 
289

INDEX
386
Israel, 144–148
Israeli National Cyber Bureau (INCB), 146
Italy, 148–151
ITU (International Telecommunications 
Union), xiii
iTyphoon, 233
iWiW, 119
IXP (internet exchange points), 250, 319
Jakarta, Indonesia, 131
Jamaica, 153–155
JamiiForums, 299
Japan, xii, xxviii, 155–160, 326
Javedch, 222
#JeSuisCharlie, 98
#JeSuisNice, 99
Jewish immigrants, 145
Jiayuan, 49
Job recruitment, 236, 295
Jokowi, 131
Jonathan, Goodluck, 211
Jose Cuervo, 264
Journalists
Botswana, 26
citizen journalism, 352–353
Honduras, 117
Mexico, 183
Morocco, 190
Qatar, 241
Yemen, 349
JuegaGerman, 43
#JunSeMueve, 284
Jun, Spain, 283–284
Jun Lei, xxxi
KACST (King Abdulaziz City for Science 
and Technology), 256
Kadyrov, Ramzan, 251
KakaoTalk, 177, 276, 278–279
Kalla, Jusuf, 131
Kanji language, 155, 158
Kaplan, Andreas, xiv
Karimova, Gulnara, 335
Kariuki, Francis, 166
Karman, Tawakkol, 348–349
Karta, 88–89
Kaskus, 132
Kat.cr, 222
Kaymu, 210
Kazakhstan, 161–164
Kazakhtelecom, 161
Kcell, 162
#kebetu, 261
Kebetu, 261
Kenya, 164–168
Kenya Information and Communications 
Act (KICA), 166
Kenyans on Twitter (KOT), 165–166
Khama, Seretse Ian, 26
KICA (Kenya Information and Communi-
cations Act), 166
Kim Jong-un, 216
Kimeltuwe, Materiales de Mapudungun, 
43
King Abdulaziz City for Science and 
Technology (KACST), 256
Kiosks, Colombia, 56
Kiwi.kz, 163
Kjellberg, Felix Arvid Ulf, 330
Klassen, Gary, xxv
“Kleenex” (Wikileaks), 174
Klout, xxviii
Kolesa.kz, 162, 163
Koo, Victor, xxxi
Korea Communications Standards 
Commission, 278
Korea Friendship Association, 217
Korea​-dpr​.com, 217
Koryolink, 214
Kosher devices, 147
KOT (Kenyans on Twitter), 165–166
Koum, Jan, xxv, xli
K-pop, 275
Krieger, Mike, xxxi
Kulena Khaled Said Facebook page, 76
Kwangmyong intranet, 216
Kwikku, 132
Kyrgyzstan, 168–171
Kyrgyztelecom, 170
Lafrenière, Nadia, 39
LamDieu, 345
Language use and issues
Asia, xix–xx
Australia, 18
Ethiopia, 88
India, 126, 127
Israel, 147–148

INDEX
387
Japan, 155, 158
Malaysia, 177
Mongolia, 184–187
Myanmar, 195–196
Nepal, 205
Pakistan, 221
Paraguay, 224–225
Senegal, 260
Timor-Leste, 305
Tunisia, 311–312
Lapsiporno​.info, 95
Latin America, xx. See also specific 
countries
Latvia, xii
Law 27.078 (Argentine Digital Law), 13
Law on the Mongolian Language (2015, 
Mongolia), 187
Le Quoc Quan, 343
Lee, Jean, 214–215, 216
Legacy media. See Traditional media
Legal right to services, Finland, 93
Lemma, Markos, 88
“Letter to the Committee of the Compre-
hensive National Development 
Strategy of Mongolia, Mongolian 
Parliament, 2007,” 187
#LeyStalker, 228
Li, David, xxxi
Liability, Hungary, 120
Libel. See Defamation
Libya, 173–175
Libya Telecom & Technology (LTT), 173
Life Is a Garden (Zindagi Gulzar Hai), 
222–223
Like as given name, 146
LIME, 153
Lin, J. J., 264
Line
Hong Kong, 53
Malaysia, 177
overview of, xxvi
Singapore, 264
Taiwan, 293, 295
Thailand, 301
LinkedIn
Canada, 38
France, 98
Hong Kong, 53
Ireland as hub for, 143
Microsoft purchase of, xlii
Morocco, 189
overview of, xxvii
Pakistan, 222
Poland, 235, 236
popularity of, xv
Singapore, 264
Spain, 281
Tunisia, 311
Yemen, 347
LinX, 146
Literacy, 222, 267, 305. See also Digital 
literacy
Live, 222
Live Digital (Vive Digital), 55–56
LiveJournal, 250, 251, 318
Loaf and arm memes, 157
LOCALLY, 88
Look@World Project, 83–84
LostZombie, xxiii
LTT (Libya Telecom & Technology), 173
Lunati, Thierry, xxvii
M1, 262–263, 264
Ma Ying-jeou, 294
Macau. See China: Macau
Maduro, Nicolás, 339, 340, 341
Magyar Telekom, 118, 119
Mail-order brides, 35–36
Mail.ru Group, 251, 335
Malaysia, 177–180
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17, 180
Malaysian Airlines Flight MH370, 
179–180
Malaysian Communications and Multi-
media Commission (MCMC), 179
Malikzada, Farkhunda, 3
Mansour, Adly, 77
MaNUfestation, 39
Maple Spring, 39–40
Mapuche peoples, 43, 44
Marco, Talmon, xxvi
Marco Civil da Internet (MCI), 29
Maroc Blog Awards, 188, 189
Maroc Telecom, 189
Marshall Islands, xvii
Mascom, 25, 26
Masiyiwa, Strive, 351
#MásPeruanoQue, 228

INDEX
388
Mathews, Dillish, 201
Mayor Boss, 210
MB (Muslim Brotherhood), 322
Mbps, xii
Mcel, 192
MCI, 137
MCI (Marco Civil da Internet), 29
MCMC (Malaysian Communications and 
Multimedia Commission), 179
MDA (Media Development Authority), 
265
Media bubble, 66
Media Development Authority (MDA), 
265
Media libraries, 9
Media-sharing, xxiv, xxx–xxxii. See also 
specific apps
Medicine via Internet, 26, 35
Meditel, 189
Medvedev, Dmitry, 249
Meerkat, xlii
Megacom, 169
Memes, 78, 157, 229–230
Messi, Lionel “Leo,” 12, 13, 15
Messina, Chris, 211
Mexico, 61, 181–184
#mh370, 180
Microblogs, xxxiv–xxxv. See also Sina 
Weibo; Twitter
MicroNET, xxxviii
Microrésumés, 295
Microsoft Corporation
Amharic in Ethiopia, 88
Ireland as hub for, 143
LinkedIn purchased by, xlii
Nigeria, 210
Outlook in Ecuador, 72
Skype purchase, xxv
“Microwave Ring,” 1
MICT (Ministry of Information and 
Communication Technology), 301
Middle East Media Survey, 77
Ministerial Decree no, 18/2015 (Mozam-
bique), 193
Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology (Egypt), 75
Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Thailand), 303
Ministry of Industry and Information 
Technology (China), 47, 49–50
Ministry of Information and Communica-
tion Technology (MICT, Thailand), 
301
Ministry of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (Qatar), 241
Ministry of Post and Information and 
Communications Technologies 
(MPTIC), 5
Ministry of Public Security (China), 47
Minitel, 96, 97
Mirabilis, 145
MIT Senseable City Lab, 264
Mivasocial, 259–260
Mixi, xxviii
mKesh, 193
Mobile device use
Afghanistan, 1
Algeria, 5
Angola, 9
Australia, 17
Bangladesh, 21
Botswana, 25, 26
Brazil, 30
Cameroon, 34
Chile, 42
China, 49
Colombia, 56–57
Denmark, 66
Ecuador, 71–72
El Salvador, 80–81
Ethiopia, 88
Finland, 93
Georgia, 101
Ghana, 108
Greece, 111
Honduras, 115–116
Hong Kong, 51
Hungary, 118–119
India, 126
Indonesia, 130
Iran, 137
Iraq, 139
Israel, 146–147
Italy, 148, 149
Japan, 156
Kazakhstan, 161, 162
Kenya, 164
Kyrgyzstan, 169
Libya, 173

INDEX
389
Macau, 54–55
Malaysia, 177–178
Mexico, 181
Mozambique, 192, 193
Myanmar, 194
Namibia, 199–200
Nepal, 204
North Korea, 214
number per person, xvii
Pakistan, 221
Paraguay, 225
Poland, 235–236
Romania, 244
Saudi Arabia, 255
Singapore, 262–263, 264
Somalia, 266–267, 268
South Africa, 271
South Korea, 275
Suriname, 285
Syria, 289–290
Taiwan, 293
Tanzania, 298
Thailand, 301
Timor-Leste, 306
Tunisia, 311
United Arab Emirates, 321
United Kingdom, 324–325
United States, 329, 332
Uzbekistan, 334
Vietnam, 342
Zimbabwe, 351
Mobile money, 164, 193
Mobile Telecommunications Corporation 
(MTC), 200
Mobile video on demand (M-VOD),  
210
Mobilis Algerie Telecom, 6
“Mochi mochi,” 157
Mochuelo, 339
Moda Capital, 183
Modems, xxxvii
Mohiuddin, Asif, 23
Moi Mir, 169
Mokbang (eating broadcasts), 277–278
MOL Global, xli
Momo Lay, 196
Mongolia, xii, 184–188
Mongolian People’s Revolutionary Party 
(MPRP), 184
Moodle, 94
Moreno, Paul, 73
Morocco, 188–191
Morsi, Mohamed, 76
Moscow Spring, 253
Movement for Democratic Change, 352
Movicel, 9
Movistar, 42, 72
Movitel, 192
Moy Mir, 163
Mozambique, 191–194
M-Pesa, 164, 193
MPLA (Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola), 8
MPRP (Mongolian People’s Revolutionary 
Party), 184
MPTIC (Ministry of Post and  
Information and Communications 
Technologies), 5
MS-13, 117
MTC (Mobile Telecommunications 
Corporation), 200
MTE and Index.hu Zrt v. Hungary, 120
MTM, 271
MTN Cameroon, 34
MTN Nigeria, 208, 209, 210
Mubarak, Hosni, 75, 76
MUD (multiuser dungeon), xxxviii
Mugabe, Robert, 351, 353–354
Mujahid, Ali Ahsan Mohammad, 23
Multi-Links, 208
Multiuser dungeon (MUD), xxxviii
Mulyasari, Prita, 133
Murphy, Bobby, xxxi–xxxii
Muslim Brotherhood (MB), 322
M-VOD (mobile video on demand), 210
MwanaHalisi Forum, 299
Mxit, 271
Myanmar, 194–198, 229
Myanmar Posts and Telecommunications, 
195
MySpace, xxiii, xl–xli, 130, 183
MySQUAR, 194–195, 196
Mytaxi app, 106
Naij​.com, 209, 210
Nakayama, Alberto, 13–14
Namibia, 199–203
Nasza-Klasa, 235

INDEX
390
National Broadband Network (NBN), 16
National Broadband Policy (Nepal), 204
National Bureau of Investigation (NBI, 
Finland), 95
National Communications Commission 
(NCC), 293
National Cyber Security Strategy (Ja-
maica), 154
National Democratic Party (Suriname), 
287
National Development Plan (Plan 
Nacional de Desarrollo, or PND), 58
National Information Technology Agency 
(Ghana), 109
National Plan to Combat Cybercrime 
(2015, Australia), 18
“National Security Strategy of the Russian 
Federation to 2020,” 249
Native apps, xvi
Navalny, Alexei, 251, 252
Naver, xxvi, 277
NBI (National Bureau of Investigation), 95
NBN (National Broadband Network), 16
NBN Co Limited, 16–17
NCC (National Communications Com-
mission), 293
NCC (Nigerian Communications Com-
mission), 208
Nemzeti Média-és Hírközlési Hatóság, 
NMHH (Hungarian National Media 
and Infocommunications Authority), 
118
@NEoCOfficial, 206
Neotropical Primate Conservation, 228
Nepal, 204–207
Nepal Telecom (NT), 204
Nepal Wireless Networking Project, 204
Nepali, 205
#NepalQuakeRelief, 206
Net neutrality, 58, 128
Netflix, 128
Netherlands, the, xii
Networked Readiness Index, 33
“New Revolution of the Angolan people,” 
10
News aggregation in Spain, 282–283
News regulations in Singapore, 265
Newspapers. See Journalists; Traditional 
media
Nexttel Cameroon, 34
N’gola Digital program, 9
Nguyen, Rita, 195–196
Nguyen Tan Dung, 343
NHN Corp, xxvi
Niantic. See Pokémon Go
Nido, 339
Nigeria, 208–213
Nigeria Internet Group, 208
Nigerian 419, 211
Nigerian Communications Commission 
(NCC), 208
Nigerian Ericsson, 210
Nikki, Matti, 95
Nippon Telegraph (NTT), 155, 156
#NiUnaMenos, 14–15
nk.pl, 235
No. 2010/012 (2010, Cameroon), 36
No! anti-fracking movement, 7
#NonLibelousTweet, 232
North America, xx. See also specific 
countries
North Korea, 214–219
Norway, xii
Norwegian Telenor, 195
#notocybercrimelaw, 232
NRC Market Research Ltd. study, 119
NSA (U.S. National Security Agency), 
271–272
NT (Nepal Telecom), 204
Ntamack, Thierry Roland, 36
Nteff, Alain, 35
NTT (Nippon Telegraph), 155, 156
Nuro, 156
NUSNET, 262
Obama, Barack, 59
Obama, Michelle, 237
O’Brien, Denis, 153
Ochoa, Eduard, 128
Octopusocial, 338
Odnoklassniki, xv, xxix, 169, 250, 335
Ohanian, Alexis, xxxiii
OICQ, xxiv
OK.RU, xxix
OMG, 325
Onclickads​.net, 222
ONE Championship, 264
One-internet gateway (Thailand), 304

INDEX
391
Onion routers, 289
Online learning, 94, 109, 201, 302
Online piracy, 17–18, 157
Onlinekhabar, 205
“Ook Zij” (They Too), 287
Ooredoo, 6, 195, 239, 241, 309
Open Business Club (later Xing), xxvii, 
105
“Open Homes, Open Hearts” Facebook 
page, 125
Open Library of Kazakhstan, 162
Opensooq​.com, 174
OpenStreetMap, 206
Opera Software, 209
Orange, 259, 260
Orange Botswana (Vista), 25, 26
Orange Cameroon, 34
Orange Revolution, 249, 318
Orange Tunisie, 309
Orascom Telecom Algerie (Djezzy), 5–6
Orkut, xxvii, 28, 29, 320
Orunbekov, Dayirbek, 170–171
“OSmartPhona” campaign, 200
al-Ouda, Salman, 257
OuedKniss, 6
Outdoor 4G mobile service, 263–264
Over-the-top (OTT) services, 35
Oxford English Dictionary, 18
Ozone, xv
Pacific Caribbean Cable System (PCCS), 
72
Paéz, Chiara, 14
Paid commentators, 48
Pakistan, 221–224
Pakistan Telecommunications Act, 223
Pakistan Telecommunications Company 
Ltd. (PTCL), 221
Palacio, Emilio, 73
Panama, 117
Paraguay, 224–227
Partner, 146
Party for Democracy and Development 
Through Unity (Suriname), 287
PCCS (Pacific Caribbean Cable System), 
72
Peak connection speed, xii, 16
Pelephone, 146
People’s Liberation Army (PLA), 50
People’s Republic of China (PRC). See 
China
Periscope, xlii
Persia. See Iran
Person Finder, 206
Peru, 227–230
Petzoldt, Oliver, 88
PewDiePie, 330
Philippines, 230–234
Picaboo. See Snapchat
Pinterist, xxxiii, 98, 116, 330. See also 
Social media/social networking
Piracy, 17–18, 157
PLA (People’s Liberation Army), 50
Plan Nacional de Desarrollo (National 
Development Plan), 58
Plurk, 295
Poderopedia, 338
Poke, xxxii
Pokémon Go, xlii, 52, 182, 290–291
Poland, 234–238
Police department social media officers, 
128
Politicians/politics
Hungary, 120
Iceland, 125
Italy, 150–151
Malaysia, 179
Namibia, 201
Romania, 245
Senegal, 260–261
social media use by, 68, 94–95
Suriname, 286–287
Taiwan, 294, 296
Tanzania, 299
Turkey, 315
Venezuela, 339
See also Elections
Popular Movement for the Liberation of 
Angola (MPLA), 8
#PorteOuverte, 99
Portland Communications report, 165
Posterous, 183
Pothole tweets, 117
#prayforMH370, 180
Prayuth Chan-o-cha, 302
Premchaiporn, Chiranuch, 303
Prenatal care, 35
La Prensa, 116

INDEX
392
Presidential decree No. 1182 (Peru),  
228
Prevention of Electronic Crimes (2016, 
Pakistan), 223
Pricing, difficulty of measuring, xii–xiii
Prince, Joseph, 264
Prinsloo, Behati, 201
Prison, El Salvador, 81
Privacy
France, 97–98
Germany, 104–105
Google and, xx
Hungary, 120
Ireland, 142, 143–144
Libya, 174
Namibia, 202
Peru, 228
Philippines, 232–233
Prodigy, xxxviii–xxxix, xxxix, xl
Produsers, 110
Progressive Reform Party (Suriname),  
287
Project Loon, xiii
Protests, media used for
Egypt, 77
Euromaidan protests, 317
Gezi Park protests, 314
Iraq, 140
Libya, 174
Morocco, 188–189
Russia, 249, 251, 253
Saudi Arabia, 256
Suriname, 287
Ukraine, 318
Vietnam, 344
Yemen, 348
See also Arab Spring; specific protests
Provost, Anne Marie, 39–40
P-Square, 210
PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia Interna-
tional (Telin), 306
PTCL (Pakistan Telecommunications 
Company Ltd.), 221
PTV Sports, 222
Pussy Riot, 252
Putin, Vladamir, 249, 252, 318
Pwar, 196
Pyaw Kyi, 196
Pyra Labs, xxxiv
Qatar, 239–242
Qatar Telecom, 239
Q-link, xxxviii
Qorqmaymiz, 336
QQ, xxiv, xl
Quakemap​.org, 206
Quantum Computer, xxxix
Quito, Ecuador, 72
Qzone, xxiv, xxix, xli
Racism, 272
Radio. See Traditional media
Radio Munna, 23
Raghib, Amine, 190
Rahman, Washiqur, 23
RaincheckPH, 233
Rakuten, xxvi
Rambler&Co, 251
Ramón Torres Psicólogo, 225
Rapid Response Team, 207
Rate, 85
Razak, Najib, 179
Red Nacional de Ciencia, Educación y 
Tecnología (INTERRED–CETCOL), 
55
“Red Patria,” 339
Red Social, 61
Red squares, 39
Red Star, 216
Reddit, xv, xxxiii–xxxiv
Refugee crisis, 125, 289–290
Refugees and Repatriations Ministry 
(Afghanistan), 4
#RefugeesWelcome, 291
Regional Informatics Networks for Africa 
project, 208
Regulation of Interception of 
­Communications and Provision of 
Communication-Related Informa-
tion (RICA) Act, 272
Religion, 108, 147, 255–256
Remittances, 79–80, 351
Renamo, 192
Renewable sources of electricity, 243
Ren-Ren, 52
Renren, xxix
Renzi, Matteo, 150–151
Replay, xxxii
“Report on the Internet Economy,” 120

INDEX
393
Republic of China (ROC). See Taiwan
Rhodes, Cecil John, statue of, 273
#RhodesMustFall, 273
RICA (Regulation of Interception of 
Communications and Provision of 
Communication-Related Informa-
tion) Act, 272
Rightel, 137
RobiAxiata Limited, 23
Roboscan, 243
ROC (Republic of China). See Taiwan
Rodman, Dennis, 215
Romania, 243–247
Roy, Avijit, 23
Royal Decree No. M/17 (2008, Saudi 
Arabia), 256
Rumors, 192–193, 196–197
Russia, 247–254
control of internet by, 251–252, 253, 
319
history, 247–248
internet penetration, 250
Moscow Spring, 253
national security concerns, 249–250
Putin and, 249
Ukraine and, 319
United States compared, 248
“Russian Federation’s Doctrine of 
Information Security,” 249
Safety Check, 43–44, 99, 206
Said, Khaled, 76
Sajde KZ, 163
Salam Pax, 139
Salas, José Antonio Rodríguez, 283–284
Saleh, Ali Abdullah, 348–349
Samsung Senegal, 259
Sánchez, Yoani, 62
Sankalpa, 207
Santadar, 29–30
Santiesteban-Prats, Angel, 62
Sanz, Fernando, xxxiii, 13–14
SAPO Timor-Leste, 307
Sarawak Report, 179
SAT-3 (South Atlantic 3) cable, 34
Satellite Solutions Worldwide, 236
Saudi Arabia, 255–258, 320
Saudi Telecom Company, 255–256
SBC Communications, xl
Scare PewDiePie, 330
Schrems, Maximilian, 143–144
Scottish Rural Development Programme 
(SRDP), 327
SEACOM cable, 298
Search engines
Cameroon, 35
Ecuador, 71
Germany, 103
human search engines in Iceland, 124
Kazakhstan, 162
North Korea, 216
South Korea, 277
Taiwan, 293
Tunisia, 311–312
Vietnam, 344
See also specific search engines by name
Sears, xxxviii
Sedition, 26
Sedition Act (Singapore), 265
SEE Egypt, 77
Self-censorship, 115, 116, 300, 335. 
See also Government control of 
Internet
Selfies, 231
Senegal, 258–262
Seneweb, 259
#SenStopEbola, 261
Serfaty, Dan, xxvii
al-Sheikh, Abdul Aziz, 256
Shufersal, 147
al-Shugairi, Ahmed, 257
@ sign, 150
Al Sihir, Kadim, 140
Silbermann, Ben, xxxiii
Silent stands, 76
“Silicon Savanah,” 164
“Silicon Wadi,” 146
SIM registration, 193, 209, 272,  
309–310
Simferopol internet exchange point (IXP), 
319
Sina Weibo, xxxiv–xxxv, 52, 53, 295
Singapore, 262–266
Singapore Airlines, 264
Singapore–Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Alliance for Research 
and Technology (SMART), 264
Singnet, 262

INDEX
394
SingTel, 262–266
SixDegrees, xxiii, xl
Skjerdal, Terje, 352–353
Skolkovo hub, 249–250
Skype, xxiv–xxv, 72, 150, 264
Skyrock, 98
Skyrock FM, 98
Sloth rescue, 71–72
SMART, 264
Smart filtering, 135
Smart Government initiative, 321
Smartphones. See Mobile device use
Smuggling, 217
Snake game, xvi
Snapchat
France, 98
Italy, 150
overview of, xxxi–xxxii
Somalia, 269
United States, 332
Snapdeal, 127
Social activism
Honduras, 117
Indonesia, 130, 133
Kenya, 164–165
Malaysia, 179
Morocco, 190
Namibia, 201
Peru, 228
Romania, 244
Senegal, 261
Somalia, 269
South Africa, 272, 273–274
Syria, 291
Yemen, 348–349
Social justice, Mapuche peoples, 43, 44
Social Media Lab, 128
Social media officers, 128
Social Media Summit, 2–3
Social media/social networking
Afghanistan, 2
Africa, xviii–xix
Algeria, 6, 7
Angola, 10
apps for, xvii–sviii
Argentina, 12–14
Australia, 16
Bangladesh, 23–24
Botswana, 25
Brazil, 27–30
Cameroon, 34–36
Canada, 38–41
China, 49
Colombia, 57
comparison of, xiv
Cuba, 60–61
defined, xiv, xxvi
Denmark, 66–67
Ecuador, 71, 72–73
Egyptian Revolution and, 76
El Salvador, 81
Estonia, 84–85
Ethiopia, 89
Finland, 94–95
France, 97, 98
Georgia, 102
Germany, 103–104
Ghana, 109
government control of, 7
Greece, 110, 111–112
Honduras, 130–133
Hong Kong, 52–53
human search engines in Iceland, 124
Hungary, 119
Iceland, 123, 124–125
India, 128
Indonesia, 130
Iran, 134, 135–137
Ireland, 142–143
Israel, 147
Italy, 149–150
Japan, 158
Kazakhstan, 163
Kenya, 165–166
Libya, 173–175
Macau, 54–55
Malaysia, 177, 178–180
Mexico, 182–183
Morocco, 188–189
Mozambique, 192
Myanmar, 194–195, 196
Nepal, 206–207
North Korea, 216, 217
overview of, xxiii–xxiv, xxvi–xxx
Pakistan, 222
Paraguay, 225
penetration versus importance of 
access, 66

INDEX
395
Peru, 227, 229
Philippines, 231–232
Poland, 235–236
popularity of, xlii, xliii
Qatar, 239–240
range of apps available, xxiii
reasons to use, xiv–xv
Romania, 244–245
Saudi Arabia, 255, 257
Senegal, 259–260
Singapore, 264
social activism with, 117
Somalia, 268–269
South Africa, 270–271, 273–274
South Korea, 275–278
Suriname, 285–287
Syria, 288, 289
Taiwan, 294
Tanzania, 299
Thailand, 301, 302
Timor-Leste, 306–307
Tunisia, 311
Turkey, 313–314
Ukraine, 318
United Arab Emirates, 321
United Kingdom, 325–326
United States, 328–332
Uzbekistan, 335–336
Venezuela, 337, 338–341
Vietnam, 343–344
Yemen, 347–348
Zimbabwe, 351–354
See also Blogs
Social Suriname, 286
Sol, Armando Calderón, 80
Somalia, xvii, 266–270
#SomeoneTellCNN, 166
Somkid Jatusripitak, 304
#SOSVenezuela, 340–341
So-Net, 156
Sony Entertainment hack, 218
Soon, Tay Eng, 262
South Africa, 270–274
South Atlantic 3 (SAT-3) cable, 34
South Korea, 274–281
app usage, 275–276
connection speeds, xii, 326
cybercrime, 279
demilitarized zone, 214
eating broadcasts, 277–278
internet penetration, 275
North Korea media banned, 217, 278
social media use, 275–278
websites banned in North Korea, 215
Space race, 248
Spain, 281–284
Sparks, xxvii–xxviii
Sparrow, Penny, 272
SparrowSMS, 207
Speak-to-tweet, 60, 61
Speigel, Evan, xxxi–xxxii
SpyEye, 7
SRDP (Scottish Rural Development 
Programme), 327
Stache Passions, xxiii
Stackoverflow, 127
Star balloons, 277
Star Trek Dating, xxiii
StarHub, 262–263, 264
Start-up businesses, 84–85, 236–237, 
344–345
“Start-Up Nation,” 146
State of the Internet report, xii, 65, 173
States of emergency in Tunisia,  
310–311
Statista survey, 95
StatsMonkey, 35
#staystrong, 180
Streaming media, 68, 210, 277
StumbleUpon, xxxiii
Suess, Randy, xxxvii
Sunday Standard, 26
#sunu2012, 261
Sunu2012, 260–261
#sunucause, 261
Sunucause, 261
SuP Media, 318
SuperWiFi broadband network in 
Jamaica, 153
#SupportYemen, 349
Support Yemen, 349
Suriname, 284–288
Surveillance, 29, 77. See also  
Government control of Internet; 
Self-censorship
Sweden, xii
Swiftkey, 245
Switzerland, xii

INDEX
396
#SY, 349
Synergie Media, 188, 189
Syria, 288–291
“Syria is Calling” Facebook page, 125
Syrian Refugee Support Group, 40–41
Systrom Kevin, xxxi
Tablets. See Mobile device use
Tablets in School (TIS), 154
Taiwan, 293–297
Taliban, 1, 2
Tallinn, Estonia, 86
Tamazight, 7
Tank Commando, 295
Tanzania, 297–300
Tanzania Communications Commission 
(TCC), 298
Tanzania Communications Regulatory 
Authority (TCRA), 298
Tanzanian Broadcasting Commission 
(TBC), 298
Taringa!, xxxiii, 13–14, 116
Taringa! Creadores, 14
Tasmania. See Australia
Tax Committee of the Kazakh Finance 
Ministry, 163
Taxes, 73, 120, 143, 163
Taxi services, 106, 313
TBC (Tanzanian Broadcasting Commis-
sion), 298
TCC (Tanzania Communications Com-
mission), 298
TCRA (Tanzania Communications 
Regulatory Authority), 298
Technical Agency for Telecommunica-
tions (l’Agence Tunisienne des 
Télécommunications), 311
Tele2, 162
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
(TRAI), 126, 128
Telecommunications Act (2001, Bangla-
desh), 21
Telecommunications Regulatory Author-
ity (TRA), 321–322
Telecommunications Regulatory National 
Agency (Agence Nationale de 
Reglementation des Telecommunica-
tions), 189
Telefónica, 72
Telegram, 28, 137, 141
Telegraph, 137
Tele-medicine, 26, 35
Telemor (Viettel Global Investment JSC), 
306
Telenor, 119
Telephone and Telephone Board (Bangla-
desh), 21
Telephony. See Voice over internet 
protocol (VoIP)
Telesur, 286
Television. See Traditional media
Telin (PT Telekomunikasi Indonesia 
International), 306
Telkom, 271
Telstra Corporation, 17
Tenashar, 264
Tencent, xxiv, xli, xlii–xliii, 49
La Tendedera, 61
Tengrinews.kz, 163
Teoti​.com, xxxiii
Tequila, Tila, 264
Terrorism, 98–99, 256. See also Daesh 
(Islamic State)
Tetum, 305
Th3professional blog, 190
Thailand, 301–304
Al Thani, Hamad bin Khalifa, 239
The Source, xxxviii, xxxix
#ThisFlag campaign, 352
They Too (“Ook Zij”), 287
Threat Intelligence Brief, 18
Threema, 104
Throttling, 135
Tiger Leap project, 83
Tigo Communications, 115–116
Tigo Senegal, 259
Time magazine selfies capital article, 231
Time Warner, xl
Timor Telcom, 305–306
Timor-Leste (East Timor), 305–308
TIS (Tablets in School), 154
Tokyo Olympics, effects on internet of, 
158–159
Tomlinson, Ray, xxxvii
Torres, Ramón, 225
Tourism, 124, 286, 326–327
TRA (Telecommunications Regulatory 
Authority), 321–322

INDEX
397
Traditional media
Georgia, 104
Ghana, 108
Iraq, 139–140
Israel, 144, 147
Kenya, 165
Mozambique, 192
social media use and, 67–68
Somalia, 267
Spain, 283
streaming media and, 68
Timor-Leste, 307
TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India), 126, 128
Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber Optic Line,  
169, 334
Transparency International survey, 
101–102
Tree removal, 344
Trintex, xxxviii
Trivia Crack, 14
Troll farms, 252
Trubshaw, Roy, xxxviii
Tsai Ing-wen, 296
Tudou, xxx–xxxi
Tuenti, 281–282, 337
Tuenti Local, 282
Tuenti Móvil, 282
Tumblr, 183. See also Social media/social 
networking
Tunisia, 308–312
Arab Spring, 308, 312
Bouazizi self-immolation in, 174, 348
government control of Internet, 308, 
309–310
language use and issues, 311–312
states of emergency in, 310–311
Yemen compared, 348
Tunisian Internet Agency (ATI, Agence 
Tunisienne d’Internet), 311
“Tunisian Jasmine,” 241
Tunisie Télécom, 309
Turkey, 313–316
Tweefs, 165
“Tweeting Pothole,” 117
Twitch.tv, 331
Twitter
Africa, xix
Algeria, 7
Canada, 38
Colombia, 57
country withheld content tool, 
302–303
Cuba, 60
Daesh (Islamic State) using, 141
Denmark, 66
Ecuador, 72
El Salvador, 81
France, 98
Greece, 112
hashtags on, 211
historic role plays on, 281
Honduras, 116
Hong Kong, 53
Indonesia, 130–131
Instagram advertised on, xxxi
Iran, 136
Islamic State (Daesh) using, 141
Italy, 150
Japan, 158
job recruitment using, 295
Kazakhstan, 163
Kenya, 165–166
length limits, xliii
Libya, 173–174
Malaysia, 179
Maple Spring in Canada, 39–40
Nepal, 204, 206
North Korea, 215, 217
overview of, xxxiv, xli
Pakistan, 222
Paraguay, 226
Peru, 228
Poland, 235
popularity of, xv
Qatar, 240
Russia, 250
Saudi Arabia, 255
Singapore, 264
Somalia, 269
South Africa, 271
Spain, 283–284
Suriname, 285–286
Syria, 289
Taiwan, 295
Thailand, 301, 302–303
Timor-Leste, 307
Tunisia, 311

INDEX
398
Twitter (continued)
Turkey, 314
Ukraine, 318
United Arab Emirates, 321
United Kingdom, 325
United States, 331, 332
Uzbekistan, 335
Venezuela, 337, 338, 339, 340
World Cup Final tweets, 104
Yemen, 347
2channel, 157
UAE. See United Arab Emirates
UA-IX (Ukrainian Internet Exchange), 
317
Uber, 106
Ubiquitous computing, xiii
Udal’tsov, Sergei, 252
UFO Social, xxiii
Ukraine, 229, 249, 317–320
Ukrainian Internet Exchange (UA-IX), 
317
Ukrtelecom, 317
UM study, 232
Underwater cable (EMOS-1), 145
“The Unintelligent Facebook Users,”  
231
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(USSR), 247–248
United Arab Emirates, xvii, 320–324
United Kingdom, 324–327
United Online, Inc., xli
United States, 328–333
ARPA created, xi
connection speeds, xii
hate speech, 229
Russia compared, 248
social media use, 328–332
El Universo, 73
UPC, 118
Upload speeds, defined, xxii
Upstream filters, 170
Urdu, 221
Urdupoint, 222
Uriminzokkiri, 217–218
U.S. Agency for International Develop-
ment (USAID), 61
U.S. Federal Communications Commis-
sion (FCC), 234
U.S. National Security Agency (NSA), 
271–272
Ushahidi, 164–165
USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-
lics), 247–248
Utube.uz, 335
Uzbekistan, 333–336
Uztelecom, 335
Varzesh3​.com, 136
Venezuela, 337–342
Vera, Carlos, 73
Verizon, xlii
Viacom, xlii
Viadeo, xxvii
Vibanda vya simu (calling booths), 298
Viber, xxvi, 195
Video gamers, watching, 330–331
Vietnam, 342–346
Viettel Global Investment JSC (Telemor), 
306
Vigilantism, Peru, 228–229
Violence in Somalia, 269
Virtual private networks (VPNs), 48
Visafone, 208
Vista (Orange Botswana), 25, 26
Vive Digital (Live Digital), 55–56
VKontakte
history of, xxix
Kazakhstan, 163
Kyrgyzstan, 169
popularity of, xv
Russia, 250
Ukraine, 318
Uzbekistan, 335
Vodacom, 192, 271
Vodacome, 298
Vodafone, 119
Voice over internet protocol (VoIP)
Brazil, 28–29
Jamaica, 154
Moroccan ban on, 189–190
overview of, xxiv–xxvi
Tunisia, 309
United Arab Emirates, 322
See also WhatsApp
VoIP. See Voice over internet protocol 
(VoIP)
von Meister, William, xxxviii

INDEX
399
Voting, internet for, 84
VPN-Hotspot Shield, 136, 137
VPNs (virtual private networks), 48
VR-Zone, 264
VTR, 42
Wade, Abdoulaye, 260–261
Walla​.co​.il, 147
Wang, Gary, xxx–xxxi
WASC (West African Submarine Cable), 
34
Wataniya Telecom Algerie (Ooredoo), 6
“Water Army,” 48
Waymu.pk, 223
Waze, 146
Weather apps, 233
Web apps, xvi
Web defacement, 7
Web Pass, 209–210
Webretho, 344–345
Webroot, 18
Website use
Argentina, 12
Bangladesh, 22–23
Chile, 45
El Salvador, 81
Ghana, 109
Greece, 112
Honduras, 116, 132
Hungary, 119
Iceland, 123
India, 127
Iran, 134–135, 136
Iraq, 140
Ireland, 142
Israel, 147
Italy, 149
Jamaica, 153
Kazakhstan, 162
Kenya, 165
Kyrgyzstan, 168–169
Libya, 173–174
Malaysia, 177
Mexico, 181
Mongolia, 185–186
Mozambique, 192
Myanmar, 196
Nepal, 205
Pakistan, 222
Peru, 227
Philippines, 231
Russia, 250–251
Senegal, 260
Spain, 282
Suriname, 285
Taiwan, 293, 294
United States, 329
Uzbekistan, 335
Venezuela, 337, 338
Vietnam, 342
See also specific websites by name
WeChat
history of, xli
Hong Kong, 53
Malaysia, 177
popularity of, xliii
Singapore, 264
Weibo, xxxiv–xxxv, 52, 295
Weinreich, Andrew, xl
Weiser, Mark, xiii
Weixin, xxiv
Weizmann Institution, 145
West African Submarine Cable (WASC), 
34
Wetruwe Mapuche, 43
WhatsApp
Brazil, 28–29
Chile, 44–45
Daesh using, 141
Ecuador, 72
Egypt, 77
encryption by, xlii
France, 98
Germany, 103–104
Honduras, 116
Hong Kong, 52
Iran, 137
Israel, 147
Italy, 150
Jamaica, 154
Mexico, 182
Mozambique, 193
Namibia, 200
overview of, xxv–xxvi, xli
purchased by Facebook, xxvi
Saudi Arabia, 255
Singapore, 264
South Africa, 271

INDEX
400
WhatsApp (continued)
Syria, 289
Tanzania, 299
United Arab Emirates, 322
United Kingdom, 325
“Where Is Raed?,” 139
Whisper, 141
Widowo, Joko, 131
Wiener, Norbert, 248
Wiexin. See WeChat
Wi-Fi kiosks, 327
WiFiChileGob, 42
WikiBilim Public Foundation, 162
Wikileaks, 174
Wikipedia, 204, 246
Wikis, 94
Wildlife smuggling, 228
Windows Store, xvii
Wolof, 260
Women, violence against, 14–15
Women Journalists Without Chains,  
349
Women’s rights, 3–4
WordPress, xxxiv, 183
World Cup Final tweets, 104
World Map of Social Networks, xv
World Wide Web, xxxix
Wretch.cc, 294
Xiaonei, xxix
Xing, xxvii, 105
X-road system, 83
yad2​.co​.il, 147
Yahoo, xxx, xlii, 136, 222
Yahoo Search, 325
Yammer, 94
Yandex, 162, 250–251
Yanukovych, Viktor, 249
Yemeksepeti​.com, 313
#Yemen, 348
Yemen, 173, 347–350
Yessentayeva, Bayan, 163
Yingluck Shinawatra, 302
Ynet​.co​.il, 147
Youku, xxxi
Youku Tudou, xxx–xxxi
YouthStream Media Networks, xl
YouTube
Chile, 42–43
Denmark, 66
Egypt, 77
El Salvador, 81
France, 98
Georgia, 102
Ghana, 108
Greece, 112
history of, xxx, xli
Honduras, 116
Hungary, 119
Ireland, 142
Kenya, 165
Libya, 173
Mongolia, 186
Morocco, 190
North Korea, 215, 217–218
notification policy, xliii
Pakistan, 222, 223
Poland, 237
purchased by Google, xli
Romania, 246
Saudi Arabia, 255
South Korea, 277
Spain, 283
Suriname, 285
Thailand, 302
Turkey, 315
United States, 330
Uzbekistan, 335
YY, xxxi
Zalo, 343, 344
Zang, Arthur, 35
Zap​.co​.il, 147
Zelaya, Manuel, 116–117
Zennström, Niklas, xxv
Zetas drug cartel, 183
ZhZh, 251
Zimbabwe, 351–354
Zimbra, 72
Zindagi Gulzar Hai (Life Is a Garden), 
222–223
ZiyoNet, 335
Zolspot, 353
Zuckerberg, Mark, xxvii, xli
ZunZuneo, 61, 338

