

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONLINE LEARNING  
IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE  
AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the eBook tab. 
 

EDUCATION IN A COMPETITIVE AND GLOBALIZING WORLD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ONLINE LEARNING  
IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
YARON GHILAY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2017 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted 
in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the written permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions to 
reuse content from this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s website and 
locate the “Get Permission” button below the title description. This button is linked directly to the 
title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you can visit copyright.com and search by 
title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 
Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is 
assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information 
contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary 
damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any 
parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts 
to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this 
book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in 
this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject 
matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in 
rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS 
JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A 
COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
ISBN: 978-1-53610-571-1 (e-book)
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
ix 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1 
The Book’s Structure 
2 
Chapter 2 
Learning Management System (LMS) 
5 
LMS – Main Characteristics 
6 
Universal Learning Management  System – Moodle 
9 
Research Findings:  Lecturer Attitudes toward 
Moodle 
9 
Follow-Up Research: Student Attitudes 
toward Moodle 
10 
Independent Design of Pages in Moodle 
14 
Characteristics of the Synchronized Interface 
Between LMS (Moodle) and AAS 
15 
Responsibilities of the Institutional Head of ICT 
Regarding LMS 
17 
Chapter 3 
Text, Hypertext and Screen Capture 
19 
Research Findings 
20 
Creating PDF Files 
20 
Adding Links to Pages of Text 
23 
Chapter 4 
Integrating Audio into Online Courses 
27 
Research Findings: Digital Voice Recording 
29 
Chapter 5 
Video in Online Courses 
33 
Disciplinary Areas 
34 
The Method’s Advantages 
34 

Contents 
vi
Research on Characteristics of Effective Training: 
Video Clips and Their Advantages 
35 
Practical Implications 
39 
Chapter 6 
CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
45 
Introduction 
45 
Research: Effectiveness of CAA 
46 
CAA via Moodle 
49 
Chapter 7 
TBAL: Technology-Based  Active Learning 
59 
Introduction 
59 
A Model for Technology-Based Active Learning 
(TBAL) 
61 
Summary: Technology-Based Active Learning 
66 
Chapter 8 
Feedback-Based Learning (FBL) 
69 
Feedback-Based Learning (FBL) model 
70 
Summary – Feedback-Based Learning 
76 
Chapter 9 
Online Learning – Additional Tools 
77 
File sharing: Google Drive 
77 
Video Sharing: YouTube 
80 
Development of a Personal Website: Google Sites 
81 
Remote support: TeamViewer-Remote Control 
82 
Synchronous Online Learning: Blackboard 
Collaborate and Teamviwer-Meeting 
83 
File backup: FreeFileSync 
84 
Chapter 10 
Online Learning: A Full Substitute for Face-to-
Face Learning 
87 
Online Learning – Main Components 
88 
OTLA: Online Teaching Learning and Assessment - 
A Model for Full Online Distance Learning 
90 
Summary: The OTLA Model for Online Distance 
Learning 
102 
Chapter 11 
Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning 
(CTBL) 
105 
CTBL Model – Research Findings 
106 
Summary: Comprehensive  Technology-Based 
Learning 
110 

Contents 
vii 
Chapter 12 
Training for Management of Online Courses 
(TMOC) 
111 
Barriers to Online Teaching and Learning 
111 
Implications for Online Learning and Teaching 
112 
The TMOC Model 
112 
Research – Effectiveness of the TMOC Model 
118 
Summary: Training for Management of Online 
Courses 
123 
Chapter 13 
Summary - Online Learning in Higher Education 
125 
Uniqueness of Online Learning 
125 
Necessary Conditions for Online Learning 
127 
References 
 
129 
Author Contact Information 
139 
Index 
 
141 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
The aim of the book is to enrich the knowledge of educators, specifically 
academics in higher education with regard to online learning. The text deals 
with the creation, development, management and updating of online courses. 
The book focuses on unraveling the complexities of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) and explaining the integration of 
technology into educational activity to faculty. Based upon both international 
research literature and studies undertaken by the author, the text is grounded in 
long-term academic experience in the management of online courses as well as 
in assisting lecturers with their educational technology problems. This book 
introduces innovative models that meet the educational needs of active 
learning, feedback-based learning, online learning (which can completely 
replace face-to-face learning), computer assisted assessment, screencast 
technology, Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL) and training 
to manage online courses.  
International research universally points out the advantage of integrating 
technology into learning. This text presents major terms in educational 
technology, focusing on original methodologies and models that promote 
technology-based learning processes. 
 
Keywords: LMS (Learning Management System), asynchronous learning, 
synchronous learning, text/hypertext, TBAL (Technology-Based Active 
Learning), FBL (Feedback Based Learning), video capture, CAA 
(Computerized 
Assisted 
Assessment), 
remote 
control, 
CTBL 
(Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning), TMOC (Training for 
Management of Online Courses), AAS (Academic Administrative 
System) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
This book is designed to enrich the knowledge of both academic staff and 
decision makers in higher education with regard to the constructs of online 
learning. It can assist teachers, principals, and tutors in promoting meaningful 
learning, diversification of learning methods and use of new technological 
tools including smartphones and tablets. The text is focused on the creation, 
development, management and updating of online courses in institutions of 
higher education. However, these educational principles and technological 
tools that focus on learners and their ways of learning are suitable to other 
scholastic frameworks as well.  
The main difficulty in the creation and management of online courses is 
the lack of information both in technology-based educational concepts and in 
the technological tools that allow these concepts to become reality. The aim of 
the book is to help lecturers overcome the complexities posed by educational 
technology and to assist them in integrating technology into their educational 
activity.  
The text is based on international research literature, published studies by 
the author, 2012-2015 as well as his multi-year experience in managing online 
academic courses and in guiding lecturers in the field of educational 
technology. These studies detail innovative models designed to meet the 
following educational needs: 
 
 
Active learning 
 
Feedback-based learning 
 
Online asynchronous learning which can be a replacement for face-to-
face learning  

Yaron Ghilay 
2
 
CAA (Computerized Assisted Assessment) 
 
Learning enhancement by video technology 
 
Training of academic staff to manage different kinds of online courses 
 
(Ghilay & Ghilay, 2015a; Ghilay & Ghilay, 2015b; Ghilay & Ghilay, 
2015c; Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014; Ghilay & Ghilay, 2013; Ghilay & Ghilay, 
2012). 
In addition, the book describes the author’s research, 2015-2016 which 
deepens and continues the above studies. It focuses on:  
 
 
Learning Management System (LMS). 
 
Online learning that is a full replacement for face-to-face learning. 
 
The combination of video capture tools (screencast technology) in 
order to create Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL). 
The CTBL model is applicable to quantitative disciplines that have a 
hierarchical structure.  
 
International research points out the benefits of integrating technology 
into learning. The text includes details of key concepts of educational 
technology as well as a description of educational approaches, methods, and 
models designed to promote technology-based learning processes. 
The chapters include references to additional resources. Each link contains 
an abbreviated URL which allows for fast typing as well as a QR code which 
enables scanning with a smartphone/tablet (detailed in Chapter 3). 
It should be noted that diverse technological solutions to meet various 
educational needs are evolving and changing rapidly. There is a continuous 
upward trend in the quality and effectiveness of solutions and their ability to 
support learning processes. It is, therefore, highly recommended that educators 
maintain continuous learning in this area. 
 
 
THE BOOK’S STRUCTURE 
 
The book includes the following chapters: 
 
1) Chapter 1 – Introduction: Aim, description of basic terms and 
structure of the text. 

Introduction 
3
2) Chapter 2 – Learning Management System: A system for managing, 
documenting, tracking, reporting and transferring courses and training 
programs allowing professors to create courses which include various 
resources and to communicate with learners as well as allowing 
learners to communicate among themselves. 
3) Chapter 3 - Text/hypertext management using pdf format and screen 
capture: The creation of high quality documents that include text and 
screenshots in a platform independent format. 
4) Chapter 4 – Adding sound to an online course: Adding an audio 
lecture or an aural text to courses that do not require visual display. 
5) Chapter 5 - Video in online courses: Using video capture technology 
to add a video lecture to courses that require both visual displays and 
vocal explanations. 
6) Chapter 6 - Computerized Assisted Assessment (CAA): Creating 
computerized tests and exercises for formative and summative 
evaluation. 
7) Chapter 7 - Technology-Based Active Learning (TBAL): Making the 
learning process one that enables active participation by students 
thereby generating involvement in a challenging experience rather 
than mere passive listening or watching. In this way, better 
assimilation of the topic is assured. 
8) Chapter 8 - Feedback-Based Learning (FBL): This technology-based 
learning enables lecturers to receive regular feedback from students 
about the degree of implementation of the topic. It enables real-time 
intervention that improves the learning process of both groups and 
individuals. 
9) Chapter 9 – Additional tools for online learning: File sharing, video 
sharing, personal websites, remote control, synchronous online 
learning, and file backup. 
10) Chapter 10 – Online learning which can be a complete replacement 
for face-to-face learning: This chapter lists the basic principles for 
building academic courses in an asynchronous online learning format. 
11) Chapter 11 - Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL): 
This type of learning is designed for high-level quantitative classroom 
courses that include major ICT components to facilitate learners 
meeting the challenges of the course and their solving exercises and 
assignments. 

Yaron Ghilay 
4
12) Chapter 12 - Training for Management of Online Courses (TMOC): 
This section lists perceptions and ways of training and guiding faculty 
members for efficient management of various types of online courses. 
13) Chapter 13 – Summary: Online learning in higher education. 
14) References. 
15) Author Contact Information. 
16) Index. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
LEARNING MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (LMS) 
 
 
Learning Management System (LMS) is a web-based platform designed 
for management, documentation, monitoring, reporting and delivery of courses 
in both higher education and other educational systems. It can assist in 
traditional classrooms, distance learning or any combination of the two. 
Moodle is one of the most common academic learning management systems, 
although other similar systems also exist.  
LMS enables lecturers easily to develop a course website which can 
include a variety of resources (text/hypertext, audio, pictures, video clips). It 
creates communication between instructor and learners and among learners 
themselves (forums, messages, emails, instant messages). LMS is also helpful 
in monitoring and evaluating student progress via assignment management 
applications, exams, exercises and attendance registration. As such, LMS is a 
central tool for group study and an intersection for links to internal and 
external resources. 
 Although the system includes a large variety of tools, it does not 
necessarily offer an exclusive answer to all teaching and learning needs. There 
may be many situations in which lecturers should use external tools. However, 
these external tools or resources should always be linked to the LMS course 
website to help learners quickly connect to the outside world.  
LMS has two key benefits: 
 
1) Optimal adjustment to the needs of learners: It is built to meet the 
unique needs of students at all educational institutions, those of higher 
education in particular.  

Yaron Ghilay 
6
2) Simple operation: System operation has a user-friendly interface for 
both teachers and learners. It obviates the need for costly dedicated 
development teams. Yet at the lecturers' level, acquisition of these 
tools requires a learning process particularly when complex needs are 
involved.  
 
 
LMS – MAIN CHARACTERISTICS 
 
LMS has a few main characteristics designed to meet learner and faculty 
needs: 
 
1) Closed groups: The system is primarily (though not always) designed 
for private groups of students who belong to an individual course or 
course group. Every user, student or lecturer can only enter a course 
in which he or she has been registered via use of a designated 
username and password. As each student in the system is identified, it 
allows the lecturer to monitor student activity. It is also possible to 
have a course for everyone without restriction or limit access via a 
common password. 
2) Hierarchy of authorizations: The system is based on a hierarchy of 
user roles (manager, course creator, teacher, non-editing teacher, 
student, guest) with each user in the hierarchy having both permitted 
and prohibited actions. The principal distinction is between students 
and lecturers: lecturers can update course content whereas students 
may usually only watch, read, or submit assignments. Nevertheless, in 
advanced systems (such as Moodle) specific authorization for access 
to certain resources may be granted to users not usually having these 
permissions. In that way, it is possible a student or a group of students 
to update a particular resource. There is also the possibility of 
restricting access to resources based on criteria such as date of entry, 
group membership, grade achieved on an exam, preliminary 
requirements, etc. Restrictions can also depend upon complex 
conditions based on logical combinations of criteria. For example, 
lecturers can allow entry to certain resources for those students who 
meet the following requirements: they belong to group X, have 
completed assignment Y, and only from dates Z to W. Moreover, 
owners of higher permissions, such as lecturers can review the course 

Learning Management System (LMS) 
7
website as if they were students in order to obtain the impression of 
the content and manner of presentation that students see.  
3) Hidden and displayed items: LMS has options for concealing a single 
element, a group of articles or a complete course from the eyes of 
learners. Furthermore, it is possible to protect individual items based 
on criteria (such as group membership or even more complex 
conditions). It enables a professor not to expose resources that are not 
yet ready for publication or to restrict access to students who are not 
sufficiently prepared. However, lecturers can see and even update 
hidden items. Such elements are presented on the teacher’s screen in a 
different color so as to be easily distinguished from the visible items.  
4) User registration and opening course sites: A lecturer can manually 
manage user registration including appropriate permissions as well as 
create course websites manually (based upon proper authorization). 
However, the recommended way is to create a digital interface 
between the Academic Administration System (AAS) and LMS. Such 
synchronization enables automatic creation of all course websites 
(having no content) and user registration (students and lecturers) 
including the proper authorizations for each group. Moreover, if 
updates in the AAS occur, the synchronization makes the same 
updates in the LMS (adding or deleting users and opening new course 
websites). This eliminates the need for academic staff to deal with 
student registration or the creation of new sites.  
5) Editing and duplicating: Every item in an LMS can be updated, 
deleted or duplicated. The possibility of duplicating items may assist 
faculty in preparing question banks for exams. In this way, workflow 
can be streamlined, eliminating the necessity to build every single 
element from scratch. It is much easier to use existing items, updating 
only required parameters. In advanced systems such as Moodle, it is 
also possible to export/import complete sites and create local backups 
for them as well. 
6) Resource types: An LMS can manage groups of central resources such 
as:  
a) Files: Different kinds of files (text, photos, audio, video) and 
folders. 
b) Communication: Messages, emails, chats, and forums. These 
tools enable communication between students and lecturer and 
among learners themselves. Messages and files can be sent and 
synchronous and asynchronous discussions can be managed.  

Yaron Ghilay 
8
c) Links: Different links can be defined for internal or external 
resources. For instance, a video clip can be stored on YouTube 
and linked to the course site (instead of storing it on the 
institutional LMS). 
d) Formatted pages: Advanced users can independently design pages 
including text, hyperlinks, pictures, embedded video and so on. In 
that way, pages with an original, personalized look can be created 
as well as a multi-level menu system. 
e) Assignments: Different kinds of coursework can be defined and 
submitted through the system subject to various restrictions 
determined by the instructor (such as dates, the number of items 
submitted, file size, group membership, etc.). Complete 
communication between students and lecturer regarding an 
assignment 
can 
be 
managed 
including 
enablement 
of 
resubmissions. 
f) Exams/exercises: Different kinds of question banks can be 
created (multiple choice, matching, essay and many others) and 
may be divided into subtopics as needed. Different restrictions 
can be determined for every practice/test such as the amount of 
permitted submissions, time limit, date limit, mixing of questions 
and answers, random retrieval of issues from certain topics, 
reliance on previous submissions, restrictions regarding where 
exams can be taken, etc. Restrictions can be determined 
differently for specific students or groups. For example, the time 
limit on an individual exam may be 120 minutes, but students 
with learning disabilities may be granted 150 minutes. 
Furthermore, the system saves full documentation of student 
answers so the course manager can always review the answers of 
every student including the date of answering and the duration. 
Examination grades can be exported to a spreadsheet which saves 
the results in an external file and even undertakes additional 
processing such as calculating a final score based on several 
components with different weights. 
g) Reports: Monitoring of learner activity, which resources were 
accessed, when, for how long, from what IP address, students’ 
personal details, etc. For exams and assignments, it is possible to 
produce reports displaying student tasks that were completed/not 
completed.  

Learning Management System (LMS) 
9
It is also possible for the system manager to add special reports. 
One of the recommended reports is a list of registered students 
including phone numbers, email, and username. Such a report can 
be easily exported to a spreadsheet or an external student list. 
Such a file can also be imported to the teacher’s smartphone so 
group messages can be sent from a mobile. Experience shows that 
a combination of emails sent from the site (and published on it) 
and text messages (SMS) distributed to mobile devices 
significantly reduces the likelihood of missed messages. It is best 
to send messages to groups using an application that allows for 
creation of permanent mailing lists.  
h) Unique applications: There are learning management systems 
enabling the use of specific applications such as a glossary, blog 
management, Wiki, etc. 
 
 
UNIVERSAL LEARNING MANAGEMENT  
SYSTEM – MOODLE 
 
Moodle (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) is 
one of the most popular learning management systems in the academic world. 
Written in PHP language, it is open sourced code. It was first developed by 
Martin Dougiamas when he was in charge of the Technology Domain at 
Curtin University, Australia. It is currently being developed by Moodle Ltd, 
Australia which consists of a core team with hundreds of developers all over 
the world. Moodle regular undergoes improvements and upgrades. It can be 
installed free of charge on an institutional server or by purchasing storage 
services, installation and maintenance from a company engaged in that 
activity. 
 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS:  
LECTURER ATTITUDES TOWARD MOODLE 
 
A two-year study by the Mofet Institute of Tel-Aviv examined lecturer 
perceptions of a model designed to train faculty in the management of online 
courses. The study examined twenty staff members who teach in ten different 
Israeli teacher-training colleges and who participated in a two-year, seven 

Yaron Ghilay 
10
academic hour-per-week course based on the new model. At the end of each 
year (2012-2013 and 2013-2014) the lecturers answered a Likert questionnaire 
on their perception of Moodle’s contribution toward their academic work. 
Faculty members evaluated the contribution of the LMS as high for their 
academic work (4.00 and 4.06 out of 5, respectively). There was no 
statistically significant difference between these two years (t-test, 
0.05

), 
as shown in Table 2.1. The similar annual results give the findings more 
validity (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014). 
 
Table 2.1. LMS contribution to academic activity of staff members 
 
13
-
2012
 
14
-
2013
 
Paired Samples T-Test  
N Mean 
S.D 
N Mean 
S.D 
19 
4.00 
1.453 18 
4.06 
0.998 
𝑇(17)  = .226, 𝑝 = .824 
 
Respondents also answered two open-ended questions that strengthened 
the outcomes of the closed items as shown by the following samples of 
lecturer quotes: 
 
“The Moodle lessons were valuable to my primary need of managing 
online courses.” 
“Learning Management System is a central tool in online learning. 
The Moodle experiences have provided a significant answer to our real 
needs at the college.”  
 
The findings indicate that LMS is a major infrastructure tool for all those 
involved in online learning in higher education. Faculty members also 
indicated that they need guidance and tutoring in order to develop competence 
with the tool. 
 
 
FOLLOW-UP RESEARCH: STUDENT ATTITUDES  
TOWARD MOODLE 
 
In 2016, more research to complete the previous study was done at the NB 
School of Design and Education. This study examined the effectiveness of 
Moodle from the learner’s perspective. The research was focused on exploring 
the advantages of Moodle for student learning processes. It also investigated 

Learning Management System (LMS) 
11
whether significant differences in Moodle existed in different types of courses: 
courses based on online distance learning, face-to-face classroom lecture 
courses, multi-text courses and quantitative courses.  
The research included students who studied during the academic years 
2014-15 and 2015-16 in the following courses which were given by the same 
lecturer. Each course had a Moodle site (n = 25).  
 
 
Entrepreneurship: Multi-text, online distance learning 
 
Strategic Management: Multi-text, face-to-face learning 
 
Management of Technology: Multi-text, online distance learning  
 
Fundamentals of PSPP (equivalent to SPSS): Quantitative, face-to-
face learning  
 
Respondents were asked to answer an online five-point Likert scale 
questionnaire consisting of 25 items and an open question intended to check if 
and why the Moodle course site was perceived to be helpful for their learning 
process.  
The following two factors were examined: 
 
1) Moodle - convenience of learning (Alpha = 0.826). This includes: 
 
Moodle centralizes all learning resources in one place 
 
It enables convenient connection from a variety of tools: PC, 
laptop, tablet, smartphone 
 
Moodle allows easy submission of assignments 
 
It assists in appropriate submission of tests 
 
It supports suitable submission of exercises 
 
It is helpful for effective communication with the lecturer 
 
It is excellent for communication with other students in the course 
 
There is an advantage to a system that is active 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week  
 
The lecturer can respond to student needs rapidly and efficiently 
 
There is rapid access to all learning tools  
 
The site is helpful for having all educational resources easily 
available 
 
Operation of the site is straightforward  
 
On Moodle sites there is no limit upon time or location of access  
 
On Moodle sites, it is also possible to continue the learning 
process outside the classroom  

Yaron Ghilay 
12
2) Moodle’s contribution to the learning process (Alpha = 0.818)  
 
The extent to which the Moodle system helps effective learning in 
the following types of courses: 
o 
Online distance learning (entrepreneurship, technology 
management) 
o 
Face-to-face learning (strategic management, PSPP) 
o 
Multi-text (strategic management, entrepreneurship, and 
technology management) 
o 
Quantitative (PSPP) 
 
Moodle helps in coping with course content 
 
A course including a Moodle site that covers the whole 
curriculum is preferable over courses without such a site 
 
The system is currently updated according to learning needs  
 
The course topics are introduced in the Moodle through partitions 
that are convenient for learning 
 
The combination of different resources in Moodle (text, video, 
pictures) facilitates learning  
 
The Moodle site is useful for understanding the subject matter 
 
It is preferable that all courses have a Moodle site covering the 
course material  
 
For each factor, all the items composing it are presented (questions in the 
questionnaire). High reliability (Cronbach's alpha) was found for each factor.  
Scores were calculated based on the means of the items composing them. 
Table 2.2 introduces the means of the factors. 
 
Table 2.2. Effectiveness of LMS from the learner’s perspective 
 
Factor 
N 
Mean S.D 
Paired Samples T-test 
Convenience of learning 
25 
4.63 
0.37 
(24)
.711,
.484
t
p


 
Contribution to the learning process 25 
4.58 
0.44 
 
Table 2.2 shows that both convenience of learning and contribution to the 
learning process received very high scores, 4.63 and 4.58 respectively 
indicating that students perceive Moodle to be very effective for a variety of 
courses.  
 

Learning Management System (LMS) 
13
Table 2.3 presents the means of the four items as relates to the 
contribution of Moodle to learning in the four different types of courses.  
 
Table 2.3. LMS contribution to learning in four types of courses  
 
Factor 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
Multi-text 
21 
4.57 
0.75 
Online distance learning 
23 
4.52 
0.79 
Face-to-face learning 
22 
4.50 
0.91 
Quantitative 
21 
4.43 
0.98 
 
As seen in Table 2.3, the four items have very high scores: multi-text 
(4.57), online distance learning (4.52), face-to-face learning (4.50) and 
quantitative (4.43). The Paired Samples T-test examines the significance of the 
differences among all six pairs of items(
.05)

. The findings show that 
there is no significant difference among all these pairs indicating that students 
give equally high scores to the contribution of LMS in all four different types 
of courses. 
Respondents were also asked to add verbal notes on their preferred way of 
learning. Below are a few examples of student comments:  
 
“Moodle has made significant contribution to courses in which the 
lecturers upload clips, explanations and teaching materials to the course 
site.” 
“The course site is magnificent and it improves learning. I am not 
limited in time of learning and the material on the site helps me gain a 
clear understanding of the subject. With a course site, we do not lose 
material learned in class and it can be completed at home.”  
“When the course website is appropriately maintained, Moodle is an 
excellent tool for learning and monitoring at home or by the mobile 
phone. I use my phone to enter the site a lot.” 
“The Moodle site is very helpful to me as a student during the 
learning process including efficient communication with the lecturer.”  
 
The findings of this study combined with those of the previous one show 
that LMS such as Moodle is a tool that significantly contributes to learning 
from the perspective of both faculty and students. 
In both studies it was found that the effectiveness of the course website is 
critically dependent upon the degree of lecturer investment in it. Students 

Yaron Ghilay 
14
explicitly point out that they received significant support for their learning 
process when the course site was well maintained. Indeed, the ability of 
faculty members to manage their course sites properly depends upon the 
knowledge and skills that they have acquired. Faculty point out 
unambiguously that they need guidance and direction and without them, they 
find it difficult to meet student expectations (Chapter 12 deals with the training 
of staff members to manage online courses).  
 
 
INDEPENDENT DESIGN OF PAGES IN MOODLE 
 
As mentioned earlier, the Moodle system includes a broad variety of 
resources which can be presented on the course site. Moreover, it is possible to 
independently design different pages based upon two principal tools, “Page” 
and “Tab display” (a collection of pages including a menu connecting them). 
This enables pages to have both a personal style and a spectacular format. It 
also enables making a series of menus that create hierarchical levels. There is 
no limit on the number of levels. In every page, an infinite number of 
resources can be combined, such as links to external or internal resources, 
images, embedded video, links to tasks, exercises or tests. It is possible to 
design the text by type of font, size, color or emphasis and to add part of the 
text to hyperlinks. This is all done via a user-friendly interface. However, 
advanced users can also browse pages’ HTML code, copy it for additional use, 
write their own code or change existing code. 
The system enables the building of an “item bank” (presented or not to 
students) which can be linked to the pages designed. 
Figure 2.1 provides an example of designed page (based on “Tab display”) 
which allows students to navigate through all the course resources from the 
same page. Every resource in each of the nine subjects of the course is opened 
in a new tab so even when a student closes it, the main page remains active. 
It is recommended that links from formatted pages always be opened in 
new tabs in the browser so that closure of the linked page does not close the 
primary page. When using Moodle, the Mozilla Firefox browser is 
recommended (download link: http://mozilla.org.il/firefox). Firefox is free, 
regularly updated and adjusted to optimal surfing on Moodle sites. This is 
particularly important when students enter test applications or exercises. 
 

Learning Management System (LMS) 
15
 
Figure 2.1. An example of Moodle tab display. 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYNCHRONIZED INTERFACE 
BETWEEN LMS (MOODLE) AND AAS 
 
Although the synchronizing system can operate in many ways, the 
following procedure is recommended: 
 
1) Every year (or semester), the AAS (Administrative Academic System) 
presents all the courses to be offered. Each course includes details 
such as the course name and information about the lecturer and the 
students.  
2) The synchronization system periodically scans changes. Upon the 
opening of each new course in AAS, a matching course site empty of 
content is automatically created in Moodle. The new course site has 
the following characteristics:  
 
It belongs to the current academic year. 
 
Students and lecturers are automatically enrolled to the course 
website, with appropriate permissions checked. 
 
Every update in student registration in AAS is performed in 
Moodle. 
 
These updates are done automatically usually once a day. 
 
In addition to automatic synchronization, the instructor can 
manually add (or remove) students to the Moodle site, including 
those who are not registered in the AAS. These students’ 
registration is not affected by the automatic synchronization 
system. 

Yaron Ghilay 
16
 
Removal of students from the Moodle course site who were 
registered by the synchronizing system is possible only for a very 
short period of time since the operation will be canceled by the 
next synchronization; hence, users manually removed by lecturers 
will be returned to the Moodle course site. To stop this activity, 
students’ Moodle status can be changed to “Suspended” (instead 
of “Active”). 
 
Using the above method, every new year (semester) all course 
sites are reopened for every lecturer (empty of content), including 
lists of students. The disadvantage of this method is that in order 
for the auto-sync to resume, the lecturer has to copy the contents 
of the old course to the course opened by the synchronization 
system. Although it is possible to import the old site to the new 
one, this method is laborious and the course site’s history is kept 
forever. 
3) Lecturers needing to manage a permanent course site while 
maintaining the advantage of auto-sync can operate as follows: 
 
Administer the course over the years via a manually opened 
website to eliminate the necessity of copying its contents at the 
start of every new period. The manually opened site is not 
attached to the synchronizing system.  
 
To install auto-sync in the permanent site, a periodic procedure 
called “Course meta link” is required. This simple procedure links 
the manually opened site (“Meta course”) to the website that was 
opened by the synchronization system (“Sub-course”). With this 
procedure, all students enrolled in the synchronized sites will also 
be registered in the permanent manually opened course site. 
Under the influence of the synchronization system any update in 
the sub-course will be reflected in the permanent site. In this way, 
the synchronized site (sub-course) will be used only for 
synchronization and will not include any content. To prevent 
students from entering the empty synchronized site (that includes 
user lists only), instructors have to conceal it from learners. 
 
Every new year (or semester), the lecturer needs to cancel the 
links in the Meta course and create new links. In this way, a 
course site remains constant (including the possibility of 
updating) and only the learners change. Registration will be 
automatically updated when there are variations in the AAS.  
 
Another advantage of this approach is that it is possible to 
manage a few groups in one course with an individual website 

Learning Management System (LMS) 
17
instead of having a separate site for each. All that is required is to 
create a meta-link to the additional sub-courses, i.e., those that 
have been created by the synchronization system. Then the meta 
course site will be automatically divided into groups. The group 
names are identical to the sub-course names but the lecturer can 
change them if necessary. 
This alternative has significant advantage for a course that 
has several groups as the lecturer needs to update only one 
learning resources database rather than several separate ones. 
Professors can maintain each group separately or refer to them 
collectively as one single group. 
Communication and access to resources can be conducted in 
different ways: 
 
1) Communication: Delivery of separate messages to the various 
groups, manage various forums and so on. If necessary, it is 
possible to communicate with all the groups together. 
2) Access to resources: As mentioned earlier, entry to various 
resources can be restricted for different groups based upon 
instructor preferences. 
 
 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE INSTITUTIONAL  
HEAD OF ICT REGARDING LMS 
 
In addition to the duties of the network administrator, the Institutional 
Head of ICT needs to be responsible for the administration of the LMS. As 
system manager (Admin) he or she is authorized to review and update each 
web course in the institution and to assist teachers and students with their 
difficulties. The Institutional Head of ICT also provides advice and guidance 
to academic staff regarding the operation of LMS both on the pedagogical and 
technical level. He or she must get to know the many options of the system so 
as to be able to advise faculty in finding technological solutions to pedagogical 
needs and to promote development of educational initiatives. 
Moreover, the Head of ICT should act to stimulate the continued 
integration of ICT into the organization. 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
TEXT, HYPERTEXT AND SCREEN CAPTURE 
 
 
Texts are essential in managing and supporting online learning. Before the 
digital age, texts were printed on paper and physically distributed to readers. In 
the digital age text is distributed over the net. Students now have access to 
enormous amounts of high-quality text without a limit on quantity. While 
learners can still print out the text on paper, these writings can now be 
comfortably read without printing them due to sophisticated mobile devices 
such as tablets and smartphones. 
The most common digital replacement for paper output is the PDF 
(Portable Document Format) file invented by Adobe. It is able to accurately 
display digital documents regardless of platform, (computer hardware or 
operating system). Accompanying the PDF concept is the “virtual page,” i.e., 
what the screen shows is identical to the printed page as opposed to HTML 
Internet files which employ separate tools for viewing and printing. 
Today PDF is the accepted standard for distributing text files. A 
significant advantage of PDF is the ability to lock documents so they cannot 
be changed and thus prevent distortion. This read-only file and does not have 
the possibility of editing. Adobe has developed the reading software (Adobe 
Reader) and distributes it for free so that every user can read PDF files.  
In the online learning world it allows for the distribution of texts (and 
hypertext) produced by a variety of software tools without the necessity of 
acquiring the software that created the original document. Thus, it is possible 
to read output from SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences) in PDF 
without having the SPSS software or the knowledge of how to use it. Even if 
the readers do have the software used to generate a document, such as MS 
Word, they may encounter a problem while receiving a file in Word format 

Yaron Ghilay 
20
since a document produced in a newer version of Office does not allow the 
document to be viewed on a computer with an older version. PDF overcomes 
these difficulties by standardizing all documents and platforms. Moreover, the 
PDF output is identical to that of the source so it can be read and printed. 
Another advantage of PDF is the possibility of creating a single file which 
combines text from different sources that can be numbered and arranged in 
any order enabling lecturers to prepare digital booklets that include texts from 
a variety of sources, such as a word processor, a spreadsheet, or a scanner, etc. 
Preparing such a booklet can be undertaken using software tools, a large 
number of which are freeware. These booklets can then be uploaded to the 
learning management system (detailed in Chapter 2). 
 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
The findings of a two-year long study focusing on training faculty 
members to manage online courses (see Chapter 12), show that lecturers’ 
appreciation of management of PDF files is high (3.83, 3.89 on a 5-point 
Likert scale). There was no statistically significant difference between the two 
years (Paired Samples T-test, 
0.05

), as presented in Table 3.1 which is 
an indication of their validity (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014). 
 
Table 3.1. Appreciation of management of PDF files in lecturers' work 
 
13
-
2012
 
14
-
2013
 
Paired Samples T-Test  
N 
Mean 
S.D 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
18 
3.83 
1.42 
18 
3.89 
1.079 
𝑇(13)  = −.425, 𝑝 = .678 
 
 
CREATING PDF FILES 
 
Creating PDF files does not entail creating something from scratch, but 
rather converting existing files into PDF files. There is a variety of tools for 
doing this: common word processors such as Word (Microsoft Office 2007 
and above) or Pages (Apple) allow users to convert files into PDF quickly and 
easily without additional software. 
The converted files also include the links, if any in the original document. 
The same is true of internal links such as automatically generated tables of 

Text, Hypertext and Screen Capture 
21
contents or links to bookmarks that were defined in the word processor file. 
Operating the internal and external links are easier in a PDF file than in the 
original file; only one click is required, whereas in Word, the Ctrl key must 
also be depressed. The same applies to spreadsheets (such as Excel or 
Numbers) and presentations (PowerPoint or the equivalent). Most of the 
scanning software produces documents in PDF with the ability to save 
multiple scanned pages in a single file.  
When necessary to convert files originating from sources that are not 
Microsoft Office, Pages (Apple) or a scanned page, additional software may 
be required. The full version of Adobe Acrobat Professional allows conversion 
of any text file with operations such as merging, splitting, deleting pages, 
changing page order, video embedding, numbering and more; however, most 
of these central operations can be performed using free tools. 
The main steps required to support online learning with PDF files are: 
 
1) Re-pagination: Includes changing page order, deletion of unnecessary 
pages or rotation of pages which are inverted or slanted. An 
unwelcome though familiar phenomenon is the posting of scanned 
multiple-page files on a course website in reverse or at a rotation of 
90°; sometimes, individual pages are straight while others are 
crooked. As students can now read text on a computer monitor, tablet 
or even on a phone screen comfortably, correctly displaying all pages 
in an upright position is easily accomplished with Adobe Professional 
or free software such as Pdfsam. 
Although such operations can be performed for each page 
individually, it is better to run a particular change on a group of pages 
(for example, a 90° clockwise rotation of all 20 pages).  
2) File merging: Combining files obtained from several sources 
(including text that has been typed into special files) and 
consolidating them into a single file whose pages have a designated 
order. It is possible to layout each of the components before the 
merger, and only then merge them or the merger can be done before 
the layout. When the file merge is done using Adobe Professional, it 
automatically generates a bookmarked menu which allows readers to 
jump between components of the consolidated file. 
3) Splitting a file into parts: There are many cases of large files wherein 
only a part is relevant to students. The files may be split into smaller 
files and published separately. Such file splitting can be based on the 
following alternatives: 

Yaron Ghilay 
22
 
Number of pages: For example, three consecutive pages can 
become separate files. 
 
Volume: The main file can be divided into several files, each of 
which has a capacity of 0.5 MB. 
 
Main bookmark headlines: File splitting to accord with the main 
bookmark headlines. 
4) Screen capture and conversion of output to PDF: When writing a text 
for an academic course, only parts of screenshots may need to be 
integrated into the text. For example, when writing instruction 
manuals for computer courses, many screenshots of different sizes 
may be needed to help visualize the descriptions in the text. With the 
“Print Screen” operation the entire computer screen is captured, yet 
only a particular area may be required. The internal Windows tool 
called “Scissors” can be used to remove unwanted parts of the image. 
However, “FastStone Capture,” a free version of which can be 
downloaded at http://bit.ly/21uMnWn is a better tool.  
 
Below is the methodology for incorporating a screenshot in the text: 
 
 
Open the text file on a word processor. 
 
Project an image, diagram or any other element on the screen and 
mark the area of capture using FastStone Capture. The computer 
performs a “Copy” command of the marked area. 
 
Note: FastStone Capture also allows the saving of the area marked as 
a file of different types (image, PDF and so on) instead of “copying”.  
 
Go back to the word processor and embed the screenshot using 
“paste”. 
 
The embedded image can be reduced/enlarged by dragging one of its 
corners. The location can also be changed (right, center, left) using the 
Microsoft Office icons shown in Figure 3.1. 
 
 
Figure 3.1. Changing screenshot location. 

Text, Hypertext and Screen Capture 
23
 
Save the word processor file that now includes all screenshots and 
then save to PDF. The PDF file will include all selected screenshots. 
 
 
ADDING LINKS TO PAGES OF TEXT 
 
Add relevant links in the body of the text to refer learners to additional 
resources. In converting a Word file to PDF all links remain active. Links can 
be created in the text in several ways: 
 
1) Full URL without hyperlink: Pasting the full-length URL into the text. 
For example, https://www.novapublishers.com/catalog/index.php.  
 
This alternative has two shortcomings: 
 
 
The address is long, cumbersome and looks forbidding. When it 
appears on printed paper, users must enter it into the browser 
manually to make use of it. The longer the size, the greater the 
chances of a typo. 
 
To activate it from within the text file, the user needs to copy and 
paste it into the browser address bar. 
2) Full URL with hyperlink: Pasting the full-length URL into the text 
page 
and 
turning 
it 
into 
a 
hyperlink, 
such 
as 
https://www.novapublishers.com/catalog/index.php. When reading 
digital files, left-clicking activates the link obviating the need for a 
copy/paste.  
3) Short URL: Pasting a short URL into the text, with or without a 
hyperlink, for example, goo.gl/ze89E3 or https://goo.gl/ze89E3. Short 
URLs can be created using different tools; the Google URL shortener 
(https://goo.gl) is one of the most reliable. After entering a personal 
Google account, type the long URL and the short equivalent will be 
retrieved from the Google database. This shorter address always 
includes the string, goo.gl/ with the addition of only another six 
characters. The advantage of the shorter URL is that it is less 
cumbersome. Moreover, when such addresses are printed on paper, 
learners can enter them into the browser without much risk of error. 
4) Hypertext: Hypertext is a word or group of words that can be clicked 
upon in order to activate a link to another site without showing the 
actual web address. This option only works in digitally displayed text. 

Yaron Ghilay 
24
If using printed paper, the short URL (Paragraph 3 above) is the 
preferred option for showing a link. 
5) QR Code: QR code (Quick Response code) is a two-dimensional 
barcode that contains graphically encoded textual information. It is 
helpful for encoding links (and other information) in combination 
with text. Scanning and decoding QR code is easy using smartphones 
or tablets with cameras and appropriate applications (such as Qrafter 
for iPhone or Barcode Scanner for Android). Through various 
websites and applications on mobile devices, links and other data can 
be converted to QR Code. 
The advantage of QR code is when transferring links (or text) to a 
casual audience, for example, students who come to an open day 
before registration. In such cases, it is possible to project the code 
onto the screen, distribute it on printed paper or present it on a poster. 
People can immediately reach the desired link (or other relevant 
information) by scanning the code via a smartphone or tablet without 
typing. There is a distinction between a Static QR Code and Dynamic 
one. When it is necessary to change the linked address (or other types 
of information) in static code, a new code must be made. With a 
dynamic code, the URL (or other information) of the existing code 
can be changed without creating a new code. This is a significant 
advantage when making changes in codes that have already been 
printed and distributed. 
For the ease of readers, all links in this book are presented both in the 
shortened version and in a QR code allowing for typing short links or 
scanning them via smartphones/tablet without typing. 
One of the sites enabling generation of both static and dynamic 
QR code is: https://www.the-qrcode-generator.com.  
 
 
QR - 3.2 
 
For the creation of static QR Code, click on “Generate” in the main 
menu, select one of the alternatives (FREE TEXT, URL, CONTACT, 
PHONE, SMS,) and paste the link/text (for generating a link, select URL). 

Text, Hypertext and Screen Capture 
25
In creating a dynamic QR code one must connect to the system (it is 
possible with a Google account) and: 
 
Select “My Codes” from the main menu. 
 
Click on the + (top left) and then choose one of the options above and 
paste the link/text. All the dynamic codes in the personal account can 
be used and the link/text corresponding to it can be updated without 
changing the code itself. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
INTEGRATING AUDIO  
INTO ONLINE COURSES 
 
 
Digital audio may be the appropriate option for multi-text courses that do 
not require visual elements. 
In online learning, digital audio has two main aims: 
 
1) Text reading: this allows students to listen to different texts, stop 
whenever necessary and repeat difficult parts or review the entire text. 
This can be advantageous for students with learning disabilities, those 
with an auditory learning style, or those for whom the language of 
instruction is not their native tongue. Listening to texts may allow 
greater flexibility in learning by combining listening with other tasks 
such as travelling, exercising, etc.  
Audio text can be produced by: 
 
 
Recording the instructor’s voice: Teachers can read a text and 
record the spoken word with a variety of tools such as Windows 
Voice Recorder or any of the applications available on tablets or 
smartphones. 
 
Using TTS (Text-To-Speech) technology: it is possible to skip the 
actual voice recording by using advanced tools that are able to 
decode written text, play it and convert it into an audio file. The 
output can be edited (for example, merging several individual 
files into one main file) and uploaded to the site. This advanced 
software creates time savings for the professor and has excellent 
audio quality. Text-to-speech tools for educators can be found at: 

Yaron Ghilay 
28
goo.gl/ExnzlT - 14 free Text-to-Speech tools for educators  
 
QR - 4.1 
 
goo.gl/GAHwvv - Top 10 Text-to-Speech Software for e-learning 
 
QR - 4.2 
 
Two excellent free tools in the first list are: 
Balabolka - goo.gl/p4uH1R: A flexible text-to-speech engine that 
delivers high quality  
 
QR - 4.3 
 
WordTalk - goo.gl/xYOf9F: A text-to-speech plug-in for Microsoft 
Word  

Integrating Audio into Online Courses 
29
 
QR - 4.4 
 
While there are differences among TTS tools, most have common 
attributes such as options for selecting the desired text, listening to the 
reading, choosing a male or female voice, controlling the speed of the 
reading and saving output to an mp3 file. This is crucial for sharing. 
The files generated by the software can be uploaded to the course site 
(or other collaborative websites) and learners can listen to them via 
appropriate links. 
2) Lecture recording: Voice recording of a lecture may be an alternative 
to or a supplement for a face-to-face lecture. The recorded lecture is 
saved as an audio file. There is no need to record a lecture in one shot. 
It is possible, even desirable to prepare the audio file small portions 
and merge all the sections into one complete lecture (this requires the 
editing procedures described below). When recording each unit, the 
instructor can pause and then resume the recording. 
 
 
RESEARCH FINDINGS: DIGITAL VOICE RECORDING 
 
In the previously mentioned 2012-13, 2013-14 study focusing on training 
faculty members to manage online courses (see Ch. 2) lecturers' attitudes 
toward the contribution of digital recordings of lectures were examined. 
Findings show that faculty appreciation of digital recording technology is high 
(4.05 and 4.11 on a 5-point Likert scale, for the two years respectively). There 
was no statistically significant difference between these two years (Paired 
Samples T-test, 
0.05

), as presented in Table 4.1 which indicates the high 
validity of the results (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014). 
 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
30
Table 4.1. Contribution of digital recording of lectures to academic work 
 
13
-
2012
 
14
-
2013
 
Paired Samples T-Test  
N 
Mean 
S.D 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
19 
4.05 
1.471 18 
4.11 
1.079 
𝑇(16)  = .960, 𝑝 = .351 
 
 
Characteristics of Audio Files 
 
The pedagogic and technical features of digital sound recording and its 
editing are: 
 
1) Voice Quality: To ensure high quality audio recording, it is best to use 
headsets of good quality and test the quality and volume of the sound 
before recording. Advanced editing software may increase low 
volume (as described below). 
2) Division into subtopics: Dividing the lecture to subtopics and treating 
each separately is recommended. It is possible to prepare an audio file 
of a lecture that relates to a text and add a link which plays that part of 
text referred to.  
Moreover, all parts of an audio lecture pertaining to the same 
topic can be merged including a link placed on the first page that 
refers to the whole lecture. Such linking assists learners in activating 
those parts of lecture that refer to a specific page that they have read. 
Basic editing such as merging audio files can be done via freeware, 
for example, Format Factory. This tool can be downloaded at: 
http://www.pcfreetime.com. 
 
 
QR - 4.5 
 
Camtasia Studio users (professional video capture software, 
detailed in Chapter 5) can perform advanced editing functions 

Integrating Audio into Online Courses 
31
designated for audio recording (splitting, merging, adjusting post- 
recording volume control, etc.).  
3) Undertaking a recording: Before recording, review the text that is the 
basis for the lesson so that the recording will go smoothly. If the work 
is done in small portions, the chances are greater that the recording 
will come out perfectly the first time eliminating the need for editing 
(except for the merging process). During recording, an unlimited 
number of breaks can be made. Thus, it is possible to stop and think, 
take some refreshment or even repeat an incorrectly performed section 
(improper parts can be subsequently deleted during the editing 
process). 
4) Quality Control: After recording, save the file, listen to it, locate 
errors (if any) and correct them. An unnecessary segment can be 
deleted during editing. A new recording can be made to replace an 
incorrect section. It is easier to perform such operations using 
advanced editing tools such as Camtasia Studio, although other 
options are also possible.  
5) Sharing: After editing, the final product, an mp3 is created and 
uploaded to the course site. An audio file, as differentiated from a 
video file has no high volume, so there is no particular difficulty in 
uploading it to the LMS site. The advantage of mp3 format is that it is 
very common, does not take up much space on the website and can be 
accessed by and operated on a variety of equipment, not only 
computers. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
VIDEO IN ONLINE COURSES 
 
 
Video is a powerful technology for online learning, especially, for viewing 
lectures asynchronously. Video clips can be produced in two principal ways: 
via a camera or by an advanced technology called video capture/screencast. In 
this chapter, the focus will be on the second alternative.  
A screencast is a digital video of a lecturer’s computer screen combined 
with an audio recording. While the screen activity and images are recorded in 
real time, the accompanying audio can either be recorded simultaneously or 
created in post-production with the inclusion of sound effects and music 
tracks. During video editing, changes can be made in the raw material such as 
splitting and merging sections, adding pictures, music, cover pages, animation 
or even new video clips. Screencasting, an excellent multimedia alternative to 
video camera recording is able to give learners even more dynamic and 
exciting contents (Ruffini, 2012). Moreover, since the clips can be paused or 
reviewed anytime, anywhere (Screencast, 2014) students can proceed at their 
own pace which serves to improve the learning process both in the classroom 
and outside of it. 
There is a distinction between “screencasts” and “screenshots” (Ch. 3): 
Screenshots generate a single picture of a computer screen, while screencasts 
are a movie of real-time changes on a computer screen enhanced with audio 
narration.  
 
 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
34
DISCIPLINARY AREAS 
 
Nowadays, educators in many disciplines use screencasting for 
instructional purposes in subjects such as computer programming languages 
(Yuen, 2007), instructional design and technology (Sugar, Brown and 
Luterbach, 2010), object-oriented programming (Lee, Pradhan, & Dalgarno, 
2008), mathematical modeling (Ellington & Hardin, 2008), nursing (Phillips & 
Billings, 2007) and more. These screencasts and video tutorials demonstrate 
specific actions associated with a particular content area. 
A moving picture can be invaluable for explaining and demonstrating the 
complicated content in today’s computer world (Yuen, 2007). Pre-recorded 
videos of computer-based steps have proven to be effective in showing how 
software applications work. Digital video technology and video screen capture 
software allow teachers to easily create original, high-quality pre-recorded 
software presentations that can be used for in-class demonstrations and 
reviewed by students at their convenience on the Web.  
Students can follow the videos and then practice on their own and 
complete assignments. They can learn complex computing techniques and 
tasks via digital videos or access lectures that they may have missed. Video 
screen capture software is an effective way of delivering software instruction 
and is ideal for student-centered learning and online learning environments 
(Yuen, 2007). 
 
 
THE METHOD’S ADVANTAGES 
 
There are significant advantages in using screencasting for instructional 
purposes: Learners can observe what the actual screen looks like when 
completing a specific operation (Peterson, 2007). The exponential growth in 
use of smartphones and personal handheld devices allows students to watch 
these enriched video clips anytime, anywhere (Campbell, Grossman, Kris, 
Kazer & Rozgonyi, 2010(. 
Screencasts can be pedagogically equivalent to face-to-face instruction 
(Pang, 2009; Traphagan, Kucsera, & Kishi, 2010). Hartsell and Yuen (2006) 
observe that online video-based instruction “brings courses alive by allowing 
online learners to use their visual and auditory senses to learn complex 
concepts and difficult procedures” (p. 31). 

Video in Online Courses 
35
Mayer’s (2009) theory of multimedia learning suggests that animated 
presentations that have a corresponding audio component provide a more 
effective learning experience than traditional alternatives of stills accompanied 
by text. This corresponds to the dual coding theory of Paivio (2007) wherein 
information processed through discrete input channels, both linguistic and 
non-linguistic improves the learning experience. By presenting an expert 
performing and describing a task, screencasts provide these multiple input 
channels (Wouters, Paas, & van Merrienboer, 2008(. Learners in an online 
learning environment rely heavily on ‘learning objects,’ reusable digital 
resources that are integrated into a ‘lesson or assemblage of lessons grouped in 
units, modules, courses and even programs.’ These resources can take the form 
of electronic text, a simulation, a website, a graphic image, a movie, etc. The 
variety of resources in technology-assisted learning (McGreal, 2004) plays 
into Mayer's (2009) ‘learning-preferences hypothesis,’ which states that 
information presented in different formats caters to students’ learning 
preferences and styles. A method which combines sound and visuals appeals 
to a greater variety of learning styles than information presented only through 
text and pictures (Gardner, 1983). Video screen capture augments live lessons 
with multimedia lessons, itself becoming a cognitive tool that supports, guides, 
and mediates the cognitive processing of learners (Kong, 2011).  
A multimedia curriculum can be made available to students outside of 
school in the form of a flipped classroom; namely, students’ studying 
principles at home via screencasts and then receiving guided practice in class 
(Smith & Smith, 2012). Smith & Smith (2012) have also found that students 
who learned Computer-Aided Design (CAD) by watching screencasted video 
clips obtained significantly higher grades than those who studied the same 
material using traditional textbook instruction. Walker (2010) obtained similar 
results with regard to the statistical functions of Excel. 
 
 
RESEARCH ON CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE 
TRAINING: VIDEO CLIPS AND THEIR ADVANTAGES 
 
A study by Ghilay & Ghilay (2015a) examined the characteristics of 
effective training videos and their advantages, trying to determine the 
pedagogical and technical attributes of effective videos in order to use these 
insights during development and creation of video-based online lessons. 

Yaron Ghilay 
36
Their study examines video clips produced by screencast technology in 
two different computer courses both of which contain dozens of clips that 
thoroughly cover the topics:  
 
 
PSPP (a statistical software package equivalent to SPSS): A one-year 
course given to third-year students at a teacher-training college. The 
course includes topics in descriptive statistics, syntax, computerized 
variables, case selection, statistical conclusion, crosstabs, reliability 
(Cronbach’s alpha), item analysis and factor analysis. In addition to 
texts and lectures, 36 high-definition (HD) clips (comprising 3 hours 
and 46 minutes of viewing time) fully covered the course material. 
 
Management of online courses: A two-year course for lecturers in ten 
teacher training colleges. The course includes all the topics described 
in the TMOC model (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014) detailed in Chapter 12. 
In addition to texts and lectures, all topics were thoroughly covered by 
50 HD clips, the length of which was 7 hours and 26 minutes.  
 
The following six factors divided into three groups were examined  
(n = 30): 
Comments: 
 
 
For each factor, all the items composing it are presented (questions 
that appear in the questionnaire).  
 
For each factor, high reliability was found (Cronbach's alpha ranges 
from 0.568 to 0.707).  
 
The mean score and standard deviation of each factor are indicated in 
parentheses. 
 
Scores were calculated based on the means of the items composing them. 
Item scores were graded on a five-point Likert scale. 
 
a) Courses' video quality 
Clip quality (Alpha = 0.707, 
_
x = 4.79,  = .32) included the following 
items: 
 
Lecturer’s explanations were clear 
Lecturer’s voice was clear  
Lecturer’s explanations were made at a moderate pace 

Video in Online Courses 
37
The course curriculum was fully covered by the video clips  
 
The learners considered the video clips to be of very high quality, giving 
the attribute a score of 4.79 on the 5-point Likert scale. This is a necessary 
condition for further examination of the next factors (since it is unreasonable 
to examine the characteristics and advantages of clips if they are not 
considered to be of high-quality). 
 
b) Characteristics of effective clips 
 
1. Pedagogic characteristics of effective clips 
(Alpha = 0.673, 
_
x = 4.42,  = .46): 
 
Effectiveness of a clip depends upon a lecturer's ability to explain clearly 
I prefer that each clip be short and not address too many topics  
Effectiveness of a clip depends upon the lecturer's ability to speak clearly  
Effectiveness of a clip depends upon the lecturer's ability to talk at a 
moderate pace 
Video clips should fully cover the whole curriculum  
 
2. Technical characteristics of effective clips 
(Alpha = 0.568, 
_
x = 4.19,  = .59): 
 
Good training videos should be of high quality (HD) 
Using the zoom (focusing on certain areas on the computer screen) helps 
me learn 
The option to download video clips is important to me  
The option of watching videos on a variety of platforms (such as a tablet, 
smartphone, MP4 Player and so on) is important to me 
 
The study shows that pedagogic (4.42) and technical (4.19) 
characteristics are both of great importance although the pedagogic 
characteristics are considered to be more important than the technical ones 
(29)
(
  2.23,  
 .034).
t
p


 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
38
c) Advantages of video clips 
 
1) Flexibility in watching video clips  
(Alpha = 0.641, 
_
x  = 4.90,  = .30): 
It is very advantageous to watch video clips as many times as I wish  
It is very helpful to watch video clips at the time that I choose 
2) Effectiveness of video clips for learning  
(Alpha = 0.631, 
_
x = 4.68,  = .40): 
The video clips were helpful for my learning 
The clips made a significant contribution to my ability to deal with the 
curriculum  
The video clips allow me to follow the course material thoroughly 
Videos allow me to assimilate the material optimally 
3) Advantages of video clips as compared to texts (
_
x = 4.52,  = .69): 
The advantage of video clips is that they explain and illustrate the 
performance of actions in a clear and efficient way, better than a 
combination of text and screen shots  
 
It turns out that the flexibility of use (4.90) and contribution to learning 
(4.68) constitute a significant advantage in learning via viewing video capture 
clips. An additionally important finding is that use of video capture technology 
is more advantageous (4.52) than use of general texts and images. The results 
indicate that this technology should be used to support the learning process 
more often. 
Respondents were also asked to add verbal notes to describe the learning 
process that they experienced through viewing these video clips. The attached 
examples reinforce the quantitative findings, giving them more validity: 
A student in the PSPP course: 
 
“Video clips have a great advantage and they are very helpful for 
learning. They give me the feeling that I am in class even while I am at 
home. It helps me understand and succeed. Nevertheless, I would not give 
up the face-to-face lectures. They are also very helpful for 
communicating with the lecturer in real time. The clips are also useful if I 
forgot or did not understand something.”  
 

Video in Online Courses 
39
Lecturers who studied in the course “Management of online courses”: 
 
“Effective learning is based upon a combination of video clips, texts 
and the access to lecturers in order to obtain support. The videos are ideal 
for practice, repetition and refreshing of the material. They should not be 
a replacement for a face-to-face lesson. It is imperative they be focused, 
short and clear.” 
“The clips accompanying the course enabled me to practice outside 
the classroom with very clear guidance. This is helpful. It is much better 
for me than reading textual descriptions. This is a perfect tool for 
learning computer courses. The ability to watch and exercise repeatedly 
makes this form of studying convenient and encouraging.”  
 
 
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS 
 
The use of video capture technology does not require significant 
investment in technological infrastructure or in software development teams. 
Every lecturer needs to learn the educational and technical aspects of video 
capture and then with minimal equipment, a personal computer and 
microphone, suitable software and access to LMS and file-sharing sites such as 
YouTube or Vimeo experiment with the technology.  
Many screencast programs exist and they vary in features and cost. Tools 
are divided into two main groups: 
 
1) Free tools: Jing, Screenr, Screencast-o-Matic (PC only), CamStudio 
and Community Clips (PC only). 
2) Commercial tools: Camtasia Studio, iShowU, HD Pro (Mac only), 
Adobe Captivate and ScreenFlow (Mac only). 
 
Beginners can use Microsoft Community Clips (freeware) which can be 
downloaded from: goo.gl/Dx779C 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
40
 
QR - 5.1 
 
The software is simple to operate but does not have editing options and is 
not updated. Editing can be accomplished by an additional free tool such as 
Windows Movie Maker, found at: goo.gl/yek0M1  
 
 
QR - 5.2 
 
For high-quality screencasts without limitations, use of a professional tool 
such as Camtasia Studio is recommended. It has a user-friendly interface and 
works on both PC and Mac (there are different version for each system). It is 
advantageous for advanced editing, importing external video clips, voice 
narration, changing audio volume after recording, audio editing, adding tracks 
without limitations, subtitles, animation, zoom, adding a table of contents, etc. 
High quality (including HD) final output can be produced in different formats 
(mp4, avi, flash, mov).  
Practical recommendations for the creation of training clips via video 
capture: 
 
1) Use professional software such as Camtasia Studio or the equivalent. 
Such tools save time and yield high-quality products which can be 
further improved in editing. 
2) Before starting the video capture, a title page should be prepared 
including information such as the name of the institution, the lesson, 
and the instructor. 
3) For ensuring highest sound recording, it is best to use a good quality 
headset. The quality of the audio recording and its volume should be 

Video in Online Courses 
41
tested beforehand. If the instructor's video is required, it should be 
placed at an appropriate location on the screen. The size of the 
lecturers' video should not be too broad so it does not hide other vital 
information. It is possible to forgo the lecturer’s presentation or to 
place it at the beginning or the end of the clip. If so, only the 
instructor’s voice will be heard for the remainder of the time. These 
parameters can also be modified during the editing stage (provided 
that the lecturer's clip was made via webcam). 
4) It is strongly recommended to divide major topics into sub-topics and 
sub-sub-topics that are covered by a short clip. Creating menu topics, 
each of which is attached to an appropriate video link allows learners 
to skip to subjects they are interested in. It is also possible to produce 
a long video either with a built-in table of contents or a YouTube 
video link that transfers the viewer to a pre-determined point in the 
clip. However, short clips are still preferable. Even if a long video was 
produced, it can be split very easily it into “smaller portions” during 
editing. 
5) Before video capture: 
 
Prepare the text which will form the basis of the lesson: such text 
may be the book the lecturer uses for the course. 
 
Rehearsal: before starting video capture, rehearse all components 
of the lesson. 
6) In video capture, operating in “small portions” is recommended even 
before the editing stage. An unlimited number of breaks for further 
thinking, refreshment or even the redoing a scene that was incorrectly 
performed (the incorrect section can be deleted during editing) can be 
made and the work resumed.  
7) When the video capture refers to a text (for example, a solution to a 
problem): 
 
Divide the screen into two halves, left and right. On one side 
place the wording of the question. On the other place the 
activities relating to the solution. This helps students read the 
question and simultaneously observe solution. The instructor can 
point out parts of the question and continue the activity. This 
gives lecturers the advantage of concentrating on the screen 
without referring to paper printouts or other forms of display. 
 
In the Windows system, it is very easy to place applications only 
in one-half of the screen (without the dragging operation) by 
pointing to the application window: 

Yaron Ghilay 
42
 
To position the application in the left half of the screen: 
press the “Start” key combined with the left arrow. 
 
To position the application of the right half of the screen: 
press the “Start” key combined with the right arrow.  
It is not necessary to remain in split-screen throughout the video. 
The presentation can be divided between full- and split-screen 
displays. 
8) After saving the clip to a file, it needs to undergo rigorous quality 
control, performing: 
 
A check for errors: Corrections can be made in several ways 
depending on the type of mistake. Deletion, if this is an 
unnecessary segment. If the error occurs in the audio explanation, 
the soundtrack of that particular section can be deleted and a new 
explanation can be recorded instead. Usually, there is no need to 
repeat the whole process of capturing the complete clip. Segments 
can be repaired or improved. 
 
Improvement: The video can be enhanced by adding elements that 
are not part of the capture process, such as: 
a) Zooming: suitable for situations where it is desirable to 
focus viewers’ attention on a specific part of the screen. 
Remember to cancel the zoom or switch to a new zoom 
when done. 
b) Changing the cursor size and shape. 
c) Adding a table of contents (if required). 
d) Increasing or decreasing the volume. 
e) Adding transitions between sections. 
9) After completing the editing process, the final product has to be 
produced in a common format (such as mp4) and shared on the course 
website. There are two principal methods for sharing a video clip: 
 
Uploading the video file to the course site (in LMS): this option is 
appropriate when the material only needs to be stored on the 
course website and not on an external database. Pay attention to 
the capacity constraints of the learning management system 
(usually - up to 150 MB per file). 
 
Uploading the file to a sharing video site: it is possible to upload 
the file to a site such as YouTube and create a link to the course 
site. This has the advantage of not having a limitation on volume, 
length or resolution. There is also a saving on storage capacity on 
the institutional server without accruing financial cost. Viewing 

Video in Online Courses 
43
without downloading the file is possible (streaming). The video 
file can be downloaded with an adequate utility (such as YTD). 
Also, it is feasible to create a playlist for a collection of videos or 
to create a link to direct the viewer to a specific point in the video 
or easily embed the video on the course site. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
CAA – COMPUTER ASSISTED ASSESSMENT 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As assessment is critical to learning (Brown, Bull & Pendlebury, 1997), 
considerable pressure has been placed on institutions of higher-education to 
measure learning outcomes more formally and more often (Brown et al., 1997; 
Farrer, 2002; Laurillard, 2002). Computer-assisted assessment (CAA), has the 
potential both to ease the assessment load and to provide innovative and 
powerful assessment tools (Brown et al., 1997; Bull & McKenna, 2004). 
Furthermore, as use of ICT increases, ‘inherent difficulties in teaching and 
learning online but assessing on paper’ may arise (Bull, 2001; Bennett, 2002). 
Objective test questions (multiple-choice, true/false or numeric answers) 
which require the choice of a predetermined answer are the most common 
format in CAA. However, other types of questions are also possible (such as 
essay, matching, matrix question, drag and drop into text/image, selection of 
missing words, etc.). A major concern on the part of both academics and 
quality assurance staff (Bull, 1999; Warburton & Conole, 2003) is whether 
multiple-choice questions can assess higher-order learning outcomes 
(Pritchett, 1999; Davies, 2002). The most optimistic view states that if 
sufficient care is taken in the construction of questions (Farthing & McPhee, 
1999; Duke-Williams & King, 2001), item-based testing may successfully 
examine the full range of learning outcomes. This can be done using questions 
that students cannot answer by relying solely on memory. Good questions 
should examine understanding and the ability of students to apply, analyze, 
evaluate and create.  

Yaron Ghilay 
46
CAA is not a new approach; it has been rapidly developing over the last 
decades in schools, universities, and other institutions, offering educational 
and technical sophistication that includes simulations and multimedia-based 
questions which are not feasible in paper-based assessments (Bull & 
McKenna, 2004). As the numbers of students are increasing while financial 
resources are decreasing, objective tests may offer a way to cut costs.  
CAA systems must be tailored so students receive advanced training 
before taking part in summative evaluations so as to avoid the danger that 
CAA evaluates competence in the use of information technology rather than 
the knowledge of the course content.  
Possible advantages of CAA are (Bull & McKenna, 2004): 
 
1) Increasing the frequency of evaluation which may motivate students 
to practice their skills and learn more  
2) Broadening the range of knowledge assessed 
3) Increasing feedback to students and lecturers 
4) Extending the range of assessment methods 
5) Increasing objectivity and consistency 
6) Decreasing marking loads 
7) Boosting administrative efficiency 
 
 
RESEARCH: EFFECTIVENESS OF CAA 
 
A study focusing on advantages and disadvantages of computerized 
assessment as compared to traditional methods of evaluation was undertaken 
at the NB School of Design and Education, Haifa, Israel. Students experienced 
computerized tests in five courses for two years (2010-11, 2011-12) and 
traditional assessment in their other subjects. Learners' attitudes (n = 54) to 
traditional assessment and CAA were examined with respect to test 
effectiveness, test experience, test flexibility, and test integrity on a 5-point 
Likert scale (Alpha Cronbach reliabilities for both methods appear in 
parenthesis in Table 6.1). The scores for each factor are the means of the 
items composing them.  
 
 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
47
The items included:  
 
1) Test effectiveness (0.891, 0.702)  
 
The test measures the level of my knowledge accurately 
 
The test covers the required course material well 
 
The test assesses basic learning objectives (knowledge and 
understanding) 
 
The test assesses higher learning objectives (implementation, 
analysis, etc.) 
 
The test covers broad areas of the course 
 
The test is objective and consistent 
 
2) Test experience (0.882, 0.769)  
 
 
I enjoyed the exam 
 
I felt comfortable during the exam 
 
Receiving my score at the end of the exam was an advantage 
 
I am sure my answers reached the lecturer in a proper manner 
 
It is convenient for me to give answers on a computer screen 
 
It is a convenient method for updating answers that I want to 
change before submission 
 
I'm not worried about the exam 
 
It is easy to concentrate on questions displayed on a computer 
screen/paper 
 
The test includes a variety of assessment methods 
 
The time limit does not disturb my concentration 
 
I can appeal the examination results 
 
3) Test flexibility (0.889, 0.649)  
 
I can get multiple opportunities to be tested 
 
There are many opportunities to improve my grade 
 
4) Test integrity (0.853, 0.670) 
 
Getting help from other examinees is difficult 
 
There is no chance of exam questions being leaked 
 
Examinees receive different test questionnaires 
 
Test integrity is carefully maintained  
 

Yaron Ghilay 
48
This study reveals that CAA has significant advantages over traditional 
assessment, as is shown in Table 6.1 (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2012(: 
 
Table 6.1. Comparison of computerized and traditional assessment 
 
Factors 
Mean N S.D 
Significance of difference 
Test effectiveness Computerized 
4.55 52 .47 𝑡(51)  =  3.276, 𝑃 =  0.002 
Traditional 
4.19 52 .74 
Test experience  
Computerized 
4.12 53 .52 𝑡(52)  =  3.328, 𝑃 =  0.002 
Traditional 
3.70 53 .81 
Test flexibility 
Computerized 
4.33 52 .58 𝑡(51)  =  5.851, 𝑃 =  0.000 
Traditional 
3.38 52 1.16 
Test integrity 
Computerized 
4.20 51 .65 
𝑡(50)  =  3.999, 𝑃 =  0.00 
Traditional 
3.66 51 .96 
 
Table 6.1 shows the advantage of CAA over traditional assessment in all 
four areas: test effectiveness (4.55, 4.19, respectively), test experience (4.12, 
3.70), test flexibility (4.33, 3.38) and test integrity (4.20, 3.66). The 
advantages of CAA over traditional assessment are statistically significant as 
indicated by the Paired Samples T-test, 
.05

. These advantages are: 
 
1) Relevant knowledge is checked more accurately, comprehensively 
and objectively (effectiveness).  
2) CAA is more convenient for students, decreasing the level of test 
anxiety and increasing concentration (test experience).  
3) There are more opportunities to be examined and hence, improve 
achievement (flexibility).  
4) A computerized exam more effectively precludes forbidden assistance 
and question leak and promotes proper discipline during the 
examination (test integrity).  
 
Respondents were asked to add verbal comments regarding their 
experience in taking computerized exams. Their verbal responses strengthen 
the quantitative findings, giving them added validity. Below are a few 
examples: 
 
“The computerized test has no weaknesses – all the questions are 
clear, accurate and understandable. I have no complaints whatsoever.” 
 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
49
“I enjoyed the computerized tests and, in my opinion, it is preferable 
to paper-based exams. A computerized test is much more convenient and 
exciting. In my view, computerized exams only have advantages.”  
 
 
CAA VIA MOODLE 
 
CAA is known for its credibility, flexibility, and ability to deal with large 
amounts of students being tested simultaneously. Elimination of the use of 
paper eliminates the time and expense of sending questionnaires out for 
printing and reproduction of scanning pages of answers. With computerized 
assessment, all these tasks are done via digital means. Due to the growing 
popularity of a mobile, lightweight computing, it is now possible to conduct 
computerized tests in regular classrooms (not only in a computer lab). Use of 
the institutional Wi-Fi with students connected via different private devices - 
laptops, tablets, and even smartphones - is feasible. A Moodle application 
allows all registered users to be identified and examined by entering username 
and password.  
The Moodle assessment tool is sophisticated, regularly updated, and 
includes lots of options. There are various tools for building computerized 
tests. Therefore, serious preparation toward universal computerized 
assessment should be made, with instructors learning the details of the 
application and constructing question banks and exams.  
 
 
Characteristics of CAA in Moodle 
 
Computerized assessment via Moodle has unique characteristics requiring 
precise definition depending on the desired educational objectives: 
 
1) Time and duration: The date of the test can be restricted (or not) to a 
specified time window (e.g., between two dates or on a specific day at 
scheduled hours). Additionally, the duration can be set so that the 
timer starts only from the beginning of the test. Examinees can submit 
the test on their own initiative before the end of the time limit, but 
automatic submission occurs as soon as time runs out. There is no 
way for an examinee to extend the duration of the test by delaying its 
delivery. If, for example, the time of the test is set to be between 
09:00 and 12:00 on a specified date and the test duration is two hours, 

Yaron Ghilay 
50
then students who start 10 minutes late will be allowed to finish 10 
minutes later (automatically and without human intervention) without 
losing any of the total time allotted. However, if the time frame of the 
exam is set from 09:00-11:00, those who start at 09:10 do lose ten 
minutes because the test will automatically be submitted at 11:00. The 
duration of an exam can also be unlimited, an option that is 
appropriate for formative assessment or practice. 
2) The number of answering attempts: The system allows lecturers to 
determine the number of response attempts allotted to examinees. If 
this is a summative evaluation (a final exam), only one attempt will be 
permitted. However, if it is a practice exam, examinees may be 
allowed to submit answers several times. Another option is to allow 
unlimited attempts – with respondents being able to go back and 
restart the test/exercise as they wish. With multiple response attempts, 
the system can allow new attempts to be built upon preceding answers 
(or not). This option is suitable for practicing. If students prefer every 
new attempt to start from scratch, all answers are blank. Instructors 
may give students the option to choose the response method they 
prefer. 
If questions are randomly selected from a databank, it is most likely 
that examinees will have different items than on previous exams or 
that questions appear in a different order. Moreover, because in 
Moodle, duplicating tests is very easy, a practice exercise can be made 
in two versions: in one alternative, new attempts are built upon 
preceding answers and in the other one, every new attempt starts from 
scratch.  
Another relevant consideration in multiple response options is 
determining how the final score should be calculated: highest grade, 
average grade, or last attempt. Also, a minimum wait period between 
two successive attempts can be set so as to encourage students to 
study the material before answering another exercise or test. 
3) Place limitations: Since Moodle is an internet platform, any 
authorized user can respond to the test/exercise on any computer 
connected to the net. However, there may be occasions (particularly 
those of summative assessment) where it is necessary to limit the 
place from which students are allowed to respond. For example, 
students must take the exam in specific rooms in the institution and 
not in their homes. Therefore, specific IP addresses from which 
students are allowed to register to take the test can be set. Anyone 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
51
logging in from an address that does not belong in the institution 
network (including cellular networks) will be automatically blocked. 
4) Producing different questionnaires: The computerized system has 
unlimited capacity to produce a large collection of profiles for a given 
test at a given time enabling each and every questionnaire to be 
different. This feature is key to maintaining exam integrity. With 
manual methods, it is hard if not impossible to approach such 
differentiation. Configuration of the question bank into topics and 
subtopics enables random selection of X questions out of Y items in 
the database. With big databases, more sophisticated test 
questionnaires can be created. For example, separate databases can be 
set up for voluntary exercises and for compulsory exercises (tests). In 
such a reservoir, random selection of questions by topic ensures no 
overlap among issues relating to different tasks (exams, practice 
exercises, and so on). 
Another option in creating differentiation in test questionnaires is 
control of question order and in multiple-choice questions, the order 
of options. While the order can be predetermined, random order is 
preferred. 
5) Setting different parameters for different examinees or groups: The 
system allows significant degrees of freedom for meaningful 
exceptions to the general test conditions. Deviation from the general 
settings can be adding an additional password to certain students for 
entering the test, changing the start/stop time, the time limit, or the 
number of attempts allowed. For example, a group of students with 
learning disabilities for whom (and only for them), the time limit 
could be three hours instead of two. In other words, in the same test, 
there may be different deadlines for different students. Such a 
differentiation can also exist on an individual basis - a particular 
student can have various restrictions designed just for him/her. For 
instance, it is possible to give a particular student a time extension for 
submission of an exercise due to special personal circumstances, a 
relief which does not pertain to the rest of the class.  
As mentioned above, the system is improving over time with options 
increasing and becoming more sophisticated. 
6) Grade management: Even in this area, computerized systems have 
great flexibility and save on manual work. Assessment of “objective 
test questions” is performed automatically and grades are retained 
within the system. Lecturers may update any grade they wish. Also, 

Yaron Ghilay 
52
any item can have a weight (the default is 1) for automatic weighting 
of the final score. In the case of open-ended questions where manual 
evaluation is required, scores can be automatically weighted for final 
score calculation.  
Lecturers can determine whether and when test scores will be posted 
as well as different types of feedback received. Also, the class grade 
sheet including a collection of exercises or tests (all or part of them) 
can be exported to common data management formats such as Excel 
which might be helpful for further processing, reporting or external 
storage.  
Instructors have the option to review the results of the test of every 
student, read all the answers, seeing what was done right and what 
was done wrong. So, without any paperwork, full and detailed 
documentation of all student responses is possible. Based on these 
digital reports alone, it is possible to have a discussion with students 
concerning test results. 
7) Restricting access to the test/exercise: Lecturers can set advanced 
restrictions on access to tests/exercises, for example, access to late-
testing questionnaires for those who have not yet been tested at all. 
This may be relevant in situations where some students are retaking 
the test while others are just making their first attempt. Without any 
human intervention, it is possible to ensure that each group of students 
is tested only on a suitable questionnaire, enabling various tests to be 
held at the same time. 
8) The variety of questions: It is believed that computerized assessment 
deals only with multiple-choice questions, but actually this is not true. 
Moodle enables more than 30 different types of questions, the most 
common of which are: 
 
Multiple-choice: An unlimited number of distractors can be 
mixed and numbered in different forms (or not numbered at all). 
Numbering is not recommended because it has no advantage and 
may disturb test integrity.  
Lecturers can decide whether students must select only one 
answer or are allowed multiple answers. If there is only one right 
answer, wrong answers can get a zero or a partial score. When 
required to select multiple answers, each correct answer has to 
receive a partial mark so that the total grade adds up to 100%. 
Other distractors are scored as zero. 
 
 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
53
The following are examples of the two types of multiple-choice questions: 
 
 
Figure 6.1. One answer. 
 
 
Figure 6.2. Multiple answers. 
 
Numerical: In numerical questions a final numeric answer is 
required with examinees writing the correct answer in a box at the 
bottom of the question as shown in Figure 6.3: It is also possible 
to require that students include measurement units for the 
numerical values. Permissible deviation from the exact value can 
also be defined.  
 

Yaron Ghilay 
54
 
Figure 6.3. Numerical answer. 
 
Matching: A matching question displays two lists of items on 
either side of the screen. Students select an answer from the list of 
items on the right side that match an item listed on the left side. 
For example: 
 
 
Figure 6.4. A matching question. 
 
Matrix: Adjustment of statements to headlines as shown in Figure 
6.5: 
 
 
Figure 6.5. A matrix. 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
55
 
Entering missing words in a paragraph: Examinees are asked to 
add missing words in a text by choosing from a menu with 
several options:  
 
 
Figure 6.6. Missing words in a paragraph. 
 
Constructing and Administering Computerized  
Assessment Tools 
 
In Moodle construction of evaluation tools (summative tests, practice 
tests, compulsory and noncompulsory exercises, etc.) and their operation are 
based on a three-stage process: 
 
1) Construction of a question bank: The process of building a question 
bank includes: 
 
Determination of main categories/subcategories: The question 
bank is divided into topics and sub-topics so that tests cover all 
the required areas of study 
 
Question determination: Associating each question with the 
appropriate topic and sub-topic, selecting the type of question 
(multiple-choice, numeric, short answer, long open question, 
matching answers, etc.), wording the question, determining the 
question weight, formulation of feedback, etc. An existing 
question can be duplicated, changed and converted into a new 
question (without repeating all its characteristics). 
 
2) Test construction: One or more tests can be built from the question 
bank. Construction of tests relies on: 
 
Defining the test characteristics: Relevant characteristics can be: 

Yaron Ghilay 
56
 
Date (including start and end time) 
 
Entrance restrictions based on different characteristics (belonging 
to a group, completing previous tasks, date, etc.) 
 
Duration 
 
Number of answering attempts 
 
Whether each new attempt builds on the last (or not) 
 
Various protections designed for summative evaluation 
 
Different types of feedback 
 
Selecting questions from the reservoir and their order of appearance: 
Each test presents questions from the database according to the 
lecturers' decisions. The following parameters can be controlled: 
 
 
The number of questions 
 
Presentation of items belonging to primary and secondary 
categories  
 
Presentation of questions in fixed or random order  
 
Fixed or random order within each separate category (including 
randomization of the various issues relating to a category)  
 
After constructing one test, similar exams can be created just by 
replicating the source and changing certain parameters. There is no 
need to starting the question generating process from the beginning.  
 
3) Administering the test/s: Before administering a test, especially a 
summative assessment, it is crucial to ensure that the students know 
how the system works and have had previous experience using it. A 
rigorous monitoring process (especially before the first administration 
of a test) should be in place to ensure quality control: 
 
The wording of the questions is right and fits the curriculum 
 
There are no wrong questions or double questions (a phenomenon 
that could occur with duplication of items) and that all the 
parameters listed above are accurate 
 
Any wrong parameter can cause a failure in administering the test. For 
example, an incorrect date might mean students are not able to start the test or 
that time duration may be too short. A similar error might occur in the wrong 
determination of the number of permitted answering attempts. In such cases, 

CAA – Computer Assisted Assessment 
57
students need to be allowed to retake the test. It is desirable that during the 
administration of an exam there be technical assistance in case of 
malfunctions, problems relating passwords, unsuitable browsers, etc. The 
consequences of power failures or involuntary rebooting of the computer 
before answers have been saved should be very carefully considered in 
advance for in such cases, answers may be lost with all the implications 
involved.  
In order to avoid such loss, it is recommended that students save their 
answers as often as possible. The system automatically saves answers after a 
page break (including the transition to the final part of the test). If every 
question appears on a separate sheet, there is low probability of fault since data 
is saved each time the examinee passes to the next question. Also, students 
receive an indication (“Answer saved”) when returning to a page containing an 
item that has been already answered. The most problematic situation is when 
all test questions are on the same page. In such cases, answers are not saved 
until the examinee passes to the final stage (the examinee can jump to the final 
page after each question without finishing the test). Before submitting an 
exam, it is desirable to go back over the questions including the indicators of 
whether questions were saved or have yet to be answered. Sometimes, students 
do not answer all the questions owing to lack of attention. It is highly 
recommended to remind students to save their work frequently, making sure 
that all questions have been answered before submitting a test. Moreover, if 
few questions are placed on each page, saving takes place frequently.  
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
TBAL: 
TECHNOLOGY-BASED ACTIVE LEARNING 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
Lectures in higher education courses traditionally consist of teachers 
verbally communicating information to students who passively receive it and 
then encode it in their memories (Boyer, 1990; Michel, Cater III, & Varela, 
2009; Stewart-Wingfield & Black, 2005). Many studies (Bonwell & Eison, 
1991; Michel et al., 2009) suggest that this passive method may not be the 
most pedagogic methodology. Teaching techniques that encourage students to 
actively engage with the material promote deeper levels of thinking and better 
facilitate encoding, storage, and retrieval of information than do traditional 
lectures (McGlynn, 2005; Peck, Ali, Matchock, & Levine, 2006). 
A common definition of active learning is:  
 
Active learning is an approach that provides opportunities for 
students to meaningfully talk and listen, write, read, and reflect on the 
content, ideas, issues, and concerns of an academic subject (Meyers & 
Jones, 1993, p. 6). 
 
Another definition describing active learning is: 
 
Any strategy that involves students in doing things and thinking 
about the things they are doing (Bonwell and Eison, 1991, p. 2). 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
60
Learning should include any technique that involves students in the 
learning process and holds them accountable for their own learning (Bonwell 
& Eison, 1991; Michel et al., 2009; Yoder & Hochevar, 2005). Unfortunately, 
most students do not function as active learners unless they are in an active 
learning environment. Active learning shifts the focus from what instructors 
teach or deliver to what they want students to be able to do with the course 
material. When students recognize that a course involves active learning, they 
realize that in order to succeed they must engage with the material (Instruction 
at FSU Handbook, 2011).  
Alas, educators’ use of the term “active learning” relies more on intuitive 
understanding than on a common definition. Many faculty assert that all 
learning is inherently active and that students can be involved even when 
listening to formal presentations in the classroom. Analysis of the research 
literature, however, suggests that students must do more than just listen: they 
must read, write, discuss, or be engaged in solving problems (Chickering & 
Gamson, 1987). 
Active learning has many benefits (McKeachie & Svinicki, 2014): 
 
 
Students are more likely to access their prior knowledge which is key 
to learning 
 
Students are more likely to find personally meaningful solutions to 
problems 
 
Students receive more frequent and immediate feedback 
 
Students increase their self-confidence and self-reliance 
 
For most learners, it is more motivating to be active than passive 
 
A task that one has done by himself/herself or as part of a group is 
more highly valued  
 
The benefits of active learning in higher education have been widely 
acclaimed. Guthrie and Carlin (2004) maintain that modern students are 
primarily active learners and traditional lecture courses are increasingly out of 
touch with how students engage with the world. Chickering and Gamson 
(1987), early proponents of active learning designate “encouraging active 
learning” as one of the seven principles of good practice in higher education 
(the others are encouragement of contact between students and faculty, 
development of cooperation among students, giving prompt feedback, 
emphasizing time on task, communicating high expectations and respecting 
diverse talents and ways of learning). 

TBAL: Technology-Based Active Learning 
61
The use of clickers, more formally denoted as Student Response Systems 
(SRS), Audience Response Systems (ARS), or Personal Response Systems 
(PRS) are one approach to employing active learning in the classroom. 
Clicking allows students to participate in classroom activities, regardless of 
class size. These remote gadgets transmit individual student responses to an 
instructor’s computer in real time so they can be recorded and even shared 
back to the class (Johnson, 2004; Kenwright, 2009).  
Johnson (2004) describes how clickers address three of Chickering and 
Gamson’s (1987) seven principles of good practice in undergraduate 
education: 
 
 
They actively engage students during the entire class period 
 
They gauge students’ level of understanding of the material being 
presented 
 
They enable prompt feedback to student questions 
 
Beatty (2004) claims that since clickers help students actively engage in 
the learning process, they encourage more robust, integrated and useful 
understandings of concepts and their applicability. Clickers are superior to 
some active learning methods such as classroom discussion where only a few 
students get the opportunity to answer a question. Even if the answer is 
correct, the instructor has no way to gauge if other students know the correct 
answer. SRS helps to overcome this quandary. Another benefit of clickers is 
that they follow the principles of game-based learning with which students are 
well acquainted having grown up playing computer games for entertainment 
(Martyn, 2007).  
Students in higher education all have smartphones, tablets or laptops. 
These devices, when connected to an LMS or other web-based application can 
function as more sophisticated clickers than the devices of the previous 
generation. They make transforming a regular class into a technology-based 
one easy and effective. This is the first step to active learning.  
 
 
A MODEL FOR TECHNOLOGY-BASED ACTIVE  
LEARNING (TBAL) 
 
Instead of just lecturing to a passive audience of students, the TBAL 
model (Technology-Based Active Learning) is designed to create a series of 

Yaron Ghilay 
62
activities in which all students in the class participate. Ghilay & Ghilay 
(2015c) recently examined the effectiveness of the model. 
 
 
Description of the TBAL Model 
 
In using students’ private mobile devices TBAL significantly improves 
the learning process in multi-text, face-to-face courses (Ghilay & Ghilay, 
2015c). In creating an environment of active and experiential learning it:  
 
1) Enables every student to participate while using his/her preferred 
technological device 
2) Creates an environment of collaboration and teamwork  
3) Links everyone to what is taking place in class  
4) Creates multiple opportunities for all students to participate and 
express themselves  
 
In this technology-based learning environment every student needs to 
come to class with either a smartphone, tablet or laptop. All devices should be 
linked via the institute’s Wi-Fi network (or students’ private 3G/4G mobile 
network) to the institutional LMS or other web-based application.  
The components of a course based on LMS technology (such as Moodle) 
are: 
 
1) All course texts are presented on the course website which is divided 
into main topics that comprehensively cover the curriculum.  
2) Each main theme is divided into subtopics, one of which includes a 
few activities. Each activity includes a short text from the course 
syllabus and an open-ended question. Such activities are introduced 
via tools like Moodle “Chatroom” or the equivalent. In the classroom 
all students are able to answer simultaneously while watching answers 
that appear on the main screen. Every student in the course may 
answer questions via any mobile device. 
3) Each activity is hidden until its turn arrives. Students can read the text 
and the question either on the main screen in the classroom or on their 
personal device. The instructor can show responses on the main 
screen in real time, including student names. The lecturer can refer to 
answers presented on the main screen by adding his/her own oral 
explanations, questions, or relevant assessments. Such pedagogy 

TBAL: Technology-Based Active Learning 
63
encourages students to participate, express their views or ask 
questions either orally or in writing. Moreover, the instructor can turn 
to those who did not respond to encourage them to be active. 
4) When each subtopic is finished, students are given a short 
computerized quiz including a few objective questions covering the 
specific subtopic. Such an option is feasible via Moodle “Quiz” or an 
equivalent tool. During that activity, students can give answers using 
their private device, although only the lecturer can view their answers 
and scores. At the end of the quiz, each student gets an automatic 
grade. That score can be informational only or it can be weighted into 
the total course grade. The instructor can establish a time limit and 
even allow students to have more than one answering attempt. After 
the quiz, the lecturer can explain questions that require additional 
treatment.  
5) At the end of each main topic, students are given a more detailed 
computerized quiz including closed questions covering all the 
subtopics in the main theme. Such a quiz can be timed, taken in class 
or at home and its score may be informational only (or not), according 
to the instructor’s discretion. 
6) At the end of the course, students have to take a final computerized 
test given at the institution. This exam is a significant component of 
the final grade. Before that examination, all activities mentioned 
above are shown on the course website so learners can go over the 
material using whatever device they wish. It might be more 
convenient at home to use a PC or tablet rather than a smartphone. 
 
 
Research Findings: Effectiveness of TBAL 
 
A study by Ghilay & Ghilay (2015c) examined student attitudes towards 
TBAL at the NB School of Design and Education (Haifa, Israel). Participants 
were enrolled in the “Strategic Management” course given to fourth-year 
students in the Department of Management. The course has nine main topics: 
Introduction, Mission statement, External assessment, Internal assessment, 
Strategies in action, Strategy analysis and choice, Strategy implementation 
(two main themes) and Strategy evaluation.  
The course, based on the TBAL model was given during the first 
semesters of 2013-2014 and 2014-2015. The aim of the Ghilay & Ghilay study 

Yaron Ghilay 
64
was to investigate whether the model enhances the learning process in face-to-
face courses and if so, what the characteristics of such learning are. 
Six factors were examined (n = 67): 
Comments: 
 
 
For each factor, all the items composing it are presented below 
(questions in the questionnaire). High reliability was found for each 
factor (as indicated in parentheses).  
 
Items were scored on a five-point Likert scale. Factor scores are the 
means of the items composing them.  
 
1) Improvement in the learning process (Alpha = 0.810): 
 
Using technology in class causes me to be active and therefore I 
learn better 
 
Integration of technology into a lecture enables me to learn better 
than just listening to the lecturer 
 
Active learning based on technology is helpful in preparation for 
the final exam 
 
Integration of technology enables me to deepen my understanding 
of the material presented during the lesson  
 
The use of technology significantly contributes to learning 
2) Successful learning experience (Alpha = 0.872): 
 
Learning through technology is better than passive learning and 
listening to a lecturer  
 
The use of technology during the lesson enables me to be active 
 
The use of technology during the lesson creates a better learning 
experience 
 
I enjoy learning with technology 
 
The use of technology makes the lesson more interesting 
 
The use of technology increases my motivation to study  
 
The use of technology causes me to be active in class 
3) Student choice of technological equipment (Alpha = 0.725): 
 
The option of using a smartphone, tablet or laptop allows any 
student to express personal choice and yet feel part of the whole 
classroom enterprise  
 
The opportunity to use my choice of device in the classroom 
makes it convenient and contributes to flexibility 
4) Collaboration and teamwork (Alpha = 0.755): 

TBAL: Technology-Based Active Learning 
65
 
The use of technology encourages teamwork and cooperation 
among students  
 
Collaborative learning through technology allows me to learn 
better than in a regular class 
 
Collaborative learning through technology allows me to learn 
from friends 
 
Collaborative learning through technology allows me to get 
feedback in real time from the lecturer 
 
Collaborative learning through technology allows me to get real-
time feedback from colleagues 
 
Displaying the answers of all students helps me 
5) Link to the lesson (Alpha = 0.742): 
 
Active learning through technology compels me to be constantly 
“connected” during the whole lesson 
 
Active learning through technology improves my concentration 
 
Active learning through technology keeps my mind on the topics 
of the lesson 
6) Student opportunities to participate (Alpha = 0.732): 
 
The use of technology allows all students to participate and 
express themselves 
 
The use of technology makes it easier for shy students to 
participate 
 
There was no significant difference in the mean scores of all factors 
examined over the two years that the TBAL course was administered (T-test, 
0.05

). The replication of results strengthens the findings and gives them 
greater validity.  
Table 7.1 presents the mean scores of both years combined: 
 
Table 7.1. Effectiveness of Technology-Based Active Learning 
 
No.Factor 
N Mean S.DIndependent Samples T-test 
1 
Improvement of the learning process  
67 4.49 .49 
(65)
.079,
.937
t
p


 
2 
Successful learning experience 
67 4.64 .47 
(65)
.205,
.838
t
p


 
3 
Student choice of technological equipment 67 4.58 .59 
(65)
.052,
.959
t
p


 
4 
Students’ opportunities to participate 
67 4.53 .58 
(65)
.019,
.985
t
p


 
5 
Link to the lesson 
67 4.51 .50 
(65)
.031,
.975
t
p


 
6 
 Collaboration and teamwork 
67 4.32 .54 
(65)
.310,
.758
t
p


 

Yaron Ghilay 
66
The findings indicate that TBAL significantly enhances the learning 
process in a face-to-face course (4.49). The other factors also received high 
assessments: successful learning experience (4.64), student choice of 
technological equipment (4.58), students’ opportunities to participate in the 
class (4.53), link to the lesson (4.51), collaboration and teamwork (4.32). 
Participants were also asked to add verbal comments on the effectiveness 
of TBAL. The following quotes strengthen the quantitative findings and give 
them more validity: 
 
“Learning with technology has made a significant contribution to my 
learning. The opportunity to have a quiz summarizing a topic and to get 
feedback gives me an excellent indicator of my understanding of the 
specific course content. In case I did not succeed, I can query the lecturer 
during the lesson itself and gain an understanding of my mistake.” 
 
“Using technology during the lessons was very helpful for my 
learning. The process was extremely effective because the lecturer is an 
expert in educational technology and he continuously develops this field. 
Technology has been tremendously helpful for me in understanding the 
course content.”  
 
 
SUMMARY: TECHNOLOGY-BASED ACTIVE LEARNING 
 
According to international research, passive learning is problematic 
because students are not engaged in the lesson and are frequently disconnected 
from what is said in class (Bonwell & Eison, 1991; Michel et al., 2009). 
Research stresses that active learning leads to better outcomes (McGlynn, 
2005; Peck et al., 2006).  
While no controversy regarding the advantages of active learning exists, 
its implementation is not straightforward. Faculty members face barriers when 
trying to transfer from traditional to active learning. The TBAL model is 
intended to overcome this difficulty and help lecturers to create an active 
environment in their class. The model simplifies the practical procedures of 
converting traditional study methods into active learning.  
According to Ghilay & Ghilay (2015c), the TBAL model is very helpful 
in providing faculty members with practical tools to assist them in 
transitioning to the world of active learning. Students in the course based on 
the model report that it substantially improved their learning process. Students 

TBAL: Technology-Based Active Learning 
67
claim that they had multiple opportunities to participate and they were 
completely focused and linked to the lessons. Collaboration and teamwork 
were significantly improved as well. 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING (FBL) 
 
 
Promoting student success in learning has become an issue of concern 
among educators all over the world (Elton & Johnston, 2002; Knight & Yorke, 
2003a; Marton & Booth, 1997; Marton & Saljo, 1997; Prosser & Trigwell, 
2001; Race, 2005; Ramsden, 2000). Substantial numbers of students come into 
a class with all the appropriate prerequisites, but yet they are incapable of 
handling the course material (Wilson & Scalise, 2006). The usual explanation 
for student difficulties is that students do not study enough or they are not 
interested (Hesse, 1989). In light of the fact that communication between 
faculty and students is a critical element of higher education, effective 
feedback (Felder & Brent, 2004) may be the missing component in successful 
outcomes. Higher education will not be significantly improved, Burksaitiene 
(2011) argues until the feedback system is changed. 
A common definition of the term “feedback” in education is:  
 
“Information describing student performance in a given activity that 
is intended to guide their future performance in the same or a related 
activity” (Ende, 1983, p. 777). 
Black and Wiliam (1998) define the term “feedback” as: 
“Any information that is provided to the performer of any action 
about that performance.” (p. 40). 
 
Feedback can have different functions depending upon the learning 
environment, the needs of the learner, the purpose of the task, and the 
feedback paradigm adopted (Knight & Yorke, 2003b; Poulos & Mahony, 
2008). 

Yaron Ghilay 
70
There is a substantial body of research reporting both university student 
and lecturer dissatisfaction with feedback (Ferguson, 2011). Most student 
complaints focus on: feedback content, organization of assessment activities, 
untimeliness of criticism, and lack of clarity about requirements or guidance as 
to how to use feedback to improve subsequent performance (Higgins, Hartley, 
& Skelton, 2002; Huxham, 2007). From the lecturers’ perspective, complaints 
revolve around students not making use of or acting upon feedback in 
subsequent tasks (Spiller, 2009) and being concerned only with the mark. 
Hence, both students and faculty (Evans, 2013) deplore what is known as the 
feedback gap.  
In order to be effective, feedback should close the gap between students’ 
actual performance level and the level required by lecturers. Efficient feedback 
gives specifics regarding shortcomings (Hattie and Timperley, 2007): Does the 
information imparted in the critique help students close the gap between 
current knowledge and the program’s desired outcomes? (Croton, Willis III & 
Fish, 2014). Providing such feedback is not an easy task. 
Yet international research indicates that students respond very well to 
feedback delivered in digital form. A meta-analysis of more than 7,000 studies 
(Hattie and Timperley, 2007) reveals that multimedia feedback is one of the 
most effective ways to obtain positive results from feedback. 
While the term “feedback” refers to information provided to students to 
encourage them to improve their learning, information from students to 
lecturers may be just as transformative, assisting academic staff in changing 
their manner of teaching to better fit learners' needs. Often students are the 
first notice whether teaching is good or not. That said, too many institutions 
are not geared to accept student insights in an atmosphere that genuinely 
welcomes such feedback. Although requesting student feedback on their 
learning experience at the end of a semester has become common practice in 
many institutes, their views may not have any actual impact. Institutions of 
higher education need to create environments and mechanisms that allow 
student views, learning experiences, and performance to be taken into account 
(McAleese et al., 2013). 
 
 
FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING (FBL) MODEL 
 
The Feedback-Based Learning (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2015b) model confronts 
the challenge of getting institutions of higher education to appreciate the 
validity of students’ learning experience. It provides immediate student 

Feedback-Based Learning (FBL) 
71
responses to lecturers’ practice via use of personal smartphones (or 
tablets/laptops) to online questionnaires concerning the delivery of the 
educational program. Undertaken at the NB School of Design and Education 
(Haifa, Israel), the model significantly improves student feedback to faculty. It 
informs lecturers how each subtopic has been understood and implemented by 
all students in the course. This enables instructors to respond in real time to 
student difficulties either by explaining topics over again or by discussing 
issues that are surrounded by lack of clarity. Depending upon the prevalence 
of the difficulty, a lecturer’s response may involve a specific student or the 
whole class. The feedback effect is achieved by: 
 
1) Having each student answer an online questionnaire that has been 
prepared by the lecturer querying understanding of all subtopics in a 
main theme at the end of every main topic. Using Google Forms (via 
Google Drive) or an equivalent tool, the online questionnaire is 
compatible with the width of a smartphone screen and the evaluation 
can be projected onto a large screen in a regular classroom 
immediately after results have been obtained and without the delay of 
statistical data processing. 
2) The format of a feedback questionnaire is presented in Figure 8.1. 
 
 
Figure 8.1. The questionnaire format. 

Yaron Ghilay 
72
3) The result of each subtopic can include a frequency table combined 
with a frequency bar chart. Figure 8.2 presents such an example (15 
responses to two subtopics in one theme in a course in online course 
management). 
 
 
Figure 8.2. An example of a questionnaire results. 
 
4) The lecturer’s response to every question (relating to one subtopic) is 
standard: 
a) If all responses have the value of 4 or above (on a 5-point Likert 
scale), no intervention is required regarding absorption of the 
material in the specific subtopic. 
b) If up to one-tenth of all responses (or other threshold determined 
by the instructor) have a value of 3 or below, this indicates lack of 
understanding of the course material. The lecturer should provide 
those students with tutoring.  
c) If more than one-tenth (or equivalent value) of responses have a 
value of 3 or below, this indicates that a significant percentage of 
the class did not understand the course material as delivered. The 
lecturer should review that specific subtopic again with the whole 
class until fuller understanding is achieved. 
 

Feedback-Based Learning (FBL) 
73
The FBL Model – Research Findings 
 
A study by Ghilay & Ghilay (2015b) examined student perceptions of 
FBL in three courses (n = 62) at the NB School of Design and Education: 
 
1) Strategic Management (34 students): a multi-text, four academic hour 
per week course. 
2) PSPP - statistical software which is equivalent to SPSS (13 students): 
A computer course including use of statistical routines combined with 
principles of statistics (two academic hours per week). 
3) Management of online courses (15 lecturers): A course designed to 
teach lecturers how to manage online courses (three academic hours 
per week).  
 
The study measured learners’ views of the effectiveness of the FBL 
model. Respondents gave their opinions online measured on a five-point 
Likert scale to 19 questions concerning feedback. An open-ended question was 
also included to elicit other comments in addition to a verbal description of the 
benefit (if one existed) of learning through FBL. 
Four factors were examined (n = 62). The first refers to improvement in 
the learning process as a result of FBL, while the other three offer possible 
explanations for this outcome: 
Comments: 
 
 
All the items composing each factor (questions that appear in the 
questionnaire) are presented. High reliability was found for each 
factor (as indicated in parentheses).  
 
The score for each factor is the mean of the items composing it 
(presented in Table 8.1). 
 
1) Improvement in the learning process (Alpha = 0.872) 
 
Feedback causes me to learn better 
 
Feedback causes me to be better prepared for the final exam 
 
Feedback enables me to better understand the material that was 
taught  
 
Feedback causes me to have meaningful learning 
 
2) Diagnosis: Identifying learning difficulties (Alpha = 0.879): 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
74
 
Feedback enables me to inform the lecturer as to topics I did not 
understand 
 
Feedback allows the lecturer to know what difficulties I have 
encountered 
 
Feedback allows the lecturer to know what subjects I am familiar 
with 
 
Feedback enables the lecturer to know my weaknesses and 
strengths 
 
3) Sense of belonging and motivation (Alpha = 0.727): 
 
 
Feedback gives me a feeling that the lecturer is interested in me 
 
When the lecturer is interested in my learning, my motivation to 
study increases 
 
It is important that the lecturer be interested in my learning 
 
Following the feedback, I feel more comfortable in contacting the 
lecturer 
 
4) Prognosis: Handling problems (Alpha = 0.933): 
 
 
Feedback allows the lecturer to explain unclear issues 
 
Feedback highlights the difficulties common to most students in 
the class 
 
Feedback allows for treating specific difficulties even if they are 
not common to most of the class 
 
Feedback allows the lecturer to address problematic issues in 
learning 
 
The lecturer can adjust the pace of the lesson to students’ progress 
 
Feedback allows the lecturer to treat each student appropriately 
and individually 
 
Feedback enabled me to get responses to difficulties I faced 
 
No significant difference appeared in the mean scores obtained in all three 
courses (T-test,
0.05

). This strengthens the findings and gives them more 
validity. Table 8.1 presents the mean scores in all three courses grouped 
together and the results of the ANOVA test which shows the differences 
among the three courses to be negligible (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2015b).  
 

Feedback-Based Learning (FBL) 
75
Table 8.1. Effectiveness of Feedback-Based Learning 
 
No. Factor 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
ANOVA 
1 
Improvement of the learning 
process through use of FBL 
62 
4.54 
.62 
(61)
2.720,
.104
f
p


 
2 
Diagnosis: Identifying learning 
difficulties 
62 
4.69 
.57 
(61)
.526,
.471
f
p


 
3 
Prognosis: Handling problems 
59 
4.69 
.59 
(58)
.714,
.402
f
p


 
4 
Sense of belonging and 
motivation 
62 
4.51 
.59 
(61)
2.505,
.119
f
p


 
 
The findings show that FBL significantly improves the learning process 
(4.54). Also the next three factors received high scores: diagnosis: identifying 
learning difficulties (4.69), prognosis: handling problems (4.69) and sense of 
belonging and motivation (4.51).  
Respondents were asked to add verbal comments on the effectiveness of 
FBL. The following quotes from students and lecturers confirm the positive 
influence of FBL on the learning process:  
Students: 
 
“It is very helpful to have feedback to inform the lecturer in real time 
what we understand and what is unclear. In such a way, the instructor can 
go over difficult issues. FBL improves the whole learning process.” 
“In my view, feedback has many advantages because relevant data is 
given to the lecturer concerning the extent of students’ understanding. 
FBL can be especially appropriate for students who need targeting and 
close monitoring to improve their learning.”  
 
Lecturers: 
 
“FBL is extremely useful and significant for learning in large groups 
because, in such classes it is tough for the lecturer to know the exact 
situation of every student. Nevertheless, it should be helpful in a class of 
any size.” 
“I think that FBL is the right method pedagogically and it is 
appropriate for learning improvement in higher education.” 
“In my opinion, FBL is helpful in realizing how students feel 
concerning their learning process. I will definitely try it in my class. The 
method gave us an excellent opportunity to directly inform the instructor 
about our difficulties and it was tremendously helpful. It gave me a 

Yaron Ghilay 
76
feeling that the lecturer is attentive to our challenges and it made me 
comfortable to contact him and ask questions, even though no 
questionnaire was given in every lesson. I am convinced that FBL has a 
positive influence, both direct and indirect, on student learning.” 
 
 
SUMMARY – FEEDBACK-BASED LEARNING 
 
Instructors may know of gaps in student knowledge mainly after checking 
the final exams or assignments at the end of the semester. By that point it is 
usually too late to intervene and make a real change. Therefore, institutions of 
higher education should encourage, welcome, and take account of student 
feedback which could detect problems in the teaching and learning 
environment early on and lead to faster, more effective improvements 
(McAleese et al., 2013). 
FBL meets this challenge by enabling faculty to consistently monitor 
student progress and intervene when required. Such intervention might consist 
of: Slowing down the pace of presentation of new material, explaining 
misunderstood topics once again or in a different way, emphasizing difficult 
issues, etc. Underlying the model is the availability of real-time continuous 
diagnosis and prognosis carried out during the learning process. Lecturers can 
focus precisely on student difficulties and provide a feeling that the faculty is 
interested in student progress. 
The model is particularly suitable for hierarchically structured courses in 
which understanding of each topic depends upon knowledge of a prior topic. 
When students accumulate gaps in knowledge, understanding subsequent 
themes becomes more challenging.  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
ONLINE LEARNING – ADDITIONAL TOOLS 
 
 
Technology offers a huge range of tools for online learning needs. Here 
we focus on the main well-known utilities that offer high-quality reliable 
solutions for specific educational needs or use in learning models. The tools 
are intended to promote: 
 
1) File sharing: Google Drive 
2) Video sharing: YouTube 
3) Development of a personal website: Google Sites 
4) Remote control: TeamViewer-Remote Control 
5) Synchronous 
online 
learning: 
Blackboard 
Collaborate 
and 
TeamViewer-Meeting 
6) File backup: FreeFileSync  
 
 
FILE SHARING: GOOGLE DRIVE 
 
Google Drive (https://drive.google.com/drive/my-drive) is a tool not only 
for file sharing but also has excellent additional services. 
 
QR - 9.1 

Yaron Ghilay 
78
With regard to online learning, three important tools that are part of 
Google Drive are: 
 
 
File storage and sharing 
 
Google Docs 
 
Google Forms 
 
 
Google’s sharing alternatives are similar to most of the company's tools: 
 
 
Only the account holder is authorized  
 
Specific users are allowed privileges of viewing or updating 
 
Anyone with the appropriate link can view or update 
 
Entrance to every single service is through the same username and 
password, so one entry enables many activities in a variety of applications. 
Each account comes with 15 free GB, which can be increased for a fee. 
 
 
File Storage 
 
Google Drive allows the uploading personal files on any computer, but 
installing the Google Drive application on the PC and linking it to an account 
automatically syncs between the PC and the server. Moreover, if there are 
several computers belonging to the same user, the application can be installed 
on each and then all computers will be connected to the same account, 
permitting automatic synchronization of the drive folder (and subfolders) on 
all computers. Different sharing settings for specific files or even folders 
(including subdirectories) are possible. For example, a collection of files can 
be uploaded to Google Drive (instead of Moodle), and a link posted on the 
course’s Moodle website or other sites. This makes just one database 
necessary which can be shared with students in different courses or even at 
various institutions without the necessity of duplicating files. 
 
 
Google Docs 
 
This application allows the creation of collaborative online documents so 
multiple users can simultaneously update them, subject to the permission of 

Online Learning – Additional Tools 
79
the document creator. Authorization may be for an individual, all Internet 
users, or only link holders. With Google Docs interesting educational activities 
such as exercises in which a group of students jointly write an academic paper 
can be created. The writing can be synchronous with all participants working 
at the same time or asynchronous – participants are active whenever they wish. 
In any case, every change can be seen immediately by all group members. A 
similar possibility also exists for spreadsheets (Google Sheets) and 
presentations (Google Slides).  
 
 
Google Forms 
 
Google Forms easily allows the creation of online questionnaires. Such 
questionnaires can be helpful for doing research (instead of using paper forms) 
and for creation of quick and efficient feedback surveys. The prevalence of 
mobile devices (smartphones, tablets) has made the collection of student 
answers easy, eliminating the need for a computer room. The account holder 
receives feedback in real-time in spreadsheet format allowing for immediate 
transfer (without typing) to statistical processing software. The application 
itself automatically generates frequency diagrams and tables. Therefore, basic 
data can be viewed while questionnaires are being filled out which can 
facilitate class discussions relating to the results while projecting them on the 
class screen as in the FBL (Feedback-Based Learning) model (detailed in 
Chapter 8).  
Questionnaires can be updated, duplicated or shared with others. It is very 
easy to prepare a pilot, modify the questionnaire and immediately transfer it to 
another group. Each form has a screen in which it is created and updated and a 
different link for receiving answers. There is a variety of question types (short 
answer, paragraph, multiple-choice, checkboxes, dropdown, multiple choice 
grid, etc.). It is easy to add photos, video clips, titles and page breaks. Each 
item can be duplicated or modified including its location on the questionnaire. 
The order of questions is not necessarily fixed. A question may appear that is 
the result of a specific answer given to a prior question. Someone who 
answered the prior question differently may get an entirely different follow-up 
question.  
 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
80
VIDEO SHARING: YOUTUBE 
 
YouTube from Google (https://www.youtube.com) is one of the most 
common video sharing tools although other similar applications exist as well. 
 
 
QR - 9.2 
 
YouTube allows users to search, view, upload, share and even download 
video clips. HD videos can be uploaded without a limit on the length of the 
video. After producing a video clip (detailed in Chapter 5), it can be uploaded 
to a YouTube account and shared on the course site by: 
 
1) Linking: Clicking on the link takes the user to the specific clip on 
YouTube. A regular link to the video can be created by copying the 
video’s URL links to various points on the video’s runtime line. This 
makes it possible to create a “table of contents” for a long film by 
setting up links that bring viewers to different sub-topics. Another 
type of link can present the video in full-screen without any reference 
to parts of the clip or to other clips. 
2) Embedding: Video can be embedded into the course site (or any other 
site) and can be activated on the website. 
 
In both alternatives the videos are not on the course website and there is 
no need to download them (although that is possible). They are linked to 
YouTube directly and operated via video streaming. The advantages of this 
method are: 
 
1) There is no overload on the academic institute’s LMS server (videos 
are high volume).  
2) Users can watch videos instantly without having to wait for a 
download. 
 

Online Learning – Additional Tools 
81
Many options for downloading YouTube videos exist; one of which is 
YouTube Downloader (free download: http://goo.gl/yWa5Ov).  
 
 
QR – 9.3 
 
Reasons for downloading a video file might be: 
 
 
To view the clip on a PC/video player that is not connected to the 
Internet (usually, a high-speed connection is required). 
 
To ensure viewing of the clip even if it has been deleted or hidden by 
the owner. 
 
To edit the clip (cropping, merging, adding audio/subtitles) before 
publication to learners. 
 
In a YouTube account, the user can create playlists which can be 
published via a single link. Such playlists allow automatic play of all clips one 
after another in an order set by the account holder (lecturer). Specific videos 
from the group may be selected according to user preferences. Each account 
holder can create playlists that include any YouTube video, not just his/her 
own clips. A playlist covering a complete course or part of it can be created 
and published on the course site using a single link pointing to an entire group 
of videos. The account holder is entitled to add or remove clips from the list 
and also change their order. In this way, a link to a playlist whose address is 
fixed can be posted, but its contents can be changed at any time.  
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF A PERSONAL WEBSITE: GOOGLE SITES 
 
Google Sites system (https://sites.google.com( enables the account holder 
to develop a personal website relatively easily and to store it on Google 
servers. The tool allows creation of a horizontal or vertical menu bar, the 
uploading of files, links, images, embedded video clips, scrolling messages, 

Yaron Ghilay 
82
site design, etc. The above tasks are usually controlled by a menu system, but 
various features can be determined using code language. Each site has a 
relatively small volume of 100 MB only. However, this does not pose a real 
problem because an unlimited number of websites can be created and linked so 
high-volume files from other databases (such as Google Drive) can be 
accommodated. As for video clips, it is recommended to create links to 
YouTube which has no volume limit.  
 
 
QR - 9.4 
 
 
REMOTE SUPPORT: TEAMVIEWER-REMOTE CONTROL 
 
Sometimes an instructor or technician needs to connect to a student’s 
computer remotely in order to help learners with operational difficulties, 
failures, and installation of software or academic counseling. Several tools are 
available to create a situation in which instructor and student work 
simultaneously on the same computer even though they are in different 
locations. During the session, it is possible to talk on the phone or to use 
software. This technology allows for solving many problems without going to 
the learner’s location. It becomes an especially significant factor in distance 
learning courses based on the OTLA model (detailed in Chapter 10). The 
lecturer can guide the student through the texts, using different software  
tools, etc. 
One of the best tools for this type of remote control is TeamViewer-
Remote Control. Connecting to a remote computer requires the consent of the 
student who is asked to pass an identification number and password to the 
instructor. Both sides can stop the connection at any time. The software also 
allows additional operations such as voice/video or file transfer (unlimited 
capacity), the switching of roles between lecturer and student, control of the 
local computer by several remote computers simultaneously, control of 
multiple computers by one remote computer, video recording of a lesson, etc. 

Online Learning – Additional Tools 
83
The software has several versions and is distributed free for personal non-
commercial use. 
Major releases of this software: 
 
1) A complete set: Designed to perform all functions 
http://download.teamviewer.com/download/TeamViewer_Setup_ 
he.exe 
 
 
QR - 9.5 
 
2) Quick support:  
http://download.teamviewer.com/download/TeamViewerQS_he.exe 
A single file given to the learner through a link via the course site for 
downloading and operating without installation.  
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
                                                QR - 9.6  
 
Lecturers should use the full version while the simpler version is sufficient 
for students. 
 
 
SYNCHRONOUS ONLINE LEARNING: BLACKBOARD 
COLLABORATE AND TEAMVIWER-MEETING 
 
Blackboard Collaborate System (formerly, Elluminate) allows the lecturer 
to manage synchronous online lessons (this requires installation on a server 

Yaron Ghilay 
84
and incurs a cost). Lessons are scheduled for a specific date and time and all 
participants can see who is in the session. The lecturer either gives a 
presentation prepared in advance or shows everything that is on his/her screen 
with relevant oral explanations. The instructor can also present a live video of 
him/herself. Learners can “raise a hand” to ask a question and the instructor 
can reply. Learners can signify applause, satisfaction, dissatisfaction, etc. They 
are also allowed to communicate with the instructor and among themselves via 
text messages. If necessary, a participant may get permission to speak as a 
lecturer enabling seminars in which there are several lecturers in remote 
places. 
Before the beginning of a synchronous meeting, it is important that the 
instructor and the learners test their equipment, the software, and microphone. 
A synchronous lesson can also be recorded so it can be watched 
asynchronously (of course, without active participation). 
TeamViewer-Meeting is a similar single file application which the learner 
can download at:  
http://download.teamviewer.com/download/TeamViewerQJ_he.exe. 
 
 
QR - 9.7 
 
The complete set for the lecturer, TeamViewer-Remote Control is 
available at: 
http://download.teamviewer.com/download/TeamViewer_Setup_he.exe.  
The advantage of this tool over Blackboard Collaborate is that it can 
function both as remote control and a meeting. It does not require installation 
on a server and is free for private non-commercial use.  
 
 
FILE BACKUP: FREEFILESYNC 
 
An essential need of all computer users in general and online learning 
managers in particular is file management and backup. A hard drive has no 

Online Learning – Additional Tools 
85
absolute reliability and its lifespan is limited. Performing daily backups of 
everything created and/or updated is one method of damage control. 
A straightforward and cheap backup technique is saving files with a new 
name each day by attaching the date to the title. With this method, an archive 
is created and saved. The cost of saving many files for a given task (instead of 
one file only) is relatively minimal. 
There are two main ways a daily backup can be performed: 
 
 
Backup to an external device (such as a portable drive) 
 
Backup to the server (“cloud”) 
 
 
External backup device 
 
The advantage of a portable hard drive is that the current price of a two-
terabyte disk that does not require an electrical outlet is relatively low. It has 
large volume and high reliability. Degradation of the portable disk is largely 
eliminated due to the fact that it is rarely used, only during the backup 
operation. For this reason, the chance of it being exposed to net attacks is also 
minimized. The most basic requirement is a daily backup of files that have 
been changed/added (backing up the entire content of the computer is 
unnecessary). There are tools which automatically do this. One of the 
recommended free tools is FreeFileSync which can be found at: 
http://www.freefilesync.org.  
 
 
QR - 9.8 
 
The software quickly and reliably compares the two drives and copies 
only new files or those that have changed. Various parameters can be set such 
as the method of comparison (time, file size, file content), the method of 
synchronization (two-way, mirror, upgrade) and the folders that should be 
synced. A tutorial is found at: http://goo.gl/TDKQ1t. 

Yaron Ghilay 
86
 
QR - 9.9 
 
Backup to Server 
 
Backing up files to an external server creates “a second protective line” in 
addition to the local backup. There are many “cloud” services, some of which 
are free although the volume is not always sufficient. Common cloud services 
are Google Drive and Dropbox (https://www.dropbox.com), both of which can 
perform 
an 
automatic 
sync 
and 
Microsoft 
OneDrive 
(https:// 
onedrive.live.com). 
 
 
QR - 9.10 
 
 
QR - 9.11 
 
For a small charge, it is possible to get higher storage capacity, enabling 
back-up of all personal files. The advantage of server backup is that servers are 
protected and secure in the event of theft or physical damage to local devices. 
This prevents irretrievable loss of information. Moreover, saving files in the 
cloud enables the account holder to access them anywhere via any device, 
including smartphones and tablets.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
ONLINE LEARNING: A FULL SUBSTITUTE  
FOR FACE-TO-FACE LEARNING 
 
 
Online learning has roots in the tradition of distance education going back 
at least 100 years to the early correspondence courses. With the advent of the 
Internet and the World Wide Web, the potential to reach learners around the 
world has increased exponentially. Today’s online learning offers rich 
educational resources in multiple media and has the capability to support both 
real-time and asynchronous communication between instructors and learners 
as well as among students themselves. Institutions of higher education and 
corporate training have been quick to adopt online learning (Means et al., 
2010).  
Online learning has become popular because of its potential to provide 
flexible access to content and instruction at any time and from any place with a 
focus on: 
 
1) Increasing the availability of learning experiences for learners who 
cannot or choose not to attend traditional face-to-face offerings.  
2) Assembling and disseminating instructional content more cost-
efficiently. 
3) Enabling instructors to handle more students while maintaining 
learning quality that is equivalent to that of face-to-face instruction. 
 
Different technology applications are used to support synchronous and 
asynchronous models of online learning. While earlier online programs tended 
to implement one model or the other, more recent applications tend to combine 

Yaron Ghilay 
88
both synchronous and asynchronous online interaction as well as occasional 
face-to-face interaction (Means et al., 2010). 
Also, online learning is designed to promote learning quality. A common 
thesis is that asynchronous discourse is inherently self-reflective and, 
therefore, more conducive to deep learning than is a synchronous one (Harlen 
and Doubler, 2004; Hiltz and Goldman, 2005; Jaffe, Moir, Swanson, & 
Wheeler, 2006). 
 
 
ONLINE LEARNING – MAIN COMPONENTS 
 
Three key elements of online learning are (Means et al., 2010):  
 
1) Objective: Whether the activity serves as a replacement for or an 
enhancement to conventional face-to-face instruction. 
2) Learning experience: The type of pedagogical approach. 
3) Communication type: Synchronous or asynchronous.  
 
 
Objective 
 
An essential characteristic in classifying online activities is whether the 
activity serves as a replacement for face-to-face instruction or as an 
enhancement to it. A replacement application is considered a success if it 
provides learning without sacrificing student achievement. If student outcomes 
are the same whether a course is taken online or face-to-face, then online 
instruction which is inherently more cost-effective is preferred. Online 
enhancements that produce learning outcomes that are equivalent to (but not 
better than) face-to-face instruction are a waste of time and money  
(Means et al., 2010). 
 
 
Learning Experience 
 
The type of learning experience depends upon who (or what) determines 
the way learners acquire knowledge and can be classified according to the 
amount of control students have over the content and nature of the learning 
activity. In traditional didactic or expository learning, they have none. Content 
is transmitted in a lecture, written material, or other mechanisms. Such 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
89
conventional instruction is often contrasted with independent learning in 
which students can control what and how they learn. In this type of learning, 
students choose their own curriculum and ways of learning. Another category 
of learning experience stresses collaborative or interactive learning activity in 
which learning content emerges as learners interact with one another and with 
a teacher or other knowledge source.  
Technology can support three types of learning experiences: 
 
1) Expository instruction: Digital devices transmit knowledge. 
2) Independent learning: Learners build knowledge through inquiry-
based manipulation of digital artifacts such as online drills, 
simulations, games, or micro-worlds (an environment wherein 
students are given room to explore, and determine goals and learning 
activities). 
3) Interactive learning: Students build knowledge through inquiry-based 
collaborative interaction with other students. Teachers become co-
learners and act as facilitators. 
(Means et al., 2010) 
 
In expository instruction, technology delivers content. In independent 
learning, technology allows students to control digital artifacts to explore 
information or address problems. In interactive learning, learning emerges 
through synchronous or asynchronous interactions with other students and the 
technology (Dede, 2006).  
 
 
Communication Type 
 
A third characteristic commonly used to categorize online learning 
activities is whether they are synchronous or asynchronous.  
Research findings show that asynchronous learning has advantages over 
synchronous learning. Bernard et al. (2004) aver that in terms of achievement, 
student attitude, and outcomes, asynchronous environments have more 
positive effects than synchronous ones. Studies of distance learning 
applications 
show 
that 
combined 
synchronous 
and 
asynchronous 
communication has more positive effects than distance learning with just one 
of these interaction types (Zhao, Lei, Yan, Lai, & Tan, 2005). Zhao et al. 
(2005) find advantages in blended learning (“Face-to-Face Enhancement”) 
over purely online learning. They also find advantages in courses with 

Yaron Ghilay 
90
instructor involvement as compared to technology-based courses without 
significant lecturer participation. 
 
 
OTLA: ONLINE TEACHING LEARNING AND ASSESSMENT 
- A MODEL FOR FULL ONLINE DISTANCE LEARNING 
 
The OTLA Model (Online Teaching, Learning, and Assessment) is a 
means of “expository academic instruction” (detailed on page 89) via full 
online asynchronous distance learning. It is based upon LMS (Learning 
Management System) such as Moodle combined with other technological 
tools. 
Examined in institutes of higher education, the model was found to be 
useful for multi-text courses. However, with minor changes, it can be applied 
to other types of courses as well (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2013).  
For each course, there is an LMS website which is divided into main 
topics and is open to registered students only. OTLA includes the following 
six digital components: 
 
1) Text: All relevant documents are included on the course website 
(created in LMS such as Moodle), so students do not have to collect 
any bibliographical material. All texts are in pdf format (including 
relevant links), enabling them to be read on screen, printed out, 
searched or saved. No software besides the free Adobe Reader is 
required. Texts are divided into main topics.  
2) Hypertext: The pdf documents include relevant links that add 
explanations to challenging notions or supplement the material with 
additional examples. Documents may include links to other texts or 
recorded lectures.  
3) Text-reading: Each topic in a multi-text course is accompanied by 
audio files enabling students to listen to the text. This is especially 
crucial for students whose native language is not the same as the one 
in which the course is given. Students can activate the audio links 
from the relevant page (each page separately) or from a primary link 
that spans the whole topic. It is possible to listen to text reading online 
or to download files to be listened to later on any supportive device.  

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
91
4) Lectures (audio/video): Each topic is accompanied by a lecture 
recorded in “lab conditions,” i.e., not a live lesson. This is more 
effective because there is no time-wasting or audience disturbance.  
Recordings can be: 
 
 
Audio only (detailed in Chapter 4): Appropriate for multi-text 
courses in which students do not have to “watch things” while 
listening. Audio files can be uploaded to the course website.  
 
Video (detailed in Chapter 5): Suitable for courses in which it is 
essential to “see things” during the lecture: formulas, 
mathematical expressions, diagrams, pictures, computer screens, 
etc. Video files are uploaded in HD resolution to a video-sharing 
site such as YouTube and linked to the course website. A 
combination of audio and video lectures is also possible. 
 
A recorded lecture is an asynchronous replacement for a live 
lecture given in a classroom. In audio recordings, each lecture topic is 
separately recorded for every accompanying text page. The separate 
files are combined to create one complete file covering the whole 
topic. Students can either activate a link from every single text page in 
the lecture or from the main link which actuates an entire lecture on a 
single main topic. For video recordings, it is worthwhile to divide a 
lecture into small portions so as to allow subtopics to receive their due 
emphasis (detailed in Chapter 5). 
5) Exercises (described in detail in Chapter 6): Both optional and 
compulsory exercises are enabled in the OTLA model. Optional 
exercises give students practice in the skills entailed in a certain topic. 
While optional exercises are not included in the final score, 
compulsory exercises are summative assessments that receive a 
certain weight in the final grade (for example, 20% for all exercises 
together). Compulsory exercises can have a time limit for submission 
ensuring that all learning activities are completed by the end of the 
semester. Students are not able to submit overdue exercises unless the 
lecturer confirms a delay. LMS such as Moodle enables lecturers to 
alter deadlines (and other parameters), both at the group and the 
individual level.  
Exercises may have permitted time durations. There should be 
different questions in optional practice than in compulsory practice on 
the same topic. It is possible even desirable to enable students to 

Yaron Ghilay 
92
submit an activity (voluntary or mandatory) more than once in order 
to improve learning. In such a case, subsequent submissions should 
contain new questions. 
6) Final computerized exam: The final exam can be given in class or at 
home and is similar to the compulsory exercises containing questions 
not given before.  
 
In addition to the technological components, the OTLA model includes 
lecturer involvement in the whole learning process. The lecturer has intensive 
daily participation in what students do and how they advance. That connection 
depends on: 
 
a) Continuous monitoring of student progress: Done by checking student 
entries on the course website and by examining their exercises. This is 
essential to ensure that all students advance according to schedule.  
b) Giving assistance to students in real-time: Student queries are divided 
into: 
 
Academic issues: Questions and answers can be sent and 
answered by: Email, phone, text messages or remote control. 
Responses to students should be sent as quickly as possible so as 
not to delay their learning process.  
 
Technical issues: Proper technical proficiency is required of every 
student and should be condition for registration in an online 
distance course. Technical problem may affect student 
advancement and should be handled rapidly and efficiently via 
remote control (such as with TeamViewer-Remote Control).  
 
To prepare, run or update a course based on the OTLA model, lecturers 
need to be familiar with online learning technologies: LMS (Moodle or 
equivalent), pdf applications, hypertext, audio recording, video capture, CAA 
(Computer Assisted Assessment) and techniques for remote control of 
computers (detailed in Chapter 9).  
 
 
OTLA Model – Research Findings 
 
Research undertaken at the Neri Bloomfield School of Design and 
Education, Haifa, Israel (College A, n = 50) and at Jerusalem College (College 
B, n = 46) has examined the effectiveness of the OTLA model by checking 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
93
students attitudes toward the model during 2011-12, 2012-13 (Ghilay & 
Ghilay, 2013). The research was carried out in three courses: 
 
College A: Entrepreneurship (B.A - fourth year) 
Management of technology (B.A - third year) 
College B: Theories in educational management and leadership (M.A in  
Management of Educational Systems) 
 
The Model Effectiveness – Colleges A and B 
Participants were asked to answer an online questionnaire on a five-point 
Likert scale that included 32 items. The questionnaire also included two open-
ended questions focusing on the advantages/disadvantages of the model over 
face-to-face instruction. 
The following eight factors, divided into three main groups were 
examined:  
Comments: 
 
 
For each factor, all the items composing it are presented (questions 
that appeared in the questionnaire). High reliability was found 
(Cronbach's alpha) as indicated in parentheses. 
 
Factor scores were the means of the items composing them.  
 
1) Inputs: 
 
Hypertext: Hypertext is helpful for learning. 
 
Lectures/texts (Alpha = 0.818):  
 
Listening to the lecture recordings helps in learning 
 
I listened to the professor's recordings  
 
Lecturer's assistance (Alpha = 0.569): 
 
Getting assistance from the lecturer is possible 
 
I got help from the lecturer during the course 
 
Exercises (Alpha = 0.682):  
 
Optional exercises are helpful 
 
Mandatory exercises are useful 
 
The required activities reflected my knowledge  
2) Learning process: 
 
Learning Effectiveness (Alpha = 0.932): 
 
I could understand the material well 
 
The texts in the course website are clear and understandable 

Yaron Ghilay 
94
 
I had a successful learning experience 
 
Due to the course design I was able to progress throughout 
the whole semester 
 
Online learning is efficient 
 
I prefer an online course 
 
Towards the end of the semester, I felt ready for the exam 
 
I had no difficulties with online learning 
 
Online learning is more efficient than face-to-face learning 
 
The learning process in an online course is effective 
 
I expect to obtain a high grade in the course 
 
I am not afraid of failing the course 
 
Learning flexibility and convenience (Alpha = 0.926): 
 
Studying in an online course is convenient  
 
An online course has great flexibility 
 
The option to study when I wish is helpful 
 
The opportunity to submit exercises when I wish is useful 
 
Online learning saves time 
 
I enjoy online courses  
 
There is flexibility regarding exercise submission dates 
 
Studying in an online course is easy 
 
I can ask the lecturer questions anytime and get answers 
3) Time: 
 
Time pressure (Alpha = 0.899:  
 
There is time pressure in the course 
 
Time pressure in the course disturbs me 
 
Time investment: I invest much time in an online course  
 
 
There was no significant difference in the mean scores of all factors in 
College A between the years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013 (T-test, 
0.05

). 
This replication strengthens the validity of the findings. In light of this, mean 
factor scores for both years are presented together in Table 10.1 (Ghilay & 
Ghilay, 2013).  
 
 
 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
95
Table 10.1. College A – effectiveness of the OTLA model 
 
Groups 
Factor 
Mean N S.D 
Inputs 
Exercises 
4.36 50 .63 
Hypertext 
4.29 48 .77 
Lecturer assistance 
4.26 50 .81 
Lectures/texts  
3.97 50 1.03 
Learning process 
Flexibility and convenience of learning 
4.26 50 .66 
Effectiveness of the learning process 
3.89 50 .69 
Time characteristics Time investment 
3.88 50 .92 
Time pressure 
3.20 50 1.25 
 
According to the findings, learners perceive the OTLA model to be 
effective for all three categories: 
 
1) Inputs: Students rate all OTLA inputs with high scores. The 
contribution of the exercises (4.36 out of 5), hypertext (4.29), lecturer 
assistance (4.26) and lectures/text reading (3.97) is substantial.  
2) The learning process: Flexibility and convenience of learning is rated 
as very effective (4.26). The learning process is considered to be 
effective as well (3.89). 
3) Time characteristics: Time pressure is moderate (3.2) and students 
invest much time in learning (3.88) which should be considered 
positively.  
 
Respondents were asked to add verbal comments regarding the 
effectiveness of the model. The following examples indicate that the OTLA 
model has significant positive influence on students’ learning process (College 
A, 2012-2013): 
 
“I prefer the OTLA model because it enables me to study other 
courses and work full time” (a student who participated in both courses - 
Entrepreneurship and Technology Management). 
“There is a huge advantage to OTLA owing to the way contents are 
displayed, the many examples and the great availability of the lecturer.” 
(Entrepreneurship) 
“I prefer the OTLA model because it saves time, it is easier, and 
when I need any help, the lecturer supports me immediately.” 
(Entrepreneurship) 

Yaron Ghilay 
96
“In such a course, I prefer online learning since it mainly includes 
texts. Although we do not meet the lecturer, he is available for answering 
questions, so there is no problem.” (Technology Management) 
“In such courses, I prefer online learning because it includes 
theoretical material which I have to read over and understand. 
Furthermore, the wonderful recordings that our lovely lecturer prepared 
help us a lot.” (Entrepreneurship and Technology Management) 
 
In College B (Table 10.2), the findings were similar to those presented in 
Table 10.1: 
 
Table 10.2. College B – Effectiveness of the OTLA model 
 
Groups 
Factor 
Mean 
N S.D 
Inputs 
Exercises 
3.90 
46 .63 
Hypertext 
3.62 
45 .77 
Lecturer assistance 
4.15 
46 .81 
Lectures/text reading 
3.50 
46 1.03 
Learning process 
Flexibility and convenience of learning 4.31 
46 .66 
Learning process effectiveness 
4.08 
46 .69 
Time characteristics 
Time investment 
3.72 
46 .92 
Time pressure 
2.75 
46 1.25 
 
There were no significant differences between the two colleges with 
regard to all factors except: 
 
Exercises:  College A – 4.36,  
College B – 3.90 (𝑡(77)  =  2.75,𝑃 =  0.007) 
Hypertext:  College A – 4.29,  
College B – 3.62 (𝑡(72)  =  3.088, 𝑃 =  0.003). 
 
The following examples of verbal responses from College B strengthen 
the previous findings and give them more validity (M.A in Management of 
Educational Systems, 2012-2013): 
 
“OTLA is much more efficient and practical than traditional 
learning. It is easier to study and assimilate the material. The flexibility 
helps a lot in the learning process. The course was fascinating and clear 
and the texts were readable and pleasant. The audio recordings were 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
97
interesting and helpful for understanding and, of course, the lecturer's 
support was outstanding.” 
“I love the model of online distant learning very much. Over the last 
years, I have taken some online courses and this is the first one in which I 
enjoyed the professionalism, the high level of study and the account taken 
of different learning styles (visual and auditory). It is the first online 
course in which I felt that learning was more meaningful than classroom 
learning. The course was clear, professional, and accessible (texts, 
recorded lectures, video clips, links and kindness and availability of the 
lecturer). All these undoubtedly contributed to the quality and efficiency 
of the learning.”  
 
 
OTLA Model – Additional Studies 
 
In 2016 two studies were undertaken at College A to validate the above 
research (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2013): 
 
1) Comparison of learning achievements in traditional learning and 
distance learning:  
 
Student achievement in the “Entrepreneurship” course over the 
last 13 years (2002-2003 until 2015-2016, for 2004-2005 the course 
was not taught) were examined. The course was given for seven 
years: 2002-2003 until 2009-2010 in the face-to-face learning format 
and six years, 2010-2011 to 2015-2016 in the online distance learning 
format based on the OTLA model. In every one of these 13 years, the 
course was conducted by the same lecturer and included similar 
content and requirements. 
 
2) Comparison of the effectiveness of multi-text courses provided in the 
classroom to similar courses provided via distance learning: 
 
A follow-up study examined whether active learning in class in 
multi-text courses (based on TBAL model, detailed in Chapter 7) is 
superior to distance learning (based on the OTLA model). If no 
superiority exists, then administratively (from the organization’s and 
the individual student’s perspective) there is an advantage to distance 

Yaron Ghilay 
98
learning due to savings in classrooms, equipment, electricity, travel, 
the ability to teach many students with fewer lecturers, etc. 
 
Face-To-Face Courses and Distance Learning – a Comparison of 
Student Achievement 
In order to compare the achievement obtained in the two forms of 
learning, the mean grade over the years of traditional classroom learning and 
distance learning was calculated (except 2004-5 in which the course was not 
given). A T-test (
0.05

) examined whether the difference in the mean 
grades was statistically significant. 
Table 10.3 compares the mean grades during the period 2002-2010 
(classroom learning) and 2010-2016 (online distance learning based on the 
OTLA model). 
 
Table 10.3. College A – A comparison of achievement in face-to-face 
learning and online distance learning (OTLA) 
 
Course 
Year 
Mean 
N 
S.D 
T-test 
Face-to-face 
(7 cohorts) 
2002-2010 
81.25 106 11.86 
(237)
1.639,
.103
t
p


 
Distance learning- 
OTLA (6 cohorts) 
2010-2016 
83.74 133 11.45 
  Overall  
82.64 239 11.99 
 
The t-test shows that as there was no significant difference in student 
achievement in both learning formats, namely, course achievement is stable 
over an extended period, regardless of the form of learning. Assuming a 
similar level of student ability in both groups (the threshold for admission was 
not changed), the conclusion is that distance learning does not adversely affect 
learning achievement. 
 
Face-to-Face Courses and Distance Learning – A Comparison of 
Student Attitudes 
Students who studied multi-text courses in both formats (College A, 
n = 40) were requested to compare the quality of learning as well as to give 
reasons for their conclusions with respect to: Concentration, the contribution 
of the lectures, learning experience, and the suitability of the course website. 
 
 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
99
The study addressed the three courses: 
 
 
Entrepreneurship (Department of Management - fourth year) and 
Fundamentals 
of 
Technology 
Management 
(Department 
of 
Management - second year). The courses were given in the distance 
learning format according to the OTLA model. 
 
Strategic Management (Department of Management - third year). It 
was given in face-to-face learning format based on the TBAL model 
(detailed in Chapter 7).  
 
Students who participated in the study attended one of the two distance 
learning courses as well as the face-to-face course given during 2014-15 and 
2015-16. They were asked to answer an online questionnaire giving their 
impressions of both modes of learning upon completion of the courses. The 
questionnaire which included 28 items evaluated on a five-point Likert scale 
and an open-ended question that focused on the preferred way of learning with 
an explanation of students’ reasoning was administered twice, once for OTLA 
and once for TBAL. 
The following five factors were examined:  
Comments: 
 
 
For each factor, all the items composing it are presented (questions 
that appeared in the questionnaire). High reliability (Cronbach's 
alpha) was found for each factor (consisting of two items or more) 
indicated in parentheses, for Part A – online distance learning (the 
value on the left side) and Part B – active learning in a classroom (the 
value on the right side). 
 
Factors’ scores were calculated based on the means of the items 
composing them.  
 
Outcome: 
 
 
Learning quality (Alpha = 0.881, 0.948):  
 
I understand the course topics well 
 
The learned material is clear 
 
I made progress during the semester 
 
I feel ready for the exam at the end of the semester 
 
I expect a high mark 

Yaron Ghilay 
100 
 
I am not afraid of failure 
 
My learning process was meaningful 
 
The topics were given in the right sequence 
 
I felt that the material was not too difficult 
 
Possible reasons: 
 
 
Concentration in learning (Alpha = 0.868, 0.941): 
 
It was easy to concentrate 
 
I succeed in listening to the lectures well 
 
I succeed in deepening my understanding of the material 
 
I concentrated during the whole lecture 
 
Effectiveness of the lectures (Alpha = 0.923, 0.918): 
 
The lectures explained the course material 
 
Lectures were useful in my learning process 
 
Lectures have added value beyond reading texts 
 
Lectures are helpful for understanding the topics covered in the 
course 
 
Learning experience (Alpha = 0.904, 0.952): 
 
The exercises helped me to learn 
 
Studying is convenient 
 
The course is enjoyable 
 
The learning experience is adequate  
 
The course is flexible 
 
Learning is efficient 
 
Learning is effective 
 
An evaluation of the course website (Alpha = 0.971, 0.977): 
 
The site includes everything needed for the course 
 
The site enhances the learning process 
 
The site includes all the necessary tools 
 
The site facilitates the learning process  
 
Table 10.4 presents the mean scores mentioned above for distance 
learning (OTLA) and classroom learning (TBAL). 
 
 
 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
101 
Table 10.4. College A – Comparison of online distance learning (OTLA) 
and classroom learning (TBAL) 
 
Factors 
Mean 
N 
S.D. 
Significance of difference between 
distance learning (OTLA) and 
classroom learning (TBAL) 
Learning quality 
Distance  
4.18 
40 
.46 
𝑡(39)  = −.990, 𝑃 = .328 
Classroom 
4.27 
40 
.65 
Concentration 
Distance  
3.97 
38 
.66 
𝑡(37)  = −1.428,𝑃 = .162 
Classroom 
4.19 
38 
.76 
Effectiveness of 
Lectures 
Distance  
4.50 
38 
.47 
𝑡(37)  = −.328, 𝑃 = .745 
Classroom 
4.53 
38 
.54 
Learning 
experience 
Distance  
4.29 
40 
.60 
𝑡(39)  = .209, 𝑃 = .835 
Classroom 
4.27 
40 
.72 
The course 
website 
Distance  
4.57 
38 
.82 
𝑡(37)  = .417, 𝑃 = .679 
Classroom 
4.54 
38 
.75 
 
The study reveals that all factors received high scores and there was no 
significant difference between distance learning and classroom learning 
(Paired Samples T-test), as shown in Table 10.4. This means that since quality 
of learning received high scores in both formats (4.18, 4.27 respectively), both 
learning methods are considered to be effective. This may be explained by 
students' high concentration (3.97, 4.19), effectiveness of the lectures (4.50, 
4.53), quality of the learning experience (4.29, 4.27) and the effectiveness of 
the course website (4.57, 4.54).  
Respondents were asked to add verbal comments concerning their 
preferred way of learning. Below are some samples: 
 
“For me, there is no significant difference between a distance 
learning course and face-to-face learning.”  
“In a distance learning course, I logged on more to the course 
website, I learned by myself and enjoyed learning at times when it was 
convenient for me. In class, it is harder to concentrate. I was able to read 
the texts and listen to recorded lectures in distance learning, so I 
understood the material better.” 
“In my opinion, it is better that multi-text courses be in distance 
learning format because the site includes all the material and the 
possibility to listen to lectures while reading the material. Graded 
exercises also helped me learn - we can just do everything at home. The 
lecturer usually replies to any question via email or phone and this gives 
us the feeling that he is with us.” 

Yaron Ghilay 
102 
“I felt that distance learning is dependent upon the lecturer. There are 
instructors whom I cannot understand without repeating the material. 
There are others with whom it is pleasant to learn. However, I felt that 
distance learning is easier for me than learning in the classroom.” 
“I think that in the 21st century, distance learning substantially 
connects to millennials. Technological systems and rapid access via 
mobile phone or landline enable students to learn quickly and thoroughly. 
It is different and unique, and I find this method superior to the 
classroom. Furthermore, the lecturer is courteous, professional, listens 
and helps remotely at any time. I had a lot of fun.” 
“I prefer learning in the classroom, although I certainly love the 
distance learning courses. The significant advantage of distance learning 
is that we can hear the text and then listen to the lectures. The lectures are 
recorded in the best way and sometimes I feel like I am in the classroom. 
The lecturer highlights the important points in the recording and explains 
everything very well. I enjoyed learning in the distance learning courses.” 
 
The students’ verbal comments substantiate the claim of the quantitative 
part of the research that there is no essential difference between the two 
learning formats. Nevertheless, it looks like many students prefer distance 
learning and not only due to its administrative advantages, but also to 
considerations of quality, ease, and efficiency of learning, the ability to 
concentrate and the possibility of obtaining a lecturer response in real time 
without restrictions. 
 
 
SUMMARY: THE OTLA MODEL FOR ONLINE  
DISTANCE LEARNING 
 
As Mayer (2009) claims, one of the main challenges of ICT is to adopt 
technology to learning. The OTLA model is a comprehensive asynchronous 
alternative to learning in the classroom with a solid technological foundation 
in teaching, learning and assessment. The model has been examined and tested 
in three studies in institutions of higher education and findings show that it is 
an excellent way to manage distance academic courses.  
The striking finding of these studies is that the OTLA model allows 
students to get what they want the most - flexibility combined with effective 
and efficient learning. Although the model does have technological 
components, it does not succeed without personalized daily lecturer 

Online Learning – A Full Substitute for Face to Face Learning 
103 
involvement as an alternative to face-to-face meetings. If students feel lonely 
or helpless while sitting in front of a computer screen, it is crucial that 
lecturers provide students with the feeling that they have someone to turn to. 
The lecturer must be patient and attentive to student needs, maintaining daily 
contact and taking care to provide fast and effective response to all student 
requests. 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11 
 
 
 
COMPREHENSIVE TECHNOLOGY-BASED 
LEARNING (CTBL) 
 
 
Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL) improves learning in 
hierarchic knowledge-based quantitative courses such as computer technology 
and mathematics where mastery of current topics depends upon mastery of 
previous ones. When gaps in students’ knowledge occur, they are difficult to 
overcome, making progress arduous. As gaps widen, learning becomes more 
and more onerous often culminating in loss of the learner’s connection with 
the course. 
This model offers a comprehensive package featuring wide coverage of all 
course material. It is designed to provide solutions in real-time to deal with the 
occurrence of knowledge gaps. The model’s educational outlook fosters the 
learning processes of all learners regardless of administrative issues such as 
poor attendance at lectures. Smaller lecture attendance is offset by the increase 
in learning quality. Face-to-face instruction is just one of the components of 
the package. Learners may avail themselves of whatever suits their learning 
style, preferences and specific difficulties. The integration of technology 
provides a richer learning experience and greater opportunity to meet student 
needs. 
Design of a quantitative course based on the CTBL model requires 
enormous investment of labor, especially in the preparation phase.  
The coverage the model provides includes: 
 
1) Text: Full textual coverage of the material including answers to 
exercises. When repeating the material taught in class or completing a 

Yaron Ghilay 
106 
missing element due to absence, it is possible to review all the 
material including exercises and solutions.  
2) Video: Video clips provide full coverage of all theoretical material 
and exercises. To assist students with difficulty in solving a question, 
a link to a video showing the solution is provided at the end of the 
question. Solutions to all exercises can be created through video 
capture technology (detailed in Chapter 5).  
3) Feedback questionnaires: To ensure that what was taught has been 
thoroughly assimilated, the FBL model as described in Chapter 8 
(Ghilay & Ghilay, 2015b) is used to transfer student feedback to the 
lecturer at the end of each topic. Every problematic issue receives a 
relevant answer from the lecturer (or the tutor), either individually or 
as a group until all irregularities have been resolved. 
4) Guided practice: Lessons also include guided practice with the 
material in the classroom. 
5) Answering questions: Each student is invited to ask questions about 
troubling issues and to get answers within a reasonable time, even 
outside of class via remote communication with the lecturer or tutor 
(including remote control of students' computers, if required).  
 
 
CTBL MODEL – RESEARCH FINDINGS 
 
A study examining whether Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning 
improves the learning process and if so, what is the explanation, was 
conducted at the NB School of Design and Education (Haifa, Israel). 
Participants in the study (n = 29) were enrolled in the PSPP (statistical 
software equivalent to SPSS) course that was conducted along the lines of the 
CTBL model. The course included the following topics: descriptive statistics, 
syntax, computerized variables, case selection, T-test, ANOVA, crosstabs, chi-
square, reliability (Cronbach's alpha), item analysis and factor analysis. This 
one-year course was taken by third-year students in the Department of 
Management (two hours per week). Respondents taking the course during 
2014-15 and 2015-16 answered a fifty-item questionnaire evaluated on a five-
point Likert scale and an open-ended question focusing on the contribution of 
CTBL to their learning process (if it existed) and the reasons explaining it.  
The following five factors were examined: the first is learning 
improvement while the other four factors present possible reasons for it.  
 

Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL) 
107 
Comments: 
 
 
All items (questions in the questionnaire) composing each factor are 
presented. High reliability for each factor was found (indicated in 
parenthesis).  
 
Factor scores were the means of the items composing them.  
 
1) Learning improvement (Alpha = 0.854) included the items: 
 
 
Comprehensive learning is helpful for better understanding of the 
material 
 
Comprehensive learning helps me to be well prepared for the final 
exam 
 
Comprehensive learning allows me to deepen my understanding of the 
material 
 
Comprehensive learning produces meaningful learning 
 
Comprehensive learning is better than traditional learning 
 
I prefer comprehensive learning over regular modes of learning 
 
2) Comprehensiveness (Alpha = 0.965): 
 
 
The variety of learning alternatives allows me to overcome difficulties 
 
Full textual coverage of the material helps me learn 
 
Full video coverage of the material helps me learn  
 
Full video coverage of all exercises is helpful 
 
The variety of alternatives allows the lecturer to focus on important 
issues  
 
The variety of alternatives allows learners to select the most 
appropriate tools  
 
Ways of learning can be suited to personal learning styles  
 
The lecturer shares helpful techniques for learning  
 
Students are exposed to a huge variety of exercises to solve  
 
The variety of learning alternatives improves my ability to handle 
difficulties 
 
Practicing various alternatives improves learning  
 
The variety of practice exams is excellent preparation for the final 
exam 
 
Having academic assistance in class is helpful  

Yaron Ghilay 
108 
 
Having assistance with installation and use of software tools is useful 
 
3) Learning experience: (Alpha = 0.953): 
 
 
Comprehensive learning allows me to be active  
 
The learning experience is much better  
 
I enjoy learning with technology  
 
Comprehensive learning makes learning much more attractive  
 
Comprehensive learning increases my motivation  
 
Comprehensive learning helps overcome difficulties more easily  
 
I have the feeling that the lecturer is interested in me  
 
I have the impression that the lecturer is interested in my progress 
 
It is convenient for me to turn the lecturer even outside of class  
 
The lecturer invites us to keep in touch with regard to our studies  
 
It is very easy to give examples of tough issues  
 
Comprehensive learning improves my ability to concentrate 
 
4) Prevention of knowledge gaps: (Alpha = 0.951): 
 
 
Overcoming gaps is easy  
 
It is easy to understand issues that are unclear by watching video clips 
again  
 
It is easy to understand unclear issues by reviewing comprehensive 
texts again 
 
It is easy to understand unclear issues by having additional help from 
the lecturer in real-time  
 
The lecturer's willingness to help is crucial for eliminating gaps 
 
Only few gaps are created since difficulties are dealt with 
immediately  
 
The clips on all the theoretical material are helpful for my progress  
 
The clips on all the exercises are useful for my progress  
 
Concurrent online feedback is helpful in diagnosing difficulties in 
real-time  
 
Concurrent online feedback is useful in eliminating knowledge gaps 
in real-time  
 
 
 

Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning (CTBL) 
109 
5) Flexibility (Alpha = 0.963): 
 
 
Getting an answer using various channels of communication is helpful 
 
The combination of technology and connection to the lecturer has 
added value 
 
There is a complementary relationship between technological tools 
and human involvement 
 
The limitation of meeting time and location is significantly reduced 
 
It is easy to continue learning outside of class 
 
It is possible to get better by repeating recorded lectures and exercises 
 
It is easy to have both human or technological feedback in real-time  
 
Table 11.1 presents the means of the factors: 
 
Table 11.1 Effectiveness of Comprehensive Technology-Based Learning  
 
No. 
Factor 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
1 
Learning improvement 
29 
4.59 
.42 
2 
Flexibility 
29 
4.65 
.44 
3 
Comprehensiveness 
29 
4.59 
.61 
4 
Prevention of gaps 
29 
4.58 
.59 
5 
Learning experience 
29 
4.51 
.59 
 
The findings show that CTBL model significantly improves the learning 
experience in a quantitative course (4.59). Possible explanations for this may 
be: Flexibility, comprehensiveness (the variety and coverage of material), the 
ability to overcome knowledge gaps, and the excellence of the learning 
experience, 4.65, 4.59, 4.58, 4.51, respectively.  
The learners’ verbal comments on the model show that comprehensive 
learning has a significant positive impact: 
 
“I appreciate the lecturer who has invested much time preparing the 
training tools and is very interested in how we progressed in the course. 
Investment in videos helps us to learn a lot of the material and to prepare 
better for the test.” 
“There is no doubt that the material is comprehensive and is well 
grounded in Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences. This 
makes a significant contribution to learning. For me it was also very 
helpful to enter the course website anytime and learn.”  
“It was very enjoyable and useful for the learning process.” 

Yaron Ghilay 
110 
SUMMARY: COMPREHENSIVE  
TECHNOLOGY-BASED LEARNING 
 
A common phenomenon in quantitative courses at institutions of higher 
education is the difficulty in absorbing new material due to lack of a strong 
base. Because of the hierarchic nature of the knowledge, breaks in 
understanding impair comprehension and integration of new information. 
Differentiated instruction overcomes the formation of these gaps, effectively 
meeting various student needs and learning styles. The Comprehensive 
learning model is based on: 
 
 
Providing thorough training covering the whole curriculum including 
all exercises. 
 
Inclusion of the FBL model (Feedback-based learning, detailed in 
Chapter 8) in CTBL. 
 
Personal attention by the instructor (or tutor) in and outside of the 
class in order to address specific difficulties.  
 
This leads to: 
 
 
Reduction in difficulties arising from misunderstanding material.  
 
Identification of existing difficulties in real-time and receipt of a 
satisfactory response. 
 
Learners who feel they still need help despite the above interventions 
may contact the lecturer or tutors for personal attention in or outside 
the classroom. 
 
The model’s effectiveness was found to be high in a two-year study. In 
spite of the initial labor needed in designing an effective online course, when it 
is intended to be given for many years, this is a worthwhile investment 
because of the many benefits. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
 
 
 
TRAINING FOR MANAGEMENT OF ONLINE 
COURSES (TMOC) 
 
 
BARRIERS TO ONLINE TEACHING AND LEARNING 
 
In many institutions of higher education faculty members are expected to 
conduct online distance learning course as a part of their regular duties (Kim 
& Bonk, 2006). However, many lecturers hesitate to convert their traditional 
courses to an online format. This resistance is attributable to lack of training 
and support (Allen & Seaman, 2008; Keengwe, Kidd, & Kyei-Blankson, 
2009). 
Rockwell, Schauer, Fritz, & Marx (1999) examine the types of training 
and support that faculty claim is needed in order to successfully manage online 
courses and report that faculty most often request support in developing 
instructional materials, in developing interaction with students, and in 
applying specific technologies.  
Faculty members perceive that teaching online is harder than conducting 
traditional courses (Gerlich, 2005), maintaining that online delivery is more 
labor intensive due to the time required to grade papers and respond to 
questions (Lao, & Gonzales, 2005; Wegmann, & McCauley, 2008; Sellani & 
Harrington, 2002). 
In other studies, faculty concerned about the quality of their online courses 
and the amount of technical assistance and training available to them at their 
institutions assert that additional instructional and technical support is needed 
(Allen & Seaman, 2008; Keengwe et al., 2009). Brogden & Couros (2002) and 
Lorenzetti (2004) point out that the time and effort required to develop online 

Yaron Ghilay 
112 
courses and learn the new technologies required to maintain them cause 
faculty frustration.  
 
 
IMPLICATIONS FOR ONLINE LEARNING AND TEACHING 
 
To successfully transfer from traditional to online pedagogy, academics 
must change their old teaching styles and adopt new skills (Colaric, & 
Taymans, 2004; Johnson, 2008; Kurzweil & Marcellas, 2008; Panda & 
Mishra, 2007). This demands thorough understanding of the design and 
delivery of online education as well as its challenges and opportunities 
(Ginzburg, Chepya, & Demers, 2007; Pankowski, 2008). In order to support 
faculty, professional development opportunities must be created that include 
preparation of relevant instructional materials so that all the elements of 
pedagogy, course management, and technology can be addressed (Grant & 
Thornton, 2007; Keeler & Horney, 2007; McQuiggan, 2007). 
As online learning is an integral part of contemporary academic practice in 
higher education (no matter the kind of online course), comprehensive 
knowledge of creation, delivery, and development is demanded. Yet some 
lecturers have only basic knowledge of educational technology. Technological 
competence requires training, experimentation, and contemplation. As 
institutions of higher education face the challenge of training faculty to 
become qualified online course managers, the TMOC (Training for 
Management of Online Courses) model can provide an answer to this 
challenge (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014). 
 
 
THE TMOC MODEL 
 
The TMOC model has two fundamental components:  
 
1) Curriculum: The specific topics lecturers should be familiar with in 
order to manage online courses. 
2) Learning methodologies: Exemplification of the diverse ways in 
which lecturers can design their own online curriculums to meet 
various student needs and learning styles.  
 

Training for Management of Online Courses 
113 
The Curriculum 
 
The TMOC curriculum includes: 
 
1) LMS: Knowledge of a Learning Management System (such as 
Moodle), one of the fundamental elements of management of online 
courses. This includes knowledge of basic applications for the 
administration, documentation, tracking, reporting and delivery of 
academic courses (detailed in Chapter 2). Although LMS does not 
answer all needs, it functions as the hub of all transactions between 
students and lecturer. It enables the creation of course websites that 
are open to specific groups. With knowledge of LMS, lecturers can do 
almost everything on their own. However, lecturers need to be 
carefully instructed. Lecturers should be familiar with: Management 
of files/directories, menus, forums, photo albums, assignments, 
glossaries, links (internal and external), groups, attendance, 
announcements, blogs, wikis, user registration, and the import, backup 
and restoration of course websites. Lecturers being trained should 
have a practice site of their own that includes lecturer authorization. 
2) Computerized Assisted Assessment (CAA): As mentioned in Chapter 
6, CAA has significant advantages over traditional assessment. 
Lecturers need to be properly trained in CAA so as to be able to: 
 
Create/update a question bank 
 
Create/update different exams (based on the question bank) 
 
Administer computerized exams 
3) Video: As presented in Chapter 5, a recorded video lecture is an 
asynchronous replacement or supplement to a face-to-face lecture 
suitable for courses in which “watching things” is essential. Lecturers 
need to know how to present formulas, mathematical expressions, 
diagrams, pictures, computer screens, etc. professionally so students 
can watch the videos they provide several times. Training of lecturers 
in producing recorded lessons should include: 
 
Creation of clips based on video capture technology: Knowledge 
of Camtasia Studio, Microsoft Community Clips or the equivalent 
is mandatory. If lessons include mathematical formulas, tools 
such as MathType combined with PowerPoint, Camtasia, etc. 
should be taught. 
 
Searching for clips across the net: There are numerous video 
clips, suitable for academic courses, i.e., lectures on TED or 

Yaron Ghilay 
114 
YouTube or other sites. Lecturers should be taught to download 
YouTube clips via YTD (YouTube Downloader) and to upload 
video files to the course website with or without editing.  
 
Editing video clips: Usually an edit of a video clip before placing 
it on the course website is required. Lecturers should be instructed 
in cutting, joining, or adding subtitles or audio. Professional 
editing tools like Camtasia or free software such as Microsoft 
Movie Maker, should be taught.  
 
Format conversion: Sometimes format conversion is required to 
place videos on the course website. Format Factory (a free 
comprehensive tool) for accomplishing this can be downloaded 
at: http://www.pcfreetime.com and its use should be thoroughly 
taught. 
 
 
QR - 12.1 
 
 
Uploading clips to the net: Techniques of direct upload to the 
course website or to a sharing site such as YouTube should be 
thoroughly mastered.  
 
Linking and embedding clips: When a video clip is on an external 
server (such as YouTube) either links to it must be created or the 
clip must be embedded into the course website. Lecturers need to 
be familiar with these techniques. 
4) Audio: Like video, this can also be an asynchronous replacement for 
or a supplement to a face-to-face lecture. It is especially suitable for 
multi-text courses. Audio files can be uploaded to the course website 
or to any other digital database. Lecturers need to be familiar with 
voice recording, format conversion (especially to mp3) and editing. 
Recordings done with standard Microsoft applications or via mobile 
devices such as tablets or smartphones need to be taught. Knowledge 
of TTS technology (detailed in Chapter 4) for text reading is also 
essential.  

Training for Management of Online Courses 
115 
5) Text files: One of the most critical components of online courses 
(detailed in Chapter 3). It is essential for lecturers to know how to use 
the Portable Document Format (PDF) as each PDF file encapsulates a 
complete fixed-layout flat document, including the text, fonts, 
graphics, and other information.  
 
Lecturers need to be acquainted with: 
 
 
Text conversion to PDF (including links): Converting any file to 
PDF so as to share texts and hypertexts no matter in what 
software the original text was created. To read all these files, 
students need only the free Adobe Reader.  
 
Merging files: Helpful for creation of course booklets based on 
various sources and formats.  
 
Splitting files: Helpful for dividing material into manageable 
portions. 
 
Reorder/rotate pages: Enabling lecturers to improve booklet 
design by changing page order, rotation or deletion. Use of tools 
like Adobe Acrobat Professional and PdfSam should be included 
in the curriculum.  
6) Remote control: Lecturers need to know how to connect to students' 
remote computers in order to support them with operational 
difficulties, tool installation as well as real academic assistance. 
Relevant tools for remote control such as TeamViewer-Remote 
Control (detailed in Chapter 9) should be taught. 
7) Online synchronous learning: A complementary component to 
asynchronous online learning. Lecturers should be familiar with 
Blackboard Collaborate (detailed in Chapter 9) in order to present 
slides or the lecturer's computer screen to remote participants. 
Lecturers should become familiar with TeamViewer-meeting to 
manage interactive synchronous online lessons. 
8) Website development: Although lecturers use LMS (such as Moodle) 
for the creation of course websites, they may also need a personal 
website that does not belong to the higher education institution. 
Academics need to acquire basic knowledge of website building using 
tools such as Google Sites (detailed in Chapter 9) or the equivalent 
and how to link their personal site or items in databases they have 
built such as Geocities (geocities.ws) to the main LMS website.  
 

Yaron Ghilay 
116 
 
QR - 12.2 
 
9) Screen capture: Screen capture which includes screenshots is a 
relatively straightforward technique for writing training literature 
which all lecturers should know. Practice with the extremely useful 
FastStone Capture (detailed in Chapter 3) and Microsoft Windows’ 
Snipping Tool should be included in the curriculum of the practice 
sessions. 
10) Principles of online courses which are a full substitute for face-to-
face learning: Even if lecturers have minimal knowledge of 
educational technology, it is usually insufficient to completely 
manage online distance learning. The OTLA model which defines a 
framework for online teaching, learning and assessment (detailed in 
Chapter 10) should be carefully studied.  
 
 
Learning Methodologies 
 
The TMOC model features a combination of the main modes of learning 
which lecturers should incorporate into their own online courses: 
 
1) Face-to-face lectures: The first nine topics in TMOC are practical and 
require much practice. Therefore, all these lessons should be based 
both on demonstrations and exercises (course restricted to a maximum 
of 25 learners). The rate of presentation of material should match 
student progress; learners have to practice each sub-topic at least on a 
basic level after its presentation. The practice stage requires both a 
lecturer and a tutor.  
2) Booklets: Each topic/subtopic in a lecture needs to be accompanied by 
a comprehensive text as it is essential to enable learners to repeat, 
deepen or complete lessons they did not attend or did not fully absorb 
during face-to-face meetings.  

Training for Management of Online Courses 
117 
3) Instructional video clips: In addition to booklets, each topic/subtopic 
should be completely covered by an instructional video. Each clip 
should be short, including only one item so learners can rapidly find 
specific help on any issue. This tool is vital for enlarging the support 
package given to learners. Although at first glance, multi-coverage of 
a topic (text plus video) may seem unnecessary or redundant, but it is 
imperative owing to different learning styles. Video clips (as 
compared to lecturers or booklets) may be essential for visual learners 
whereas, for others, it is only complementary. This multiplicity of 
presentation of learning material is a significant instrument in building 
asynchronous curriculums.  
4) Personalized guidance: Personalized guidance (face-to-face or 
remote) takes place at the learner's request. Its main aim is to convey 
material that has not yet been absorbed despite all the preceding 
means. Personalized guidance is also helpful in assisting learners to 
install software tools or use applications.  
5) Classroom practice: Lessons that cover topics already taught and 
consist only of exercising. The purpose is to enable learners to deal 
with more challenging tasks than that which was covered in the 
lecture. Learners are guided and get relevant answers to their 
difficulties in real-time.  
6) Home practice: This complements classroom practice enabling 
learners to review more issues than can be covered in a time limited 
lesson. In this kind of practice, learners can also send questions to 
tutors and get answers in a reasonable amount of time.  
7) Final project: The final project is a comprehensive assignment 
integrating most of the topics in the course. It extends over the whole 
year and has to be carefully guided. The project should be based on 
learners' proposals and should be relevant to students’ academic 
practice.  
8) Pedagogic implications of technology: Each technological tool should 
be learned based on technological as well as pedagogic criteria. Any 
instructional activity (lessons, booklets, exercises, etc.) should have 
educational significance and not only a technological function. The 
technology taught is always in the service of education. Technology 
that makes no contribution to teaching, learning or assessment is 
irrelevant.  
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
118 
RESEARCH – EFFECTIVENESS OF THE TMOC MODEL 
 
Lecturers' perceptions of the TMOC were examined in a biennial study 
conducted during 2012-13 and 2013-14. The study examined twenty lecturers 
in ten different Israeli teacher-training colleges who participated in a two-year 
course based on the TMOC model (seven academic hours-per-week). The aim 
was to measure the curriculum’s contribution to the instructors’ management 
of online courses.  
Lecturers were asked to answer an online questionnaire at the end of each 
academic year regarding their perceptions of the model. The questionnaire 
included 21 items and was divided into two parts:  
 
 
Part 1: Ten topics on the TMOC curriculum 
 
Part 2: Eight instructional methodologies for teaching these topics 
 
For each item, respondents were requested to give their opinion (on a five-
point Likert scale) on the item’s contribution/effectiveness. The questionnaire 
included two open-ended questions so students could elaborate both on the 
contribution of the course contents and the related learning methodologies. 
All items regarding the ten components of the curriculum are presented 
separately except for four items relating to video clips that were combined into 
one factor: videos. This factor's reliability (Cronbach’s alpha) was found to be 
high (first year: 0.904, second year: 0.756). The score of the video factor was 
determined by calculating the mean value of the four items composing it.  
Table 12.1 introduces all the items on the questionnaire relating to 
curriculum:  
 
Table 12.1. Items relating to curriculum 
 
Factor 
The questionnaire’s questions 
Video: 
First year - 
Alpha = 0.904 
Second year - 
Alpha = 0.756 
Video editing and format conversion 
Uploading video to the net 
Video capture 
Subtitling videos 
 
CAA (Computer Assisted Assessment) 
 
Recording, editing and integrating a lecture on a course 
website 
 

Training for Management of Online Courses 
119 
Factor 
The questionnaire’s questions 
 
LMS (management of files/directories, menus, forums, 
photo albums, assignments, glossaries, links, groups, 
attendance, announcements, blogs, wikis, user registration, 
file import, backup and restore) 
 
Principles of full distance online courses (OTLA) 
 
Online synchronous learning (Elluminate) 
 
PDF files 
 
Control of a remote computer  
 
Screen Capture (FastStone Capture) 
 
Websites built with auxiliary tools such as Google Sites  
 
Table 12.2 introduces all the items on the questionnaire relating to 
learning methodologies:  
 
Table 12.2. Items relating to learning methodologies 
 
Instructional booklets 
Discussion of pedagogical implications of ICT tools and applications 
Instructional video clips 
Personalized instruction 
Lectures 
Final project 
Home practice 
Classroom practice 
 
For each item/factor, a mean score was calculated (including standard 
deviation). A paired samples t-test was done (
) to check if there 
were significant differences between the first and second year.  
At the end of the first year, learners were only questioned on seven 
content areas of the curriculum (CAA, recording lectures, video, LMS, PDF, 
synchronous online learning and remote control). At the end of the second 
year, they were questioned on all ten topics. There was no significant 
difference between the mean scores of the seven items examined in both years 
(T-test, 
05
.0


). The replication of the results strengthens the findings and 
gives them greater validity. Table 12.3 presents the mean scores of both years 
and the t-test which shows that differences between scores in the two years are 
insignificant. 
 
05
.0



Yaron Ghilay 
120 
Table 12.3. Evaluation of the curriculum in year one and two 
 
Items 
First year 
Second year 
Paired Samples 
T-Test
 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
CAA 
19 
4.42 
.77 
16 
4.69 
.48 
𝑇(14)  = .899, 
 𝑝 = .384 
Recording and editing a 
lecture 
19 
4.05 
1.47 
18 
4.11 
1.08 
𝑇(16)  = .960,  
𝑝 = .351 
Principles of full 
distance online courses 
- 
- 
- 
16 
4.11 
1.02 
- 
Video  
20 
3.91 
1.05 
18 
4.10 
.58 
𝑇(17)  =  1.170,  
𝑝 = .258 
LMS 
19 
4.00 
1.45 
18 
4.06 
0.99 
𝑇(17)  = .226, 
 𝑝 = .824 
PDF files 
18 
3.83 
1.42 
18 
3.89 
1.08 
𝑇(13)  = −.425,  
𝑝 = .678 
Website building  
- 
- 
- 
16 
3.88 
1.09 
- 
Synchronous online 
learning  
20 
3.95 
1.28 
17 
3.82 
1.13 
𝑇(16)  = .000,  
𝑝 =  1.000 
Screen capture 
- 
- 
- 
16 
3.81 
1.11 
- 
Control of a remote 
computer 
20 
3.90 
1.165 
17 
3.76 
.83 
𝑇(16)  = .000, 
𝑝 =  1.000 
 
As shown in Table 12.3, at the end of the second year lecturers give CAA 
(Computer Assisted Assessment) the highest score (4.69). There is a 
significant difference in this item’s score and all the others (with the exception 
of lecture recording and principles of full distance online courses). All the 
other items received high scores as well: recording and editing a lecture (4.11), 
principles of full distance online courses (4.11), video (4.10), LMS (4.06), 
PDF files (3.89), website building (3.88), synchronous online learning (3.82), 
screen capture (3.81) and control of a remote computer (3.76). There was no 
significant difference among these nine items. 
The findings indicate that lecturers in the TMOC course evaluated the 
contents of the curriculum as having made a big contribution to their ability to 
manage online courses. 
At the end of each year, learners were asked about learning methodologies 
for delivering the curriculum. There were no significant differences between 
the two years (t-test, 
0.05

) except with regard to: 
 

Training for Management of Online Courses 
121 
1) Booklets: The score at the end of the first year, 3.79 increased to 4.65 
at the end of the second year (𝑇(15)  =  2.236,𝑝 = .041). 
2) Final project: The score at the end of the first year, 3.33 increased to 
4.00 at the end of the second year, 𝑇(15)  =  2.551, 𝑝 = .022). 
 
This indicates that most learning methodologies got high scores during 
both years. Regarding the two above mentioned learning methodologies, lower 
scores in the first year picked up significantly at the end of the second year. 
Table 12.4 presents the mean scores of both years and the t-test showing the 
significance of differences between the two years.  
 
Table 12.4. Evaluation of the learning methodologies in year one and two 
 
Items 
First year 
Second year 
Paired Samples T-Test 
 
N 
Mean 
S.D 
N Mean 
S.D 
Booklets 
19 
3.79 
1.13 17 
4.65 
.60 
𝑇(15)  =  2.236,  
𝑝 = .041 
Videos 
20 
4.20 
.95 
17 
4.59 
.79 
𝑇(16)  =  1.329,  
𝑝 = .203 
Discussions of pedagogic 
implications 
20 
4.40 
.94 
18 
4.56 
.70 
𝑇(17)  = .511,  
𝑝 = .616 
Personalized instruction 
19 
4.42 
.84 
17 
4.35 
.70 
𝑇(15)  = −.436,  
𝑝 = .669 
Lectures 
20 
3.85 
1.23 18 
4.17 
.92 
𝑇(17)  =  1.141,  
𝑝 = .270 
Final project 
18 
3.33 
1.40 17 
4.00 
.79 
𝑇(15)  =  2.551,  
𝑝 = .022 
Home practice 
18 
3.94 
1.00 17 
3.88 
.93 
𝑇(15)  = −.159, 
𝑝 = .876 
Classroom practice 
20 
4.35 
.87 
18 
3.78 
1.06 
𝑇(17)  = −1.567,  
𝑝 = .135 
 
As can be seen in Table 12.4, lecturers give all the learning methodologies 
high or very high scores at the end of the course. Booklets (4.65), videos 
(4.59), discussion of pedagogic implications (4.56), personalized instruction 
(4.35) and lectures (4.17) receive very high scores. The final project (4.00), 
home practice (3.88) and classroom practice (3.78) are rated with high scores. 
There is no significant difference in the ratings of Booklets, Videos, 
Discussions of pedagogic implications, Personalized instruction, and Lectures 
(second year). However, significant differences in the ratings of Booklets-

Yaron Ghilay 
122 
4.65, Videos-4.59, and Discussions of pedagogic implications-4.56 as 
compared to the Final project-4.00, Home practice-3.88, and Classroom 
practice-3.78 are revealed in the paired sample t-test (
0.05

) which 
examined all possible combinations of pairs. 
The quantitative findings show that the TMOC model is very suitable for 
preparing lecturers in higher education to become managers of online courses. 
The open-ended questions strengthen the quantitative research as shown by the 
following examples (lecturer's quotes): 
Regarding the TMOC curriculum: 
 
“The combination of ICT tools and pedagogy was very helpful for 
me. It significantly improved my ability to manage an online course 
effectively.” 
“The Moodle lessons were systematic and relevant to my basic need 
to manage online courses.”  
“The lessons dealing with website building by Google Sites had high 
value for me. It is a fantastic complement to Moodle because it is 
absolutely personal.”  
“The tools selected in the curriculum reflect real needs we all have in 
the college. Therefore, the learning process was meaningful.”  
“CAA was crucial for me. If possible, I would be delighted to go into 
this topic even more intensively.”  
 
Quotes about learning methodologies for presenting the curriculum reveal: 
 
“The texts and videos were so clear and comprehensive that I am 
sure they could replace some lectures. Such helpful material allows 
lectures to be less detailed because most topics can be studied 
asynchronously.”  
“The tutors' dedication was outstanding. They were both welcoming 
and accessible on a constant basis. Personalized guidance helped me a lot 
in overcoming difficulties.” 
“The wonderful video clips enabled me to adopt the notion of the 
'flipped classroom': to watch a video before class and then start the lesson 
with practice activities.”  
 
The lecturers’ quotes stress the importance of the contents of the TMOC 
model, especially the necessary linkage between tools and pedagogy. 
Instruction in LMS, website building and CAA all reflect the real needs of 
academics. The lecturer quotes relating to learning methodologies emphasize 

Training for Management of Online Courses 
123 
the power of comprehensive texts and video clips combined with tutor 
dedication and accessibility. 
 
 
SUMMARY: TRAINING FOR MANAGEMENT  
OF ONLINE COURSES 
 
Faculty encounter many obstacles when transitioning from traditional 
learning to 21st century learning models. Lack of training and support (Allen & 
Seaman, 2008; Keengwe et al., 2009) is the main reason for these difficulties. 
It is obvious that institutions of higher education need to train staff 
systematically and thoroughly before asking them to manage online courses. 
The TMOC model offers a comprehensive solution in this regard, training 
lecturers to function successfully.  
The model is a package with many components for creation, delivery and 
developing of online courses. Successful courses based on TMOC principles 
require texts, exercises and video clips that cover the entire curriculum to be 
comprehensively prepared. Tutors available on a daily basis must guide hands-
on practice (Ghilay & Ghilay, 2014).  
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 13 
 
 
 
SUMMARY - ONLINE LEARNING  
IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
 
 
UNIQUENESS OF ONLINE LEARNING 
 
Online learning with its technological inputs contains so many 
components differentiating the learning process from the traditional one. A 
narrow measure of “benefit” of online learning is the extent to which the new 
models improve student achievement. Using a broader perspective, online 
learning exceeds traditional instruction in many empowering ways. The 
advantages of online learning are found in: 
 
 
Learning experience 
 
Flexibility 
 
Monitoring and evaluation 
 
Communication 
 
 
Learning Experience 
 
Instead of bored students counting the minutes to the end of the lesson, 
appropriately integrated technology opens up new worlds of experience, 
interest, activity, and enjoyment. Engaged learners have improved motivation 
and this is reflected in the quality of learning. 
 
 

Yaron Ghilay 
126 
Flexibility 
 
Acknowledging differences among learners, the philosophy behind online 
learning enables it to fit into every learner’s personal learning style as opposed 
to the traditional approach which is based upon the perception that all learners 
have similar needs and therefore get the same services. Thus the benefit of 
online over traditional learning is comparable to the benefit of a specially 
tailored suit over a ready-made one.  
Integrating technology into education fulfills the moral dictum that 
variation among people should be accepted and dealt with practically. The 
flexibility of the online world allows students to maintain different learning 
styles enabling them to better fulfill their own potentials. Online learning 
grants students freedom in choosing different paths towards educational 
targets and thus is a significant innovation. Everyone is given the opportunity 
to consume the resources suitable to their unique learning style. Some learners 
prefer to watch video lectures (including the possibility of reviewing a lecture 
more than once) while others read texts or receive personalized guidance 
(either face-to-face or distance).  
A student in a course based on the CTBL model (Comprehensive 
Technology Based Learning, detailed in Chapter 11) can attend all lectures and 
watch all the video tutorials or be present only at some of the lectures and rely 
on the comprehensive texts and the video solutions to exercises. The old-
fashioned insistence upon mandatory attendance makes unnecessary and 
onerous demands upon students who prefer to learn in a different way. 
The flexibility of online learning grants students the benefit of learning 
without limits upon time and location. This also accrues cost savings to both 
students and institutions in terms of classrooms, travel, etc. The benefits of 
online flexibility are also found in the broad range of devices with which 
students can use to connect to online courses: Not only via desktop or laptop 
computers, but also via lightweight mobile devices such as tablets or 
smartphones which are in the hands of almost every student. Also, wired 
internet service, wireless (Wi-Fi) or mobile (3G/4G) allow learners to take 
online courses everywhere, globalizing learning.  
 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
Technology allows lecturers to manage control processes and monitor the 
progress of learners so much more comprehensively than was ever feasible 

Summary - Online Learning in Higher Education 
127 
heretofore. With computerized evaluation tools and online feedback 
questionnaires, instructors can monitor the status of students during the 
learning process both by an actual knowledge test (computerized formative 
evaluation) and by receiving real-time feedback about learner assimilation of 
course material (detailed in Chapter 8). With this information, instructors can 
modify the course in real-time to better suit student needs.  
Another benefit of CAA is the easy opportunity to update assessments. 
Unlimited quantities of differentiated versions of summative evaluation 
questionnaires can be generated. The benefit: not only in preserving test 
integrity, but also in providing multiple opportunities for practice and re-
testing. This is surely enhances learning and student performance (detailed in 
Chapter 6).  
 
 
Communication 
 
Online learning directly contributes to a significant improvement in 
communication between the students and instructors as well as among students 
themselves. Digital communication allows for sharing resources, asking 
questions and receiving answers and working in teams. Sometimes, the quick 
and efficient response of a lecturer to a student makes the difference between 
progress and regress or even preventing a situation of a student dropping-out 
of a course. A variety of tools and resources are available to lecturers and 
instructors to provide learners with practical answers within a reasonable time, 
another benefit. 
 
 
NECESSARY CONDITIONS FOR ONLINE LEARNING 
 
In order to manage online learning effectively, faculty must have the 
knowledge and skills to utilize the pedagogical and technical tools contained 
in the TMOC model (Training for Management of Online Courses, detailed in 
Chapter 12): 
 
 
Learning Management System (LMS): This is a necessary 
infrastructure tool linked to many other worlds. The system is a 
central node for learners, directing them to internal and external 
resources. 

Yaron Ghilay 
128 
 
CAA: Moodle has a powerful tool for computerized assessment. 
Formative evaluation has been shown to improve the learning process. 
 
Video: Lecturers have to master video capture, editing and sharing to 
create different training videos. Video lectures and clips of solutions 
to exercises may either be an alternative or an addition to similar class 
activities. 
 
Audio: Creating a replacement for or a supplement to face-to-face 
lessons in multi-text courses or those that do not require visual 
displays. 
 
Text files: Text is an essential element of any course and the aim is to 
share text files including hyperlinks and graphics (diagrams, pictures, 
and so on). 
 
In addition to these five fundamental components, acquiring skills with 
regard to controlling a remote computer, synchronous online learning, building 
a personal website and principles of online distance learning are beneficial. 
Not every academic needs to be familiar with all these fields, but it is 
important to assure that instructor training and guidance addresses all the areas 
of expertise required for successful online course management. Preparation of 
an online course requires not only knowledge and skill but also an investment 
of much work. This kind of investment is surely worthwhile for courses that 
are given year after year because the hard labor bears fruit many times over. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
Allen, I. E., & Seaman, J. (2008). Staying the Course: Online Education in the 
United States. Needham MA: Sloan Center for Online Education. 
Beatty, 
I. 
(2004). 
Transforming 
student 
learning 
with 
classroom 
communication systems. EDUCAUSE Centre for Applied Research, 
Research Bulletin, 3, 5. 
Bennett R. E. (2002). Inexorable and inevitable: the continuing story of 
technology and assessment. Journal of Technology, Learning and 
Assessment, 1, 100-108. 
Bernard, R. M., Abrami, P. C., Lou, Y., Borokhovski, E., Wade, A., Wozney, 
L., Wallet, P.A., Fiset, M. & Huang, B. (2004). How does distance 
education compare with classroom instruction? A meta-analysis of the 
empirical literature. Review of Educational Research 74 (3), 379–439. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/00346543074003379. 
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. 
Assessment in Education: Principles, Policy & Practice, 5(1), 7-74. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0969595980050102. 
Bonwell, C., & Eison, J. (1991). Active learning: Creating excitement in the 
classroom. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 1, Washington, 
D.C.: The George Washington University, School of Education and 
Human Development. 
Boyer, E. (1990). Scholarship reconsidered. New York: The Carnegie 
foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 
Brogden, L.M., & Couros, A. (2002). Contemplating the virtual campus: 
Pedagogical and administrative considerations. The Delta Kappa Gamma 
Bulletin, 68(3), 22-30. 

Yaron Ghilay 
130 
Brown, G., Bull, J. & Pendlebury, M. (1997). Assessing student learning in 
higher education, Routledge: London. 
Bull, J. (2001). TLTP85 implementation and evaluation of computer-assisted 
assessment: final report. 
Bull J. (1999). Update on the National TLTP3 Project the Implementation and 
Evaluation of Computer-assisted Assessment. In 3rd International CAA 
Conference (eds Danson M.). Loughborough University, Loughborough. 
Bull, J. & McKenna, C. (2004). Blueprint for Computer-Assisted Assessment. 
RoutledgeFalmer, NY. 
Burksaitiene, N. (2011). Promoting student learning through feedback in 
higher education. Societal Studies, 4(1), 33-46. 
Campbell, S., Grossman, S., Kris, A., Kazer, M. & Rozgonyi, J. (2010). 
Screen Capture Classes for Student Learning and Success. EDULEARN10 
Proceedings, pp. 5579–5584.  
Chickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good 
practice. AAHE Bulletin, 39, 3-7. 
Colaric, S., & Taymans, J. (2004). Introducing Faculty to Online Learning: An 
Online Course as Professional Development. In G. Richards (Ed.), 
Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, 
Government, Healthcare, and Higher-education 2004 (pp. 549-554). 
Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Croton, B., Willis III, J. E., & Fish, J. (2014). EDUCAUSE Review. Retrieved 
August 
11, 
2015, 
from 
http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/ 
passnote-feedback-tool-improving-student-success. 
Davies P. (2002). There’s no confidence in multiple-choice testing. In 6th 
International CAA Conference (eds Danson M.). Loughborough 
University, Loughborough. 
Dede C. (2006). Online professional development for teachers: Emerging 
models and methods. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Education Publishing 
Group. 
Duke-Williams E. & King T. (2001). Using computer-aided assessment to test 
higher level learning outcomes. In 5th International CAA Conference (eds 
Danson M. & Eabry C.). Loughborough University, Loughborough. 
Ellington, A. J., & Hardin, J. R. (2008). The use of video tutorials in a 
mathematical modeling course. Mathematics and Computer Education, 
42(2), 109–117. 
Elton, L., & Johnston, B. (2002). Assessment in universities: A critical review 
of research. York: Learning and Teaching Support Network Generic 
Centre. 

References 
131 
Ende, J. (1983). Feedback in clinical medical education. The Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 250(6), 777-781. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1001/jama.1983.03340060055026. 
Evans, C. (2013). Making sense of assessment feedback in higher education. 
Review of Educational Research, 83(1), 70-120. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3102/0034654312474350. 
Farrer, S. (2002). End short contract outrage. MPs insist, Times Higher 
Education Supplement. 
Farthing D. & McPhee D. (1999). Multiple choice for honours-level students? 
In 3rd International CAA Conference (eds Danson M.). Loughborough 
University, Loughborough. 
Felder, R. M., & Brent, R. (2004). The intellectual development of science and 
engineering students. Part 2: Teaching to Promote Growth. Journal of 
Engineering Education, 93(4), 280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2168-
9830.2004.tb00817.x. 
Ferguson, P. (2011). Student perceptions of quality feedback in teacher 
education. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 36(1), 51-62. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02602930903197883. 
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences, 
New York: Basic Books. 
Gerlich, R. N. (2005). Faculty perception of distance learning. Distance 
Education Report, 9(17), 8. 
Ghilay, Y. & Ghilay, R. (2015a). Computer Courses in Higher-Education: 
Improving Learning by Screencast Technology. Journal of Educational 
Technology, 11(4), 15-26. 
Ghilay, Y. & Ghilay, R. (2015b). FBL: Feedback-Based Learning in Higher 
Education. 
Higher 
Education 
Studies, 
5(5), 
1-10. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/hes.v5n5p1. 
Ghilay, Y. & Ghilay, R. (2015c). TBAL: Technology-Based Active Learning 
in Higher Education. Journal of Education and Learning, 4(4), 10-18. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/jel.v4n4p10. 
Ghilay Y. & Ghilay, R. (2014). TMOC: A model for lecturers’ training to 
management of online courses in higher education. Journal of Educational 
Technology, 11(2), 6-16. 
Ghilay, Y. & Ghilay, R. (2013). OTLA: A New Model for Online Teaching, 
Learning and Assessment in Higher Education. Journal of Educational 
Technology, 10(1), 10-21. 

Yaron Ghilay 
132 
Ghilay, Y. & Ghilay, R. (2012). Student Evaluation in Higher Education: a 
Comparison between Computer Assisted Assessment and Traditional 
Evaluation. Journal of Educational Technology, 9(2), 8-16. 
Ginzburg, E., Chepya, P. & Demers, D. (2007). Creating an effective training 
curriculum for faculty who teach online. In G. Richards (Ed.), 
Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, 
Government, Healthcare, and Higher-education 2007 (pp. 2025-2026). 
Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Grant, M. R., & Thornton, H. R. (2007). Best practices in undergraduate adult 
centered online learning: mechanisms for course design and delivery. 
Journal of Online Learning and Teaching. 3, (4). 
Guthrie, R. W., & Carlin, A. (2004). Waking the dead: Using interactive 
technology to engage passive listeners in the classroom. Proceedings of 
the Tenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, New York. 
Harlen W. & Doubler S. (2004). Can teachers learn through enquiry online? 
Studying professional development in science delivered online and on-
campus. International Journal of Science Education, 26 (10): 1247–67. 
Hartsell, T. & Yuen, S. (2006). Video streaming in online learning. AACE 
Journal, 14(1), 31–43. 
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of 
Educational 
Research, 
77(1), 
81-112. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3102/ 
003465430298487. 
Hesse, J. (1989). From naive to knowledgeable. The Science Teacher. 
Higgins, R., Hartley, P., & Skelton, A. (2002). The conscientious consumer: 
Reconsidering the role of assessment feedback in student learning. Studies 
in 
Higher 
Education, 
27(1), 
53-64. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 
03075070120099368. 
Hiltz S. R. & R. Goldman, eds. (2005). Learning together online: Research on 
asynchronous learning networks. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Huxham, M. (2007). Fast and effective feedback: Are model answers the 
answer? Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 32(6), 601-611. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02602930601116946. 
Instruction at FSU Handbook. (2011). A guide to teaching and learning 
practices. The Florida State University. 
Jaffe R., Moir E., Swanson E. & Wheeler G. (2006). EMentoring for Student 
Success: Online mentoring and professional development for new science 
teachers. In Online professional development for teachers: Emerging 
models and methods, ed. Dede C., 89–116. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
Education Press. 

References 
133 
Johnson, A. (2008). A nursing faculty’s transition to teaching online. Nursing 
Education Perspectives, 29(1), 17-22. 
Johnson, C. (2004). Clickers in your classroom. Wakonse-Arizona E-
Newsletter, 3(1). 
Keeler, C., & Horney, M. (2007). Online course designs: are specials needs 
being met. The American Journal of Distance Education, 21(2), 65-75. 
Keengwe, J., Kidd, T. T., & Kyei-Blankson, L. (2009). Faculty and 
technology: Implications for faculty training and technology leadership. 
Journal of Science Education and Technology. 18 (1), 23-28. 
Kenwright, K. (2009). Clickers in the classroom. TechTrends, 53(1), 74-77. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11528-009-0240-7 
Kim, K.J., & Bonk, C. J. (2006). The future of online teaching and learning in 
higher-education: The survey says. Educause Quarterly, 29(4), 22-30. 
Knight, P. T., & Yorke, M. (2003a). Employability and good learning in 
higher 
education. 
Teaching 
in 
Higher 
Education, 
8(1), 
3-16. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1356251032000052294. 
Knight, P. T., & Yorke, M. (2003b). Assessment, learning and employability. 
Maidenhead, UK: McGraw-Hill, Open University Press. 
Kong, S. (2011). An Evaluation Study of the Use of a Cognitive Tool in a one-
to-one Classroom for Promoting Classroom-based Interaction. Computers 
& Education, 57(3), 1851–1864. 
Kurzweil, D., & Marcellas, B. (2008). The Faculty - Instructional Designer 
Dyad. In Proceedings of World Conference on Educational Multimedia, 
Hypermedia and Telecommunications 2008 (pp. 3445-3446). Chesapeake, 
VA: AACE. 
Lao, T., & Gonzales, C. (2005). Understanding online learning through a 
qualitative description of professors and students’ experiences. Journal of 
Technology and Teacher Education, 13(3), 459-474. 
Laurillard, D. (2002,). Rethinking university teaching a conversational 
framework for the effective use of learning technologies (2nd edn). 
RoutledgeFalmer, London. 
Lee, M. J. W., Pradhan, S., & Dalgarno, B. (2008). The effectiveness of 
screencasts and cognitive tools as scaffolding for novice object-oriented 
programmers. Journal of Information Technology Education, 7, 61–80. 
Lorenzetti, J. P. (2004). Changing faculty perceptions of online workload. 
Distance Education Report, 8(20), 1-6. 
Marton, F., & Booth, S. (1997). Learning and awareness. New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Yaron Ghilay 
134 
Marton, F., & Saljo, R. (1997). Approaches to Learning. In F. Marton, D. 
Hounsell, & N. J. Entwistle, (Eds.), The Experience of learning: 
Implications for teaching and studying in higher education. Edinburgh: 
Scottish Academic Press. 
Martyn, M. (2007). Clickers in the classroom: An active learning approach. 
Educause Quarterly, 2, 71-74. 
Mayer, R.E. (2009). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
McAleese, M., Bladh, A., Berger, V., Bode, C., Muehlfeit, J., Petrin, T., 
Schiesaro, A., & Tsoukalis, L. (2013). Report to the European commission 
on improving the quality of teaching and learning in Europe’s higher 
education institutions. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European 
Union. 
McGlynn, A. P. (2005). Teaching millennials, our newest cultural cohort. 
Educational Digest, 12-16. 
McGreal, R. (2004). Online Education using Learning Objects. London: 
Routledge Falmer. 
McKeachie, W. J., & Svinicki, M. (2014). Teaching tips: Strategies, research, 
and theory for college and university teachers. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
McQuiggan, C. A. (2007). The role of faculty development in online 
teaching’s potential to question teaching beliefs and assumptions. Online 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration. 10 (3). 
Means, B., Toyama, Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M. & Jones, K. (2010). 
Evaluation of Evidence-Based Practices in Online Learning: A Meta-
Analysis and Review of Online Learning Studies. U.S. Department of 
Education. 
Meyers, C., & Jones, T. B. (1993). Promoting active learning: Strategies for 
the college classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Michel, N., Cater III, J. J., & Varela, O. (2009). Active versus passive teaching 
styles: An empirical study of student outcomes. Human Resource 
Development Quarterly, 20(4), 397-418. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ 
hrdq.20025. 
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding approach, Mahwah 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Panda, S., & Mishra, S. (2007). E-Learning in a mega open university: Faculty 
attitudes, barriers, and motivation. Educational Media International, 44 
(4), 323-338. 
 

References 
135 
Pang, K. (2009). Video-driven multimedia, web-based training in the 
corporate sector: Pedagogical equivalence and component effectiveness. 
The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
10(3). Retrieved February 8, 2015 from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/ 
irrodl/article/view/629. 
Pankowski, M. (2008). Training and Support for Online Faculty in 
Postsecondary Institutions. In K. McFerrin et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of 
Society for Information Technology and Teacher Education International 
Conference 2008 (pp. 633-636). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Peck, A. C., Ali, R. S., Matchock, R. L., & Levine, M. E. (2006). Introductory 
psychology topics and student performance: Where’s the challenge? 
Teaching of Psychology, 33(3), 167-170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/ 
s15328023top3303_2. 
Peterson, E. (2007). Incorporating screencasts in online teaching. The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 8(3). 
Retrieved February 8, 2015 from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/ 
article/viewArticle/495/935. 
Phillips, J. M., & Billings, D. M. (2007). Using webcasts for continuing 
education in nursing. Journal of Continuing Education in Nursing, 38(4), 
152–153. 
Poulos, A., & Mahony, M. J. (2008). Effectiveness of feedback: The students’ 
perspective. Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education, 33(2), 143-
154. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02602930601127869. 
Pritchett N. (1999). Effective question design. In Computer-assisted 
assessment in higher education (eds Brown S., Race P. & Bull J.). Kogan 
Page, London. 
Prosser, M., & Trigwell, K. (2001). Understanding learning and teaching. The 
Experience in Higher Education. Buckingham: SRHE & OUP. 
Race, P. (2005). Making learning happen: A guide for post-compulsory 
education. London: Sage Publications. 
Ramsden, P. (2000). Learning to teach in higher education. Vilnius: Aidai. 
Rockwell, K., Schauer, J., Fritz, S. M., & Marx, D. B. (1999). Incentives and 
obstacles influencing higher education faculty and administrators to teach 
via distance. Online Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 2(4). 
98. 
Ruffini, M.F. (2012). Screencasting to engage learning. Retrieved February 6, 
2015, from http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/screencasting-engage-
learning. 

Yaron Ghilay 
136 
Screencast. (2014, August 9). Wikipedia. Retrieved September 2, 2014, from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screencast/ 
Sellani, R. J., & Harrington, W. (2002). Addressing administrator/faculty 
conflict in an academic online environment. Internet and Higher-
education, 5, 131-145. 
Smith, J. G. & Smith, M. R. L. (2012). Screen-Capture Instructional 
Technology: a Cognitive Tool for Designing a Blended Multimedia 
Curriculum. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 46(3), 207–
228. 
Spiller, D. (2009). Assessment: Feedback to promote learning. The University 
of Waikato, New Zealand: Teaching Development Unit. 
Stewart-Wingfield, S., & Black, G. S. (2005). Active versus passive course 
designs: The impact on student outcomes. Journal of Education for 
Business, 81, 119-125. http://dx.doi.org/10.3200/JOEB.81.2.119-128. 
Sugar, W., Brown, A. & Luterbach, K. (2010). Examining the Anatomy of a 
Screencast: Uncovering Common Elements and Instructional Strategies. 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 11(3), 
1-20. 
Traphagan, T., Kucsera, J. V., & Kishi, K. (2010). Impact of class lecture 
webcasting on attendance and learning. Educational Technology Research 
& Development, 58(1), 19–37. 
Walker, L. (2010). Quantifying the benefits of narrated screen capture videos. 
In Steel. C.H., Keppell. M.J., Gerbic. P. & Housego. S. (Eds.) Curriculum, 
technology & transformation for an unknown future, pp.1031–1034. 
Sydney: Proceedings ascilite 2010. 
Warburton W. & Conole G. (2003). CAA in UK HEIs: the state of the art. In 
7th International CAA Conference (eds Christie J.). University of 
Loughborough, Loughborough. 
Wegmann, S., & McCauley, J. (2008). Shouting through the fingertips: 
Computer-mediated discourse in an asynchronous environment. In K. 
McFerrin et al., (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology 
and Teacher Education International Conference 2008 (pp. 805-808). 
Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Wilson, M., & Scalise, K. (2006). Assessment to improve learning in higher 
education: The BEAR assessment system. Higher Education, 52(4), 635-
663. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10734-004-7263-y. 
Wouters, P., Paas, F. & van Merrienboer, J.G. (2008). How to optimize 
learning from animated models: A review of guidelines based on cognitive 
load. Review of Educational Research, 78(3), 645–675. 

References 
137 
Yoder, J. D. & Hochevar, C. M. (2005). Encouraging active learning can 
improve students’ performance on examinations. Teaching of Psychology, 
32(2), 91-95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15328023top3202_2. 
Yuen. S (2007). Integrating Screen-Capture Based Instructional Videos into 
Instruction. Retrieved September 21, 2014, from 
http://scyuen. 
wordpress.com/2007/11/24/integrating-screen-capture-based-
instructional-videos-into-instruction/. 
Zhao Y., Lei J., Yan B., Lai C. & Tan H. S. (2005). What makes the 
difference? A practical analysis of research on the effectiveness of 
distance education. Teachers College Record 107 (8):183684. 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AUTHOR CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
 
Yaron Ghilay, Ph.D. 
Senior Lecturer 
The Neri Bloomfield School of Design and Education 
25 Yeshayahu street, Holon 5883726, Israel 
Email: yghilay@gmail.com; gy21@inter.net.il


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
academic administrative system (AAS), v, 
ix, 7, 15, 16 
academic learning, 5 
access, 6, 7, 11, 17, 19, 34, 39, 52, 60, 86, 
87, 102, 123 
administrative efficiency, 46 
administrators, 135 
age, 14, 19 
ANOVA, 74, 75, 106 
ARS, 61 
assessment, ix, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 
56, 63, 70, 102, 113, 116, 117, 128, 129, 
130, 131, 132, 135, 136 
assessment tools, 45 
asynchronous communication, 87, 89 
asynchronous learning, ix, 1, 89, 132 
B 
banks, 7, 8, 49 
blogs, 113, 119 
browser, 14, 23 
C 
CAD, 35 
class period, 61 
class size, 61 
classes, 75 
classroom, 3, 11, 33, 35, 39, 60, 61, 62, 64, 
71, 91, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 106, 
110, 117, 121, 122, 129, 132, 133, 134 
coding, 35, 134 
cognitive load, 136 
cognitive processing, 35 
cognitive tool, 35, 133 
collaboration, 62, 66 
colleges, 9, 36, 96, 118 
commercial, 83, 84 
communication, 5, 7, 8, 11, 13, 69, 106, 
109, 127, 129 
communication systems, 129 
comprehension, 110 
comprehensive technology-based learning 
(CTBL), vi, ix, 2, 3, 105, 106, 109, 110, 
126 
computer, ix, 19, 20, 21, 22, 33, 34, 36, 37, 
39, 47, 49, 50, 57, 61, 73, 78, 79, 82, 84, 
85, 91, 103, 105, 113, 115, 119, 120, 
128, 130 
computer assisted assessment, ix 
computer technology, 105 
computer use, 84 
computerized assisted assessment (CAA), 
vi, ix, 2, 3, 45, 46, 48, 49, 92, 113, 118, 
119, 120, 122, 127, 128, 130, 131, 136 
computing, 34, 49 
construction, 45, 55 

Index 
142 
cooperation, 60, 65 
corporate sector, 135 
cost, 39, 42, 84, 85, 87, 88, 126 
cost saving, 126 
counseling, 82 
course content, 6, 12, 46, 66, 118 
covering, 12, 63, 81, 91, 110 
criticism, 70 
curriculum, 12, 35, 37, 38, 56, 62, 89, 110, 
113, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 
132 
D 
data processing, 71 
database, 17, 23, 42, 51, 56, 78, 114 
decision makers, 1 
decoding, 24 
deep learning, 88 
Delta, 129 
demonstrations, 34, 116 
Department of Education, 134 
dissatisfaction, 70, 84 
distance education, 87, 129, 137 
distance learning, 5, 11, 12, 13, 82, 89, 90, 
97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 111, 116, 128, 
131 
diversification, 1 
E 
education, 1, 45, 60, 69, 112, 117, 126, 130, 
131, 132, 133, 135, 136 
educational institutions, 5 
educational objective, 49 
educational system, 5 
educators, ix, 2, 27, 28, 34, 60, 69 
e-learning, 28 
electricity, 98 
employability, 133 
encoding, 24, 59 
encouragement, 60 
engineering, 131 
entrepreneurship, 12 
equipment, 31, 39, 64, 65, 66, 84, 98 
Europe, 134 
European Union, 134 
examinations, 137 
exercises, 3, 5, 8, 11, 14, 39, 50, 51, 52, 55, 
79, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 100, 101, 105, 
106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 116, 117, 123, 
126, 128 
expertise, 128 
F 
face-to-face interaction, 88 
face-to-face learning, ix, 1, 2, 3, 11, 12, 13, 
94, 97, 98, 99, 101, 116 
facilitators, 89 
factor analysis, 36, 106 
faculty development, 134 
feedback-based learning (FBL), vi, ix, 1, 3, 
69, 70, 73, 75, 76, 79, 106, 110, 131 
financial, 42, 46 
financial resources, 46 
flexibility, 27, 38, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51, 64, 94, 
96, 102, 126 
freedom, 51, 126 
G 
Google, vi, 23, 25, 71, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 
86, 115, 119, 122 
grades, 8, 35, 51, 98 
grants, 126 
group membership, 6, 7, 8 
H 
handheld devices, 34 
higher education, ix, 1, 4, 5, 10, 59, 60, 61, 
69, 70, 75, 76, 87, 90, 102, 110, 111, 
112, 115, 122, 123, 130, 131, 133, 134, 
135, 136 
hypertext, v, ix, 3, 5, 19, 23, 90, 92, 93, 95, 
96 

Index 
143 
I 
ideal, 34, 39 
improvements, 9, 76 
in transition, 66 
individuals, 3 
information and communications 
technology (ICT), v, ix, 3, 17, 45, 102, 
119, 122 
information technology, 46 
infrastructure, 10, 39, 127 
institutions, 1, 45, 46, 70, 76, 78, 102, 110, 
111, 112, 123, 126, 134 
instructional design, 34 
instructional materials, 111, 112 
integration, ix, 17, 105, 110 
interface, 6, 7, 14, 40 
intervention, 3, 50, 52, 72, 76 
investment, 13, 39, 94, 95, 96, 105, 110, 
128 
IP address, 8, 50 
Israel, 46, 63, 71, 92, 106, 139 
issues, 8, 51, 56, 59, 71, 74, 75, 76, 92, 105, 
106, 107, 108, 117 
item bank, 14 
L 
laptop, 11, 62, 64, 126 
leadership, 93, 133 
learning activity, 88 
learning difficulties, 73, 75 
learning disabilities, 8, 27, 51 
learning environment, 60, 62, 69, 76 
learning management system (LMS), v, ix, 
2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 20, 31, 
39, 42, 61, 62, 80, 90, 91, 92, 113, 115, 
119, 120, 122, 127 
learning outcomes, 45, 88, 130 
learning process, ix, 2, 3, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 33, 38, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 73, 75, 
76, 92, 94, 95, 96, 100, 105, 106, 109, 
122, 125, 127, 128 
learning styles, 35, 97, 110, 112, 117, 126 
light, 69, 94 
Likert scale, 11, 20, 29, 36, 37, 46, 64, 72, 
73, 93, 99, 106, 118 
logging, 51 
love, 97, 102 
M 
management, ix, 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 12, 20, 42, 51, 
52, 72, 84, 93, 112, 113, 118, 119, 128, 
131 
manipulation, 89 
materials, 13 
mathematics, 105 
media, 87 
medical, 131 
memory, 45 
mentoring, 132 
messages, 5, 9, 17, 81, 84, 92 
meta-analysis, 70, 129 
methodology, 22, 59 
Microsoft, 20, 22, 28, 39, 86, 113, 114, 116 
Microsoft Word, 28 
mobile device, 9, 19, 24, 62, 79, 114, 126 
mobile phone, 13, 102 
models, ix, 1, 2, 77, 87, 123, 125, 130, 132, 
136 
modules, 35 
moodle, v, vi, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15, 16, 49, 50, 52, 55, 62, 63, 78, 90, 91, 
92, 113, 115, 122, 128 
motivation, 64, 74, 75, 108, 125, 134 
multimedia, 33, 35, 46, 70, 135 
multiple-choice questions, 45, 51, 52, 53 
N 
New Zealand, 136 
nursing, 34, 133, 135 
O 
objective tests, 46 
objectivity, 46 

Index 
144 
online courses, ix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 14, 20, 
29, 36, 39, 73, 94, 97, 111, 112, 113, 
115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 126, 
131 
online learning, ix, 1, 3, 10, 19, 21, 27, 33, 
34, 35, 77, 78, 84, 87, 88, 89, 92, 94, 96, 
112, 115, 119, 120, 125, 126, 127, 128, 
132, 133 
operating system, 19 
operations, 21, 31, 82 
opportunities, 47, 48, 59, 62, 65, 66, 67, 
112, 127 
overlap, 51 
P 
password, 6, 49, 51, 78, 82 
pedagogy, 62, 112, 122 
personal choice, 64 
personal learning, 107, 126 
platform, 3, 5, 19, 50 
post-compulsory education, 135 
principles, 1, 3, 35, 60, 61, 73, 120, 123, 
128, 130 
prior knowledge, 60 
professional development, 112, 130, 132 
programming languages, 34 
psychology, 135 
Q 
quality assurance, 45 
quality control, 42, 56 
quantitative research, 122 
query, 66 
questionnaire, 10, 11, 12, 36, 51, 52, 64, 71, 
72, 73, 76, 79, 93, 99, 106, 107, 118, 119 
R 
reading, 19, 23, 27, 29, 39, 90, 95, 96, 100, 
101, 114 
real time, 33, 38, 61, 62, 65, 71, 75, 102 
reliability, 12, 36, 64, 73, 85, 93, 99, 106, 
107, 118 
remote control, ix, 3, 77, 82, 84, 92, 106, 
115, 119 
replication, 65, 94, 119 
reproduction, 49 
resources, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 14, 17, 23, 
35, 87, 126, 127 
restrictions, 8, 51, 52, 56, 102 
routines, 73 
S 
savings, 27, 98 
school, 35, 46 
science, 131, 132 
screen capture, 3, 22, 34, 35, 116, 120, 136 
self-confidence, 60 
seminars, 84 
servers, 81, 86 
simulation, 35, 46, 89 
SMS, 9, 24 
software, 19, 20, 21, 27, 29, 30, 34, 36, 39, 
40, 73, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85, 90, 106, 108, 
114, 115, 117 
speech, 27, 28 
spreadsheets, 21, 79 
SPSS software, 19 
staff members, 9, 10, 14 
standard deviation, 36, 119 
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, 
19 
statistical processing, 79 
statistics, 36, 73, 106 
storage, 9, 42, 52, 59, 78, 86 
strategic management, 12 
stress, 122 
structure, 2 
student achievement, 88, 98, 125 
student attitudes, 63 
synchronization, 7, 15, 16, 17, 78, 85 
synchronous learning, ix, 89, 115, 119 

Index 
145 
T 
teacher training, 36 
teachers, 1, 6, 17, 34, 59, 130, 132, 134 
teams, 6, 39, 127 
technical assistance, 57, 111 
technical support, 111 
technician, 82 
techniques, 34, 59, 92, 107, 114 
technology, ix, 1, 2, 3, 12, 27, 29, 33, 34, 
35, 36, 38, 39, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 82, 87, 
89, 90, 92, 93, 102, 105, 106, 108, 109, 
111, 112, 113, 114, 116, 117, 125, 126, 
129, 132, 133, 136 
technology-based active learning (TBAL), 
vi, ix, 3, 59, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 97, 99, 
100, 101, 131 
test anxiety, 48 
test scores, 52 
testing, 45, 52, 127, 130 
text/hypertext, ix, 3, 5 
textbook, 35 
theft, 86 
time frame, 50 
time pressure, 94 
tracks, 33, 40 
training, ix, 3, 4, 9, 14, 20, 29, 35, 36, 37, 
40, 46, 87, 109, 110, 111, 112, 116, 118, 
123, 128, 131, 132, 133, 135 
training for management of online courses 
(TMOC), vii, ix, 4, 36, 111, 112, 113, 
116, 118, 120, 122, 123, 127, 131 
training programs, 3 
true/false, 45 
tutoring, 10, 72 
U 
undergraduate education, 61 
United States, 129 
universities, 46, 130 
V 
variables, 36, 106 
variations, 16 
video capture, ix, 2, 3, 30, 33, 38, 39, 40, 
41, 92, 106, 113, 118, 128 
video clips, 5, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
79, 80, 81, 97, 106, 108, 113, 114, 117, 
118, 119, 122, 123 
videos, 34, 35, 37, 39, 43, 80, 81, 109, 113, 
114, 118, 121, 122, 128, 136, 137 
W 
waste, 88 
web, 5, 17, 23, 61, 62, 135 
websites, 3, 7, 24, 29, 82, 113, 115 
Wi-Fi, 49, 62, 126 
workflow, 7 
workload, 133 
World Wide Web, 87 
Y 
yield, 40 
 

