

Praise for
OPEN SOURCE LEADERSHIP
“At a time when we are seeing a global crisis of leadership, this book provides a
powerful pit stop. Full of courageous new leadership thinking, it will help you
ride the tsunami of change in the world around us.”
—SANJEEV CHADHA
PepsiCo CEO, Asia Pacific, Middle East & North Africa
“This is such a Foolish book, such a beautiful example of flipping conventional
wisdom with fresh thinking. When leaders relentlessly drive values and team
members are liberated to perform (without cheap short-term incentives), it’s a
wonder to behold. Enjoy it.”
—TOM GARDNER
Co-Founder, CEO of The Motley Fool
“Rajeev Peshawaria is a keen observer of people, organizations, and social
phenomena. His guided tours through the energized lives and minds of
paradoxically humble and respectful autocrats will provide fresh perspectives to
every reader and aspiring leader.”
—CHARLES H. FINE
Chrysler LGO Professor of Management, MIT Sloan School and President and
Dean, Asia School of Business
“A breakthrough book! Peshawaria has hit the leadership pressure points hard
and comes up with a new framework that is provocative and useful at the same
time.”
—RAGHU KRISHNAMOORTHY

Vice President Human Resources, GE Healthcare, and Former Chief Learning
Officer, GE
“Peshawaria challenges, provokes, and even makes you uncomfortable. But, that
is the whole point. Whether you agree or disagree, he forces us to confront the
meaning of trust—without which there is no right to lead—derived through
establishing the right values and purpose.”
—SALMAN AMIN
SC Johnson & Son
“In Open Source Leadership, Rajeev Peshawaria makes the sound assertion that
‘Leadership today needs to be characterized by the firm resolve to create a better
future. Leadership is not a positional title, it is making the choice to continue to
struggle and never give up.’ He then lays out a compelling view of how the new
era is disrupting traditional leadership thinking. Those in leadership roles should
take time to contemplate his message.”
—ASHLEY STEPHENSON
Partner, Egon Zehnder
“In these ever-changing times, Peshawaria gives a counterintuitive—but
convincing—call to recognize the new rules of engagement. He shows you how
to balance what we know works with the changes we need to keep up.”
—DAVID BURKUS
author of Under New Management
“Rajeev eloquently outlines the blueprint for embracing a fast moving,
technology influenced future for Leadership. These concepts will equip
executives to proactively embrace the next generation business environment and
to future proof your personal leadership legacy.”
—ORLANDO ASHFORD
President, Holland America Line, and author, Talentism
“For a variety of demographic, technological, and cultural reasons, ordinary
people are more empowered today than ever before. Under such conditions, it
follows that the best way to maximize performance is to minimize supervision.
In Open Source Leadership, based on a global study spanning 28 countries,
Rajeev Peshawaria introduces and provides persuasive arguments on behalf of
this and many other counterintuitive insights. This is a must-read for anyone that

aspires to be a successful leader in the twenty-first century.”
—STEVE KERR
Former Vice President of Leadership Development at GE; Former Chief
Learning Officer and Managing Director at Goldman Sachs; author of Reward
Systems
“Rajeev is both clairvoyant and pragmatic. He elegantly lays out a technology
enabled changing future, then offers provocative and insightful ways for leaders
and organizations to respond. The book offers a road map into unchartered
management territory.”
—DAVE ULRICH
Rensis Likert Professor, Ross School of Business, Partner, The RBL Group
“Rajeev Peshawaria’s counterintuitive new book details an ‘open source’
management system geared to today’s unique pressures and opportunities.
Unlike so many leadership books, which traffic in platitudes and obvious
insights, Peshawaria provokes readers into seeing a big picture most might have
missed. Open Source Leadership will help anyone in any organization trying to
surf the tumultuous waves of the twenty-first century business.”
—DANIEL H. PINK
author of Drive and To Sell Is Human
“Explore new ideas, embrace the future, and get ready for today’s transformed
organizational leadership landscape with Rajeev Peshawaria’s cutting-edge book
Open Source Leadership!”
—MARSHALL GOLDSMITH
The Thinkers50 #1 Leadership Thinker in the World
“Open Source Leadership overturns many conventional truths about leading and
managing. From ‘Emotional Integrity before emotional intelligence,’ to the path
breaking idea of minimum versus stretch goals, this book will surprise you on
every turn. A must-read for anyone who wants to understand how to navigate the
current times of breakneck speed and total transparency.”
—ARNOLD DHANESAR
Chief Talent Officer, Zurich Insurance Group
“Open Source Leadership is indeed an eye-opener. Peshawaria has, once again,

astutely articulated the changing role of leadership in a world that is
continuously connected, highly mobile, and has 24-7 access to knowledge. In
this new order, innovation, motivation, and the roles of leaders can indeed be
counterintuitive and, frankly, contrary to what has been perceived to date. This is
a must-read book.”
—EDDIE AHMED
Chairman, President and CEO, MassMutual International MassMutual Financial
Group
“In Open Source Leadership, Rajeev Peshawaria has once again crafted
provocative and yet powerful ideas on leadership. His claims on the Naked
Autocrat and Leadership Energy will challenge whatever model of leadership
you ascribe to at present. As you read this book, your mind might initially argue
with Rajeev, but your intuition will tell you that there is something very, very
important here that all aspirants to leadership in this digital age need to open up
to.”
—HITENDRA WADHWA
Professor, Columbia Business School and Founder, Institute for Personal
Leadership



Copyright © 2018 by Rajeev Peshawaria. All rights reserved. Except as
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or
stored in a data base or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of
the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-010837-8
MHID: 1-26-010837-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN:
978-1-26-010836-1, MHID: 1-26-010836-8.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a
trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names
in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no
intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in
this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use
as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To
contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at
www.mhprofessional.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve
all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as
permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one
copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer,
reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute,
disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own
noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly prohibited.
Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these

terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND
ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO
THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS
TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA
HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not
warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your
requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither
McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for
any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any
damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for
the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no
circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any
indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that
result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply
to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract,
tort or otherwise.

To Mohini and Ram Gopal Peshawaria who left too early
To Kusum and Rajendra Kumar who filled the void
To Vandana Peshawaria, without whom I wouldn’t be here today
To Rahee, Salim, and Kabir Peshawaria who inspire me to keep going

CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
PART 1
Context
CHAPTER 1 The Open Source Era
PART 2
Open Source Personal Leadership
CHAPTER 2 The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
CHAPTER 3 Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
PART 3
Open Source Enterprise Leadership
CHAPTER 4 Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
CHAPTER 5 No More Engagement Surveys

CHAPTER 6 Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession
FINAL THOUGHTS
APPENDIX
REFERENCES
INDEX

T
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
his book would not be possible without the contribution, help, and
encouragement from a lot of people. It is impossible to list all of them here
because much of the work is inspired by the numerous conversations I have had
with participants of my programs, seminars, and senior management retreats
over the years. The best part of my job as a leadership consultant and educator is
the opportunity to interact with and learn from so many smart people all over the
world. Thank you all for sharing your wisdom so generously. This book now
takes our collective work out of our workshops to a broader audience globally.
There are a few names I must call out. First of all, I must thank my agent
Lucinda Blumenfeld and my editor Donya Dickerson because without their faith
in this project, this book would not have seen the light of day. Next, my research
team comprising Adel Jayasuria, Michael Kossler, and Nadine France did an
amazing job of building out our hypothesis into a compelling story. Not far
behind was Salim Karan Peshawaria, who contributed to and improved
significant parts of the book.
In the early stages of the project, Michele Adelene Sagan was part of the
team that helped shape the global study. Toward the end, my assistant Deanna
Teh worked tirelessly to get the manuscript ready as per McGraw-Hill
guidelines. Wong Siew Li, Rahee Ghosh Peshawaria, and Kabir Raman
Peshawaria provided critical feedback after reading the manuscript, which
significantly helped improve the text. I am also thankful to Philip Steggals and
his team at Kadence for their diligent work as we collected and analyzed data
from 28 countries, and the Mohammed Bin Rashid School of Government Dubai
(MBRSG) for the Middle East study.
Last but not least, I want to acknowledge the biggest source of inspiration
behind this work—Tan Sri Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, former governor of the Central
Bank of Malaysia, and chairperson of the board of directors of The Iclif
Leadership and Governance Centre. Whatever I have learned about leadership

until today has been possible mostly by observing unconventional and large-
hearted leaders like her.

I
FOREWORD
n Silicon Valley, there’s a saying that the only way you make money as an
entrepreneur and investor is by being “contrarian and right.”
If you’re only right, but not contrarian, it’s unlikely you’ll be able to achieve
a major impact because everyone else is attempting the same thing. You’ll be
ignored in a marketplace of sameness. If you’re only contrarian but not right,
well—that’s called failure.
To be contrarian and right is to be Jeff Bezos announcing that he was going
to sell books online, on Day 1 of Amazon. To be contrarian and right is to be
Oprah Winfrey vowing to create a talk show and media empire that would make
her one of the richest people in the world. In both cases, and countless others,
their visions were met with skepticism. It didn’t seem possible. It didn’t seem
likely. Their ideas were flawed. Yet, it was the very unpopularity of their ideas,
at the start, that enabled them to outmaneuver complacent competitors and
achieve market dominance.
This book, by one of the most thoughtful thinkers today on leadership
development, is full of ideas that are definitely contrarian, and may just turn out
to be right.
Let’s look at one example. In the social media age, prevailing wisdom holds
that companies and governments everywhere are being overturned by bottoms-
up forces. Anyone with a Twitter account is empowered to speak out and help
overthrow established governments (think Arab Spring). Crowdsourcing enables
large numbers of amateurs to work together and produce news that rivals the
quality of what comes out of established news organizations (think Wikipedia).
As a result, many business leaders draw parallel lessons to the world of
leadership and management advice. They think that giving their employees the
loudest voice possible is essential, and that decision making ought to be as
democratic as possible. After all, decision-making culture in business ought to
mirror the social media–rich age we are living in, right? Consider the adoption of

“Holocracy” by companies like Zappos to see this mindset in its extreme: there
are no real managers or corporate hierarchy at companies that practice
Holocracy. All decision making is truly democratic.
Rajeev Peshawaria argues that leaders who think this way are badly
mistaken. He writes, “To drive breakthrough results in today’s age of speed, top-
down autocratic leadership is indeed required.” Autocratic leadership in . . . the
age of Facebook? Yes. Here’s the nuance: “do the naked autocrat dance whereby
[as a leader, you] practice autocracy of values and purpose, and compassion,
humility, and respect for people at the same time.” It’s complicated, but Rajeev
captures your attention through a genuinely contrarian thought.
Rajeev is on a mission to make you think. He’s on a mission to make you a
better leader. Do not read Open Source Leadership expecting clichés that affirm
all of your intuitions. Read it to open your mind to different ways of acting in a
changing world that demands nothing less.
Time to go restart your career, restart your company, and perhaps restart your
mind. The era of open source leadership is upon us.
BEN CASNOCHA
Former chief of staff to the chairman of LinkedIn, and coauthor, with Reid
Hoffman, of The Start-up of You: Adapt to the Future, Invest in Yourself, and
Transform Your Career and The Alliance: Managing Talent in the Networked
Age
Silicon Valley—June 2017

T
INTRODUCTION
he world’s largest taxi company owns no cars, and employs no drivers
directly. The world’s largest hotel service owns no properties and employs
no housekeeping or room-service staff. Communication has been WhatsApped,
memories Instagrammed, jobs Bangalored and life itself Facebooked. Almost
everything we knew as normal in both business and social life has changed
dramatically in just the last 15 years. We now live and work in the age of 24/7
connectivity where knowledge is free and abundant, ordinary people more
empowered than ever before, everything fully transparent, and leaders
completely exposed and naked.
Global population doubled from three billion to six billion between 1960 and
1999, and is expected to reach nine billion by 2050. On one hand, the population
explosion is creating significant pressure in terms of food, water, communal
harmony, and other basic necessities; on the other it is creating an abundance of
talent and innovation. Thanks to 24/7 connectivity, we can now source talent and
innovation far easier and quicker than ever before in human history.
Welcome to the twenty-first century where everyone and everything is
completely open and connected, and where scarcity and abundance coexist.
Even while the very nature in which people work, interact, and transact has
already changed beyond recognition, and current times are posing unprecedented
challenges and opportunities, the most widely used frameworks and practices for
personal career and organizational success seem to have remained unchanged
over the last 50 to 75 years. Many of these practices were insufficient even in
stable times, let alone in the brave new world of today and the fast-evolving
world of tomorrow.
Of the following statements, which would you agree with?
 The consumption-led growth formula of the last 100 years will enable global
well-being and success in the twenty-first century.

 A democratic, all-inclusive style of leadership is better than an autocratic
style.
 The traditional theory and practice of effective leadership still applies in
today’s uber-connected and uber-populated world.
 Setting stretch goals universally for all employees will spur high performance
throughout the organization.
 People leave managers, not companies.
 Measuring and proactively managing the engagement of all employees drives
productivity and profitability.
 Isolating innovation to incubators and other pockets of an organization will
produce new breakthroughs as quickly as needed in the new economy.
 Leadership succession must be planned; future leaders must be identified and
groomed deliberately.
While they may have served us well for quite a while, in this book I will
argue that these ideas have outlived their useful lives, and offer updated thinking
better suited to enable effective personal and organizational leadership for
today’s transformed landscape. We must shed myths of the past and adopt future-
ready ideas. Over a 30-year career in business, and particularly the last two
decades as a leadership, management, and strategy consultant and educator, I
have worked with hundreds of senior management teams as they have led their
businesses, and coached thousands of executives individually. There is no
shortage of smarts within these teams and individuals, but are they inventing
new personal and organizational frames of reference fast enough to succeed in
today’s new world? Having lived, worked, and researched in the United States,
Europe, Asia, and the Middle East, I have seen the same tendency everywhere—
individuals and organizations are still trying to compete and succeed using tools
and frameworks built for times where knowledge was scarce, talent seemingly
limited, and privacy still possible.
Consider just one example: communication (Table I.1). Until 1995, snail
mail, telegram, telex, fax, and expensive international phone calls were the ways
in which people communicated. Since long-distance contact was difficult and
inadequate compared to what it is today, knowledge and location were great
competitive advantages in business. However, in just the last 15 to 20 years we
have started taking things like free voice and video calling, email, instant
messaging, and 24/7 connectivity for granted. The amount of freedom and
empowerment these communication channels provide individuals and employees
is unprecedented. Yet, large companies still use management tools and practices

designed in the industrial age when knowledge was at a premium and individuals
had far fewer livelihood choices. Management’s role then was largely to
organize systems, processes, and people in ways that reduced costs and increased
efficiency.
TABLE I.1 The Emergence of the Open Source Era

Today change itself is changing at a pace never seen before, with much of the
acceleration happening in the last 15 years. Yet, instead of replacing outdated
management and leadership practices to better compete in the new reality, many
senior executives complain about the poor work ethic and values of millennials.
In the twenty-first century, life and business have become “open source” with the
advent of uber-connectivity and uber-population. To succeed and thrive in this
new era, our thought and action must also become open source. Only those who
adopt a mindset of changing faster than change itself will survive. We have
already seen examples of this at the product innovation level. Organizations that
are unafraid of cannibalizing their own products before others make them
obsolete (think Steve Jobs and Apple) are the ones that win and thrive. But there
aren’t enough examples of innovation in people management practices. Going
forward, as STEM-based knowledge (left brain acumen) becomes more
commoditized, innovation on the people management front will distinguish
winners from losers. More so than ever before, it is time for both established and
aspiring business leaders to question conventional wisdom and adopt open
source thinking around these five fundamental questions/challenges:
Powerful Personal Leadership in the Twenty-First Century
1. What style of leadership is best for creating breakthrough success in
today’s environment?
2. How must leadership be redefined/reincarnated in the open source era?
Leading the Organization to Outperforming Competition
3. How can we inspire, manage, measure, and reward performance at a time
when a significant section of the workforce is opting for free agency
rather than traditional full-time employment?
4. How can we measure employee engagement and effectively address the
gaps?
5. How can organizations innovate quickly and more often, and create a
pipeline of future visionary leaders at the same time?
Amidst all the rapid change, however, there is one thing that has stayed
constant—the 80:20 rule, aka the Pareto Principle. Roughly speaking, the 80:20
rule posits that 80 percent of the effects come from 20 percent of the causes.

From macroeconomic conditions to micro-level business practices and personal
patterns, 80:20 is omnipresent and omnipotent, but it is almost unacknowledged
in much of contemporary management practice. In Chapter 1, I will describe the
open source era in detail and highlight just how much has changed in the recent
past. Before that, let me now briefly introduce the five challenges, which I will
further elaborate with suggested solutions (using the wisdom of 80:20) in
Chapters 2 through 6.
1. What Style of Leadership Is Best Suited for
Creating Breakthrough Success in Today’s
Environment?
Conventional wisdom says that an all-inclusive democratic style of leadership is
best suited for driving innovation and breakthrough success. While I am in full
praise of diversity and inclusion, and generally against a dictatorial style of
leadership, my research data shows that conventional wisdom may not be the
preference of most employees. In a research experiment spanning approximately
16,000 people in 28 countries, one of the questions we asked respondents was to
indicate their level of agreement with the following statement: When it comes to
achieving breakthrough success for the organization, a significant amount of
top-down/bold leadership is required.
Our data shows that over 75 percent of respondents agree or strongly agree
with the statement. In other words, respondents are saying that if you want to
create breakthrough success in today’s fast-changing environment, you need to
be willing to embrace an autocratic style, particularly when driving a vision
forward. According to this data, the Steve Jobs phenomenon is not an anomaly.
Chapter 2 provides details of the global study, the case for top-down
leadership, and offers practical guidance on how to overcome the challenges
associated with it. Key questions we will try to answer are:
 In an age where ordinary people are so empowered and leaders completely
exposed/naked, is it even possible to use top-down autocratic leadership?
 If top-down leadership is indeed the need of the hour, how can one practice it
without antagonizing today’s free and empowered workforce?

2. How Must Leadership Be Redefined/Reincarnated
in the Open Source Era?
At a time when population explosion is creating unprecedented challenges across
planet Earth, and universal connectivity has made nearly everything transparent
and available at the speed of light, how should one think about leadership? What
does leadership even mean in this uber-connected and uber-populated world?
For far too long, leadership has been confused with:
 Followership. Leadership is typically seen as repeating the behaviors and
practices of successful leaders. Hence the huge current focus on competency
modeling and case study based education.
 A position of authority. Pick up any dictionary and look up the words boss
and leader, and the root cause of the problem is obvious. We tend to define
the two words almost identically. The 2010 Arab Spring and other similar
phenomena tell us that in the age of uber-connectivity and freedom, “boss-
ship” simply will not work.
 Genetics. There is a widespread belief that leaders are born, not made.
The first thing we need to do is remove this confusion. In order to create an
environment in which the next generation(s) can thrive, we need to take today’s
challenges head-on. We need to recognize that current thinking around
leadership will not be adequate to do so, and redefine leadership away from
followership, authority, and genetics toward a burning desire to make a
difference. When we adopt this new way of looking at leadership, we will
become creators of a better future, and must be prepared to face stiff resistance
along the way. The resistance will become stronger as we begin our journey, but
we must not give up. Our resolve to stay the course will need to be stronger and
firmer than the resistance, and we will need to find a way of developing this
strength. This firm resolve to create a better future is leadership. Leadership is
not a position or title, it is making the choice to continue to struggle and never
give up. The primary difference between a leader and a nonleader is that the
latter gives up in the face of resistance. The ability or force that prevents leaders
from giving up is therefore the main ingredient of leadership. In Too Many
Bosses, Too Few Leaders, I called this force leadership energy, and described it
briefly. In Chapter 3 of this book, I will decode it in more detail. The likes of
Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, and Martin Luther King drew their power
from their leadership energy, not from their position or title.

At the end of the day, leadership is about choosing to create a better future,
and embracing a path that involves significant risk, loneliness, and unpopularity.
So most “sane” people do not opt for it. Rather than asking how one can become
a leader, the more appropriate question might therefore be, how many people opt
for it? You guessed it—80:20! Individuals and organizations will be better off
accepting the fact that only about 20 percent of people will choose leadership as
defined here, and that is more than enough. Far more important than trying to
figure out how one can become a leader is the question of whether or not one
wants to in the first place.
3. How Can We Inspire, Manage, and Reward
Performance at a Time When a Significant Section of
the Workforce Is Opting for Free Agency Rather
Than Traditional Full-Time Employment?
Since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution, thinking and tools for managing
employees toward high performance have largely remained the same. Common
practice around managing individual performance says all employees must be
given stretch goals at the beginning of each year, managers must closely monitor
performance and give regular feedback to ensure employees put their best foot
forward every day, and performance must be measured and rewarded based on
the preset stretch goals.
There are several problems with this approach. First, this system places the
onus of enabling performance mostly on the shoulders of managers rather than
employees themselves. Essentially, we have been treating people like machines
that must be constantly programed, monitored, and controlled for optimal
performance. Second, even while the existence of the performance bell curve is
well acknowledged, we conveniently forget all about it in the beginning of the
year and expect all employees to uniformly write stretch goals and perform at
the highest level. According to the bell curve theory (which is derived from the
80:20 rule), performance in any group of people distributes itself along a bell-
shaped curve in which 20 percent are top performers delivering 80 percent of the
results, 60 percent are average performers, and 20 percent are poor (bottom)
performers. Consequently, when people are stacked along the bell curve at the
end of the year, both managers and employees are left feeling cheated. In today’s
reality, where the very nature of work has been democratized, it is time to turn

this logic upside down. What if instead of stretch goals, employees were given
goals that only specified the minimum level of performance outcomes required,
and left everything else loose or undefined? What if instead of stipulating an
annual limit, employees were allowed to take as much vacation as they wanted?
What if we reduced supervision and management of employees to the bare
minimum? In other words, what if we adopted an open source performance
management system driven by self-management?
What then about the role of the immediate manager? Gallup and others have
told us for decades, “People leave managers, not companies,” essentially
suggesting that the biggest influence on employee motivation is the employee’s
manager. This assumption is probably the reason why the current (outdated)
performance management system puts much of the onus of employee motivation
on the shoulders of immediate managers. By this logic, managers must do
whatever they can to motivate their employees, because they can in fact motivate
employees.
My research data points exactly in the opposite direction. It shows that the
primary source of an employee’s motivation is not his or her manager. But most
companies still focus their management development efforts on teaching their
managers tricks and techniques to motivate their employees.
An open source performance management system as described above would
particularly benefit women. If a high-performing woman wants to take her foot
off the pedal for a few years because she wants to take care of a young baby, she
would not be frowned upon under such a system. Once her baby is old enough
and she feels it is time to step on the gas again, she may. She decides!
“But if you allow employees to get away with just the minimum, the
organization will suffer. Who will do all the work that needs to get done?” This
is the counterargument against creating an open source performance
management system. The truth is that with or without such a system,
performance will distribute itself along the 20:60:20 curve anyway. By
acknowledging it, you set the right expectations and let people contribute as
much as they want without stress or stigma. As the knowledge-is-free-and-
abundant digital economy matures further, companies might have no choice but
to give more freedom.
In Chapter 4 we will discuss the pros and cons of open source performance
management in more detail, and show how minimizing supervision can
maximize organizational performance.

4. How Can We Measure Employee Engagement and
Effectively Address the Gaps?
While companies evoke the bell curve to justify their year-end compensation and
promotion decisions, they tend to forget about it when conducting annual
employee engagement surveys. The same survey is sent to all employees
regardless of performance level, and feedback data is aggregated in terms of
high and low scoring items. In other words, if it is true that performance falls on
the 20:60:20 curve, the voice of the top 20 percent gets drowned under the
weight of the rest who are not as good. Furthermore, the best performers are so
busy that they often do not fill out the survey in the first place, whereas the
underperformers not only find the time to fill it out, they complain the most
while doing so. As a result, senior management does not get an accurate picture
of actual engagement levels across each segment of the bell curve. By
addressing average scores with well-meaning but ill-informed measures
thereafter, senior management ends up unknowingly promoting mediocrity
instead of excellence.
In Chapter 5, I will show how and why a values-based 360-degree feedback
process is far superior to an annual engagement survey. For those that still want
to conduct annual engagement surveys, I will offer a much better alternative than
the current one-size-fits-all model.
5. How Can Organizations Innovate Quickly and
More Often, and Create a Pipeline of Future
Visionary Leaders at the Same Time?
According to the 80:20 principle, only a handful of people will have the ability
and motivation to innovate. Acknowledging this fact, companies typically
choose their so-called innovators and put them to work in innovation incubators.
Before long, large amounts of money and time are spent on such isolated
incubators with no guarantee that the chosen few will actually have the best
ideas or the ability to see them through.
How can anyone predict who the 20 percent are and where they live? In the
open source twenty-first century, one must use open source leadership and
crowdsource innovation from in- and outside the organization. To understand

this phenomenon, consider what General Electric did recently in its aviation
(aircraft engines) business. It ran a global contest for designs to reduce the
weight of engine brackets by 30 percent, and offered a prize of $20,000 for the
best design. To GE’s surprise the winning design came from a small town in
Indonesia, and reduced the weight by a whopping 84 percent. Now how’s that
for exceeding your innovation KPI by 180 percent at the cost of just $20,000?
And who would have thought that the world’s biggest aviation giant would
achieve such a breakthrough for so little, and more importantly from small- town
Indonesia? Open source leadership enables the democratization of innovation by
crowdsourcing it, thereby significantly increasing the chances of success.
Similarly, when it comes to succession planning and developing and
retaining the next generation of leaders, it is time for companies to rethink
conventional practices. Succession planning typically begins with plotting
employees on a nine-box grid on which one axis represents current performance
and the other axis is future potential as shown in Figure I.1.
FIGURE I.1 Traditional Succession Planning
Employees that end up in the top right-hand box of the grid are considered
part of the succession pool. HR departments then draw up spreadsheets showing
several possible successors for each key job, and create special development

programs to prepare the deemed “successors” for those positions. These special
programs often require participants to work on extra projects over and above
their day jobs, to solve important issues while showcasing their leadership at the
same time. The programs are considered win-win arrangements, wherein
participants “learn by doing” and get a chance to showcase their abilities to
senior management, and the company gets to solve problems and exploit new
opportunities. In theory everyone is happy, and the board of directors is
impressed with management’s succession planning efforts.
Again, there are several issues with this approach. First, in today’s uber-
connected free world, how can we say that the so-called chosen ones will
actually remain with the company after such programs? Since there is no longer
the promise of long-term employment, why should employees be forever
grateful for all the investment in their development? Second, most high
performers are already very busy and stretched while delivering on their
performance goals.
Participating in development programs that require them to put in even more
hours on special projects puts additional burden on these high performers’
already full plates. It is not that they don’t welcome opportunities for career
progression; they just don’t have extra bandwidth for hypothetical work. So,
many of the chosen few end up unhappy about being included in such succession
pools. And finally, the rest of the employees—those not chosen for such
accelerated development—end up unhappy too because they see no hope for
their careers in the company. What is intended as a win-win initiative ends up
being lose-lose.
Chapter 6 first takes a deep dive into building long-lasting capability for
brisk innovation through external crowdsourcing. Next, it shows why it might be
time to dismantle the traditional succession planning machinery, and how
internal crowdsourcing is a much better strategy for developing a leadership
pipeline for the future. As you will see in this chapter, crowdsourcing kills two
birds with one stone—more frequent innovation and leadership succession
planning—and it does so with minimal or no cost to the organization.
Figure I.2 serves as a road map for the book that we will revisit in each
chapter.
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era

OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession
FIGURE I.2 Open Source Leadership Roadmap
Throughout the book, I will also introduce you to some leaders who
epitomize the concepts of this book. Learning about their life stories was one of
the more enjoyable parts of writing this book for me. I hope you enjoy reading
them as much as I enjoyed writing them.
This book could get uncomfortable for some individuals, executives,
management (and even corporate boards), as it reveals several inconvenient
truths around current practices that need to be inversed. It is, however, urgently
required for those seeking to get—and stay—ahead in the open source era.
Rather than being a “how to” recipe book for success, this book is a “think”
book. Leadership is more of an art than a science, so readers will need to think
carefully about how the ideas in this book fit in with whatever they are trying to
accomplish, and paint their own canvas by mixing colors according to their own
preference. Whether leading their own careers or leading the organization, I hope
that this book poses thought-provoking insights and dilemmas for readers. Pablo
Picasso once said, “Computers are useless. They only give you answers.” It is
with the right questions that leaders first imagine, then create, a better future. So
rather than answers, this book provides questions.

PART 1
Context

CHAPTER 1
The Open Source Era
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

K
laus Schwab, founder and chairman of the World Economic Forum,
describes the technology driven changes to business and society as the
Fourth Industrial Revolution. In his 2017 book of the same title, he lists the
previous three revolutions roughly as follows:
 The first revolution used water and steam power to mechanize production.
 The second used electric power to create mass production.
 The third used electronics and information technology to automate
production.
 The fourth is building on the third and is blurring the lines between physical,
digital, and biological spheres.
Each revolution created massive disruption in business and society. Those that
adapted and innovated quickly (Like Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and others)
not only survived, they created tremendous well-being and wealth. Most others
were displaced and left panting. Can you imagine being the owner of a business
delivering goods by horse carriage when the railroad was invented? A similar
displacement is under way now. While some are reaping huge benefits, many are
being left behind because they don’t have either the right skills for the new
economy, or the innovative leadership mindset to acquire them quickly enough.
Both individuals and organizations today stand on the edge of either extinction
or renewal. In later chapters I will lay out both personal and organizational
strategies for powerful leadership in today’s reality, which is both daunting and
exciting at the same time. First, I believe it is important to revisit the lessons of
history. While the context and extent of the current revolution is different and
larger, the wisdom gained from past experience will help us better comprehend
the profound changes unfolding as we speak. So, let us take a brief tour of
history, beginning with the advent of the twentieth century.
1900 to 1950: From Artisanal Labor to Factory Work
The first half of the twentieth century shattered the social, economic, and
political norms of the previous centuries and cemented many of the management
practices we still use a hundred years later. World Wars I and II brought the
beginning of the end of the great European empires, cracked open the door for
women and minority groups to enter the workplace, and provided the first

inklings of the urbanization that would define the latter half of the century. It was
also the very beginning of the rapid growth of global population. In 1900, there
were 1.6 billion inhabitants on the planet, which had jumped to 2.5 billion by
1950, despite the vast loss of life in the two World Wars.
1900 to 1950 cemented the separation between work and home life, a
separation we are reconsidering over a century later. For most of the nineteenth
century the workplace had been indivisible from home life. Men, women, and
children worked where they lived and pitched in when required. The majority of
farming remained family-owned and small-scale, and production was artisanal,
handmade, and small-batch. However, the rise of the railroads in the latter half of
the nineteenth century brought with it the creation and separation of jobs that
had never existed before, particularly in finance, as U.S. tycoons created
influential transport, shipping, and steel companies and employed thousands of
blue-collar and office workers. The railroads also allowed for large-scale
movement of goods and workers crossing the country in search of employment.
In 1900, much of the Western workforce (38 percent) was still defiantly
agricultural, with another third in mining, manufacturing, or construction. Only
five percent of factories in production used electricity to power their machines,
and less than 10 percent of private homes had electricity. Work remained split
along gender and class lines; only 19 percent of working-age women were in the
workforce, while less than 14 percent of the wider workforce had graduated
from high school. Men with college degrees earned on average 62 percent more
than those with a high school diploma.
World Wars I and II solidified the transition from agriculture to
manufacturing. As the majority of young males went to the trenches, women’s
participation in the U.S. workforce doubled. Munitions factories were by far the
largest employers, a trend repeated in World War II. In postwar America,
manufacturing provided 34 percent of all “nonfarm” employment in 1950,
alongside 14.9 percent in retail trade and 13.3 percent in government. Services,
at 11 percent, were a small but soon to be rapidly growing sector of the
employment market.
Communication was slow by the standards of today, but had been
revolutionized by newspapers, telephone, telegram, and radio. Radio in
particular opened up marketing and advertising to a mass audience, and
companies could start pushing their goods and services instantly to previously
untapped audiences. Telephones were limited to one-on-one discussions but
allowed for greater communication between buyers, sellers, and suppliers.
However, location remained a key asset for any company or business owner; in

1900, only 0.11 of every 1,000 Americans owned a car, and shopping was
limited to local shops and suppliers.
The best example of the changing workplace in the first half of the century is
the Ford Motor Company. The company templated the shift from artisanal labor
to factory work under the watchful eyes of Henry Ford and Frederick Taylor,
whose “scientific management” theories enabled Ford’s assembly line model.
Influential thinker Gary Hamel, in fact, believes that management as a concept
may have been the greatest invention of the twentieth century, with its ability to
organize people and resources in a way not really seen before. Taylor applied the
principles of mechanization to the workforce, establishing standard times and
production standards for each factory task. His writing emphasized the laziness
and stupidity of the average factory worker, who he believed required detailed
training, supervision, and an authoritarian style of management.
Ford’s Model T brought automobiles to the masses. In 1908, he hired Taylor
as a consultant to streamline construction. At the time, a team of skilled workers
took 12 hours to build a single car, which remained in a stationary central
position as workers brought and attached each component. Taylor and Ford
broke down construction into individual actions and rearranged the line, with the
workers stationary rather than the vehicle. The speed of the new assembly line
(down to 93 minutes per car) allowed Ford to bring down prices and make the
Model T accessible to the mass market.
1951 to 1990: The Birth and Practice of Modern
Management
The latter half of the twentieth century laid the groundwork for many of the
workplace realities that we are still grappling with today. The postwar job-for-
life model was steadily eroded, and the global population started to boom. This
period also heralded the beginning of the technology that has so disrupted our
lives, and if you looked closely enough, you could begin to see the wheels of
change spinning a little faster.
The post–World War II years began with a new era of prosperity, superior
healthcare, and a “baby boom” that more than doubled the global population in
40 years, from 2.6 billion in 1950 to 5.3 billion in 1990. Immediately postwar,
workers benefited from economic stability, increased purchasing power, and so-
called “jobs for life.” The automation of many household tasks, the civil rights

and women’s movements, and postwar migration began to diversify the white,
male-dominated Western workforce. These decades also heralded the shift away
from manual labor to service-based employment. In 1956, workers in white-
collar roles outnumbered blue-collar workers for the first time, and by 1967 the
economic contribution of jobs dealing with the production of information
accounted for 46 percent of U.S. gross national product.
This change in employment was reflected in a shift in management theory,
which began to recognize the complexity of motivation, challenge, and reward
for employees and define the role and responsibilities of a manager beyond
simply keeping employees in line. Peter Drucker’s influential The Practice of
Management outlined five core roles for managers, which included objective
setting, organizing the group, motivating and communicating, measuring
performance, and developing people. The idea that workers were motivated by
personal challenge, recognition, and advancement rather than pay or punishment
represented an enormous shift in thinking. The war for talent increased as
economies grew and flourished, and workplaces began to offer benefits outside
of salaries.
These decades also presaged a new age of technology and the beginning of a
shift toward globalization enabled by the new communication tools. Between
1945 and 1960 computers moved from purely military use to electronic data
processing machines for office use. They remained fairly discreet entities
throughout the 1960s and 1970s, used by an individual worker to facilitate a job
rather than as a tool for communication. In the late 1970s the invention of the
LAN (local area network) broke new ground as computers within an initially
limited area were linked up. LAN networks were first used to share storage and
printers, but eventually expanded to include tens if not hundreds of computers,
despite the restrictions of early wired models.
Other new forms of communication were having an enormous impact.
Television opened new options for advertising and communication to a mass
audience, while the increasing prevalence of home telephones also led to a rise
in telemarketing and the use of the facsimile or fax. It’s important to note here,
though, that while the options for communication seemed to expand quickly,
they still grew at a much slower pace, relatively speaking, than anything we
experience today. To illustrate this point: it took 76 years for the telephone to
reach half of the U.S. population. In contrast, the smartphone achieved the same
coverage in under 10 years and is rapidly eating into another market, the desktop
market, with share rising from 17 percent in 2013 to 29 percent only a year later.
IBM is a good example of the wider trends that occurred throughout this

period, and an interesting comparison to what would come later. Founder
Thomas Watson Sr. established the company in 1914 and adopted three “basic
beliefs”—respect for the individual, exceptional customer service, and the
pursuit of excellence in all tasks—that translated into progressive,
nondiscriminatory hiring policies and pro-family workplace activities. Watson
believed that job security was good for business, and until the 1980s not one
IBM employee was made redundant, a fact that seems entirely astonishing now.
In the 1960s, Thomas Watson Jr. reiterated his father’s beliefs. During those
years IBM flourished, providing, leasing, and servicing the System/360
mainframe computer.
IBM weathered the economic shocks of the 1970s while other U.S.
companies began to feel the squeeze of the Vietnam War, skyrocketing inflation,
unemployment, and the rise of Japan and Germany as industrial powerhouses.
Between 1973 and 1995, U.S. wages fell 15 percent and family income
stagnated. Government policies favored deregulation and privatization of
previously state-owned industries. Seeking ways to cut costs, companies began
to investigate outsourcing labor to cheaper locations. The 1990 “Washington
Consensus” outlined 10 policy prescriptions for developing countries
(particularly in South America) that focused on market liberalization and state
nonintervention. Workers were no longer protected by the state, and unions
began to lose their influence.
In the 1980s, IBM’s mainframe business began to lose traction with the rise
of the PC and competition from Apple, Hewlett-Packard, and Sony. The
company hired its first “outsider” CEO, who rejected many of the values that the
Watson dynasty had established. Fast running out of cash in the face of global
competition, in 1993 IBM laid off 60,000 members of its global workforce, at
the time the biggest redundancy in U.S. corporate history. This massive shift
marked the death of lifetime employment as practiced by most successful large
corporations of the time. From now on, employees would have to think more
entrepreneurially about their jobs and careers. By 2015 this mindset was to
become the very difference between survival and extinction.
1991 to the Present, and Beyond: The Open Source
Era
And now we come to the recent past, present, and beyond. As I mentioned
briefly in the Introduction, this era is defined by two major megatrends: uber-

connectivity and uber-population, both of which present huge opportunities and
daunting challenges at the same time.
Uber-Connectivity
The 1990s and beyond are dominated by the exponential rise of information
technology, automation, and 24/7 connectivity, which have facilitated the
globalization of the business landscape and a shift in economic dominance from
West to East. Free-trade agreements made goods production and service
provision vulnerable to outsourcing, and job insecurity and short-term,
contracted, or contingent positions are now the norm. The separation between
work and life established during the Industrial Revolution is again breaking
down as mobile technology allows workers to contact the office anytime,
anywhere and globalization demands that employees function within a 24-hour
marketplace.
The 1990s were the final nail in the coffin of the “job for life” model.
Companies in the 1970s had vastly overestimated their sustainability and future
success, and the 1980s recession meant corporations fired well-trained and
experienced employees en masse. As the global economy picked up again in the
1990s, newly streamlined organizations were able to pick and choose from the
surplus of skilled talent, ushering in and cementing the “free agent” model. By
2014, the United States had 28 million temporary workers, representing 20
percent of the entire workforce, while by 2012, some 20 percent of short-term
assignments lasted less than 12 months.
At the same time, many jobs were outsourced to the East. An estimated 2.1
million U.S. manufacturing jobs were eliminated or relocated between 2001 and
2011 as China became the “factory of the world.” This trend is no longer
confined to manufacturing; white-collar roles are increasingly outsourced as
well. In recent years, 13 out of every 100 computer programming jobs have been
shifted offshore, while automation in the workplace is making human workers
obsolete. When was the last time, for example, that you spoke to a bank teller? It
is reasonable now to say that no job is “safe,” and the breakneck pace of change
demands that workers keep endlessly refreshing their skill sets to maintain
relevance.
All these changes would not have been possible without the growth of
connectivity, which has revolutionized almost every aspect of the workplace.
The advent of the local area network we saw in the 1970s was the first step in
the development of the Internet (launched in 1991), and now the ubiquitous

3G/4G mobile broadband (launched in 2001). This sharing technology
revolutionized the way workers communicate with each other, as well as with
customers, clients, and the public, across time and space in ways not previously
imaginable. No longer is location a prized asset; companies can reach customers
and clients across the globe with the click of a button. The two biggest disruptors
over this period are possibly the advent of the smartphone and the birth of social
media platforms. Both have brought information to the public in astonishing
ways. Many of the smartphones and tablets we currently use have more power
than the supercomputers that only decades ago filled an entire room. Information
now moves at the speed of light across viral platforms like Twitter and
Facebook, which users can access anywhere, anytime.
Before I suggest ways in which organizations will have to adapt to survive
this new world order, let’s take a look at the technological, business, and social
trends that are going to reshape the landscape as we know it.
Technology: The Brave New World
In the new millennium, digital life is becoming difficult to distinguish from “real
life,” and the line will only get more blurred. Mobile phone sales are outpacing
seemingly old-fashioned PC or laptop purchases six to one, while 43 percent of
the global population is currently connected to the Internet. A recent World
Economic Forum report posited this mind-bending question: could it be that in
only a decade or two Internet connectivity is considered not a privilege, but a
basic human right?
Consider this. Implantable technology (already seen in pacemakers and
cochlear implants) is predicted to become ubiquitous. By 2022 it is estimated
that 10 percent of people will be wearing clothes directly connected to the
Internet. This will be alongside the supercomputer already in many people’s
pockets: global smartphone subscribers are anticipated to hit 3.5 billion by 2019.
Who you are in “real life” is going to become indistinguishable from who you
are on the Internet, and establishing and managing your digital presence will
become just as important as what you choose to wear or how you choose to
physically present yourself.
Alongside the data generated by individuals, “the Internet of things” (IoT) is
predicted to skyrocket. Literally everything that can be digitally connected, will
be. This will mean greater communication and ever more data-driven devices, in
your home with smart appliances and in your city with smart traffic lights,
services, utilities, and roads. More than 10 percent of cars on the roads will be
driverless by 2026. While this isn’t the focus of this book, this will raise (and

already is raising) questions about surveillance and the right to privacy, as well
as legality, ownership, and accessibility of the torrent of data being collected
every moment of the day. Organizations both public and private are going to
have to find ways of building public trust in data collection and application.
Big data is an ongoing theme. We are already seeing debate raging over the
use and abuse of data. This can only become more critical and pertinent. Ninety
percent of the world’s data has been collected in the last two years, and the
amount of information being collected is doubling every 1.2 years. Data analysis
can and will become increasingly sophisticated and sought-after as consumers
seek ever more customized products. Big data will also become the basis of
decision making. It is predicted that in 2023 governments will start to use big
data as a replacement for the traditional paper-bound population census.
If driverless cars don’t seem like enough science fiction for you, yes, the
robots are coming. According to Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points and
Societal Impact, a September 2015 report by the World Economic Forum, the
first artificial intelligence machine will sit on a corporate board of directors by
2026. If that isn’t startling enough, robots are going to continue to make inroads
into previously unassailable jobs. We might be used to blue-collar manufacturing
jobs being outsourced to the robot world, but the white-collar world is going to
feel the impact too. Robots already account for 80 percent of the manufacturing
of a car—prepare for that statistic to get even higher.
Finally, 3D printing is going to disrupt just about everything, particularly
manufacturing, healthcare (including 3D printed transplantable organs), and
consumer products. The last one is most interesting considering the themes that
will come up later in this chapter. Already 3D printing can be done anywhere,
and is cropping up in shared tech cafes and laboratories around the world. It
creates opportunities for consumers to print products locally, at home or in an
office, rather than going to a traditional shop or ordering online. It is already
being used in making wind turbines, toys, and a whole host of other products.
Over time, 3D printers will use many different materials such as plastic and
aluminum, and replace entire factories to produce (print) complex products such
as cars. This raises interesting issues about employment—what will happen to
people who work in shops, manufacturing, and even services?
Employment: The Pressures on the Workplace
In the face of all this technology, what of us mere human workers? There are a
number of trends impacting on the workplace over the coming decades.
Technology is only one of them, alongside major shifts in demographics,

motivation, mobility, and the kind of work we will be doing.
The millennial generation best exemplifies the early twenty-first-century
workplace. The “digital natives” will shape the workforce as the century
evolves, with limited or nonexistent loyalty to any one employer, expectation of
more than one career path, prioritization of development and work-life balance
over finances, and a preference to communicate electronically rather than face-
to-face. Equally, their focus on ethical business and social and environmental
responsibility is going to put businesses under pressure to live up to their
sustainable and ethical demands, both as employees and as consumers.
Yet by 2025 the over-65s will be the fastest-growing demographic group on
earth, making for a uniquely multigenerational workforce. While most people
expect to retire by 65 years of age, a lack of planning and pressure on state
pensions may force many baby boomers to stay in the workforce longer than
expected. Employers are going to have to grapple with the complexities of the
multigenerational workforce. At the same time, the baby boomers’ purchasing
power offers enormous potential for companies to provide unique, targeted
goods, services, and experiences catering to their requirements, particularly
around healthcare.
Organizations too must face the rise and rise of entrepreneurship and free
agency, putting their offerings of “traditional” employment under pressure. The
entrepreneurs and free agents of today and tomorrow are young, increasingly
female, and are launching businesses because of financial necessity, or to
sidestep the “decaying social contract” between employer and employee.
Entrepreneurship is particularly popular in rapid growth markets, with the
percentage of people aged 18 to 64 establishing new businesses at 27 percent in
sub-Saharan Africa, 19 percent in Latin America, and 12 percent in Asia-Pacific,
compared with only 8 percent in Europe.
Similarly, a lot of people who were earlier available for traditional full-time
jobs now prefer free agency. Consider Uber. Uber neither employs any drivers
nor owns any cars, yet it is one of the largest taxi companies in the world today.
An Uber driver:
 Decides when he wants to work and when not. If it is his partner’s birthday in
the middle of the week, he has the option of not taking a customer and
taking his partner out to lunch instead. He blends work-life boundaries
rather than “managing” them.
 Realizes that her income depends directly on how much she drives.
 Realizes that the continuation of his contract with Uber depends largely on

the customer ratings he gets after each ride. In other words, he must self-
manage performance on the job.
 Has the flexibility of switching to another mobile app–based taxi company if
offered a better deal, or working with more than one company at the same
time.
 Knows that with technology-enabled infrastructure (Internet-enabled home
office, Wi-Fi enabled coffee shops, 24-hour print and copy shops,
reasonably rentable executive suites, and overnight delivery services), she
has the perfect self-employment ecosystem at her disposal, allowing her to
offer her services to businesses other than taxi operations. It is now possible
to be an Uber driver, an Instacart shopper, a paid blogger, and an Airbnb
host at the same time. In other words, she has discovered the joys of being a
free agent.
Traditional full-time employers have historically found it hard to provide
much freedom to their people. The more companies grew in size, the more rules
and policies they introduced. In today’s free agent gig economy, they will need
to rethink this traditional approach and invent ways to make full-time
employment as attractive, if not more so, than free agency. I will return to this
need with concrete suggestions in several chapters starting with Chapter 2.
Mobility and the Shift from West to East
Western countries may try to fill gaps in their workforce by recruiting from the
East. The exponential rise in tertiary education across the developing world has
created a new class of young, highly skilled workers who are interested in
seeking opportunities outside of their home countries—we’ll explore this more
when discussing the global population explosion. That said, it doesn’t mean that
young workers will immediately look to the West, but may instead look to their
own home countries as their economies continue to boom.
That young workers are looking to their home countries rather than to the
West is indicative of another huge trend. The gulf between mature and
developing economies is predicted to shrink. Growth in key developing markets
is expected to taper but remain strong, as in China (+5.9 percent), India (+6.7
percent) and sub-Saharan Africa (+5.8 percent). In particular, the growth of the
middle class in these markets will increase their consumer power and these
formerly “developing nations” will instead become hubs for global business. By
2025 the cost of manufacturing goods in China is predicted to be the same as
that of the United States. Manufacturers will need to look further afield for

cheap, low-skilled labor, moving the manufacturing bases to the next tier of
developing economies in Africa, the Middle East, and South America.
The trend in mobility will also manifest in a way that we’ve already
mentioned. The increasing sophistication and complexity of mobile technology
is predicted to produce more efficient ways of collaborating remotely. An
estimated 60 percent of the U.S. workforce today works in a role where physical
location is no longer relevant. Additionally, almost 50 percent of managers in the
United States, United Kingdom, and Germany are allowed to work remotely.
This will only keep growing.
New Work
Finally, the sweeping change in our economic and social lives is going to change
the very work that we do. Many of the jobs that people will be doing in 5 to 10
years don’t currently exist, and 475 occupations in advanced countries are at risk
of being automated in the next 20 years. An example of this new world of
occupations is the data scientist, a role that was only coined in 2008 when
organizations began to deal with the information generated by online technology.
Businesses are drowning in data they have no idea how to interpret, and the data
scientist was created to fill a previously unrealized need.
As we have seen, technology has reduced the need for actual human workers.
While manufacturing still accounts for 30 percent of U.S. GDP, the number of
Americans actually employed in the sector has declined dramatically as
automation has taken over. It reflects the same trend in agriculture, where
technology has hastened the end of the small family farm and the rise of
industrial scale farms that require few, if any, human workers. Services are
already being moved offshore, or automated through apps, software, or online
tools. This raises a crucial question that must be answered: How can workers
prepare themselves to work in jobs that might not yet exist?
Uber-Population
The Earth is experiencing a population explosion. This exponential rise in
human life is a testament to the advances in healthcare and standards of living
over the last century, but it also carries profound implications for the way we live
now, and the way we must live in the future.
The soaring population offers both exciting opportunities and daunting
challenges. On one hand, a growing global population offers companies new
markets to grow their businesses, and an abundance of talented people to hire.

On the other, resource depletion and the threat of climate change will disrupt
how we manufacture, transport, and consume goods and services. It is worth
exploring the complexities of the population explosion in greater depth, before
outlining how the leadership of our organizations must adjust to take advantage
of the best and mitigate the worst of this rapid change.
The Population Explosion
In 1804, global population reached one billion for the first time. Only 205 years
later, Earth’s population reached seven billion, with much of that growth
occurring since 1960. The Earth’s population is estimated to hit nine billion by
2050, with the majority of growth expected in Africa and East Asia. The Indian
subcontinent will jump from 1.6 billion people (2014) to 2.2 billion in (2050),
and sub-Saharan Africa from 899 million (2014) to 2.2 billion (2050). Countries
like Yemen, Somalia, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Bangladesh are anticipated to see
the most growth, and in 2028 India will overtake China as the most populous
country in the world. In contrast, the West is likely to see modest growth, or
even population shrinkage.
Population models had until recently assumed that the global population
would peak at nine billion midcentury and then decline. However, a 2014 report
by the United Nations Population Division and the University of Washington
(Seattle) instead found that world population stabilization was unlikely in the
twenty-first century. Their analysis suggested that the population would instead
reach 10.9 billion in 2100. Asia was likely to remain the most populous
continent, but the main driver of this growth would be Africa.
Running parallel is the expectation that the majority of individuals across the
globe will be urban. Currently 54 percent of the global population lives in cities,
expected to rise to 66 percent by 2050. Again, the vast majority of urban growth
over the next 20 years will occur in Africa and Asia, while 122 of the 750
current biggest cities in Europe, Japan, and China will shrink by midcentury.
The impact of this increasing urbanization is mixed. Cities use a
disproportionate amount of natural resources to function. The infrastructure
upgrades and construction needed to cope with the influx of people will be
enormous. In addition, while urbanization offers many rural dwellers the
possibility of a better life, for many the move is harsh. In 2014, nearly one
billion people lived in urban slums, bearing the brunt of traffic congestion, air
pollution, crime, unsafe water, and inadequate sanitation. These hopeless living
conditions have the potential to erupt into social unrest.
Yet it is also important to acknowledge that the population explosion and

urbanization has birthed a young, educated, and productive labor force. This
burgeoning middle class is the result of agricultural and economic policies since
the 1970s that have pulled millions out of extreme poverty and given young
people in developing countries access to higher education. From 1990 to 2010
the gross enrollment ratio in tertiary education globally rose from 13.6 to 29.2
percent.
The Population Explosion and the War for Talent
So, what does this mean? The population explosion is going to increase the
global pool of skilled workers, but will this actually have a positive impact on
the war for talent, or just take the battle international?
In recent years, the portion of young people with a tertiary education has
grown significantly, particularly in the West. However, this is counterbalanced
by two factors: one, that Western populations are predicted to stagnate or shrink,
and two, the rapid economic growth of emerging markets. As these markets
move from low-cost manufacturing to skills-based economies, they will compete
with the established Western multinationals for their own skilled workers.
China is a case in point. Between 1979 and 2014, China’s annual real GDP
grew nearly 10 percent, representing a massive global economic shift, and
hauling 679 million people out of extreme poverty. China’s economic growth
was based on a manufacturing boom, predicated on the surplus of low-cost labor.
In 2010 China overtook the United States as the world’s largest manufacturer (on
a gross value added basis), and in 2015 it was named by the IMF as the number
one economic superpower in the world.
However, China’s demographics and role as the “world’s factory” are
changing. From 2005 to 2014 Chinese wages rose by 309 percent, and by 2014
were at $763 per month (or 72.2 percent higher than Mexico). It is no longer
“cheap China”; a Booz & Co. study in 2010 found that 83 percent of companies
located their manufacturing in China for access to the large, educated, urbanized
middle class consumer market, rather than for low-cost labor. Demand for
workers is now outstripping supply, particular for young talented managers in
Chinese and multinational organizations. In addition, the rise of Chinese
organizations like Huawei and Haier, alongside prominent Chinese banks, are
making skilled workers question whether working at the Chinese subsidiary of a
Western business is actually better than working at the headquarters of a
multinational Chinese-owned business.
It’s a trend likely to repeat in other emerging markets, although the situation
is more complex. At present, Bangladesh, Kenya, Morocco, and Nigeria will

contribute a third of the estimated growth in the labor force, and currently supply
greater numbers of college-educated workers than can be employed in local
industries. Yet these are also important new markets for multinational
companies, and increased foreign investment, entrepreneurship, and growing
industry will close the talent gap.
It’s worth noting, too, that increased population does not necessarily mean an
increase in the kind of skills that employers are seeking. What it does mean is
that employers will ratchet up the battle over those workers who do exhibit those
skills, and that uber-connectivity will enable them to source talent from
wherever it exists.
The Impact on Resources
While this book focuses on personal and organizational leadership rather than
the environment, it is important to provide a quick outline of the impacts of the
population boom on our natural world. The predicted scarcities make for
alarming reading, and underscore the need for new ways of looking at and
leading through the twenty-first century.
Since 1980 collective human demands on our natural resources provided by
the planet have exceeded the Earth’s regenerative capacity by 30 percent. This is
particularly marked in the resources we use to feed, water, and warm ourselves,
and is predicted to only get worse as the population grows. Water is the greatest
concern. As a species, we drink on average four liters of water per person per
day, but the food we eat requires 2,000 liters of water per day to produce. During
the last half of the twentieth century the irrigated land used for food production
tripled, which in turned tripled the amount of grain produced—70 percent of
which is used for livestock feed. Clearly, this growth is unsustainable.
At present 18 countries, making up half the world’s population, are pumping
water over and above levels that can be replenished. These countries include
India, China, the United States, Iran, Pakistan, and Mexico. According to the
World Bank, 175 million Indians (15 percent of the population) are being fed
with grain produced with unsustainably sourced water. This has grave
implications for both food production and prices. More than one commentator
has mentioned the likelihood of “water wars” as a result of shortages. In India,
the states of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka are already fighting over the Cauvery
River, while Punjabi landowners have used bulldozers to sabotage an unfinished
canal designed to take water from the Sutlej River to Haryana.
Alongside water scarcity, land use is of concern. Just as harvests are
shrinking in some countries due to water depletion, they are shrinking as a result

of land overuse and soil erosion. Countries including Mongolia, Lesotho,
northwest China, and the Sahel in Africa are developing into “dust bowls.”
Demand for agricultural land is predicted to double at least by 2050, and triple
by 2100, ratcheting up pressure to clear some of the world’s last remaining
forests and rainforests. Roughly 20 percent of the Amazon rainforest has been
cleared for soybean farming and cattle ranching, with another 22 percent
weakened by logging and road building. Clearing or weakening half the Amazon
rainforest may be the tipping point after which the remainder of the rainforest
cannot be saved, also releasing roughly the equivalent of 15 years of human
induced carbon emissions into the atmosphere.
Despite the numbers of people pulled out of extreme poverty in the second
half of the twentieth century, the number of extremely poor in Asia, the Middle
East, and Africa actually rose by 130 million between 2005 and 2009, and the
number of malnourished people rose to over 1 billion. These alarming statistics
are at least in part the result of the massive diversion of grain to fuel the ethanol
industry.
At the same time 80 percent of the world’s oceanic fisheries are being fished
at or beyond their sustainable yields. While solutions including fish farming
have been mooted, they also come with an environmental cost and require yet
more land and water to produce the soy and cornmeal used as fish food. At
present, we have no known way of providing food for the estimated nine billion
residents of Earth by 2050, based on current land usage.
Finally, our energy use is scheduled to skyrocket. By the end of the twenty-
first century we will need to triple energy production to meet demand at current
rates. According to The Guardian columnist George Monbiot, this translates into
23,000 new nuclear power stations, 1,800 more of the world’s largest dams, and
14 million wind turbines. Monbiot also notes that our urban transport needs will
similarly rise, which not only increases air pollution and our demand for cheap
oil, but may also increase the chances of the quick spread of pathogens and
pandemics.
Our Unsustainable Economic Model
Clearly, the challenges of the future will require new ways of leadership. In light
of the grim predictions of our resource-scarce, highly populated future, is it now
relevant to reconsider the economic system that has got us here?
In his book Consumptionomics (2011), Chandran Nair argues that the
adoption of the Western model of consumption by the developing world is
impossible to achieve without ruining the planet in the process. He believes that

Asia in particular must model new ways of living that place resource
sustainability and care at the heart of government policy. To be effective,
organizations must be forced to account for the cost of resources in their
financial results.
Nair was inspired to write Consumptionomics following the 2008 financial
crisis, when Asian consumers were encouraged to spend their way out of the
Western-fueled recession to drive up global demand. At the same time the 2009
Copenhagen Climate Conference was highlighting the unsustainability of
Western-style consumption. Nair recognized the disconnect: if the environment
is in near-calamity due to Western consumption habits, what will happen when
China, India, and the rest of Asia’s middle class start living the same way, let
alone the growing populations in Africa? He also recognized that Asia will bear
much of the brunt of any potential environmental disasters, including rising sea
levels, flooding, and water, air, and land pollution.
Nair uses poultry to demonstrate the potential impact. As observed in 2011,
Americans eat nine billion birds per year, while Asia (with a population 13 times
the size) eats 16 billion birds annually. If Asia followed American consumption
patterns, the continent would consume 150 billion birds each year by 2050, with
associated pressure on land, water, and grain requirements.
Using industrial capitalism’s economic and technological tools to solve the
world’s climate and environmental problems will not work, because they focus
on maintaining the system that caused the problem in the first place. Economic
models to “fix” or mitigate climate change, including cap and trade and carbon
credits, have roundly failed or been exploited and ignore the fact that climate
change is not a static problem. The population is growing, consumption of
natural resources is increasing, and economic schemes that strive to maintain the
status quo in the face of these ecological pressures miss the point entirely.
Technology might offer some solutions, but it is more often used to justify
things remaining the same. Take cars in China. In 1990 China’s car industry
produced only a few hundred thousand vehicles per year, yet by 2009 it passed
the United States to become the world’s largest car market, with 13 million
vehicles sold. The U.S. Department of Energy estimates that in the late 2020s
China will have around 330 million cars on the road, and anywhere between 470
and 660 million by 2050. Clearly the fuel requirements for running this fleet are
enormous, not to mention the impact on air quality, infrastructure, and urban
congestion. While the growth of zero emission vehicles is posited as an answer
to the problems caused by this surge in traffic, it ignores the glaring fact that
even zero emission cars must be built, fueled, and driven on congested roads.

Technological advances themselves may be part of the problem. High-speed
financial transactions fuel growth in consumption by offering consumers new
ways of spending. This financial speed “accelerates the speed at which decisions
can be taken to exploit resources,” without consideration of the true costs.
Consumptionomics makes the case that the West can also afford to have a
fundamentally different attitude to climate change, in the context of the
shrinking Western population. Nair uses the equation I = PAT, in which Impact
on environment = Population size + Affluence + Technology, or the level of
environmental impact per unit of spending (the equation was first formulated in
the 1970s by Paul Ehrlich and John Holdren). The West can focus almost solely
on adjusting T, in the context of a stable or shrinking P, to maintain the existing
level of A. Technology is the easy fix to lower the environmental impact given
the stability of the rest of the equation.
The developing world doesn’t have this luxury. Grappling with the desire to
emulate Western affluence alongside a skyrocketing population, it is impossible
to lower T through short-term technological fixes alone. This explains why
Western solutions to environmental problems are so ineffective in the developing
world. They are based on an industrialized model that fails to account for the
differences in context.
It is clear that tackling the challenges imposed by the population explosion
and seizing the opportunities it entails will require leaders of deep emotional
strength and vision. As we will discuss later in the book, creating and
implementing transformative change will come up against intractable and fierce
resistance.
Where Do We Go from Here?
As I see it, both exciting opportunities and daunting challenges are unfolding at
an unprecedented scale as we speak. I am no expert in connectivity, population
explosion, or climate change. My aim in this chapter was neither to predict
future megatrends nor prove that climate change is real. Instead, by summarizing
what is going on around us, I wanted to contextualize the environment in which
we live and work today, and raise a few questions:
 Are our career development and leadership models adequate for personal,
organizational, and global success going forward?
 Have our business leadership and management practices kept pace with the

rate of social and business change?
The answer to both questions, unfortunately, is a big no. Our management
models are designed to manage the workers of over a century ago. The majority
of current management tools, including task design, pay-for-performance,
divisionalization, and task management were all invented in the first part of the
twentieth century. While there has been modification on the fringes, the pace of
evolution of management theory has slowed markedly over the last 50 to 60
years, just as the pace of change of technology, society, and work has ramped up.
We need to develop new management strategies that not only reflect the
workplace of today, but have the flexibility to adjust to the rapidly changing
work of tomorrow. Specifically, we must look at both personal and
organizational leadership frameworks as they exist today and devise new, open
source paradigms to replace them.
Personal Leadership in the Open Source Twenty-First
Century
To lead businesses in these complex yet exciting times will demand a new style
of leadership that speaks directly to changing trends and is brave enough to leave
behind outdated management dogma. Leaders in this new world will require a
strength of vision and emotional resilience far beyond what is popularized in
current leadership models taught at most business schools.
Leading the Organization in the Open Source Twenty-
First Century
Thanks to uber-connectivity and uber-population, organizations are now in
competition with approximately 7.5 billion people across the globe who are
empowered by technology and driven by speed. Surviving and thriving in the
open source era will require the full energy and imagination of all employees.
Traditional “carrot and stick” methodologies will not work.
The shift in economic power from West to East and rapid-growth economies,
the democratization of knowledge, and the ever-increasing pace of change means
that competitive advantage is rarely found and quickly lost. Individuals and
organizations will not only need to keep up with the Joneses, but to get there
first. Organizations will only thrive if they can find new ways of sourcing

innovation, at ever-faster speeds. Old-style, in-house innovation labs will no
longer be enough. Fortunately, the population explosion alongside the
possibilities of globalized communication means that organizations have greater
access to potential innovators than ever before, should they find effective ways
of tapping into it.
Likewise, developing the leaders of tomorrow will become even more
important than ever before. Here again, traditional models of succession
planning will need to give way to open source methods.
Over the next five chapters I will look at these challenges in greater detail
and propose new and sometimes counterintuitive ways for organizations to
adjust and thrive. There are no half measures. We’ve seen the scale of change to
our lives and our work over the last century and can only begin to imagine the
changes we will see in the future. This demands bold and unconventional
thinking. In the next two chapters we will establish a much-needed redefinition
of personal leadership in the context of the open source era. To begin with, in
Chapter 2 let’s take a look at what leadership style will be best suited for these
times.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 We now live and work in the open source era where everyone and everything
is connected, ordinary people are highly empowered, and leaders stand
completely exposed and naked.
 Uber-connectivity and uber-population are the two megatrends shaping the
twenty-first century.
 Implantable technology, driverless cars, robots, IoT, big data, and 3D printing
are just some of the ways in which life will change in the coming years.
 Digital natives will drive and shape economies.
 Digital natives prefer free agency over full-time employment. They have
much more freedom and flexibility compared to their parents and
grandparents.
 Many more traditional jobs will disappear, but plenty of new jobs will also be
created.
 Global population will hit nine billion by 2050, creating huge pressure on
natural resources such as food and water.

 If the Western model of consumption-led growth is replicated in Asia and
Africa, it will lead to disastrous consequences for planet Earth and
generations to come.
 We need new and bold forms of leadership to tackle both daunting challenges
and exciting opportunities posed by the open source twenty-first century.
Questions for Reflection
1. In what ways is my business or profession changing?
2. What might replace my job or business in the near future?
3. What steps can I take now to remain viable?

PART 2
Open Source Personal
Leadership

CHAPTER 2
The Naked Autocrat Creates
Breakthrough Results
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

I
n Chapter 1, I outlined a new landscape of work and life. Over the next three
chapters starting with this one, I raise the questions:
 What kind of personal leadership is best suited for the open source era?
 Will traditional frameworks of personal leadership still enable success today
and tomorrow?
Perhaps the biggest inconvenient truth of the current times is this: we’ve
been idealizing democratic and all-inclusive leadership far too much, when the
need of the hour is—and always has been—autocratic, top-down leadership.
If you’re like most people, your first reaction to this statement is probably
one of disbelief and even disgust. Having seen what the likes of Stalin, Hitler, Idi
Amin, and others did during their dictatorial reigns, how could anyone say
something like this? Allow me to explain.
As we’ve said all along, speed is everything today. It is no longer enough to
have great innovations and ideas. Individuals and organizations must also move
at lightning speed to implement them before someone else does. The cost of not
moving fast enough is death. Consider Kodak. In 1998 Kodak had 170,000
employees and sold 85 percent of all the photo paper consumed worldwide.
Within three years, its business model was obsolete and the company went
bankrupt. In his thought-provoking LinkedIn post, Marco Ronnie Seiler, a
hotelier with 20-plus years of global leadership experience, asserts that what
happened to Kodak will happen to many more companies over the next 10 years,
and at a pace faster than ever before. “Did you think in 1998 that three years
later you would never take pictures on paper film again?” he asks. What’s sad
about Kodak is not just that it did not respond fast enough to a changing world.
The worst part is that the digital camera itself was invented at Eastman Kodak by
Steven J. Sasson in 1975! The first camera had only 10,000 pixels and shot
black-and-white photos that took 23 seconds to capture. While the first camera
was initially a commercial disappointment, it eventually followed Moore’s Law
(that digital processing speeds will double every two years) and became
mainstream in just a few short years.
As Seiler rightly points out in his post, the same phenomenon is about to
happen to artificial intelligence, healthcare, cars and transportation, 3D printing,
and jobs. “Welcome to the fourth industrial revolution,” he says. Artificial
intelligence is already helping computers beat the best chess and Go players in
the world. IBM Watson is now helping diagnose cancer with an accuracy four

times greater than human nurses. By 2020 you may no longer need to own a car
at all, because you will be able to call one on your phone whenever you need
one. Our kids might never need a driver’s license. Insurance will become one
hundred times cheaper with far fewer accidents. In a few years, a medical device
called the Tricorder X will work with your phone to take your retina scan, blood
sample, and breath to analyze 54 biomarkers to identify almost any disease.
Ultimately, Seiler says, “if you think of a niche you want to go in, ask yourself,
in the future, do you think we will have that? If the answer is yes, how can you
make that happen sooner? If it doesn’t work with your phone, forget the idea.
And any idea designed for success in the twentieth century is doomed to failure
in the twenty-first century.”
John Chambers of Cisco agrees. In his 2016 Fortune article “How to Get on
the Right Side of the Digital Divide,” he argues that unless countries act fast
enough to accelerate growth, they risk falling into a long-cycle recession. He
asserts that countries that “get” digitization—the intelligent connection of
people, process, data, and things—will thrive in terms of innovation,
competitiveness, and job creation. He claims that while most world leaders are
tackling symptoms such as trade and tax policies, those that are getting it right
are focusing on the core issue of digitization. He cites France as an example,
which has an impressive plan to transform into a digital republic by creating 1.1
million digital jobs between 2017 and 2019, and $719 billion in GDP growth by
2026. He also cites leaders in Israel, India, the United Kingdom, Germany, and
the Middle East as other examples of people who “get it” and are building
massive digital ecosystems for growth. “In India, Prime Minister Narendra Modi
is working to build architectures that can support the Digital India vision, which
leverages information and communication technology to deliver citizen services,
virtual education, remote healthcare, and more. If that vision is successfully
implemented, India will completely transform the way governments, citizens,
and businesses interact, creating unprecedented economic value,” Chambers
says.
With the world changing as fast as we speak, how can anyone afford to be
slow and still thrive? This brings us back to the question of democratic versus
autocratic and top-down leadership. Will the time-consuming democratic
consensus process deliver what is needed, fast enough? Or do we need
something that provides faster results?
Typically, if we ask someone what kind of boss he or she would like to work
for—a democratic or autocratic one—the most likely answer will be the former.
However, history shows that people love working for and admire autocratic top-

down leaders. Take just a few examples: Walt Disney, Henry Ford, Steve Jobs,
John Chambers, Lee Kuan Yew, Nelson Mandela, and Mahatma Gandhi.
According to Vivek Wadhwa, Disney, Ford, Jobs, and Chambers were all
autocrats. Wadhwa is Distinguished Fellow at Carnegie Mellon University’s
College of Engineering, and has held positions at Stanford Law School, UC
Berkley, Harvard Law School, and Emory University. In his 2016 Washington
Post article he describes them as follows:
 Walt Disney would ask employees for their ideas through surveys but would
then dictate his requirements. When employees didn’t perform, he would fire
them immediately. He had a clear vision, was coherent and moral, and
demanding. Disney did end up becoming excessively autocratic and losing
touch with what made him successful. Yet he touched the hearts and minds
of billions all over the world and created one of the greatest companies of
its time.
 Henry Ford was known as a tough leader who had a hand in every major
decision. He was so demanding of his employees that he monitored their
activities outside of work. He was, however, resolute in vision. Ford defied
his investors when they demanded he build a car for the wealthy, and
increased average wages to $5 a day while reducing the work day to eight
hours. He ended up revolutionizing transportation and setting new
standards for the workplace.
 Steve Jobs ruled with an iron fist and demanded absolute secrecy and loyalty
from his employees. He was egotistical and moody. Yet Jobs had a brilliant
vision, unwavering determination, and uncanny understanding of what
consumers wanted. He built the world’s most valuable company and set new
standards for technology design.
 The greatest technology innovator of today, Elon Musk, is a highly imperfect
human being who makes extreme demands and sets unrealistic public
deadlines for his employees. Yet he is single-handedly changing several
industries—including space, energy, and transportation.
 Leaders need to step aside when they have peaked, as Cisco CEO John
Chambers did last year. He too was an autocrat who said to the New York
Times “I’m a command-and-control person. I like being able to say turn
right, and we truly have 67,000 people turn right.”
Why do so many people continue to willingly work at Disney, Ford, Apple,
Tesla, and Cisco? How did these leaders create so much value, even while they
were autocratic? Similarly, why did the people of Singapore listen to and

willingly follow their nation’s founder and first prime minister Lee Kuan Yew,
even though he was well known for his autocratic style of leadership? Why did
the people of South Africa, who were thirsty for blood and revenge, instead
listen to Nelson Mandela when he preached forgiveness and reconciliation? In
Clint Eastwood’s 2009 movie Invictus, a pivotal scene depicts Mandela’s
autocratic leadership style very well. On finding out that the black-dominated
South African Sports Committee had decided to change the name of the national
rugby team from Springboks to something else, and to drop the green and gold
colors of their uniform, Mandela (played by Morgan Freeman) cuts short a
meeting with foreign delegates and rushes to the sports committee meeting
venue to successfully persuade the group to change their decision. Even though
the group had just voted unanimously to remove the “symbols of apartheid”
from rugby, why did they listen to him and reverse their decision? And why did
the people of India follow Gandhi even though his nonviolent path to
independence differed significantly from the popular desire to fight the British
with guns and knives?
Looking at these and countless other examples over the years started me
thinking. Is democratic leadership really as effective as it is made out to be in
leadership literature? Ask any leader who has ever come up with a radically
different vision for the future, and he or she will tell you how hard it was to
implement it. All you get is resistance. With that in mind, and with breakneck
speed all around, does one then risk missing the bus by spending precious time
on consensus building? And if it is indeed true that democratic inclusion is the
best form of leadership, then how do the above examples from history fit in?
Could it be true that to drive breakthrough change, autocratic leadership was
always needed, and that today’s breakneck speed has simply amplified the need?
To find out, my colleagues and I designed a research experiment conducted
in 28 countries covering approximately 16,000 senior and mid-level executives.
Rather than simply asking up front which leadership style respondents felt was
more effective, we decided to give them something to think about first. We
provided a list of famous leaders comprising Aung San Suu Kyi, Jack Ma, Steve
Jobs, Abraham Lincoln, Nelson Mandela, Mahatma Gandhi, and Lee Kuan Yew,
and asked them to identify what they had in common. From a list of 11
leadership behaviors, we wanted them to choose the top three commonalities.
Five of the 11 behaviors were democratic and all-inclusive, five were top-down
and autocratic, and one was a mix of both. In our questionnaire, the behaviors
were mixed up in one list and were not labeled as one or the other, but for ease
of reference here, I have marked them with a D for Democratic or T for Top-

Down/Bold:
1. Used a democratic style of leadership to achieve their vision—D
2. Took incremental steps to cautiously implement their vision—D
3. Dared to be different and willing to challenge general opinion—T
4. Enlisted everyone’s approval and acceptance of an idea before moving
ahead—D
5. Were bold risk-takers that pursued unpopular or unconventional ideas to
break new ground—T
6. Remained firm in their course of action despite setback and resistance—
T
7. Envisioned audacious ideas that didn’t yet exist to create a better world
—T
8. Listened to find middle ground in the face of opposing viewpoints to
preserve harmony—D
9. Had long-lasting energy to see their plans through without giving up
amidst challenges—T
10. Relied on consensus and support from others to make a difference—D
11. Listened to the views of others but made their own decisions of what is
right—D + T
In country after country, the T behaviors were most frequently selected as the
top three commonalities. There were no significant differences by country.*
Figure 2.1 shows how they stacked up.


FIGURE 2.1 What Great Leaders Have in Common
Next, we asked the same question in reference to today’s business leaders.
We asked respondents to tell us what today’s business leaders need to do most in
order to drive breakthrough success. We gave respondents the same list of 11
behaviors and asked them to rank order them in the same way as the previous
question. Again, the T behaviors dominated the top of the list, as shown in
Figure 2.2.


FIGURE 2.2 What Business Leaders Most Need to Do
Finally, we asked an agree/disagree question. We asked respondents to
indicate their level of agreement with the statement: “In order to drive
unprecedented success for the organization in today’s fast paced environment, a
significant amount of top-down leadership is required.” Seventy five percent of
our global respondents agreed or strongly agreed (Figure 2.3).


FIGURE 2.3 Top-Down Leadership (Aggregate)
While we had a hunch that respondents might admire top-down autocratic
leadership (even though they might think otherwise), we were surprised by the
one-sidedness of the data. For example, we had expected to see some differences
by country, gender, and age group. But no, each country, gender, and age group
consistently returned the same results. Figure 2.4 shows the extent of agreement
with the need for top-down leadership by country.
FIGURE 2.4 Top-Down Leadership (by Country)
The data was collected and analyzed independently by Kadence
International, a reputable market research organization. Appendix 1 outlines the
research methodology and provides an overview of the data by country.
Of course, acknowledging this data causes more problems than it solves.
When we shared the first cut with our colleagues, several concerns emerged.

“Are we now promoting autocratic leadership?” asked one. “Will this data be
misunderstood, and will it give bosses license to justify their dictatorial
behavior?” asked another. As we grappled with these concerns, another big
question emerged: In today’s day and age when ordinary people are so
empowered and bosses completely exposed and naked, is it even possible to lead
with an autocratic style?
It became obvious that we needed to understand the data more deeply, and
tread carefully. With recording devices in their pockets, and social media reach
at their fingertips, most people are more empowered than ever before. They can
expose any and every action of their bosses at the drop of a hat. In the old days,
it was easy for bosses to deny having said or done anything that was regrettable.
Today, it is almost impossible. One simply needs to look at electoral politics as
an example. The 2016 U.S. presidential election is an excellent case in point.
There was no shortage of video clips and other fact-checking devices that made
it impossible for Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump to deny their actions or
misspoken words. Both stood completely exposed throughout their campaigns.
In this environment, how can anyone get away with autocratic leadership? Yet,
the data strongly suggests that it is the need of the hour. Welcome to the twenty-
first-century leadership dilemma!
In the past, dictators and autocrats could use their authority and power to do
what they wanted. It is becoming increasingly impossible to do so in the open
source era. India Against Corruption, the 2010 grassroots movement created and
led by ordinary citizens in India, shook the ruling Congress government and
changed the country’s political landscape once and for all. Until then, corruption
was accepted as part of life and political leaders were seldom questioned. The
power of the crowd made it very clear that from then on, corrupt leaders were on
notice, and people demand higher standards of integrity from their leaders.
Former Uber engineer Susan J. Fowler’s now famous February 2017 blog
about rampant sexual harassment prompted NDTV.com to post a Bloomberg
story with the headline “Uber CEO, with Tears in His Eyes, Apologizes for
Company Culture.” In the same month, a video posted by a driver who was
berated by the CEO went viral, causing Uber even more PR trouble.
In April 2017, United Airlines had David Dao, a 69-year-old Kentucky
physician, physically dragged off a plane upon his refusal to be bumped off due
to overbooking. Almost immediately after the incident, videos of the incident
recorded by passengers on their cell phones went viral, causing United one of its
worst reputational disasters and costing the CEO his chairmanship.
The examples of Uber and United Airlines above, and the 2011 Arab Spring

that toppled several totalitarian regimes in the Middle East, are great reminders
of how vulnerable leaders, governments, and businesses are today. It is clear that
using force or position power might not even be an option anymore. Yet, our
data and practical experience strongly suggests that in order to drive
breakthrough results in today’s age of speed, top-down autocratic leadership is
indeed required. So, what do we make of this strange paradox? The answer to
this question lies in getting back to the question I raised earlier about Lee Kuan
Yew, Mandela, and Gandhi. Why did their people listen to and follow them
despite their autocratic behaviors? What was the difference between them and
ruthless dictators like Hitler and Stalin?
Lee Kuan Yew, Mandela, and Gandhi practiced a form of autocratic
leadership that was actually net positive. They realized that in their positions,
every step they took and every word they uttered was in full public view. In this
sense, they were naked and scrutinized by people 24/7. As leaders, on one hand
they wanted people to like and respect them; on the other they knew hard
decisions were needed to create a better future for all. So, they had to master the
dance of the naked autocrat, which I explain below.
Five Keys to Positive Autocratic Leadership
In the open source era, leaders can apply autocratic leadership by practicing the
following principles toward positive autocracy:
1. Earn the Right to Use Autocratic Leadership
Lee Kuan Yew, Mandela, and Gandhi were true leaders according to the
definition and criteria of real leadership we discussed briefly in the Introduction
and will revisit in detail in the next chapter. They wanted to build better futures
for their people. The key word is better. They had tremendous leadership energy
that was derived from a values-based purpose. People deeply believed that the
three of them were each working solely to create a better future. Singaporeans
were willing to forgo some liberties because they strongly believed that Lee
Kuan Yew had their best interest at heart. So great was the trust between him and
his people that people allowed him to be autocratic. The case was the same with
Mandela and Gandhi. In other words, unlike ruthless dictators who used force,
Lee Kuan Yew, Mandela, and Gandhi had earned the right to use top-down,
autocratic leadership.

Earlier I quoted Marco Ronnie Seiler’s question, “If you think of a niche you
want to go in, ask yourself: in the future, do you think we will have that? If the
answer is yes, how can you make that happen sooner?” The first part of Seiler’s
question helps uncover what the leader should do, and that is the relatively easy
part. The second part—how can you make it happen sooner—is the hard part
because it deals with the how. To make it happen sooner, leaders needs to look in
the mirror and make sure they are comfortable with their values and purpose,
and if their values and purpose will resonate with people. In the open source era,
leaders earn the right to use top-down leadership by getting the essence of their
leadership energy right—by establishing the right values and purpose.
2. Be Autocratic About Values and Purpose While
Remaining Humble, Respectful, and Considerate with
People
Mandela, Gandhi, and Lee Kuan Yew each arrived at their values and purpose
slowly, deliberately, and thoughtfully. In Chapter 3 we will see exactly how this
is done. Because of their deliberate thoughtfulness, they were sure that they were
on the right track. Gandhi decided after much careful consideration that his
purpose would be to obtain India’s independence from British rule, in a
nonviolent way. “For this purpose, I am prepared to die, but there is no purpose
for which I am prepared to kill,” he would say. Mandela was sure that the better
future for South Africa was possible only through forgiveness and reconciliation,
not revenge and bloodshed, and was not prepared to compromise on those values
under any circumstances. Lee Kuan Yew recognized that discipline was sorely
needed to make Asian nations prosperous, and there was little time to lose. All
three recognized that democratic leadership alone was inadequate to bring about
positive change, and that a certain amount of push was needed even without
consensus. Again, unlike ruthless dictators, they did not use power to force
people into submission. They balanced the need for autocratic action with
respect, humility, and consideration. The biggest key to their success at using
autocratic leadership was that they were autocratic about their values and
purpose while being considerate, humble and respectful with their people at the
same time. It is perfectly possible to do both. As Lee Kuan Yew famously said,
“If there was a good reason why it is ‘no,’ then it must remain a ‘no,’ but the man
must be told politely. You lose nothing by being polite.”
In fact, in today’s open source era, leaders have no choice but to live their
values all the time. Because leaders are held in high esteem by their followers,

even one slipup is one too many. The very people that put you on a pedestal with
their love and admiration bring you down ruthlessly if you betray their trust. In
this sense, leaders carry a tremendous responsibility on their shoulders, and are
naked. So how can they be autocratic when they are naked? The only answer is
to constantly do the naked autocrat dance whereby one practices autocracy of
values and purpose, and compassion, humility, and respect for people at the same
time (Figure 2.5). This is the paradox of twenty-first century leadership, and
leaders need to learn the art of finely balancing the two seeming opposites.
FIGURE 2.5 The Naked Autocrat Dance
3. Provide “Freedom Within a Framework”
I first heard the phrase “freedom within a framework” in 2006 at Coca-Cola
where I was chief learning officer. Neville Isdell had just come back to the
company from retirement with a mandate to turn the storied ship around. Given
the breadth of Coke’s operations, he knew he couldn’t lead the turnaround with a
centralized command and control strategy. He also knew that what was good for
one market was not necessarily good for another country even in the same

neighbourhood. Yet, he was convinced that the only way the global giant would
be successful again is if the entire company adhered to some common principles.
So, he laid out a broad, values-based framework, and told his top 150 people that
they had full freedom within the framework. They could use whatever local
strategies they needed, provided they played by and within the framework.
Results were spectacular, and Coke began to get its mojo back in no time.
Gandhi, Mandela, and Lee Kuan Yew practiced the idea of freedom within a
framework too. While their values and the values-based purposes they pursued
were nonnegotiable, for everything else they provided full freedom to their
people. As long as the values were adhered to, how results were obtained was
left to people to decide in their own way. Business leaders today need to do the
same.
It is common knowledge that large companies tend to get overly bureaucratic
over time. As business grows in size and scope, so does the number of
employees. This growth in business and headcount highlights the need for
consistent customer and employee experience, which in turn drives the
formulation of internal rules, policies, processes, and procedures. Generally
speaking, the larger the organization, the bigger the internal regulation or
bureaucracy. Initially these rules and policies bring about a sense of order,
transparency, and consistency and provide a backdrop for effective decision
making and behavior. However, there comes a point when the internal
bureaucracy becomes so cumbersome that the organization loses its agility and
fails to innovate or respond to the market fast enough. This is because many
companies, without realizing it, become too inwardly focused. While rules and
policies become outdated fairly quickly, many companies are slow to update or
change them in a timely manner. Eventually, many go into extinction because of
this inertia; of the original Fortune 500 list published in 1955, 87 percent were
gone by 2001.
In today’s market, speed is everything. A key question facing large
companies therefore is how to remain nimble and agile in an ever-changing
landscape. While all ecosystems require some rules for effective functioning,
rigid internal policies and processes get in the way of producing positive
outcomes. One way to solve for this dilemma might be to lead more with values
and less with rules because:
 The shelf life of values is much longer than that of rules and policies.
 Values tend to be broader than specific rules—they provide principles or
guidelines for behavior rather than strict boundaries.

 A company’s rules and policies usually stem from its values, or at least they
should. As long as employees do not violate the values while conducting
business, everything should be fine.
A simple example will illustrate the idea. A company’s rule book might say
that employees must show up at work punctually at 9 a.m. every day. To enforce
this rule, many companies introduced the punch card system, which records
arrival and departure times of employees. The same company’s values might
include things like:
 Think and act like an owner.
 Provide excellent customer service at all times.
 Strive for excellence to produce the best possible outcomes for the company.
It is no secret that with 24/7 connectivity, business has also become 24/7.
Employees in different time zones routinely work at odd hours of the night to
meet customer needs in another time zone, or to attend global conference calls.
So as long as someone is living the values diligently and delivering satisfactory
results, how important is the 9 a.m. punctuality rule? And what’s wrong with a
manager allowing his or her staff flexibility as long as there is no letup on
productivity, integrity, and overall results? It is ironic that on one hand
companies expect their employees to think and act like owners, yet on the other
they impose rules upon rules, leaving no room for creativity.
This example uses a relatively simple issue to demonstrate the freedom
within a framework idea, but the principle of values-based decision making and
performance management can be equally applied to complex business situations.
To begin with, it requires proactive focus on the part of management to make
sure that the “letter of the law” quadrant (Figure 2.6) does not get too big and
cumbersome over time (Figure 2.7).

FIGURE 2.6 Rules and Values Framework

FIGURE 2.7 Restrictive Framework (Boss)
In general, managers and companies will be much better off if they create a
culture where the “spirit of the law” quadrant is bigger (Figure 2.8). To
operationalize this, business leaders will need to sit down with their teams to
evaluate the current state of play within their organizations, and figure out what
actions, behaviors, and philosophy will make the “spirit of the law” box bigger.
We will come back to this idea again in Chapter 4 when we discuss how to
minimize supervision and maximize performance.

FIGURE 2.8 Freedom Within a Framework (Leader)
4. Listen, Learn, and Reflect Continuously
The work of leadership involves walking a very fine line. On one hand, the high-
speed, open source era requires a significant amount of top-down, autocratic
leadership. Leaders must be prepared to push hard on their vision despite initial
opposition and resistance. On the other hand, too much autocracy can make
leaders blind to the changing needs of society and lead to their downfall. So,
while they must practice autocratic leadership to drive results, they must make
every effort to listen carefully for how things might be changing around them,
and question themselves regularly about the efficacy of their values and purpose.
Leaders must repeatedly and regularly ask themselves the following questions:
 Are my values still relevant in today’s context?
 Will my purpose still create a better future?
 Why should I not pursue my purpose?

If, after careful listening and consideration, they remain convinced about
their values and purpose, they must continue along the chosen path. But they
must play devil’s advocate regularly to ensure that the path is still correct.
Listening with an open mind without being defensive is key here, because
effective listening leads to learning. Regular effective listening either reaffirms a
leader’s belief in her vision, or prompts her to change or adjust it. In the open
source era, leaders have a heavier onus to continue listening and learning.
However, the open source era also places heavy demands on leaders’ time. They
are bombarded with distractions, and in this busy-ness it is easy to slip into not-
listening-and-not-learning mode. To avoid this trap, leaders must make time for
regular silent reflection. I know this because I have been coaching C-level
executives around the world for over 20 years now. Driving in the heady fast
lane of corporate business, they become too busy to take a pause and reflect. In
order to keep up with their ever-increasing workload, they begin to multitask,
and do with less sleep. They think they are being efficient, but often realize too
late that they’ve made some fatal mistakes. They should talk to themselves
regularly to challenge their assumptions about the better future they want to
create. In Chapter 3, I will provide a framework on how to do this. The open
source era enables followers to disempower leaders with the same ease with
which they empower them in the first place. Only if people continue to believe
in a leader’s values and purpose will they allow him or her the right to top-down,
autocratic leadership. To retain the right to top-down leadership, leaders need to
retain the trust of their people. Only regular listening and learning combined
with honest reflection can enable them to do so.
5. Forgive More Often
Leadership is about creating a better future. Holding grudges and anger creates
negative energy, and bogs a leader down from her core work of creating that
better future. Forgiveness, on the other hand, frees up the leader to focus on the
positive work of leadership. Two quotes sum up why forgiveness is one of the
most important (yet perhaps the least understood) leadership tools.
“To forgive is to set a prisoner free and discover that the prisoner was you.”
—LEWIS B. SMEDES
“Forgiveness does not change the past, but it does enlarge the future.”
—PAUL BOESE

Many examples of forgiveness abound in history, but two of the three names
we’ve been discussing throughout this chapter stand out as those who conducted
greatest acts of leadership in the twentieth century—Gandhi and Mandela. In
fact, I believe they will remain evergreen examples of powerful leadership for
centuries to come. While punishment and revenge have been part of the natural
human condition ever since the dawn of humanity, these two men rocked the
history of the world by doing the exact opposite. It takes huge courage to
forgive. It is far easier to nurture anger and continue to seek revenge.
Forgiveness requires one to rise above the hurt and focus on a better future. In
the words of Gandhi, forgiveness is not for the weak. Only the strong can
forgive. Abraham Lincoln was another leader who understood this idea very
well. One of his many examples of forgiveness was appointing Edward Stanton
as his Secretary of War, even though a few years earlier Stanton had insulted and
humiliated Lincoln publicly. On unexpectedly seeing Lincoln in an Ohio
courtroom in 1855, Stanton asked “Where did the long-armed baboon come
from?” and described Lincoln as “a long, lank creature from Illinois, wearing a
dirty linen duster for a coat and the back of which perspiration had splotched
wide stains that resembled a map of the continent.” Lincoln was then ignored
and required to sit in the spectator’s section of the courtroom. According to one
of the Ohio lawyers, Lincoln was “pushed aside, humiliated and mortified.” Yet,
having been impressed by Stanton’s courtroom performance, when he needed a
really able Secretary of War, Lincoln had no hesitation in approaching Stanton.
When criticized about his unwillingness to fight his enemies, Lincoln would say,
“I destroy my enemies when I make them my friends.”
In the open source era, forgiveness is more important than ever. As I’ve said
before, in this age of speed only those who take risks and try new things will
succeed. If business leaders create an environment where it is not safe to take
risks, no one will try anything new, and eventually the business will suffer
because of a lack of innovation. In a forgiving culture, mistakes and failures are
seen as learning steps rather than acts that deserve punishment.
The five keys to positive autocratic leadership allow leaders to respond to
market conditions with lightning speed to create breakthrough success. Failure to
practice the five keys can easily turn autocratic leadership into a toxic
dictatorship. Fortunately, the open source era has a built-in check and balance
system for leaders today. Because followers and ordinary people are so
connected and empowered today, leaders have no choice but to stay acutely
focused on the five keys. This is why we call them naked autocrats rather than
just autocrats. The nakedness reminds leaders of their vulnerability and keeps

them honest to the ideas discussed in this chapter. This is not to suggest that
bosses today don’t ever cross the line toward dictatorship. They do. But the open
source era will not allow them to get away with it for too long. Only real leaders
(as against bosses) understand the delicate naked autocrat dance of leadership.
Only real leaders succeed in creating a better future.
Dr. Sanduk Ruit—Nepal
Sushma Limbu was only eight years old when she hurt her eye while playing on
the fields in the village near Panchthar district, Nepal. Her parents dismissed her
injury as a simple scratch; even if they had wanted to do more, the nearest
hospital was several days walk away and there were no health clinics nearby. But
soon little Sushma was unable to see through her left eye. No longer able to
ignore the condition, her parents frantically took the little girl from one hospital
to another across eastern Nepal seeking treatment, only to be told repeatedly that
there was no cure.
Fifty-year-old Thuli Maya Thing has struggled with life and caring for the
needs of her family since losing her eyesight. She is no longer able to fetch
firewood, collect water, or cook. In numerous attempts to continue with her
regular routine, Thuli has suffered painful falls and repeatedly burnt herself on
the stove. Life has become unbearable with the loss of income coupled with days
having to go hungry, due to her inability to work. She longs to see her children
and husband and participate fully in her home life again.
Sudip recently married Kamala, but he has never truly seen his wife’s face.
Sudip’s eyes are clouded with the milky color of cataract, and all he has been
able to see in the last seven years are shapes and shadows. Both husband and
wife have walked for two days through the foothills of the Himalayas, carrying
only a blanket for warmth, in search of treatment and a life beyond blurry
outlines and hazy silhouettes.
Blindness in poor and remote regions of the world such as the Nepal
Himalayas is not just a medical condition but a problem with dire consequences
for sufferers. Basic survival can be seriously compromised without strong feet
and sharp sight. In the Himalayas, prolonged exposure to the sun renders those
who live in higher altitudes vulnerable to damage from its ultraviolet rays. By
the early 1990s, limited access to medical care, malnutrition, low water quality,
and a lack of sanitation had already left more than 100,000 in the Himalayan
region suffering from cataract, a preventable blindness. The poor and elderly

bore the most of its cruel effects, and without hope of a cure, most had accepted
it as part of their unfortunate fate.
This devastating situation would have continued and worsened but for one
man who decided not to accept it as fate. Unlike many in Asia and Africa who
have become desensitized to the abject poverty around them, he felt deeply
about the situation and decided to do something about it. A leader was born! He
is Dr. Sanduk Ruit, an ophthalmologist dubbed the “God of Sight” and regarded
as a hero in his home country of Nepal. I met Ruit in 2016 and was mesmerized
by his story. Among other things, I particularly appreciated how well he has
blended social cause with business. He has gained worldwide recognition for his
pioneering form of cataract surgery that requires no stitches and can be
performed at a fraction of the cost of the normal procedure. Known as the Nepali
technique, this viable method of removing cataracts has restored vision to scores
of people living in poverty not only in Nepal, but across the world. And Ruit did
not wait to strike it rich or secure his own future before dedicating his life to
helping the poor. Today, he runs a profitable global business that restores sight to
thousands each year and exports low-cost lenses to 30 countries. I am often
asked if one has to choose between high pay and higher purpose. The answer is
no, not always. There is nothing wrong with desiring prosperity. If one can find a
purpose bigger than oneself, and still create wealth, prosperity, and fame for
oneself, what’s wrong with that? Sanduk’s story is a perfect example of blending
both needs. Besides combining high pay and higher purpose so successfully, all
along his journey he has had to practice the five keys of positive autocracy
described in this chapter.
Early Life and Education
Sanduk was born in 1955 to uneducated parents in Olanchungola, northeast
Nepal, a poor and remote mountain area. His father, a salt trader, prioritized his
children’s education. Sanduk vaguely recalls holding his weeping mother’s
hands at age seven, when he and his father started on a long journey to the
nearest school more than a week away. Having walked for days over the
mountains to Darjeeling, India, he was left to study at St. Robert’s, a missionary
school. “It was very tough, very lonely. Between the ages of 7 and 13, I think I
went home only twice,” he says. Sanduk understood from an early age that he
was perceived as a “backward lad” from the remote mountains, and was
determined to work extremely hard to prove himself, spending long hours bent
over his books and working on homework by the light of a candle. Sanduk’s

drive to work hard was greatly driven by the devastating loss of his sister. He
channeled his grief into his studies. With memories of his late sister on his mind,
he sat for the most important entrance examination of his life. This son of a salt
trader, from a poor distant village in Nepal, scored so highly that he earned a
scholarship to one of India’s most prestigious medical colleges, King George’s
Medical College in Lucknow.
The Trigger Toward a Path of Service
Sanduk’s firm resolve to pursue a career in medicine was based on a simple but
heartfelt idea. He believed that people should not be blinded, maimed, or
sickened because of poverty. From a family of six children he had lost three
siblings to what are considered treatable conditions, including, most
devastatingly, the painful death of his 15-year-old sister Ying La to tuberculosis.
Her passing had such a deep impact on him that he struggled with the loss for a
long time. “Unacceptable, unacceptable, unacceptable,” Sanduk said to himself
repeatedly as he reflected on his siblings’ deaths. “Why?” he kept asking,
because he knew they didn’t have to die. If they had had access to the medical
resources available so easily in the rest of the world, they might still be alive
today. “We ran door-to-door like refugees trying to find a doctor who could cure
her. I didn’t want anyone to suffer the same fate as my sister,” he has said, when
describing his commitment to medical studies.
That painful experience shed immediate light on the path ahead. After
graduating with a general medical degree, Ruit was called to study
ophthalmology while working as a medical officer on Nepal’s northern borders.
“In every village, I’d find people blinded by cataracts living like animals,
actually worse than animals,” he says. Thousands and thousands of people lived
in dark huts, resigned to their fate. It was here that Ruit knew cataract surgery
would restore their humanity, and made eradicating curable blindness caused by
cataracts, regardless of one’s ability to pay, his mission in life. Establishing
Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology in 1994, he provides cheap, efficient, and,
more important, world-class eye care to the people of Nepal—half for a fee, half
gratis. Tilganga also manufactures tiny lenses used in cataract surgery for $3
compared to $200 in the West, trains countless eye surgeons, and implements
eye health programs in many parts of the world. For those unable to access the
hospital, Ruit and his team run mobile eye camps, trekking through remote and
mountainous areas for days, helping the poor, weak, and isolated to see again.
All this is possible due to his groundbreaking, stitch-free surgical “Ruitectomy”

cataract technique.
Swimming Against the Tide
“Slicing through someone’s eyeball with steady hands was hard not to watch, as
much as you wanted to look away,” said the 101 East team from broadcaster Al
Jazeera, who observed the “God of Sight” in action in 2014. The team watched
intently as Ruit removed a cataract and inserted an artificial lens, restoring sight
in minutes. It was like a miracle unfolding. This revolutionary technique came
about in 1986 when Ruit worked alongside his longtime friend and mentor Fred
Hollows, the renowned Australian ophthalmologist acclaimed for his efforts to
provide quality healthcare to the underprivileged. Ruit studied with Dr. Hollows
for 14 months in Australia. After the study program, and until his death in 1993,
Hollows was instrumental in supporting the Nepalese surgeon’s fearless goal to
provide world-class healthcare in his home country.
Hollows was also a pillar of support in battling resistance from the
international medical fraternity over Ruit’s new cataract surgery technique.
While they were together at a conference, Ruit was met with a rude awakening
as he presented his findings and argued for a radical change in the way the world
medical community fought cataract disease. “You’re wasting our time, this is
nonsense” and “It’s only logical to work with techniques that have been proven
in the field” were some of the many harsh comments that were hurled against
him on the podium. These reactions came from the world’s most respected
authorities in eye care. He recalls his blood pounding in his temples as he
responded, “Would you let your own mother or father be operated on with a
technique twenty years out of date? Are you saying the millions of poor deserve
less than you or I? Are you saying they are children of a lesser God?” as he
walked off the podium and out the door.
Nothing could break his spirit. The Sydney Morning Herald has described
him as the maverick who refused to allow a sceptical medical establishment to
get in the way of his dream in providing high-quality affordable eye surgery to
the developing world. This was no matter of compromise, nor was it an agenda
for consensus. With the clock ticking, Ruit understood that the stakes were too
high in view of the number of lives affected by this leading cause of blindness.
With boldness, he forged ahead with his new method of treating cataract amidst
huge criticism. Being autocratic to his values and purpose, he remained humble
and empathetic with people, thereby skilfully mastering the dance of the naked
autocrat. An unshakeable spirit is only possible when you know unreservedly

that you are on to something larger than yourself, something that would make a
huge and lasting difference to humanity—that was the clarity of vision Sanduk
Ruit possessed. Nearly two decades forward, the technique once condemned by
the international medical community has not only transformed the lives of
millions, most of whom live in the developing world, it has now spread
worldwide with thousands of doctors being trained in the technique, including
U.S. military surgeons who were sent to Nepal to learn under Ruit’s tutelage.
The Road Less Traveled
Truth be told, Ruit was always aware of the many lucrative alternatives available
to him. With his talent and skills, the world was at his feet. Early in his career, he
was offered the opportunity to serve as physician to the Sultan of Oman. It was
an offer laced with tempting rewards including a home, driver, and cook of his
own. A path of less resistance would also have been to stay on in Australia
where he had trained as a specialist, or to move to the United States or India.
Despite the many powerful incentives in that direction, Ruit remained committed
to his sole mission and driving purpose, grounded on his values of compassion
and love.
He is the recipient of many awards, and the subject of several books and
films. But his fame is not what makes him great. The recognition is a by-product
of his leadership energy, not the purpose of it. His real motivation comes from
the inner joy he experiences each time he restores a patient’s sight. “Magnificent,
highly emotional and energizing,” is how Ruit describes the moment when
surgical patches are peeled away from once-blinded eyes and patients see the
world again. “I am a mortal being after all. I have to do what I do best to give
people a better shot at life. I have to do it before my time comes,” says the
radiant, down to earth, world-renowned eye surgeon, Dr. Sanduk Ruit.
As you can imagine, being a positive autocrat is risky, lonely, and often
unpopular. Another challenge is to make sure the positive autocracy does not
inadvertently slip into blind or brutal dictatorship, which is why key 4 (listen,
learn, and reflect continuously) is critically important. But in today’s open
source era, it might be the only way to lead effectively. Howard Schultz of
Starbucks, John Mackey of Whole Foods, Steve Jobs of Apple, and Jeff Bezos of
Amazon are just some examples of corporate leaders that have skillfully
practiced positive autocracy. The question is, how to develop enough inner
strength to weather the loneliness, unpopularity, and inherent risks of leading in

this way? The answer lies in discovering true and authentic leadership energy—a
concept we will explore in great detail in the next chapter.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 Speed is everything in the open source era.
 Contrary to conventional wisdom, a top-down, autocratic style of leadership
might be more suited in current times.
 A large proportion of leaders through history have in fact been autocratic.
 While autocratic leadership is required in today’s age of speed, thanks to 24/7
connectivity and social media, leaders stand completely exposed and naked.
 The only way to use autocratic leadership is to practice the five keys:
1. Earn the right to use autocratic leadership.
2. Be autocratic about values and purpose while remaining humble,
respectful, and considerate with people.
3. Provide “freedom within a framework.”
4. Listen, learn, and reflect continuously.
5. Forgive more often.
Questions for Reflection
1. What is your style of leadership? Is it working?
2. What do you need to do in order to make your leadership more
effective?

3. Do you agree with the need for top-down, autocratic leadership? If
so, how can you practice all or some of the five keys of positive
autocracy?
* See Appendix for country by country snapshots and an overall description of the research methodology.

CHAPTER 3
Leadership Energy, Not
Competencies
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

T
he human race has made tremendous progress in the last 200 years in almost
every endeavor. Engineers today are significantly more knowledgeable and
capable as compared with only a few decades ago. The same is true for
scientists, doctors, lawyers, and almost every other profession. Our knowledge,
experience, and application has steadily improved over time. But in this era of
rapid progression, are we producing more great leaders? Sadly, the answer is no.
In recent years, I’ve seen many CEO surveys (PwC, Harvard, DDI, and the
Conference Board to name just a few) that report a shortage of great leadership
talent as one of their top challenges. Despite so much progress in other fields and
the billions spent every year on leadership development, why are we not getting
better at leadership?
In fact, the dearth of leadership talent was reported throughout the 1980s and
even earlier—an era that could be considered steadier times. If the state of
leadership was not enough then, how can we hope to face the challenges of
today’s uber-connectivity and uber-population? As we saw in Chapter 1, in the
twenty-first century exciting opportunities and daunting challenges exist side by
side. Be it finance, healthcare, food production, energy, or water, we need new
rules for the new reality that is unfolding as we speak. Now more than ever
before, traditional models of leadership will not be enough.
So, what has been and remains the problem with leadership? It begins with
the way we define and understand the word itself. We’ve created several myths
around it that need to be busted, the first of which (democratic leadership style is
best) we discussed at length in the last chapter. Here are a few more:
Myth 2: Followership = Leadership
For far too long, we’ve been confusing followership with leadership. What
we’ve been calling leadership is nothing of the sort. Let me explain.
Confusing leadership with followership begins early. Parents love children
who listen and obey. Kids learn quickly that the way to be rewarded is to comply
with their parents’ wishes. From an early age, we learn to follow—and are
rewarded for our followership behavior.
In school and college, teachers love students who do what they are told.
Anyone who asks too many questions or wants to do something out-of-the-box is
generally frowned upon. Even Thomas Edison, the inventor of the phonograph

and the light bulb, was thrown out of school for asking too many questions. I
will never forget an elective course I took during my MBA program on
International Relations. It was about U.S.-Russia (then U.S.S.R) relations during
the Cold War. Our professor had a very unique take on the relationship and
balance of power between the two countries, and most of the class did not agree
with him. When it came to writing term papers (on which the course grade
would largely depend), the professor assured us that he did not expect us to agree
with him. “I’ve given you my deductive reasoning as to why I believe what I do,
and I need you to do the same. You don’t have to agree with me. I will not
penalize you for your political opinion. All I want to see is good reasoning and
basis for your opinion. So please feel free to think independently and write what
you really want to,” he assured us repeatedly. Luckily, a senior student who had
taken the same course in the previous year told me to ignore the professor’s
assurances and write exactly what I had heard in class. I did, and I earned an A
grade. However, I was one of only a handful of students who received an A in
that class. All those who “thought independently” and “wrote what they really
wanted to” received B’s and C’s.
In large companies, when you ask employees what they want from their
boss, they usually list hygiene factors such as caring, listening, kindness, and
flexibility. In other words, employees state what they “want,” which is not
necessarily what they “need.” So, bosses quickly become pleasers (another form
of following), particularly if their leadership performance is measured by
employee surveys. I have seen far too many bosses in my career who over time
became masters of pleasing their subordinates and “gaming” the surveys. One
senior executive I know of at a large international bank was on the verge of
getting fired because of consistent low scores on his employee surveys. Sensing
that he had to turn the situation around to save his job, he devised a six-month
plan of engaging with his team in a way that convinced them he was really
turning the corner for the better. To no one’s surprise, his scores showed a
remarkable improvement in the next survey and he kept his job. Yet amongst the
casualties of this exercise was the abandonment of a sorely needed delayering
exercise, and rescoping a key project that would have involved some disruption
in the normal working pattern of the group. Both of these had a negative impact
on the organization as a whole. And the worst part is, this executive abandoned
the two initiatives while being fully aware of the fact that he was acting against
the larger interest of his bank.
Even in boardrooms followership is rewarded in the name of leadership.
When a CEO presents a bold new idea or vision, the first question the board

typically asks is, “Where’s the McKinsey report showing that others have done
this successfully?” Very few projects are approved without best-practice
benchmarking and proof.
Wherever you look, leadership is confused with followership. There was a
time when best practice replication was enough to lead. If you could be the first
to transfer best practice from one part of the world to another, you would be a
successful leader because information moved slowly. Today, with the
democratization of knowledge and the instant spread of information in the open
source era, best practice replication is no longer enough. Winners need to invent
“next practices,” and do so faster than others.
Myth 3: A Position of Authority = Leadership
Confusing authority for leadership is perhaps the biggest myth of leadership, and
the real culprit is the dictionary. If you look up the word leader and compare the
definition with the word boss in the same dictionary, you will find that the two
definitions are remarkably similar, if not identical. We automatically assume that
the president or prime minister is the leader of his or her country, or that the
CEO is the leader of his or her company. We also assume that in order to lead
effectively, one needs to be empowered with the right amount of authority.
Position and title go hand in hand with how we currently define and understand
leadership.
Yet in more than two decades of studying leadership I have found nothing
further from the truth. Another quick look at three of the most powerful
twentieth-century leaders—Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, and Martin
Luther King Jr.—should put to rest all notions about the connection between
authority and leadership. Coming from Asia, Africa, and the United States
respectively, they were all powerful leaders whose lives will continue to inspire
generations to come, but none consistently held any officially recognized
position. Gandhi never held political office, and had no title or authority given to
him by law throughout his lifetime. Mandela was president of South Africa for a
few years toward the end of his life, but spent the majority of his younger years
in prison. King too did not enjoy a big position or title, yet he occupies a place of
pride in the history of humankind. What does that say about great leadership and
the need for authority? What made them powerful leaders was certainly not their
title, position, or authority given to them through public office. East or West,
what made them leaders was who they were, what they stood for, and most

important, what they chose to do or not do. In this sense, everyone can be a
leader well before they are given formal authority. Authority is given, but
leadership must be taken.
In my seminars, I often ask participants if they think being a boss and a
leader is the same thing. Wherever I ask in the world, the answer is always a
unanimous “No.” I then ask whether every boss is a leader, and again I hear a big
“No.” Finally, I ask if one needs to be a boss in order to be a leader, and again I
get a unanimous “No.” Yet outside the classroom, many of these same people
complain bitterly about how helpless they are, and why they cannot be good
leaders without adequate empowerment and authority. I cannot tell you how
many senior people I’ve met—and by “senior” I mean people in supposedly
powerful positions—who’ve expressed helplessness because of what they
consider to be inadequate formal authority and power. A few years ago, this
phenomenon prompted me to write a piece called “Powerful Victims” for
Forbes.com in which I described how some people feel helpless despite holding
powerful positions. Think about it. Do you know of someone who became a
leader because of the power and authority bestowed upon him or her? And do
you know a great leader who failed because of inadequate authority? If anything,
you will instead find plenty of examples where power corrupted people,
absolutely!
“But this is in total contradiction to the case we made for top-down
autocratic leadership in the last chapter,” you might think. But if you look
carefully, you will find no contradiction whatsoever because when you practice
positive autocracy, you don’t need to use formal power and authority. As we will
see later in this chapter, real leadership depends on self-empowerment. Stay
tuned.
Myth 4: Leaders Are Born, Not Made
Another of my favorite things to do in my seminars is to ask participants why
there are so few great leaders as compared to great scientists, engineers, or
accountants. Invariably, someone in the audience always brings up the issues of
genetics and heredity. I hear things like:
 Great leaders have something inborn in them that others don’t.
 Great leaders are blessed with certain traits, personality, or charisma that
makes them more suitable for leadership.

How I wish this were true, and how I wish I could prove it. Why? Because if
I could prove that leaders are born, not made, we could pretty much shut down
the multibillion dollar a year (estimates range from $30 billion to $80 billion)
leadership development industry. Imagine how many hungry people we could
feed with the money saved. Alas, no matter how much I tried, I could find no
such proof. What I found instead is that leaders are self-made. I also found that
great leadership has nothing to do with shallow external symbols of personality
and charisma. Instead it has everything to do with character, which is deep and
internal.
Consider just one example. It is commonly believed that good salespeople
are either “rather extraverted” or “very extraverted,” yet there is barely any
research evidence supporting that belief. While there is research that explains
why extraverts might have an advantage in sales, studies that try to prove a
relationship between extraverted personalities and sales success have shown
conflicting results. A meta-analysis of 35 studies of more than 3,800 salespeople
found that the correlation between extraversion and sales performance was
essentially zero (0.07, to be exact). Far more intriguing is research by Professor
Adam Grant of the Wharton School of Business. Grant’s findings (see Figure
3.1) reveal that contrary to popular belief, sales performance is highest not
among extraverts but “ambiverts,” or individuals that exhibit features of both an
extravert and an introvert (the term was coined by Kimball Young in his book
Source Book for Social Psychology in 1927). Ambiverts achieve greater sales
productivity because they can express sufficient assertiveness and enthusiasm to
persuade and close a sale, but are more inclined to listen to customers’ interests
and less likely to appear too excited or overconfident. So, in simple terms and
contrary to conventional dogma, extreme extraverts don’t make the most
successful salespeople, and it’s the same in leadership. Good leaders and bad
leaders come in all personality types. There is no ideal personality profile in
determining leadership potential.

FIGURE 3.1 Sales Revenue by Levels of Extraversion. Grant’s findings: The
strong introverts (the people represented on the left of the chart’s horizontal axis,
around 1 and 2) weren’t very effective salespeople. No surprise there. But the
strong extraverts (those over to the right, around 6 and 7) weren’t much better.
The chart denotes that those who fared the best—by a wide margin—were in the
modulated middle.
If you make a list of your top 10 most admired leaders in history, you will
find that they had very different personalities. No one personality type can be
associated with good or bad leadership. You will also find that not all of them
had charisma. In other words, leadership is personality and charisma agnostic.
Yet the leadership development industry has a subindustry of psychometric
personality testing within it, which is built upon that misinformed belief. Our
potential clients frequently ask which assessments we include in our programs
before awarding leadership development work to us. The look on their faces
when we say none is worth a million bucks. They can hardly believe what they
hear!
To finish the argument about whether leaders are born or made, I tend to play
with words and tell my audiences, “Yes, a leader in you is born, but not at the
time of your biological birth. The leader in you is born when two things happen
to you simultaneously. First, you feel deeply about the inadequacies of current
reality, and second, you decide to do something about it.” Both must occur

together for leadership to surface. And they usually happen at a point in time
much later than one’s biological birth date. As I will explain shortly, in order to
find one’s leadership potential, one has to live life awake.
Myth 5: Leadership Can Be Learned Through Case
Studies, Role Plays, and Competency Models
Much of the $30 billion to $80 billion global spend on leadership development is
spent on developing competency models, writing and discussing case studies,
and doing copycat role plays in training programs. The competency modeling
approach came into vogue during the 1980s and has been popular ever since.
The basis of the approach is that the best predictor of future success is past
successful behavior. So, senior successful leaders are interviewed and quizzed to
make a list of competencies that made them successful within the context of
their company. The competencies are further broken down into specific
behaviors. A model (diagram) is typically drawn up, and much of leadership
training and performance measurement systems are designed to encourage future
leaders to exhibit the same behaviors that made yesterday’s leaders successful.
Many HR consulting firms offer services to design leadership competency
models “customized for your unique context and strategy.” But in a world where
business models become obsolete within months, how can this rearview mirror–
gazing approach create tomorrow’s leaders?
Similarly, business schools boast of their great invention of the case study
method and claim that the best way to learn leadership is to read and discuss
other people’s mistakes. Some schools rely solely on the case method for
teaching just about anything. I have been to several of these courses, and all you
do day after day is read and discuss cases. It is a teaching method that is great for
professors and students alike. Professors do not need to prepare much before a
class, and can often delegate class discussions to teaching assistants. Participants
of executive education programs, who typically want to get away with minimal
work, like them because all they have to do in class is participate in a discussion.
But does true learning really take place? For those of you who’ve attended
leadership courses at prestigious business schools, I have a question. How many
of those cases do you remember? And what were the learnings? When I ask
people what they loved the most about such business school courses, they almost
always say the same thing—the networking opportunity with other participants!
You don’t learn leadership by reading other people’s mistakes. You learn

leadership through your own defining moments, making your own mistakes, and
sometimes by falling down multiple times and learning how to stand up again.
Another of my pet peeves with leadership training is role plays. Most people
like formulas, because formulas make life easier. So, the leadership development
industry has created formulas of its own. The teaching method goes something
like this. You get a lesson on greatness from, say, Jack Welch. No doubt it will
involve reading and discussing cases on how he led GE during his time as CEO.
After the case discussion, the teacher will typically offer a three-or-four-step
formula summarizing Jack Welch’s approach to handling people or situations.
Once the formula is unfolded, the teacher breaks the group into triads and asks
two people to role-play the formula, receiving feedback from the third person
who acts as observer. The goal is to make you practice copycat formulas so that
you too can become a great leader like Jack Welch. But the last time I checked
the dictionary, copying somebody else’s behavior was followership, not
leadership!
It amazes me why even after so many decades of low ROI, no one questions
these methods of leadership development. Why don’t the smart people who sign
off on the annual $30 billion to $80 billion collective global spend question the
efficacy of such methods? As Barbara Kellerman of Harvard and Jeffrey Pfeffer
of Stanford agree, if they haven’t produced leaders in all these years, how in the
world will they do so in the open source era where the need for leadership is
greater than ever? It is time to reject these myths and develop a new way of
thinking about leadership. To begin doing that, consider the following three
stories.
Norma Bastidas—Canada
Imagine being an 11-year-old who is raped by the disabled family member you
are caring for, and then being routinely sexually assaulted for years afterward.
Imagine being desperately poor at 19 and promised a lucrative career in a
foreign land only to realize on arrival you have been sold to sex slavery. Imagine
being thousands of miles away from home, constantly drugged and raped with
no one to come to your aid because you were marked as a prostitute. And years
later, imagine finding out that your little son was going blind. What would you
do?
This is the story of Norma Bastidas, whom I first saw on CNN and finally

met in November 2016. What I learned listening to her is an unparalleled
example of the power of the human spirit.
Born to a desperately poor family in Mazatlán, western Mexico in 1967,
Norma’s father passed away when she was 11 and left her mother alone with a
family of five children. Each member of the impoverished family had to work to
support the family, including Norma. Her nightmare began when the family
moved away from their gang-ridden neighborhood to be closer to extended
relatives for support. Some family members took advantage of Norma’s
vulnerability. Her blind grandfather, whom she was providing care to, raped her.
Deep down she knew that what had happened was terribly wrong, but, young
and afraid, she kept silent for two years. “The first time I was raped, I was 11
years old. It continued until my midtwenties by different perpetrators,” she says.
Nobody ever did anything to stop it or to help her, and feeling alone and
helpless, Norma turned to alcohol for solace.
Despite the trauma, she managed to finish high school and joined the
workforce to support her family despite her dreams of going to university.
Several years later, the 19-year-old was noticed and offered a job as a model in
Japan. “I remember my mom saying, ‘I’m afraid, but I can’t stop you,’ ” she
recalls. Despite her fears of sending her daughter across the world, her mother
felt this was the only chance for Norma to have a better life. Norma saw this as a
golden opportunity, her only chance of getting out from a life of poverty and
years of abuse and a way to provide for her family and see her university dreams
fulfilled. Only her second time on a plane, she arrived in Tokyo with great
excitement, convinced that this would be the moment her life would change.
On arrival, she was housed in luxury hotels with the other “models.” From
the best hotels to moving around in expensive cars, the parade of luxury blinded
her from the early signals of deception and danger. Finally, one night at the club,
forced to display herself in a Playboy bunny costume, she realized she had been
sold to the club. Trapped with no money and no passport, she was told that she
owed the agency a huge sum of money and would have to repay the large debt
by providing escort services to men. Here was a hopeful 19-year-old girl,
dreaming of a life she never had, eager to break away from the dark years of
growing up in Mexico but instead confronted with the reality of being tricked
and forced into a life of sex slavery. “You become a child with no control of
anything,” she says. Once again, she turned to alcohol to suppress her pain.
After enduring several years of hell in Japan and with help from a nearby
school, Norma managed to escape. She later moved to Vancouver, Canada,
where she married and had two beautiful sons, Hans and Karl. However, her

marriage broke up and she became a single mom. In 2006, Norma was once
again stuck in a nightmare. Her 11-year-old son Karl received shattering news
that he had an incurable eye condition that would see his vision slowly
deteriorate to blindness. He was diagnosed with cone-rod dystrophy, a
progressive condition with no cure. The news was unbearable for 38-year-old
Norma, then a struggling single parent in Calgary, Canada. Just when she
thought things could not get any worse as she was trying to juggle work and
staying home with Karl, she lost her job. Lying in bed, at breaking point and not
knowing what to do, she put on an old pair of trainers and decided to go for a
walk. On that cold September night, that walk became a run and marked the
beginning of her journey of release.
Adversity has been a recurring theme in Norma’s life, and she is no stranger
to struggle. Karl’s condition was only one of the many tragedies she had
endured, but it was the single event that triggered her running. This time, while
dealing with the devastating news of Karl’s eye disease and having lost her job,
she decided to break the cycle of pain by turning to running instead of alcohol.
Running became a form of release and a symbolic sign of her inner strength and
endurance. “I just became an incredible runner because of the incredible amount
of stress that I had to manage. It gave me something that I could control. I started
running at night because I didn’t want my family to hear me crying,” she told
me.
“I couldn’t control the rate of progression of my son. I couldn’t control
whether they were going to fire me again. But I could lace up and train,” she
says. She was determined to do something that advocated publicly for victims of
sexual abuse and human trafficking, and pushed past her limits of endurance. In
2014, she crushed the world record for the longest triathlon in history. She
covered 3,762 miles in only 65 days following a route known for human
trafficking from Mexico to Washington, DC. Like the journey of her life, the
triathlon was plagued with roadside accidents, punishing waves, attacks from sea
creatures, and rough weather. She never gave up and pushed forward to send a
message. “I have a son who’s losing his sight . . . I’m an example to him when I
tell him it’s hard, but it gets better if you continue.” Norma’s reason for pushing
through her physical limits is also fueled by the desire to send a message to other
survivors of human trafficking. “I can’t undo what has been done. But by living
large, I’m empowering every single victim. Somebody who was once living in a
nightmare is now living out her dreams. That’s what a world record is—it’s a
dream.” That has become Norma’s underlying purpose as she continues to
dedicate her athletic feats and life toward raising funds and awareness for the

causes close to her heart—eradicating avoidable blindness and putting an end to
human trafficking worldwide.
When I met Norma in November 2016 and interviewed her for our website, I
asked her why she decided to take destiny in her own hands and do something
about it when her son was losing his sight. I probed, “Why not earlier when you
were going through so much yourself? Why didn’t you decide to do something
big then?” Here’s what she said. “You know, to pursue something big, and not be
scared doing it, you have to have a purpose larger than yourself.” Clearly, the
power of purpose propelled her to keep going. Even the fact that she did not
know how to swim was not enough to deter her from the world record target.
She learned to swim just months before she attempted the triathlon.
In business and profession, the same applies. If you’re trying to create
change, you will encounter resistance. One sure way to keep going in the face of
stiff resistance is to have a purpose greater than yourself. Belief in a greater
purpose strengthens leaders to keep going. For instance, Jeff Bezos’s objective of
retailing books online (on Kindle) was not just to make money. He wanted to
promote the habit of long-form reading by making every book ever published
available to readers anywhere in the world within 60 seconds.
Muhammad Yunus and Grameen Bank—Bangladesh
It was the 1970s. Muhammad Yunus had just returned home to Bangladesh to
teach economics at Chittagong University, after completing his PhD at
Vanderbilt University in Tennessee. Bangladesh, a country still recovering from
a vicious war of independence that had destroyed much of its infrastructure and
productivity, had been hit with a terrible famine, and people were dying of
hunger. When he saw the extent of the devastation caused by the famine, Yunus
realized, “When people are dying of hunger, and you are a young economics
teacher teaching economic theory in the classroom, it does not make you feel
good. Because all your brilliant and elegant theories don’t seem to help the
people who are dying. And it’s death you cannot explain because it’s not caused
by disease, it’s just not having food to eat.”
While questioning the relevance of the grand economic theories he had been
teaching, he came face-to-face with the immediate needs of the hungry and the
desperation of the poor. He learned that the impoverished villagers had become
soft targets for loan sharks and money lenders, who charged exorbitant rates of
interest (usually over 10 percent per week) on their loans, which were usually

less than one U.S. dollar.
Yunus was deeply disturbed. He felt he couldn’t go on simply teaching
economic theories in the classroom while people outside campus were starving
to death, being cruelly harassed and controlled by loan sharks. He knew he had
to do something to make life a little better for the villagers in Jobra—it was time
to act!
Working with a student, Yunus took to the streets and traced everyone in
Jobra who was borrowing money from loan sharks. From a list of 42 names, the
total amount owing was around 856 Bangladeshi Taka. He lent 856 Taka
(roughly US$27) to the 42 villagers from his own pocket to help them pay back
their loans. It was the defining moment for Yunus—he felt happy about having
been able to help a few people in distress, but knew that his personal resources
were woefully inadequate to address the endemic problem of poverty. He
realized, “People were poor not because they were stupid or lazy. They worked
all day long, doing complex physical tasks. They were poor because the financial
institutions in the country did not help them widen their economic base.” There
had to be a financially viable way to meet the credit needs of the poor in a way
that helped alleviate poverty, he thought.
He knew that charity was not the answer. “When we want to help the poor,
we usually offer them charity. Most often we use charity to avoid recognizing
the problem and finding the solution for it. Charity becomes a way to shrug off
our responsibility. But charity is no solution to poverty. Charity only perpetuates
poverty by taking the initiative away from the poor. Charity allows us to go
ahead with our own lives without worrying about the lives of the poor. Charity
appeases our consciences.”
Having experimented through an action research project at his university, he
learned and proved that lending small amounts to the poor could be a profitable
business for a bank. So, in 1976 Yunus approached the local branch of Janata
Bank, one of the largest government banks in Bangladesh, and pitched the idea
of small loans to the very poor. The bank manager rejected the idea at first,
saying, “The poor are illiterate and they can’t fill out the necessary forms. Plus,
they have no collateral.” After much effort and negotiation, Yunus finally
succeeded in securing a credit line from Janata Bank offering himself as
guarantor. He also acted as intermediary, filling out the necessary paperwork for
each loan. Against the advice of banks and government, he continued to give
“microloans” to villagers, eventually converting his project into the now well-
known, full-fledged microfinance bank named Grameen Bank in 1983.
Muhammad Yunus is often referred to as “the world’s banker to the poor.”

His life’s work has been to prove that the poor are also creditworthy, and in 2006
he received the Nobel Peace Prize. His revolutionary for-profit microcredit
system is estimated to have extended credit to more than seven million of the
world’s poor, most of them in Bangladesh, which remains one of the poorest
nations in the world. The vast majority of Grameen Bank beneficiaries are
women, and today Grameen has a presence all over the world. Amidst all the
critique and opposition that surrounds him, Yunus has remained firm in the
pursuit of his vision. He believes, “Poverty is the absence of all human rights.
The frustrations, hostility, and anger generated by abject poverty cannot sustain
peace in any society. To build stable peace we must find ways to provide
opportunities for people to live decent lives, fully equipped not only to take care
of him- or herself, but also to contribute to enlarging the well-being of the world
as a whole.”
Sheikh Mohammed Bin Rashid Al Maktoum—Dubai
To the amazement of the world, in 2016 the United Arab Emirates established
two new ministries of Happiness and Tolerance, and appointed two young
women to head each of them. They also expanded the remit of the existing
Ministry of Cabinet Affairs and rechristened it the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs
and the Future.
A Ministry of Tolerance in the Middle East? Who would have thought?
While it sounds a little New Age, it is in fact a monumental milestone in a region
known for turmoil, gender disparity, devotion to rulers, and minimal tolerance
for dissent. It is also a deliberate reaction by the UAE government to the recent
upheaval across the Middle East that was rooted in frustration about high-level
corruption and the lack of opportunity for average citizens, and spread across the
region through social media and mobile technology. The new ministries are
tasked with transforming information hierarchies and the power balance, and
creating open channels of communication, engagement, and empowerment—
especially between the government and hard-to-reach segments of society. His
Highness Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, vice president and prime
minister of the UAE and ruler of Dubai, tweeted about the new appointments, “I
am writing to send a message that governments in our region and elsewhere need
to revise their roles. The point is to empower people, not hold power over them.
Government, in short, should nurture an environment in which people create and
enjoy their own happiness.”

The announcements should not be surprising at all if you consider Sheikh
Mohammed’s track record in recent decades. The picture in Figure 3.2 says it all.
FIGURE 3.2 Dubai 1984 and 2014 (@GulfNews, Dubai)

Sheikh Mohammed is the visionary behind the conversion of Dubai from a
tiny fishing village to the bustling world city it is today, with ultramodern
facilities for transportation, healthcare, education, and entertainment. Both the
speed and extent of the transformation are breathtaking. The Sheikh’s Dubai
dream was conceived atop the Empire State Building in the 1960s when he
visited the United States as a young boy with his father. While his father had
already laid the foundations, it was Sheikh Mohammed who significantly
accelerated the execution after becoming the ruler of Dubai in 2006. When 60
Minutes reporter Steve Kroft asked him a few years ago why he was in such a
hurry to build in five years what most people build in a lifetime, he said, “Why
not! When you can have it in Europe, why can’t you have it here? I want the
highest standard of living for my people not just in the region but in the world. I
want them to have a better life now. I want them to go to better schools now. I
want them to have access to good healthcare now—not after 20 years!”
Compare the overall development of Dubai and the UAE with other
countries in the region (like Saudi Arabia), and it is easy to see that Sheikh
Mohammed is not just another monarch. As someone born into a royal family
and one of the richest people on earth, he really doesn’t need to do much. Yet he
is a workaholic, personally driving the evolution of Dubai. When asked about
Dubai’s problems during the 2008 economic crisis, he said, “It is a challenge,
and we will come through it. Anybody can lead when everything is all right. A
good leader comes about when there are challenges.” With the crisis now behind
him, Sheikh Mohammed continues to make his city bigger and better. The
October 2016 groundbreaking of what will be known as the Tower at Dubai
Creek Harbour is just one example. When completed in 2020, the Tower will be
the tallest building in the world, dwarfing Dubai’s own Burj Khalifa (the current
tallest building) by about 100 meters, and will boast rotating balconies, hanging
gardens, and other architectural wonders.
So, What Is Leadership After All?
To answer the question of what is leadership, let’s reflect on the stories above
and ask what these people were trying to do. In essence, they were each trying to
create something bigger and better than what already existed. They were so
moved by the inadequacies of current reality that they developed a burning
desire to create a better future against all odds. Rather than a position or title,
leadership is this burning desire to create a better future. Leadership does not

begin when one is promoted to a big position or when one wins an election.
Instead, it begins when one closes one’s eyes and clearly visualizes the better
future one wants to create. As Stephen Covey, Robin Sharma, and others have
said in different ways, all great things are created twice, first in the mind of the
leader and then in reality. Leadership is all about dreaming up a better future and
then simply getting started. It wasn’t Sheikh Mohammed’s oil wealth,
Mohammad Yunus’s privileged position, or Norma Bastidas’s charisma or
personality type that made them leaders. They are all leaders because they dared
to dream and got started. But doing so is not easy. While this is where leadership
begins, this is also the point where the leader’s troubles begin.
The moment you share your goal to create a different future with people
around you, you will begin to get resistance. As anyone who has tried knows
only too well, any attempts to change or create something new are met with
resistance. No matter how beautiful and strong the promise of a better future,
most people prize today’s certainty more than tomorrow’s uncertainty. Right
from the start of a leader’s journey to create a better future, her constant
companion is resistance. Active resistance, passive resistance, all kinds of
resistance. This then raises a critical question. What is the main ingredient of
leadership?
Leadership Energy
The main ingredient in leadership is leadership energy—the force within that
prevents real leaders from caving in when faced with even the most formidable
resistance. One must have a deep reservoir of intrinsic, almost spiritual kind of
inner energy in order to keep going in spite of the environment. The problem is
we humans are social beings, and most of us value society’s approval more than
anything else. So, when the resistance gets difficult, we give up. Sadly, as we
give up, we also give up the right to be called leaders. Real leaders find the
energy required to stay true to their dreams, just like the people you met in the
stories earlier. As I explained in Chapter 1, in today’s open source era, the need
to create a better future is greater than ever before.
So where does such leadership energy come from? What prevented Mandela
from giving up even during 27 years of imprisonment? In Too Many Bosses, Too
Few Leaders I explained that leadership energy is a function of two things:
clarity of values and clarity of purpose. When she gets crystal clear about a set of
deeply held values that move her, and develops an equally clear sense of

purpose, she discovers leadership energy. Now, whenever she feels like giving
up, she simply closes her eyes and visualizes the better future (purpose) she has
in mind, and that visualization energizes her again. Whenever she faces a
difficult crisis she asks herself, what would I do if I were to act in accordance
with my values? And the answer becomes clear.
Unfortunately, very few people have real clarity of values and purpose. Over
the years, I have asked hundreds of very senior and powerful people, what is
your purpose? With a few exceptions, most people struggle to answer the
question crisply. The usual response I get is something like, “Hmmm! That’s a
very deep question, I haven’t thought about it. No one has ever asked me this
before.” When I follow up with the values question, they usually walk up and
down the room a few times to buy time, then make up a list as they speak. To be
fair, these are difficult questions, and finding the answers takes a long time. But
there is still no reason why someone who calls himself a leader would not have
clarity of values and purpose. Unlike popular notions, leadership is not just a set
of skills that one learns in a classroom or by experience. Leadership is also not
what one does to other people. Leadership involves finding one’s leadership
energy—which is the values that drive an individual toward a clearly defined
purpose. Without leadership energy, there can be no leadership. People without
such clarity usually blame the environment for their lack of leadership.
So, the essence of real leadership can be summarized in five simple points:
1. Leadership is a burning desire to create a better future.
2. Creating or changing something usually meets with stiff resistance.
3. The difference between a leader and a nonleader is that the latter gives up
when faced with resistance.
4. In order to stay the course, the leader needs to uncover her long-lasting
leadership energy.
5. Leadership energy is made up of deep clarity of values and purpose.
As I will explain a bit later, it is only on the strength of such leadership
energy that a leader can master the naked autocrat dance we discussed in the last
chapter. It is time the leadership development industry moved away from look-
back competency models, case studies, personality assessments, and role plays
and instead started focusing on helping people find their leadership energy. It is
also time to clearly differentiate between leadership and boss-ship and to
redefine leadership along the lines we’ve discussed in this chapter.

So, what does this all mean for you and me? The first step is to get clear on
your values. As Figure 3.3 shows, one’s values form the basis of one’s identity.
They also are the reason why one acts or doesn’t. Energy, or the will to do
something, is produced at the intersection of values and day-to-day situations.
Any situation in life is either a match or a mismatch with one’s values. A
mismatch between values and the situation or environment produces negative
energy in the form of anger or sadness. A match produces positive energy in the
form of joy and happiness. As one’s awareness and clarity about deeply held
values increases, one begins to recognize one’s energy. As one begins to
recognize what one has more or less energy for, one can start looking for
purpose. If the energy produced in certain situations is so big that it does not
allow the person to stay still, it can lead to purpose. But for this to happen, deep
and honest reflection is required. For Mohammad Yunus, seeing so many poor
people suffering was a mismatch between his value of equality and the situation
at hand. He was angered and saddened by what he saw. The mismatch produced
enough energy for him to eventually start and run a successful microfinance
business. Sheikh Muhammad’s idea of creating a ministry of tolerance and
happiness, on the other hand, was driven by the positive energy he derived from
seeing his emirate prosper.
FIGURE 3.3 Sources of Leadership Energy

Deeply Held Values
I will come back to finding your purpose a bit later, but let’s look at values first.
I often ask my audiences for a show of hands if they are totally clear about their
top five deeply held values. Typically, a few hands go up each time I ask. I then
follow up with a trick question. Under what circumstances is it OK to
compromise one of your deeply held values? Most people easily fall into the trap
and give very creative answers like, “If it is good for my family, I’ll be willing to
compromise one of my values,” or “For the greater good of my country . . . .” I
call this a trick question because if you are willing to compromise your values
for a variety of reasons, then they are not deeply held values at all. True
leadership requires courage. Only unwavering conviction in your values gives
you courage needed to lead against resistance. As Mahatma Gandhi said,
“Strength does not come from physical capacity. It comes from an indomitable
will.”
So how can one identify one’s core values? Again, the short answer is deep
and honest reflection. But if it helps, let me share what I do to help people who
attend my leadership courses. I first ask them to list anything and everything that
is important to them. “There is no limit to your desires. List everything you
value and would like to have in your life,” I tell them. After giving them some
time to think and complete their lists, I pose an imaginary dilemma by telling
them that they can only have five values if they want to avoid spending the rest
of their lives in jail. So, they will need to give up everything in their list except
five things in order to remain free. Many people struggle at this stage. Let’s say
your initial list includes:
 Personal achievement/accomplishment
 Advancement
 Autonomy
 Balance
 Challenge
 Creating something new
 Fame
 Family happiness
 Financial security
 Health
 Independence
 Integrity

 Leisure
 Mastering a field/technique
 Recognition
 Respect
 Teamwork
 Helping others
How would you prioritize your top five? What would you give up? Remember,
in this imaginary dilemma, you need to give up the others for good in order to
remain free. Which five will you keep?
When they’ve finally boiled it down to the top five, I give them the final
step, which is to rank them in order of importance. Steps two and three get really
tough for some people, particularly if they haven’t thought along these lines ever
before. While doing the exercise, I remind them that the only way this exercise
will help them is if they are 100 percent honest with themselves. I ask them to
make their choices based on what they want for themselves, not based on what
they think looks good to others.
Emotional Integrity
You have no doubt heard and read about emotional intelligence. There is a whole
industry around the concept. Countless books, CDs, videos, assessments, and
training programs are available—take your pick. But you probably haven’t heard
the term emotional integrity, which I argue is much more important for
leadership than emotional intelligence, and must come first. Just like the myths
about leadership I discussed earlier, emotional intelligence is seen today as the
be-all and end-all of career success. According to generic literature, emotional
intelligence consists of two parts:
1. One must recognize and understand one’s own emotions, and regulate
them intelligently.
2. One must recognize and understand others’ emotions, and handle them
intelligently.
While this sounds perfectly logical, and not doing these two things can
certainly be highly detrimental, emotional intelligence is like personality or
charisma, a superficial skill. True leadership instead requires intrinsic strength of
character, and this is where emotional integrity comes in. Emotional integrity is

the courage to look into the mirror and acknowledge one’s deepest wants and
desires without using a societal lens. In essence, it is about 100 percent self-
honesty. If you value your own personal success above everything else, there is
nothing wrong with it. Just before takeoff, most commercial flights make
security announcements. In case of a drop in air pressure when wearing oxygen
masks becomes necessary, they tell passengers to secure their own mask before
helping others. Emotional integrity is a bit like that too. If you cannot make
yourself happy, you most likely cannot make others happy either. So, the
reflection on selecting one’s values must happen with full emotional integrity. As
I’ve emphasized before, leadership (creating a better future) involves facing
significant resistance, and being a naked autocrat is hard, lonely, and unpopular.
Only if one is totally clear about one’s values will one find the strength to make
tough decisions and keep going. And the best part is this: leaders who pursue a
better future amidst the stiffest of resistance actually derive a lot of personal
satisfaction and happiness while doing so. The very fact that they are fighting the
good fight and that they are working on something meaningful makes them
happy.
Again, as rare as clarity of values and purpose are, emotional integrity is
even more uncommon. We literally lie to ourselves even without realizing it.
Here’s a classic example. For over 10 years now, I’ve been asking people to
identify what’s most important to them. “What do you care about the most in
your life?” I ask. Can you guess the most common answer all across the globe?
Yes, that’s right—it is family. The majority of people say “family” regardless of
where this question is asked. But I know from experience that it is not true for a
lot of people. Sometimes when people say “family,” I ask them to show me their
diary for the last six months. Flipping through their calendar on their phones for
a few minutes, I return the phone saying they failed the diary test. Indeed, every
so often there is no proof in their calendars that family is the most important
thing in their lives. “But I work so hard just for the sake of my family. . . .”
comes the protest soon after I tell them that they failed the diary test. I tell them
they may be right, but urge them to go away and think deeply about the question
overnight with full emotional integrity and to see me the next morning. Many
have tears in their eyes when we meet again the next day.
In my own experience, as my awareness about my values and purpose
deepened, I realized that my work purpose—which is to wake up as many
individuals and organizations as possible to their full potential—is the most
important thing for me. Because of this clarity, I work long hours, travel
extensively, and often prioritize work over everything else. Strangely enough,

even though I am and will always be a long way from being perfect, this
realization has made me a better father, husband, and person than before. It has
also made me happier and comfortable in my own skin despite all my
weaknesses.
So, if it is not true for them, why do so many people say family is the most
important thing in their lives? Because it is the societally correct answer. I am
not saying family should not be first. All I am saying is that emotional integrity
must come before emotional intelligence if you want to find long-lasting
leadership energy. This values-finding exercise I just explained is a good starting
point, but don’t expect to find values clarity in one day. Getting clear about
values takes time. And even after you clarify your values, living them every day
without compromise is the real deal. Living one’s values creates conflict. But
real leaders embrace such conflict. They don’t run away from it.
From Values to Purpose
Once clear about a set of deeply held values, leaders must look to find their
purpose to complete the leadership energy equation. Again, finding that purpose
requires deep and honest reflection, but sadly, thanks to today’s 24/7
connectivity, we’ve become too busy to take pause. We have become too busy in
the business of busyness. Whenever we have a free moment, we fill it up with
browsing or messaging. For example, when you step into an elevator to go up a
few floors, if you didn’t enter the elevator with your eyes and hands on your
connectivity device, chances are you will switch it on the moment you take your
place amongst the strangers that ride up with you. Think about it: What’s the
first thing you do when you wake up? What’s the last thing you do before you
finally shut your eyes? If your answer is something other than browsing or
messaging on your phone, congratulations, you’re an original!
Nipun Mehta, founder of the Silicon Valley incubator ServiceSpace, likes to
say, “We are more connected to our devices than to other people. . . . We may
have thousands of friends on Facebook, but how many real friends do we have?”
He goes on to say, “Technology was supposed to bring us together, but we are in
the midst of a profound crisis of disconnection.” It is true. As we get more and
more attached to our devices and technology, we are getting increasingly
disconnected from people and even more disconnected from our inner selves.
When was the last time you spent 20 minutes silently gazing out of the window
reflecting upon your own life? When was the last time you took a pause to think
about who you are and what your purpose is? Even when we go for holidays, we

stress ourselves out with overplanning and the urge to pack in as much as
possible.
Fortunately, there is growing realization today that we need to take a pause.
Mindfulness is fast becoming a movement in the West. Unfortunately, even
though it was invented in the East thousands of years ago, most people there
have forgotten it in the business of busyness. East or West, to find our true
purpose and with that our leadership energy, we have to make time for reflection.
There are no shortcuts. To help you get started, I will now describe a powerful
reflection process about how you can move from values to purpose.
Discovering Your Leadership Energy by Living Life
Awake
Converting one’s deeply held values into fearless purpose is a process of
continuous reflection. You literally need to keep asking a set of questions until
your own authentic answers become fully clear. Before you start, let me warn
you that this will be frustrating and difficult, but if you get through to the end
you will empower yourself to live a life more satisfying and fulfilling than words
can ever describe. The process involves six bases of honest questioning and self-
reflection (Figure 3.4). The first base requires answering questions like what
makes me happy, what makes me sad, and what makes me angry.

FIGURE 3.4 Discovering Leadership Energy by Living Life Awake
Answers to questions on the first base may seem obvious at first glance, but
most people do not know them beyond the surface level. As you will recall from
the earlier section about values, energy is produced at the intersection of one’s
values and life situations. To recognize the extent of energy produced from
different stimuli or situations, you will need to be crystal clear about base two,
and quantify the level of pain or joy. Until they gain clarity about values and
purpose, most people associate happiness with material success and social status.
Unfortunately, even as they become immensely successful in the material and
social sense, happiness continues to elude many. As Bronnie Ware, a palliative
care nurse in Australia, found out after talking to dying patients over several
years, unless one reflects early in life about what is really important, one might
regret it later. In her global bestseller The Top Five Regrets of the Dying, she lists
the number one regret of the dying as, “I wish I had the courage to live a life true
to myself, not a life others expected of me.” Without reflection on what’s really
important, one gets trapped into a lifetime of chasing power and products, with
no guarantee of real happiness or feeling of true success. This is not to suggest

that material wealth is not a worthy goal. I am not preaching nonprofit work or
social volunteering here. What I am trying to emphasize is the need to be clear
about what one really cares about. If material wealth and success it is, so be it.
But it should not be the default answer without having reflected on the questions
deeply enough.
As you get clear about bases one and two, the third base asks, does the pain
or joy move me enough to want to create a better future? Here, one needs to
further analyse one’s sources of happiness, sadness, or anger, and ask: Do I
really want to do something about it? If the answer is not a strong yes, it means
answers to base one and two are not fully clear or are not strong enough to
convert energy into purpose. Only if the answer to base three is a very
convincing yes can one move on to base four. This process of going back to
bases one and two needs to be repeated until base three becomes a strong yes.
When it does, you move on to base four.
Base four now asks, who is the better future for? Here, emotional integrity is
really important. If the better future is just for yourself, so be it. If it is to serve
others, so be it. There are no right or wrong answers, there are only honest or
dishonest answers. Creating a better future just for yourself is also leadership—
self-leadership. You still have to develop a strong set of values and a values-
based purpose, and work hard until you achieve your goals. There is absolutely
nothing wrong with wanting to become the biggest rock star or tennis player in
the world. It requires a huge amount of discipline and leadership energy to keep
going even when the going gets really tough.
Whatever your answer to base four, base five asks you to close your eyes and
visualize the better future you want to create, and pretend that it is already here.
How does it feel? If it feels just nice but not ecstatic, again it means that you still
have room for greater clarity about bases one and two, and need to go back
there. Basically, what we are trying to do here is find out what you would really
want to spend the rest of your life doing, if there were no constraints to pursuing
such a path. If the feeling of excitement is so powerful that you cannot wait to
get started, you’ve probably earned the right to move to the sixth and final base.
Base six asks one last time if you are willing to face formidable resistance,
great uncertainty, and personal risk while pursuing the better future you have in
mind. Again, if the answer is not a resounding yes, you need to go back to bases
one and two and start over. Only when your perception of the reward of a better
future is greater than the pain and risks associated with getting there can you
move forward. Only then will you have found fearless purpose. Again, you will
need emotional integrity more than emotional intelligence to do so.

I am often asked how long this journey takes, and what is a good “better
future” to pursue. These are impossible questions to answer because it takes
different people very different lengths of time to find their values and purpose, if
they find them at all. As for what’s the right purpose, again it depends on what
moves you when you open your eyes. For Norma Bastidas, it was doing
something about her son’s impending blindness. For Muhammad Yunus, it was
the plight of the people in his village, and for Sheikh Mohammed, it was his
ambition to make his emirate a world-class city. What do you have your eyes
open for? Are you living your life awake? If you are, sooner or later you will
find your leadership energy. Meanwhile, here are two stories that might inspire
you.
Ben Ripple—USA and Bali, Indonesia
As a college student studying sustainable agriculture and economics, Ben Ripple
longed to travel far out of the United States to learn more about agriculture,
particularly traditional forms of agriculture and the way they related to modern
markets all around the world. Little did he know that inside that restless
yearning, he was also in search of purpose, and was soon going to uncover
tremendous leadership energy to build a better future for himself and for
thousands around him in Bali, Indonesia.
Chancing on the Island of Gods
Landing in the beautiful island of Bali started from a game of chance—poker!
Ben and his then-girlfriend Blair won airline coupons and chose the furthest
destination flown by United Airlines. They arrived in Australia and traveled on
to Bali at the insistence of backpacker friends. In Bali, Ben and Blair (now his
wife) were mesmerized by the magic and mystique of the Indonesian
archipelago. “This was unlike anything we had ever experienced before,” he
says when recalling the adventure. Through several life-changing encounters in
that visit, including a surprise gift of a plot of family land and bearing witness to
the appalling level of agricultural exploitation in Indonesia, Ben and Blair’s lives
changed forever and Bali became their home.
“We saw children clothed in nothing but their undergarments, with bare
hands deep into pots full of DDT, liquid paraquat (also known as Agent Orange,
a defoliant used by the U.S. military during the Vietnam War), and other

chemicals, all of which are classified as disastrous chemicals to both human
health and the environment,” said Ben in his interview with my colleague Adel
Jayasuria while describing what he and Blair witnessed. The children were
handling chemicals banned internationally since before he was born, yet they
were being used across the Indonesian islands by individuals living below the
poverty line. “These concoctions were completely inappropriate [to the scale of
farming]. It was a horrific economic concept with these individuals using the
chemicals without a proper understanding of their ill effects. . . . I saw these
communities besieged by the capital markets. . . . There were companies
stepping into poor communities, taking complete advantage of them just to make
a quick buck. I found that completely unacceptable and distressing.”
He realised, “Unless somebody stepped in to show these poor farmers a
better way, they would never be ready to deal with the realities of the coming
market economy.” The realization ultimately became the spark that fueled the
establishment and mission of Big Tree Farms. Founded by Ben and Blair in 2000
in the shadow of Bali’s sacred Mount Agung, Big Tree Farms had the goal of
helping Balinese farmers build sustainable livelihoods while reviving their
cultural traditions and natural environment, and changing the balance of power
in their interaction with the global market—achieving a healthy balance of
economy and ecology.
Defining Moments and Humble Beginnings
Starting with just under an eighth of an acre, Big Tree Farms has grown to
become the premier producer of sustainably grown crops in Indonesia, with over
10,000 acres of certified organic land producing well over 50 different crops.
“We are now Indonesia’s largest certified organic food company, supporting
thousands of family farms across five islands,” Ben says.
While agriculture has always been a major driving force, Ben’s creative spirit
also stems from a deep desire to create a positive difference. Upon returning to
the United States from Bali to complete his bachelor’s in Sustainable Food
Production at Evergreen State College in Washington, Ben never lost sight of his
original plan of attacking the companies behind the assault on the marginalized
Indonesian farmers. He participated in a World Trade Organisation protest in
Seattle. “Along with many others in that huge protest, I had myself handcuffed
to the door of the hotel where the delegates were.” Locked down and teargassed
by riot police, he suffered an asthma attack. The individual who held the key to
his handcuffs had fled. In that moment of hopelessness and frustration, Ben

realized that this was no way of resolving anything. “That kind of activism
doesn’t create solutions, it only creates more aggression and anxiety in the
system.” It was a powerful moment in the life of this idealistic activist, who
returned to Bali in 1999 upon graduation with the realization that in order to
make a difference, he needed to create a financially viable business.
Brace for Impact
Priding themselves on their top-quality, “best in class” food products, an ethos
that has taken years to refine, Big Tree Farms endured a journey full of adversity.
The first challenge was having a start-up founder lacking business experience. “I
wasn’t an MBA that came out with a smart packet of how to start a company,” he
says. “However, Blair and I had made a commitment that no matter what the
odds, we were going to find a way to improve the lives of these producers.” Big
Tree Farms stayed true to its promise, making many mistakes on the journey but
not giving up. Taking stock of the numerous lessons, Ben and his team
challenged their own idealistic views of sustainability and sustainable supply
chains, and reconsidered what volume of risk was acceptable for a market starter
like Big Tree Farms. They chose to partner with farmer-producers rather than
simply take on all of the risk themselves.
When Adel asked him specifically about a major challenge in getting the
business off the ground, he said, “First and foremost, the biggest challenge we
faced was profitability. It’s been a long and hard road.” He explained that Big
Tree Farms was born from an emotional ideology of sustainability and social
enterprise, but the realities of business meant the fledgling company had to
switch to a for-profit model. This required a major change in mindset, vision,
and existing company culture. Alongside the new focus on profitability had to
come a new way of interacting with their farmer-partners. “We didn’t understand
how to communicate properly with our [potential farmer-partners], and that
contributed to a misconception among farmer groups that Big Tree Farms paid
more. Overnight, the company became sort of a celebrity.” That was a major
obstacle; Big Tree Farms promises to “partner with communities, to co-create
production systems and bring about improvement in livelihoods . . . while
making viable margin for sustainable growth.” Paying top dollar was never their
intention, nor what they wanted to achieve. “The real opportunity for change was
in the efficiencies [in production and market access],” Ben says. “From that we
learned that you really have to know your target market and ensure that the
messages sent out are exactly what you mean.”

Reaping the Fruits of Labor
Having come a long way, today Big Tree Farms is now Indonesia’s largest
certified organic food company. It has grown from a small-scale organic farming
training venture in 2003, to a profitable integrated social enterprise focused on
production and export of food products for retailers and ingredient channels
globally. Its products can be found in many global markets such as the United
States, European Union, Japan, and Australia on the shelves of major global
retailers such as Costco, Whole Foods, and Amazon.
Ben’s drive and passion continue despite the many challenges that have
come his way. There are many stories on the impact Big Tree Farms has had on
the lives of people, the community, and even customers through the production
of products that now include coconut sugar and cacao/chocolate products. The
most moving stories are ones that describe how poor and destitute farmers have
evolved to living decent, more financially sustainable lives. Ben, who has now
lived on the island of Bali for 19 years with Blair and their two daughters and
speaks fluent Bahasa, shared one particular story that still moves him deeply and
reassures him about the positive difference the company has made. Pak Paryono
was a farmer well-known in his community as a hard worker. When Ben first
met him, he was tapping his own trees and producing his own sugar. He lived in
a simple, traditional house with his entire family. As Big Tree Farms started
working toward their first organic certificate, a cooperative of farmers was put
together and Pak Paryono was voted as the cooperative president. He initially
struggled with the new role, having to leave the familiarity of tapping trees and
moving to a different style of work. He had to deal with administrative matters,
learn how to manage a simple set of finance records, and manage the detailed
recording of the organic process. He was given training, and slowly the initial
resistance to the new work shifted. Time passed, and one day Pak Paryono came
to Ben and expressed his interest in setting up a farmer group cooperative of his
own. That move showed Ben the individual Pak Paryono had become. From a
simple farmer, he had ambitions to reach out for something more, something he
would never have considered without the opportunity and support. And that’s
exactly what Big Tree Farms provided him. “Menoreh Politan,” Pak Paryono’s
vision of having his own collective of individual farmers, has come to fruition,
and he is today one of the top three producers of coconut sugar partnered with
Big Tree. He owns a production kitchen as well as a warehouse with production
facilities, and has rebuilt his own house and put a down payment on leases for
large trucks used in the logistics business he runs to service the demand of Big
Tree Farms. But he isn’t the only beneficiary. Today, the thousand-plus member

farmers in his collective have reaped the benefits of gaining access to a fair
economy, making huge strides and living better quality lives.
“I believe that sustainable success relies on believability,” says Ben. “Our
ideas about business are sometimes radical and our goals aggressive. No doubt,
we have countered many obstacles, made plenty of mistakes over the years. But
these errors were also wins, because they have served to increase our overall
culture, passion, and drive as we continue to build a best-in-class company that
produces innovative, high-quality products providing sustainable health,
environment, and economy to our customers, farmers, and community.”
I visited Big Tree Farms last year with a group of executives who were
attending Leading Leaders—a personal and enterprise leadership development
program I host a couple of times a year. We could sense strong leadership energy
everywhere. Each employee we spoke with, regardless of their title and position,
spoke with great passion about their business. They told the same thing in
different ways—we are making money, we get paid well, but most importantly,
we are changing the world, one farmer and one customer at a time.
Later when the group analysed why Big Tree Farms was so successful, they
agreed that Ben’s own personal leadership energy—driven by his strong belief in
his values and purpose—was infectious. He led by example every day, and
inspired his team by being a powerful role model. The group also pointed out
that Big Tree Farms has a strong “can do” culture. They don’t let obstacles derail
them. Rather than blaming and complaining, employees take pride and
responsibility in tackling the toughest of challenges head-on. Why? Because
they are a purpose-driven company that lives its values everyday.
Dr. William Tan—Singapore
At school, kids constantly teased him, pulled his ears, pinched him, and ran
away, knowing he could never chase after them. He spent countless days holed
up in a classroom watching from a window while his classmates ran out on the
field, leaving him dreaming of the day when he might join them. He routinely
had to crawl over dirty floors with his arms and legs covered in open sores.
Since his childhood, he had to plan ahead for every single thing, including
simple tasks like taking a shower. He almost had to drop out of the prestigious
school he had worked so hard to enter because his parents could not afford the
costs of transportation. Ultimately, having somehow made it through to
university, he had to face the humiliation of being told by his professor that he

should not have taken up a precious spot when it could have gone to someone
more deserving—more able-bodied. Finally, when he thought he had pulled
through it all and soared, he was told at age 51 that he had stage 4 leukemia and
only 12 months to live.
How would you feel if you were this person? Devastated, shattered, angry,
and defeated? Not if you had the zeal for life and laser-sharp clarity of purpose
of Dr. William Tan. Undaunted, determined, relentless—William has defied all
odds, turning adversity into advantage and dreams into reality, allowing nothing
and no one to stand in his way. “Physical disability is visible, but there are those
who are limited by disabilities which are not visible . . . in the mind and spirit. I
believe the human spirit is indomitable and that has helped me stay the course,”
he says in his book No Journey Too Tough.
A Tough Childhood
William was born in Singapore in 1957, and a month before he turned three he
contracted polio, which left him paralyzed below the waist. Though poor,
William’s parents knew that the only way for their son to grow up independently
was to have him placed in a mainstream school among the able-bodied. “You
may not have legs, but you still have your arms and your brain. You simply have
to learn to win with less,” his parents told him. “My parents taught me never to
worry and complain about what I don’t have. Most people make comparisons
with others and feel sorry about what they don’t have. That makes them give up
in despair. Instead, if you focus on what you have, you are filled with hope,” said
William to a 500-strong audience at the 2016 Leadership Energy Summit Asia—
a conference my company hosts every year to spread awareness about leadership
energy. That resolve (of winning with less) brought with it struggle, sacrifice,
and hard work for the family and for William. William’s elder sister Lily had to
stop school to care for him. She would carry him on her back up the stairs to his
classroom and wait for him till school ended. “I became too heavy for my sister
to carry at the age of 10, so my parents approached the medical social worker for
a pair of leg braces and crutches. I had to learn how to walk again,” he says.
After days of bullying in his first month at kindergarten, young William had
had enough. He eventually caught hold and bit the bullying hands that had
teased, pulled, and pinched, hard enough that they would never touch him again.
Expelled from school for his behavior, with great difficulty the following year
his parents found him a place in a new primary school. He topped his year and
won a copy of The Tortoise and the Hare. In that moment, he was determined to

excel in his studies, no matter what obstacles stood in his way, and decided to
work toward his childhood dream of becoming a medical doctor. “I was so
inspired by the doctors who helped me. I also understood suffering, and I
realized that if I can become a doctor, I will be in a really good position to help
other suffering patients,” William told me as we chatted along the sidelines of
the summit.
Next, he went to the Raffles Institute for his preuniversity studies. The
physical environment there was so challenging that William nearly dropped out,
as his parents couldn’t afford the taxi fare from their house to the school. His
English language teacher volunteered instead to pick him up and drop him off.
She noticed something special about this child. “William was an extremely good
student, very conscientious and very shy. He was very sensitive to other people’s
needs even at a very young age,” she said. With the help of teachers such as
these, and with his resolve to compensate for his disability by excelling in
academics, he finished at Raffles with flying colors and joined the prestigious
National University of Singapore. Though very disappointed to not be accepted
to medical school, he completed a degree in Life Sciences.
For as long as William can remember, he had to work part-time for extra
income. His father’s earnings as a street hawker were not enough to support a
family of nine. While at primary school he sewed and sold fishing nets, and he
sold magazines door to door on crutches while at Raffles Institution. “I
encountered a lot of barriers growing up,” he says. “I would get very frustrated
with staircases and inaccessibility, and difficulties in finding employment.”
Despite his disability, as a child William never owned a wheelchair simply
because his family couldn’t afford one. He was 16 before he was gifted a chair,
which changed his life. The first time he got on a wheelchair, he wheeled round
and round a circular 400-meter running track. “I was flying, I was unbound,” he
says recalling the day he found movement and freedom. It was the starting point
of an illustrious athletic career that took him to the Paralympics, where he made
history as part of the first Singapore Paralympics team, who attended the 1988
games in Seoul, South Korea.
Joining the Singapore civil service for three years, he saved enough to
further his studies. He moved to Australia, graduating with a first-class honors
masters in physiology from Massey University Veterinary School, before
completing his PhD in brain science at the University of Auckland Medical
School. As a postdoctoral researcher in Auckland, he was offered a position as
research fellow at the world-famous Mayo Clinic in Minnesota, United States—
the first-time the Mayo Clinic had offered a fellowship to a non-neurosurgeon

candidate. While grateful for the opportunity, it wasn’t enough for William. He
hadn’t forgotten his childhood dream of becoming a doctor. Encouraged by
classmates, he left Mayo Clinic and completed a five-year medical degree at the
University of Newcastle, Australia, thereby realizing his dream to become a
doctor 21 years after originally failing to qualify for medical school. Topping the
class in his fourth year, he also won two yearlong scholarships: a Fulbright to
Harvard University and a Chevening scholarship to Oxford University. William
had overcome enormous adversity to achieve outstanding academic success. He
became the only wheelchair-bound doctor in Singapore, and now serves as a
resident physician at the Singapore National Cancer Centre. His athletic
conquests continued side by side. By April 2009, he had completed seven
marathons across seven continents in 27 days, as well as an amazing race
stretching from Antarctica to Chile to Kenya and the United States to raise funds
for childhood cancer. “It was the peak of my life. I had completed the Antarctica
marathon, the North Pole marathon, I had set a world record for achieving
marathons in the fastest time across seven continents,” he said.
William’s athletic endeavors weren’t purely for self-fulfillment or for the
sake of competition alone. In 1986 William completed a 16-hour charity push to
raise money for the Singapore National Kidney Foundation. In 1990, he
completed a 1,330-kilometer journey across New Zealand in 22 days to help
raise NZD 1.2 million for children with physical disabilities. While at Harvard in
2002, he qualified for the Boston Marathon and became the first wheelchair
athlete in the 105-year history of the run to have dedicated his race to the
Children’s Hospital fund-raising program. Singlehandedly over the last 22 years
he has raised more than S$18 million for charities and causes around the world
by racing in more than 120 marathons and ultramarathons. He holds six
marathon and ultramarathon world records, and is the first person in the world to
complete a wheelchair marathon to the North Pole in 21 hours and 10 minutes.
Tragedy Strikes Again
Just when he thought that the worst was behind him, while competing in the
Paris marathon in October 2009, William’s resilience was tested like never
before with the diagnosis of end-stage leukemia. “Here I was, in Paris
completing another marathon, and ready to tie the knot with my fiancée right
after that, and I noticed I was bleeding from my nose. At first I dismissed it as
nothing, and continued with the marathon. Determined to finish the race, I
pushed along, and finally went through the Arc de Triomphe. It was great to be

there, but I also knew something was seriously wrong as by then the bleeding
was profuse,” says William. “I thought this cannot be. I am a world-renowned
athlete. I am a doctor who gives care to patients, how can I be a patient? How
can I have just 12 months to live? It was the first time I realized that there is
nothing that is ‘too big to fail.’ I had read in the papers about the subprime
mortgage crisis that was in full swing at the time, and I said to myself, this is my
own subprime crisis . . . not long ago I was on the cover of Prime Magazine
Singapore, and now I have cancer? This is definitely subprime.”
“What happened next?” my colleague Muhammad Sabri asked him in a one-
on-one interview, and here is how William replied: “Initially I was disappointed.
I was angry. Hadn’t I had enough? Why this now? They told me I could try six
months of chemotherapy followed by a bone marrow transplant. So, I thought to
myself, do I bear the pain of chemotherapy or live the next 12 months
completing my bucket list? I finally thought about my mom, who had endured so
much to make me who I am today, and decided I could not die before her. How
would she feel seeing me go before her? I have to make myself fit again. The
choice for pursuing treatment was now clear.”
In concluding the interview, Sabri asked, “From being a polio-stricken child,
you went on to outperform your peers in elementary and secondary school. You
then defied the odds and studied at some of the most prestigious universities
including Harvard, studied neuroscience, fulfilled your childhood dream of
becoming a doctor, fought cancer, and became a world record–setting athlete.
May I ask you, what’s next for William Tan?” Already 59, this is how he replied:
“Well, I’m very grateful for this second chance, this second lease of life. I have
been seven years in remission! In return, I want to do more for humanity. I may
not be superman, but there is a lot more I want to do for others. I am back to
wheelchair racing since last year, I am just back from a race in London—500
kilometers in four days—to raise money for cancer research. The next will be
my tenth Boston Marathon. And I will work towards the 2020 Tokyo
Paralympics, and then I will retire and become a volunteer sports administrator
to nurture young athletes.”
No stranger to difficulty, despite the chemotherapy and bone marrow
transplant, William returned to action with hours of training every day to regain
strength and fitness levels. He achieved his best time at the Berlin Marathon
soon after his treatment and completed two full marathons back-to-back, beating
the completion times of his preleukemia days. In all my years studying
leadership energy, this is probably one of the strongest stories I have come
across. When I asked him what his secret was to keep going despite one setback

after another he attributed it to positive visualization and the plasticity of the
brain. “It is all about the power of the mind,” he said, leaving me completely
awestruck by the stunning example of the resilience of the human spirit.
What I’ve tried to explain in this chapter is a journey most great leaders have
undertaken at some point in their lives. Having studied numerous leadership
development models over the years, I haven’t found a more powerful one. It is
tough to undertake this journey, but it is the only way to fortify yourself with the
strength you will need if you decide to lead. There are no shortcuts or easy
answers to developing limitless leadership energy. Only a well-thought-out set of
values and a values-based purpose can give you the fearlessness that leadership
needs, particularly in today’s open source era. Besides all the examples in this
book, I can vouch for this approach from personal experience, too. I do not have
the talent or tenacity of Norma Bastidas or William Tan, so I asked myself what
my purpose could be. And I found it in my work. I decided to challenge status
quo in my profession and uncover new insights. Now, my purpose is to wake up
individuals and organizations to their true potential. Ever since I discovered this
purpose, I have become more energized than ever before. Now, my work was not
just a job, it became a passion. I work much harder than before. As you can
imagine, writing books while still doing a full-time job as CEO is not easy. But I
don’t get tired, and I derive a lot of happiness from working really hard because
I have found my leadership energy. While I certainly enjoy and value the
monetary rewards associated with my work, they are not the main reason why I
work so hard. I get my real reward each time I am able to help an individual or
organization achieve their potential.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 Despite the money spent annually on leadership development, it is not
working because it is based on five myths:
1. Democratic leadership is the best way to create breakthrough success.
2. Followership = Leadership.
3. A Position of Authority = Leadership.

4. Leaders are born, not made.
5. Leadership can be learned through case studies, role plays, and
competency models.
 Leadership is the art of harnessing human energy toward the creation of a
better future.
 Leadership energy is the main ingredient of powerful leadership, and it
emanates from deep clarity of values and a values-based purpose.
 Most people go through life without clarity of values and purpose, and are
therefore devoid of leadership energy.
 Strong leadership energy can only be discovered through reflection based on
emotional integrity, which is the courage to acknowledge what one really
wants for oneself without using a societal lens.
 Leadership energy forms the basis of practicing the five keys of positive
autocratic leadership.
Questions for Reflection
1. What are your most deeply held values that you will never
compromise, no matter what?
2. Are you totally honest with yourself in terms of what you want out
of life? Or are you trapped in a story you don’t like or that is
untrue?
3. Do you really want to be a leader?

4. Do you have a carefully thought through and well-defined purpose?
If so, what is it?

PART 3
Open Source Enterprise
Leadership

CHAPTER 4
Minimum Supervision, Maximum
Performance
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

U
p until now I’ve discussed in detail the sweeping technological and social
trends that will change the face of our business, social, and economic
landscapes over the next decades. I’ve tried to make the case that this brave new
world will require brave new personal leadership, and more important, brave
new thinking about personal leadership. From this chapter onward, let’s switch
gears toward leading the organization. If everything we’ve discussed so far
wasn’t radical enough already, prepare yourself for the ride to get a little
bumpier. In this chapter I am going to go further and suggest that some of our
most widely loved people-management tenets must be swept aside if
organizations are to survive and flourish in the coming years. Our old models
were suitable for a static past where workers were expected to stay in one
company and one industry, and climb the slippery ladder in pursuit of wealth,
perks, and titles. This is no longer relevant, when so many workers are carving
their own career paths, having multiple employers in multiple industries, and are
driven to succeed for reasons far more intrinsic or complex than purely financial.
Specifically, I’m going to challenge three basic principles that have been the
mainstay of management thinking for about a hundred years:
1. All employees must be given stretch goals so that they remain energized
to go “above and beyond” to make the organization highly successful.
2. The immediate manager has the maximum influence on employee
engagement.
3. Employees must be managed and monitored in order to drive high
performance.
Instead, I will suggest a radical new open source way of thinking about
performance management that is designed to cater to the myriad talents and
motivations of employees.
Minimum Goals, Unlimited Vacation
I will begin by showing how stretch goals ignore the scientific truth that governs
employee performance and motivation, then discuss the seemingly absurd idea
of allowing employees to take unlimited vacation.

Stretch Goals
Stretch goals are the cornerstone of many performance management systems
today. Usually part of yearly goal setting for an individual employee, they
require employees to extend themselves significantly past their usual limit to
achieve their goals. Instead of asking for small or incremental changes, the
stretch goal (sometimes called a BHAG*—big hairy audacious goal) calls on
workers to take a leap into the unknown, far past their usual achievements. The
practice of goal setting was first popularized in the mid-1960s by professors
Edwin Locke and Gary Latham, who found that setting specific and ambitious
goals energized employees and focused their attention to positive effect. The
practice has taken off since, notably with former GE CEO Jack Welch, but more
broadly across the business landscape, where the importance of stretch goals is
held up almost as gospel.
Not surprisingly, stretch goals are credited with inspiring employees to
achieve astonishing new feats of creativity and innovation. A widely used
example is that of U.S. airline Southwest, that challenged its staff to bring the
plane turnaround time on the tarmac down to only 10 minutes. Despite
widespread disbelief, Southwest staff managed to do just that, calling on
techniques used by pit crews in Formula One racing. Likewise, Google—one of
the most innovative and forward-thinking companies of recent years—has
stretch goals embedded in its company philosophy. “We set ourselves goals we
know we can’t reach yet, because we know that by stretching to meet them we
can get further than we expected,” it says. Google doesn’t always expect its
employees to reach the individual stretch goals set in their annual performance
targets. A score of 60 to 70 percent is considered enough. However, it continues
with the practice in the belief that in some cases the goal will be met, and push
the company a little bit further than the rest.
Stretch goals have also come in for a share of criticism. A Harvard Business
School report, Goals Gone Wild: The Systematic Side Effects of Over-
Prescribing Goal Setting, argued that the benefits of goal setting have been
enormously overstated and have instead led to high levels of employee stress,
unethical behavior and distorted risk-perception, corroded organizational culture,
and a reduction in intrinsic motivation. Among several quite fascinating case
studies, the report cited the very public failure of the Ford Pinto as an example of
the potential disaster of goal setting. In the late 1960s the Ford company set a
goal of designing and producing a new car weighing under 2,000 pounds and
costing less than US$2,000, to be produced by 1970. The resulting Ford Pinto
met the goal, but was rushed through safety checks where engineers failed to

notice a key design flaw—that the car ignited on impact. When the flaw was
discovered, Ford executives elected to pay out the victims rather than recalling
and changing the design of the car. Ford may have reached its stretch goal, but it
did so at the expense of customer safety, ethical behavior, and the reputation of
the company. The reason I bring up this fairly old story is to point out that
decades later in 2008, Tata Motors of India tried to do the exact same thing with
disastrous results. The resultant Tata Nano was a huge flop. Chairman Ratan
Tata laid out an audacious goal to produce a car costing $2,000, and wouldn’t
take no for an answer. Well, his engineers gave him what he wanted, but the
product had so many problems that it was dead on arrival.
Likewise, the downfall of Enron is in part blamed on the company’s stretch
goals, which caused employees to take unethical and ill-considered risks that
eventually brought down the whole company. The authors of Goals Gone Wild
believe that Enron’s downfall was in part because its stretch goals were entirely
financial, with no relationship to the values and ethics supposedly espoused by
the company. If they have any chance of being effective, stretch goals must be
aligned with not only the strategy but the wider values of the company. They
must also offer employees a framework to dictate behavior when the stretch
goals seem out of reach.
In addition, Goals Gone Wild suggests that managers set stretch goals far
more frequently than they actually need to “ensure” employee motivation.
Excessive goal setting can harm the employee’s intrinsic motivation to do the job
well for its own sake, while the psychological impact of goal failure or the
constant low-lying stress that the goal will not be achieved can drive down
performance even further. The authors conclude, and this is an important point,
that stretch goals can be additionally problematic when the same goal is set for
many individuals. The goal may be too easy for some and far too difficult for
others, and the culture of competition that builds as employees stretch to achieve
their goal can break down team camaraderie and cooperation.
Interestingly, a study by Sim Sitkin of Duke University also suggests that
setting organization-wide stretch goals can also backfire, simply because the
wrong companies are setting them. Stretch goals should be set by large
companies that have the resources to fund them, and the cushion to fall back on
if the goal isn’t achieved. A company like Google is an obvious example; it has
an existing reputation for innovation and excellence and a very healthy balance
sheet to fall back on if one of its goals fails to launch. Instead, stretch goals are
more often used by desperate organizations as a last-ditch solution to a much
wider problem, when there is little or no room to fail.

Stretch Goals: Yes or No?
So, what is the answer? Stretch goals are embedded in our organizational
structures, not only in the vision, mission, and strategies of many companies but
in the day-to-day work and performance management of most employees. They
are believed to be the main way to motivate employees, and equally of providing
a framework for measuring employee performance whether good or bad. Can we
truly consider a performance management system that doesn’t include stretch
goals? After all, organizations still need a way of assessing employees, and there
is no doubt that setting achievable or moon-shoot goals can work. Likewise, in
the increasingly fractured workplace where many employees lack permanent
contracts, a permanent workspace, or may not even be present in the office, city,
or country, goals remain a valuable way of tying staff together to reach a
common purpose, or individually working toward personal achievement and
organizational success.
My argument is this. Stretch goals are inherently neither good nor bad. They
work well for some employees and less well for others, depending on the goal,
on the job, and where an individual is in his or her personal or professional life.
Stretch goals work well for those who want to be stretched, but can be a source
of stress, anxiety, or poorly thought out behavior for others.
The problem with stretch goals lies in the way in which they are applied.
Employees are far more aware and educated than ever before. They fully
understand that if they want to earn a certain standard of living, they need to
work accordingly. If they want a higher standard of living, they will willingly
embark upon stretch goals, but if they simply want to make enough to pay their
bills and pursue other interests in their spare time, stretch goals will not work for
them. Today more than ever before, ordinary people are searching for
empowerment and meaning in their personal and professional lives, and are no
longer interested in traditional carrot and stick measures of motivation and
performance. If they don’t like the goal or the demand that they reach it, they
will simply move on. Creating arbitrary stretch goals and demanding employees
reach them for presumed financial or career gain is not enough for many people,
especially in jobs that might seem uncertain, temporary, or eventually obsolete.
Likewise, and most critically, the problem with stretch goals is that they
assume not only that each employee wants to be stretched, but that each
employee is capable of being stretched. What do I mean by this? As we saw with
leadership in previous chapters, only a small percentage (20 percent if Pareto is
to be believed) of individuals have the energy, drive, desire, and resilience to be
a truly effective leader. I’ll come back to this statistic again and again, because

the same goes for stretch goals. Only a small percentage of employees have the
creativity, innovation, and drive to truly relish and achieve stretch goals at any
one point or time. Assuming that every employee has the ability and drive to
achieve these goals will be tantamount to setting them, and the organization, up
for failure and disappointment.
The Ubiquitous 80:20 Rule
We’ve been referring to this rule throughout the book, and will continue to do so
in the remaining chapters as well. Before I discuss how and why stretch goals
should be applied, it might be time to take a detour and delve into 80:20 in a bit
more detail. The 80:20 rule (also known as the Pareto Principle) is one of the
most ubiquitous rules in nature, science, and business and should be the basis for
how our management and organizational practices must evolve to have any
chance of keeping up in the twenty-first century.
The Pareto Principle posits that 80 percent of output is a direct result of only
20 percent of input. It’s a principle as old as time, yet the theory as we know it
was first developed by Italian economist Vilfredo Pareto in 1906, the result of
his survey of land ownership in Italy. Pareto discovered that 80 percent of land
was owned by only 20 percent of the population, a statistic he discovered was
repeated throughout the Western world. Likewise, Pareto quickly realized the
rule’s wider relevance when he noted that 80 percent of the peas in his garden
came from only 20 percent of the pods, a discovery that is repeated time and
again in our natural world. It’s interesting to note, also, that the 80:20 rule also
applies within its own rule, for example in the Richter scale, which measures the
impact of earthquakes on a 10-point scale. Each one point increase on the 10-
point scale in fact represents a tenfold increase in impact, so the top 20 percent
of the top 20 percent has almost unimaginable scale. In fact, once you start
looking for the Pareto Principle, also called the “law of the vital few,” and the
“principle of factor sparsity,” you see it everywhere. It has been recognized
across the natural, social, and economic landscapes, in areas as diverse as
criminology, drug abuse, earthquakes and volcanos, healthcare, and biology.
Obviously, the Pareto Principle has widespread relevance in business as well
and is recognizable across sales, marketing, project management, software
applications, and customer service. A few examples that might seem familiar: 80
percent of complaints come from 20 percent of customers; 80 percent of profits
come from 20 percent of time allocated; 80 percent of sales come from 20
percent of clients; 80 percent of sales come from 20 percent of sales staff.

Microsoft, in fact, discovered Pareto applied to both product features (Windows
consumers used only 20 percent of features, 80 percent of the time) and software
bugs. After discovering that 80 percent of system crashes were caused by 20
percent of the most complex bugs, the company was able to speed up product
fixes by focusing on the most mission critical areas. Similar to the Richter scale,
Microsoft also discovered that over 50 percent of system problems were caused
by a mere 1 percent of bugs.
The Pareto Principle has been used before as a basis for performance
management, most notably and notoriously under Jack Welch’s leadership at GE.
Welch took over GE in 1981, and instituted a “rank and yank” performance
management system. Managers were asked to rank employees along the bell
curve; the top 20 percent of employees were given praise and generous financial
rewards, while the bottom 10 percent were fired. The middle 70 percent were
given coaching, training, and goal-setting, based around the opportunity to move
into the vaunted top 20 percent. Welch believed that rigorous differentiation
between employees was critical, saying that “it’s all about being extreme,
rewarding the best and weeding out the ineffective. Rigorous differentiation
delivers real stars—and stars build great businesses.” A feature of Welch’s policy
was what he called “candor,” letting employees know where they stood in the
organization, so that, according to him, those who were fired were already
expecting it.
Welch’s enthusiasm (and spectacular results) at GE were at least part of the
reason why the 20:70:10 model became so widespread across the 1980s and
1990s. The argument for Welch’s version of the bell curve is obvious—it’s
important to identify, reward, and incentivize employees who have achieved top
results, and equally critical to “trim” employees who are failing to deliver. Done
well, the bell curve should also give midrange employees the opportunity to
assess their performance and receive support and training. The system is
particularly useful in service-driven organizations where impact can be measured
quantitatively or through customer results, or when individual performance is
considered more important than group work or teamwork. It also gives a useful
framework for managers tasked with giving bonuses, and theoretically can
increase performance by sparking healthy internal competition.
The downsides to the bell curve model are equally obvious. Critics point out
that employee performance does not necessarily follow the model as precisely as
it demands. The system lacks the flexibility to reward a greater number of high-
performing employees, running the risk of losing some who don’t make the cut.
Managers are forced to push employees into rankings that might not represent

the true nature of their work, nor reflect the increasingly team-driven, cross–
business unit workplace. Likewise, the ranking system can promote unhealthy
and demotivating internal competition, which distracts staff from focusing on the
greater challenge of their external competitors. The bell curve, in addition, has
been accused of a lack of transparency in which managerial subjectivity,
favoritism, and even discrimination preclude a fair result. It’s interesting here
again to point out that Enron, the epitome of corrupt practices that I mentioned
when discussing the problems with stretch goals, also utilized the forced ranking
model, with only 5 percent of employees awarded the top ranking while the
bottom 15 percent were fired.
Given that the bell curve is a derivative of the 80:20 rule, I believe Welch
was right in using it. In the open source era, the only difference I suggest is to
refrain from force ranking and predeciding which of your employees form the
top 20 percent, the middle 60 percent, and the bottom 20 percent. In Enron’s
case, they were playing with the proven statistic itself (5 percent instead of 20
percent), and performance was measured on all the wrong parameters. We will
discuss this more in the next chapter, but in today’s dynamic environment, it is
impossible to slot people based on assessments and other artificial means. There
is no guarantee in today’s forever-changing business landscape that someone
who is performing well today will also do so in the future.
80:20 and Stretch Goals
So how does the 80:20 rule relate to stretch goals? As I am sure you’ve guessed
by now, expecting all employees to write and achieve stretch goals defies the
80:20 rule. If most management teams agree that only 20 percent of their people
perform at “above and beyond” levels, what is the point of assigning stretch
goals to everyone? And how can the universal truth of 80:20 be effectively
applied to performance management without creating the negativity associated
with Welch’s model? The answer lies in a complete change of mindset, and
speaks directly to the empowerment, flexibility, and independence demanded by
the workers of today and tomorrow.
I propose that every employee be given the minimum standards required to
perform his or her role adequately, and everything beyond that, including stretch
goals, be left up to the individual worker to choose.
Radical? Yes. Requiring an enormous change of mindset? Definitely.
Unworkable? Not at all. This solution speaks directly to the opportunities and
problems presented by stretch goals, and also acknowledges the universal truth

that is the 80:20 rule. It also better meets the needs of today’s empowered and
free workforce. And as I will explain later in the chapter, if applied correctly, this
new philosophy will radically change the role of the manager as well.
Consider this. The 80:20 rule (or 20:60:20, if we apply the standard bell
curve model rather than Welch’s version) dictates that only 20 percent of your
employees will be highly motivated achievers. They will contribute the lion’s
share of the innovation, drive, and performance that a company needs to achieve
breakthrough success. Irrespective of what goals are or are not set for them,
these workers will always overdeliver and will consistently score in the top
percentile of any performance curve. The middle 60 percent of employees play a
critical role; they are the supporters, the followers, and the solid citizens who
keep the daily operational needs of an organization ticking over. They will
deliver or sometimes overdeliver to a greater or lesser extent depending on
various factors and motivations, but they will not be pressured to go beyond
what they are comfortable achieving. Then there will be the bottom 20 percent.
Most of these will likely achieve the minimum standards required of the job, but
no more. A small proportion of the bottom 20 percent might not make the
minimum standard no matter how much external motivation is applied, and will
need to be moved on or retrained.
According to the Pareto Principle and the numerous examples we see every
day in organizations, performance will always fall along the certain bell curve no
matter what measures or metrics are in place, and even if no metrics are in place.
So why not just acknowledge this truth and accept that not every employee can,
should, and would be an overachiever, and dispense with the annual stress for
managers and employees of setting stretch goals?
This approach differs in a significant way from the approach taken in many
companies that believe in the “rank and yank” philosophy. In rank and yank,
management acknowledges that performance will roughly fall across the bell
curve, but rather than let employees naturally fall within the model depending on
their own inclination, it artificially and harshly imposes from above. This leads
to dissatisfaction and disempowerment, particularly for those employees forced
to reach for stretch goals they don’t want. In contrast, allowing employees to
choose their level of performance gives empowerment and flexibility to workers,
and lets them decide how much or how little they want to go above the minimum
requirements for the role. As most business leaders agree, not all roles within
their companies require superstars. Some roles simply require a certain standard
of performance and no more. So why not let people choose where they want to
be on the bell curve?

Another way of looking at this is to go back to Chapter 3 and look at
purpose. For some employees, their professional work, or making money, is their
main purpose. They may choose to go for stretch goals and exhibit the strongest
leadership energy. For some, work might still be an important part of their lives
but not their main purpose. They may choose to be in the middle 60 percent so
that they have time and energy to pursue other interests. For some people, work
may just be a means to pay bills. They may choose to work only to the minimum
standards required so that they get paid accordingly, and can devote a majority of
their energy to other interests. I will talk about this in a bit more detail in the
next chapter. The point I want to make here is this: in the open source economy,
people have a lot of choice and a lot of freedom. Thanks to the democratization
of knowledge, they are also more aware and knowledgeable than ever before.
Giving them stretch goals when they don’t want them will not work.
Management must rethink the old approach of standing above the workforce
with sticks to make sure they don’t slack off. As with succession planning and
innovation,* in this new era, they need to let the cream rise to the top naturally.
Consider who might be positively affected by this model. One example that
springs to mind very quickly is that of young parents, who are juggling the
pressures of child-rearing alongside the demands of the busy twenty-first-
century workplace. Many women in particular feel they must choose between
having children and having a career, and fear that taking their foot off the
accelerator while they have young children will have a longstanding and
negative impact on their career. My solution is tailor-made for parents in this
position: they can choose to “take a break” from the fast lane and decide how
much they can commit to their work beyond the minimum, in the knowledge that
this will not impact negatively on their long-term career. Once their children
have grown or their life circumstances change, they can choose to press down on
the accelerator again. If companies don’t allow such flexibility, today’s workers
will choose to opt out of the company toward the more flexible model of free
agency. Rather than lose your best employees, why not change your thinking
along with the times, and give them the opportunity to decide?
This model also has the flexibility to work in the changing workforce. We
saw in Chapter 1 that the key trait of twenty-first-century employees is diversity
—of culture, age, background, and gender—all of whom will have different
reasons for working and motivations for working hard. Take for example the
baby boomers and the millennials, two widely divergent generational groups
who will be playing key roles in the workforce over the next few decades. Many
baby boomers will choose to remain at work past their retirement age, either to

earn additional money for retirement, to fill gaps in the workforce, to maintain
social connections, or to continue deriving the fulfilment they experience from
working, while using the skills they have gained over a lifetime. They may be
motivated to do a good and effective job that uses their skills, without having the
desire to stretch past the minimum. They no longer feel the need to reach upward
on the career ladder. Does that mean that they are any less valuable workers?
Not at all. Within the generation lies a wealth of knowledge, ability, and skills
that should be appreciated by an organization. What this means is that the
workers are freed from the pretense of reaching for goals that no longer relate to
them, and the organization from the frustration of feeling that every employee
should be overachieving. On the other end, some millennials might be looking to
maximize their earnings and career acceleration. They may be much more
inclined to pursue stretch goals to be one of the top 20 percent.
How Will This Work in Practice?
I can imagine at this point you are thinking, there is no way that this model can
work! There is no way that organizations can function without the frameworks
and structures that force employees to work a certain number of hours, or work
toward certain goals and standards. Without them, there will be nothing to hold
an organization together.
Stretch Goals
I’m going to speak to the realities rather than the myths of employee
performance and motivation later in this chapter, but first I want to address the
claim that organizational performance overall will suffer. Consider Uber, an
example I’ve discussed several times in this book. The strength of organizations
like Uber is that they offer drivers the opportunity to choose how much or how
little they work, to fit in with personal circumstances, professional goals, or
motivations. An Uber driver is not required to work a certain amount of hours,
but is instead asked to behave according to the organization’s frameworks,
mission, and values. Because of this, Uber has a flexible and effective
workforce, and has quickly become the largest taxi company in the world. A
2015 study into Uber drivers’ motivations for driving with the company revealed
that 62 percent of drivers had full- or part-time jobs and used Uber as a
supplementary income, while 38 percent used Uber as their primary source of
income. Yet Uber is flourishing, because it has accepted the reality of
“employee” performance. In that same survey, 78 percent of drivers said they

were satisfied with their work, and 73 percent said they would prefer a job where
“they are their own boss” rather than the traditional 9-to-5 job, with salary and
benefits. Notably, Uber is not simply a career option for those who may feel they
have no other options. Forty-eight percent of Uber drivers have tertiary degrees,
compared with 19 percent of taxi drivers in traditionally structured companies.
In comparison, the authors in Goals Gone Wild cite New York taxi drivers as
an example of when daily uniform targets designed to keep employees on track
actually demotivate staff and cause a reduction in earnings; when employees see
the goal as the “ceiling rather than the floor.” Rainy days in New York
significantly increase demand for taxis, yet the number of taxis on the street
actually drops, particularly at night. The reason is that taxi drivers are given a
daily target, which they tend to achieve quicker on rainy days, and then knock
off work. There is no incentive (financial or otherwise) for them to work longer
hours, as exceeding their daily target one day does not mean a decrease in target
for the next. If the drivers were given financial targets that took a longer time
horizon and given the flexibility to work longer hours on busier days and shorter
hours on less busy days, paradoxically earnings overall would be likely to
increase. It involves the organization ceding elements of control and choice to
the drivers, yet with a better mutual outcome.
Another relevant precedent for setting minimum rather than stretch goals is
the contract grading system used in many U.S. universities. Initially used by
professor of history Gerald Herman at Northeastern University in the 1970s,
contract grading comes in several different formats. At its heart are a clear and
detailed set of guidelines agreed between lecturer and student, which stipulate
what assignments a student must complete to receive a certain grade. Within the
terms of the contract, students are given the flexibility to choose how many
assignments they complete depending on which grade or achievement standard
they wish to meet. Each assignment must meet a minimum set of standards but is
otherwise ungraded—the raw number of requirements is what determines a
student’s final grade. Proponents of contract grading argue that the process
rewards students who are hard workers and highly motivated, while giving other
students the flexibility to devote their time to other courses or priorities
depending on their circumstances. Herman particularly believed that a key
benefit of contract grading was it allowed for a course to be tailored to a
student’s individual motivations (a point I’ll come back to later in this chapter).
By allowing students to pick and choose which assignments they complete, they
are also able to tailor their learning experience to align with their particular
passions, interests, motivations, and goals.

Other tertiary teachers have subsequently put their own stamp on contract
grading, with successful outcomes. Professors Jane Danielewicz and Peter
Elbow at the University of Massachusetts sign a contract with their students at
the beginning of the course, which gives them an immediate base B grade
provided they complete a certain amount of assignments and coursework.
Seeking anything above a B involves individual evaluation and assessment by
both lecturers. The way Danielewicz and Elbow see it, this version of contract
grading gives students the flexibility to accept a B grade if that is all they wish to
achieve, but also gives more motivated students the opportunity to stretch
themselves further. Danielewicz and Elbow specifically make the distinction
between personally evaluated and nonevaluated work, arguing that an assessor is
subject to personal opinion, subjectivity, and circumstance like everyone else.
Students searching for something more than a B do so in the knowledge that no
assessment can be wholly impersonal or objective; the system acknowledges that
we are complex beings who bring a series of biases, motivations, and beliefs to
our judgement of others. This method directly confronts the accusations of
subjectivity and bias that frequently dog both tertiary assessment and workplace
performance reviews. The argument, too, is that contract grading attempts to
reduce the passivity of students in the learning and grading process. Instead of
simply going along with whatever is dictated by the teacher, students take an
active decision-making role in their own learning and their own outcomes,
leading to greater empowerment, choice, and motivation.
Of course, contract grading is not without its critics. As I would anticipate
with my own proposal to let employees choose their achievement levels in the
workplace, critics of contract grading fear that without the traditional grading
process students won’t work as hard, do homework, or study for exams. It also
disrupts the traditional power balance between teacher and student by giving
more power into student hands to take what they choose from their courses, a
concept that can be profoundly threatening to traditional power structures. It is
for this reason in particular that I think contract grading, and my own model of
performance evaluation, are tailored to the workplace reality of the twenty-first
century.
The days of using power and authority to drive people toward desired
performance are over. As we exhaustively discussed in the first half of this book,
one of the chief outcomes of the technological and population revolutions is the
democratization of knowledge and information. The availability of knowledge
on the Internet has undermined many of the old tenets that universities held dear;
the “sage on the stage” model where a lecturer held knowledge and parceled it

out to students is no longer relevant. I recently met Michio Kaku, physicist,
futurist, author, television host, and professor of theoretical physics at the City
College of New York. We were discussing future trends, and he described a
coming near-future in which powerful computing power and vast information
will be available at the blink of an eye. He meant it literally, because he was
talking about an Internet-enabled device implanted within an ordinary contact
lens. From soldiers to surgeons, everyone will have access to instant knowledge
and computing power through wearable and implanted devices.
I asked Professor Kaku to talk a bit about the future of education. Much of
education today depends upon learning from professors before reproducing that
knowledge in exam papers to receive a grade. If all knowledge will be available
at “the blink of an eye,” what will happen to traditional education? He smiled
and told me that my question reminded him of a time when professors debated if
calculators should be allowed in class and during exams. “Some professors
wanted to ban calculators in class simply because they felt that they had suffered
with manual calculations in their time, so why should their students not suffer?”
The fact of the matter is that knowledge is going to be even more freely
available in the future as compared to today’s Internet. It is an irreversible trend.
Education therefore will need to be about what the student wants to learn rather
than what the professor wants to teach. Grades will depend upon how students
process existing knowledge to create new knowledge or ideas, not on how much
a student can memorize existing knowledge and formulas. The education
industry will need to adapt to the new reality.
Contract grading directly addresses this shift, and instead acknowledges a
more egalitarian playing field by giving students an active role in designing their
own courses and assessments, and choosing where and how to channel their
individual motivations. In a way, this speaks directly to the wider search for
meaning that grips our modern society. Instead of being forced to buy into a
prefabricated, one-size-fits-all degree, students are given the chance to shape,
mold, customize, and make individual meaning from their educational
experience. If universities cannot provide this, students will go elsewhere,
including to the myriad online courses that are now offered by the most elite
institutions. While education is not the subject of this book, universities are
another example of organizations that must adapt or die in the coming decades.
Just as contract grading is a way that universities can choose to offer a more
customized, meaningful, and empowering experience to their key stakeholders,
their students, so too organizations must embrace new ways of empowering and
adjusting to fit the changing needs of their staff.

What is curious about contract grading, and as yet unexplored in the
literature I have read on the subject, is whether students who participate in it fall
under the 80:20 rule. My guess is that they probably do! The prevalence of 80:20
is such that university students and their grades are highly likely to fit within that
framework. What is key to the success of the method and to the framework is
that the teachers involved acknowledge that students will have other
commitments, and do not penalize them for choosing to do only the minimum. It
doesn’t after all mean that students are unmotivated or underperforming; it’s that
they are making a conscious choice to devote as much or as little of their energy
to the task at hand and are aware of and prepared for the outcomes. As Professor
Kaku told me, “The early 1900s was an age of mass standardization. Today, we
have entered the age of mass customization.”
Unlimited Vacation
I will never forget the reaction of an old-fashioned manager in my audience a
while back when I first presented the idea of minimum goals. To say that he was
furious would be a gross understatement. Without the slightest attempt at
listening to understand, he relentlessly shunned the idea as baseless and
impractical. No matter what I tried, he kept saying it would not work, and that if
we set minimum goals, employees won’t even show up to work, thereby
disrupting critical services the business offers. “Can you imagine a bus driver
having this flexibility? If he doesn’t show up, commuters will be stranded.” he
argued. Clearly, my friend here did not understand the meaning of “minimum
performance goals,” and what the consequences of not meeting them would be.
But the point of raising this incident is not to offer an explanation, because that I
think is very clear if you’ve read the rationale above carefully enough. The
reason I bring it up is this: can you imagine what his reaction would have been if
I had suggested what I am about to suggest now—that in addition to the
flexibility of choosing minimum goals instead of stretch goals, employees
should also be allowed to take as much vacation as they want to? I think he
would have simply imploded.
I can empathize with such people because what we are talking about is
radical compared to conventional practice. But so was the idea of flying
airplanes before they were invented, and so was the idea of working from home
before it became accepted practice. In the past, new ideas took a long time
before going mainstream. My argument now is that in the open source era there
is no time to be lost. Speed is everything, and those that don’t adapt to the
changing reality quickly risk being left behind.

So is the idea of unlimited vacation totally absurd and unworkable? Well, not
if you consider what’s already going on. Per Thomas Frohlich in USA Today,
General Electric, Grant Thornton, Grubhub, Netflix, LinkedIn, Virgin Group,
and HubSpot are already allowing unlimited vacation. Yes, you read that right—
a 124-year-old company like GE is in that list too. This is not a list of funky
Silicon Valley start-ups alone. And a quick search on Google revealed that these
were not the only companies doing so. It is a small but growing trend. Why?
Because in today’s economy you cannot force anyone to work more than they
want to. More so than ever before, in the open source era we need to let
employees be their own entrepreneurs and manage their time and input as they
see fit. Of course, they (employees) also need to be prepared to accept the fact
that they will reap only what they sow.
Another reason companies are doing this is to manage output, not input. By
putting the output onus on employees and turning them free, organizations can
free up considerable management time and allow employees to self-manage.
Again, the 80:20 rule will apply. Twenty percent of employees will be highly
motivated to perform and excel at work, and they will probably take the least
vacation. The middle 60 percent will probably take as much as the unspoken
norm the organization’s culture allows. Perhaps a very small percentage of
employees will try to maximize on vacation, with some even attempting to
misuse the privilege. In the open source era, such behavior will be totally
transparent and visible to all. And the open source performance management
system can easily address such misuse by giving (or not giving) people what
they deserve based on what they put in as effort and energy, and more important,
based on their performance and results. The fact of the matter is, in today’s
digitally connected world, we wear our reputation “rating” on our forehead—
everyone knows who we are and what we are made up of. There is nowhere to
hide, and each one of us will need to manage our own reputation in this open,
transparent, and naked world, and face consequences accordingly. The best part
of the open source era is that it is a self-governing system where undesirable
behavior cannot be hidden and becomes a liability for those choosing to practice
it. Only genuine and sincere people will survive and thrive in the long run.
Coming back to our favorite example of Uber again, would you accept a driver
with a 2.5 rating, or would you cancel immediately and request another car?
To summarize, 80:20 is a fact of life. In organizations, it’s derivative—the
20:60:20 applies to performance distribution whether we like it or not. So, both
with setting goals and vacation time, instead of “managing” performance, we
need to free up people to work (or not) as they best see fit, and reward

accordingly.
Employee Motivation and the Role of the Manager
So, now that you’ve read about this new philosophy for performance
management, and considered some of the arguments I have put forward, I’ll
guarantee you have two main objections! First, you are wondering why any
employee will be motivated to achieve beyond the bare minimum, and secondly,
if we are leaving it up to employees to drive their own performance, where does
this leave their immediate manager? Am I right? Well, let’s take these one at a
time because they are both important points, and critical to understanding the
success of the framework. They are also deeply intertwined.
First of all, let’s talk about motivation. Motivation at heart is both very
complex and very simple. We are all, as workers and as humans, motivated by a
complex mix of emotions and drivers based on millions of years of evolution, as
well as our personalities, our personal histories, our goals, and our past, present,
or future circumstances. We are all uniquely individual and yet frequently quite
similar. So complex is motivation that thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of
books and articles have been written, attempting to explore the reasons why
employees are motivated to perform well or badly. Yet there has never been a
clear outcome that has caused every organization to think, Yes! We know how to
motivate our employees to achieve their stretch goals!
A study by professor of psychology and psychiatry at Ohio State University
Stephen Reiss was the result of five years of intensive research into human
motivation, and I think sheds interesting light on the problem. Reiss and his
graduate students conducted studies of more than 6,000 people and from that
identified 16 basic desires that guide our behavior, drive our everyday actions,
and make us who we are. Of the 16 desires,* at least 14 (idealism and
acceptance are the outliers) may have a genetic component. What makes us all
unique is the combination and ranking of these desires. We all prioritize each
desire differently, and what drives one person may have no meaning for another.
There are two outcomes that Reiss has found from this study that I think
have relevance to our discussion. First, we often tend to assume that we all have
very similar motivations and what is best for one person is best for another.
Professor Reiss uses “workaholism” as an example of this. Some people may be
driven to work long hard hours, not necessarily because they are trying to fill a
void or lack in their lives, but because their main drivers are power and status.

Working long hours might be considered the best way to achieve their desires,
yet those who are not motivated by the same drivers can consider this unhealthy
or “wrong.” In fact, it’s just a manifestation of a different desire profile.
Secondly, Reiss makes clear that no one motivation is better or worse than the
other, but there are structures and systems built into our society that penalize
individuals who might be driven by different desires. He cites the modern
education system as an example, arguing that the system assumes that all
children are driven by curiosity, and penalizes those children who are naturally
not-curious. Instead, he argues, “It’s OK to be non-curious. As long as the child
is not failing, and is meeting the minimum standards, parents need to ease up on
expectations . . . all they are doing is ruining their relationship.” (Italics mine.)
Ring any bells? As we unpack motivation and understand how this new
framework of performance management with minimum goals and unlimited
vacation might work, it’s critical to keep in mind that each employee will be
driven by a complex and individual web of motivation. Neither is good or bad,
and neither will be exactly the same. To apply a “one-size-fits-all” method of
stretch goals to a diverse group of people and to expect them to be motivated and
perform equally is an exercise in disappointment. As with the schoolchildren and
their parents, so too will organizations need to “ease up on expectations” and
realize that their employees can and will not be motivated the same or in fact
perform the same, simply because of who we are as diverse individuals.
I’m going to come back to this point later when I discuss the role of the
manager, but it’s important to keep in mind that Reiss clearly states that no one
motivation is more meaningful or “legitimate” than any other. I say this because
his 16 drivers include both intrinsic and extrinsic motivations. There is a
hierarchy in certain parts of our culture that suggests intrinsic motivation (doing
things for the good of others, or doing things for abstractions like honor or
idealism) is somehow more “worthy” than doing things for extrinsic motivations
(money, power, or status). While there are clear caveats (the disaster at Enron
pops to mind), I will argue that both sources of motivation are equally valid, and
it is the changing role of the manager that will need to identify, validate, and
utilize those motivation drivers.
Are Managers a Dying Breed?
I discussed the role of a manager back in Chapter 1, and discovered that the key
tenets of management have remained unchanged since the first half of the
twentieth century. Management guru Peter Drucker, working in the 1950s,

established the five priorities of managers that still define the role more than 60
years later. They were: objective setting, organizing the group, motivating and
communicating, measuring performance, and developing people. Under
Drucker’s theories, and most theories since, managers have taken on
responsibility for their employees’ performance, assuming that it is their role to
set stretch goals, motivate their staff to achieve them, and then measure and
reward their supposedly successful performance.
Let’s consider this model and what it might mean. According to Gallup,
managers are doing such a poor job in motivating and measuring their workers
that at least 50 percent of employees in the United States have left a job to get
away from a manager at some point in their career. This finding, and the model,
suggests that managers play the core role in employee motivation and
performance and are entirely failing. Added to this, organizations and employees
are constantly decrying the lack of good managers (if we apply 20:60:20 to this,
only 20 percent of managers could be said to be doing a truly inspirational job),
with Gallup again finding that companies fail to choose the right manager for the
job 82 percent of the time.
Given that the management model was created in the 1950s, it’s not
surprising that it is no longer working in the open source era. In the mid-
twentieth-century landscape, work tended to be more manual or repetitive, and
managers tended to play a much more significant role in motivating employees.
Furthermore, in the absence of the Internet, they were accessible gurus who
provided an example of where an employee could be if he or she worked hard
enough. But this is no longer the case. Similar to what we saw in contract
grading, the “sage on the stage” model of management is no longer relevant.
Workers no longer look to their managers as gurus from whom they can learn,
and have resources far beyond their workplace from which to gain knowledge,
expertise, or inspiration. The guru is dead, long live Google!
So, what do we make of Gallup’s “people leave managers, not companies”
research? As I said above, the manager was probably the key driver of
engagement prior to the advent of the open source era. Both Drucker and Gallup
were right—the manager had to shoulder the burden of motivating her
employees until then. But is it still true in today’s economy? To find out, we
asked approximately 16,000 people in 28 countries to tell us on what their
motivation to excel at their job most depended. We gave them 100 points and
asked them to distribute them into three sources of on-the-job motivation: Boss,
Self, or Both. We wanted to test if the manager was still as important in driving
motivation, and were curious about how many of our respondents would give

more than 50 points to the Self category—in other words, how many would say
that the biggest driver of their motivation was within themselves. Guess what
percentage of our respondents ended up reporting Self as the main driver? Sixty-
nine percent (Figure 4.1). Only 14 percent of respondents nominated their
manager as their primary source of motivation, while 17 percent indicated it was
a combination of both.


FIGURE 4.1 Primary Driver of Motivation (Aggregate)
Primary Driver of Motivation: Self or Boss
Breaking down by country, we saw remarkable consistency (Figure 4.2). Even
countries where the “self” score was relatively lower, it was still the largest
category.
FIGURE 4.2 Primary Driver of Motivation (by Country)
So, while it might still be true that people leave managers, not companies,
the reverse is not true. What I mean is that our data shows that managers are not
the key drivers of motivation to excel in the job. In other words, having a good
manager is no guarantee that the employee will be highly engaged. I agree that
managers play a part in an individual’s enjoyment of a role—everyone wants to
get along with fellow workers, and for many of us the social and team aspects of
work contribute to the meaning that we derive from our occupation. But the

manager is simply a vessel for individuals’ frustrations with their jobs and the
failed structure of the performance management system. In some cases, I have
no doubt, there are personal issues. This is standard for any enterprise that
involves groups of people—we are animals and we clash! So some people might
leave because of their relationship with their manager. Yet my research has
found that the vast majority of employees are motivated more by themselves and
their own individual drivers and desires, rather than by any one thing that a
manager does or does not do.
So, what does this say about what a manager’s role in the open source era
should be? I have two suggestions.
1. Managers Should Stop Bearing the Burden of Motivating Their
Employees
No matter how much managers try, they cannot create motivation. Instead, they
should get much better at recognizing preexisting motivation, and putting
employees to work in areas and on projects that best utilize that preexisting
motivation. Speaking of motivation, in our global survey we also asked close to
16,000 respondents to tell us how they are motivated. The first question we
asked was: Are you more intrinsically or extrinsically motivated? Please indicate
by way of percentage which you believe is a greater motivator.
In other words, we asked them to allocate 100 points to three categories of
motivation sources: extrinsic, intrinsic, or equally extrinsic and intrinsic. (Figure
4.3). Extrinsic motivation here refers to drivers like money or status, whereas
intrinsic motivation refers to self-actualization needs like serving society or a
higher purpose. Twenty-seven percent of respondents allocated more than half
their points to extrinsic, that is, money and status were the most important
motivators for them. Another 27 percent said both were equally important and
allocated 50 points to each category. Forty-six percent allocated more than half
their points to intrinsic, making it the largest category.


FIGURE 4.3 Extrinsic or Intrinsic Motivation (Aggregate)
On this question, there were some differences by country, most notably
Russia, Malaysia, South Korea, and Japan, where “intrinsic” was not the largest
category (Figure 4.4). Overall, however, the data suggests that intrinsic
motivation is the bigger of the two drivers of engagement.
FIGURE 4.4 Extrinsic or Intrinsic Motivation (by Country)
What this means for managers is obvious. They need to uncover what
exactly motivates each of their people, and align their work accordingly. So, the
role of the manager changes, from being “motivators of people” to “motivation
aligners.” For those respondents who allocated more than 50 percent of their
points to the “intrinsic” category, we asked a further question:
Your previous responses indicate your motivation to perform is primarily
dependent on yourself, and that you are more intrinsically motivated. Please
rank the following drivers of motivation in order of importance to you.

We wanted to find out from those who had chosen “self” as the primary
driver in Figure 4.1 and “intrinsic” as a motivation source in Figure 4.3, what
exactly they need in order to be highly motivated. So, after talking to a large
number of such people, we devised a list and asked the “self” and “intrinsic”
responders to rank certain drivers in order of their importance to them. The result
was Figure 4.5.


FIGURE 4.5 Sources of Intrinsic Motivation
To no surprise, the opportunity to work on something that aligned with their
passion and strengths ended up at the very top. The opportunity to make a
positive difference and to continuously challenge themselves to raise the bar
were also seen as very important drivers. In other words, self-motivated people
look for meaningful work more than anything else, and are ready to challenge or
stretch themselves to make a difference. Perhaps what this data also says is that
those who are unclear about their values, purpose, and passions are more
dependent upon their environment (boss, working conditions) for their
motivation.
It is clear that each person is motivated by different considerations. The
primary job of managers should therefore be to find out what they are, and align
and assign work accordingly. Additionally, despite this brave new world,
organizations will still need structures, still need some administration and
performance management, and still need leaders at all levels who can pull
together teams with vision and direction. In addition to deeply understanding
preexisting motivation and aligning staff accordingly, managers must focus on
overall vision, mission, and strategy formulation. Therein lies what I believe to
be the new role of a manager.
2. Managers Should Accept the 80:20 Rule
Managers must understand that only 20 percent of workers can and want to rise
to the challenge of a stretch goal and far exceed expectations. Wholly 60 percent
of workers do not find stretch goals motivating, either because they don’t align
with their intrinsic motivations or because they have other priorities in their life
at the time. Twenty percent of workers are never going to be motivated to
achieve beyond the minimum, no matter what external motivation or challenge is
thrown at them. If managers continue to take on the responsibility of motivating
all their employees to the maximum, the exercise can only end in failure and
frustration and an allegedly poor performance on the managers’ part. Instead,
after deeply understanding sources of employees’ existing motivation triggers,
managers should adopt the philosophy of setting minimum goals, and help those
who want to achieve to stretch. In this sense, they should become mentors for
those who choose to be in the top 20 percent. It is a mistake to leave your highest
performers alone. Many managers do so, to focus instead on their “problem

children.” This is a double-edged problem because without coaching and
mentoring, the high performers don’t usually achieve their full potential, and
despite all the time and attention, the low performers don’t always improve. As I
mentioned earlier, a feature of the 80:20 rule is that the top 20 percent of the top
20 percent have a disproportionately higher impact on overall organizational
performance. Managers should therefore save enough time to coach and guide
them in realizing their true potential. If they adopt the minimum goal
methodology, they can free themselves up significantly to do so.
Furthermore, managers must acknowledge that the middle 60 percent and the
bottom 20 percent are also essential to the success of a business, and manage
them accordingly. It is the remaining 80 percent that support the top 20 percent
in creating the magic that they (the top 20 percent) do. If the top 20 percent get
bogged down in routine executional work, they will not be as effective. In order
to continue innovating, they need the 80 percent to execute their ideas. The top
20 percent are motivated to create excellence through innovation and other
means. To do this, they are willing to go above and beyond the normal call of
duty. Most of the remaining 80 percent still want to do good work, but not
necessarily go above and beyond because they may have other priorities. Just
because people do not want to stretch themselves does not mean they are poor
workers. The key lies in understanding the needs and desires of all segments of
the performance bell curve—a point I will elaborate further in the next chapter.
A “one-size-fits-all” stretch goal, and a “one-size-fits-all” way of working does
not fit in the empowered open source age, when individuals are looking for
meaning both in and outside their work, and have no hesitation in moving on to
the next job if the current one doesn’t work.
The cornerstone of this new relationship between manager and employee is
trust and communication. Employees must be able to trust that they can choose
their level of motivation and performance at or above the minimum, and that
their choice will not be penalized either in the present or the future. Equally, the
manager will have to trust his or her staff member to make the best decision for
himself or herself, and not impose his own motivations or career goals onto the
employee. For some managers, this will be difficult. We all want what we
perceive to be “the best” for ourselves and our staff, but this will involve putting
aside our own biases and opinions and accepting that each employee is different,
and has different motivations for being at work and deciding what to achieve. It
is difficult because the logic is counterintuitive—as I explained earlier, you have
to give up control to improve overall performance.
This trust should be based on constant, frequent, and meaningful

communication between the two parties, so both are on the same page about
motivation, circumstance, goals, and performance. Frequent feedback from both
sides will ensure that both parties are clear on expectations. Like contract
grading, expectations and rewards must be laid out clearly and concisely, so
neither party is caught short come the end of the year.
At first glance, the recommendations of this chapter might seem to contradict
Chapter 2, where we argued that leaders need to be autocratic. If we give up
control of performance back to our employees, how can we be autocratic? But if
you look carefully, there is no contradiction. What this new way of managing
implies is that managers remain autocratic about their values and purpose, and at
the same time, are sensitive and caring about the needs of their employees.
While the values-based behavior should be absolutely nonnegotiable and
expected from all employees, how much they choose to contribute (and
consequently how much they choose to be rewarded) can be flexible based on
each employee’s unique motivation triggers. This is completely in line with the
“freedom within a framework” concept we discussed in Chapter 2, which Coca-
Cola and many other companies use very well in today’s context. This
philosophy will involve a massive mindset shift, and there are times when it will
not be easy. What I am proposing is a move away from almost a century of habit,
thought, and practice. It throws away the tropes of motivation and performance
that we have held dear for so long. But the fact is that in order to remain relevant
in the next decades, organizations must adapt, and those adaptations must be
drastic and sweeping. I can understand that organizations and managers will be
fearful; what will happen if we stop wielding the big carrot and stick of stretch
goals, performance management, and expectation that we have wielded for so
long? Yes, this new approach involves giving up control. But giving up control
and empowering employees to choose how and how much to contribute will
enhance overall organizational performance, and free managers of the burden of
“motivating” all employees the same way—something that has always been, and
will remain, impossible.
The tectonic shifts that are happening in our organizational, business, and
social worlds will continue regardless of whether or not we are ready. The open
source era is placing a huge amount of freedom and opportunity at the hands of
employees. The command and control style of management, and the one-size-
fits-all performance management yardstick, will not work anymore in this age of
mass customization. Organizations and leaders which flourish will need to make
these bold, brave, unprecedented steps in order to rise to the challenges and
opportunities coming our way. Throwing away the old tropes around

performance management, stretch goals, and motivation will take a leap of faith,
but it is one that is critical to move forward into groundbreaking new territory.
Only those managers and leaders who are comfortable and confident in their
own skin will be able to do this. To be one of those, you will need to first find
your leadership energy from your values and purpose as described in Chapter 3.
Once empowered that way, you will not need to worry about loss of control.
Your employees will choose to follow you because of your leadership energy,
not because of your span of control.
We’ve discussed some seemingly radical but much needed ideas for open
source era performance management in this chapter. In the next chapter let’s
look at current organizational practices at measuring and managing employee
engagement, and see if we need an operating system update there, too.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 The 80:20 rule is omnipresent and shows that in any group, only 20 percent of
the people will excel and work at a stretch level. It is therefore futile to have
all employees write stretch goals.
 Organizations should consider setting minimum rather than stretch goals for
all employees, and leave it up to employees if they want to do more.
Performance will eventually fall into a 20:60:20 bell-shaped distribution.
Those that want to excel will come forward and do so.
 Keeping this in mind, some companies have already started allowing
unlimited vacations.
 Like leaders, in the open source era, employees are also naked. In this sense,
it is a self-governing environment where undesirable players will be
exposed and left behind.
 In the open source era, employees must manage themselves like
entrepreneurs, and decide how much they want to be rewarded or punished.
 Managers are not the primary source of motivation anymore. Consequently,
they should stop “motivating” and start identifying what employees are
already motivated by.

Questions for Reflection
1. What is the performance management policy and process at your
organization?
2. How can you minimize supervision in order to maximize
performance?
3. How must the role of the manager change with changing social and
demographic trends?
* Popularized by Jim Collins in his global bestseller Good to Great.
* We will discuss natural innovation and succession planning in Chapter 6.
* The 16 desires identified by Professor Reiss are, in no particular order: power, independence, curiosity,
acceptance, order, saving, honor, idealism, social contact, family, status, vengeance, romance, eating,
physical exercise, tranquility.

CHAPTER 5
No More Engagement Surveys
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

B
en Casnocha is a Silicon Valley entrepreneur, angel investor, and coauthor
of The Alliance, written with LinkedIn founder and chairman Reid Hoffman
and fellow Silicon Valley entrepreneur Chris Yeh. Like Dr. William Tan, whom
we met in Chapter 3, Ben was invited to speak at the 2016 Leadership Energy
Summit Asia (LESA), a conference about leadership energy that my company
hosts every year in several Asian cities. The conference has a mix of speakers
who discuss either personal or enterprise leadership energy. Having read The
Alliance, I requested Ben to talk about the latter. Over the two days that he was
with us I had several conversations with him, all of which were fascinating.
“The whole foundation of modern employment is based on a dishonest
conversation,” he said, while describing how companies hire employees these
days. Even though both employee and employer know that the company can fire
anyone “at will” without any reason whatsoever, and that employees can jump
ship anytime they see better opportunities, both parties lie to each other.
Employers talk about the possibility of having a long-term career with the
company, and employees reciprocate by pretending the company is where they
have always wanted to work, and are looking forward to staying for the rest of
their career.
Yet we all know that the days of lifetime employment are over. To illustrate
his point, Casnocha speaks of General Electric. “In 1963, a GE executive said
that maximizing employee job security is a prime company goal. In that era, a
career was like a marriage. Fast-forward to the 1990s, and Jack Welch, GE’s
CEO, said that “loyalty to a company is nonsense, and employees have to prove
themselves every day.” Drawing an interesting analogy, he continued, “On one
hand, companies hire employees and say, welcome to the family. Yet they fire
you the moment things get difficult. In a real family, parents can’t fire their
children. Imagine disowning a child for poor performance. We’re sorry Suzie,
but your mom and I have decided you’re just not a good fit for us. Your table
setting skills aren’t delivering the exceptional customer service experience we’re
known for. We’re going to have to let you go. But don’t take it the wrong way; it’s
just family.”
If loyalty is indeed nonsense in this age of “at will” employment contracts,
how can companies ensure high employee engagement? And will traditional
methods of measuring and addressing engagement levels work in today’s open
source era?
Back in 1987, I took up my first full-time corporate job at American Express
in India. Since then I have lived in eight countries and worked with many

Fortune 100 companies either as an employee or as a consultant. Almost every
company I’ve interacted with so far agrees that employee engagement is one of
its top priorities. The logic goes something like this: engaged employees (those
willing to go the extra mile in their jobs) make customers happy, and satisfied
customers in turn make shareholders happy by giving the company their loyalty
and repeat business. So, it makes sense to measure and address employee
engagement levels, right? Yes! But the way employee engagement is measured
and addressed in most organizations might be causing more problems than it
solves. Most organizations rely on an annual employee survey to determine
engagement levels and spend significant amounts of time and money each year
addressing issues highlighted by the survey. And therein lies the problem.
Problem 1: One-Size-Fits-All Surveys
The biggest problem with employee engagement surveys stems again from
ignoring the 80:20 rule. Most HR departments swear by the fact that
performance falls on a bell-shaped curve, where 20 percent of employees are
exceptional performers, 60 percent are average, and 20 percent are low
performers. Even managers who hate the bell curve and strongly oppose any
edicts that require them to force-stack their people along the 20-60-20
distribution are unable to deny the fact that everyone in a group cannot perform
at the same level. Even in a blue chip company that hires the brightest and the
best, employee performance distributes itself in a bell shape. Their bell curve
may be on a higher achieving axis than other companies, but the shape doesn’t
change. Wherever you look in this case, HR is absolutely right.
However, when it comes to sending out the annual employee engagement
survey, HR departments send it out to all staff regardless of where their
performance falls on the bell curve, then average the data to get scores on each
item. The lowest scoring items are then addressed with initiatives led by
management, so that overall scores can improve by the following year. But if it
is true that 20 percent of the employees produce 80 percent of the results, or only
20 percent of the people perform at a truly exceptional level, what happens when
you average out the responses of all employees regardless of performance? Quite
simply, the voice of the top 20 percent is drowned under the voices of the
remaining 80 percent. Gallup claims to be one of the leading firms when it
comes to measuring employee engagement. By its own admission, only 13
percent of the global working population is engaged. In other words, the

remaining 87 percent make up the bulk of the voice in employee surveys. If time
and money is then spent on addressing employee engagement concerns based on
this data, does the company end up encouraging excellence or mediocrity?
This idea of hoping to drive excellence but ending up inadvertently
promoting mediocrity is what I call the “Intention Excellence, Outcome
Mediocrity” trap. For decades, large organizations around the world have been
conducting engagement surveys as described above, and have been victims of
the trap. It is time to look for a better way.
The solution is simple. If survey you must, send out the same engagement
survey separately (in batches) to your top, average, and low performers, and find
out what each segment has to say. This way, the needs of each segment can be
better understood, and management can make more informed decisions on where
to spend their time and money. As Cy Wakeman says on Forbes.com, “Don’t
treat every opinion the same. Listen to what your top performers tell you.
They’ve proved their value and earned their credibility, so go ahead, play
favorites. Spend less energy on the demands and complaints of your worst
employees. You know the ones—resistant, hard to please, full of excuses.”
Casnocha agrees with this argument and says, “You have to treat your most
valuable people differently. Your most valuable people are those with an
entrepreneurial mindset.”
While I agree with Wakeman and Casnocha to a large extent, I also believe
that average performers remain a very important part of any organization. They
are the ones who enable the top 20 percent to drive 80 percent of the results.
They are generally good workers, but as I highlighted in Chapter 4, they may
have interests outside of work as well. They may not be as ambitious about their
careers as the top 20 percent, but that does not make them slackers. They simply
have different needs and expectations from the workplace that must be
understood and addressed. Similarly, the bottom 20 percent may be performing
lower than the rest, but if they are doing the minimum required of them, they are
needed too.
Let’s take another example to illustrate. If we were to plot the earnings of all
freelance graphic designers in New York City on a chart, it is probably safe to
assume that the earnings data will form a bell-shaped distribution. About 20
percent of the designers will be high revenue earners, about 60 percent will fall
in the average earner category, and the remaining 20 percent will be low revenue
earners. But can we say that the bottom 20 percent are slackers or bad designers?
No. There could be several reasons why people are in the bottom 20 percent.
Perhaps they are students who only work on weekends to balance their budgets.

Perhaps they are young moms who only work during school hours. Perhaps they
do freelance graphics and another job and devote more time to the other job. In
other words, they may be in the bottom 20 percent by choice. It does not
automatically make them bad graphic designers. The same might be the case
with today’s full-time employees. As I explained in Chapter 4, they may be
performing at the minimum level by choice. In today’s free economy, it could
mean that they don’t want to work any more than the minimum because of other
interests and priorities.
At whatever level they choose to perform, every employee needs to be
engaged enough to provide a consistent experience to customers. As you will see
in the next chapter, even free agents need to be engaged enough to behave in
accordance with company values. They must display an “owner mentality”
rather than a “renter mentality.” So, it is important to understand their voices and
needs through a survey or other means, and to address those needs. But treating
all employees the same way and averaging engagement scores across the
organization distorts the picture, and makes the whole exercise far less effective
than it ought to be.
Of course, if performance falls below minimum acceptable standards, or it
becomes clear over time that the employee does not have the basic skills needed
to perform at a satisfactory level, appropriate action must be taken. But you
simply cannot have an entire employee population made up of superstars either.
By segmenting the employee engagement survey data and by designing
segmented responses, companies can avoid the trap of accidentally promoting
mediocrity, and make much better decisions to address the needs of all segments.
Problem 2: Annual Surveys Are a Panacea for All
Things Engagement
Are surveys even the best way to address employee engagement in the first
place? If a company runs a survey every year, it creates an expectation with
employees that something will be done, and that the “something” must be done
by management. So, it becomes a one-sided affair. If management responds with
a few initiatives, there are many that feel their voice wasn’t heard or acted upon.
If management does not respond at all, every employee feels cheated. The whole
process can very quickly become a lose-lose proposition.
Instead of the annual survey, what if leaders were to use the age-old method

of “management by walking around,” and actually talk to people throughout the
year? And what if companies could leverage social technology to remain in
touch with people in real time, all year long? After all, if the aim is to create an
environment in which people are happy and flourishing, why wait for the annual
survey? Unfortunately, too many HR departments and too many senior
management teams get so fixated on improving survey scores that they miss the
underlying point—to engage more with their people and improve the wider
company culture.
As Bloomberg writer Elizabeth Ryan says, “When you blast out a once-a-
year engagement survey, the message it sends your employees is insulting. A
reliance on employee surveys in any organization makes it clear that
communication isn’t what it should be. If you care what your team members
think, ask them to talk to you all the time, face-to-face or mediated by
technology. If your leadership team has determined through a survey algorithm
that you had a problem in some area—say, in the preparedness of your first-line
supervisors to lead—what good would that numeric score do you? What would
you need to solve the problem? You’d need stories. So why not collect stories
from the start, as they unfold?”
Problem 3: Annual Surveys Are Seen as an HR
Activity
HR departments love annual surveys because the results get the attention of
management. HR analyzes and presents data to management, and management is
asked to act upon it. So in this sense it makes HR’s life a bit easier—“See, I told
you that you need to pay attention to your employees.” An external entity
usually conducts the survey to ensure anonymity, and it is treated as a stand-
alone initiative. In reality most employees also see the survey as an HR issue,
and treat it as a check-the-box activity. If results don’t improve, the blame is
placed squarely on HR’s shoulders.
However, if an organization is really serious about employee engagement,
the answer instead is to develop a compelling organizational purpose, and a set
of values that define its culture. As George Serafeim at Harvard and Claudine
Gartenberg at Stern found out in their research study, purpose-clarity companies
—those companies where employees perceive a higher sense of purpose and
where management provides clarity of direction—showed better accounting and
stock market performance. Purpose-clarity was measured with survey statements

like “My work has special meaning, this is not just a job”; “I feel good about the
ways we contribute to the community”; “When I look at what we accomplish, I
feel a sense of pride”; and “I’m proud to tell others I work here.” Management
clarity, on the other hand, was measured by statements like “Management makes
its expectations clear” and “Management has a clear view of where the
organization is going and how to get there.”
Problem 4: Survey Scores Are Used to Evaluate
Leadership Performance
In some organizations, engagement survey results are linked to leaders’
scorecards. This is probably the most inappropriate use of the survey. If leaders
and managers know that their performance rating—and therefore their bonus—
depends in part on their employee survey results, they quickly learn to game the
system and engage in unhealthy behavior just to prop up scores. As I mentioned
in Chapter 3, bosses become pleasers—another form of followership—and make
decisions based on what their employees want rather than what they need. I have
seen many bosses who resort to all sorts of gimmicks during the survey season,
like departmental family picnics and office parties. Knowing that employees fill
out the survey based on how they feel at a given point in time, bosses are able to
manipulate their behavior in the period just leading up to the survey to make sure
everyone is in a good mood.
Another fallout of linking leadership performance to employee engagement
scores is linked to Problem 1. If a leader is doing what is right for the business,
and if that has an adverse effect on the lower half of the bell curve, then lower
performing employees can penalize the leader by low-scoring his leadership
style. This makes it difficult for the leader to make tough but needed decisions
without harming his own interests. To avoid unpopularity and low engagement
scores to go with it, bosses at times shy away from doing what is right. By using
engagement survey scores to measure leadership performance, we end up
promoting followership instead of real leadership.
So, if annual surveys are not the answer to measure and address employee
engagement, what should companies do instead? To answer this question, I first
want to go back to my conversations with Ben Casnocha to share what he, Reid
Hoffman, and Chris Yeh suggest, and then offer my own perspective. I will in
fact offer an alternative to the annual survey that is much more powerful.

Entrepreneurial Employees on Tours of Duty
To maximize employee engagement, Casnocha says the first thing companies
need to do is bring honesty back into the employment equation. While
acknowledging that the days of lifetime employment are over, his coauthors and
he suggest a two-pronged approach: (1) attract people with an entrepreneurial
mindset, and (2) offer those people “tours of duty” rather than regular
employment contracts. What makes Silicon Valley so successful, they argue, is
that it is all about the people. In The Alliance, they write, “The most successful
Silicon Valley businesses succeed because they use the alliance to recruit,
manage, and retain an incredibly talented team of entrepreneurial employees.”
Instead of trying to treat employees as family, the Valley has honest, limited time
alliances with people in the form of tours of duty.
Why entrepreneurial employees? And what kind of employees are they?
They are the people who possess a “founder” mindset. To elaborate, The
Alliance quotes former eBay CEO and PayPal chairman John Donahoe, “People
with a founder mindset drive change, motivate people, and just get stuff done.”
Founders or entrepreneurs are motivated and engaged because it is their own
business. In today’s gig economy, everyone should be the CEO of his or her own
career and have an entrepreneurial or founder mindset, because even if one
doesn’t start one’s own business, most companies still want their employees to
behave like entrepreneurs. I argued in Chapter 4 that companies should give
employees the maximum freedom possible because in today’s economy there is
no other option. In return for the freedom, companies have a right to expect
responsible entrepreneurial behavior. This is what Silicon Valley is all about.
Can this ideology be applied to other industries and in other countries?
Absolutely. The gig economy (where short-term temporary positions are
common) is a global phenomenon, not just a Silicon Valley anomaly.
Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh use the story of John Lasseter at Pixar to
describe the entrepreneurial mindset. Lasseter’s movies Toy Story, Finding
Nemo, and Monsters, Inc. have grossed over $3.5 billion in the United States
alone. Lasseter was originally employed at Disney, where he pitched the idea of
a fully computer-generated animation film only to be fired for his “crazy ideas.”
Undeterred, Lasseter took his entrepreneurial mindset and idea to George Lucas,
who gave him a job as a computer animator. Lucas eventually sold his company
to Steve Jobs, who renamed it Pixar. In 1995, Pixar, in partnership with Disney,
released the world’s first computer animated film—Toy Story. When Disney
finally realized its mistake, it brought Lasseter back by buying Pixar from Steve

Jobs for $7 billion.
In contrast, the authors talk about Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, who reacted
very differently when one of his employees, Benjamin Black, mooted the idea of
cloud computing. Bezos recognized the potential and pushed it through, despite
opposition from his board about moving away from the company’s core business
of online retailing. Bezos’s decision eventually made Amazon the biggest global
player in cloud computing. Clearly, the two stories show how both employees
and employers need to maintain an entrepreneurial mindset in today’s fast-
moving economy.
With entrepreneurial employees, though, companies must have honest
alliances in the shape of tours of duty. Instead of offering them false promises of
lifetime employment, companies should instead offer lifetime employability. In
an alliance, an employer and employee agree on a tour of duty of about two to
four years in which both parties agree on mutually beneficial outcomes. At the
end of a tour of duty, they may either part ways amicably or enter into another
mutually beneficial tour of duty. Hoffman and his coauthors describe three types
of tours of duty:
 Rotational. A structured program of a finite duration, usually aimed at entry-
level employees to give them exposure to a number of functions through a
structured rotational program.
 Transformational. Rather than a finite period, a transformational tour of duty
is linked to completing a specific mission that transforms both the company
and the employee.
 Foundational. In a foundational tour of duty, the employee’s personal
purpose is the mission of the company itself. There is perfect alignment
between the two.
The difference between the three types of tours is the extent of alignment
between employee interests and company interests. In a rotational tour, the
alignment may be modest; in a transformational tour, it is significant; and in a
foundational tour it is almost 100 percent. The key to engaging employees is in
having honest, tailor-made agreements based on tours of duty.
Use Culture to Drive Engagement
While I totally agree with Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh, I believe leaders can

additionally use their culture to drive employee engagement. Instead of using an
annual satisfaction or engagement survey, they can use a values-based 360-
degree feedback system. Let me explain.
At the end of the day, whether or not an employee is fully engaged depends
in large part on the extent of the match or mismatch between an employee’s
personal values and the culture of the organization he or she works for. Let’s
understand organizational culture first, then I’ll get back to personal values and
the 360 idea. What is an organization’s culture? It is a word that is often
misunderstood or made unnecessarily complicated by many. A quick Google on
the words “corporate culture” reveals many confusing or complicated definitions
and constructs.
Investopedia defines organizational culture as:
the beliefs and behaviors that determine how a company’s employees and
management interact and handle outside business transactions. Often,
corporate culture is implied, not expressly defined, and develops
organically over time from the cumulative traits of the people the
company hires. A company’s culture will be reflected in its dress code,
business hours, office setup, employee benefits, turnover, hiring
decisions, treatment of clients, client satisfaction and every other aspect
of operations.
The Small Business Encyclopedia defines organizational culture as:
a blend of the values, beliefs, taboos, symbols, rituals and myths all
companies develop over time. Whether written as a mission statement,
spoken or merely understood, corporate culture describes and governs
the ways a company’s owners and employees think, feel and act.
These definitions were just on the first search page on Google. In total, there
were 14.5 million search results for “corporate culture.” So much information,
yet culture is so hard to define, shape, and understand. So first things first, let me
offer two very simple ways of looking at corporate or organizational culture:
1. Culture is what your people do when no one is looking.
2. Culture is your organizational values in action or inaction.
This might be an oversimplification, but I believe it is required. I have seen
too many companies complicating their culture-transformation efforts to such an

extent that they amount to absolutely nothing. If we simply look at the culture of
an organization in terms of the behaviors and habits of its people, it ought to be
enough. Do people do the right thing when the boss is away? Whatever the
answer, that is the culture of the organization or team. Do people live the stated
values of the organization day in and day out, or are the values just posters on
the wall? Again, whatever the answer, that is the culture of the organization.
So how can an organization ensure that a desired values-based culture takes
root? Simple. Make values-based behavior count. If I am measured, rewarded, or
punished based on my values-based behavior, I am more likely to pay attention
to it. If company values are just pretty posters that management doesn’t really do
anything with, as an employee I am unlikely to take them seriously. It really does
not have to be more complicated than that. Coming back to the question of
employee engagement, an employee’s engagement to a large extent will depend
upon:
1. The extent to which stated values match the employee’s personal values
2. The extent to which those values are in action or inaction throughout the
organization
Clearly, if the mismatch between personal values and organizational values is
too big, or if the values are correct but are not practiced by a majority of the
people, the employee will be highly disengaged, and will probably leave. If there
is a significant match on those two fronts, the employee is much more likely to
be engaged, and will choose to stay.
So how can organizations measure and reward or punish values-based
behavior? There are several ways, none of which are perfect. Whichever
framework is chosen, management will need to stay on top of it, and tweak it
regularly before it becomes ineffective. My favorite framework is to establish a
values-based 360-degree feedback process and link it to compensation, rewards,
and promotion. To my knowledge, no one does this better than Goldman Sachs,
where each year every employee receives 360-degree feedback based on the
company’s business principles, and employees’ compensation is directly linked
to the outcome. Goldman partners and employees are often asked why their firm
has historically been the most successful on the street, and they all attribute it to
their strong culture of teamwork, and to their robust 360-degree feedback
process.
I believe an annual 360-degree feedback process is far better than the annual
employee survey. It measures the extent to which each employee lives the

organizational values, and forces them to do so or move on. Since humans are
societal beings, nothing shames someone more than getting negative behavioral
feedback from peers, subordinates, and seniors. Over time as the system
encourages employees to behave in a certain way (or leave), a desired culture
takes shape. As the culture takes root, it encourages aligned employees to be
highly engaged and stay longer. The 360 process makes engagement a shared
responsibility between employer and employee, and makes it personal. As I
explained in Chapter 4, an annual employee survey is a one-sided affair where
employees give feedback but it is the management’s responsibility to fix
problems.
But don’t expect this model to be easily accepted. If you try to implement a
compensation-linked 360, expect serious resistance. Like any other human
system, it has its flaws, but of all the processes I have seen it is the most
effective despite all the arguments against it. The most common criticism is that
it discourages people from making tough decisions that are required for the
business. A close second is that it encourages a “you scratch my back and I’ll
scratch yours” mentality. While both are possible, they can still be better
managed as compared to the annual employee survey. If a 360-degree feedback
process discourages leaders from making tough decisions, imagine what an all-
employee survey does. In the case of 360, only a handful of people provide
feedback, and a leader can manage their expectations through honest and regular
communication. In an employee survey, everyone provides feedback and makes
it much harder for the leader to make tough decisions, particularly if his
leadership performance is measured by his survey results. So as far as the first
criticism goes, the 360 is much more manageable. As for the second criticism of
encouraging the “you scratch my back and I’ll scratch yours” mentality, this can
be easily mitigated. All you have to do is ensure that employees’ rater lists are
approved by immediate managers. If someone is making his or her list up with
“friends and family,” the manager can intervene and ensure only those people the
employee works closely and regularly with are included.
When I introduced the annual 360 in my company, many people protested.
Some even complained to our board of directors that the practice was unfair, and
that too much weight (40 percent in our case) was attached to the 360 scores
while measuring overall performance. It has been one of the things that I chose
to be autocratic about, and after seven years of doing this annually, I can safely
say that we have a great culture of teamwork and excellence. People now know
that living the values is nonnegotiable, and that if they don’t like the company’s
values, they can choose to leave. And some did choose to leave. Those that

chose to stay have done so because they are comfortable with the company’s
values and relish the fact that we are a values-based company. We are far more
tolerant about employees missing their targets or KPIs as compared to getting
repeatedly low scores on their values-based 360. We believe that in a high-
ambition company, employees must take risks and try new things. Not all risks
and new ideas will work, so KPIs will sometimes not be achieved as imagined.
But as long as the employee lives the values of the company, we are not
concerned. We quickly put the setback behind us, learn from it, and move on to
the next thing. As I explained in Chapter 2, we are autocratic about our values
and purpose but compassionate and respectful with our employees. This makes
our employees loyal and motivated, which in turn makes us successful as an
organization. As consultants, we have helped many of our clients in establishing
a robust 360-degree feedback process, and many are really happy with the
results.
In summary, much like succession planning (which I will discuss in the next
chapter), employee engagement has become a spreadsheet, check-the-box
exercise. My purpose behind writing this chapter is to highlight the fact that in
today’s dynamic free-agency environment of uber-connectivity, only genuine
leadership will thrive. The days of check-the-box exercises are over. As
Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh say, the very foundation of modern employment is
based on a dishonest conversation. In the open source era where everyone is
naked, there is no place for dishonesty.
Leaders who are genuinely concerned about employee engagement should
not need annual engagement surveys. They know how to keep in touch with their
people on a human level. If the organization they lead is too large for them to
talk to everyone in person, they should devise methods to keep in touch all year
round rather than just once a year. For this, many a technology platform is
available. Engagement can be much better managed by shaping a winning,
values-based culture, and by making each employee a part of the process.
Finally, if an annual survey is a must, it is much better done in phases along the
bell curve, so that deeper information is uncovered about high, average, and low
performing employees.
Having discussed performance management, the role of the manager, and
employee engagement in this and the previous chapter, let us now look at two
more important responsibilities of organizational leadership—innovation and
leadership succession. In Chapter 6, we will look at twenty-first-century ready,
open source ways of addressing both.

CHAPTER SUMMARY
 Annual employee engagement surveys remain the main vehicle of measuring
and managing employee engagement in large organizations. But there is a
big flaw in this process—it goes against the 80:20 rule. The voice of the top
20 percent of performers (who produce 80 percent of the results) is drowned
under the voice of the remaining 80 percent. Inadvertently organizations
therefore end up promoting mediocrity instead of excellence.
 Organizations should hire employees with an entrepreneurial mindset, and
invest in their development through tours of duty. In return, these in-house
entrepreneurs will give their best to the organization.
 An annual values-based 360-degree feedback system is perhaps superior to an
engagement survey when it comes to building a culture of high engagement.
 If engagement surveys are necessary, doing them in a segmented way along
the bell curve might be the way to go.
Questions for Reflection
1. What is the current practice of measuring and addressing employee
engagement in your organization?
2. How can the concepts of this chapter (segmented surveys, 360-
degree feedback, tours of duty) be applied within your
organization?

CHAPTER 6
Crowdsourced Innovation and
Leadership Succession
CONTEXT
1. The Open Source Era
OPEN SOURCE PERSONAL LEADERSHIP
2. The Naked Autocrat Creates Breakthrough Results
3. Leadership Energy, Not Competencies
OPEN SOURCE ENTERPRISE LEADERSHIP
4. Minimum Supervision, Maximum Performance
5. No More Engagement Surveys
6. Crowdsourced Innovation and Leadership Succession

S
tephen van Vuuren lives in Greensboro, North Carolina, USA, and has been
working for over 10 years to turn his vision into reality. He has spent
countless hours weaving together a 40-minute documentary on space. This grand
film, In Saturn’s Rings, is intended for IMAX and Giant Screen Theatres. In
Saturn’s Rings is intended to take viewers on a journey through stunning images
of Earth, the Moon, and the Milky Way, culminating in a fly through Saturn’s
rings. The film uses no computer-generated images. Rather, it relies on over 7.5
million real images captured by the Hubble and other space missions and uses
innovative visual techniques developed by Stephen himself. Stephen’s purpose
in creating the film is to get people excited again about exploring the
possibilities that reside in outer space.
Stephen’s journey to create this film has taken many twists and turns. When
he began the project, his financial condition was less than ideal. He had limited
funding, which quickly turned into no funding after he exhausted his own
savings. He decided to take an alternative route to resolving his financial
dilemma by seeking volunteers to donate funds and help pay for his nonprofit
project. Stephen turned to the “crowd,” the legions of online amateurs and
professionals interested in space and creative films. After making a short video
trailer for his film, he posted it online, expecting donations to come rolling in.
They did not. In fact, the trailer sat unnoticed for almost a year. In March 2011,
an online science fiction magazine asked permission to post the trailer on its site.
Stephen says, “The next day my inbox went crazy and donations started rolling
in.” Things quickly picked up speed from there. NASA posted the video on its
website as a photo-of-the-day, and it promptly went viral.
The next step was to translate the enthusiasm into more substantial funding.
Using Kickstarter, a platform for crowdfunding whose “mission is to help bring
creative projects to life,” Stephen to date has raised almost $63,500 from more
than 500 supporters, almost double his original goal of $37,500. From the online
community of space enthusiasts also came volunteers who helped process over
seven million photographs to be used in the film. At the time of this writing as of
November 2016, Stephen was only months away from completing his film.
What kept Stephen going throughout this long journey? Obviously, he is an
example of personal leadership energy in action as discussed in Chapter 3. His
clarity of values and purpose has sustained him even when circumstances looked
dire, and many others would have given up. What is also remarkable is that
Stephen had a vision but no idea of how to make it happen, so he turned to the
“crowd,” not only to help fund his project but to bring it fully to life. Along the

way, he learned a lot about how to work with and leverage the power of the
crowd.
Indian Railways is the world’s largest employer with over 1.3 million
employees, and is notorious for its hierarchical, top-down culture. Once, while
talking to some of its executives, I asked how they found out about new
assignments, transfers to other locations, or changes in their day-to-day
responsibilities. “Surely you must have a conversation with your immediate
superior before something like that is expected of you, right?” I asked. To my
surprise, they said no. They found out about such things by way of a formal
memo. There was hardly any one-on-one communication. All key decisions
were made by the Railway Board, and cascaded down for implementation
without discussion. For decades, Indian Railways has suffered from declining
revenues, bulging costs, low employee morale, and extremely poor service.
While the board has tried many new initiatives over the years to improve the
overall poor performance, very few have taken off. So, in 2016, they turned over
a new leaf. Over a four-month period they organized a massive internal
crowdsourcing initiative, covering all 1.3 million employees, to solicit ideas on
how to turn around this vast, colonial-era ship. All employees were asked to
submit ideas, which were evaluated and patented by zonal teams, and the top 30
ideas were presented to the railway minister and the prime minister at a massive
retreat November 18–20, 2016. Ultimately, eight ideas, ranging from converting
railway stations into banking and shopping hubs, to creating a one-stop app for
all passenger needs, were selected for implementation. Even a government-run
organization as old-fashioned as Indian Railways has realized that it needs to
bring about transformative change, and that it needed to harness the power of the
“crowd” to do so. While results will take some time before they become visible,
the quality of ideas collected is already very impressive. Another big benefit is
the excitement and pride generated within the rank-and-file. As one linesman
exclaimed, “Now, even my voice will reach the prime minister.”
From independent filmmakers like Stephen to the world’s largest employer,
the crowd is now for anyone. It is a powerful tool for individuals and
organizations interested in alternative approaches to speed up their innovation
and development of products and services. It can also be a source for critical
organizational talent in an age where the war for talent, as originally described
by McKinsey & Co., has been fought and won by the talents rather than the
organization.
But it will take leadership to leverage this power. The Internet has enabled
the democratization of innovation and talent identification, significantly

increasing the chances (and speed) of organizational success and sustainability.
Now, anyone can connect with millions of people around the world, any day or
any time, to innovate. The Internet is arguably the biggest force shaping the
twenty-first century with its power to connect people and things 24/7 and make
once closely held knowledge and information available to the masses. The
crowd, individuals that virtually congregate based upon shared interests, when
engaged correctly and for the right purpose, can be a powerful source of
innovation and the talent needed to drive it.
In the first part of this chapter I will describe how crowdsourcing can be, at
minimum, an addition to the conventional approach of internal R&D or
innovation departments and incubators. I will briefly explore the growing trend
by organizations to use crowdsourcing for innovation, discuss advantages and
potential disadvantages, and provide examples of successful and unsuccessful
uses of crowdsourcing. The chapter is not intended to be a total compendium of
knowledge about crowdsourcing. Information available on the various
permutations that crowdsourcing takes is exploding and literally fills shelves of
books. Consequently, this part of the chapter is presented as a primer on the use
of crowdsourcing. It is intended to raise questions and prompt discussion in
organizations that have not started to use the crowd for innovation.
The second part of the chapter will examine how the crowd, both in- and
outside the organization, can be a source for new talent and revolutionize the
traditional approaches to talent searches and succession planning.
Crowdsourcing for Innovation
A quick note on terminology before we begin. There are many ways to refer to
leveraging the power of the crowd, including crowd collaboration,
crowdfunding, crowd labor, and crowdsourcing. In this chapter I will use the
terms crowd and crowdsourcing interchangeably as a way of simplifying
explanations and text.
Why Crowdsourcing for Innovation?
The answer to why we should use crowdsourcing for innovation may well be
“survival.” Many companies still cling to an outdated model for innovation
based upon a bricks-and-mortar structure, where new ideas must be created
inside the four walls of their own company. In these organizations, innovation is

a top-down driven, internal process. But the results coming from this approach
have significantly slowed down in the last decade. In 2013, The Economist even
questioned whether the global innovation machine had broken down!
To generate new ideas, some organizations have turned to both internal and
external stopgap measures, such as promoting greater collaboration within the
organization and engaging in acquisitions and strategic alliances externally. But
these are just temporary solutions that are probably unsustainable in the long
term. In today’s uber-connected and uber-populated world, one organization
rarely has all the brain trust it needs to remain consistently at the top of its game.
Instead, the crowd provides a source of knowledge and ability not found in one
location, let alone one company. Consequently, organizations have gradually
begun turning to a combination of internal and external sources for innovation
generation. One way to think about crowdsourcing from an organizational
perspective is to view it as the bridge between traditional internal innovation
(R&D departments) and an external solo inventor (individual innovation). As
depicted in Figure 6.1, this bridge allows organizations to leverage existing
internal innovation structures and enhance and stimulate them by introducing
new and different ideas and perspectives.

FIGURE 6.1 The Bridge Between Internal and External Innovation (This
graphic is adapted from Daren C. Brabham’s article “Using Crowdsourcing in
Government,” IBM Center for The Business of Government, Collaborating
Across Boundaries Series, 2013.)
What Is Crowdsourcing?
The word crowdsourcing was coined by Jeff Howe and Mark Robinson,
contributing editor and editor at Wired magazine. The term was popularized in
Howe’s 2006 article “The Rise of Crowdsourcing.”
According to Howe, crowdsourcing is “the act of taking a job traditionally
performed by a designated agent (usually an employee) and outsourcing it to an
undefined, generally large group of people in the form of an open call.”
The concept of crowdsourcing is not new. In fact, it has been around for
centuries under different names. Consider the Oxford English Dictionary, which
started out in the late eighteenth century as an open appeal by Professor James
Murray to collate English idioms and phrases. Over the course of several
decades, thousands of volunteers around the English-speaking world sent
Murray, who lived in Oxford, England, hundreds of thousands of letters
containing the definitions of specific English words. These contributors all
strangers to Murray, were unpaid, but worked together as one to collate the
definitions and origins of every word in the English language. Murray’s project
took 70 years to complete, but the Oxford English Dictionary was arguably
history’s first massively crowdsourced collation of English knowledge.
Another example of the use of the crowd that predates the Oxford English
Dictionary is the Longitude Prize, established in 1714 by a British Act of
Parliament to solve the problem of determining a ship’s longitude at sea. The
prize was established after prominent scientists, including Edmond Halley and
Isaac Newton, had tried and failed to come up with a solution. The prize was
won by John Harrison, a carpenter and clockmaker, whose highly accurate
chronometer enabled the exact triangulation of a ship’s location. Harrison was
awarded approximately £23,000 for his invention. The Longitude Prize is a
unique early example of a crowdsourced contest, an approach that I will discuss
in more detail later in this chapter.
Two parallel but contemporary examples of crowdsourcing are the United
States’ National Air and Space Administration (NASA) and Wikipedia.

Accessing the crowd in the form of challenges and prizes is part of NASA’s
innovation tool kit. In a personal interview, Jason C. Crusan, the director of
Advanced Exploration Systems Division at NASA’s Human Exploration and
Operations Mission Directorate, told my colleague Michael Kossler that many
people assume that NASA does all its innovation internally. In fact, NASA
spends less than 10 percent of its budget on its civilian workforce. Much of its
budget is spent on open innovation, a form of crowdsourcing. “Our use of open
innovation is basically a different way to contact and access people outside our
organization, in a way that gets to nontraditional players,” said Crusan. Instead
of setting up its own site for accessing the crowd, NASA approached several
existing online communities and asked how to engage them (an important point
that will be discussed later in the section on how to work with the crowd).
Crusan notes that NASA is keen on using the crowd to help solve a variety of
software, engineering, and hardware problems. In fact, he goes so far as to say
that he has “not found a project that could not have benefited from the crowd.”
Wikipedia is another example of crowdsourcing in the form of collaborative
efforts. Wikipedia is one of the top-10 most visited websites in the world. While
not as large as Google (the reigning champion), according to Wikipedia’s own
statistics its English language encyclopedia consists of over 5 million pages of
information with almost 30 million registered users. Overall, Wikipedia is
available in 295 languages, and its various sites receive close to 500 million
visitors per month. What makes Wikipedia unique is the fact that its online
encyclopedia has been and continues to be built by volunteers who contribute to
one of the world’s largest repositories of free information and knowledge. It took
James Murray 70 years to compile the Oxford English Dictionary, but
Wikipedia, founded by Jimmy Wales, has been built in just 15 years. It is a prime
example of the power of crowdsourcing for innovation, and of the speed of the
open source era.
Crowdsourcing Trends
Use of crowdsourcing by corporations for innovation has increased dramatically
in the last decade, and has been pioneered by some of the world’s largest tech
companies listed on Interbrand’s list of Best Global Brands. Organizations such
as Apple, Google, Microsoft, and Samsung have been some of the largest users
of the crowd for distributed innovation during the last decade. More recently,
brands from the fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) sector have overtaken
tech brands in the use of crowdsourcing.

According to eYeka, a large crowdsourcing platform host, the use of
crowdsourcing increased by 30 percent among the Best Global Brands that have
been using it since 2004. eYeka’s report on The State of Crowdsourcing in 2016
reflects a clear trend (of increased usage of crowdsourcing) across all industries.
Again, according to eYeka, the list of the top-20 brand players incorporating
crowdsourcing into their innovation strategies is striking. As Figure 6.2
illustrates, the list of top-20 brands using crowdsourcing in 2015 was led by
Coca-Cola, Danone, Nestlé, and PepsiCo with each company showing increased
use.
FIGURE 6.2 Increased Use of Crowdsourcing by Top-20 Brands (Graphic used
with permission from eYeka.)
Even more striking is the increase in use of crowdsourcing by the subset of
companies that fall into the category of FMCG. As illustrated by Figure 6.3, this
group increased their usage of crowdsourcing by 27 percent in 2015 as compared
to 2014, outpacing many of the tech companies that originally used the crowd
for innovation. Additionally, the same FMCG companies use of the crowd to

generate new ideas almost doubled (+95 percent) in 2015!
FIGURE 6.3 FMCGs’ Increased Use of Crowdsourcing for Innovation (Graphic
used with permission from eYeka.)
Perhaps the most intriguing trend impacting the use of the crowd for
innovation is mobility. In its annual Mobility Report, Ericsson, the Swedish
networking and telecommunications equipment and services company, predicts
that by 2020 global smartphone subscriptions will more than double to 6.1
billion, 70 percent of people will use smartphones, and 90 percent will be
covered by mobile broadband networks. Even more striking is the fact that
almost 80 percent of new smartphone subscriptions by the end of 2020 will
come from Africa, the Middle East, and Asia-Pacific. That’s a lot of untapped
potential. Organizations will be able to take advantage of that mobile saturation
by making innovation anytime, anywhere, and from any device.
The Crowd’s Potential

The crowd has tremendous potential to transform and disrupt just about any
industry. Two of the most recognizable examples are Airbnb and Uber. Airbnb,
which started renting out air mattresses, is now valued at over $25 billion
without owning any tangible assets such as apartments or hotels. Uber, whose
app-based taxi fleet of cars is continuously expanding, is worth more than $50
billion without owning vehicles or employing drivers. These two “sharing
economy” companies are leveraging the crowd’s resources, producing a domino
effect not just in their respective markets but also redefining the very concept of
consumption, from rides to apartments to private aircraft. In case you are
wondering, there are Uber equivalents for air travel. The goal of companies like
OpenAirplane, AirPooler, and Flytenow is to simplify air travel and cut costs for
the consumer. The ability to order a pilot and airplane with a few taps on a
mobile device has already begun. Without a doubt, these enterprises are
disrupting the traditional airline, hotel, and taxi industries.
But crowdsourcing also has the potential to reshape entire industries. For
example, traditional marketing is in transition from a broadcast model dependent
upon demographic segmentation and print, radio, and television advertising to a
model of individual participation and cocreation. For example, PepsiCo used
video games, sweepstakes, and voting to induce the crowd to collaborate on a
new flavor for one of its popular beverages, Mountain Dew. As a result, changes
are under way in market research, product development, and brand/marketing
strategies. Another example is Reflik, a platform that combines referrals and
crowdsourcing to match qualified candidates with organizations seeking new
talent. Reflik and other similar platforms have the potential to completely
revolutionize how organizations source new talent. I’ll talk about the
implications of using crowdsourcing to identify talent later in this chapter.
Perhaps the one person who understands the potential of the crowd better
than most is Sean Parker, who at age 19 hacked his way into the music industry
with Napster, his short-lived music file–sharing service. Learning from the
experience, he later launched Spotify, which is a fully legal and highly popular
music streaming service today. “It’s technology, not business or government,
that’s the real driving force behind large-scale societal shifts,” said Parker in
2010. While his focus is on technology, what Parker has been doing is
leveraging the crowd. Napster was a peer-to-peer file sharing platform that
enabled people to easily share their music files. Yes, it was technology, but the
idea behind it was the need for human connection, which is a powerful aspect of
the crowd. Parker was also a key early investor in social media giant Facebook
—together, Spotify and Facebook have entirely transformed the way we

communicate, collaborate, and consume. Together they have helped to further
the potential of the crowd.
Now Parker is using his creativity to accelerate cancer research. Based on his
strong belief that one thing holding back the discovery of a cancer cure is the
lack of collaboration between leading research institutes and scientists, Parker
has pledged $250 million to reshape the field of cancer immunology through the
new Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy (PICI). However, his disruptive
influence remains intact. Unusually, the Institute hacks into the secretive world
of cancer research, but in a positive way. It brings together six of the biggest
research institutes and entrepreneurial individual scientists to collaborate and
share their research. Now, scientists are sharing their research at every milestone,
so that they can collectively accelerate overall progress. PICI will own the
intellectual property rights of all marketable findings, allowing scientists within
the wider consortium to quickly share results with participating colleagues and
ultimately bring effective products to market faster and cheaper.
Crowdsourcing also has the potential to have positive impact on corporate
innovation. As I mentioned in the Introduction, GE used the crowd to solve a jet
engine mounting problem with an investment of just $20,000. Another example
of this is the pharmaceutical company Merck. In 2012, Merck used the crowd to
streamline its drug discovery process. The traditional industry practice for
identifying new molecules that might be effective in targeting specific diseases
involves testing hundreds of thousands of compounds. There is no cost-effective
way to test all of them against all potential diseases. Working with Kaggle, a
predictive data analytics platform that hosts crowdsourcing competitions, Merck
set up an eight-week, $40,000 contest in which it released data on chemical
compounds it had previously tested and challenged participants to identify which
held the most promise for future testing. The contest attracted 238 teams that
submitted well over 2,500 proposals. The winning solution came from computer
scientists (not professionals in the life sciences) employing machine-learning
approaches previously unknown to Merck. The results were dramatic enough
that the New York Times reported the results in a front-page story. Merck is now
implementing the solution.
The Crowd Has Many Faces
The “crowd” takes many shapes and forms. It has been associated with self-
organization, creation, contests, design, jams, outsourced labor, collaboration,
funding, and wisdom. Other writers (Brabham, Howe, Sloane, and Shellshear,

just to name a few) have written about the various permutations taken by the
crowd. Since the focus of this chapter is how the crowd can be used by
organizations, the number of shapes and forms that can be taken by the crowd
has been intentionally restricted to four general approaches, represented in
Figure 6.4. The idea for this figure has been influenced by the work of others
such as Deloitte Consulting, Daren Brabham, Kevin Boudreau, and Karim
Lakhani.
FIGURE 6.4 Different Approaches to Organizational Crowdsourcing
Four general ways of using crowdsourcing for innovation are:
1. Crowd contests. As the title suggests, a crowd contest is used to generate
an idea or solve a specific problem. Organizations that use contests
typically offer some type of cash prize for the winning idea or best
solution.
2. Crowd labor. Crowd labor is used to match external talent to specific
organizational work. A good example of this is Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk, an “online work marketplace.” With crowd labor the workplace has

no walls, no national borders, and virtually no limits.
3. Crowd complementors. Crowd complementing allows organizations to
use external input to expand and evolve existing products or services.
Procter & Gamble, for example, uses its Connect+Develop platform to
seek out new uses for existing products.
4. Crowd collaboration. Crowd collaboration involves partnering with the
crowd to advance thinking around specific ideas or problems. Wikipedia
is probably the premier example of crowd collaboration.
Any of these approaches can help an organization drive its innovation.
However, one of the questions that organization leaders will need to address is
which approach best fits their organization. I will discuss this question in more
detail a bit later in the chapter.
Advantages of Crowdsourcing
Using the crowd for innovation has some distinct advantages not found within
the four walls of the traditional organization, including access to knowledge,
resources, and scale.
The amount of knowledge available through the crowd is staggering, and
shifting through all that information can be challenging. Consider this. Between
2009 and 2019, global data generation is expected to increase by a factor of 40.
Every day, 475 billion content items are shared on Facebook alone, and 90
percent of the world’s data has been produced in just the last two years.
However, accessing a user group, interest group, or peer-to-peer learning
community can frequently help make the process of finding information faster.
These communities offer reviews, feedback, guidance, and solutions (charges
may apply!). A simple example of this type of group is TripAdvisor, a platform
where travelers provide feedback ratings and information about airlines, hotels,
and things to do in a particular geographic location, as well as service providers
such as restaurants and tour guides. Five bubbles on TripAdvisor has become a
coveted rating. The crowd can also put organizations in touch with a wide range
of resources for funding and labor. Platforms such as Kickstarter, Indiegogo, and
GoFundMe can help individuals and small enterprises raise funding through the
crowd.
Outsourcing a variety of work to the crowd is well under way. The type of
workers that can be found online ranges from micro-manual labor (organizing
and reviewing data, completing surveys, labeling photographs) to highly

sophisticated design, engineering, and IT specialists. Skilled work completed in
the service economy can literally be re-created in the crowd via online platforms.
Organizations that have work to be completed can post it on specific platforms.
Individuals who want to work can post their profiles, advertise and sell their
services, and receive reviews from users. RapidWorkers is a good example of
this type of platform.
Does your organization have a large-scale project to be completed in a short
time frame? Is your organization struggling with a complex problem that no one
in your internal R&D department has been able to solve? Is your organization
looking for the next molecule to beat cancer? The crowd could be your solution.
Crowdsourcing can put your organization in touch with millions of people who
can potentially complete your project in record time or provide solutions to
previously unsolvable problems. The crowd can also provide your organization
with fresh perspectives that can lead to new products and services. This is the
power of today’s uber-connected and uber-populated world.
Another advantage to crowdsourcing is a potential reduction in costs and
overheads. Most of today’s organizations prefer to hire full- or part-time staff to
closely control all aspects of the business. But this approach to staffing can be
very costly when salaries and benefits are taken into consideration.
Crowdsourcing can give organizations access to millions of professions for
significantly less cost.
The Challenges of Crowdsourcing
While crowdsourcing has distinct advantages, it also presents some unique
challenges, especially the interface between the organization and the crowd,
intellectual property (IP) rights, and quality. As we will see later in this chapter,
managing the interface between the organization and the crowd can be a
challenge. Defining the problem, selecting the approach to the crowd (contest
verses collaboration), handling questions, determining rules for engagement, and
determining the most appropriate solutions all takes time and must be carefully
managed.
Intellectual property (IP) rights can likewise be a tricky issue. While
conditions will vary from one project to the next, the organization sourcing the
problem typically retains the IP rights. However, in the case of projects where
many users have provided solutions like an IT design contest, the question of
who owns the rejected designs must be addressed as part of the contest’s terms
and conditions.

Unfortunately, whether performing a task or solving a problem, there is no
guarantee that crowdsourcing will result in usable solutions or solutions of
sufficient quality. Sometimes the results will exceed expectations, while other
times the results can be very disappointing. To illustrate these points, here are a
couple of humorous examples of how crowdsourcing can backfire:
 NASA. Using a crowdsourced contest, NASA invited the public to help name
the International Space Station. The public was given the opportunity to
vote for suggestions put forward by NASA as well as suggestions coming
from the public. When Stephen Colbert, an American comedian and host of
The Colbert Report, learned about the contest he got his thousands of fans to
vote for the space station to be named after him. The turnout was so massive
that the name “Colbert” won the contest, not exactly what NASA had in
mind. After some negotiations, NASA agreed to name a specially designed
treadmill after Colbert (Combined Operational Load Bearing External
Resistance Treadmill, or COLBERT).
 Kraft. In 2009, Kraft Foods used a crowdsourced contest to introduce a more
spreadable version of Vegemite, a popular spread made from yeast extract.
While the competition was under way, the nameless product was made
available on supermarket shelves with a cleverly designed label that read
“Name Me.” More than 48,000 people responded to the challenge to come
up with a name for the new combination of cream cheese and Vegemite.
When the winning product name was revealed to be iSnack2.0, things
quickly turned sour for Kraft. The new “Americanized” name did not reflect
the product’s Australian roots and hit a nerve with the public, annoyed that
the iconic spread was now American-owned. Kraft faced a huge backlash.
After just four days, Kraft announced that it would dump iSnack2.0 and let
the public decide on the new name through a poll, which resulted in the new
name “Cheesybite.”
 President Obama. In 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama tried
crowdsourcing to gather questions for a press conference. His website,
“Open for Questions,” was quickly overtaken by supporters for the
legalization of marijuana.
Driving Innovation Through Crowdsourcing
How can the crowd best be used for innovation? As noted previously, it is
important to make the distinction between external crowdsource problem solving

and traditional internal approaches. Most organizations are good at collecting
and organizing specialized knowledge to address problems and innovation
challenges. In contrast, the crowd is flexible and decentralized. The crowd
exposes an innovation problem to a widely diverse group of individuals who
have varied experience, perspectives, and skills. It can operate on a scale that
exceeds even the largest multinational corporation by bringing together many
more individuals to focus on any given challenge. This means it is possible to
use the crowd to solve problems more efficiently (and faster) due to the number
of people involved. In the age of breakneck speed that we live in today, product
shelf lives are shrinking at an alarming rate. Innovation too needs to be sped up
in order to survive and thrive. Enter the crowd!
However, there are a variety of outcome-oriented issues to consider when
determining whether to use crowdsourcing for innovation. Issues such as how to
approach and keep the crowd engaged, what platform to use, and how much and
what kind of information to make available are just a few of the many issues to
consider. Here are some successful examples of how organizations are using the
crowd.
Corporate Sponsored Platforms Where Ideas Are Submitted
Directly to the Sponsor
1. Dell’s IdeaStorm. Launched in 2007, the purpose of Dell’s platform is to
gauge which ideas are most important and most relevant to its users.
According to Dell’s website, IdeaStorm has received over 25,000
submissions and the company has implemented almost 550 of them.
2. Procter & Gamble’s (P&G) Connect+Develop. Launched in 2002, the
website serves as its “open front door to the world,” allowing innovators
anywhere to share their ideas with P&G. The website states, “It’s a fact:
collaboration accelerates innovation. In an increasingly connected world,
the biggest business wins come from working together. When we partner
externally, inspiration and innovation—and mutual value creation—are at
our fingertips.” According to the company, Connect+Develop, which
includes translations in Chinese, Japanese, Spanish, and Portuguese,
receives about 20 submissions every weekday—or more than 4,000 a
year—from all over the world.
3. My Starbucks Idea. Launched in 2008, in its first year the site generated
over 70,000 ideas directly from consumers. Now eight years later, the site

has received more than 200,000 ideas, approximately 300 of which have
been implemented by Starbucks. Engaged customers can share ideas
regarding anything linked to the Starbucks brand in three broad
categories: products, in-store experience, and involvement (social
responsibility, building a community, etc.).
4. Unilever Foundry. Originally launched in 2014, Unilever’s Foundry was
intended to be a single-entry point platform to harness, nurture, and
evolve thousands of innovative ideas from the entrepreneurial
community. Its goal was to simplify the way in which small start-ups and
entrepreneurs engaged with Unilever. In 2015, Unilever announced its
commitment to increase the use of crowdsourcing, with the launch of its
Unilever Foundry IDEAS. The new platform is to become Unilever’s hub
to centrally organize all crowdsourcing, and allow the company to
increase its Foundry IDEAS tenfold as an idea-generation mechanism by
2020.
Intermediary Platform Providers
Intermediary platforms make connections between solution seekers and solution
providers. These platforms generally bring solution seekers and solution
providers together through a challenge or competition that involves a monetary
reward. Solution providers are attracted to these sites not just for the financial
reward, but also for the notoriety and acknowledgment they receive from the
crowd community for their ideas. Solution providers typically register with
intermediary platforms that focus on either specific industries or unique
challenges. Registered solution providers are usually familiar with the specific
type of business the platform supports, making it possible to gain more useful
innovative ideas from them. The number of organizations providing these
platforms is growing almost daily. Listed below are three examples of these
intermediary platforms.
1. Spigit is a provider of innovation management software used by diverse
industries including financial services, manufacturing, healthcare, and
energy. Spigit has worked with brands such as AT&T, Citi, MetLife,
Pfizer, and Unilever.
2. InnoCentive is also a provider of innovation management software that
hosts a wide range of “challenges” with a goal to find solutions to

business, social, policy, scientific, or technical problems. InnoCentive has
worked with brands such as AstraZeneca, Boehringer-Ingelheim, Ford,
and Thomson Reuters.
3. IdeaConnection is another provider of innovation management software
that offers a variety of crowdsource options. IdeaConnection has worked
with brands such as Kraft, Syngenta, Nike, and Kellogg’s.
Working with the Crowd
While Stephen van Vuuren is not a corporate executive, his experience and
insight derived from working with the crowd is instructive and serves as a good
starting point for understanding how to best approach the crowd. He suggests
that organizations:
1. Turn to the crowd when you need a lot of help, not because you “think it
is cool.”
2. Have a clearly defined and compelling problem that will not just attract
but also keep the crowd engaged. “The more universal appeal your
problem has the more it will attract people.”
3. The timing of your approach to the crowd is critical. “If you go to the
crowd too far into your own process the door may be closed.” You need
to find the “right inflection point for engaging and exiting from the
crowd.”
4. Provide leadership. With the crowd, “leadership is even more important
when it is outside of the confines of the traditional organizational
hierarchy. The crowd craves vision and leadership for something larger
than itself. In fact, when you think about it, a crowd without leadership is
a mob.”
Based upon my own research, here are several other suggestions for working
with the crowd. First, determine the right crowdsourcing strategy for your
organization. Are you going to use a single approach, such as crowd contests, or
a combination of approaches? Are you going to build your own platform, partner
with an existing platform provider, or post your organization’s challenge or
problem on an intermediary platform? As noted earlier in Figure 6.5, a wide
range of approaches to crowdsourcing exists. Before launching any
crowdsourcing initiative, it is important to determine your organization’s
ultimate goal. Do you want to draw upon your customers to provide a new

design for a coffee cup, as Starbucks did? Are you trying to find technical
solutions to a vexing problem, as GE Aviation did? Or, are you trying to find
short-term labor for a large data crunching project, like AOL Inc., when it set out
to determine whether it was getting the best use of its video library?
FIGURE 6.5 Main Reasons for IAOP’s Respondents’ Using On-Demand
Outsourcing (Graph used with permission.)
AOL’s task required a tool to measure which of the thousands of web pages
it publishes daily contained videos. Instead of developing video-detecting
software, which would take too long, or hiring temps to accomplish the task,
which also would take too long, AOL turned to crowdsourcing. If your challenge
is highly technical in nature, it might be best to use an intermediary’s platform
that attracts engineers, IT specialists, or medical research scientists. For less
technical issues, such as naming a product, general platforms are more
appropriate.
Next, clearly define the input you seek or the problem you are trying to
solve. Have defined targets. Crusan at NASA says, “How you pose problems to
an online community is fundamentally different. It takes greater levels of
specificity to optimize the composition of the online community. Figuring out
how to define a problem for this larger community took us the longest time. In
the Advanced Exploration Systems Division, we probably spend 80 percent of
our time formulating problem statements for the online community. Working

with the crowd has helped us become better problem solvers.” If you are looking
for new ideas, define what you mean by new ideas. If you have a complex
problem to solve, describe the problem, what steps have been taken so far, any
attempted solutions that failed, and what issue an ideal solution would resolve.
You could potentially be searching through thousands of ideas, which can be
complicated and painstaking. Taking time to define the outcomes you seek is
important.
Part of the difficulty in bringing a challenge or problem to the crowd is to
make sure that it is appropriately “extracted” from your organization. Your
challenge or problem needs to be easily understandable to outsiders. If your
problem is highly technical in nature, it is best to remove all company jargon
from the challenge or problem description unless the crowd you are working
with is highly technical. Additionally, trade secrets or patented processes or
technologies should be removed. If Coca-Cola wanted to come out with another
“new” Coke, it would most likely not make its secret formula available to the
crowd.
If this is your organization’s first foray into crowdsourcing, it will be best to
seek ideas that have some degree of success already. For example, trying to find
expanded or new uses for a product that has already proven successful in the
marketplace is a good starting point. If soliciting brand new product ideas from
the crowd, request working prototypes or proof of consumer interest.
Most important, trust the crowd! If deferring to internal subject matter
experts was the answer to your organization’s development problems, there
would be no need for the crowd. The crowd is powerful because of the myriad
perspectives and experiences of the individuals inhabiting it. Do not make the
mistake of assuming the crowd is inferior to your internal experts. Polaris
Industries, a manufacturer of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), partnered with Spigit
(see above) to address its traditional, top-down innovation process. The
company’s existing innovation process was entirely manual, making progress
fragmented, expensive, time-consuming, and siloed. It had no way to predict the
risk, value, or viability of an idea, which made it difficult to get executive
sponsorship. Polaris needed a way to access greater idea diversity, streamline
processes, and drive implementation of new ideas. When Polaris turned to the
crowd using Spigit’s platform, it could fully automate its Ideate Innovation
program, making the process of ideation to execution 80 percent faster. The
result was a bestselling three-wheel motorcycle in the United States.
When you trust the crowd, it will trust you back, and can provide your
organization with valuable feedback. Seek out and use the crowd’s feedback.

The crowd can be an incredible source of innovative ideas, but it can also be a
source of critical feedback, which can lead an organization in new directions.
Take the pharmaceutical company Pfizer as an example. Pfizer is one of the top
10 pharmaceutical companies in the world. The pharmaceuticals market consists
of healthcare experts, doctors, manufacturers, nurses, pharmacists, researcher
scientists, and more. This hugely diverse “crowd” can sometimes hinder
innovation efforts, since it is often difficult for experts to think outside of
conventional patterns and processes. But when Pfizer began using
crowdsourcing, everything changed. The company’s first innovation challenge
(hosted on a platform provided by Imaginatik) was to identify and select ideas
from a crowd of employees, customers, and/or partners. It had nearly 6,000
participants and resulted in 660 viable ideas. It also led to a significant increase
in employee engagement—330 percent more people submitted and voted on
ideas than the company originally anticipated. Pfizer quickly learned that people
want to provide feedback and share their ideas, but it needed to give them the
right place to do it.
If your organization decides to use the crowd for innovation, you need to
consider how to promote your challenge or problem in a way that draws the
attention of the crowd. Offering the right incentive is critical. In addition to scale
and diversity, crowds offer benefits that organizations find difficult to match.
While companies can provide salaries and bonuses, research shows that crowds
are energized by intrinsic motivations, such as a desire for meaningful work.
This desire comes into play when people decide for themselves what problems to
address.
Jeff Howe says that the most important ingredient of a successful
crowdsourcing event is a “vibrant, committed community.” The obvious
incentive is some type of reward for effort like prizes or cash, but there are other
incentives worth considering. Identifying what will attract your crowd initially
and keep it engaged is critical. Is your crowd interested in learning something
new or improving its skills, being a part of an online community of people with
similar interests, or looking for notoriety as the one innovator who solved your
organization’s problem? For some participants, increased stature among peers is
an important motivator. Additionally, people can be incentivized simply by the
organization they are working with. The crowd willingly gave Stephen van
Vuuren money, time, and knowledge, all for free, because it was interested in his
project.
Finally, a couple of “don’ts” when using the crowd for innovation. Don’t
pretend to be seeking input or innovation from the crowd when you have no

intention of using the ideas and suggestions you receive. A couple of individuals
responsible for maintaining their organization’s crowdsource platform told me
confidentially that their companies rarely use the ideas they receive from the
crowd. Don’t use the crowd because it is the new thing to do. The crowd can be
very sophisticated and can turn against you quickly. United Airlines learned this
the hard way. In 2008, Canadian Dave Carroll and his band the Sons of Maxwell
were on a United Airlines flight to Nebraska. While the plane was sitting on the
airport tarmac, Dave had a perfect view of the baggage handlers loading bags on
the plane. Dave watched as the United employees carelessly loaded the band’s
instruments into the plane and damaged them. After a year of phone calls and
meetings with United which produced no results, Dave and the band wrote,
recorded, and uploaded to its website the hit song “United Breaks Guitars.”
Since the music video was released in 2009 it has been watched over 16 million
times on YouTube. The video negatively impacted United’s image and is a
perfect example of how quickly the crowd can turn against a company.
Special Considerations for Organizational Sponsors
and Advocates
In addition to my suggestions for how best to work with the crowd, there are a
couple of special considerations to which crowdsourcing sponsors or advocates
within an organization need to pay attention.
The first is to make certain your organization is truly committed to using the
crowd. While crowdsourcing for innovation can potentially save and generate
revenue in both the short and long term, setting up your organization’s
crowdsourcing strategy takes time. Be clear about why your organization wants
to use crowdsourcing, what outcome you expect, and how it fits into your overall
innovation strategy. Crowdsourcing is not a replacement for your internal R&D
or innovation department. Rather it is an enhancement and supplement. Yes,
crowdsourcing may permit you to reduce the size of your R&D or innovation
department, but you will still need knowledgeable and skilled internal experts to
help manage the process.
The second consideration is that crowdsourcing needs to be built into your
organization’s innovation culture. This will not be a natural process because
many people initially may feel a loss of control when the crowd is used for
innovation. But, per NASA’s Crusan, this perceived loss of control is artificial
and more psychological. He compares crowdsourcing to issuing a traditional
contract where you select one winning bid with the expectation that you will

receive a specific deliverable. But you never truly know whether the winning bid
can actually deliver on expectations. When you use the crowd, you are using
multiple sources for input, which the law of statistics says increases your chance
of getting the right solution. Ultimately, Crusan believes that working with the
crowd in fact gives you more control. Using the crowd for innovation did not
catch on at Procter & Gamble until 2000 when then-CEO A. G. Lafley set an
organizational goal for 50 percent of its innovations to come from outside the
company. Lafley’s strategy was not to replace the capability of its innovation
team but to better leverage it. Through its crowdsource platform
Connect+Develop and other internal improvements, Procter & Gamble’s
innovation productivity went up 60 percent between 2000 and 2006.
Finally, the issue of intellectual property (IP) rights deserves special
consideration. Most organizations are used to controlling all the innovation
rights to their products and services. But when an organization turns to the
crowd for ideas and input, things can quickly become complicated. Two IP
issues in particular stand out: confidentiality and infringement. For example,
crowdsourcing usually involves interacting with a crowd of people unknown to
your organization. Even when nondisclosure agreements are signed there is only
a certain amount of confidence you can anticipate with a large, sometimes
anonymous group. How prepared are you to lose control of some information if
it were to be hacked or passed on to someone else? Just ask Hillary Clinton’s
former campaign manager, John Podesta, about his hacked e-mails, which were
published by WikiLeaks and revealed the sometimes questionable inner
workings of Washington politics and power-broking. The other issue is
infringement. With crowdsourcing, your organization can receive anywhere from
a few to thousands of ideas and solutions. All of these ideas will have to be
reviewed before a final decision is made. But what about the solutions that are
rejected? Your organization will need to make sure that none of your future work
uses any of the rejected solutions, otherwise you are at risk of an infringement
lawsuit.
The Verdict
Crowdsourcing for innovation has and continues to demonstrate tremendous
potential. As I have discussed in this part of the chapter, traditional approaches
to corporate innovation are increasingly limited when compared to the potential
breakthroughs offered by the crowd. Organizations that do not include the crowd
as one of the sources of innovation risk being left behind, or worse, becoming

irrelevant in today’s open source era. So, while it is messy and difficult to
manage, the days of corporations living in secrecy and isolation are over. In the
open source era, living inside the box is not even an option anymore. Join the
crowd!
Crowdsourcing for Talent and Leadership Succession
As noted previously, there are four broad approaches to crowdsourcing:
competition, labor, complementary, and collaborative. In this section, I will
focus on using crowdsourcing for talent solutions, including for external hiring
and internal succession planning. In addition to being a source for innovation,
the crowd has the potential to be a solution for many labor-related issues
including: short-, mid-, and long-term staffing issues; attracting talent; and
developing the leaders your organization will need for long-term sustainability.
Crowdsourcing Talent
According to IMPACT Hiring Solutions, roughly 56 percent of newly hired
executives fail within two years of starting a job. That’s less than the probability
of correctly guessing the result of a coin toss. Barry Deutsch, founding partner of
IMPACT Hiring Solutions, says that “year after year companies experience this
syndrome of 56 percent hiring failure, and yet they keep doing the same thing
over and over hoping for better results . . . didn’t Benjamin Franklin call that the
definition of insanity?” I think most of us can relate to Deutsch’s comment. The
question is, what can we do instead? The answer might lie in crowdsourcing.
Given the uber-connected economy, the first question hiring managers need
to ask is whether this position really needs to be a full-time, in-house role. Can
the work instead be outsourced to free agents who work on-demand? Websites
like upwork.com now allow hiring or sourcing managers to outsource work to
individuals or teams in a variety of disciplines like code writing, web design,
virtual assistants, or copywriting. They simply post their work requirements on
the site, which almost immediately starts matching the right freelance workers
with the work. As I mentioned in Chapter 1, a significant part of the workforce
now prefers free agency as compared to traditional full-time employment,
making this a possible win-win arrangement for both employers and workers.
Employers need not incur recurring costs of full-time hires, and need not bear
the risk of the hiring decision going bad. Even for more senior positions where

full-time employment is necessary, why not hire someone on a 6- or 12-month
contract initially before giving the person a full-time job? There is no stigma
attached to contract work anymore.
Let me make a distinction between on-demand labor and longer-term talent
solutions. By on-demand labor I mean contract labor that does work either on an
item or project basis for your organization. These are individuals that are not
considered employees. Most likely, these individuals are very mobile and will
work for you from virtually anywhere in the world. When I refer to
crowdsourcing for talent, what I mean is the process of searching for,
identifying, and recruiting suitable employees for your organization by soliciting
the input of large numbers of people using a variety of online means. These
individuals typically will join your company as some type of employee.
On-Demand Workers
On October 24, 2016, a New York Times International Edition article described
how many skilled and unskilled professionals are starting to move into on-
demand roles, in what has become known as the “gig economy.” The gig
economy is a work arrangement in which temporary positions are common, and
organizations contract with independent free agents for short-term engagements.
These short-term engagements are filled by individuals who come from diverse
backgrounds and professions (accountants, designers, skilled laborers, etc.). The
work can involve watching a video and responding to an eight-minute survey or
proposing questions that could be used on a survey to complete complex IT or
medical tasks. Fees for this work can range from $0.05 to thousands of dollars.
According to an Intuit Forecast report, more than 40 percent of the U.S.
workforce will be freelancers by 2020. Some of this is driven by the workforce’s
desire for more flexibility, and some by companies hiring free agents to reduce
costs. Either way, the arrangement can benefit both employers and employees.
From the employees’ perspective, working on-demand in the gig economy
provides the flexibility to work anytime and anywhere on projects they find
interesting and engaging. From an organizational perspective, there are several
benefits to using an on-demand approach to work. The 2014 State of the Industry
report conducted by the International Association of Outsourcing Professionals
(IAOP), in collaboration with Accenture, indicates that the advantages to
organizations using on-demand workers include business flexibility, cost
savings, and access to skills and knowledge currently not available to the
company. According to the IAOP’s report, 57 percent of its respondents cite

increasing business flexibility as the main reason for using on-demand labor.
Online platforms such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk or Allegion’s
crowdsourcing platform are easy ways to access on-demand talent. However,
organizations face some challenges when trying to source work from the crowd.
Ironic as it may seem, high-demand talent is not interested in submitting résumés
or checking career and job platforms. This type of talent works by word-of-
mouth through a circle of friends and colleagues, or participation in relevant
online forums. For example, most talented free agents tend to have more work
than they can easily handle. They are generally not looking to move. But if
something more engaging and exciting comes along, this type of talent will
move unless something is done to hold their attention.
Additionally, many of these talents also look to build long-term relationships
with organizations. They don’t want to work for a company, but they do want to
collaborate with it on projects that are challenging and interesting. While this
talent may want the flexibility to work with any organization when they want to,
they are still interested in developing a mutually beneficial, long-term
relationship.
Finally, while money is important to these talents, the best way to engage
them is to be transparent, provide recognition for good, quality work, and make
it easy for them to work with your company. Remember, in the age of Uber,
these workers have options and can shift their loyalties quickly.
A Cautionary Note
While there are many benefits to using the crowd for on-demand workers, I offer
one cautionary note for consideration. In his book The Ownership Quotient:
Putting the Service Profit Chain to Work for Unbeatable Competitive Advantage,
Harvard Business School Professor James L. Heskett describes two types of
worker mentalities: “owners” and “renters.” Owner-workers have a mentality
that leads them to take responsibility for their organization and its customers.
They exhibit this mentality when they “take responsibility for improving
relationships, products, and processes as well as referring new employee
candidates.” Owner-workers notice things that need to be corrected and act on it,
even when it is not their area of responsibility. They exhibit a high degree of
loyalty to their organizations. Renter-workers, on the other hand, literally come
and go. They are on-demand workers who do the work assigned to them and
nothing more.
Ultimately ownership is psychological, not financial. Heskett points out that

ownership here is not real estate or physical assets, but people and relationships.
A key challenge that leaders in the open source era will need to address is how to
ensure an adequate amount of “ownership” even within free agents. Whether we
like it or not, the gig economy is here to stay. Uber has already paid a heavy
price in some countries due to the bad behavior of some of its drivers. Even if
workers are free agents, they cannot have a “renter” mentality. They need to
adhere to company values and give customers a consistent experience. So how
do leaders ensure such consistency with free agents? First, they will need to
determine very carefully which jobs are suitable for free agents and which
require full-time employees. Second, they will need to take advantage of today’s
full transparency and do careful screening before hiring free agents. Thankfully,
with openly available information this should not be difficult. And finally, after
hiring they will need to monitor performance closely through user reviews and
other means, and weed out those with a renter mentality.
Hiring Talents Through the Crowd
Two decades ago, to recruit talent most employers relied upon a combination of
classified advertisements in newspapers, and trade magazines, and executive
search firms. But with the growth of the Internet, organizations have expanded
into the online realm by posting job positions on a wide range of recruiting job
sites such as Career Builder and Monster.com. The challenge with these sites is
how to identify the right, high-quality talents out of thousands of often low-
quality applicants. Frequently the best candidate is already employed and not
actively seeking a job.
As a result, many organizations are turning to the crowd to identify potential
talent, and leveraging professional and social networks to sort through the large
volume of job seekers and find the best talent match. Crowdsourcing talent
allows an organization to leverage databases, extensive professional and social
networks, and the “wisdom” of the crowd to locate and identify the best
candidates for any type of position. Using the crowd also has the potential to
speed up the recruitment process, starting from the time a position becomes
available to when a hire is made. The crowd can help to quickly identify
potential applicants and narrow the respondents to a select group of high-quality
candidates.
There are two types of crowdsourcing strategies your organization can
consider when it comes to identifying potential talent: employee based, when
your own employees refer talent to fill open positions; and crowdsourcing,

where the public is encouraged to make referrals. Of these two strategies,
creating a partnership with your own employees to identify external talent is
probably the best starting point. Your own employees know the organization, its
culture, and the work required. They are in the best position to assess an external
candidate’s “fit” in the organization. Start by asking them to participate in an
online forum that focuses on topics or areas of interest to your company. Ask
them to invite their friends and professional colleagues to participate. If the
content of the forum is targeted to the interests of high-demand talent (e.g.,
auditors, designers, and engineers) they will want to participate and share their
expertise, raise questions, and offer solutions. Ask your talented existing
employees to rate the various people who participate, and use this information to
identify potential candidates. Filling vacant positions through an employee
referral program is a proven method that many organizations have used
successfully. A study by Undercover Recruiter found that while internal referrals
may only account for 7 percent of corporate applications, they turn into 40
percent of all hires. Zappos, the online shoe and clothing company, exclusively
hires new talent through an employee referral and social networking system
called Zappos Insider. If you decide to engage your employees to identify
potential talents, you may need to consider some type of incentive, usually in the
form of a cash reward.
Since the majority of today’s workforce uses some form of social media, the
other option for finding and hiring talent is to turn to the crowd. Facebook and
LinkedIn are examples of social media platforms that can be used to help
identify potential talent. New recruitment platforms, such as the one hosted by
Reflik, are intended to bring together employers, independent recruiters, and
individuals to match skilled candidates with positions. Organizations pay a fee to
Reflik to list positions. With each job listing, Reflik pays a referral reward if a
candidate is hired through a recruiter’s referral.
Leadership Succession
Traditional methods of succession planning are quickly becoming outdated in
today’s economy. With the rate at which change happens today, how can
companies forecast who amongst their ranks will make good leaders in a few
years? Until the early 1990s, the succession planning process was relatively
simple. HR departments usually helped their companies identify a few possible
successors for each key job, and developed these potential successors through a
combination of classroom training, on-the-job experiences, and coaching. It was

easier to predict future success because business was relatively steady. Behaviors
that made leaders successful in a particular company in the past could be
codified into competency models, and future leaders assessed and developed on
the basis thereof. The competencies themselves did not change much from
decade to decade, so the best predictor of future success was considered to be the
replication of past successful behaviour. Consequently, companies maintained
nine-box grids that plotted their talent into boxes based on two axes—current
performance and future potential. Those on the top right-hand side of the grid
then became the designated future leaders of the company and were given a
special development diet of job rotations, training, mentoring, and coaching for
their future roles. As and when senior positions became available, HR would
simply tap into the pool of anointed successors and fill them.
In comparison, today the rate of obsolescence is faster than ever before.
According to some estimates, half of what an engineering student learns in the
first year of a four-year degree is outdated by the time he or she is in the third
year. In this environment, how can companies correctly predict future
performance? Why should they anoint a few successors based on subjective
criteria and hope they will work out? After investing in their special
development diet, what is the guarantee that these future leaders will even stay
with the company, or that the skills and experiences developed will even be
relevant? And why risk disenfranchising the rest of the employee population
because they were not chosen? What about the late bloomers and early fizzlers?
Could there be a better way to identify and develop future leaders? Yes, there is,
and the answer again lies in internal crowdsourcing. Let me explain with an
example from my own career.
Back in the nineties when I was a young currency trader with American
Express in Mumbai, India, my colleagues and I became frustrated with our
hiring failure rate. One in every two traders we hired turned out to be unfit for
trading, even though on average 7 to 10 people interviewed each candidate.
Barry Deutsch was right then too! The company had a global program called the
Chairman’s Award for Quality (CAQ), in which any staff member who had an
idea to improve something in the company could form a team and work on the
idea. Once the work was completed, teams would submit reports about their
projects to a designated committee that would evaluate all projects and select the
best. The top projects from each country would qualify for a regional contest,
and the best from each region would compete for a global award. Even if your
project did not make it to the regional or global stage, you could still compete for
a country level award. There was no compulsion for anyone to join the program;

it was totally voluntary. There were no barriers to entry either—anyone who
wanted to could participate, but employees would need to make time for their
projects over and above their normal duty.
I decided to take advantage of the program and formed a team of colleagues
from the trading room and operations, and together we created an interactive,
real-time trading game that we converted into a weeklong training program. We
would bring in participants from around the company to attend the program in
batches of 16 to 20, teach them the basics of markets, then have them trade with
each other using connected computers that simulated a live forex market
environment. Our idea was to see which participants exhibited the skills and
aptitude for trading and to hire future traders from amongst the program’s
alumni, thereby reducing the hiring failure rate.
To cut a long story short, the program became a huge success and won the
country level gold award. While it did not get past the country level, our hiring
success rates improved considerably. But there was one more unintended
positive consequence for me. The head of HR noticed that I seemed to have a
natural flair for teaching and offered me a job in HR to head Learning and
Development. After getting over my initial hesitation I accepted the job, and it
changed my life forever. The program and my subsequent work eventually
received broader attention, and I landed a global job in New York. Had it not
been for the CHQ program, I would have most likely remained a trader for the
rest of my life, would probably never have discovered my true passion, and
certainly would not have moved to the United States. While many of my
colleagues and I were always willing to go the extra mile to get recognized, there
was no real avenue (before the CHQ program) available to showcase our talents
and energy. The CHQ program became a vehicle not only for my career
progression, it was also the basis on which I was selected for the global job.
The point I am trying to make is this. Gone are the days when past successful
behavior was a reliable predictor of future success. Instead of using subjective
criteria to map people on a performance/potential grid, why not crowdsource
internally for leadership energy just like the CHQ program did at American
Express? Throw out such challenges to the entire employee base and see who
comes forward to showcase their talent and energy. Those who raise their hands
year after year to solve company problems or exploit revenue opportunities are
your natural leaders for tomorrow. Let the cream rise to the top naturally!
Besides natural succession planning, internal crowdsourcing for leadership
energy allows companies to solve problems and exploit opportunity at virtually
no cost. Remember our definition of leadership from Chapter 3: leadership is the

art of harnessing human energy toward the creation of a better future. Internal
crowdsourcing as proposed here automatically and organically identifies better
future creators.
Whether for driving innovation, attracting talent, or succession planning,
crowdsourcing is the way to go in today’s uber-connected and uber-populated
economy. In 1997, Steven Hankin of McKinsey & Co. coined the term The War
for Talent, suggesting that there was an acute shortage of great leadership talent
and that companies needed to develop exciting employee value propositions
(EVPs) to attract and retain the best of the best. While the latter part is still true
—that companies need to have excellent EVPs—the scarcity of talent aspect is
not. As Raghu Krishnamoorthy, VP Human Resources at GE Healthcare, said in
a talk a few years ago, “talent is abundant, not scarce.” To illustrate his point, he
described the GE Aviation crowdsourcing of innovation experiment I mentioned
in the Introduction. Thanks to uber-connectivity and uber-population, we can
source talent and innovation from the crowd, both internally and externally, more
easily than ever before in history. With this, we can lower the cost and increase
the speed and accuracy of both innovation and talent development.
CHAPTER SUMMARY
 Traditional methods of innovation (secretive R&D incubators) are giving way
to crowdsourced innovation in the open source era.
 Global companies across industries are increasingly using the crowd for
innovation.
 Using the crowd requires leadership, and is not without its challenges.
However, the risks are well worth it because it increases and speeds up
innovation while keeping costs low.
 Internal crowdsourcing can be used not only for innovation, but also for top
talent identification and developing leadership succession.
Questions for Reflection
1. What is the state of innovation in your organization, and how can

you use the crowd to increase and speed it up?
2. How does your organization currently plan for leadership
succession?
3. How can the idea of internal crowdsourcing be applied within your
organization?

C
FINAL THOUGHTS
ongratulations for reaching here. We’ve covered a lot of ground, starting
with how the fourth industrial revolution is dramatically reshaping our lives,
to what it means to lead personally in this brave new world, and to how open
source thinking must replace organizational leadership and management dogma.
Hopefully you enjoyed the ride. If the book has left you with more questions
than answers, then my research team and I have achieved our objective. As I said
in the Introduction, this is more of a “think book” rather than a “how-to book.”
At the end of the day, leadership is more art than science—and art requires
judgment rather than formulas. Consequently, in this book I have avoided giving
definitive formulas or answers because each situation is different, and only you
can judge yours. And here’s the thing about judgment ability—it gets better as
you engage in more mindful reflection. So the best way to make use of what
you’ve just read is to reflect carefully on how it all applies to you personally, and
to the organization or group you lead. If you haven’t already done so, pondering
over the questions at the end of each chapter might help.
Whether we like it or not, the open source era is upon us. Rather than
complaining about how different young people are these days, and trying to
resist the megatrends shaping society, we will all be better off accepting the new
reality and asking ourselves what we need to change about ourselves and our
organizations to survive and thrive. I meet too many people calling themselves
experts with “decades of business experience and wisdom” who reject ideas
emerging from the unfamiliar open source era. But as Vinod Khosla once said,
“Many times experts fail because they are experts in the past version of the
world.” My hope is that this book has served as a reminder of just how much has
changed, and encourages us all—employees, free agents, managers, C-suite
leaders, and board directors—to keep an open mind.
Finally, there is a lot of talk these days about technological singularity—a
time when computer intelligence will surpass human intelligence, and there will

be no jobs left for us mere humans. Personally, I don’t think that day will ever
come because computers will never have emotions, feelings, and judgment.
Some may argue that artificial intelligence and machine learning are making
computers smarter by the day, and so computers are developing the ability to
make judgments. I respectfully disagree because artificial intelligence is only
making computers quicker at sifting through data and finding formula-based
solutions. The human ability to judge is based on both the left and the right
brain. The information-processing, linear left brain must work along with the
amygdala (the house of feelings and emotions in our brain) in order to make
judgments. So if leadership is all about judgment, which in turn relies heavily on
feelings and emotions, then I don’t think computers will ever lead humans. But
to secure our future as a race, we must continue to make the choice to lead as we
discussed in Chapter 3. Simply living life is not good enough anymore. We must
lead our lives. Never before in our history has this been more important.
Since we are still in the early stages of the open source era, this book is a
work in progress. In the true spirit of open source thinking, I invite you to add to
it by sharing your thoughts and ideas on how we can live and lead better in this
new era. As my team and I hear from you, we will update this work from time to
time. You can also access all the data we’ve presented from our 28-country
research at the open source portal we’ve created on our website. Here, you can
not only take the survey yourself, you will also be able to map your scores by
country and other slices. You can connect with me on any of the following:
Email: rajeev@rajeevpeshawaria.com or rajeevp@iclif.org
LinkedIn: Rajeev Peshawaria
Twitter: @rajeevpeshawria
Open Source Portal: www.iclif.org/opensource
So, what better future will you create, and for whom?
Good luck on your chosen journey!

A
APPENDIX
Open Source Leadership—a Global Study
s mentioned in Chapters 3 and 6, the goal of the Open Source Leadership
study was to learn how people viewed leadership and motivation for
superior performance. We wanted to test some generally accepted “truths” and
ascertain if they were still valid in today’s uber-connected and uber-populated
world.
Through a structured questionnaire we asked approximately 16,000 senior
and midlevel executives from 28 countries the following: Q1. What do Nelson
Mandela, Steve Jobs, Mahatma Gandhi, Jack Ma, Abraham Lincoln, Howard
Schultz, Aung San Suu Kyi, and Soichiro Honda have in common?
Q2. What do business leaders most need to do in order to drive
unprecedented success in today’s fast-paced environment?
Q3. On a 1–5 scale where 1 is “strongly disagree,” 2 is “disagree,” 3 is
“neither agree nor disagree,” 4 is “agree,” and 5 is “strongly agree,”
please rate your level of agreement with the following statement: In
order to drive unprecedented success for the organization in today’s
fast paced environment, a significant amount of top-down leadership is
required.
Q4. Who does your primary motivation to excel at work most depend on,
yourself or your immediate boss?
Q5. Are you more intrinsically or extrinsically motivated?
For Q1 and Q2, we gave them a list of leadership attributes/behaviors and
asked them to rank order them in terms of importance. About half the

attributes/behaviors were top-down, even a bit autocratic, and the other half were
democratic and all-inclusive. The categories were hidden and statements
randomized when shown to respondents. Q3 aimed to quantify the views
expressed in Q1 and Q2. With Q4 we wanted to test the popular notion that an
employee’s primary motivation driver is his or her relationship with the
immediate manager. Finally, with Q5, we wanted to ascertain how important
intrinsic factors of motivation were as compared to extrinsic ones.
In order to maintain data integrity and total independence, we outsourced the
survey to Kadence and SSI. Kadence is a full-service global market research
consultancy, and SSI is a premier global provider of data solutions and
technology for consumer and business-to-business survey research. Sample sizes
for each country were chosen in accordance with generally accepted margin of
error guidelines. The project was led by Philip Steggals, managing director of
Kadence Singapore.
Our analysis and insights from the study have already been discussed in
Chapters 2 and 4. Overall global results and country-specific snapshots are
shown in Figures A.1 through A.29.


FIGURE A.1 Global Results 


FIGURE A.2 Argentina


FIGURE A.3 Australia


FIGURE A.4 Belgium


FIGURE A.5 Brazil


FIGURE A.6 Canada


FIGURE A.7 China


FIGURE A.8 Denmark


FIGURE A.9 France


FIGURE A.10 Germany


FIGURE A.11 India


FIGURE A.12 Indonesia


FIGURE A.13 Italy


FIGURE A.14 Japan


FIGURE A.15 Malaysia


FIGURE A.16 Mexico


FIGURE A.17 Netherlands 


FIGURE A.18 Portugal


FIGURE A.19 Russia


FIGURE A.20 Singapore


FIGURE A.21 South Africa 


FIGURE A.22 South Korea 


FIGURE A.23 Spain


FIGURE A.24 Sweden


FIGURE A.25 Thailand


FIGURE A.26 United Kingdom 


FIGURE A.27 United States 


FIGURE A.28 Vietnam


FIGURE A.29 United Arab Emirates

REFERENCES
INTRO
1. Global population doubled from three billion . . . : United Nations,
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. (2017).
World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance
Tables. Retrieved from:
https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2017_KeyFindings.pdf.
2. Picasso quote—Computers are useless: Pablo Picasso. BrainyQuote.com.
Retrieved from:
https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/authors/p/pablo_picasso.html.
CHAPTER 1
1. In 1900, much of the Western workforce was still defiantly agricultural . . . :
Fisk, Donald M. (2003, January 30). “American Labor in the 20th Century.”
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved from:
http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/cwc/american-labor-in-the-20th-century.pdf.
2. Women’s participation in the U.S. workforce . . . : Anitha, S., and Pearson, R.
(2013). “World War I: 1914–1918,” Striking Women. Lincoln: University of
Lincoln. [Online]. Retrieved from: http://www.striking-
women.org/module/women-and-work/world-war-i-1914-1918.
3. Services, at 11 percent, were a small but soon to be rapidly growing sector of
the employment market . . . : Kutscher, Ronald. (1993, November). “The
American Workforce, 1992–2005.” Monthly Labor Review. Retrieved from:
http://www.bls.gov/mlr/1993/11/art1full.pdf.
4. Telephones were limited to one-on-one discussion . . . : Odlyzko, Andrew.
(2000, June 16). “The History of Communications and Its Implications for
the Internet.” AT&T Labs—Research. Retrieved from:
http://www.dtc.umn.edu/~odlyzko/doc/history.communications0.pdf.

5. Only 0.11 of every 1,000 Americans owned a car . . . : Dudley, Geoff. (2014,
November). “Future Demand: The Motor Car and the Construction of a New
World.” Ministry of Transport, New Zealand. Retrieved from:
http://www.transport.govt.nz/assets/Uploads/Our-Work/Documents/fd-car-
and-the-construction-of-a-new-world.pdf.
6. Hamel, in fact, believes that management as a concept may have been the
greatest invention . . . : Hamel, Gary. (2011, May 20). “Gary Hamel:
Reinventing the Technology of Human Accomplishment.” Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=aodjgkv65MM&index=4&list=PLowtqNzwm1fFonoI9ErTw1F-
uIWM5jyeG.
7. Ford’s Model T brought automobiles to the masses . . . : The Saylor
Foundation. “Scientific Management Theory and the Ford Motor Company.”
Retrieved from: http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-
content/uploads/2013/08/Saylor.orgs-Scientific-Management-Theory-and-
the-Ford-Motor-Company.pdf.
8. In 1956, workers in white-collar roles outnumbered blue-collar workers . . . :
Hill, Roger. B. (1992, 1996). “History of Work Ethic: The Work Ethic in the
Information Age.” Retrieved from: http://workethic.coe.uga.edu/hia.html.
9. It took 76 years for the telephone to reach half of the U.S. population . . . :
PwC United Kingdom. “Megatrends: Technological Breakthroughs.”
Retrieved from: http://www.pwc.co.uk/issues/megatrends/technological-
breakthroughs.html.
10. In contrast, the smartphone achieved the same coverage in under 10 years . . .
: Ernst and Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in
Motion.” Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
11. Fast running out of cash . . . IBM laid off 60,000 members of its global
workforce . . . .: Bobkoff, Dan. (2016, June 14). “IBM Refused to Lay Off
Workers for Decades, and Then America Had to Rethink Its Entire
Corporate Strategy.” The Business Insider, Australia. Retrieved from:
http://www.businessinsider.com.au/ibm-corporate-america-history-2016-6?
r=US&IR=T.
12. By 2014, the United States had 28 million temporary workers . . . :
Greenhouse, Steven. (2014, August 31). “The Changing Face of Temporary
Employment.” New York Times. Retrieved from:
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/01/upshot/the-changing-face-of-
temporary-employment.html.

13. By 2012, some 20 percent of short-term assignments . . . : PwC. (2012)
“Talent Mobility—2020 and Beyond.” Retrieved from:
https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/managing-tomorrows-people/future-of-
work/pdf/pwc-talent-mobility-2020.pdf.
14. An estimated 2.1 million U.S. manufacturing jobs were eliminated . . . :
Scott, Robert E. (2012, August 23). “The China Toll.” Economic Policy
Institute. Retrieved from: http://www.epi.org/publication/bp345-china-
growing-trade-deficit-cost/.
15. In recent years, 13 out of every 100 computer programming jobs have shifted
offshore . . . : The Week Staff. (2011, March 18). “Where America’s Jobs
Went.” Retrieved from: http://theweek.com/articles/486362/where-americas-
jobs-went.
16. Mobile phone sales are outpacing seemingly old fashioned PC or laptop
purchases six to one . . . : Davidson, Jacob. (2015, May 26). “Here’s How
Many Internet Users There Are.” TimeInc/Money. Retrieved from:
http://time.com/money/3896219/internet-users-worldwide/.
17. Could it be that in only a decade or two Internet connectivity is considered a
basic human right?: World Economic Forum. (2015, September). “Deep
Shift: Technology Tipping Points and Societal Impact.” Retrieved from:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Point
18. Who you are in “real life” . . . : World Economic Forum. (2015, September).
“Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points and Societal Impact.” Retrieved
from:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Point
19. Organizations both public and private are going to have to find ways of
building public trust . . . : World Economic Forum. (2015, September).
“Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points and Societal Impact.” Retrieved
from:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Point
20. If that isn’t startling enough, robots are . . . : World Economic Forum. (2015,
September). “Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points and Societal Impact.”
Retrieved from:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Point
21. Robots already account for 80 percent . . . : World Economic Forum. (2015,
September). “Deep Shift: Technology Tipping Points and Societal Impact.”
Retrieved from:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GAC15_Technological_Tipping_Point
22. While most people expect to retire by 65 . . . : Boschna, Janie. (2015, June

23). “When Do Americans Think They’ll Actually Retire?” The Atlantic.
Retrieved from: http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2015/06/ideal-
retirement-age-work/396464/.
23. The entrepreneurs and free agents of today . . . : Ernst and Young. (2015).
“Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.” Retrieved from:
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-megatrends-report-
2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
24. Entrepreneurship is particularly popular in rapid growth markets . . . : Ernst
and Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in
Motion.” Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
25. Growth in key developing markets is expected to taper . . . : Ernst and
Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.”
Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
26. Additionally, almost 50 percent of managers . . . are allowed to work
remotely: The Economist Intelligence Unit. (2015, February). “Engaging
and Integrating a Global Workforce.” SHRM Foundation. Retrieved from:
http://whitepaper-admin.eiu.com/futurehrtrends/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2015/03/Engaging-and-Integrating-a-Global-
Workforce-June2015.pdf.
27. Many of the jobs that people will be doing in 5 to 10 years . . . : Ernst and
Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.”
Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
28. The Indian subcontinent will jump from 1.6 billion people . . . : Larsen,
Janet. (2014, February 4). “Eco-economy Indicators: Global Temperature.
Earth Policy Institute.” Retrieved from: http://www.earth-
policy.org/indicators/C51.
29. Countries like Yemen, Somalia . . . : Larsen, Janet. (2014, February 4). “Eco-
economy Indicators: Global Temperature. Earth Policy Institute.” Retrieved
from: http://www.earth-policy.org/indicators/C51.
30. However, a 2014 report . . . world population stabilization was unlikely . . . .:
Gerland, P., Raftery, A., et al. (2014, October 10). “World Population
Stabilization Unlikely This Century.” Science 346 (issue 6206): 234–237.
Retrieved from: http://science.sciencemag.org/content/346/6206/234.full.
31. Currently 54 percent of the global population lives in cities . . . : Ernst and
Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.”

Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
32. Again, the vast majority of urban growth . . . : Ernst and Young. (2015).
“Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.” Retrieved from:
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-megatrends-report-
2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
33. In 2014, nearly one billion people lived in urban slums . . . : Ernst and
Young. (2015). “Megatrends 2015: Making Sense of a World in Motion.”
Retrieved from: http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-
megatrends-report-2015/$FILE/ey-megatrends-report-2015.pdf.
34. From 1990 to 2010 the gross enrollment . . . : Taylor, P., and Kochlar, R. et
al. (2009, September 3). “Recession Turns a Graying Office Grayer.” Pew
Research Centre. Retrieved from:
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2009/09/03/recession-turns-a-graying-
office-grayer/#prc-jump.
35. Between 1979 and 2014, China’s annual real GDP . . . : Morrison, Wayne M.
(2015, October 21). “China’s Economic Rise: History, Trends, Challenges
and Implications for the United States.” Congressional Research Service.
Retrieved from: https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL33534.pdf.
36. China’s economic growth . . . : Scott, Robert E. (2012, August 23). “The
China Toll.” Economic Policy Institute. Retrieved from:
http://www.epi.org/publication/bp345-china-growing-trade-deficit-cost/.
37. In 2010 China overtook the United States . . . : Kamrany, N. M., and Jiang, F.
(2015, February 2). “China’s Rise to Global Economic Superpower.” The
Huffington Post. Retrieved from: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/nake-m-
kamrany/chinas-rise-to-global-eco_b_6544924.html.
38. However, China’s demographics . . . are changing: Morrison, Wayne M.
(2015, October 21). “China’s Economic Rise: History, Trends, Challenges
and Implications for the United States.” Congressional Research Service.
Retrieved from: https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/RL33534.pdf.
39. It is no longer “cheap China” . . . : Booz & Co. (2010, March 30). “Serving
the China Market Emerges as Primary Strategy of Multinational
Manufacturers in New AMCHAM Shanghai/Booz & Company Study.”
Retrieved from:
http://www.strategyand.pwc.com/global/home/press/displays/47818590.
40. The rise of Chinese organizations like Huawei . . . : De Silva, Jan. (2012,
September/October). “The War for Talent in China.” Ivey Business Journal.
Retrieved from: http://iveybusinessjournal.com/publication/the-war-for-

talent-in-china/.
41. At present, Bangladesh, Kenya, Morocco, and Nigeria will contribute a third
of the estimated growth in the labor force . . . : Dobbs, R., and Lund, S., et
al. (2012, November). “Talent Tensions Ahead: A CEO Briefing.” McKinsey
Quarterly. Retrieved from: http://www.mckinsey.com/global-
themes/employment-and-growth/talent-tensions-ahead-a-ceo-briefing.
42. Since 1980 collective human demands on our natural resources . . . : Brown,
Lester. (2009, July 30) “Learning from Past Civilizations.” Grist. Retrieved
from: http://grist.org/article/2009-07-29-learning-from-past-civilizations/.
43. During the last half of the twentieth century the irrigated land used for food
production tripled . . . : Brown, Lester. R. (2013, April 12). “Peak Water:
What Happens When the Wells Go Dry?” Retrieved from:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/water/peak-water-what-happens-when-wells-go-
dry.
44. According to the World Bank, 175 million Indians are being fed . . . : Brown,
Lester. R. (2013, April 12). “Peak Water: What Happens When the Wells Go
Dry?” Retrieved from: http://blogs.worldbank.org/water/peak-water-what-
happens-when-wells-go-dry.
45. In India, the states of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka are already fighting over
the Cauvery river . . . : Mallet, Victor. (2016, April 14). “India: Water Wars.”
Financial Times. Retrieved from: https://www.ft.com/content/96687242-
009b-11e6-ac98-3c15a1aa2e62.
46. Demand for agricultural land is predicted to double . . . : Monbiot, George.
(2015, November 19). “There’s a Population Crisis All Right. But Probably
Not the One You Think.” The Guardian. Retrieved from:
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/population-crisis-
farm-animals-laying-waste-to-planet.
47. Clearing or weakening half the Amazon rainforest . . . : Brown, Lester. R.
(2009, July 30). “Learning from Past Civilizations.” Grist. Retrieved from:
http://grist.org/article/2009-07-29-learning-from-past-civilizations/
48. These alarming statistics are at least in part the result of the massive
diversion of grain to fuel the ethanol industry: Brown, Lester. R. (2010, June
29). “Book Bytes: The Population-Poverty Connection.” Earth Policy
Institute. Retrieved from: www.earth-
policy.org/book_bytes/2010/pb4ch07_ss1.
49. At the same time 80 percent of the world’s oceanic fisheries are being fished
at or beyond their sustainable yields: Brown, Lester. R. (2013, September
15). “The Ecology of Population Growth.” Pop!ulation Press. Retrieved

from: https://populationpress.org/2013/09/15/the-ecology-of-population-
growth-by-lester-r-brown/.
50. According to The Guardian . . . : Monbiot, George. (2015, November 19).
“There’s a Population Crisis All Right. But Probably Not the One You
Think.” The Guardian. Retrieved from:
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/population-crisis-
farm-animals-laying-waste-to-planet.
51. Monbiot also notes that our urban transport needs will similarly rise . . . :
Monbiot, George. (2015, November 19). “There’s a Population Crisis All
Right. But Probably Not the One You Think.” The Guardian. Retrieved
from: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/19/population-
crisis-farm-animals-laying-waste-to-planet.
52. If Asia followed American consumption patterns . . . : Nair, Chandran.
(2011). Consumptionomics: Asia’s Role in Reshaping Capitalism and Saving
the Planet. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons.
53. This financial speed accelerates the speed at which decisions can be taken to
exploit resources . . . : Nair, Chandran. (2011). Consumptionomics: Asia’s
Role in Reshaping Capitalism and Saving the Planet. Singapore: John Wiley
& Sons.
CHAPTER 2
1. What happened to Kodak will . . . : Seiler, Marco Ronnie. (2016, April 28).
“Everything Is Changing Faster Than Ever Before.” LinkedIn. Retrieved
from: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/everything-changing-faster-than-ever-
before-marco-ronnie-seiler.
2. The digital camera was invented at Eastman Kodak . . . : Wikipedia. “Steven
Sasson.” Retrieved from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steven_Sasson.
3. As Seiler rightly points out in his post . . . : Seiler, Marco Ronnie. (2016, April
28). Everything is changing faster than ever before. Retrieved from:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/everything-changing-faster-than-ever-
before-marco-ronnie-seiler.
4. John Chambers of Cisco agrees . . . : Fortune. “Cisco’s John Chambers
Explains How Leaders Can Cross the Digital Divide.” Retrieved from:
http://fortune.com/2016/09/14/cisco-john-chambers-digital-age/.
5. According to Vivek Wadhwa, Disney, Ford . . . : Wadhwa, Vivek. (June 7).
“Democracy Is a Great Thing, Except in the Workplace.” The Washington
Post. Retrieved from:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/innovations/wp/2016/06/07/democrac

is-a-great-thing-except-in-the-workplace/.
6. Uber CEO with tears in his eyes . . . : NDTV. (2017, February 22). Uber CEO,
With Tears in His Eyes, Apologises for Company Culture. Retrieved from:
http://www.ndtv.com/world-news/uber-ceo-apologizes-for-company-culture-
after-harassment-claims-1662213.
7. Uber CEO apologizes . . . : Bloomberg. (2017, February 22). Uber CEO
Apologizes for Company Culture After Harassment Claims. Retrieved from:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-02-21/uber-ceo-apologizes-
in-staff-meeting-after-harassment-allegations
8. Of the original Fortune 500 list published in 1955 . . . : csinvesting. (2012,
January 6). “Fortune 500 Extinction.” Retrieved from:
http://csinvesting.org/2012/01/06/fortune-500-extinction/.
9. Abraham Lincoln was another leader who understood forgiveness . . . :
Symphonyofdissent. (2014, May 18). “Forgiving Others: The Example of
Abraham Lincoln.” Retrieved from:
https://symphonyofdissent.wordpress.com/2014/05/18/forgiving-others-the-
example-of-abraham-lincoln/.
10. Sanduk was born in 1955 to uneducated parents in Olanchungola, northeast
Nepal . . . : Traveller. (2012, April 7). “The Barefoot Surgeon.” Retrieved
from: http://www.traveller.com.au/the-barefoot-surgeon-1w7a6.
11. It was here that Ruit knew cataract surgery would restore their humanity . . . :
Cure Blindness, Himalayan Cataract Project. “Dare The Impossible.”
Retrieved from: http://www.cureblindness.org/our-story/transformative.
12. He provides cheap, efficient, and, more importantly, world-class eye care to
the people . . . : Lak, Daniel. (2003, October 28). “Nepal’s Unique Eye Care
Centre.” BBC News. Retrieved from:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/3218471.stm.
13. Both husband and wife have walked for two days through the foothills of the
Himalaya . . . : The Fred Hollow’s Foundation. “Sudip’s Story.” Retrieved
from: http://www.hollows.org/au/what-we-do/our-stories/sudip-s-story.
14. His efficient model of eye care is now practiced in many parts of the world . .
. : Mero Gulf. (2016, December 15). “Dr. Sanduk Ruit for CNN Heroes
2011.” Retrieved from: http://www.meroguff.com/2011/03/dr-sanduk-ruit-
for-cnn-heroes-2011.html.
15. Slicing through someone’s eyeball with steady hands was hard . . . :
Aljazeera. (2014, July 20). “The Gift of Sight.” Retrieved from:
http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/101east/2014/07/gift-sight-
201471574440164234.html.

16. Establishing Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology in 1994 . . . :
Protagonisten. “Out of the Darkness.” Retrieved from:
http://www.outofthedarkness-film.com/protagonisten/.
17. Sushma Limbu was only eight years old when she hurt her eye . . . : Newar,
Naresh. (19 March 2004–25 March 2004). “An Eye for an Eye.” Nepali
Times, issue 188. Retrieved from: http://nepalitimes.com/news.php?
id=3804#.WDvFyeT_pjo.
18. Fifty-year-old Thuli Maya Thing has struggled with life and caring for the
needs of her family since losing her eyesight . . . .: Kristof, Nicholas. (2015,
November 7). “In 5 Minutes, He Lets the Blind See.” New York Times.
Retrieved from: http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/08/opinion/sunday/in-5-
minutes-he-lets-the-blind-see.html?_r=0.
19. The maverick who refused to allow a skeptical medical establishment to get
in the way of his dream . . . : Levy, Megan. (2016, November 5). “ ‘It’s A
Whole New World’: Nepalese Doctor Who Studied Under Fred Hollows Is
Changing Lives for Thousands.” The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved
from: http://www.smh.com.au/national/its-a-whole-new-world-nepalese-
doctor-who-studied-under-fred-hollows-is-changing-lives-for-thousands-
20161024-gs9pnc.html.
20. Hollows was also a pillar of support in battling resistance from the
international medical fraternity . . . : Melhem, Yaara Bou. (2014, September
2). “Nepal’s Very Own ‘Fred Hollows’ Is on a Mission to Eradicate Curable
Blindness.” SBS. Retrieved from:
http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2014/09/02/nepals-very-own-fred-
hollows-mission-eradicate-curable-blindness.
CHAPTER 3
1. Powerful Victims for Forbes.com . . . : Peshawaria, Rajeev. (2015, May 11).
“Powerful Victims.” Forbes. Retrieved from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/rajeevpeshawaria/2015/05/11/powerful-
victims/#3c8a17044e6b.
2. Research by Professor Adam Grant . . . : Grant, Adam M. “Rethinking the
Extraverted Sales Ideal: The Ambivert Advantage.” The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania. Retrieved from:
https://faculty.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2013/06/Grant_PsychScience2013.pdf.
3. Sales revenue by levels of extraversion . . . : Priceonomics. (2013, November
29). “Do Extraverts Make the Best or Worst Sales People?” Retrieved from:

https://priceonomics.com/do-extraverts-make-the-best-or-worst-sales-
people/.
4. As Barbara Kellerman of Harvard and Jeffrey Pfeffer of Stanford agree . . . :
Kellerman, Barbara. (2012). The End of Leadership. Harper Collins.
5. As Barbara Kellerman of Harvard and Jeffrey Pfeffer of Stanford agree . . . :
Pfeffer, Jeffrey. (2015). Leadership BS. Harper Business.
6. As Barbara Kellerman of Harvard and Jeffrey Pfeffer of Stanford agree . . . :
Wakefield, Nicky. (2016, February 29). “Leadership Awakened.” Deloitte
University Press. Retrieved from: https://dupress.deloitte.com/dup-us-
en/focus/human-capital-trends/2016/identifying-future-business-leaders-
leadership.html#endnote-sup-1.
7. In 2014, she crushed the world record for the longest triathlon in history . . .
:“Be Relentless: A Documentary About Norma Bastidas.” Indiegogo.
Retrieved from: https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/be-relentless-a-
documentary-about-norma-bastidas#/.
8. I have a son who’s losing his sight . . . :“Be Relentless.” Retrieved from:
http://www.normabastidas.com/.
9. Norma’s father passed away when she was 11 and left her mother alone with a
family of five children . . . : Coorlim, Leif. (2016, May 17). “Human
Trafficking Survivor Who Smashed Triathlon World Record.” CNN.
Retrieved from: http://edition.cnn.com/2016/05/16/world/human-trafficking-
norma-bastidas-triathlon-record/.
10. Some family members took advantage of Norma’s vulnerability . . . :
Heilpern, Will. (2016, July 12). “How a Human Trafficking Survivor
Smashed a Record-Breaking 3,762-Mile Triathlon.” Business Insider UK.
Retrieved from: http://uk.businessinsider.com/norma-bastidas-the-human-
trafficking-survivor-who-broke-a-world-record-triathlon-2016-7/?IR=T.
11. He was diagnosed with cone-rod dystrophy . . . : Parkes, Melenie. (2013,
May 6). “Extraordinary Moms: Norma Bastidas.” Retrieved from:
https://au.be.yahoo.com/lifestyle/a/17029301/extraordinary-moms-norma-
bastidas/#page1.
12. The news was unbearable for 38-year-old Norma, then a struggling single
parent in Calgary . . . : Newsner. (2016, 31 May). “She Was Raped and Sold
as a Sex Slave. 36 Years Later, She Crushes the Triathlon World Record and
Inspires Us All.” Retrieved from: http://en.newsner.com/she-was-raped-and-
sold-as-a-sex-slave-36-years-later-she-crushes-the-triathlon-world-record-
and-inspires-us-all/about/news,gender-en,sports.
13. Norma’s reason for pushing through her physical limits is also fueled by the

desire to send a message to other survivors of human trafficking . . . :
Fuhrmaneck, Jessika. (2016, June 27). “The Story of Norma Bastidas.” Two
Wings. Retrieved from: http://withtwowings.org/the-story-of-norma-
bastidas/.
14. She never gave up and pushed forward to send a message . . . : Bernstein,
Lenny. (2014, May 2). “Norma Bastidas Is About to Complete the Longest
Triathlon Ever.” Washington Post. Retrieved from:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-
health/wp/2014/05/02/norma-bastidas-is-about-to-complete-the-longest-
triathlon-ever/.
15. Adversity has been a recurring theme in Norma’s life, . . . : Nazarian,
Angella. (2015, May 14). “An Interview with Norma Bastidas: Pursuing
Dreams.” Positively Positive. Retrieved from:
http://www.positivelypositive.com/2015/05/14/an-interview-with-norma-
bastidas-pursuing-dreams/.
16. Running became a form of release . . . : WR, Team. (2014, November 21).
“Inspiration Awards: Norma Bastidas.” Women’s Running. Retrieved from:
http://womensrunning.competitor.com/2014/11/inspiration/inspiration-
awards-norma-bastidas_32941#qhWmAK1UjVbCkRMZ.97.
17. When we want to help the poor, . . . : “Muhammad Yunus Quotes.” Retrieved
from:
https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/1254841.Muhammad_Yunus.
18. To the amazement of the world, in 2016 the United Arab Emirates
established two new ministries . . . .: Gulf News, Dubai.
19. William has defied all odds, turning adversity into advantage . . . : Virtue, R.,
and Millington, B. (2016, May 30). “Cancer Survivor Dr. William Tan Eyes
Final Paralympics Performance.” ABC News. Retrieved from:
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-30/cancer-survivor-dr-william-tan-
eyes-final-paralympics-performan/7459500.
20. William’s resilience was tested like never before with the diagnosis of end-
stage leukemia . . . : Tee, Karen. “Against All Odds.” Singapore
International Foundation. Retrieved from:
http://singaporemagazine.sif.org.sg/against-all-odds.
21. Topping the class in his fourth year, he also won two year-long scholarships .
. . : HSBC Bank (Singapore) Limited. “Why No Journey Is Too Tough for
Paralympian William Tan.” Retrieved from:
https://www.hsbc.com.sg/1/2/hsbcpremier/live-richer/plan-my-
retirement/william-tan-journey/.

22. He was determined to excel in his studies . . . : Dunlap, Tiare. (2016, June 3).
“Dr. William Tan Was Told He Had 12 Months to Live with Stage 4 Cancer
—Seven Years Later, He’s Gearing Up for the Rio Paralympics.”
People.com. Retrieved from: http://people.com/sports/dr-william-tan-was-
told-he-had-12-months-to-live-with-stage-4-cancer-seven-years-later-hes-
gearing-up-for-the-rio-paralympics/.
23. He finished at Raffles with flying colors and joined the prestigious . . . :
Chan, Wilson, et al. “The Doctor in a Wheelchair.” Rafflesian Times.
Retrieved from: https://rafflesiantimes.wordpress.com/2015/10/13/the-
doctor-in-a-wheelchair/.
24. William was born in Singapore in 1957 . . . : Celebrity Speakers. “Exclusive
Gold Elite Speaker: Dr William Tan.” Retrieved from:
http://www.celebrityspeakers.co.nz/dr-william-tan/.
25. Dedicated his race to the Children’s Hospital fund-raising program . . . :
YouTube. (2007, November 9). “Dr William Tan “(video). Retrieved from:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p_q90gJ7Nbc&feature=related.
26. William’s athletic endeavors weren’t purely for self-fulfillment or for the
sake of competition alone . . . : Tan, William. (2006). “No Journey Too
Tough; My Record Breaking Attempt To Race in 10 Marathons in 65 Days
Across 7 Continents.” National University of Singapore.
27. He eventually caught hold and bit the bullying hands . . . : Singapore Heroes.
“Dr William Tan.” Retrieved from:
http://singaporeheroes.weebly.com/william-tan.html.
CHAPTER 4
1. A widely used example is that of U.S. airline Southwest, that challenged its
staff to bring the plane turnaround time on the tarmac down to only 10
minutes . . . : Dean, Michael. (2016, July 28). “The Pros & Cons of Stretch
Goals.” Peakon. Retrieved from: https://peakon.com/blog/post/the-pros-and-
cons-of-stretch-goals.
2. We set ourselves goals we know we can’t reach . . . : “Ten Things We Know
To Be True.” Google Company. Retrieved from:
https://www.google.com/about/company/philosophy/.
3. Stretch goals have also come in for a share of criticism . . . : Ordóñez, L., and
Schweitzer, M., et al. (2009, February 11). “Goals Gone Wild: The
Systematic Side Effects of Over-Prescribing Goal Setting.” Harvard
Business School Working Paper Summaries. Retrieved from:
http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/goals-gone-wild-the-systematic-side-effects-of-

over-prescribing-goal-setting.
4. Organization-wide stretch goals can also backfire, simply because the wrong
companies are setting them . . . : Sitkin, Sim. (2010). “The Paradox of
Stretch Goals: Organizations in Pursuit of the Seemingly Impossible.” The
Academy of Management Review.
5. Microsoft, in fact, discovered Pareto applied to both product features . . . :
Rooney, Paula. (2002, October 3). “Microsoft’s CEO: 80-20 Rule Applies
To Bugs, Not Just Features.” Retrieved from:
http://www.crn.com/news/security/18821726/microsofts-ceo-80-20-rule-
applies-to-bugs-not-just-features.htm.
6. Welch believed that rigorous differentiation between employees was critical . .
. : Business Insider Australia. (2015, September 28). “Tips from the Very
Top: 10 Leadership Insights from Legendary GE CEO Jack Welch.”
Retrieved from: http://www.businessinsider.com.au/jack-welch-leadership-
insights-2015-9.
7. Welch’s enthusiasm (and spectacular results) at GE were at least part of the
reason why the 20:70:10 model became so widespread across the 1980s and
1990s . . . : Murray, Alan. “Should I Rank My Employees?” The Wall Street
Journal Asia Edition, adapted from The Wall Street Journal Guide to
Management. Retrieved from:
http://guides.wsj.com/management/recruiting-hiring-and-firing/should-i-
rank-my-employees/.
8. An Uber driver is not required to work a certain amount of hours . . . : Huet,
Ellen. (2015, January 22). “Uber’s Ever-Renewing Workforce: One-Fourth
of Its US Drivers Joined Last Month.” Forbes. Retrieved from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/ellenhuet/2015/01/22/uber-study-
workforce/#315fac361244.
9. Contract grading comes in several different formats . . . : Harvard University.
(2012, June 17). “Making Your Own Grade II: Contract Grading in the 21st
Century.” Retrieved from: http://bokcenter.harvard.edu/blog/making-your-
own-grade-ii-contract-grading-21st-century.
10. Professors Jane Danielewicz and Peter Elbow at the University of
Massachusetts sign a contract with their students . . . : Volk, Steve. (2016,
March 27). “Contract Improv: Three Approaches to Contract Grading.”
Oberlin College. Retrieved from:
http://languages.oberlin.edu/blogs/ctie/2016/03/27/contract-improv-three-
approaches-to-contract-grading/.
11. A study by professor of psychology and psychiatry at Ohio State University

Stephen Reiss . . . : Grabmeier, Jeff. (2000, June 28). “New Theory of
Motivation Lists 16 Basic Desires That Guide Us.” Ohio State University.
Retrieved from: https://news.osu.edu/news/2000/06/28/whoami/.
12. General Electric, Grant Thornton, Grubhub, Netflix, LinkedIn, Virgin Group,
and HubSpot are already allowing unlimited vacation . . . : Frohlich, Thomas
C. (2015 December 19). “7 Companies with Unlimited Vacation.” USA
Today. Retrieved from:
http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2015/12/19/24-7-wall-st-
companies-unlimited-vacation/77422898/.
13. Managers are doing such a poor job in motivating and measuring their
workers . . . : Snyder, Benjamin. (2015, April 2). “Half of Us Have Quit Our
Jobs Because of a Bad Boss.” Fortune. Retrieved from:
http://fortune.com/2015/04/02/quit-reasons/.
14. Companies fail to choose the right manager for the job 82 percent of the time
. . . : Beck, R., and Harter, J. (2014, March 25). “Why Great Managers Are
So Rare.” Gallup. Retrieved from:
http://www.gallup.com/businessjournal/167975/why-great-managers-
rare.aspx.
CHAPTER 5
1. As Cy Wakeman says on Forbes.com . . . : Wakeman, C. (2013, January 14).
“It’s Time to Rethink Employee Engagement.” Forbes. Retrieved from:
http://www.forbes.com/sites/cywakeman/2013/01/14/its-time-to-rethink-
employee-engagement/#2fdfa6293983.
2. By its own admission, only 13 percent of the global workforce is engaged . . .
: Crabtree, Steve. (2013, October 8). “Worldwide, 13% of Employees Are
Engaged at Work.” Gallup. Retrieved from:
http://www.gallup.com/poll/165269/worldwide-employees-engaged-
work.aspx.
3. As Bloomberg writer Elizabeth Ryan says . . . : Ryan, Elizabeth. (2012,
October 5). “The Employee Engagement Racket.” Bloomberg. Retrieved
from: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-10-05/the-employee-
engagement-racket.
4. As George Serafeim at Harvard and Claudine Gartenberg at Stern found out in
their research . . . : Serafeim, G., and Gartenberg, C. (2016, October 21).
“The Type of Purpose That Makes Companies More Profitable.” Harvard
Business Review. Retrieved from: https://hbr.org/2016/10/the-type-of-
purpose-that-makes-companies-more-profitable.

5. A quick Google on the words “Corporate Culture.” . . . : Investopedia.
Retrieved from: http://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corporate-culture.asp.
6. The Small Business Encyclopedia defines . . . : “Corporate Culture.”
Entrepreneur. Retrieved from:
https://www.entrepreneur.com/encyclopedia/corporate-culture.
7. Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh use the story of John Lasseter . . . : Hoffman, R.,
and Casnocha, B., et al. (2014, July 8). “The Alliance: Managing Talent in
the Networked Age.” Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from:
https://hbr.org/product/the-alliance-managing-talent-in-the-networked-
age/an/14046-HBK-ENG.
CHAPTER 6
1. Stephen van Vuuren lives in Greensboro . . . : Vuuren, Stephen van. (2016,
October 10). Personal interview.
2. As originally described by McKinsey & Co. . . . : Chambers, Elizabeth G.,
Fouldon, Mark, Handfield-Jones, Helen, Hankin, Steven M., Michaels,
Edward G., the War for Talent, McKinsey Quarterly, retrieved from:
http://www.executivesondemand.net/managementsourcing/images/stories/arti
3. In 2013, The Economist even questioned . . . : The Economist. (2013, January
12). “Has the Ideas Machine Broken Down?” Retrieved from:
http://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21569381-idea-innovation-and-
new-technology-have-stopped-driving-growth-getting-increasing/.
4. This graphic is adapted from . . . : Brabham, Daren C. (2013).” Using
Crowdsourcing in Government.” IBM Center for The Business of
Government. Collaborating Across Boundaries Series.
5. Per Howe, crowdsourcing is . . . : Howe, Jeff. (2006, June 2).
“Crowdsourcing: A Definition.” Retrieved from:
http://crowdsourcing.typepad.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html.
6. In a personal interview, Jason C. Crusan . . . : Crusan, Jason C., Director,
Advanced Exploration Systems Division, NASA Human Exploration and
Operations Mission Directorate, (2016 September 15). Personal Interview.
7. Wikipedia is another example . . . : Wikipedia. “Statistics.” Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Statistics.
8. According to eYeka . . . : eYeka. “The State of Crowdsourcing in 2016.”
Retrieved from: https://en.eyeka.com/resources/reports. In its annual
Mobility Report . . . : Ericsson. (2015, June). “Ericsson Mobility Report.”
Retrieved from: http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2015/ericsson-mobility-
report-june-2015.pdf.

9. It’s technology, not business or governments . . . : Sean Parker, quoted in
David Kirkpatrick, “With a Little Help from His Friends,” Vanity Fair,
October 2010. Retrieved from:
http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2010/10/sean-parker-201010.
10. Another example of this is the pharmaceutical company Merck . . . : “Using
the Crowd as an Innovation”, Boudreau, Kevin J., Lakhani, Karim R.,
Harvard Business Review, April 2013.
11. Polaris Industries . . . partnered with Spigit . . . : “Case Study of Polaris
Industries: Driving Breakthrough Innovation Through Crowd Sourcing.”
Retrieved from: http://go.spigit.com/rs/123-ABC-
801/images/Spigit_Polaris_Case_Study.pdf.
12. Take the pharmaceutical company Pfizer as an example . . . : Kreutz,
Christian. (2016, January 19). “36 Great Examples of Crowdsourcing.” WE
THINQ. Retrieved from: https://www.wethinq.com/en/blog/2014/08/12/39-
Great-Crowdsourcing-Examples.html.
13. United Airlines learned the hard way . . . : Sonsofmaxwell. (2009, July 6).
“United Breaks Guitars” (video). YouTube. Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5YGc4zOqozo
14. United Airlines learned the hard way . . . : Wikipedia. “United Breaks
Guitars.” Retrieved from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Breaks_Guitars.
15. Using the crowd for innovation did not catch on at Procter & Gamble until . .
. : Huston, L., and Sakkab, N. (2006, March). “Connect and Develop: Inside
Procter & Gamble’s New Model for Innovation.” Harvard Business Review.
Retrieved from: https://hbr.org/2006/03/connect-and-develop-inside-procter-
gambles-new-model-for-innovation.
16. According to IMPACT Hiring Solutions . . . : Deutsch, Barry. (2012, October
16). “IMPACT Hiring Solutions.” Retrieved from:
http://www.barrydeutsch.net/impact-hiring-solutions/.
17. On October 24, 2016, a New York Times International Edition article . . . :
Farrell, Christopher. (2016, October 22). “Very Mobile Work Force, Never
Far from Home.” New York Times, International Edition.
18. The 2014 State of the Industry report . . . : The International Association of
Outsourcing Professionals (IAOP), “New York. 2014 Key Findings from the
State of the Industry Report.” Retrieved from:
https://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?
q=cache:pFuh82WIFkQJ:https://www.iaop.org/Download/Download.aspx%3
19. In his book The Ownership Quotient . . . : Heskett, J., and Sassare Jr., et al.

(2008, December 9). “The Ownership Quotient: Putting the Service Profit
Chain to Work for Unbeatable Competitive Advantage.” Harvard Business
Press.
20. A study by Undercover Recruiter found . . . : Hebbard, Laurence. (2015).
“Why Employee Referrals Are the Best Source of Hire.” The Undercover
Recruiter. Retrieved from: http://theundercoverrecruiter.com/infographic-
employee-referrals-hire/.
21. Zappos, the online shoe . . . : Sullivan, Dr. John. (2014, June 2). “Examining
Zappos’s ‘No Job Postings’ Recruiting Approach—Innovation or
Craziness?” Blog Post, Ere Media. Retrieved from:
https://www.eremedia.com/ere/examining-zapposs-no-job-postings-
recruiting-approach-innovation-or-craziness/.
22. New recruitment platforms, such as the one hosted by Reflik . . . : Reflik.
(2015, September 22). “Why Crowdsourcing Works for Recruiting.”
Retrieved from: https://www.reflik.com/blog/why-crowdsourcing-works-
recruiting/.
23. In 1997, Steven Hankin of McKinsey & Co. . . . : Chambers, Elizabeth G.,
Fouldon, Mark, Handfield-Jones, Helen, Hankin, Steven M., Michaels,
Edward G., the War for Talent, McKinsey Quarterly, retrieved from:
http://www.executivesondemand.net/managementsourcing/images/stories/arti
In addition to the direct references cited above, my thoughts and
recommendations in this chapter were informed by the following articles and
books:
1. Abrahamson, S., and Ryder, P., et al. (2013, January). Crowdstorm: The
Future of Innovation, Ideas, and Problem Solving. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, New Jersey.
2. Board of Innovation. List of open innovation crowdsourcing platforms.
Retrieved from: http://www.boardofinnovation.com/list-open-innovation-
crowdsourcing-examples/.
3. Brabham, Daren C. (2013). “Crowdsourcing.” MIT Press. Retrieved from:
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/crowdsourcing.
4. Bratvold, David. “What Is Crowdsourcing.” Daily Crowdsource. Retrieved
from: https://dailycrowdsource.com/content/crowdsourcing.
5. Chrum, Alex. (2012, September 11). “Learning from the Crowdsourcing
Efforts at Netflix.” CrowdSource. Retrieved from:
http://www.crowdsource.com/blog/2012/09/learning-from-the-
crowdsourcing-efforts-at-netflix/.

6. Cirujano, Ron. (2014, March 19). “Crowdsourcing: A Shift in Talent
Acquisition.” Crowdsourcingweek.com. Retrieved from:
http://crowdsourcingweek.com/blog/crowdsourcing-a-shift-to-talent-
acquisition/.
7. Deloitte LLP UK. (2016). “The Three Billion Enterprise Crowdsourcing and
the Growing Fragmentation of Work.”
8. Fuller, Johann. (2012, July 9). “The Dangers of Crowdsourcing.” Harvard
Business Manager. Retrieved from:
http://www.harvardbusinessmanager.de/blogs/a-840963.html.
9. Gardner, James. (2015, December 7). “How to Succeed at Crowdsourcing
Innovation.” Techonomy Exclusive. Retrieved from:
http://techonomy.com/2015/12/how-to-succeed-at-crowdsourcing-
innovation/.
10. Gardner, James. “Innovation as a Science: Predicting the Value of Ideas.”
Daily Crowdsource. Retrieved from:
https://dailycrowdsource.com/content/open-innovation/1459-innovation-as-
a-science-predicting-the-value-of-ideas.
11. Gasca, Peter. (2013, February 14). “6 Reasons to Use Crowdsourcing.” Inc.
Retrieved from: http://www.inc.com/peter-gasca/6-reasons-to-use-
crowdsourcing.html.
12. Gaudino, Laura. (2014, April 28). “Crowdsourcing Benefits, Limitations and
How to Avoid Failure.” Crowdsourced Testing. Retrieved from:
https://crowdsourcedtesting.com/resources/crowdsourcing-benefits/.
13. Hancock, Bill. (2015, June). “Sixth Rock from the Sun.” O. Henry Magazine
5, no. 6.
14. Heskett, James. (2016, November 2). “Are Employees Becoming Job
‘Renters’ Instead of ‘Owners’?.” Harvard Business School. Retrieved from:
http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/are-employees-becoming-job-renters-instead-of-
owners.
15. Horthon, Karen. (2015, June 4). “NASA Uses Crowdsourcing for Open
Innovation Contracts.” NASA TV Press Release. Release J15-010. Retrieved
from: https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-uses-crowdsourcing-for-
open-innovation-contracts.
16. Howe, Jeff. (2008, 2009). Crowdsourcing. Why the Power of the Crowd Is
Driving the Future of Business. Three Rivers Press, New York.
17. Howe, Jeff. (2006, June 1). The Rise of Crowdsourcing. Retrieved from
https://www.wired.com/2006/06/crowds/.
18. “In Saturn’s Rings Blog.” Retrieved from: http://insaturnsrings.com/blog/.

19. Intuit Investor Relations. (2015, August 13). “Intuit Forecast: 7.6 Million
People in On-Demand Economy by 2020” (press release). Retrieved from:
http://investors.intuit.com/press-releases/press-release-details/2015/Intuit-
Forecast-76-Million-People-in-On-Demand-Economy-by-2020/default.aspx.
20. Kass, A., and Dubey, A. (2016, February 22). “Putting Crowdsourcing to
Work for the Enterprise.” Accenture, Technology Labs Blog. Retrieved
from: https://www.accenture.com/us-en/blogs/blogs-putting-crowdsourcing-
work-enterprise.
21. Kearns, Kathryn. (2015, October 7). “9 Great Examples of Crowdsourcing in
the Age of Empowered Consumers.” Tweak Your Biz.com. Retrieved from:
http://tweakyourbiz.com/marketing/2015/07/10/9-great-examples-
crowdsourcing-age-empowered-consumers/.
22. Kickstarter.com. “About us.” Retrieved from:
https://www.kickstarter.com/about?ref=nav.
23. Kickstarter.com. “Funding Project: In Saturn’s Rings.” Retrieved from:
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/sv2/adagio-in-space-the-greensboro-
symphony-in-saturns?ref=nav_search.
24. Ladime, Kazim. (2014, June 13). “Should You Start Crowdsourcing Talent?”
Recruiter. Retrieved from: https://www.recruiter.com/i/should-you-start-
crowdsourcing-talent/.
25. Lindegaard, Stefan. (2012, August 9). “40 Examples of Open Innovation and
Crowdsourcing.” Innovation Excellence. Retrieved from:
http://innovationexcellence.com/blog/2012/08/13/40-examples-of-open-
innovation-crowdsourcing/.
26. Morton, Michael. (2014, August 12). “Driving Innovation with
Crowdsourcing.” Retrieved from:
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/236418.
27. Neumann, Michel. (2014, April 17). “Open Innovation vs. Crowdsourcing
vs. Co-creation.” Retrieved from: https://www.wazoku.com/blog/open-
innovation-vs-crowdsourcing-vs-co-creation/.
28. Noble, C., and Durmusoglu, S., et al. (2014, October). Open Innovation,
Product Development and Management Association. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
29. Shellshear, Evan. (2016, July 16). “Innovation Tools: The Most Successful
Techniques to Innovate Cheaply and Effectively.” 7 Publishing.
30. Silverman, Rachel E. (2012, January 17). “Big Firms Try Crowdsourcing.”
Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from:
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB100014240529702044090045771574932018

31. Simperl, Elena. (2015). “How to Use Crowdsourcing Effectively: Guidelines
and Examples.” Liber Quarterly 25, issue 1.
32. Sloane, Paul. (2011). A Guide to Open Innovation and Crowdsourcing:
Advice from Leading Experts. Kogan Page Limited, United Kingdom.
33. Speier, Kim. (2016, January 7). “4 Examples of Clever Crowdsourcing
Campaigns.” Mainstreethost Blog Post. Retrieved from:
http://www.mainstreethost.com/blog/four-examples-of-clever-
crowdsourcing-campaigns/.
34. SPIGIT. “6 Ways to Create a Successful Innovation Program.” Retrieved
from: https://www.spigit.com/project/6-ways-to-create-a-successful-
innovation-program/.
35. Stevens, Darren. “Crowdsourcing: Pros, Cons, and More.” Hongkait.com.
Retrieved from: http://www.hongkiat.com/blog/what-is-crowdsourcing/.
36. Talentsbay. “A Case for Talent Crowdsourcing.” Retrieved from:
http://talentsbay.com/downloads/talent-crowdsourcing.pdf.
37. Thiel, Peter. (2014). Zero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the
Future. Virgin Books, London.
38. Wagorn, Paul. (2014, April 8). “The Problems with Crowdsourcing and How
to Fix Them.” IdeaConnection. Retrieved from:
https://www.ideaconnection.com/innovation-articles/the-problems-with-
crowdsourcing-and-how-to-fix-them-00574.html.
39. West, Harry. (2015, August 21). “How Crowdsourcing Can Solve Your
Toughest Talent Gaps.” REWORK. Retrieved from:
https://www.cornerstoneondemand.com/rework/how-crowdsourcing-can-
solve-your-toughest-talent-gaps.
40. Wheeler, Kevin. (2013, May 2). “5 Ways to Build a Crowdsourcing Strategy
to Uncover Hard-to-Find Talent.” ERE Media. Retrieved from:
https://www.eremedia.com/ere/5-ways-to-build-a-crowdsourcing-strategy-
to-uncover-hard-to-find-talent/.
41. Wladawsky-Berger, Irving. (2013, January 27). “Innovation May Be
Slowing, Threatening Great Stagnation.” Wall Street Journal.
42. Zhou, Wynn. (2015, October 22). “Crowdsourcing: How to Get the Best
Global Talent to Work for Your Startup.” Tech.Co. Retrieved from:
http://tech.co/crowdsourcing-get-best-global-talent-work-startup-2015-10.
43. Zoref, Lior. (2015). Mindsharing: The Art of Crowdsourcing Everything.
Penguin Publishing Group, New York, New York.

INDEX
Please note that index links point to page beginnings from the print edition.
Locations are approximate in e-readers, and you may need to page down one or
more times after clicking a link to get to the indexed material.
AB InBev, 204
Abundance:
scarcity vs., 1
of talent, 233–234
Africa, 35, 39, 161, 164, 202
Agriculture:
demand for land for, 39
employment in manufacturing, 34
in Indonesia, 116–122
move to manufacturing from, 21–23
water use in, 38
Airbnb, 202, 205
Air-Pooler, 205
Allegion, 225
The Alliance (Hoffman, Casnocha, and Yeh), 174, 182
All-inclusive leadership, 50
Amazon, 183, 209, 225
American Express, 231–233
AOL Inc., 217
Apple, 4, 26, 201
Argentina, 161, 164, 244
Artificial intelligence, 51, 238

Asia, 35, 39–41, 161, 164
Asia-Pacific, 31, 35, 202
At will employment, 174–175
Australia, 161, 164, 245
Authority, 7
in driving people toward performance, 150
position of, 87–88
Autocratic leadership, 49–80
continuous listening, learning, and reflection in, 68, 70–71
earning right to use, 63–64
examples of, 52–53
forgiveness in, 71–73
freedom within a framework in, 66–70
humility, respect and consideration in, 64–65
need for, 50–52
principles for positive autocracy, 63–73
research supporting value of, 54–61
by Sanduk Ruit, 73–79
for speed, 50, 52, 54–55
values and purpose in, 64–65
Bali, Indonesia, 116–122
Bangladesh, 35, 37, 97–100
Bastidas, Norma, 93–97, 103, 116
Belgium, 161, 164, 246
Bell curve theory/model, 9–11, 141–144, 176–178
Best Global Brands, 201
Best practice replication, 86–87
Bezos, Jeff, 80, 97, 183
BHAG (big hairy audacious goals), 135 (See also Stretch goals) Big data, 29
Big Tree Farms, 117–122
Black, Benjamin, 183
Blue-collar roles, 24
Boese, Paul, 72
Bosses:
as drivers of motivation, 159–167

leaders vs., 88
as pleasers, 86
Boudreau, Kevin, 207
Brabham, Daren, 207
Brazil, 161, 164, 247
Budweiser, 203
Bureaucracy, 66–67
Canada, 161, 164, 248
Cancer research, 206
Career Builder, 228
Carroll, Dave, 220
Case studies, 92
Casnocha, Ben, 174, 181–183, 189
Challenges for leadership, 5–14
Chambers, John, 51–53
Change, 3–4
Chevrolet, 203
China, 27, 33, 35–39, 41, 161, 164, 249
Clarity:
of purpose, 104–106, 111–116
of values, 104–116
Class differences in employment, 22
Climate change, 41–42
Coca-Cola, 66, 169, 202–204
Colbert, Stephen, 212
Colgate-Palmolive, 204
Communication, 3
from 1900 to 1950, 22
from 1951 to 1990, 24–25
from 1991 to present, 28
in employee–manager relationship, 168–169
and Internet of things, 29
(See also Connectivity)
Competency models, 91–92
Confidentiality, 222

Connect+Develop, 209, 214, 222
Connectivity, 1
from 1991 to present, 26–34
employment trends, 30–32
mobility and shift from West to East, 32–33
new work trends, 33–34
technology enabling, 28–30
and 24/7 business, 68
Consideration for others, 64–65
Consumer market, in China, 37
Consumptionomics (Chandran Nair), 40, 41
Continuous listening, learning, and reflection, 68–71
Contract grading, in universities, 148–152
Covey, Stephen, 103
Crowd collaboration, 209
Crowd complementors, 209
Crowd contests, 207
Crowd labor, 209
Crowdsourcing, 12, 193–234
advantages of, 209–211
challenges of, 211–212
defined and described, 198–199
driving innovation through, 213–214
examples of, 199–201
forms of, 207–209
for innovation, 197–214
intermediary platform providers for, 215
internal vs. external, 13
for leadership succession, 230–234
potential of, 202, 205–207, 222–223
special considerations with, 221–222
suggestions for, 216–220
for talent, 223–230
trends in, 201–204
Crusan, Jason C., 200, 217, 221
Culture, 185

as engagement driver, 184–189
for innovation, 221
Danielewicz, Jane, 149
Danone, 202, 203
Dao, David, 62
Data scientists, 34
Decision making, values-based, 68
Deep Shift (World Economic Forum), 29
Dell, 213
Deloitte Consulting, 207
Democratic leadership, 6, 50, 52, 54
Democratization of innovation, 12 (See also Crowdsourcing) Denmark, 161,
164, 250
Deutsch, Barry, 223
Diageo, 204
Digitization, 51–52
Disney, 183
Disney, Walt, 52, 53
Disruption, 20, 28–30
Donahoe, John, 182
Drucker, Peter, 24, 157
East:
outsourcing to, 27
population growth in, 35
shift from West to, 26, 32–33
East Asia, 35
Economic models:
microloans, 98–100
unsustainable, 40–42
Edison, Thomas, 20, 85
Education:
from 1990 to 2010, 25
contract grading in universities, 148–152
Internet’s effect on, 150–151

of workers, from 1900 to 1950, 22
Ehrlich, Pau, 42
80:20 rule, 5, 139–141
and contract grading, 152
and engagement surveys, 175–176
innovation and, 11–12
for leadership, 8
managers’ acceptance of, 167–170
in motivating employees, 167–169
for performance, 9
in performance management, 141–152
stretch goals, 143–152
and unlimited vacation, 154
Elbow, Peter, 149
Emotional integrity, 108–111, 115
Emotional intelligence, 108–109
Employment skills, 37
Employment trends:
from 1900 to 1950, 21–22
from 1951 to 1990, 23–26
from 1991 to present, 26–32
connectivity and, 30–34
(See also Work trends)
Energy use, 39–40
Engagement, as top organizational priority, 175
Engagement surveys, 11, 173–190
culture as engagement driver, 184–189
and entrepreneurial employees, 182–184
as HR activity, 180
one-size-fits-all, 175–178
as panacea for creating engagement, 179–180
scoring results of, 176
using scores to evaluate leadership performance, 181–182
Enron, 137, 142
Enterprise leadership:
crowdsourcing, 193–234

fundamental questions/challenges for, 5
performance management, 133–171
(See also individual topics)
Entrepreneurial employees, 182–184
Entrepreneurship, 31–32
Environmental problems, 41–42
Ericsson, 202
Europe, 31, 35, 161, 164
Extrinsic motivation, 162–167
eYeka, 201–202
Facebook, 206, 209, 230
Fast-moving consumer goods, 201, 202
Fisheries, 39
Flytenow, 205
FMCG sector, 201, 202
Followership, 7, 85–98
Food resources, 38–41
Ford, Henry, 20, 22, 23, 52, 53
Ford Motor Company, 22–23, 136, 203
Ford Pinto, 136
Forgiveness, 71–73
Foundational tours of duty, 184
Founder mindset, 182
Fourth Industrial Revolution, 20
Fowler, Susan J., 62
France, 52, 161, 164, 251
Free agents, 27, 31–32, 228
Freedom within a framework, 66–70, 169
Future, creating, 103, 115
Gallup, 176
Gandhi, Mahatma, 8
authority of, 87
as autocratic leader, 52, 54, 55, 62–66
forgiveness practiced by, 72

on strength, 107
Gartenberg, Claudine, 180
Gender differences in employment, 22
General Electric (GE), 12, 141, 153, 174, 203, 206
General Mills, 204
Genetics of leadership, 7
Germany, 33, 52, 161, 164, 252
Gig economy, 183, 225–227
Globalization, 24, 26, 27
Goals:
minimum, 9, 10, 143–146, 148, 152
stretch (see Stretch goals)
value of, 135
Goals Gone Wild (Harvard Business School), 136, 137, 148
GoFundMe, 210
Goldman Sachs, 187
Google, 135–138, 201, 203
Grameen Bank, 99–100
Grant, Adam, 89–90
Grant Thornton, 153
Haier, 37
Halley, Edmond, 200
Hamel, Gary, 22
Hankin, Steven, 233
Harrison, John, 200
Harvard Business School, 136
Healthcare, 51, 73–79
Heineken, 204
Herman, Gerald, 148, 149
Heskett, James L., 227–228
Hewlett-Packard, 26, 203
Hiring:
through crowdsourcing, 228–230
traditional, 223–224
(See also War for talent)

History of business/management practices, 20–42
from 1900 to 1950, 21–23
from 1951 to 1990, 23–26
from 1991 to present, 26–42
Hoffman, Reid, 174, 181–184, 189
Holdren, John, 42
Hollows, Fred, 77–78
Howe, Jeff, 198, 219
Howe, Per, 198, 199
HR activity, engagement surveys as, 175–176, 180
Huawei, 37
HubSpot, 153
Humility, 64–65
IAOP (International Association of Outsourcing Professionals), 225, 226
IBM, 25–26
IBM Watson, 51
IdeaConnection, 215
IdeaStorm, 213
In Saturn’s Rings (film), 194–195
India, 33, 35, 38, 52, 161, 164, 253
India Against Corruption, 61–62
Indian Railways, 195–196
Indiegogo, 210
Indonesia, 116–122, 161, 164, 254
Industrial revolutions, 20
Infringement, 222
InnoCentive, 215
Innovation, 4–5, 11–12
crowdsourcing for, 197–214 (See also Crowdsourcing) democratization of,
196
and forgiveness of mistakes, 73
internal and external, 198, 199
Integrity, emotional, 108–111, 115
Intel, 203
Intellectual property (IP) rights, 211, 222

Intelligence, emotional, 108–109
“Intention Excellence, Outcome Mediocrity” Trap, 176–177
International Association of Outsourcing Professionals (IAOP), 225, 226
Internet, 28–29, 150, 196
Internet of things (IoT), 29
Intrinsic motivation, 162–167
Invictus (movie), 54
IoT (Internet of things), 29
IP (intellectual property) rights, 211, 222
Iran, 38
Isdell, Neville, 66
Israel, 52
Italy, 161, 164, 255
Japan, 35, 161, 164, 256
Jayasuria, Adel, 117, 119
Job-for-life model, 23, 26, 27, 174
Jobs, Steve, 4, 5, 52, 53, 55, 80, 183
Johnson & Johnson, 203, 204
Judgment, 238
Kadence, 242
Kaggle, 207
Kaku, Michio, 150–152
Kellerman, Barbara, 93
Kellogg’s, 204
Kenya, 37
Khosla, Vinod, 238
Kickstarter, 194–195, 210
Kimberly-Clark, 204
King, Martin Luther, 8
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 87
Kodak, 50–51
Kraft Foods, 212
Krishnamoorthy, Raghu, 233–234
Kyi, Aung San Suu, 55

Lafley, A. G., 221–222
Lakhani, Karim, 207
Land use, 38–39
Lasseter, John, 183
Latham, Gary, 135
Latin America, 31
Law of the vital few, 140 (See also 80:20 rule) Leaders:
bosses vs., 88
competencies of, 91–92
personality types of, 90–91
Leadership:
in challenging times, 102
defining, 103
desire for, 8
as desire to created better future, 103
essence of, 105
followership and, 85–98
as inherent vs..created, 89–91
learning, 91–93
main ingredient in (see Leadership energy)
myths around, 84–93
outdated practices/frames of reference, 2–3
position of authority vs., 87–88
redefining, 7–8
Leadership energy, 8, 83–129
of autocratic leaders, 63, 64
of Norma Bastidas, 93–97
clarity of purpose for, 104–106, 111–112
clarity of values for, 104–111
definition of, 103
from living life awake, 112–116
and myths around leadership, 84–93
of Ben Ripple, 116–122
of Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, 100–102
of William Tan, 122–128
of Muhammad Yunus, 97–100

Leadership Energy Summit Asia (LESA), 123, 174
Leadership performance, using engagement survey scores to evaluate, 181–182
Leadership style, 6 (See also Autocratic leadership) Leadership succession (see
Succession planning)
Leading Leaders, 121
Learning:
continuous, 68, 70–71
of leadership, 91–93
Lee Kuan Yew, 52, 54, 55, 62–66
LESA (Leadership Energy Summit Asia), 123, 174
Lesotho, 39
Lifetime employability, 183–184
Lifetime employment, 23, 26, 27, 174
Lincoln, Abraham, 55, 72–73
LinkedIn, 153, 230
Listening, continuous, 68, 70–71
Living life awake, 112–116
Locke, Edwin, 135
Longitude Prize, 200
Lucas, George, 183
Ma, Jack, 55
Machine learning, 238
Mackey, John, 80
Malaysia, 161, 162, 164, 257
Management practices/theory:
from 1900 to 1950, 22–23
from 1951 to 1990, 23–26
outdated, 2–3, 43, 157–158
Management thinking, basic principles of, 134
Managers, 9–10
acceptance of 80:20 rule by, 167–170
Drucker’s core roles for, 24
Drucker’s five priorities of, 157
role in motivating employees, 155–169
Managing performance, 8–10

Mandela, Nelson, 8
authority of, 87
as autocratic leader, 52, 54, 55, 62–66
forgiveness practiced by, 72
Manufacturing:
from 1900 to 1950, 21–23
from 1951 to 1990, 24
from 1991 to present, 27, 30, 33, 34
in China, 33, 37
Marketing, transition in, 205
Mayo Clinic, 125
Meaning, search for, 151
Mechanical Turk, 209, 225
Mehta, Nipun, 111
Menoreh Politan, 121
Merck, 206–207
Mexico, 37, 38, 161, 164, 258
Microloans, 98–100
Microsoft, 140–141, 201, 203
Middle class, 33, 36, 40
Middle East, 39, 52, 100–102, 161, 164, 202
Millennial generation, 30–31, 146–147
Mind, power of, 128
Mindfulness, 112
Minimum goals, 9, 10, 143–146, 148, 152
Mobility, connectivity and, 32–33
Modi, Narendra, 52
Monbiot, George, 39–40
Mondelez/Kraft, 204
Mongolia, 39
Monster.com, 228
Morocco, 37
Motivating employees, 155–169
80:20 rule in, 167–169
with goals, 135, 137 (See also Stretch goals) individual differences in, 157
role of manager in, 155–169

self vs. boss as primary driver of, 159–167
types of desires in, 155–157
Motivation:
from 1951 to 1990, 24
extrinsic and intrinsic, 162–167
primary source of, 10
Multigenerational workforce, 31
Murray, James, 199
Musk, Elon, 53
My Starbucks Idea, 214
Myths around leadership, 84–93
Nair, Chandran, 40
Naked autocrat dance, 65 (See also Autocratic leadership) Napster, 205, 206
National Air and Space Administration (NASA), 200, 212, 217
Nepal, 73–79
Nescafé, 203
Nestlé, 202–204
Netflix, 153
Netherlands, 161, 164, 259
New York taxi drivers, 148
Newton, Isaac, 200
Nigeria, 35, 37
Nokia, 203
North America, 161, 164
North Asia, 161, 164
Obama, Barack, 212
On-demand workers, 224–228
Open source era, 3–4, 19–45
from 1900 to 1950, 21–23
from 1951 to 1990, 23–26
from 1991 to present, 26–42
crowdsourced innovation in, 12
freedom and opportunity in, 170
uber-connectivity in, 26–34

uber-population in, 34–42
Open Source Leadership study, 241–271
agreement on top-down leadership, 56, 59–60
global results, 243
individual country results, 244–271
on motivation, 159–167
questions on, 241–242
and value of autocratic leadership, 54–61
what business leaders most need to do, 56, 58
what great leaders have in common, 56, 57
Open source performance management, 10
Open source thinking, 5, 238
OpenAirplane, 205
Outsourcing, 27 (See also Crowdsourcing) The Ownership Quotient (James L.
Heskett), 227–228
Owner-workers, 227–228
Oxford English Dictionary, 199
Pakistan, 35, 38
Paralympics, 125
Pareto, Vilfredo, 140
Pareto Principle, 5 (See also 80:20 rule) Parker, Sean, 205–206
Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy (PICI), 206
Paryono, Pak, 120–121
PepsiCo, 202–205
Per Thomas Frohlich, 153
Performance management, 8–10, 133–171
at GE under Welch, 141
motivating employees, 155–169
open source, 10
Pareto Principle as basis for, 141–152
stretch goals, 135–139, 143–152
unlimited vacation, 152–155
values-based, 68
Personal leadership:
autocratic leadership, 49–80

fundamental questions/challenges for, 5
leadership energy, 83–129
(See also individual topics)
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, 93
Pfizer, 219
Philips, 203
Physical disability, 122–128
PICI (Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy), 206
Pixar, 183
Podesta, John, 222
Polaris Industries, 218
Policies, 67
Population:
from 1900 to 1950, 21
from 1951 to 1990, 23
from 1991 to present, 34–42
impact on resources, 38–40
population explosion, 35–36
and unsustainable economic model, 40–42
and war for talent, 36–37
Portugal, 161, 164, 260
Position of authority, 87–88
Poverty, 97–100
Power, 88, 150
The Practice of Management (Peter Drucker), 24
Principle of factor sparsity, 140 (See also 80:20 rule) Procter & Gamble, 204,
209, 214, 221–222
Purpose:
in autocratic leadership, 64–65
clarity of, 104–106, 111–112
efficacy of, 70
followers’ beliefs in, 71
reflecting on, 112–116
and stretch goals, 145–146
Purpose-clarity companies, 180

Rackitt Benckiser, 204
Railroads, 21
“Rank and yank” philosophy, 141, 144
RapidWorkers, 210
Reflection:
continuous, 68, 70–71
living life awake process, 112–116
Reflik, 205, 230
Reiss, Stephen, 155–157
Renter-workers, 227, 228
Research (see Open Source Leadership study)
Resistance, 103, 104, 109–110
Resources, impact of population growth on, 34, 38–40
Richter scale, 140
Ripple, Ben, 116–122
Ripple, Blair, 116–117, 119, 120
Robinson, Mark, 198
Robots, 29–30
Role plays, 92–93
Rotational tours of duty, 184
Ruit, Sanduk, 73–79
Rules, leading with values vs., 67–68
Russia, 161, 162, 164, 261
Ryan, Elizabeth, 179–180
SAB Miller, 204
Sabri, Muhammad, 127
Sales performance, 89–90
Samsung, 201, 203
Santander, 203
Sasson, Steven J., 51
Scarcity:
abundance and, 1
of resources, 38–40
Schultz, Howard, 80
Schwab, Klaus, 20

“Scientific management,” 22
Seiler, Marco Ronnie, 50, 51, 63–64
Self-motivation, 159–167
Serafeim, George, 180
Service-based employment, 24
Sharma, Robin, 103
Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, 100–103, 106–107, 116
Shell, 203
Singapore, 161, 164, 262
Sitkin, Sim, 137
Skills, employment, 37
Smartphones, 28–29, 202
Smedes, Lewis B., 72
Somalia, 35
Sons of Maxwell, 220
Sony, 26
South Africa, 161, 164, 263
South America, 161, 164
South Korea, 161, 162, 164, 264
Southeast Asia, 161, 164
Southwest Airline, 135
Spain, 161, 164, 265
Spigit, 215, 218
Spotify, 205–206
SSI, 242
Standon, Edward, 72–73
Steggals, Philip, 242
STEM-based knowledge, 4–5
Stretch goals, 9, 135–136
applications of, 138–139
criticisms of, 136–138
80:20 rule and, 143–152
Sub-Saharan Africa, 31, 33, 35
Succession planning, 12–14, 230–234
Sweden, 161, 164, 266

Talent:
crowdsourcing, 223–230
democratization of identifying, 196
“free agent” model, 27
leadership, 84
war for, 24, 36–37
Tan, Lily, 123
Tan, William, 122–128
Tata, Ratan, 136–137
Tata Motors, 136–137
Tata Nano, 136–137
Taxi drivers, New York, 148
Taylor, 22–23
Technological singularity, 238
Technology:
from 1900 to 1950, 20–23
from 1951 to 1990, 24
from 1991 to present, 26–30, 34
connectivity enabled by, 28–30 (See also Connectivity) social and self-
disconnection with, 111–112
sustainability and, 41
Temporary workers, 27
Thailand, 161, 164, 267
3D printing, 30, 51
360-degree feedback, 184–185, 187–189
Tilganga Institute of Ophthalmology, 77
The Top Five Regrets of the Dying (Bronnie Ware), 114
Top-down leadership, 5 (See also Autocratic leadership) Tours of duty, 183–184
Toyota, 203
Transformational tours of duty, 184
Transparency, 1, 142
Transportation, 51
Tricorder X, 51
TripAdvisor, 210
Trust:
and autocracy, 63

in the crowd, 218–219
in employee–manager relationship, 168–169
20:60:20 model, 10, 11, 143, 154, 158, 176–178 (See also Bell curve
theory/model) 20:70:10 model, 141–142
Uber, 31–32, 62, 147–148, 154, 202, 205, 228
Unilever, 204
Unilever Foundry IDEAS, 214
United Airlines, 62, 220
United Arab Emirates, 100–102, 161, 164, 271
United Kingdom, 33, 52, 161, 164, 268
United States, 33, 34, 38, 40–41, 61, 161, 164, 269
Universities, contract grading in, 148–152
Unlimited vacation, 152–155
upwork.com, 224
Urban growth, 35–36
Urban transport, 39–40
Vacation, unlimited, 152–155
Values:
in autocratic leadership, 64–65
clarity of, 104–111
compromising on, 107
core, 107–108
for effective functioning, 67
efficacy of, 70
and emotional integrity, 108–111
followers’ beliefs in, 71
goals and, 137
of millennial generation, 30–31
reflecting on, 112–116
Values-based behavior, 186–187
Values-based decision making, 68
Values-based 360-degree feedback, 184–185, 187–189
Van Vuuren, Stephen, 194–195, 216, 220
Vietnam, 161, 164, 270

Virgin Group, 153
Wadhwa, Vivek, 52–53
Wakeman, Cy, 177
Wales, Jimmy, 201
War for talent, 24, 36–37, 233
Ware, Bronnie, 114
“Washington Consensus,” 25–26
Water scarcity, 38
Watson, Thomas, Jr., 25
Watson, Thomas, Sr., 25
Welch, Jack, 135, 141, 174–175
West:
and climate change, 41–42
consumption in, 40
population growth in, 35
population shrinkage in, 36
White-collar roles, 24, 27, 30
Wikipedia, 201, 209
Work trends:
connectivity and, 33–34
differing employee motivations, 146–147
new work, 33–34
on-demand workers, 224–228
unlimited vacation, 153
(See also Employment trends)
Work–home life separation, 21, 27
World Economic Forum, 29
Yeh, Chris, 174, 181–183, 189
Yemen, 35
Young, Kimball, 90
Yunus, Muhammad, 97–100, 103, 106, 116
Zappos, 230

C
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
EO of the Iclif Leadership and Governance Centre, author of Too Many
Bosses, Too Few Leaders, and a contributor for Forbes.com, Rajeev
Peshawaria has extensive global experience in leadership and human capital
consulting. He began his professional life as a banker and currency trader. Very
soon thereafter he became disillusioned with the fact that a lot of young people
joined the workforce full of hope and enthusiasm, only to be crushed into
cynicism by bosses who don’t care to develop and nurture them. He could not
understand the work-life balance debate, and struggled with questions like: Why
are work and life considered so different and opposite from each other? Why
don’t people feel a sense of excitement coming to work every day? He also
noticed that while technological advances were changing life and work at a pace
never experienced before, management practice was still stuck in the 1930s.
Unable to discard these thoughts from his mind, Rajeev began to educate
himself on the mysteries of human behavior, and eventually abandoned the
highly lucrative field of trading for a career in human resources—something that
was considered suicidal at that time. He concluded that many people and
organizations underachieve their potential because of poor leadership, or no
leadership at all. He has since dedicated his life to redefining leadership, thereby
helping individuals in enriching their lives, and organizations in achieving their
full potential.
Rajeev provides speaking and consulting services globally to organizations
in both the public and private sectors. Prior to joining Iclif, he was Chief
Learning Officer of both Coca-Cola and Morgan Stanley, and has held senior
positions at American Express and Goldman Sachs.
A TEDx talk based on one of the themes of this book can be viewed at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y6bTquxTC-c.

