



Andy Oram
Open Source in Brazil
Growing Despite Barriers
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-96919-9
[LSI]
Open Source in Brazil
by Andy Oram
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Dawn Schanafelt
Production Editor: Melanie Yarbrough
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing Services
Proofreader: Amanda Kersey
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
September 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-09-09: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781491969199 for release details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Open Source in
Brazil, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Community                                                                                                2
Free-Software Movements and Regional Efforts                                  6
Business and Workforce                                                                        10
Education                                                                                                 13
Looking Toward the Future                                                                   18
v


Open Source in Brazil:
Growing Despite Barriers
Foi pesado o sono pra quem não sonhou
 
Brazil, which not so long ago formed one of the bright spots in the
world economy (remember the promise of the BRICS quintet?: Bra‐
zil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), has been battered in
recent years by its geographic location, history, and political leader‐
ship. When you add up the despair of seeing one set of politicians
accused of corruption fighting another set of politicians who are, in
turn, accused of corruption; the fall of commodity prices; the implo‐
sion of the Petrobras oil giant; the pressures of hosting the Olympics
(and the frequent protests it caused); the threat of the Zika virus; the
failures of public health; and the threat of general crime met by
harsh police incursions—one can well wonder how Brazil gets along
at all.
Yet, Brazil remains the most important Latin American economy,
strong in extractive industries, manufacturing, and services. It is
indeed much weaker than many developed countries in many of the
factors that support robust computer industries—universities, a
business environment friendly to entrepreneurs, a history of techni‐
cal innovation, fast Internet access, and a population with strong
general or technical educations. However, its strengths give it a
long-standing IT infrastructure and IT staff that could be the envy
of the rest of Latin America. As we will see, a large tech startup cul‐
ture has also sprung to life over the past decade.
1

In the 1970s and ’80s, Brazil instituted a rigorous form of protec‐
tionism, requiring its companies to buy Brazilian-made computers.
This produced many of the desired results, creating a home-grown
computer manufacturing environment and producing many trained
staff. Eventually, of course, the government had to abandon the pol‐
icy in order to keep up with advances outside the country.
Brazil is also the birthplace of some other historic companies
founded on open source software. One, Conectiva, was important in
the early history of Linux for creating and selling a popular distribu‐
tion of GNU/Linux that received worldwide recognition. Another
company—mentioned to me by Jon “maddog” Hall, a free-software
developer and activist who has devoted an enormous amount of
time to Brazil—was Cyclades, whose developers in 1999 became
some of the first to build an embedded system around Linux.
According to Luciano Ramalho, an O’Reilly author and leader in the
Brazilian Python community, IT is booming in Brazil. None of the
problems just mentioned are holding it back, because businesses
understand the need to digitally transform themselves. They are
going through a reevaluation of computers and IT that is familiar in
other parts of the world, as well. Originally, businesses outsourced as
much IT as possible, assuming they couldn’t do it as efficiently in-
house as an outside, specialized firm could. Now, however, they real‐
ize that computer automation and data exploitation are intricately
connected to their business models, and that these things need to be
done in-house. Ramalho’s experience is backed up by an article in
TechCrunch.
Free and open source software is also thriving in Brazil. Open
source is not discussed as prominently as it was during the first dec‐
ade of the 2000s, but it is ubiquitous. This report distills the many
trends in business, education, and government that have brought
about the current state of open source in Brazil.
Community
Aqui nesse mundinho fechado ela é incrível
Hackers have created meetups and other spaces for collaboration
and training, often with government support. You will find most of
the activity centered in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo, but smaller
communities are building their own development spaces.
 
2 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

The energy in Brazil around open source software is best felt at the
Fórum Internacional Software Livre (FISL), the biggest open source
conference in Latin America. The conference has been running for
17 years straight—although Ramalho says it was almost cancelled
this year because of the bickering over leadership in the federal gov‐
ernment—and attracted more than 5,200 participants in 2016, 25
percent of them women. I had a chance to attend in 2006 and found
a thriving collection of attendees, vendors, and booksellers. Many
European and North American leaders in free software, including
Jon Hall and Richard Stallman, endured the long flight to come and
speak, which shows the importance they assigned to the conference
and to the free-software community in Brazil. Thus, one conference
track was held in English, with the others in Portuguese.
Hall, who has been a prominent advisor to Brazilian open source
developers and an advocate for them worldwide, mentions also the
importance of the Latin-American Conference of Free Software
(Latinoware) and Software Freedom Day.
Major Brazilian cities have meetups like those in other countries.
One meetup in São Paulo even promises the “cultura de Inovação e
empreendedorismo digital do Silicon Valley” (digital culture of
innovation and entrepreneurship of Silicon Valley)”. Brena Mon‐
teiro, a coach for Rails Girls, says that technical events are much less
common in smaller cities. Monteiro, who studied Linux and Java in
college, cofounded the company Uprise IT to bring technology into
businesses in her city of Governador Valadares.
The tech scene is by no means barren in smaller cities, though.
Some exciting trends have been noticed by Henrique Bastos, a
Python developer responsible for a Django course, some popular
Django extensions, python-decouple, and GoogleGroup Exporter.
He is very active with developer communities in Brazil, particularly
as the financial director of the Brazil Python Association and a fel‐
low at the Python Foundation. Bastos travels the entire country
speaking at conferences, and finds important grassroots activities.
In the small towns, people are organizing technical forums with
speakers, along with hands-on hackathons. Bastos thinks that,
although small towns lack the resources of Rio de Janeiro and São
Paulo, they have the key advantage that people know one another
well. A conference of 100 to 200 people is a big success, and some of
these groups meet once a month or even once a week. Hacking on
Community 
| 
3

open source projects is common at conferences. Bastos measures
participation in terms of how often people get in contact, whether
face to face or online. He wants them to aim to get in contact at least
weekly.
Open source is a great way to connect with people. It is much better
than job interviews and other formal channels for finding out what
a person is capable of accomplishing and how he or she interacts
with others. In addition, it provides a flexible and humane environ‐
ment in which people can be more genuine. Bastos says that Brazil‐
ians enjoy a lot of emotional freedom, and this combines powerfully
with open source. Conferences and meetups always end up at a bar,
where people can develop strong bonds.
The education of developers that takes place in many developed
countries is hampered in Brazil, as in many countries, by a brain
drain. Basically, if you become an expert in your technological area,
you can get a foreign job that pays more than Brazillian jobs and
offers the enticements of living in a major tech center such as Lon‐
don or San Francisco. Thus, the people who could be attending
meetups and mentoring the next generation of experts are drawn
away.
Ramalho founded the first hackerspace in Brazil, the Garoa Hacker
Clube. Its project page covers a range of robotic, media, educational,
and other applications. One amusing project illustrates the infor‐
mality of the organization. The space is administered a bit haphaz‐
ardly, with members given keys but without set hours. So the
“Presence notification” project, based on a similar Dutch system, lets
people check online whether the space is open at that moment.
Unfortunately, many of their links are broken, so it’s difficult to
check some of the organization’s activities. Ramalho says that its
Arduino Night, started in November 2010, has long been the most
popular weekly event. In late October 2016, the province of Rio
Grande do Sul will hold the first open hardware conference in Bra‐
zil.
The free-software movement is committed to evening out disparities
in society and providing opportunities for all. Software engineer
Valéria Barros points to two particularly strong examples in Brazil.
Rio Mozilla Club, which puts the motto “Aprender, Criar, Compar‐
tilhar” (Learn, Create, Share) on its home page, runs educational
programs for people without Internet access at sites called LAN
4 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

houses. These programs teach people how to create and remix video
content. Laboratório de Cidades Sensitivas (LabCEUS) was created
by the Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. It operates in several
cities to engage people in their local communities and give them a
voice, including the use of audio and video technology.
Barros also points out several programs in Brazil whose goal is to
develop female engineers and that are based on open source
software. Two have a worldwide reach—Technovation Challenge
and PyLadies—whereas MariaLab is a São Paulo–based organiza‐
tion. Barros describes MariaLab as a feminist hackerspace that aims
to create a safe place where women (cisgender or trans) can learn IT
and experience its possibilities as well as become teachers them‐
selves.
Unfortunately, Brazil is tarred by the same sexism and expressions
of violence against women that one finds elsewhere in the world, as
in the misogynistic expressions of GamerGate, the hate speech
directed at O’Reilly author Kathy Sierra, and the increasing attacks
on celebrities. Monteiro says that negative comments and opposi‐
tion from men keep many women out of computer science courses
and out of the field in general. The free-software movement is no
haven. On the one hand, Barros has seen many efforts in the free-
software community to create safe spaces for the woman, hold
events for women, and recruit them for talks. But Monteiro cites
one situation in which a woman within an organization sponsoring
a conference wrote a code of conduct for the event, and a number of
men posted outrageous comments verging on death threats in
response. Although the organization supported the woman and
adhered to the code of conduct, incidents like this make many
women feel that they won’t be safe in the tech community.
According to Leandro Ramalho, Ubatuba, a coastal city of about
85,000 in the state of São Paulo, has leapt into the free-software
movement with multiple community projects: hacker and Maker
spaces, open-science and open-data initiatives, free-software advo‐
cacy, a technology week, weekly open-hardware workshops, and
more. Although a tourist destination, Ubatuba is still representative
of the numerous smaller cities and towns of Brazil that lack employ‐
ment opportunities. The mayor there is sponsoring free-software
activities, and labs in 14 public schools train students on their own
distribution of Linux. The goal is to let people remain in the town
while earning good money providing services to Brazil and the
Community 
| 
5

world. Ramalho is now organizing the kind of informal event that
Brazilians (and, for that matter, people worldwide) love: a Free
Everything get-together that discusses craftsmanship, ceramics, and
software over beers (and, hopefully, caipirinhas).
Fabio Kon, who has worked with Linux since 1993 (Torvalds first
released it in 1991), offered me an assessment of Brazil’s open source
communities. Kon used to be a director of the Open Source Initia‐
tive (OSI), a leading organization in the promotion of open source
worldwide, and now runs the Center of Competence in Free Soft‐
ware (CCSL) at the University of São Paulo, Brazil’s leading educa‐
tional institution. Kon says that from about 2000 to 2012, open
source software was fashionable, generating lots of meetups and
other events. Although there is plenty of evidence that open source
has continued to grow in importance in Brazil, attendance at FISL
has decreased (particularly as it has lost federal funding), and the
organizers of meetups have turned from technical topics to entre‐
preneurship.
Even though developers and managers at startups are steeped in
open source software and sympathize with its communities, Kon
says, these staff are too busy at their day jobs to participate in them
much. Their own products are not open source, because they have
seen how difficult it is to sustain an open source business.
Kon also laments that Brazilian programmers don’t create much new
software under open source licenses or contribute to open source
projects used outside Brazil. However, Valéria Barros offers counter‐
examples of people, including contributors to this report, who do
substantial coding on open source projects. Henrique Bastos
believes that few major open source software projects come out of
Brazil but finds that developers are using open source extensively in
Unix-like fashion, tying together different tools to make useful
products.
Free-Software Movements and Regional
Efforts
A minha casa vive aberta
Many Latin American governments, especially the one led by the
Partido dos Trabalhadores in Brazil, have declared support for open
source software, but results are disappointing. Still, support from
6 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

the federal government during the first decade of the 2000s helped
educate the public about open source.
 
Free and open source software has an easy appeal for people outside
the United States (or at least in developing countries). First of all,
people can count up the millions of dollars that go into the coffers of
multinational companies based in the US instead of into local jobs
and local businesses, and compare it to other historical examples of
companies extracting value while not giving back to the local econ‐
omy.
Even more important is the inherent flexibility and transparency of
open source. The software can be fashioned to suit local needs
without asking permission or waiting for a vendor to decide the
changes meet its business needs. This is crucial for all kinds of activ‐
ities ranging from translation and localization to meeting local regu‐
lations. People in developing countries also mistrust the data-
collection practices of US companies. They felt entirely justified
when Edward Snowden’s leaks revealed a US data-gathering cam‐
paign, implicating US telecom companies as well as the US govern‐
ment, throughout Brazil and the rest of Latin America.
To understand the adoption of open source, therefore, we must look
at political and social movements that consciously link the use of
free and open source software to numerous social goals, including
government transparency, wider public participation in govern‐
ment, freedom from surveillance, and better cooperation between
nations. Activists in these movements deliberately prefer the term
“free software” (using the Portuguese term livre and similar words in
other Romance languages) to “open source software” because of
freedom’s political and ethical resonance.
As in many countries (perhaps all), the appeal of free and open
source software is held back by the easy availability of unauthorized
proprietary software (a situation proprietary companies like to stig‐
matize as “pirating”). Thus, Jon Hall cites a Software Business Alli‐
ance report estimating that 84 percent of desktop software in Brazil
is unauthorized installations of proprietary software. But this doesn’t
mean that the proprietary companies are eager to crack down—that
would drive their users to truly free (as in freedom) software.
The early 2000s saw flamboyant public accolades for free software in
Latin America. In September 2004, Venezuelan president Hugo
Free-Software Movements and Regional Efforts 
| 
7

Chávez reinforced his leftist positions by promising to adopt free
software throughout the government. A similar declaration was
made by the Peruvian congress in the early 2000s, resisting powerful
opposition by Microsoft. Brazil was also early to the scene, as the
Partido dos Trabalhadores (Workers’ Party, or PT), led by President
Luiz Inácio “Lula” da Silva, took up the baton for free software soon
after taking power in 2003. To receive the Brazilian government’s
endorsement, free software programmers worked intimately with
party activists as well as with computer businesses that had large
operations in Brazil, such as Sun Microsystems, IBM, and Red Hat.
Certainly, the Brazilian free-software community benefitted from
government attention for a few years. The PT endorsement called
attention to its achievements and brought more business to it. FISL,
which was originally launched with the help of the state government
of Rio Grande do Sul, began to receive federal government backing.
Many government administrators attended and spoke there, and
President Lula himself delivered a keynote at FISL in 2009.
Ultimately, none of these well-intentioned initiatives proceeded very
far. Although I have to rely on vague impressions I hear from open
source advocates, it appears that most countries lacked the technical
expertise to carry out a conversion to open source software. Govern‐
ment staff was not, for the most part, trained in how to evaluate
open source software, install and maintain it, and work with the
open source community to handle bug fixes and feature requests;
these are hard-won skills that take time and practice. There was also
a paucity of local companies that could help bridge the gap between
the untrained government staff and the open source communities.
In Brazil, lack of education is probably not the cause of the delays in
transitioning to open source. The Brazilian free software commu‐
nity is large and well-organized politically. But it takes effort and
political will to recruit open source experts and give them the leeway
to change the entire system of procurement and deployment. Many
managers outside of IT departments must be on board. Therefore,
open source didn’t get much further than the political goodwill won
by the PT when it announced the adoption of free software. Accord‐
ing to Marques and Gobbi, proprietary companies launched a cam‐
paign against open source in 2010, unmatched by any lobbying
effort by open source advocates. And according to Cesar Brod, an
executive at the Linux Professional Institute (LPI), government sup‐
8 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

port for the free-software movement never went beyond the PT to
become a government-wide policy.
Several of my correspondents tell me that the current chaos over
corruption has ended the government’s interest in open source.
According to Luciano Ramalho, the forced resignation of a leading
PT government official, José Dirceu de Oliveira e Silva, in 2005
along with the complete dismissal of his staff, dealt a particularly
bad blow because he was in charge of the supposed conversion to
free software. By that time, according to Marques and Gobbi, thanks
to its public relations and funding, the public tended to associate
open source with the PT, so open source became a victim of the cor‐
ruption scandals. It has suffered this collateral damage in several
ways: the general paralysis now pervading government, the loss of
PT staff who had been trained in the benefits and ways of dealing
with open source, and the general zeal of opposing parties who want
to indiscriminately tear down any initiative associated with the PT.
Regardless of the setbacks, Ramalho has seen progress: “I believe
there has been an organic growth of free and open source software
use on servers across the government and private sectors. For
instance, the Receita Federal, our equivalent of the IRS in the United
States, was 100 percent committed to the Microsoft tech stack before
Lula was elected, but today it is much more diversified and mostly
use Java on GNU/Linux. It even supports GNU/Linux on the desk‐
top with its tax reporting applications.”
The suggestion of an association between free software and corrup‐
tion is particularly unfortunate, because open source software is
strongly resistant to corruption thanks to the open and public pro‐
cess behind its development. Additionally, corruption in Brazil
hardly started with the PT—it equally taints the opposition politi‐
cians who are jockeying to take over from the PT. Corruption
rewards personal connections and established actors instead of crea‐
tive, new projects, particularly ones designed by communities, so
corruption puts a brake on entrepreneurship as well as open source.
The worldwide “open data” drive to make government data more
available has prompted a recent effort among Latin American gov‐
ernments to become more computer-savvy. Adopting open source
tools and open formats is central to the provision of open data. Red
Gealc (Network of Electronic Government of Latin America and the
Caribbean), which includes 32 participating countries, represents a
Free-Software Movements and Regional Efforts 
| 
9

wide-ranging effort to make government more transparent, release
data sets, and give members of the public the tools to make use of
the data. Luis Felipe Costa, who introduced me to Red Gealc, drew
up guidelines for it that cover licenses, technology, and governance
in open source software. Red Gealc also offers online courses on
government transparency and created an eight-level model of
maturity in open source development communities.
Business and Workforce
É um pedaço de pão
You can find open source software everywhere in business, with a
good deal of growth attributable to the importance of open source
in cloud computing and to startups. Consequently, Brazil suffers
from a shortage of workers knowledgeable in open source.
 
According to Fabio Kon, the same factors that made it easy to start
up a software firm anywhere in the world—cloud services and a
swelling number of open source tools and libraries—led to a new
entrepreneurial environment in Brazil around 2012. A government
incubator program called Startup Brazil (comparable to the Small
Business Innovation Research [SBIR] program in the US) would
give the equivalent of US$50,000 to selected early-stage startups and
help the successful ones find further investment. In addition, a São
Paulo program called PIPE (Innovative Research in Small Enterpri‐
ses) funds 200 companies each year, of which 100 are startups. Even
after an economic downturn in 2015, startup activity remained high,
with just a small decrease. The most common sorts of new software
companies handle ecommerce, and the next most popular domain is
agriculture, in which companies offer Internet of Things (IoT)
approaches to improving yields.
Kon hopes that over the next year or two, the political situation will
calm down and the economy will improve. That will lead to changes
benefitting the tech sector: more money for education, lower taxes,
and more investment in startups.
As mentioned earlier, Brazil suffers from a brain drain and a short‐
age of computer staff. Kon estimates that a graduate from one of the
country’s top 10 universities will receive an entry-level salary
between 3,000 and 5,000 reais (US$950 to US$1,500) a month. This
10 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

figure can double within five years of employment but still will not
approach the earnings that person could get in the US and Europe.
Luciano Ramalho says there is full employment in the Brazilian IT
sector, with a shortage of knowledgeable people in all areas of com‐
puting. Cesar Brod cites fruitless searches for trained Linux and
open source experts in Brazil by major firms such as Global Auto‐
mation, Intel, and Hewlett-Packard. He also says that cloud comput‐
ing has become popular in Brazil, as in other places, and that most
cloud companies run Linux as the host machines. Therefore, a large
number of professionals familiar with Linux are being hired by
cloud companies, leaving fewer for customers.
Brod reports that many people don’t believe open source companies
have learned how to make money and survive in Brazil. However, he
has started two such companies and hopes that their models will be
copied by others.
The first company, Solis, was founded by open source programmers
who came out of the university setting, a typical open source story
because research institutions are quicker than commercial busi‐
nesses to adopt open source. The company took over from the uni‐
versity two key pieces of software that are still its core products: an
academic administration called SAGU (now marketed as Solis GE),
and Gnuteca, a library circulation system. Founded in 2003, the
company now employs 60 people, and Brod estimates that other
products and services spun off from it provide work for some 300 to
350 other people. Brod estimates that 80 percent of Solis’s business
comes from outside its own province. In 2004, he wrote an article
about the company’s strategy for Linux Journal.
The second company, Sysvale, Brod still considers a startup. The
opportunity to found it came in 2013 when a new Brazilian law
required more open data from municipalities. Most of them, of
course, had little IT of any sort in place and were not prepared to
provide their data on the Internet. Brod worked with a university in
Bahia, an area so historically underdeveloped that it is the setting for
numerous books about backwardness (most notably La guerra del
fin del mundo by Mario Vargas Llosa). At the Universidade Federal
do Vale do São Francisco in Bahia, Brod recruited graduates to work
in local city offices using open source software to solve the data-
transparency problem. After staying a couple years in these posi‐
tions, the students were initiated into the methods of real-life
Business and Workforce 
| 
11

software development and could find jobs elsewhere, all the while
having made a meaningful contribution to the town. Sysvale was
founded by some of these graduates and now provides services to
many public-sector offices in both affluent and poor areas of the
country. It won a “best business idea” award in 2014.
To turn a college graduate into an effective on-the-job coder, Brod
seeks out students who show a strong love of learning. Sysvale starts
them out with one week of SCRUM training, followed by some sub‐
sets of extreme programming. Then, the graduates are thrown into
the open source community. Brod finds that the free software phi‐
losophy is not difficult to teach to students who are “not yet conta‐
minated by the proprietary industry.” They begin participating in
forums and learn English to be more effective.
Brod also notes that many environments mix Windows, Linux, and
maybe even mainframes. There is a great demand for people with
this mix of skills, and few who have it.
After starting five companies in Brazil, Douglas Conrad investigated
free software and decided to make it the basis of his next company.
To make the company sustainable, he adopted a business model that
I call closed core, embodying a mix of proprietary and open code. In
2004, he created open source call-routing software called SNEP.
Built on Linux and released under the GPL version 2, SNEP func‐
tions as a layer on top of Asterisk but adds useful features such as
routing and a web-based administrative interface. Conrad says that
8,000 companies use the software, including the major bank Caixa
Economica Federal (CEF), and that 40 partners are working on the
SNEP software. In an illustration of the real-world experience open
source can bring to students, three schools are using SNEP to teach
students communications software and entrepreneurship.
The proprietary side of Conrad’s company is OPENS, a Software as a
Service (SaaS) company located in the state of Santa Catarina in
southern Brazil. The service parses telephone information and pro‐
vides intelligence based on it. For instance, a customer service rep
who answers your call can greet you with, “Hello, Andrew. I know
you called us last week about an outage. How is the system working
now?”
As an individual running his own software consultancy, Henrique
Bastos finds open source a tremendous boon to small businesses. He
can use friends’ libraries to fulfill his own contracts, and offer his
12 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

libraries to his friends. They can also collaborate easily on a contract
through open source. Furthermore, opening code makes mainte‐
nance easier, because many people can collaborate as they have time.
So Bastos releases as much of his code as open source as possible,
isolating ancillary code from the core product delivered to the cus‐
tomer.
Internet access is an important part of open source adoption, both
for downloading software and for participating in forums where it is
developed and discussed. The International Telecommunications
Union estimates that more than 65 percent of Brazilians have Inter‐
net access (although another summary is less optimistic). Internet
speeds in major urban centers are several orders of magnitude less
than speeds in most developed countries, and the country as a whole
is much worse. Kon says that even in an advanced market such as
São Paulo, Internet access fails several times a day. The cost of 10-
megabit-per-second Internet access (download speed) is US$26 per
month, according to one site. When you consider that the average
monthly income is 2,000 reais or US$627 (or, for a computer pro‐
grammer, 3,000 reais or US$941), the cost is a significant but afford‐
able burden.
Education
Toda a cidade vai cantar
Although open source is being adopted widely in Brazilian
businesses, education in open source for the employees of these
businesses is harder to obtain. The reasons go back to underdevel‐
opment in the economy and education, Brazilian university regula‐
tions, and the dominance of English-language texts. Because of
difficulties in gaining access to education, Brazilian students and
programmers must find nontraditional ways to pick up open
source skills. Forward-thinking local governments support some
creative educational projects.
 
Most of the world takes proprietary software and services for gran‐
ted. Only Silicon Valley and a few other places evince the startup
mentality that assumes that new employees will possess a day-to-day
intimacy with Linux, Git, an open source database such as Mon‐
goDB or MariaDB, and other free software tools. The question for
this section of the report is where can people acquire such skills?
Education 
| 
13

Although useful, a computer science education isn’t required for
frontend programming or system administration jobs in Brazil.
Luciano Ramalho, for instance, the Python expert, held computing
jobs for 20 years without a college degree, finally getting one in
library information sciences at age 45. Henrique Bastos has also
founded a successful business and become an important figure in
the Python community without finishing college. Seeing his wife’s
experience working within the school system, he considers it broken
and suspects that the next generation of children will learn in a
totally different way that obviates the need for a formal education
system.
The most pressing shortage is in data science and machine learning.
Unlike frontend programming or system administration, you can’t
become a data scientist by taking a few courses and picking up tech‐
niques informally. You need a strong math and statistics background
for data science.
Brazil’s federal and state universities are excellent, and are free to all
who pass the necessary entrance exams. These exams, however, cre‐
ate a bias toward affluent students. As in the United States, affluent
people have access to better schools—often private ones—so wealthy
students come out much better prepared for university than poor
students. Lula’s PT government made a difference here, offering
scholarships and low-interest loans to help poorer people get a col‐
lege education, but the disparities are still large.
The recent movie Que Horas Ela Volta?, distributed in the US as The
Second Mother, provides an interesting view of a lower-class woman
who overcomes enormous barriers in her quest for entry to the Uni‐
versity of São Paulo. Physicist Richard Feynman’s experiences lectur‐
ing in Brazil, reported in his famous book Surely You’re Joking, Mr.
Feynman!, might also still be relevant, even though he published it in
1985.
The University of São Paulo also has the Center of Competence in
Free Software (CCSL) run by Fabio Kon, which offers courses, lec‐
tures, workshops, and community gatherings to strengthen the local
open source ecosystem. The CCSL also carries out R&D projects
and offers consulting to private companies and government in sub‐
jects related to open source policies.
The research universities in the state of São Paulo graduate, every
year, more than 500 professionals in IT-related subjects with very
14 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

good skills in open source development. However, this is still a very
small number compared to the size of the São Paulo economy and
its needs.
According to Kon, Brazil’s public universities produce computer sci‐
ence graduates who are familiar with open source tools and active in
those communities. To illustrate the penetration of open source, he
estimates that 600 of the 800 computer science students at the uni‐
versity have GNU/Linux on their laptops. Hardly anyone outside the
hacker community runs Linux on the desktop, just as in the US and
Europe.
In contrast to the public universities, there are large numbers of for-
profit schools (as in the US) of questionable quality that promise
paying students the skills that will get them a job. These for-profit
schools tend to focus on proprietary tools. In fact, according to Kon,
a few software companies give the schools proprietary software at
no cost, stipulating that courses be designed around it.
As mentioned earlier, data centers and SaaS services in Brazil are
largely based on open source. Kon says this was not true 10 years
ago. These companies have entered firmly into the open source
camp, without advertising the fact, because open source makes them
more cost effective and robust. One interesting question is how their
IT staff have become trained on the new open source tools. Kon says
that company training has become rare. Instead, employees train
themselves, often using online courses such as Coursera and edX.
Douglas Conrad, whose open source business I described earlier,
met Jon Hall in 2004 and found that they held similar views about
how to promote free software: not to focus on the ideological bene‐
fits (“free as in freedom”) but instead to show how it can spur entre‐
preneurship and provide other benefits to society. They founded
Project Cauã, which teaches young people how to start a business
using free software. As SaaS takes over, Conrad believes we have to
change our concept of free software. We should stress sharing and
collaboration, not just as nice things that make the world better, but
also as a way to bolster one’s own success. (The turn toward practical
justifications is historically the impetus for adopting the term “open
source”.) He tries to instill in students the ethos of making enough
money to live comfortably while doing something that is meaning‐
ful for them and helps others.
Education 
| 
15

In starting a business, Conrad urges students to think of the entire
customer experience, not just the code. Three principles drive suc‐
cess:
Focus
Although you should believe that you can do anything you put
your mind to, you need to focus on something and devote
enough time to learn it thoroughly.
Partnerships
If you’re a great developer, focus on the code, but bring in a
marketing person to listen to customers.
Inclusiveness
Sharing code is valuable, but you should do more. Otherwise,
different people will build redundant businesses using your
code and that do essentially the same thing. On the positive
side, by including others in your business, two services based on
different code bases can cooperate to serve clients more effec‐
tively.
Bastos’s company also offers training, and estimates that more than
3,000 people have passed through his courses since 2010. Although
he focuses on Django, like Conrad he uses the class project to teach
real-life professional skills: how to connect with real customers, deal
with crises, and so on. Thus, Bastos’s work represents another path
to open source success, standing outside of the university system,
and melding technical skills with entrepreneurial skills.
Jon Hall points to another important barrier to learning computer
science: the high prices of textbooks in Brazil, a problem I can attest
to from my visits there in the 2000s. Free-software developer Brena
Monteiro also warns that the quality of Portuguese technical transla‐
tions is terrible—a failure that I hope was not true of the O’Reilly
Media books translated into Portuguese.
I talked to Marcelo Marques and Rodolfo Gobbi, who founded and
run 4Linux, the largest company in Brazil that trains students in
Linux and open source technologies. (They also wrote a book for
O’Reilly several years ago.) They have noticed that, for reasons they
can’t explain, fewer students have been taking computer courses in
Brazilian universities over the past several years. As mentioned ear‐
lier, you can get a job as a web programmer without a university
course. 4Linux draws many of its students in that area.
16 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

The Linux Professional Institute (LPI), which was founded in 1999,
began offering its exams in Brazil in 2002 with support from 4Linux
and Conectiva. The exam has several levels that cover wide areas of
system administration, both on the GNU/Linux system itself and on
popular utilities and services such as mail and security.
Certification provides a universal worldwide standard for compe‐
tence and gives people a goal to work toward. Because experience
counts more than training for a certification such as LPI, people
without access to good colleges, or other resources for expensive
training like other certifications require, have enhanced opportuni‐
ties for getting jobs. However, Brod says that the top activity by LPI
is not giving the exam itself (although that is where their funds
come from) but promoting organizations that can teach people the
skills needed to succeed with Linux and related tools.
Brod says that, as LPI developed into a global organization, in 2006
it hired a single manager to cover all of Latin America. This ended
up short-changing the countries in that region (particularly
Portuguese-speaking ones), so in March of 2016, the organization
hired Brod to focus on promoting the exam and related training in
Brazil. Certifications seem to be regarded as more important by Bra‐
zilian businesses than by American companies. Cesar Brod says that
many software RFPs from the Brazilian government require bidders
to provide LPI- or Red Hat–certified staff to handle the contract.
Another barrier to entering the computer field is the need to learn
English. Because most technical books, papers, and websites are in
English, with an eye toward reaching a global community that has
coalesced around that language, everyone must become pretty profi‐
cient in English before they can advance far in the computer field.
Even when Brazilians write code and documentation for local
projects, they tend to do so in English because the project might
someday appeal to developers outside the country. So, Cesar Brod
advises students and staff that their salaries will be doubled if they
know English. Spanish is also useful in order to communicate with
other Latin American countries.
Education 
| 
17

Looking Toward the Future
Gosto muito de te ver, leãozinho, caminhando sob o sol
Brazilian open source advocates are, out of necessity, weaning
themselves off their tight collaboration with the federal government
and finding grassroots ways to promote the software and methods.
 
Marcelo Marques and Rodolfo Gobbi say that budget cuts and the
fall of the Brazilian Real against the US dollar are forcing govern‐
ment agencies to take another look at open source, this time for
practical reasons rather than ideological ones. Marques and Gobbi
are among the first to see this new interest, because they are receiv‐
ing more requests about their training programs from government
offices.
Open source actually tends not to save money at first (due to con‐
version costs), and other arguments for its adoption are stronger
than cost-related ones, but budget cuts can still be a useful incentive
to pique curiosity about open source. The cost and effort of convert‐
ing to open source software often goes to waste, according to Jon
Hall, because commercial and government sites get new managers
who arbitrarily relicense proprietary software, discarding the knowl‐
edge and cultural understanding derived from the open source
period.
Open source is not just a business or a project, but a growing com‐
munity. Therefore, despite the setbacks in government, both in Bra‐
zil and elsewhere, the movement continues to advance. Luciano
Ramalho sees a positive sign in Red Hat’s recent expansion in Brazil.
As part of their products and services, many other companies—
including IBM, Oracle, and Intel—use open source software.
What can the free and open source communities in Brazil do to
keep the process moving along? Some problems lie within their
grasp to solve, whereas others exist on a larger level that requires
decisive action by government and society. Several intersecting
issues need to be addressed:
• The shortage of trained staff, which is particularly distressing
given the poverty and a high unemployment in Brazil.
18 
| 
Open Source in Brazil: Growing Despite Barriers

• The continuing weaknesses in Brazil’s primary, secondary, and
university-level education.
• Geographic disparities—employment and educational opportu‐
nities drop rapidly as one moves out of major cities.
• Inertia and corruption that leave companies and government
agencies feeding huge amounts of money into proprietary soft‐
ware that was designed for the North American market.
• Factors that hold back computerization in general. Hall cites
high import taxes (especially on small systems like the popular
Raspberry Pi), unnecessarily expensive hardware, risk aversion
among manufacturers of computers and parts, poor shipping
infrastructure, and low investment by venture capitalists.
Brazil seems ripe for a major educational push in technology. It
needs a hundred more organizations like 4Linux, Solis, Sysvale, and
OPENS. Given low budgets and deliberate neglect by the govern‐
ment, creative educational solutions need to be put in place by
NGOs and businesses. Rural areas might benefit from hackerspaces
and Maker spaces that can reach young people with nonacademic,
hands-on learning. Volunteers might be able to fill in where trained
staff are lacking or there is not enough money to hire them. Brena
Monteiro believes that more women need to be recruited as pro‐
grammers, a process that includes fighting gender bias. She consid‐
ers training female developers a prerequisite for recruiting more
women into the free-software movement.
The inevitable world trend in software is toward standardization
and commoditization, which means open source. Brazil will no
doubt continue along this path, as well. Artificial government stim‐
uli provided some benefit, but less than the community had hoped
for. It also led to an undeserved backlash when the PT lost its
momentum. Free software advocates have no doubt learned from
this history and will rebuild their movement on the basis of open
source’s benefits.
Looking Toward the Future 
| 
19

About the Author
Andy Oram is an editor at O’Reilly Media. An employee of the com‐
pany since 1992, Andy currently specializes in programming topics.
His work for O’Reilly includes the first books ever published com‐
mercially in the United States on Linux and the 2001 title Peer-to-
Peer.

