
O P E R AT I O N S  A N D S U P P LY C H A I N 
M A N A G E M E N T

SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Benton
Purchasing and Supply Chain Management
Third Edition
Burt, Petcavage, and Pinkerton
Supply Management
Ninth Edition
Bowersox, Closs, and Cooper
Supply Chain Logistics Management
Fifth Edition
Johnson, Leenders, and Flynn
Purchasing and Supply Management
Fifteenth Edition
Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky, and Simchi-Levi
Designing and Managing the Supply Chain: Concepts, Strategies, Case 
Studies
Third Edition
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Brown and Hyer
Managing Projects: A Team-Based Approach
Second Edition
Larson and Gray
Project Management: The Managerial Process
Sixth Edition
SERVICE OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Fitzsimmons, Fitzsimmons, and Bordoloi
Service Management: Operations, Strategy, Information Technology
Eighth Edition
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Hillier and Hillier
Introduction to Management Science: A Modeling and Case Studies 
Approach with Spreadsheets
Fifth Edition
Stevenson and Ozgur
Introduction to Management Science with Spreadsheets
First Edition
MANUFACTURING CONTROL SYSTEMS
Jacobs, Berry, Whybark, and Vollmann
Manufacturing Planning & Control for Supply Chain Management
Sixth Edition
BUSINESS RESEARCH METHODS
Cooper-Schindler
Business Research Methods
Twelfth Edition
BUSINESS FORECASTING
Wilson, Keating, and John Galt Solutions, Inc.
Business Forecasting
Sixth Edition
LINEAR STATISTICS AND REGRESSION
Kutner, Nachtsheim, and Neiter
Applied Linear Regression Models
Fourth Edition
BUSINESS SYSTEMS DYNAMICS
Sterman
Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex 
World
First Edition
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Cachon and Terwiesch
Matching Supply with Demand: An Introduction to Operations 
Management
Fourth Edition
Finch
Interactive Models for Operations and Supply Chain Management
First Edition
Jacobs and Chase
Operations and Supply Chain Management: The Core
Fourth Edition
Jacobs and Chase
Operations and Supply Chain Management
Fifteenth Edition
Jacobs and Whybark
Why ERP? A Primer on SAP Implementation
First Edition
Schroeder, Goldstein, and Rungtusanatham
Operations Management in the Supply Chain: Decisions and Cases
Seventh Edition
Stevenson
Operations Management
Twelfth Edition
Swink, Melnyk, Cooper, and Hartley
Managing Operations across the Supply Chain
Third Edition
PRODUCT DESIGN
Ulrich and Eppinger
Product Design and Development
Sixth Edition
BUSINESS MATH
Slater and Wittry
Practical Business Math Procedures
Twelfth Edition
Slater and Wittry
Practical Business Math Procedures, Brief Edition
Eleventh Edition
Slater and Wittry
Math for Business and Finance: An Algebraic Approach
First Edition
BUSINESS STATISTICS
Bowerman, O’Connell, Murphree, and Orris
Essentials of Business Statistics
Fifth Edition
Bowerman, O’Connell, and Murphree
Business Statistics in Practice
Eighth Edition
Doane and Seward
Applied Statistics in Business and Economics
Fifth Edition
Lind, Marchal, and Wathen
Basic Statistics for Business and Economics
Eighth Edition
Lind, Marchal, and Wathen
Statistical Techniques in Business and Economics
Seventeeth Edition
Jaggia and Kelly
Business Statistics: Communicating with Numbers
Second Edition
T H E M CG R AW- H I L L E D U C AT I O N S E R I E S
Operations and Decision Sciences

f i f t e e n t h  e d i t i o n
F .  R O B E R T J A C O B S
Indiana University
R I C H A R D B .  C H A S E
University of Southern California
O P E R AT I O N S  A N D S U P P LY C H A I N 
M A N A G E M E N T

OPERATIONS AND SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT, FIFTEENTH EDITION 
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous 
editions © 2014, 2011, 2009, and 2006. No part of this publication may be reproduced or 
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the 
prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or 
other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers 
outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 21 20 19 18 17 
ISBN 978-1-259-66610-0
MHID 1-259-66610-7
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Marty Lange
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Betsy Whalen
Managing Director: James Heine
Brand Manager: Dolly Womack
Director, Product Development: Rose Koos  
Product Developer: Camille Corum
Marketing Manager: Britney Hermsen
Director of Digital Content Development: Douglas Ruby
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Linda Avenarius
Program Manager: Mark Christianson
Content Project Managers: Kathryn D. Wright, Kristin Bradley, and Karen Jozefowicz
Buyer: Sandy Ludovissy
Design: Egzon Shaqiri
Content Licensing Specialists: Beth Thole and Melissa Homer
Cover Images: Modern globe network blue background: © Shutterstock/Sarunyu_foto; Delivery time 
line and transportation icons: © Shutterstock/Nucleartist; Blue background: © Shutterstock/natrot 
Compositor: SPi Global
Printer: LSC Communications
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the 
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Jacobs, F. Robert, author. | Chase, Richard B., author.
Title: Operations and supply chain management / F. Robert Jacobs, Indiana
   University, Richard B. Chase, University of Southern California.
Other titles: Operations and supply management
Description: Fifteenth edition. | New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education,
   [2018] | Previously published as: Operations and supply management. |
   Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016042219 | ISBN 9781259666100 (acid-free paper)
Subjects:  LCSH: Production management.
Classification: LCC TS155 .J27 2018 | DDC 658.5—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016042219
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a 
website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and ­McGraw-Hill 
Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

To  m y  f a t h e r,  Fo r e s t
To  m y  w i f e ,  H a r r i e t ,  a n d  t o  o u r  c h i l d r e n
L a u r i e ,  A n d y ,  G l e n n ,  R o b b ,  a n d  C h r i s t i n e

vi
BRIEF TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
S E C T I O N  O N E
STRATEGY, PRODUCTS, 
AND CAPACITY
	
1	Introduction  2
	
2	Strategy  23
	
3	Design of Products 
and Services  42
	
4	Projects  73
	
5	Strategic Capacity 
Management  110
	
6	Learning Curves  130
S E C T I O N  T W O
MANUFACTURING AND 
SERVICE PROCESSES
	
7	Manufacturing Processes  148
	
8	Facility Layout  168
	
9	Service Processes  201
	 10	Waiting Line Analysis and 
Simulation  221
	 11	Process Design and Analysis  265
	 12	Six Sigma Quality  298
	 13	Statistical Quality Control  317
S E C T I O N  T H R E E
SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESSES
	 14	Lean Supply Chains  350
	 15	Logistics, Distribution, and 
Transportation  378
	 16	Global Sourcing 
and Procurement  402
S E C T I O N  F O U R
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 
PLANNING AND CONTROL
	 17	Enterprise Resource Planning 
Systems  426
	 18	Forecasting  444
	 19	Sales and Operations 
Planning  489
	 20	Inventory Management  515
	 21	Material Requirements 
Planning  559
	 22	Workcenter Scheduling  590
	 23	Theory of Constraints  622
S E C T I O N  F I V E
SPECIAL TOPICS
	 24	Health Care  656
	 25	Operations Consulting  671
APPENDICES
	
A	Linear Programming 
Using the Excel 
Solver  691
	
B	Operations Technology  711
	
C	Financial Analysis  718
	
D	Answers to Selected Objective 
Questions  734

	
	
	
BRIEF TABLE OF CONTENTS	
	
vii
	
H	Uniformly Distributed Random 
Digits  739
	
I	Interest Tables  740
Index  744
	
E	Present Value Table  736
	
F	Negative Exponential Distribution: 
Values of e–X  737
	
G	Areas of the Cumulative Standard 
Normal Distribution  738

viii
Productivity Measurement  33
Concept Connections  35
Solved Problem  37
Discussion Questions  37
Objective Questions  37
Case: The Tao of Timbuk  40
Practice Exam  41
	
3	 DE S I GN  O F  PRO D UC TS  A ND 
SE RV I C E S  42
Product Design  43
Product Development Process  44
Product Design Criteria  49
Designing for the Customer  49
Value Analysis/Value Engineering  51
Designing Products for Manufacture 
and Assembly  52
Designing Service Products  56
Economic Analysis of Product 
Development Projects  57
Build a Base-Case Financial 
Model  58
Sensitivity Analysis to Understand 
Project Trade-Offs  60
Measuring Product Development 
­Performance  61
Concept Connections  62
Solved Problem  63
Discussion Questions  66
Objective Questions  66
Case: IKEA: Design and 
Pricing  69
Case: Dental Spa  72
Practice Exam  72
	
4	 PROJ E C TS  73
What is Project Management?  74
Organizing the Project Team  75
Pure Project  75
Functional Project  75
Matrix Project  76
Organizing Project Tasks  77
Network-Planning Models  78
Critical Path Method (CPM)  79
CPM with Three Activity Time 
Estimates  83
Time–Cost Models and Project 
Crashing  86
S E C T I O N  O N E
STRATEGY, PRODUCTS, 
AND CAPACITY
	
1	 INT RO DU CTIO N  2
Introduction—the Elements of OSCM  3
What Is Operations and Supply Chain 
Management?  3
Distinguishing Operations versus Supply 
Chain Processes  4
Categorizing Operations and Supply 
Chain Processes  6
Differences Between Services and Goods  7
The Goods–Services Continuum  8
Product–Service Bundling  9
Careers in OSCM  9
Chief Operating Officer  10
The Major Concepts that Define the 
OSCM Field  11
Current Issues in Operations and Supply 
Chain Management  13
Efficiency, Effectiveness, and Value  14
How Does Wall Street Evaluate 
­Efficiency?  14
Concept Connections  18
Discussion Questions  19
Objective Questions  20
Analytics Exercise: ­Comparing 
­Companies Using Wall Street 
­Efficiency Measures  21
Practice Exam  22
	
2	 ST RATEGY  23
A Sustainable Operations 
and Supply Chain Strategy  24
What Is Operations and Supply Chain 
Strategy?  25
Competitive Dimensions  27
The Notion of Trade-Offs  29
Order Winners and Order Qualifiers: The 
Marketing–Operations Link  29
Strategies are Implemented Using 
Operations and Supply Chain 
­Activities—IKEA’s Strategy  30
Assessing the Risk Associated with Oper­
ations and Supply Chain ­Strategies  31
Risk Management Framework  32
CONTENTS

	
	
	
CONTENTS	
	
ix
S E C T I O N  T W O
MANUFACTURING AND 
SERVICE PROCESSES
	
7	 MA N UFAC TURI N G PROCE S S E S	
148
What are Manufacturing 
Processes?  149
How Manufacturing Processes 
are Organized  151
Break-Even Analysis  153
Manufacturing Process 
Flow Design  155
Concept Connections  160
Solved Problems  161
Discussion Questions  162
Objective Questions  163
Case: Circuit Board Fabricators, 
Inc.  165
Practice Exam  167
	
8	 FAC I L I TY LAYO UT   168
Analyzing the Four Most Common 
­Layout Formats  170
Workcenters (Job Shops)  170
Systematic Layout Planning  174
Assembly Lines  174
Assembly-Line Design  174
Splitting Tasks  178
Flexible and U-Shaped Line Layouts  179
Mixed-Model Line Balancing  179
Cells  181
Project Layouts  181
Retail Service Layout  183
Servicescapes  183
Signs, Symbols, and Artifacts  185
Office Layout  185
Concept Connections  186
Solved Problem  187
Discussion Questions  190
Objective Questions  191
Advanced Problem  197
Analytics Exercise: Designing a 
Manufacturing Process  198
Practice Exam  200
	
9	 SE RV I C E  PRO C E S S E S  201
The Nature of Services  202
An Operational Classification of 
Services  203
Designing Service Organizations  203
Structuring the Service Encounter: The 
Service-System Design Matrix  205
Managing Customer-Introduced 
Variability  207
Applying Behavioral Science to Service 
Encounters  207
Service Blueprinting and 
Fail-Safing  211
Managing Projects  89
Earned Value Management 
(EVM)  91
Project Management Information 
­Systems  94
Concept Connections  95
Solved Problems  97
Discussion Questions  101
Objective Questions  102
Analytics Exercise: Product Design 
­Project  108
Practice Exam  109
	
5	 STRATEG IC CAPACITY 
MANAG EMENT  110
Capacity Management in 
­Operations and Supply Chain 
Management  111
Capacity Planning Concepts  112
Economies and Diseconomies of 
Scale  112
Capacity Focus  113
Capacity Flexibility  113
Capacity Planning  114
Considerations in Changing 
Capacity  114
Determining Capacity Requirements  115
Using Decision Trees to Evaluate 
Capacity Alternatives  117
Planning Service Capacity  120
Capacity Planning in Services versus 
Manufacturing  120
Capacity Utilization and Service 
Quality  121
Concept Connections  122
Solved Problem  123
Discussion Questions  125
Objective Questions  125
Case: Shouldice Hospital—A Cut 
Above  127
Practice Exam  129
	
6	 LEARNING  CU RVES  130
What are Learning Curves?  131
How are Learning Curves 
Modeled?  132
Logarithmic Analysis  133
Learning Curve Tables  133
Estimating the Learning 
Percentage  138
How Long Does Learning 
Go On?  138
In Practice, How Much Learning 
Occurs?  138
Individual Learning  138
Organizational Learning  139
Concept Connections  141
Solved Problems  141
Discussion Questions  142
Objective Questions  143
Practice Exam  146

x	
	
CONTENTS
	
12	 SI X SI GM A QUAL I TY  298
Total Quality Management  299
Quality Specifications and Quality 
Costs  300
Developing Quality Specifications  300
Cost of Quality  301
Six Sigma Quality  303
Six Sigma Methodology  304
Analytical Tools for Six Sigma  305
Six Sigma Roles and Responsibilities  308
The Shingo System: Fail-Safe 
Design  309
ISO 9000 and ISO 14000  310
External Benchmarking for Quality 
Improvement  311
Concept Connections  312
Discussion Questions  313
Objective Questions  314
Case: Tesla’s Quality Challenge  315
Practice Exam  316
	
13	 STATI STI CA L  QUA L I TY CO NT RO L  317
Statistical Quality Control  318
Understanding and Measuring Process 
Variation  319
Measuring Process Capability  321
Statistical Process Control 
Procedures  325
Process Control with Attribute 
­Measurements: Using p-Charts  326
Process Control with Attribute 
­Measurements: Using c-Charts  328
Process Control with Variable 
­Measurements: Using X- and 
R-Charts  329
How to Construct X- and R-Charts  330
Acceptance Sampling  333
Design of a Single Sampling Plan for 
Attributes  333
Operating Characteristic Curves  334
Concept Connections  336
Solved Problem  337
Discussion Questions  340
Objective Questions  340
Analytics Exercise: Hot Shot Plastics 
Company  345
Analytics Exercise: Quality 
Management—Toyota  346
Practice Exam  347
S E C T I O N  T H R E E
SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESSES
	
14	 LE AN SUP P LY CH A I N S  350
Lean Production  351
The Toyota Production System  352
Lean Supply Chains  353
Value Stream Mapping  355
Lean Supply Chain Design Principles  357
Lean Concepts  358
Three Contrasting Service Designs  212
The Production-Line Approach  212
The Self-Service Approach  213
The Personal-Attention Approach  213
Seven Characteristics of a Well-Designed 
Service System  215
Concept Connections  216
Discussion Questions  217
Objective Questions  218
Case: Pizza USA: An Exercise in Trans­
lating Customer Requirements into
Process Design Requirements  218
Practice Exam  220
	
10	 WAITING  LINE ANALYSIS AN D 
SIMU L ATIO N  221
The Waiting Line Problem  222
The Practical View of Waiting Lines  222
The Queuing System  223
Waiting Line Models  230
Approximating Customer Waiting Time  236
Simulating Waiting Lines  239
Example: A Two-Stage Assembly Line  239
Spreadsheet Simulation  242
Simulation Programs and Languages  244
Concept Connections  246
Solved Problems  248
Discussion Questions  251
Objective Questions  251
Case: Community Hospital Evening 
Operating Room  256
Analytics Exercise: Processing Cus­
tomer Orders  256
Practice Exam  259
	
11	 PROCESS DESIGN AND ANALYSIS  265
Process Analysis  266
Example—Analyzing a Las Vegas Slot 
Machine  266
Process Flowcharting  268
Understanding Processes  270
Buffering, Blocking, and Starving  270
Make-to-Stock vs. Make-to-Order  271
Measuring Process Performance  273
Production Process Mapping and Little’s 
Law  275
Job Design Decisions  278
Behavioral Considerations in Job 
Design  278
Work Measurement and Standards  279
Process Analysis Examples  280
A Bread-Making Operation  280
A Restaurant Operation  281
Planning a Transit Bus Operation  283
Process Flow Time Reduction  285
Concept Connections  287
Solved Problems  289
Discussion Questions  291
Objective Questions  292
Case: Analyzing Casino Money-­
Handling Processes  296
Practice Exam  297

	
	
	
CONTENTS	
	
xi
Routine Decision Making  428
How ERP Connects the Functional 
Units  429
Finance  430
Manufacturing and Logistics  430
Sales and Marketing  430
Human Resources  430
Customized Software  431
Data Integration  431
How Supply Chain Planning and Control 
Fits Within ERP  432
Simplified Example  432
SAP Supply Chain Management  433
SAP Supply Chain Execution  433
SAP Supply Chain Collaboration  434
SAP Supply Chain Coordination  434
Performance Metrics to Evaluate Inte­
grated System Effectiveness  435
The “Functional Silo” Approach  435
Integrated Supply Chain Metrics  436
Calculating the Cash-to-Cash Cycle 
Time  438
Concept Connections  440
Solved Problems  441
Discussion Questions  442
Objective Questions  442
Practice Exam  443
	
18	 FO RE CASTI N G  444
Forecasting in Operations and Supply 
Chain Management  445
Quantitative Forecasting 
Models  446
Components of Demand  447
Time Series Analysis  448
Forecast Errors  463
Causal Relationship Forecasting  466
Qualitative Techniques in 
Forecasting  468
Market Research  469
Panel Consensus  469
Historical Analogy  469
Delphi Method  469
Web-Based Forecasting: Collaborative 
Planning, Forecasting, and Replenish­
ment (CPFR)  470
Concept Connections  471
Solved Problems  473
Discussion Questions  478
Objective Questions  478
Analytics Exercise: Forecasting 
Supply Chain Demand—Starbucks 
Corporation  487
Practice Exam  488
	
19	 SAL E S  A N D  OP E RATI O NS 
PL A N N I N G  489
What is Sales and Operations 
Planning?  490
An Overview of Sales and Operations 
Planning Activities  490
Lean Production Schedules  359
Lean Supply Chains  363
Lean Services  364
Concept Connections  366
Solved Problems  368
Discussion Questions  372
Objective Questions  372
Case: Quality Parts Company  373
Case: Value Stream Mapping  375
Case: Pro Fishing Boats—A Value 
Stream Mapping Exercise  376
Practice Exam  377
	
15	 LO G ISTICS,  DISTRIBUTIO N , AN D 
TRANSPO RTATIO N  378
Logistics  379
Decisions Related to Logistics  380
Transportation Modes  380 
Warehouse Design  381
Locating Logistics Facilities  381
Plant Location Methods  383
Centroid Method  387
Locating Service Facilities  388
Concept Connections  391
Solved Problems  392
Discussion Questions  396
Objective Questions  396
Analytics Exercise: Distribution Center 
Location  399
Practice Exam  401
	
16	 GLO BAL  SO U RCING  AN D 
PRO CU REMENT  402
Strategic Sourcing  403
The Bullwhip Effect  404
Supply Chain Uncertainty Framework  405
Outsourcing  408
Logistics Outsourcing  408
Framework for Supplier Relationships  409
Green Sourcing  411
Total Cost of Ownership  414
Measuring Sourcing Performance  416
Concept Connections  418
Discussion Questions  419
Objective Questions  420
Analytics Exercise: Global Sourcing 
Decisions—Grainger: Reengineering the 
China/U.S. Supply Chain  422
Practice Exam  424
S E C T I O N  F O U R
SUPPLY AND DEMAND 
­PLANNING AND CONTROL
	
17	 ENTERPRISE RESO U RC E PL A N N I N G 
SYSTEMS  426
What is ERP?  427
Consistent Numbers  427
Software Imperatives  428

xii	
	
CONTENTS
Inventory Records  569
Performing the MRP Calculations  569
Lot Sizing in MRP Systems  572
Lot-for-Lot  573
Economic Order Quantity  573
Least Total Cost  574
Least Unit Cost  574
Choosing the Best Lot Size  576
Concept Connections  576
Solved Problems  577
Discussion Questions  583
Objective Questions  583
Analytics Exercise: An MRP Explosion—
Brunswick Motors  587
Practice Exam  589
	 22	 WO RKC E N TE R SC H E D UL I NG  590
Workcenter Scheduling  591
The Nature and Importance of 
­Workcenters  591
Typical Scheduling and Control 
Functions  593
Objectives of Workcenter Scheduling  594
Job Sequencing  594
Priority Rules and Techniques  595
Scheduling n Jobs on One Machine  595
Scheduling n Jobs on Two Machines  598
Scheduling a Set Number of Jobs on the 
Same Number of Machines  599
Scheduling n Jobs on m Machines  601
Shop-Floor Control  601
Gantt Charts  601
Tools of Shop-Floor Control  602
Principles of Workcenter Scheduling  604
Personnel Scheduling in Services  605
Scheduling Daily Work Times  605
Scheduling Hourly Work Times  606
Concept Connections  607
Solved Problems  609
Discussion Questions  614
Objective Questions  614
Case: Keep Patients Waiting? Not in My 
Office  619
Practice Exam  621
	
23	 TH E O RY O F  CO N STRAI NTS   622
Eli Goldratt’s Theory of 
Constraints  623
The Goal of the Firm  625
Performance Measurements  625
Unbalanced Capacity  626
Bottlenecks, Capacity-Constrained 
Resources, and Synchronous 
Manufacturing  628
Basic Manufacturing Building Blocks  628
Methods for Synchronous Control  629
Comparing Synchronous Manufacturing 
(TOC) to Traditional Approaches  638
MRP and JIT  638
Relationship with Other Functional 
Areas  639
Theory of Constraints—Problems About 
What to Produce  640
The Aggregate Operations 
Plan  492
Aggregate Planning Techniques  496
A Cut-and-Try Example: The JC 
Company  496
Aggregate Planning Applied to Ser­
vices: Tucson Parks and Recreation 
Department  501
Yield Management  503
Operating Yield Management 
Systems  504
Concept Connections  505
Solved Problems  506
Discussion Questions  509
Objective Questions  509
Analytics Exercise: Develop­
ing an Aggregate Plan—Bradford 
Manufacturing  512
Practice Exam  513
	 20	 INVENTO RY MANAG EME N T  515
Understanding Inventory 
Management  516
Purposes of Inventory  518
Inventory Costs  519
Independent versus Dependent 
Demand  520
Inventory Control Systems  521
A Single-Period Inventory Model  521
Multiperiod Inventory Systems  524
Fixed–Order Quantity Models  525
Fixed–Time Period Models  532
Inventory Turn Calculation  534
Price-Break Model  535
Inventory Planning and Accuracy  538
ABC Classification  538
Inventory Accuracy and Cycle 
Counting  539
Concept Connections  541
Solved Problems  543
Discussion Questions  546
Objective Questions  546
Analytics Exercise: Inventory Manage­
ment at Big10Sweaters.com  555
Practice Exam  557
	
21	 MATERIAL  REQ U IREMEN TS 
PL ANNING  559
Understanding Material Requirements 
Planning  560
Where MRP Can Be Used  560
Master Production Scheduling  561
Material Requirements Planning 
System Structure  563
Demand for Products  563
Bill-of-Materials  563
Inventory Records  565
MRP Computer Program  566
An Example Using MRP  567
Forecasting Demand  567
Developing a Master Production 
Schedule  568
Bill-of-Materials (Product Structure)  568

	
	
	
CONTENTS	
	
xiii
Data Analysis and Solution 
Development  682
Cost Impact and Payoff Analysis  683
Implementation  684
Business Process Reengineering 
(Bpr)  684
Principles of Reengineering  685
Guidelines for Implementation  686
Concept Connections  687
Discussion Questions  687
Objective Questions  688
Exercise: Quick Plant Assessment  688
Practice Exam  690
APPENDICES
	A	 Linear Programming Using the 
Excel Solver  691
	B	 Operations Technology  711
	C	 Financial Analysis  718
	D	 Answers to Selected Objective 
Questions  734
	E	 Present Value Table  736
	F	 Negative Exponential Distribution: 
Values of e–X  737
	G	 Areas of the Cumulative Standard 
Normal Distribution  738
	H	 Uniformly Distributed Random 
Digits  739
	 I	 Interest Tables  740
IN D E X  744
Concept Connections  647
Solved Problem  648
Discussion Questions  649
Objective Questions  650
Practice Exam  654
S E C T I O N  F I V E
SPECIAL TOPICS
	 24	 HEALTH CARE  656
The Nature of Health Care 
Operations  657
Classification of Hospitals  658
Hospital Layout and Care Chains  659
Capacity Planning  660
Workforce Scheduling  661
Quality Management and Process 
Improvement  661
Health Care Supply Chains  663
Inventory Management  664
Performance Measures  665
Trends in Health Care  665
Concept Connections  667
Discussion Questions  668
Objective Questions  668
Case: Managing Patient Wait Times at a 
Family Clinic  669
Practice Exam  670
	 25	 OPERATIO NS CO NSU LTIN G  671
What Is Operations Consulting?  672
The Management Consulting Industry  673
Economics of Consulting Firms  673
When Operations Consulting Is 
Needed  674
The Operations Consulting 
Process  676
Operations Consulting Tool Kit  677
Problem Definition Tools  677
Data Gathering  679

xiv
PREFACE
Operations and supply chain management (OSCM) is a key element in the improvement in 
productivity in business around the world. Establishing a competitive advantage through 
operations requires an understanding of how the operations and supply chain functions con­
tribute to productivity growth. However, our intent in this book is to do more than just show 
you what companies are doing to create a competitive advantage in the marketplace by con­
veying to you a set of skills and tools that you can actually apply.
Hot topics in business today that relate to operations and supply chain management are 
reducing the cost of supply chain processes, integration and collaboration with customers and 
suppliers, sustainability, and minimizing the long-term cost of products and processes. These 
topics are studied in the book with up-to-date, high-level managerial material to clarify the 
“big picture” of what these topics are and why they are so important to business today.
A significant feature of this book is the organization of each chapter by concise learning 
objectives. Each objective relates to a block of knowledge that should be studied as a unit. 
The objectives are carried through the end-of-chapter material that includes Concept Con­
nections, Discussion Questions, Objective Questions, and a Practice Exam. The material is 
organized to ease understanding of each topic.
Success in OSCM requires a data-driven view of a firm’s business. Every chapter in the 
book has analytic content that ties decisions to relevant data. Mathematical models are used 
to structure the data for making decisions. Given the facts that are supported by data, success 
in OSCM requires using a strategy that is consistent with the operations-related priorities of 
a firm. Different approaches can often be used, and usually trade-offs related to cost-and-
flexibility-related criteria exist. Strategies are implemented through processes that define 
exactly how things are done. Processes are executed over and over again as the firm conducts 
business, so they must be designed to operate efficiently to minimize cost while meeting 
quality-related standards. Great managers are analytic in their approach to decision making; 
they understand and select the appropriate strategy, and then execute the strategy through 
great processes. We develop this pattern throughout the topics in this book.
The reality of global customers, global suppliers, and global supply chains has made the 
global firm recognize the importance of being both lean and green to ensure competitive­
ness. Applications that range from high-tech manufacturing to high-touch service are used 
in the balanced treatment of the traditional topics of the field. Success for companies today 
requires successfully managing the entire supply flow, from the sources of the firm, through 
the value-added process of the firm, and on to the customers of the firm.
Each chapter includes information about how operations and supply chain–related prob­
lems are solved. There are concise treatments of the many decisions that need to be made in 
designing, planning, and managing the operations of a business. Many spreadsheets are avail­
able from the book website to help clarify how these problems are quickly solved. We have 
indicated those spreadsheets with an Excel icon in the margin.
OSCM should appeal to individuals who want to be directly involved in making products 
or providing services. The entry-level operations specialist is the person who determines how 
best to design, supply, and run the processes. Senior operations managers are responsible for 
setting the strategic direction of the company from an operations and supply chain standpoint, 
deciding what technologies should be used and where facilities should be located, purchasing 
the resources needed, and managing the facilities that make the products or provide the ser­
vices. OSCM is an interesting mix of managing people and applying sophisticated technol­
ogy. The goal is to efficiently create wealth by supplying quality goods and services.

	
	
	
PREFACE	
	
xv
Features to aid in your understanding of the material include the following:
∙	 OSCM at Work boxes provide short overviews of how leading-edge companies are 
applying OSCM concepts today.
∙	 Solved problems at the end of chapters to serve as models that can be reviewed prior to 
attempting problems.
∙	 Concept Connections section in each chapter that summarizes the concepts in each 
learning objective, has definitions of the key terms, and lists the equations where 
appropriate.
∙	 Discussion questions that are designed to review concepts and show their applicability 
in real-world settings. These are included in each chapter and organized by learning 
objectives.
∙	 Objective questions at the end of chapters that cover each concept and problem. These 
are organized by the chapter learning objectives.
∙	 Practice exam questions at the end of each chapter. These are special questions designed 
to require a deeper understanding of the material in the chapter. They are similar to the 
type of short-answer questions that might be given on a test.
∙	 Answers to selected problems are in Appendix D.
∙	 Available as a supplement to the book is the super-innovative Connect smart-learning 
system. Connect includes LearnSmart, a study system that uses automated intelligent 
drills to test and ensure your mastery of the material. Connect also includes PowerPoint 
slide outlines of each chapter, Excel spreadsheets for the solved problems and other 
examples, practice quizzes, ScreenCam tutorials, Internet links, and video segments that 
illustrate the application of operations concepts in companies such as Xerox, ­Zappos, 
Six Flags, Caterpillar, Burton Snowboards, Honda, Disney, Ford, and many others.
Our aim is to cover the latest and the most important issues facing OSCM managers, as 
well as basic tools and techniques. We supply many examples of leading-edge companies and 
practices and have done our best to make the book an interesting read and give you a competi­
tive advantage in your career.
We hope you enjoy it.
P L A N  O F  T H E  B O O K
This book is about methods to effectively produce and distribute the goods and services sold 
by a company. To develop a better understanding of the field, this book is organized into five 
major sections: Strategy, Products, and Capacity; Manufacturing and Service Processes; Sup­
ply Chain Processes; Supply and Demand Planning and Control; and Special Topics. In the 
following paragraphs, we quickly describe the major topics in the book.
Strategy and sustainability are important and recurring topics in the book. Any company 
must have a comprehensive business plan that is supported by a marketing strategy, operations 
strategy, and financial strategy. It is essential for a company to ensure that the three strategies 
support each other. Strategy is covered from a high-level view in Chapter 2 (Strategy), and 
more details that relate to economies of scale and learning are covered in Chapters 5 and 6.
The lifeline of the company is a steady stream of innovative products that are offered to 
the marketplace at the lowest cost possible. Design of Products and Services (Chapter 3) 
includes a view of how products are designed in the context of having to actually produce and 
distribute the product over its life cycle. The chapter includes material on how to manage and 
analyze the economic impact of a stream of products that are developed over time. Projects 
(Chapter 4) are used to implement change in a firm, be it a change in strategy, a new product 
introduction, or a new process.
The second section of the book, titled Manufacturing and Service Processes, focuses on 
the design of internal processes. Chapters 7 and 9 cover the unique characteristics of produc­
tion and service processes. Important technical material that relates to design activities is 
covered in Chapters 8 (Facility Layout) and 10 (Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation).

xvi	
	
PREFACE
Chapter 11, Process Design and Analysis, is a nuts-and-bolts chapter on process flow 
charting and static process analysis using some easily understood real-life examples.
An essential element of process design is quality. Six Sigma Quality is the topic of 
­Chapter 12. Here we cover total quality management concepts, Six Sigma tools, and ISO 
9000 and 14000. Technical details covering all the statistical aspects of quality are in Chapter 
13 (Statistical Quality Control).
The third section of the book, titled Supply Chain Processes, expands our focus to the 
entire distribution system from the sourcing of material and other resources to the distri­
bution of products and services. We discuss the concepts behind lean manufacturing and 
just-in-time processes in Chapter 14. These are ideas used by companies throughout the 
world and are key drivers for efficient and quick-responding supply systems. Many different 
transformation processes are needed to put together a supply chain. There are critical deci­
sions such as: Where should we locate our facility? What equipment should we buy or lease? 
Should we outsource work or do it in-house? These are the topics of Chapters 15 and 16 that 
relate to sourcing, procurement, location of facilities, and distribution. All of these decisions 
have a direct financial impact on the firm.
Section Four, titled Supply and Demand Planning and Control, covers the techniques 
required to actually run the system. This is at the heart of OSCM. The basic building blocks 
are Forecasting (Chapter 18), Sales and Operations Planning (Chapter 19), Inventory Man­
agement (Chapter 20), Material Requirements Planning (Chapter 21), and Workcenter 
Scheduling (Chapter 22). These daily processes are often partially automated with computer 
information systems. Coverage of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems is the topic of 
Chapter 17.
In the final section of the book, titled Special Topics, we show how the concepts in the 
book are applied to special business situations. Here we have selected two types of busi­
nesses, Health Care (Chapter 24) and Operations Consulting (Chapter 25). We know that 
many of you may be interested in working for hospitals and similar specialized care facilities, 
a growing segment of the world economy. In addition, we know that many of those interested 
in OSCM are also interested in consulting as a profession.
Making fact-based decisions is what OSCM is all about, so this book features extensive 
coverage of decision-making approaches and tools. One useful way to categorize decisions 
is by the length of the planning horizon, or the period of time that the decision maker must 
consider. For example, building a new plant would be a long-term decision that a firm would 
need to be happy with for 10 to 15 years into the future. At the other extreme, a decision 
about how much inventory for a particular item should be ordered for tomorrow typically has 
a much shorter planning horizon of a few months or, in many cases, only a few days. Such 
short-term decisions are usually automated using computer programs. In the intermediate 
term are decisions that a company needs to live with for only 3 to 12 months. Often these 
decisions correspond to yearly model changes and seasonal business cycles.
As you can see from this discussion, this material is all interrelated. A company’s strategy 
dictates how operations are designed. The design of the operation dictates how it needs to be 
managed. Finally, because businesses are constantly being presented with new opportunities 
through new markets, products, and technologies, a business needs to be very good at manag­
ing change.

xvii
Many very talented scholars have made major contributions to specific chapters in this edition 
of the book. We are pleased to thank the following individuals:
Rhonda Lummus of Indiana University for her many ideas for improving the material in the 
book. Ronny Richardson of Kennesaw State University and Matthew Drake of Duquesne 
University, who spent countless hours checking problems and improving Connect.
Chris Albright, Goker Aydin, Doug Blocher, Kyle Cattani, Seb Hesse, Ash Soni, Gilvan 
Souza, and Wayne Winston of the ODT department at the Kelley School of Business, 
Indiana University, for all the time spent discussing ideas.
Supplements are a great deal of work to write, and we appreciate the efforts that make 
teaching the course easier for everyone who uses the text. John Kros of East Carolina Uni­
versity created the Connect guided examples. P. Sundararaghavan of University of Toledo 
updated the test bank. Ronny Richardson of Kennesaw State University updated the Power­
Point decks and revised Smartbook. 
We also want to thank former doctoral students who have contributed to the book 
over the years, including Mahesh Nagarajan, University of British Columbia; Hiroshi 
­Ochiumi, Wayne Johannson, and Jason Niggley, USC; Douglas Stewart, University of New 
Mexico; Anderas Soteriou, University of Cyprus; Arvinder Loomba, University of Northern 
Iowa; Deborah Kellogg, University of Colorado–Denver; Blair Berkeley, California State 
University–Los Angeles; and Bill Youngdahl, Thunderbird American Graduate School of 
International Management.
We also want to thank the following individuals for their thoughtful reviews of the previous 
edition and suggestion for this text: Gladys Simpson, Florida International University; Scott 
Swenseth, University of Nebraska; Mohsen El Hafsi, University of California Riverside; Joel 
Wisner, University of Nebraska; Kim Roberts, Athens State University; Chris Kiscaden, Uni­
versity of New Mexico; Steven Yourstone, University of New Mexico; Mark Ippolito, Indiana 
University; Frank Armstrong, Ferris State University and Lansing Community College. 
Thanks to the McGraw-Hill Education team who make this ­possible—Chuck Synovec, 
director; Michele Janicek, lead product developer; Trina Maurer, senior marketing manager; 
Kathryn Wright and Kristin Bradley, project managers; Mark Christianson, program man­
ager; Sandy Ludovissy, senior buyer; Egzon Shaqiri, designer; and Melissa Homer and Jacob 
Sullivan, content licensing specialists.
Finally, I want to thank my past co-authors Dick Chase and Nick Aquilano for giving me 
the opportunity to work with them on their book for the past 16 years. I had the opportunity 
to work with Nick Aquilano on two editions of the book and with Dick Chase on six editions. 
Both Nick and Dick have now retired from writing the book, but they are still engaged in 
many creative activities. They have been an inspiration to me and are wonderful colleagues. 
Enjoy your retirement, you both deserve it.
F. Robert Jacobs
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Required=Results
McGraw-Hill Connect®	
 
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform 
that is proven to deliver better results for 
students and instructors. 
Connect empowers students by continually 
adapting to deliver precisely what they 
need, when they need it, and how they need 
it, so your class time is more engaging and 
effective.
Connect Insight®	
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-
of-a-kind visual analytics dashboard that 
provides at-a-glance information regarding 
student performance, which is immediately 
actionable. By presenting assignment, 
assessment, and topical performance results 
together with a time metric that is easily 
visible for aggregate or individual results, 
Connect Insight gives the user the ability to 
take a just-in-time approach to teaching and 
learning, which was never before available. 
Connect Insight presents data that helps 
instructors improve class performance in a 
way that is efficient and effective.
73% of instructors who use 
Connect require it; instructor 
satisfaction increases by 28% when 
Connect is required.
Analytics
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 
 Using Connect improves retention 
rates by 19.8%, passing rates by  
12.7%, and exam scores by 9.1%.

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more efficiently, SmartBook contains the 
same content within the print book, but actively 
tailors that content to the needs of the individual. 
SmartBook’s adaptive technology provides precise, 
personalized instruction on what the student 
should do next, guiding the student to master 
and remember key concepts, targeting gaps in 
knowledge and offering customized feedback, 
and driving the student toward comprehension 
and retention of the subject matter. Available on 
tablets, SmartBook puts learning at the student’s 
fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 8 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com

N O T E  T O  I N S T R U C T O R S
D I S C U S S I O N  O F  F I F T E E N T H  E D I T I O N  R E V I S I O N S
The revisions to the fifteenth edition are a refinement of major changes made in the last 
edition. Each chapter is organized around a short set of learning objectives. These learning 
objectives define the major sections of each chapter. A complete set of Discussion Questions 
together with Objective Questions, which include concepts and problems, are included. 
The many questions now included in each chapter are all available for use in Connect, the 
automated assignment grading system available to adopters of the book.
Much work has been put into Connect to make it an easy to use and reliable tool. The 
Objective Question problems are available and many have both static versions (these are iden­
tical to the problem in the book) and scenario versions. In the scenario versions of the prob­
lem, the parameters have been changed, but the problem is essentially the same, thus allowing 
students to see different examples of the same problem. The instructor can select predefined 
or set up custom problem sets that students can complete. These are automatically graded 
with the results available in a spreadsheet that can be easily downloaded by the instructor. 
There are many options for how these problem sets can be used, such as allowing the students 
multiple tries, giving the students help, and timed exams.
In this edition, we have increased our focus on supply chain analytics. Supply chain analyt­
ics involve the analysis of data to better solve business problems. We recognize that this is 
not really a new concept because data has always been used to solve business problems. But 
what is new is the reality that there is so much more data now available for decision making.
In the past, most analysis involved the generation of standard and ad hoc reports that sum­
marized the current state of the firm. Software allowed query and “drill down” analysis to 
the level of the individual transaction, useful features for understanding what happened in the 
past. Decision making was typically left to the decision maker, based on their judgment or 
simply because they were aware of the rules. The new “analytics” movement takes this to a 
new level using statistical analysis, forecasting to extrapolate what to expect in the future, and 
even optimization, possibly in real time, to support decisions.
In this edition, our goal is to capture this spirit of using integrated analytic and strategic 
criteria in making operations and supply chain decisions. We have done this in two major 
ways. First, we have reorganized the material in the book by integrating the strategic and 
analytic material. Next, we have refined our series of 11 Analytics Exercises spread through­
out the chapters. In this edition, many small changes designed to increase clarity, simplify 
assumptions, and make the exercises better learning tools have been made.
These new Analytics Exercises use settings that are modern and familiar to students taking 
the course. They include Starbucks, cell phones, notebook computers, Taco Bell Restaurant, 
Toyota, a retail website-based company, and industrial products that are sourced from China/
Taiwan and sold globally. The book has been reorganized into five major sections: Strategy, 
Products, and Capacity; Manufacturing and Service Processes; Supply Chain Processes; Sup­
ply and Demand Planning and Control; and Special Topics. Our strategy is to weave analytics 
into the managerial material so students see the important role of data analysis in making 
operations and supply chain management decisions.
In the first section, Strategy, Products, and Capacity, our chapters cover Strategy, the 
Design of Products and Services, Project Management, Strategic Capacity Management, and 
Learning Curves. The key themes of operations strategy, product design to support the strat­
egy, and strategic capacity are a good foundation for learning about operations and supply 
chain management. Because most strategic plans are implemented using projects, we include 
this topic in the first section as well. In the project management chapter, we introduce a good 
amount of material on product design through examples and exercises, emphasizing the stra­
tegic importance of these projects to the success of the firm.
xx

	
	
	
NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS	
	
xxi
The second section, Manufacturing and Service Processes, gets into the nuts and bolts of 
operations management. The section introduces the ways manufacturing and service systems 
are organized and includes new Analytics Exercises for assembly line design and queuing. 
The Six Sigma and Statistical Quality Control chapters cover topics that would be appropri­
ate for a green-belt program and include good coverage of the popular value-stream mapping 
technique.
The third section, Supply Chain Processes, discusses processes that source material 
for internal operations and then distribute products to the customers. The analytic models 
involved with location/transportation are included here. The topics are tied together in the 
Lean Supply Chain chapter, which now stresses the cost versus disruption risk trade-offs that 
are involved in such tactics as single sourcing and just-in-time inventory.
The fourth section, Supply and Demand Planning and Control, covers the techniques 
typically implemented in Enterprise Resource Planning Systems. These include Forecasting, 
Sales and Operations Planning, Inventory Management, Material Requirements Planning, and 
Workcenter Scheduling. We also include a chapter on the Theory of Constraints, a set of 
thought-provoking concepts.
Finally, the fifth section, titled Special Topics, covers two industries where operations and 
supply chain management concepts are being applied with great success. The first is health 
care, with the majority of our material on hospital and special care facilities. We also discuss 
operations consulting because this is an area where many of our students find jobs.
The following are a list of the major revisions in selected chapters:
∙	 Chapter 1 Introduction—The opening vignette has been changed to highlight “Effi­
ciency at Southwest Airlines.” Exhibit 1.4 the “Good-Services Continuum” has been 
changed to make it more relevant to today. A number of new key terms were added that 
relate to major concepts that define OSCM. These are from the timeline. Exhibit 1.7 
has been updated and is now a comparison of Toyota, GM, and Ford.
∙	 Chapter 2 Strategy—The new opening vignette features the innovative car company 
Tesla Motors. Exhibit 2.2 “Formulating an Operations and Supply Chain Strategy” is 
new. A new definition of the key term order winner now indicates that there can be 
more than one order winner. Exhibit 2.4 “Risk Mitigation Strategies” has been updated.
∙	 Chapter 3 Design of Products and Services—The opening vignette has been updated. It 
still features IDEO but now captures their new process, Overlapping Thought Spaces. 
Tesla has been added as an example of an innovative and highly successful company. 
Exhibit 3.7 (“Process Alternatives for a Family Restaurant”) has been updated to be 
more in tune with today. Exhibit 3.11 has been replaced with measures related to prod­
uct development success, focusing on the terms: time-to-market, productivity, and 
quality. These terms have all been changed to keywords.
∙	 Chapter 4 Project Management—The opening vignette that describes how a Chinese 
construction company builds 30-story hotels in only 15 days was updated.
∙	 Chapter 5 Strategic Capacity Management—The opening vignette was updated. 
Rewrote Example 5.1 to explain how this planning example fits into a hierarchical plan­
ning process. Also, clarified some terminology.
∙	 Chapter 6 Learning Curves—The opening vignette was updated.
∙	 Chapter 8  Facility  Layout—The opening vignette was updated. The description of 
assembly line task times was updated to reflect the usual focus on labor task time. Effi­
ciency calculation was also updated to reflect this. The Retail Service Layout section 
was rewritten and updated to reflect current trends. The Analytic Exercise discussion 
questions were updated for clarity.
∙	 Chapter 9  Service Processes—The opening vignette was updated. Exhibit 9.4 was 
updated to reflect current thought. Updated material on service guarantees. Updated 
examples to reflect current times. The “Three Contrasting Service Design” section was 
extensively rewritten to reflect current thought.
∙	 Chapter 10 Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation—The opening vignette was completely 
rewritten. The “Waiting Line Problem” section was rewritten. The new Exhibit 10.9 

xxii	
	
NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS
for multi-server (Model 3) analysis now includes many more values. This is needed to 
support the Connect scenario-based problems.  
∙	 Chapter 11 Process Design and Analysis (title changed)—A new opening vignette was 
added featuring Amazon Air Prime. In Example 11.2, the solution was rewritten and 
clarified. The material describing cycle time and flow time was rewritten and clarified. 
Object question 21 was rewritten to clarify assumptions.
∙	 Chapter 12 Sigma Quality—Here, a new case “Tesla’s Quality Challenge” was added. 
This replaced the old Toyota case. 
∙	 Chapter 13 Statistical Quality Control—The notation for the standard deviation (Sc) 
for the c-chart was changed from Sp to Sc to prevent any confusion with Sp, the stan­
dard deviation for the p-chart. The “Hot Shot Plastics Company” was changed to an 
analytics exercise. “Quality Management—Toyota” was also changed to an analytics 
exercise.
∙	 Chapter 14 Lean Supply Chains—The section that describes “minimized setup time” 
was rewritten.
∙	 Chapter l5 Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation—The opening vignette was 
rewritten to reflect the current status and thoughts related to the Panama Canal project. 
Many other updates have been made to make the material up-to-date. The OSCM at 
Work box about Boeing was rewritten.
∙	 Chapter 16 Global Sourcing and Procurement—Exhibit 16.6 was rewritten and updated 
to current thought. 
∙	 Chapter 17 Enterprise Resource Planning Systems—Updated OSCM at Work box 
titled Open Information Warehouse. Updated “Supply Chain Council” section to show 
current association with APICS.
∙	 Chapter 18 Forecasting—Changed the definition of MAPE and how it is calculated. It 
is the average of the percent errors associated with each forecast. This does not impact 
any problems, but it does impact the analytics exercise section (only slightly) at the end 
of the chapter.
∙	 Chapter 20 Inventory Management—Here the exhibits in Big10Sweaters were updated 
to make them clearer.
∙	 Chapters 23 Theory of Constraints—Updated Eli Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints sec­
tion to reflect current thinking. The Lahey Clinical OSCM at Work box was removed.
∙	 Chapter 24 Health Care—Exhibit 24.2 was updated and Exhibit 24.6 was replaced 
with better material. Exhibit 24.7 was updated. The description of DRGs was updated. 
Exhibit 24.8 was removed and its material was inserted into the text.
F. Robert Jacobs
July 2016
T E G R I T Y  C A M P U S :  L E C T U R E S  2 4 / 7
Tegrity Campus is a service that makes class time available 24/7 
by automatically capturing every lecture in a searchable format for 
students to review as they study and complete assignments. With a simple one-click start-and-
stop process, you capture all computer screens and corresponding audio. Students can replay 
any part of any class with easy-to-use browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac.
Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, the 
better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With Tegrity Campus, students quickly recall key 
moments by using Tegrity Campus’s unique search feature. This helps students efficiently 
find what they need, when they need it, across an entire semester of class recordings. Help 
turn all your students’ study time into learning moments, immediately supported by your 
lecture
To learn more about Tegrity watch a 2-minute Flash demo at http://tegritycampus.mhhe.
com.

	
	
	
NOTE TO INSTRUCTORS	
	
xxiii
A S S U R A N C E  O F  L E A R N I N G  R E A D Y
Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards. Operations and Supply Chain Manage­
ment is designed specifically to support your assurance of learning initiatives with a simple, 
yet powerful solution.
Each test bank question for Operations and Supply Chain Management maps to a specific 
chapter learning objective listed in the text. You can use our test bank software, EZ Test and 
EZ Test Online, or Connect Operations Management to easily query for learning objectives 
that will directly relate to the learning objectives for your course. You can then use the report­
ing features of EZ Test to aggregate student results in a similar fashion, making the learning 
of data simple and easy.
M C G R AW - H I L L  C U S T O M E R  C A R E 
C O N TA C T  I N F O R M AT I O N
At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be chal­
lenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You can e-mail 
our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product-training online. Or you can search our 
knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. For Customer Sup­
port, call 800-331-5094  or visit www.mhhe.com/support. One of our Technical Support 
Analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion.

xxiv
Walkthrough
The following section 
highlights the key features 
developed to provide 
you with the best overall 
text available. We hope 
these features give you 
maximum support to 
learn, understand, and 
apply operations concepts.
Chapter Opener
Opening Vignettes
Each chapter opens with a 
short vignette to set the stage 
and help pique students’ 
interest in the material about 
to be studied. A few examples 
include:
∙	 Boeing, Chapter 6
∙	 United Parcel Service (UPS), 
Chapter 11
∙	 Starbucks, Chapter 18
This ratchet wrench 
was made using a 
3-D printer on the 
International Space 
Station in about four 
hours.
© NASA/Sipa USA/
Newscom
THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRINTING—THE 
TECHNOLOGY COULD BE USED TO 
MAKE PARTS THAT PERFORM BETTER 
AND COST LESS
The technology for printing three-dimensional objects has existed for 
decades, but its application has been largely limited to novelty items 
and specialized custom fabrication, such as making personalized pros-
thetics. The technology has now improved to the point where these 
printers can make intricate objects out of durable materials, including 
ceramics and metals (such as titanium and aluminum), with a resolution 
on the scale of tens of micrometers.
The impact of advanced manufacturing technology on productiv-
ity is dramatic. Every year, U.S. manufacturing firms invest millions of 
dollars to convert manufacturing plants into computerized environments in an effort 
to improve the firm’s competitive position. Companies in other major manufacturing 
countries such as Germany, Japan, and South Korea are making similar investments. 
Chinese companies, though, are the productivity leaders, with the country’s combina-
tion of advanced technology and low labor costs.
Learning Objectives
 LO 7–1 Understand what a manufacturing process is.
 LO 7–2 Explain how manufacturing processes are organized.
 LO 7–3 Analyze simple manufacturing processes.
Manufacturing 
Processes
7
AMAZON—THE MASTER OF EFFICIENCY 
AND LOGISTICS
How does the world’s largest online retailer run the fulfillment centers that process 
the thousands of orders received by the company each hour? They employ more than 
120,000 full-time and part-time workers around the world and use an optimized com-
bination of humans and machines to efficiently process each order.
The fulfillment centers use conveyor belts to transport items and employ machines 
to print and stick mailing labels on them. The company’s computers track every item 
using bar codes. All of this happens with 
the assistance of workers who are as effi-
cient as the machines.
The company’s amazingly efficient pro-
cess allows them to offer free two-day 
delivery for it’s Prime membership custom-
ers. In major cities, Amazon even offers 
same day delivery to some areas.
Amazon is experimenting with the use 
of drones that may someday deliver pack-
ages within 30 minutes. Amazon calls the 
service Prime Air. With no human interven-
tion, a small plastic package containing 
your items are loaded under the drone, 
which then automatically flies to your home. It may be a few years before the Prime 
Air is operational, but it offers an intriguing opportunity for Amazon.
This wildly efficient infrastructure is what sets Amazon apart and ahead of competi-
tors such as Walmart Target and the Chinese Alibaba com
Amazon’s Prime Air 
service may someday 
allow small packages 
to be delivered in 30 
minutes.
© Polaris/Newscom

	
	
	
WALKTHROUGH	
	
xxv
OSCM at Work Boxes
The boxes provide examples 
or expansions of the topics 
presented by highlighting 
leading companies practicing 
new, breakthrough ways to 
run their operations. Examples 
include:
∙	 Efficiency: It’s the Details 
That Count, Chapter 1
∙	 What’s It Like Working on an 
Assembly Line?, Chapter 8
∙	 J.D. Power and Associates 
Initial Quality Study of New 
Cars, Chapter 12
∙	 Mr. Rounder Is On-Call 
at Hackensack University 
Medical Center, Chapter 24
Excel
Excel icons point out concepts 
where Excel templates are 
available on the text website.
Remote Doctor Consultation!
You broke your ankle playing tennis yesterday afternoon. 
What a mess—the whole joint dislocated and three broken 
bones. The doctor says that it might be a year before you 
are back to normal. Your surgery was performed last night. 
No pain right now, but the medication coming through that 
tube connected to your arm may be the reason for that. 
The doctor wanted to get the surgery done last night 
since he was leaving for vacation early this morning. Just 
prior to going under the knife, he assured you that every-
thing would be fine and that he would talk to you in the 
morning. He is 700 miles away by now, so how could this be? 
OSCM AT WORK
The nurse comes in and asks how things are going. 
She says the doctor wants to talk and asks if I am up for that. 
“Sure,” I say, but I am still unsure how this can be done. “No 
problem, I’ll be right in with the doctor” says the nurse. The 
nurse rolls in a device like I had never seen before. It looks to 
be a little over 5 feet high and has a computer monitor on top. 
I hear a voice say, “Hi, how are you doing?” I look up 
and sure enough there is my doctor on the screen. He tells 
me about how well the surgery went. He describes how he 
put a plate in my ankle and seven screws to hold everything 
together. He explains that it is going to take time for all of this 
to heal and that after six months he would probably do another 
surgical procedure and take the plate and screws out. It is all 
part of the process. He said he would check in with me again 
tomorrow morning and that it might be four or five days before 
I could leave the hospital. Also, I should let the nurses know if I 
am feeling any pain. He assured me that he was connected to 
the gadget through an app and that the nurses could contact 
him quickly, even better than if he were at the local office. 
This type of electronic physician assistant gives the 
doctor direct access to current data related to the patient—
heart rate, blood pressure, sleep and active periods, and 
current drugs being administered. In many ways, this is even 
better than the old way of doing hospital rounds. Everything 
is at the doctor’s finger tips; the information is in real-time 
and accurate. 
The “Remote Presence Robot” is a reality and is being 
used by many hospitals today. Physician-to-patient commu-
nication is now possible regardless of whether a physician 
is out of town or out of the country. Doctors can now make 
rounds off-site or from their office any time of the day via an 
app on the physician’s cell phone. Patients are still monitored 
by the hospital nursing staff, but now they have a direct link to 
the doctor via the app with real-time ability to communicate.
Many patients are impressed with the new technology 
as it gives doctors the ability to provide better coverage to 
patients, rather than everything being done face-to-face. 
For example, the doctor is now able to connect and see the 
patient when family members are visiting. This is so much bet-
ter when the need to communicate with the family is critical.
The Remote Presence Robot (RP-7) from InTouch Health is a 
mobile telemedicine unit that connects physicians and specialists 
with patients and other doctors in real time through computers 
equipped with cameras and microphones. 
© Patrick Farrell/Miami Herald/MCT/Getty Images
age time for two units is the average time of the sum of the 
e time for three units is the average time for the sum of the 
splay could have almost any starting shape, not necessarily 
 on the stream of random numbers. What we can be sure of 
while until they settle down as units are finished and smooth 
age time that parts spend in the system. At the start, the 
nt of time in the system. This can be expected because the 
no interruptions for parts passing from Bob to Ray. Often, 
ave to wait between stages as work-in-process; this causes 
ds to the waiting time. As time goes on, however, stability 

xxvi	
	
WALKTHROUGH
Photos and Exhibits
Over 60 photos and 200 
exhibits are included in the 
text to enhance the visual 
appeal and clarify text 
discussions. Many of the 
photos illustrate additional 
examples of companies that 
utilize the operations and 
supply chain concepts in their 
business.
Key Ideas
Important points in the 
text are called out and 
summarized in the margins.
Reorder point/equal
order period
Manual
two-bin
High
Transaction costs
Low
Independent
Dependent
Demand
High
Low
Obsolete
inventory
(risk)
Material
requirements
planning
Rate-based
synchronous
planning
Drawing a picture is 
always the first step in 
analyzing a process. 
Keep the drawing 
simple to start with.
KEY IDEA

	
	
	
WALKTHROUGH	
	
xxvii
Concept Connections
The Concept Connections grid appears at the end of every chapter. This tool 
draws students’ attention to the main points, key terms, and formulas for 
each learning objective. The organization of the Concept Connections gives 
students a quick and effective reference when applying the chapter content.
Solved Problems
Representative problems 
are placed at the end of 
appropriate chapters. Each 
includes a worked-out 
solution, giving students 
a review before solving 
problems on their own.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
American Vending Inc. (AVI) supplies vended food to a large university. Because stud
kick the machines out of anger and frustration, management has a constant repair pro
machines break down on an average of three per hour, and the breakdowns are distri
Poisson manner. Downtime costs the company $25 per hour per machine, and each ma
worker gets $16 per hour. One worker can service machines at an average rate of five
distributed exponentially; two workers working together can service seven per hour, d
exponentially; and a team of three workers can do eight per hour, distributed exponen
What is the optimal maintenance crew size for servicing the machines?
Solution
Case I—One worker:
λ = 3/hour Poisson, μ = 5/hour exponential
The average number of machines in the system is
 L s =  λ 
____ 
μ − λ  =  3 
____ 
5 − 3  =  3 
__ 2  = 1 1 ⁄ 2 machines 
Downtime cost is $25 × 1.5 = $37.50 per hour; repair cost is $16.00 per hour; and
per hour for 1 worker is $37.50 + $16.00 = $53.50.
Concept Connections
LO 10–1   Understand what a waiting line problem is.
Summary
∙ The study of waiting in line is the essence of this prob-
lem. Queuing theory is the mathematical analysis of 
the waiting line. 
∙ A queuing (or waiting line) system is composed of 
three major parts: (1) the customers arriving to the 
system, (2) the servicing of the customers, and (3) 
how customers exit the system. 
 ∙ Queuing theory assumes that customers arrive
ing to a Poisson arrival distribution and are
according to an exponential service time distr
These are specific probability distributions th
match well with actual situations.
Key Terms
Queues A line of waiting persons, jobs, things, or the 
like.
Queuing system A process where customers wait in line 
for service.
Arrival rate The expected number of customers that 
arrive each period.
Exponential distribution A probability distributi
ciated with the time between arrivals.
Poisson distribution Probability distribution for 
number of arrivals during each time period.
Service rate The number of customers a server c
handle during a given time period.

xxviii	
	
WALKTHROUGH
Practice Exams
The Practice Exams are designed to allow students to see how well they 
understand the material using a format that is similar to what they might see 
in an exam. This feature includes many straightforward review questions, but 
also has a selection that tests for mastery and integration/application level 
understanding, i.e., the kind of questions that make an exam challenging. The 
practice exams include short answers at the bottom so students can see how 
well they have answered the questions.
Practice Exam
Answer the following questions. Answers are listed at the 
end of this section.
 1. The queuing models assume that customers are 
served in what order?
 2. Consider two identical queuing systems except for 
the service time distribution. In the first system, the 
service time is random and Poisson distributed. The 
service time is constant in the second system. How 
would the waiting time differ in the two systems?
 3. What is the average utilization of the servers in a sys-
tem that has three servers? On average, 15 custom-
ers arrive every 15 minutes. It takes a server exactly 
three minutes to wait on each customer.
 4. What is the expected waiting time for the system 
described in question 3?
 5. Firms that desire high service levels where custom-
ers have short wait times should target server utiliza-
tion levels at no more than this percentage.
 6. In most cases, if a firm increases its service capac-
ity by 10 percent, it would expect waiting times to 
be reduced by what percentage? Assume customer 
arrivals and service times are random.
 7. An ice cream stand has a single window and one 
employee to serve customers. During their busy sea-
son, 30 customers arrive each hour, on average. It 
takes 1.5 minutes, on average, to serve a customer. 
What is the utilization of the employee?
 8. How long would customers have to wait in line, on 
average, at the ice cream shop discussed in question 7?
 9. Random service times can be modeled by this.
 10. A bank teller takes 2.4 minutes, on average, to serve 
a customer. What would be the hourly service rate 
used in the queuing formulas?
 11. There are three teller windows in the bank described 
in the prior question. On average, 60 customers per 
hour arrive at the bank. What will be the average 
number of customers in line at the bank?
Answers to Practice Exam  1. First come, first served  2. Waiting time in the first system is two times the second.  3. 100%  4. Infinite   
5. 70–80%  6. Greater than 10%  7. 75%  8. .075 hours, or 4.5 minutes  9. Exponential distribution  10. 25 customers per hour  11. 2.5888  
(from Exhibit 10.9) 

	
1
	 1.	Introduction
	 2.	Strategy
	 3.	Design of Products and Services
	 4.	Project Management
	 5.	Strategic Capacity Management
	 6.	Learning Curves
SECTION 
ONE
Twenty-First-Century Operations 
and Supply Chain Management
Managing a modern supply chain involves special-
ists in manufacturing, purchasing, and distribution, 
of course. However, today it is also vital to the work 
of chief financial officers, chief information officers, 
operations and customer service executives, and 
chief executives. Changes in operations and supply 
management have been truly revolutionary, and the 
pace of progress shows no sign of slowing.
In the first section of Operations and Supply 
Chain Management, we lay a foundation for under-
standing the dynamic field of operations and sup-
ply management. This book is about designing and 
operating processes that deliver a firm’s goods 
and services in a manner that matches customers’ 
expectations.
Strategy, Products, 
and Capacity

2
1
Introduction
Boarding a Southwest 
Airlines flight: Quick 
boarding with no 
preassigned seats 
is a key part of the 
45-minute turnaround 
process.
© F. Robert Jacobs
Learning Objectives
	LO 1–1	 Identify the elements of operations and supply chain management (OSCM).
	LO 1–2	 Know the potential career opportunities in operations and supply chain management.
	LO 1–3	 Recognize the major concepts that define the operations and supply chain management field.
	LO 1–4	 Evaluate the efficiency of a firm.
EFFICIENCY AT SOUTHWEST AIRLINES
Getting passengers on a plane quickly can greatly affect an airline’s cost. Southwest, 
considered the fastest at turning a plane around, does not assign seats. For Southwest, 
the goal is to have its airplanes in the air as much as possible. This is difficult, given the 
multiple short flights that a Southwest jet flies each day.
On average, Southwest’s 550 jets fly about 3,400 flights a day. Without adjust-
ing for jets that are not flying for maintenance, this averages out to over 6 flights a 
day per jet. Turning a jet around—from landing to takeoff—is critical to this 
type of airline, and it has been estimated that Southwest can do this in 30 to  
55 minutes, depending on the airport and plane. Think about this: Even at  
45 minutes per turn, a Southwest jet still spends about 4.5 hours on the 
ground each day. Those precious minutes Southwest can save in loading 
passengers result in more flights for the airline.

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
3
Really successful firms have a clear and focused idea of how they intend to make money. 
Whether it be high-end products and services custom-tailored to the needs of a single customer 
or generic and inexpensive commodities bought largely on the basis of cost, competitively 
producing and distributing these products is a major challenge.
The chapter opening describes the importance of turning planes around quickly at South-
west Airlines. Keeping planes in the air each day is a key factor in the profitability of the 
company. The process Southwest uses when their planes are on the ground was carefully 
studied by OSCM (operations and supply chain management) specialists to make it as effi-
cient as possible.
In the context of major business functions, operations and supply chain management 
involves specialists in product design, purchasing, manufacturing, service operations, logis-
tics, and distribution. These specialists are mixed and matched in many different ways 
depending on the product or service. For a firm that sells televisions, like Sony, these are the 
functions responsible for designing televisions, acquiring materials, coordinating equipment 
resources to convert material to products, moving the product, and exchanging the final prod-
uct with the customer. Some firms are focused on services, such as a hospital. Here the con-
text involves managing resources, including the operating rooms, labs, and hospital beds used 
to nurse patients back to health. In this context, acquiring materials, moving patients, and 
coordinating resource use are keys to success. Other firms are more specialized, such as Ama-
zon. Here purchasing, website services, logistics, and distribution need to be carefully coor-
dinated for success. In our increasingly interconnected and interdependent global economy, 
the process of delivering finished goods, services, and supplies from one place to another is 
accomplished by means of mind-boggling technological innovation, clever new applications 
of old ideas, seemingly magical mathematics, powerful software, and old-fashioned concrete, 
steel, and muscle.
This book is about doing this at low cost while meeting the requirements of demand-
ing customers. Success involves the clever integration of a great operations-related strategy, 
processes that can deliver the products and services, and analytics that support the ongoing 
decisions needed to manage the firm. Our goal in this book is to introduce students to basic 
operations and supply chain concepts so they understand how things should be done and the 
importance of these functions to the success of the firm.
No matter what your major is in business, understanding OSCM is critical to your success. 
If you are interested in the study of finance, you will find that all of the concepts are directly 
applicable. Just convert all of those widgets to their value in the currency of your choice and 
you will realize it is all about dollars and cents moving, being stored, and appreciating in 
value due to exchanges. What you study in finance class is exactly the same, but we look at 
things in very different ways due to the physical nature of goods and the intangible features of 
services. The topics presented here are critical to a successful study of marketing, too. If the 
product or service can’t be delivered to the customer at an acceptable cost, then no matter how 
good your marketing, no one may buy it. Lastly, for those accountants keeping score, opera-
tions and supply chain processes generate most of the transactions used to track the financial 
health of the firm. Understanding why these processes operate the way they do is important to 
understanding the financial statements of the firm.
What Is Operations and Supply Chain Management?
Operations and supply chain management (OSCM) is defined as the design, operation, 
and improvement of the systems that create and deliver the firm’s primary products and ser-
vices. Like marketing and finance, OSCM is a functional field of business with clear line 
management responsibilities. OSCM is concerned with the management of the entire system 
that produces a product or delivers a service. Producing an item such as the Men’s Nylon Sup-
plex Parka, or providing a service such as a cell phone account, involves a complex series of 
transformation processes.
Strategy
Processes
Analytics
Operations and supply 
chain management 
(OSCM)
The design, operation, 
and improvement of the 
systems that create and 
deliver the firm’s primary 
products and services.
INTRODUCTION—THE ELEMENTS OF OSCM
Identify the elements of 
operations and supply 
chain management 
(OSCM).
LO 1–1

4	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Exhibit 1.1 shows a supply network for a Men’s Nylon Supplex Parka sold on web-
sites such as L.L.Bean or Lands’ End. We can understand the network by looking 
at the four color-coded paths. The blue path traces the activities needed to produce 
the Polartec insulation material used in the parkas. Polartec insulation is purchased 
in bulk, processed to get the proper finish, and then dyed prior to being checked for 
consistency—or grading—and color. It is then stored in a warehouse. The red path 
traces the production of the nylon, Supplex, used in the parkas. Using a petroleum-
based polymer, the nylon is extruded and drawn into a yarnlike material. From here, 
the green path traces the many steps required to fabricate the clothlike Supplex used 
to make the parkas. The yellow path shows the Supplex and Polartec material coming 
together and used to assemble the lightweight and warm parkas. The completed parkas 
are sent to a warehouse, and then on to the retailer’s distribution center. Afterward, the 
parkas are picked out and packed for shipment to individual customers. Think of the 
supply network as a pipeline through which material and information flow. 
There are key locations in the pipeline where material and information are stored for future 
use: Polartec is stored near the end of the blue pipeline; Supplex is stored near the end of the red 
pipeline. In both cases, fabric is cut prior to merging with the yellow pipeline. At the beginning of 
the yellow path, bundles of Supplex and Polartec are stored prior to their use in the fabrication of 
the parkas. At the end of the yellow path are the distribution steps, which involve storing to await 
orders, picking according to each customer order, packing, and finally shipping to the customer.
Networks such as this can be constructed for any product or service. Typically, each part of 
the network is controlled by different companies, including the nylon Supplex producer, the 
Polartec producer, the parka manufacturer, and the catalog sales retailer. All of the material is 
moved using transportation providers—in this case, ships and trucks. The network also has a 
global dimension, with each entity potentially located in a different country. For a successful 
transaction, all of these steps need to be coordinated and operated to keep costs low and to 
minimize waste. OSCM manages all of these individual processes as effectively as possible.
Distinguishing Operations versus Supply Chain Processes
Success in today’s global markets requires a business strategy that matches the preferences 
of customers with the realities imposed by complex supply networks. A sustainable strategy 
that meets the needs of shareholders and employees and preserves the environment is critical. 
Concepts related to developing and analyzing this type of strategy are the topic of Section 
One of this book (see Exhibit 1.2).
In the context of our discussion, the terms operations and supply chain take on special 
meaning. Operations refers to manufacturing and service processes used to transform the 
resources employed by a firm into products desired by customers. These processes are cov-
ered in Section Two. For example, a manufacturing process would produce some type of 
physical product, such as an automobile or a computer. A service process would produce an 
intangible product, such as a call center that provides information to customers stranded on 
the highway or a hospital that treats accident victims in an emergency room. Planning the use 
of these processes involves analyzing capacity, labor, and material needs over time. Ensuring 
quality and making ongoing improvements to these processes are needed to manage these 
processes. Concepts related to this are included in Section Two of this book as well.
Supply chain refers to processes that move information and material to and from the manu-
facturing and service process of the firm. These include the logistics processes that physically 
move product and the warehousing and storage processes that position products for quick 
delivery to the customer. Supply chain in this context refers to providing products and service 
to plants and warehouses at the input end and also the supply of products and service to the 
customer on the output end of the supply chain. Details concerning how these supply chain 
processes work and are analyzed are covered in Section Three.
Section Four of the book is about planning the use of operations and supply chain 
resources. Starting with a forecast of demand, resources are planned in increasingly shorter 
increments of time to match supply inputs with the demand-driven outputs of the firm. These 
planning activities are completed using integrated computer systems that capture the activi-
ties and current status of a firm’s resources.
Courtesy of L.L.Bean, Inc.
A good starting  
point for understanding 
a supply chain is to 
sketch out the network 
from start to finish.
KEY IDEA

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
5
Strip and
Inspect Pack
into Quads
Spin
(Extrude,
Draw,
& Wind)
Produce
Polymer
Doﬀ
Store in
Warehouse
Receive, Palletize,
and Store in
Warehouse
Draw In
Inspect/
Test
Create
Section
Beam
Slash
Tag, Fold,
and Pack
Parka
Sew Outer
Shell
Pick
Assemble
Bundle
Sew
Parka
Sew Inner
Lining
Pack
Receive at
Distribution
Center
Assemble
Bundle
Spread and
Cut Fabric
Store Polartec
in Warehouse
Store
Supplex
in Warehouse
Store in
Staging
Area
Warehouse
Manufacturing Plant
Test and
Shade Check
Spread and
Cut Fabric
Test
Extraction
Scour and
Dye
Finish Fabric
Face and
Back
Sew Fabric
Rolls
Batch
Fabric
Rolls
Scour
and Jet
Dye
Slit, Relax Dry,
and Fold
Grade
Store in
Warehouse
Pack
Package
Weave
Pack
Stage
Heat Set
On-Line
Grade
The red path traces the production of the nylon, a raw material for the clothlike Supplex material. This is followed by the green path, where the nylon is made into Supplex. The blue path is 
the steps needed to make Polartec, the insulating material in the parkas. The yellow path is where the Supplex and Polartec come together and the parkas are assembled. Completed  
parkas are then distributed to retailers that sell the product.
Process Steps for Men’s Nylon Supplex Parkas
exhibit 1.1

6	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Process
One or more activities 
that transform inputs into 
outputs.
The final section of the book shows how these concepts are applied in more specialized 
types of businesses such as health care and consulting. Part of understanding this material 
is seeing how the concepts can be directly applied to business processes that are not specifi-
cally covered. In this book, in a relatively generic way, manufacturing, service, sourcing, and 
logistics processes are studied. How these ideas are applied in the context of a few specific 
businesses is the motivation of this section.
All managers should understand the basic principles that guide the design of transforma-
tion processes. This includes understanding how different types of processes are organized, 
how to determine the capacity of a process, how long it should take a process to make a unit, 
how the quality of a process is monitored, and how information is used to make decisions 
related to the design and operation of these processes.
The field of operations and supply chain management is ever changing due to the dynamic 
nature of competing in global business and the constant evolution of information technology. 
So while many of the basic concepts have been around for years, their application in new and 
innovative ways is exciting. Internet technology has made the sharing of reliable real-time 
information inexpensive. Capturing information directly from the source through such sys-
tems as point-of-sale, radio-frequency identification tags, bar-code scanners, and automatic 
recognition has shifted the focus to understanding both what all the information is saying and 
also how good the decisions that can be made using it are.
Categorizing Operations and Supply Chain Processes
Operations and supply chain processes can be conveniently categorized, particularly from the 
view of a producer of consumer products and services, as planning, sourcing, making, deliv-
ering, and returning. Exhibit 1.3 depicts where the processes are used in different parts of a 
supply chain. The following describes the work involved in each type of process.
	1.	 Planning consists of the processes needed to operate an existing supply chain strategi-
cally. Here a firm must determine how anticipated demand will be met with available 
resources. A major aspect of planning is developing a set of metrics to monitor the 
supply chain so that it is efficient and delivers high quality and value to customers.
	2.	 Sourcing involves the selection of suppliers that will deliver the goods and  
services needed to create the firm’s product. A set of pricing, delivery, and pay-
ment processes are needed, along with metrics for monitoring and improving the 
Questions Answered in Each Section of the OSCM
exhibit 1.2
II. Manufacturing and
     Service Processes
How are processes that
transform resources into
products designed?
How are products moved
through the supply chain?
III. Supply Chain Processes
How are these concepts
used in special industries?
V. Special Topics
How are OSCM processes
managed using computer
systems?
IV. Supply and Demand
      Planning and Control
I. Strategy, Products, and
   Capacity
How does the firm’s strategy
impact its products and
processes?

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
7
relationships between partners of the firm. These processes include receiving ship-
ment, verifying them, transferring them to manufacturing facilities, and authorizing 
supplier payments.
	3.	 Making is where the major product is produced or the service provided. The step 
requires scheduling processes for workers and the coordination of material and other 
critical resources such as equipment to support producing or providing the service. 
Metrics that measure speed, quality, and worker productivity are used to monitor 
these processes.
	4.	 Delivering is also referred to as logistics processes. Carriers are picked to move 
products to warehouses and customers, coordinate and schedule the movement of 
goods and information through the supply network, develop and operate a network of 
warehouses, and run the information systems that manage the receipt of orders from 
customers and the invoicing systems that collect payments from customers.
	5.	 Returning involves processes for receiving worn-out, defective, and excess products 
back from customers and support for customers who have problems with delivered 
products. In the case of services, this may involve all types of follow-up activities 
required for after-sales support.
To understand the topic, it is important to consider the many different players that need to 
coordinate work in a typical supply chain. The aforementioned steps of planning, sourcing, 
making, delivering, and returning are fine for manufacturing and can also be used for the 
many processes that do not involve the discrete movement and production of parts. In the case 
of a service firm such as a hospital, for example, supplies are typically delivered on a daily 
basis from drug and health care suppliers and require coordination between drug companies, 
local warehouse operations, local delivery services, and hospital receiving. Patients need to 
be scheduled into the services provided by the hospital, such as operations and blood tests. 
Other areas, such as the emergency room, need to be staffed to provide service on demand. 
The orchestration of all of these activities is critical to providing quality service at a reason-
able cost.
Differences Between Services and Goods
There are five essential differences between services and goods. The first is that a service 
is an intangible process that cannot be weighed or measured, whereas a good is a tangible 
output of a process that has physical dimensions. This distinction has important business 
implications, because a service innovation, unlike a product innovation, cannot be patented.  
Companies are 
positioned in different 
places in the supply 
chain. Within the 
context of their 
position, they all require 
planning, sourcing, 
making, delivering, and 
returning processes.
KEY IDEA
Sourcing
Planning
Making
Returning
Delivering
Supply Chain Process
exhibit 1.3

8	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Thus, a company with a new concept must expand rapidly before competitors copy its pro-
cedures. Service intangibility also presents a problem for customers because, unlike with a 
physical product, customers cannot try it out and test it before purchase.
The second is that a service requires some degree of interaction with the customer for it 
to be a service. The interaction may be brief, but it must exist for the service to be complete. 
Where face-to-face service is required, the service facility must be designed to handle the 
customer’s presence. Goods, on the other hand, are generally produced in a facility separate 
from the customer. They can be made according to a production schedule that is efficient for 
the company.
The third difference is that services, with the big exception of hard technologies (such as 
ATMs) and information technologies (such as answering machines and automated Internet 
exchanges) are inherently heterogeneous—they vary from day to day and even hour to hour as 
a function of the attitudes of the customers and the servers. Thus, even highly scripted work, 
such as found in call centers, can produce unpredictable outcomes. Goods, in contrast, can be 
produced to meet very tight specifications day-in and day-out with essentially zero variability. 
In those cases where a defective good is produced, it can be reworked or scrapped.
The fourth difference is that services as a process are perishable and time dependent, and 
unlike goods, they can’t be stored. You cannot “come back last week” for an air flight or a day 
on campus.
And fifth, the specifications of a service are defined and evaluated as a package of features 
that affect the five senses. These four features are:
∙	 Supporting facility (location, decoration, layout, architectural appropriateness, support-
ing equipment)
∙	 Facilitating goods (variety, consistency, quantity of the physical goods that go with the 
service; for example, the food items that accompany a meal service)
∙	 Explicit services (training of service personnel, consistency of service performance, 
availability and access to the service, and comprehensiveness of the service)
∙	 Implicit services (attitude of the servers, atmosphere, waiting time, status, privacy and 
security, and convenience)
The Goods–Services Continuum
Almost any product offering is a combination of goods and services. In Exhibit 1.4, we show 
this arrayed along a continuum of “pure goods” to “pure services.” The continuum captures 
the main focus of the business and spans from firms that just produce products to those that 
only provide services. Pure goods industries have become low-margin commodity busi-
nesses, and in order to differentiate, they are often adding some services. Some examples are 
The things  
produced by a service 
are intangible. Service 
processes tend to be 
highly variable and time 
dependent compared 
to goods-producing 
processes.
KEY IDEA
The Goods–Services Continuum
exhibit 1.4
Pure Goods
Food products
Chemicals
Mining
Goods
Services
Core Goods
Appliances
Automobiles
Data storage systems
Core Services
Hotels
Airlines
Internet service
providers
Pure Services
University
Medical
Investment

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
9
providing help with logistical aspects of stocking items, maintaining extensive information 
databases, and providing consulting advice.
Core goods providers already provide a significant service component as part of their busi-
nesses. For example, automobile manufacturers provide extensive spare parts distribution ser-
vices to support repair centers at dealers.
Core service providers must integrate tangible goods. For example, your cable television 
company must provide cable hookup and repair services and also high-definition cable boxes. 
Pure services, such as those offered by a financial consulting firm, may need little in the way 
of facilitating goods, but what they do use—such as textbooks, professional references, and 
spreadsheets—are critical to their performance.
Product–Service Bundling
Product–service bundling refers to a company building service activities into its product 
offerings for its customers. Such services include maintenance, spare part provisioning, train-
ing, and, in some cases, total systems design and R&D. A well-known pioneer in this area is 
IBM, which treats its business as a service business and views physical goods as a small part 
of the “business solutions” it provides its customers. Companies that are most successful in 
implementing this strategy start by drawing together the service aspects of the business under 
one roof in order to create a consolidated service organization. The service evolves from a 
focus on enhancing the product’s performance to developing systems and product modifica-
tions that support the company’s move up the “value stream” into new markets. This type of 
strategy might not be the best approach for all product companies, however. A recent study 
found that while firms that offer product–service bundles generate higher revenues, they tend 
to generate lower profits as a percent of revenues when compared to focused firms. This is 
because they are often unable to generate revenues or margins high enough to cover the addi-
tional investment needed for service-related costs.
CAREERS IN OSCM
So what do people who pursue careers in OSCM do? Quite simply, they specialize in manag-
ing the planning, production, and distribution of goods and services. Jobs abound for people 
who can do this well since every organization is dependent on effective performance of this 
fundamental activity for its long-term success.
It is interesting to contrast entry-level jobs in OSCM to marketing and finance jobs. Many 
marketing entry-level jobs focus on actually selling products or managing the sales of prod-
ucts. These individuals are out on the front line trying to push product to potential customers. 
Often, a significant part of their income will depend on commissions from these sales. Entry-
level finance (and accounting) jobs are frequently in large public accounting firms. These jobs 
involve working at a desk auditing transactions to ensure the accuracy of financial statements. 
Other assignments involve the analysis of transactions to better understand the costs associ-
ated with the business.
Contrast the marketing and finance jobs to OSCM jobs. The operations and supply chain 
manager is out working with people to figure out the best way to deliver the goods and ser-
vices of the firm. Sure, they work with the marketing folks, but rather than being on the sell-
ing side, they are on the buying side: trying to select the best materials and hiring the greatest 
talent. They will use the data generated by the finance people and analyze processes to figure 
out how to deliver that good or service. OSCM jobs are hands-on, working with people and 
figuring out the best way to do things.
The following are some typical jobs in OSCM:
∙	 Plant manager—Oversees the workforce and physical resources (inventory, equipment, 
and information technology) required to produce the organization’s product.
∙	 Hospital administrator—Oversees human resource management, staffing, supplies, and 
finances at a health care facility.
OSCM jobs focus on 
delivering the goods 
on-time and at low cost. 
They are interesting, 
people-oriented jobs.
KEY IDEA
Product–service 
bundling
When a firm builds 
service activities into its 
product offerings to create 
additional value for the 
customer.
Know the potential career 
opportunities in operations 
and supply chain 
management.
LO 1–2

10	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
∙	 Branch manager (bank)—Oversees all aspects of financial transactions at a branch.
∙	 Department store manager—Oversees all aspects of staffing and customer service  
at a store.
∙	 Call center manager—Oversees staffing and customer service activities at a call center.
∙	 Supply chain manager—Negotiates contracts with vendors and coordinates the flow 
of material inputs to the production process and the shipping of finished products to 
customers.
∙	 Purchasing manager—Manages the day-to-day aspects of purchasing, such as invoicing 
and follow-up.
∙	 Logistics manager—Oversees the movement of goods throughout the supply chain.
∙	 Warehouse/distribution manager—Oversees all aspects of running a warehouse, includ-
ing replenishment, customer order fulfillment, and staffing.
∙	 Business process improvement analyst—Applies the tools of lean production to reduce 
cycle time and eliminate waste in a process.
∙	 Quality control manager—Applies techniques of statistical quality control, such as 
acceptance sampling and control charts, to the firm’s products.
∙	 Lean improvement manager—Trains organizational members in lean production and 
continuous improvement methods.
∙	 Project manager—Plans and coordinates staff activities, such as new-product develop-
ment, new-technology deployment, and new-facility location.
∙	 Production control analyst—Plans and schedules day-to-day production.
∙	 Facilities manager—Ensures that the building facility design, layout, furniture, and 
other equipment are operating at peak efficiency.
Chief Operating Officer
So how far can you go in a career in OSCM? One goal would be to become the chief oper-
ating officer of a company. The chief operating officer (COO) works with the CEO and 
company president to determine the company’s competitive strategy. The COO’s ideas are 
filtered down through the rest of the company. COOs determine an organization’s loca-
tion, its facilities, which vendors to use, and the implementation of the hiring policy. Once 
the key decisions are made, lower-level operations personnel carry them out. Operations 
personnel work to find solutions and then set about fixing the problems. Managing the 
supply chain, service, and support are particularly challenging aspects of a chief operating 
officer’s job.
Career opportunities in OSCM are plentiful today as companies strive to improve prof-
itability by improving quality and productivity and reducing costs. The hands-on work of 
managing people is combined with great opportunities to leverage the latest technologies in 
getting the job done at companies around the world. No matter what you might do for a final 
career, your knowledge of OSCM will prove to be a great asset.
Operations and Supply Chain Management 
Professional Societies
If you are interested in career opportunities in operations 
and supply chain management, you can learn more about 
the field through the following professional societies. These 
groups provide industry-recognized certification programs 
and ongoing training for those seeking to work in the field.
OSCM AT WORK
APICS, the Association for Operations Management,  
www.apics.org.
Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals 
(CSCMP), www.cscmp.org.
Institute for Supply Management (ISM), www.ism.ws.
The Project Management Institute (PMI), www.pmi.org.

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
11
Our purpose in this section is not to go through all the details of the history of OSCM; that 
would require us to recount the entire Industrial Revolution. Rather, the focus is on the major 
operations-related concepts that have been popular since the 1980s. Exhibit 1.5 will help clar-
ify the dates as you read about the concepts. Where appropriate, how a supposedly new idea 
relates to an older idea is discussed. (We seem to keep rediscovering the past.)
M a n u f ac t u r i n g  S t r a t e g y  P a r a d i g m 
The late 1970s and early 1980s saw the development of the manufacturing strategy para-
digm, which emphasized how manufacturing executives could use their factories’ capabilities 
as strategic competitive weapons. Central to this thinking was the notion of manufacturing 
trade-offs among such performance measures as low cost, high quality, and high flexibility.
Lean Manufacturing, JIT, and TQC
The 1980s saw a revolution in the management philoso-
phies and technologies by which production is carried out.  
Just-in-time (JIT) production was the major breakthrough in 
manufacturing philosophy. Pioneered by the Japanese, JIT is 
an integrated set of activities designed to achieve high-vol-
ume production using minimal inventories of parts that arrive 
exactly when they are needed. The philosophy—coupled with 
total quality control (TQC), which aggressively seeks to 
eliminate causes of production defects—is now a cornerstone 
in many manufacturers’ production practices, and the term 
lean manufacturing is used to refer to the set of concepts.
Of course, the Japanese were not the first to create a highly 
integrated, efficient production system. In 1913, Henry Ford 
developed an assembly line to make the Model-T automo-
bile. Ford developed a system for making the Model-T that 
was constrained only by the capabilities of the workforce and 
existing technology. Quality was a critical prerequisite for 
Manufacturing strategy
Emphasizes how a 
factory’s capabilities could 
be used strategically to 
gain advantage over a 
competing company.
THE MAJOR CONCEPTS THAT DEFINE THE OSCM FIELD
Recognize the major 
concepts that define the 
operations and supply 
chain management field.
LO 1–3
Manufacturing strategy developed
Just-in-time (JIT) production
pioneered by the Japanese
Service quality and productivity
Six Sigma Quality
Supply Chain
Management (SCM)
Service Science
Total Quality Management
(TQM) and Quality
Certification programs
Business Process
Reengineering (BPR)
Electronic Commerce
Business Analytics
Late 1970s
Late 1990s
Early 1980s
Early 2000s
Early 1990s
Mid 1980s
Mid 1990s
Mid 2010s
Source: F. Robert Jacobs
Time Line Depicting When Major OSCM Concepts Became Popular
exhibit 1.5
Source: Library of Congress/ [LC-DIG-det-4a27966]
Just-in-time (JIT)
An integrated set of 
activities designed to 
achieve high-volume 
production using minimal 
inventories of parts that 
arrive exactly when they 
are needed.
Total quality control 
(TQC)
Aggressively seeks 
to eliminate causes of 
production defects.
Lean manufacturing
To achieve high customer 
service with minimum 
levels of inventory 
investment.

12	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Ford: The line could not run steadily at speed without consistently good components. On-time 
delivery was also critical for Ford; the desire to keep workers and machines busy with materi-
als flowing constantly made scheduling critical. Product, processes, materials, logistics, and 
people were well integrated and balanced in the design and operation of the plant.
S e r v i c e  Qu a l i t y  a n d  P r o d u c t i v i t y
The unique approach to quality and productivity pioneered by McDonald’s has been so suc-
cessful that it stands as a reference point in thinking about how to deliver high-volume stan-
dardized services.
T o t a l  Q u a l i t y M a n a g e m e n t  a n d  Q u a l i t y  C e r t i f i c a t i o n
Another major development was the focus on total quality management (TQM) in the late 
1980s and 1990s. Helping the quality movement along was the Baldrige National Quality 
Award, started in 1987 under the direction of the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy. The Baldrige Award recognizes companies each year for outstanding quality manage-
ment systems.
The ISO 9000 certification standards, created by the International Organization for Stan-
dardization, now play a major role in setting quality standards for global manufacturers. 
Many companies require that their vendors meet these standards as a condition for obtaining 
contracts.
Business Process Reengineering
The need to become lean to remain competitive in the global economic recession in the 1990s 
pushed companies to seek innovations in the processes by which they run their operations. 
The business process reengineering (BPR) approach seeks to make revolutionary changes 
as opposed to evolutionary changes (which are commonly advocated in TQM). It does this by 
taking a fresh look at what the organization is trying to do in all its business processes, and 
then eliminating non-value-added steps and computerizing the remaining ones to achieve the 
desired outcome.
Six Sigma Quality
Originally developed in the 1980s as part of total quality management, Six Sigma in the 
1990s saw a dramatic expansion as an extensive set of diagnostic tools was developed. These 
tools have been taught to managers as part of “Green and Black Belt Programs” at many cor-
porations. The tools are now applied not only to the well-known manufacturing applications, 
but also to nonmanufacturing processes such as accounts receivable, sales, and research and 
development. Six Sigma has been applied to environmental, health, and safety services at 
companies and is now being utilized in research and development, finance, information sys-
tems, legal, marketing, public affairs, and human resource processes.
S u p p l y  C h a i n  M a n a g e m e n t
The central idea of supply chain management is to apply a total system approach to managing 
the flow of information, materials, and services from raw material suppliers through factories 
and warehouses to the end customer. Trends such as outsourcing and mass customization are 
forcing companies to find flexible ways to meet customer demand. The focus is on optimizing 
core activities to maximize the speed of response to changes in customer expectations.
E l e c t r o n i c  C o m m e r c e
The quick adoption of the Internet and the World Wide Web during the late 1990s was 
remarkable. The term electronic commerce refers to the use of the Internet as an essential 
element of business activity. The use of Web pages, forms, and interactive search engines 
has changed the way people collect information, shop, and communicate. It has changed the 
way operations managers coordinate and execute production and distribution functions.
Business process 
reengineering (BPR)
An approach to improving 
business processes 
that seeks to make 
revolutionary changes as 
opposed to evolutionary 
(small) changes.
Six Sigma
A statistical term to 
describe the quality goal of 
no more than 3.4 defects 
out of every million units. 
Also refers to a quality 
improvement philosophy 
and program.
Mass customization
The ability to produce a 
unique product exactly 
to a particular customer’s 
requirements.
Electronic commerce
The use of the Internet as 
an essential element of 
business activity.  
Total quality 
management (TQM)
Managing the entire 
organization so it excels in 
all dimensions of products 
and services important to 
the customer.

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
13
Sustainability and the Triple Bottom Line 
Sustainability is the ability to maintain balance in a system. Management must now consider 
the mandates related to the ongoing economic, employee, and environmental viability of the 
firm (the triple bottom line). Economically, the firm must be profitable. Employee job secu-
rity, positive working conditions, and development opportunities are essential. The need for 
nonpolluting and non-resource-depleting products and processes presents new challenges to 
operations and supply managers.
B u s i nes s  A n a l y t i c s 
Business analytics involves the analysis of data to better solve business problems. Not that 
this is something new: Data has always been used to solve business problems. What is new is 
the reality that so much more data is now captured and available for decision-making analysis 
than was available in the past. In addition, mathematical tools are now readily available that 
can be used to support the decision-making process.
In the past, most analysis involved the generation of stan-
dard and ad hoc reports that summarized the current state of 
the firm. Software allowed querying and “drill down” analy-
sis to the level of the individual transaction, useful features for 
understanding what happened in the past. Decision making 
was typically left to the decision maker based on judgment or 
simple alerting rules. The new “analytics” movement takes 
this to a new level using statistical analysis, forecasting to 
extrapolate what to expect in the future, and even optimiza-
tion, possibly in real time, to support decisions. These math-
ematical results can be used either to support the decision 
maker or to automate decision making.
Take, for example, an airline manager presented with the 
task of setting price points for tickets on a flight. Real-time 
demand data, historic demand patterns, and powerful math-
ematical models can now be applied to setting price points for 
different classes of tickets. As it is closer to the time of depar-
ture for a particular flight, these price points can be adjusted 
based on how sales are going. These decisions have a major impact on the utilization of air-
craft capacity, which impacts both revenue and costs for the airlines. These decisions can even 
be made using criteria related to weather conditions, fuel prices, crew schedules, and other 
flights to maximize the profit of the firm.
Current Issues in Operations and Supply Chain 
Management
OSCM is a dynamic field, and issues arising in global enterprise present exciting new chal-
lenges for operations managers. Looking forward to the future, we believe the major chal-
lenges in the field will be as follows:
	1.	 Coordinating the relationships between mutually supportive but separate orga-
nizations. Recently, there has been a dramatic surge in the outsourcing of parts and 
services as companies seek to minimize costs. Many companies now even outsource 
major corporate functions, such as information systems, product development and 
design, engineering services, and distribution. The ability to coordinate these activi-
ties is a significant challenge for today’s operations and supply chain manager.
	2.	 Optimizing global supplier, production, and distribution networks. The imple-
mentation of global enterprise resource planning systems, now common in large 
companies, has challenged managers to use all of this information. Operations and 
supply chain analytics involves leveraging this information for making decisions 
related to resources such as inventory, transportation, and production.
Business analytics
The use of current 
business data to solve 
business problems using 
mathematical analysis.
© Monty Rakusen/Getty Images RF
Triple bottom line
A business strategy that 
includes social, economic, 
and environmental criteria.
Sustainability
The ability to meet current 
resource needs without 
compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet 
their needs.

14	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	3.	 Managing customer touch points. As companies strive to cut costs, they often 
scrimp on the customer support personnel (and training) required to effectively staff 
service departments, help lines, and checkout counters. This leads to the frustrations 
we have all experienced, such as being placed in call center limbo seemingly for 
hours, getting bad advice when finally interacting with a company rep, and so on. 
The issue here is to recognize that making resource utilization decisions must capture 
the implicit costs of lost customers as well as the direct costs of staffing.
	4.	 Raising senior management awareness of OSCM as a significant competitive 
weapon. Many senior executives entered the organization through finance, strategy, 
or marketing, built their reputations on work in these areas, and as a result often take 
OSCM for granted. As we will demonstrate in this book, this can be a critical mis-
take when we realize how profitable companies such as Amazon, Apple, Taco Bell, 
and Southwest Airlines are. These are companies where executives have creatively 
used OSCM for competitive advantage.
EFFICIENCY, EFFECTIVENESS, AND VALUE
Compared with most of the other ways managers try to stimulate growth—technology 
investments, acquisitions, and major market campaigns, for example—innovations in oper-
ations are relatively reliable and low cost. As a business student, you are perfectly posi-
tioned to come up with innovative operations-related ideas. You understand the big picture 
of all the processes that generate the costs and support the cash flow essential to the firm’s 
long-term viability.
Through this book, you will become aware of the concepts and tools now being employed 
by companies around the world as they craft efficient and effective operations. Efficiency 
means doing something at the lowest possible cost. Later in the book, we define this more 
thoroughly, but roughly speaking, the goal of an efficient process is to produce a good or 
provide a service by using the smallest input of resources. In general, these resources are the 
material, labor, equipment, and facilities used in the OSCM processes.
Effectiveness means doing the right things to create the most value for the company. For 
example, to be effective at a grocery store it is important to have plenty of operating check-out 
lines even though they may often stand idle. This is a recognition that the customer’s time is 
valuable and that they do not like waiting to be served in the check-out line. Often, maximiz-
ing effectiveness and efficiency at the same time creates conflict between the two goals. We 
see this trade-off every day in our lives. At the check-out lines, being efficient means using 
the fewest people possible to ring up customers. Being effective, though, means minimizing 
the amount of time customers need to wait in line.
Related to efficiency and effectiveness is the concept of value, which can be abstractly 
defined as quality divided by price. Here, quality is the attractiveness of the product, con-
sidering its features and durability. If you can provide the customer with a better car without 
changing price, value has gone up. If you can give the customer a better car at a lower price, 
value goes way up. A major objective of this book is to show how smart management can 
achieve high levels of value.
How Does Wall Street Evaluate Efficiency?
Comparing firms from an operations and supply chain view is important to investors because 
the relative cost of providing a good or service is essential to high earnings growth. When you 
think about it, earnings growth is largely a function of the firm’s profitability, and profit can 
be increased through higher sales and/or reduced cost. Highly efficient firms usually shine 
when demand drops during recession periods because they often can continue to make a 
profit due to their low-cost structure. These operations-savvy firms may even see a recession 
as an opportunity to gain market share as their less-efficient competitors struggle to remain 
in business.
Efficiency
A ratio of the actual output 
of a process relative to 
some standard. Also, being 
“efficient” means doing 
something at the lowest 
possible cost.
Effectiveness
Doing the things that will 
create the most value for 
the customer.
Value
The attractiveness of a 
product relative to its price.
Evaluate the efficiency of 
a firm.
LO 1–4

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
15
An interesting relationship between the costs related to OSCM functions and profit is the 
direct impact of a reduction of cost in one of these functions on the profit margin of the firm. 
In Exhibit 1.6, we show data from a company’s balance sheet. The balance sheet on the left 
shows the return on investment (ROI) for the company prior to a reduction in raw material 
cost. The balance sheet on the right shows the same data, but with a reduction of 5 percent in 
the cost of raw materials. The cost of raw materials affects the values throughout the supply 
chain, including the cost of goods sold, inventory value, and total value of assets; therefore, 
reducing raw material costs by 5 percent leads to nearly a 29 percent increase in profit mar-
gins and a 30 percent increase in the company’s ROI. Thus, there is an almost 6:1 leverage on 
every dollar saved by reducing raw materials costs.
A common set of financial indicators that Wall Street tracks to benchmark companies are 
called management efficiency ratios. Benchmarking is a process in which one company 
studies the processes of another company (or industry) to identify best practices. You prob-
ably discussed these measures in one of your accounting classes. It is not our purpose to do 
an in-depth review of this material, but it is important to recognize the significant impact the 
operations and supply chain processes have on these ratios. A comparison of a few automobile 
companies using the ratios is shown in Exhibit 1.7.
The following is a brief review of these ratios. Starting from basic financial data for the 
firm, the simplest efficiency-related measures relate to the productivity of labor employed by 
the firm. There are two of these ratios:
∙	 Net income per employee
∙	 Revenue (or sales) per employee
Benchmarking
When one company 
studies the processes 
of another company to 
identify best practices.
LABOR
$700
OVERHEAD
$800
OTHER COSTS
$800
SALES
$5,000
NET INCOME
PROFIT MARGIN
8%
SALES
$5,000
DIVIDED BY
COGS
MINUS
MATERIALS
Operating Costs
INVENTORY
CASH
$300
SALES
$5,000
Asset Turnover
Ratio 1.25
Total Assets
DIVIDED BY
RECEIVABLE
$300
Current Assets
Fixed Assets
$2,900
PLUS
Assets
MULTIPLY
Business Performance before Improvement
$2,300
$500
$1,100
$4,000
$3,800
$400
ROI
10.0%
LABOR
$700
OVERHEAD
$800
OTHER COSTS
$800
SALES
$5,000
NET INCOME
PROFIT MARGIN
10.3%
SALES
$5,000
DIVIDED BY
COGS
MINUS
MATERIALS
Operating Costs
INVENTORY
CASH
$300
SALES
$5,000
Asset Turnover
Ratio 1.26
Total Assets
DIVIDED BY
RECEIVABLE
$300
Current Assets
Fixed Assets
$2,900
PLUS
Assets
MULTIPLY
Business Performance with 5% Reduction in Materials Cost
$2,185
$475
$1,075
$3,975
$3,685
$515
ROI
13.0%
The Impact of Reducing Raw Material Cost
exhibit 1.6
Efficiency Measure
Toyota (TM)
General Motors (GM)
Ford (F)
Industry
Income per employee
$60,266
$50,255
$17,037
$39,170
Revenue (or sales) per employee
$738,754
$1,949,113
$770,465
$799,932
Receivables turnover
3.3
6.4
1.6
3.2
Inventory turnover
10.5
9.7
15.3
9.5
Asset turnover
0.6
0.9
0.7
0.7
A Comparison of Automobile Companies
exhibit 1.7

16	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
These labor productivity measures are fairly crude since many employees are not directly 
employed in operations and supply chain–related functions. Also, it is important to recog-
nize that the concepts described in this book are certainly applicable to the other functions 
in the firm.
A third efficiency ratio measures the number of times receivables are collected, on aver-
age, during the fiscal year. This ratio is called the receivables turnover ratio, and it is calcu-
lated as follows:
	
​​Receivable Turnover = ​ 
Annual Credit Sales 
 
____________________ 
 
 
Average Account Receivable ​​
​​[1.1]​
The receivables turnover ratio measures a company’s efficiency in collecting its sales on 
credit. Accounts receivable represent the indirect interest-free loans that the company is pro-
viding to its clients. A higher receivables ratio implies either that the company operates on a 
cash basis or that its extension of credit and collection methods are efficient. Also, a high ratio 
reflects a short lapse of time between sales and the collection of cash, while a low number 
means collection takes longer. The lower the ratio, the longer receivables are being held and 
the higher the risk of them not being collected.
A ratio that is low by industry standards will generally indicate that the business needs to 
improve its credit policies and collection procedures. If the ratio is going up, either collec-
tion efforts are improving, sales are rising, or receivables are being reduced. From an opera-
tions and supply chain perspective, the firm may be able to impact this ratio by such things 
as the speed of delivery of products, accuracy in filling orders, and amount of inspection the 
customer needs to do. Factors such as the outgoing quality of the product and how customer 
orders are taken, together with other order-processing activities, may have a huge impact on 
the receivables turnover ratio. This is particularly true when Internet catalogs are the main 
interface between the customer and the firm.
Another efficiency ratio is inventory turnover. It measures the average number of 
times inventory is sold and replaced during the fiscal year. The inventory turnover ratio 
formula is:
	
​Inventory Turnover = ​ 
Cost of Goods Sold 
 
_________________ 
 
Average Inventory Value ​​  ​​
​​[1.2]​
This ratio measures the company’s efficiency in turning its inventory into sales. Its purpose 
is to measure the liquidity or speed of inventory usage. This ratio is generally compared 
against industry averages. A low inventory turnover ratio is a signal of inefficiency, because 
inventory ties up capital that could be used for other purposes. It might imply either poor 
sales or excess inventory relative to sales. A low turnover ratio can indicate poor liquid-
ity, possible overstocking, and obsolescence, but it may also reflect a planned inventory 
buildup in the case of material shortages or in anticipation of rapidly rising prices. A high 
inventory turnover ratio implies either strong sales or ineffective buying (the firm may be 
buying too often and in small quantities, driving up the buying price). A high inventory 
turnover ratio can indicate better liquidity, but it can also indicate shortages or inadequate 
inventory levels, which may lead to a loss in business. Generally, a high inventory turnover 
ratio when compared to competitors’ is good. This ratio is controlled to a great extent by 
operations and supply chain processes. Factors such as order lead times, purchasing prac-
tices, the number of items being stocked, and production and order quantities have a direct 
impact on the ratio.
The final efficiency ratio considered here is asset turnover. This is the amount of sales 
generated for every dollar’s worth of assets. The formula for the ratio is:
	
​​Asset Turnover = ​ Revenue (or Sales ) 
 
_____________ 
 
Total Assets 
​​
​​[1.3]​
Asset turnover measures a firm’s efficiency at using its assets in generating sales revenue—
the higher the number, the better. It also indicates pricing strategy: Companies with low profit 
margins tend to have high asset turnover, while those with high profit margins have low asset 

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
17
turnover. This ratio varies significantly by industry, so comparisons between 
unrelated businesses are not useful. To a great extent, the asset turnover ratio 
is similar to the receivables turnover and the inventory turnover ratio since 
all three involve the investment in assets. Asset turnover is more general and 
includes the plants, warehouses, equipment, and other assets owned by the 
firm. Since many of these facilities are needed to support the operations and 
supply chain activities, the ratio can be significantly impacted by investments 
in technology and outsourcing, for example.
These ratios can be calculated from data in a firm’s annual financial state-
ments and are readily available on the Internet from websites such as AOL 
Finance (http://www.aol.com/stock-quotes/).
Ford Fiestas on the assembly line at the Ford factory 
in Cologne, Germany  © Oliver Berg/dpa/Corbis
EXAMPLE 1.1: Comparing the Management Efficiency of Companies in the Same 
Industry Using Wall Street Measures
Building on the data in Exhibit 1.7, compare the Japanese automobile manufacturer Honda to 
Toyota, General Motors, and Ford. Specifically address the following questions:
	1.	 How does Honda (stock symbol HMC) differ relative to income per employee, rev-
enue per employee, receivables turnover, inventory turnover, and asset turnover?
	2.	 Speculate on why Honda’s Wall Street efficiency measures are different from the other 
automobile companies’. Be sure to consider the fact that Honda is a smaller company 
compared to the others.
SOLUTION
The first step is to get comparable data on Honda. One Website that has these data is, again, 
www.aol.com/stock-quotes/. Hyperlink to this site using your browser and then enter HMC in 
the “Get Quote” block. Then, from the menu find Key Ratios, select Efficiency Ratios. Check 
to see that you have the correct data.
Example data for Honda on the date this chapter was written were as follows:
Income per employee
30,203
Revenue per employee
585,647
Receivables turnover
4.9
Inventory turnover
6.3
Asset turnover
0.8
Next, we need to try to understand the data. It is probably good to start with asset turnover, 
because this is the most comprehensive measure. Notice that GM is the highest in the group. 
Recall that GM recently went bankrupt and was recapitalized, which could explain the higher 
asset turnover. Honda, though, is fine compared to the industry average on this measure.
On net income per employee, revenue per employee and inventory turn, we see that 
Honda appears, for the most part, to be stronger than Ford, but weaker than Toyota and Gen-
eral Motors. Ford is strongest in inventory turn. This is surprising because we might expect 
Toyota to be strong here, given its reputation in managing inventory. It is interesting to see 
how Ford is weakest in receivables turnover, which may relate to the amount of credit it is 
giving customers in order to sell vehicles.

18	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Concept Connections
LO 1–1   Identify the elements of operations and supply chain management (OSCM).
Summary
	∙	 Processes are used to implement the strategy of the 
firm.
	∙	 Analytics are used to support the ongoing decisions 
needed to manage the firm.
Key Terms
Operations and supply chain management (OSCM)  The 
design, operation, and improvement of the systems that 
create and deliver the firm’s primary products and services.
Process  One or more activities that transform inputs 
into outputs.
Product -service bundling  When a firm builds service 
activities into its product offerings to create additional 
value for the customer.
LO 1–2   Know the potential career opportunities in operations and supply chain management.
Summary
	∙	 OSCM people specialize in managing the production 
of goods and services.
	∙	 OSCM jobs are hands-on and require working with 
others and figuring out the best way to do things.
	∙	 The chief operating officer (COO) works with the 
CEO and company president to determine the com-
pany’s competitive strategy.
	∙	 COOs determine an organization’s location, its facili-
ties, which vendors to use, and how the hiring policy 
will be implemented.
LO 1–3   Recognize the major concepts that define the operations and supply chain management field.
Summary
Many of the concepts that form the OSCM field have 
their origins in the Industrial Revolution in the 1800s. 
Key Terms
Manufacturing strategy  Emphasizes how a factory’s 
capabilities could be used strategically to gain advantage 
over a competing company.
Just-in-time (JIT)  An integrated set of activities designed 
to achieve high-volume production using minimal inven-
tories of parts that arrive exactly when they are needed.
Total quality control (TQC)  Aggressively seeks to elimi-
nate causes of production defects.
Lean manufacturing  To achieve high customer service 
with minimum levels of inventory investment.
Total quality management (TQM)  Managing the entire 
organization so it excels in all dimensions of products 
and services important to the customer.
Business process reengineering (BPR)  An approach to 
improving business processes that seeks to make revolu-
tionary changes as opposed to evolutionary (small) changes.
Six Sigma  A statistical term to describe the quality goal of 
no more than 3.4 defects out of every million units. Also 
refers to a quality improvement philosophy and program.
Mass customization  The ability to produce a unique 
product exactly to a particular customer’s requirements.
Electronic commerce  The use of the Internet as an 
essential element of business activity.
Sustainability  The ability to meet current resource 
needs without compromising the ability of future gen-
erations to meet their needs.
The focus of this book is on popular concepts developed 
since the 1980s.
These concepts include:

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
19
Triple bottom line  A business strategy that includes 
social, economic, and environmental criteria.
Business analytics  The use of current business data to 
solve business problems using mathematical analysis.
LO 1–4   Evaluate the efficiency of a firm.
Criteria that relate to how well the firm is doing include:
	∙	 Efficiency
	∙	 Effectiveness
	∙	 Value created in its products and services
Summary
Key Terms
Efficiency  A ratio of the actual output of a process rela-
tive to some standard. Also, being “efficient” means 
doing something at the lowest possible cost.
Effectiveness  Doing the things that will create the most 
value for the customer.
Value  The attractiveness of a product relative to its 
price. 
Benchmarking  When one company studies the pro-
cesses of another company to identify best practices.
Efficiency Measures:
Income per employee
Revenue (or sales) per employee
	
​Receivables turnover = ​ 
Annual credit sales 
 
____________________ 
 
 
Average accounts receivable ​​
​
	
​​Inventory turnover = ​ 
Cost of goods sold 
 
_________________ 
 
Average inventory value ​​
​
	
​​Asset turnover = ​ Revenue ​(​or sales​)​ 
 
_____________ 
 
Total assets 
​​
​[1.1]​
​[1.2]​
​[1.3]​
Discussion Questions
	1.	 Using Exhibit 1.3 as a model, describe the source-make-deliver-return relationships in the 
following systems:
	
a.	 An airline
	
b.	 An automobile manufacturer
	
c.	 A hospital
	
d.	 An insurance company
	2.	 Define the service package of your college or university. What is its strongest element? Its 
weakest one?
	3.	 What service industry has impressed you the most with its innovativeness?
	4.	 What is product-service bundling, and what are the benefits to customers?
	5.	 What is the difference between a service and a good?
	6.	 Look at the job postings at www.apics.org and evaluate the opportunities for an OSCM 
major with several years of experience.
	7.	 Recent outsourcing of parts and services that had previously been produced internally is 
addressed by which current issue facing operation management today?
	8.	 What factors account for the resurgence of interest in OSCM today?
LO1–1
LO1–2
LO1–3

20	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	  9.	 As the field of OSCM has advanced, new concepts have been applied to help companies 
compete in a number of ways, including the advertisement of the firm’s products or ser-
vices. One recent concept to gain the attention of companies is promoting sustainability. 
Discuss how you have seen the idea of sustainability used by companies to advertise their 
goods or services.
	10.	 Some people tend to use the terms effectiveness and efficiency interchangeably, though we’ve 
seen they are different concepts. But is there any relationship at all between them? Can a firm 
be effective but inefficient? Very efficient but essentially ineffective? Both? Neither?
	11.	 Two of the efficiency ratios mentioned in the chapter are the receivable turnover ratio 
and the inventory turnover ratio. While they are two completely separate measures, they 
are very similar in one way. What is the common thread between these two?
LO1–4
Objective Questions
	1.	 What are the three elements that require integration to be successful in operations and sup-
ply chain management? (Answer in Appendix D)
	2.	 Operations and supply chain management is concerned with the design and management 
of the entire system that has what function?
	3.	 Match the following OSCM job titles with the appropriate duties and responsibilities.
LO1–1
LO1–2
	4.	 What high-level position manager is responsible for working with the CEO and company 
president to determine the company’s competitive strategy?
	5.	 Order the following major concepts that have helped define the OSCM field on a time line. 
Use 1 for the earliest concept to be introduced, and 5 for the most recent.
LO1–3
	6.	 Which major OSCM concept can be described as an integrated set of activities designed to 
achieve high-volume production using minimal inventories of parts that arrive at worksta-
tions exactly when they are needed?
	7.	 Operations and supply chain _____________ leverages the vast amount of data in enter-
prise resource planning systems to make decisions related to managing resources.
	8.	 Which current issue in OSCM relates to the ability of a firm to maintain balance in a sys-
tem, considering the ongoing economic, employee, and environmental viability of the firm?
_____ Plant manager
A.  Plans and coordinates staff activities such as new 
product development and new facility location.
_____ Supply chain manager
B.  Oversees the movement of goods throughout the 
supply chain.
_____ Project manager
C.  Oversees the workforce and resources required to 
produce the firm’s products.
_____ Business process 
improvement analyst
D.  Negotiates contracts with vendors and coordinates 
the flow of material inputs to the production 
process.
_____ Logistics manager
E.  Applies the tools of lean production to reduce cycle 
time and eliminate waste in a process.
_____ Supply chain management
_____ Manufacturing strategy
_____ Business analytics
_____ Total quality management
_____ Electronic commerce

	
Introduction	
Chapter 1	
21
	  9.	 Consider the following financial data from the past year for Midwest Outdoor Equipment 
Corporation. (Answers in Appendix D)
LO1–4
Gross income
$25,240,000
Total sales
24,324,000
Total credit sales
18,785,000
Net income
2,975,000
Cost of goods sold
12,600,000
Total assets
10,550,000
Average inventory
2,875,000
Average receivables
3,445,000
	
a.	 Compute the receivable turnover ratio.
	
b.	 Compute the inventory turnover ratio.
	
c.	 Compute the asset turnover ratio.
	10.	 A manufacturing company has entered into a new contract with a major supplier of raw 
materials used in the manufacturing process. Under the new arrangement, called vendor 
managed inventory, the supplier manages its raw material inventory inside the manufac-
turer’s plant, and only bills the manufacturer when the manufacturer consumes the raw 
material. How is this likely to affect the manufacturer’s inventory turnover ratio?
	11.	 What is the name of the process in which one company studies the processes of another 
firm in order to identify best practices?
	12.	 A company has recently implemented an automated online billing and payment process-
ing system for orders it ships to customers. As a result, it has reduced the average number 
of days between billing a customer and receiving payment by 10 days. How will this 
affect the receivables turnover ratio?
The idea behind this exercise is for the class to generate 
data comparing companies in many different industries. 
These data will be used to compare these industries from 
an operations and supply chain view to better understand 
differences. Be prepared for a lively class discussion for 
this session.
Step 1: Pick an industry you find interesting. This 
may be driven by a company by which you would like to 
be employed or by some other factor. Within the industry, 
identify three companies that compete with one another. 
To find the data for this exercise two sites are suggested 
http://www.aol.com/stock-quotes/ and http://www.msn.
com/money/. These sites are updated frequently, and 
the data needed should be available for most companies 
listed on the United States stock exchanges. 
Step 2: Collect data related to each company. At a 
minimum, try to find the income per employee, revenue 
per employee, receivables turnover, inventory turnover, 
and asset turnover for each company. It may be necessary 
to calculate the income per employee and revenue per 
employee ratios by taking the financial data and dividing 
by the number of company employees. For the other data, 
look for “efficiency ratios” on the Website. 
Step 3: Compare the companies based on what you 
have found. Which company appears to have the most 
productive employees? Which company has the best 
operations and supply chain processes? Which com-
pany is most efficient in its use of credit? Which com-
pany makes the best use of its facility and equipment 
assets?
Step 4: What insights can you draw from your analy-
sis? What could your companies learn from benchmark-
ing each other?
Analytics Exercise: Comparing Companies Using Wall Street Efficiency 
Measures (LO 1–4)

22	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Practice Exam
Name the term defined in each of the following 
statements.
	1.	 The pipelinelike movement of the materials and infor-
mation needed to produce a good or service.
	2.	 A strategy that meets the needs of shareholders and 
employees and that preserves the environment.
	3.	 The processes needed to determine the set of future 
actions required to operate an existing supply chain.
	4.	 The selection of suppliers.
	5.	 A type of process where a major product is produced 
or a service provided.
	6.	 A type of process that moves products to warehouses 
or customers.
	7.	 Processes that involve the receiving of worn-out, 
defective, and excess products back from customers 
and support for customers who have problems.
	8.	 A type of business where the major product is intan-
gible, meaning it cannot be weighed or measured.
	  9.	 Refers to when a company builds service activities 
into its product offerings.
	10.	 Means doing something at the lowest possible cost.
	11.	 Means doing the right things to create the most value 
for the company.
	12.	 Abstractly defined as quality divided by price.
	13.	 A philosophy that aggressively seeks to eliminate 
causes of production defects.
	14.	 An approach that seeks to make revolutionary 
changes as opposed to evolutionary changes (which 
is advocated by total quality management).
	15.	 An approach that combines TQM and JIT.
	16.	 Tools that are taught to managers in “Green and 
Black Belt Programs.”
	17.	 A program to apply the latest concepts in informa-
tion technology to improve service productivity.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Supply (chain) network  2. Triple bottom line strategy  3. Planning  4. Sourcing  5. Making  6. Delivery  7. Returning  
8. Service  9. Product-service bundling  10. Efficiency  11. Effectiveness  12. Value  13. Total quality management  14. Business process 
­reengineering  15. Lean manufacturing  16. Six Sigma quality  17. Service science management and engineering

	
23
TESLA MOTORS
Started by Elon Musk, Tesla Motors is radically changing the way we think about per-
sonal travel. The all-electric Model S has features like an autopilot with advanced 
cruise control and automatic passing. Parking features, where the car can park itself 
and even be retrieved automatically, are safety and convenience abilities that will be 
commonly available soon. 
The company has needed to address major obstacles for the mass-market 
acceptance of a battery-powered car. These relate to the limited range of bat-
teries and the time it takes to charge the battery packs.
Consider the strategic initiatives that Tesla has implemented to address 
these issues:
	 •	 They have built thousands of “supercharging” stations around the world 
that can charge the car in just 30 minutes.
	 •	 To drive the cost of the batteries down, they are building a giant battery 
plant in Reno, Nevada. Tesla refers to this as their “gigafactory,” and the 
intent is to produce a low-cost industry standard around its interchangeable battery 
pack form-factor and power. Elon Musk turned over the patents associated with the 
new battery to the public so that the standards can be easily adopted by others.
	 •	 Finally, Tesla has introduced a “battery swap” technology that can be easily adopted 
by gas stations around the world. The automated stations quickly swap the battery 
and install a freshly charged one. This technology positions Musk where he may 
well own the energy franchise for electric automobile power for the future.
Learning Objectives
	LO 2–1	 Know what a sustainable business strategy is and how it relates to  
operations and supply chain management.
	LO 2–2	 Define operations and supply chain strategy.
	LO 2–3	 Explain how operations and supply chain strategies are implemented.
	LO 2–4	 Understand why strategies have implications relative to business risk.
	LO 2–5	 Evaluate productivity in operations and supply chain management.
Strategy
2 
Courtesy of Michael Gabriel, 
Vero Beach FL

24
Strategy should describe how a firm intends to create and sustain value for its current share-
holders. By adding sustainability to the concept, we add the requirement to meet these cur-
rent needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Shareholders are those individuals or companies that legally own one or more shares of stock 
in the company. Many companies today have expanded the scope of their strategy to include 
stakeholders. Stakeholders are those individuals or organizations that are influenced, either 
directly or indirectly, by the actions of the firm. This expanded view means that the scope 
of the firm’s strategy must not only focus on the economic viability of its shareholders, but 
should also consider the environmental and social impact on key stakeholders.
To capture this expanded view, the phrase triple bottom line has been coined. The triple 
bottom line, Exhibit 2.1, considers evaluating the firm against social, economic, and environ-
mental criteria. Many companies have developed this expanded view through goals that relate 
to sustainability along each of these dimensions. Some alternative phrases for the same con-
cept are “People, Planet, and Profit” used by Shell Oil Company, and “Folk, Work, and Place” 
which originated with twentieth-century writer Patrick Geddes. The following expands on the 
meaning of each dimension of the triple bottom line framework.
∙	 Social Responsibility. This pertains to fair and beneficial business practices toward 
labor, the community, and the region in which a firm conducts its business. A triple 
bottom line company seeks to benefit its employees, the community, and other social 
entities that are impacted by the firm’s existence. A company should not use child 
labor, and should pay fair salaries to its workers, maintain a safe work environment 
with tolerable working hours, and not otherwise exploit a community or its labor force. 
A business can also give back by contributing to the strength and growth of its com-
munity through health care, education, and other special programs.
Sustainability
The ability to meet current 
resource needs without 
compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet 
their needs.
Triple bottom line
A business strategy that 
includes social, economic, 
and environmental criteria.
The innovations, introduced by Tesla in their cars, span many areas, including the 
design and manufacture of their cars, software technology for safe operation, pro-
curement and development of a new battery, and the infrastructure for use of the 
car. Taken together, Tesla Motors may well mark the start of a new era in highway 
transportation.
A SUSTAINABLE OPERATIONS  
AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY
Social
Responsibility
Economic
Prosperity
Environmental
Stewardship
The
Triple
Bottom
Line
The Triple Bottom Line
exhibit 2.1
Know what a sustainable 
business strategy is and 
how it relates to operations 
and supply chain 
management.
LO 2–1

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
25
∙	 Economic Prosperity. The firm 
is obligated to compensate share-
holders 
who 
provide 
capital 
through stock purchases and other 
financial instruments via a compet-
itive return on investments. Com-
pany strategies should promote 
growth and grow long-term value 
to this group in the form of profit. 
Within a sustainability framework, 
this dimension goes beyond just 
profit for the firm; it also pro-
vides lasting economic benefit  
to society.
∙	 Environmental Stewardship. This  
refers to the firm’s impact on the 
environment. The company should 
protect the environment as much 
as possible—or at least cause no 
harm. Managers should move to 
reduce a company’s ecological footprint by carefully managing its consumption of natu-
ral resources and by reducing waste. Many businesses now conduct “cradle-to-grave” 
assessments of products to determine what the true environmental costs are—from  
processing the raw material to manufacture to distribution to eventual disposal by the 
final customer.
Conventional strategy focuses on the economic part of this framework. Because many of the 
processes that fall under the domain of operations and supply chain management have a social 
and environment impact, it is important these criteria be considered as well. Some proponents 
argue that, in many ways, European Union countries are more advanced due to the standard-
ized reporting of ecological and social losses that came with the adoption of the euro.
Although many company planners agree with the goals of improving society and pre-
serving the environment, many others disagree. Dissenting arguments relate to the potential 
loss of efficiency due to the focus on conflicting criteria. Others argue that these goals 
may be appropriate for rich societies that can afford to contribute to society and the envi-
ronment. A company in a poor or developing society/nation must focus on survival. The 
economic benefit derived from the use of abundant local resources may be viewed as worth 
their destruction.
In this chapter, we take a customer-centered approach; issues associated with people and 
the environment are left to an individual case approach. Depending on the country, industry, 
and scope of the firm, these other issues vary widely, and it would be difficult to provide a 
general approach for analysis. The issues and their relationship to operations and supply chain 
management are very real, however, and we anticipate they will become even more relevant 
in the future.
Lights are turned off at an SMBC Nikko Securities Inc. office as employees 
work on desks equipped with LED bulbs in an energy-saving measure.
© Tomohiro Ohsumi/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Define operations and 
supply chain strategy.
LO 2–2
WHAT IS OPERATIONS AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGY?
Operations and supply chain strategy is concerned with setting broad policies and plans for 
using the resources of a firm and must be integrated with corporate strategy. So, for example, if 
the high-level corporate strategy includes goals related to the environment and social respon-
sibility, then the operations and supply chain strategy must consider these goals. A major 
focus to the operations and supply chain strategy is operations effectiveness. Operations  
effectiveness relates to the core business processes needed to run the business. The processes span 
all the business functions, from taking customer orders, handling returns, manufacturing, and  
Operations and supply 
chain strategy
The setting of broad 
policies and plans that 
will guide the use of the 
resources needed by 
the firm to implement its 
corporate strategy.
Operations 
effectiveness
Performing activities 
in a manner that best 
implements strategic 
priorities at minimum cost.

26	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
managing the updating of the Website, to shipping products. Operational effectiveness  
is reflected directly in the costs associated with doing business. Strategies associated with 
operational effectiveness, such as quality assurance and control initiatives, process redesign, 
planning and control systems, and technology investments, can show quick near-term (12 to 
24 months) results.
Operations and supply chain strategy can be viewed as part of a planning process that 
coordinates operational goals with those of the larger organization. Because the goals of 
the larger organization change over time, the operations strategy must be designed to antic-
ipate future needs. A firm’s operations and supply chain capabilities can be viewed as a 
portfolio best suited to adapting to the changing product and/or service needs of the firm’s 
customers.
Planning strategy is a process just like making a product or delivering a service. The pro-
cess involves a set of activities that are repeated at different intervals over time. Just as prod-
ucts are made over and over, the strategy planning activities are repeated. A big difference is 
that these activities are done by executives in the boardroom!
Exhibit 2.2 shows the major activities of a typical strategic planning process. Strategic 
analysis is performed at least yearly and is where the overall strategy is developed. This step 
involves looking out and forecasting how business conditions that impact the firm’s strategy 
are going to change in the future. Here, such things as changes in customer preferences, the 
impact of new technologies, changes in population demographics, and the anticipation of new 
competitors are considered. As part of the overall strategy, the firm needs to define a clear set 
of priorities to help guide the implementation of a plan. When possible, it is useful to define 
specific measures that relate to the objectives of the firm. A successful strategy will anticipate 
change and formulate new initiatives in response.
The corporate strategy is operationalized through a set of operations and supply chain 
initiatives. Initiatives are the major steps that need to be taken to drive success in the firm. 
Many of these initiatives are repeated from year to year, such as the updating of existing prod-
uct designs and the operation of manufacturing plants in different regions of the world. New 
initiatives that innovatively respond to market dynamics are extremely important to company 
success. Initiatives that develop innovative products or open new markets, for example, drive 
future revenue growth. Other initiatives that reduce costs directly impact the profitability of 
Formulating an Operations and Supply Chain Strategy
Initiatives
Strategic 
Analysis
n
oitatn
e
m
elp
m
I
Projects
Outputs
Process
Customer preferences
New technologies
Population 
demographics
Competition analysis
Define vision, 
mission, and 
objectives
Conduct strategic 
analysis
Define strategic 
competitive 
priorities
Identification of 
major steps needed 
in response to new 
competitive 
priorities
Product design 
initiatives
Operations and 
supply chain 
initiatives
Product/platform 
changes
Operation/supply 
chain changes
Definition of specific 
implementation 
projects
Identification of 
resources needed
Project funding 
procurement
Specific project plans
Formulating an Operations and Supply Chain Strategy
exhibit 2.2

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
27
the firm. Companies with triple bottom line strategies may have initiatives that reduce waste 
or enhance the welfare of the local communities.
These activities are refined and updated as often as four times a year. Here, each initiative 
is evaluated and appropriate budget estimates for the next year or more are developed. Mea-
sures that relate to the performance of each initiative are needed so that success or failure can 
be gauged in an unbiased and objective way. Because of the quickly changing nature of global 
business, many businesses must revise plans several times per year.
Carefully designed projects are used to implement change. The planning of these projects 
requires the identification of the resources needed, such as the expertise of the project mem-
bers, special equipment, and other resources. Specific timing of the activities of the project 
are analyzed as part of each project implementation plan.
Competitive Dimensions
Given the choices customers face today, how do they decide which product or service to buy? 
Different customers are attracted by different attributes. Some customers are interested pri-
marily in the cost of a product or service and, correspondingly, some companies attempt to 
position themselves to offer the lowest prices. The major competitive dimensions that form 
the competitive position of a firm are discussed next.
Cost or Price: “Make the Product or Deliver the Service Inexpensively”  
Within every industry, there is usually a segment of the market that buys solely on the basis 
of low cost. To successfully compete in this niche, a firm must be the low-cost producer. 
However, even this does not always guarantee profitability and success. Products and services 
sold strictly on the basis of cost are typically commodity-like; in other words, customers cannot 
distinguish the product or service of one firm from that of another. This segment of the market 
is frequently very large, and many companies are lured by the potential for significant profits, 
which they associate with the large unit volumes. As a consequence, however, competition 
in this segment is fierce—and so is the failure rate. After all, there can be only one low-cost 
producer, who usually establishes the selling price in the market.
Price, however, is not the only basis on which a firm can compete (although many econo-
mists appear to assume it is!). Other companies, such as BMW, seek to attract people who 
want higher quality—in terms of performance, appearance, or features—than what is avail-
able in competing products and services, even though it means a higher price.
Qu al i t y :  “ M a k e  a  G r e a t  P r o d u c t 
o r  D el i v er  a  G r e a t  S e r v ic e ”   There 
are two characteristics of a product or service that 
define quality: design quality and process quality. 
Design quality relates to the set of features the 
product or service contains. This relates directly 
to the design of the product or service. Obviously, 
a child’s first two-wheel bicycle is of significantly 
different quality than the bicycle of a world-
class cyclist. The use of special aluminum alloys 
and unique lightweight sprockets and chains 
is important to the performance needs of the 
advanced cyclist. These two types of bicycles 
are designed for different customers’ needs. The 
higher-quality cyclist product commands a higher 
price in the marketplace due to its special features. 
The goal in establishing the proper level of design 
quality is to focus on the requirements of the 
customer. Overdesigned products and services 
with too many or inappropriate features will be 
Competing based 
on cost can be 
difficult unless the 
firm has some unique 
advantage over 
the competition. 
For example, an 
inexpensive source of 
raw material or access 
to low-cost labor may 
create the necessary 
advantage.
KEY IDEA
An aerodynamics expert logs results from a wind tunnel test for 
cycling clothing and racing bicycle design.
© David L. Ryan/Boston Globe/Getty Images

28	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
viewed as prohibitively expensive. In comparison, underdesigned products and services will 
lose customers to products that cost a little more but are perceived by customers as offering 
greater value.
Process quality, the second characteristic of quality, is critical because it relates directly 
to the reliability of the product or service. Regardless of whether the product is a child’s first 
two-wheeler or a bicycle for an international cyclist, customers want products without defects. 
Thus, the goal of process quality is to produce defect-free products and services. Product and 
service specifications, given in dimensional tolerances and/or service error rates, define how 
the product or service is to be made. Adherence to these specifications is critical to ensure the 
reliability of the product or service as defined by its intended use.
D e l i v e r y  S p e e d :  “ M a k e  t h e  P r o d u c t  o r  D e l i v e r  t he S er v i c e 
Q u i c k l y ”  In some markets, a firm’s ability to deliver more quickly than its competitors is 
critical. A company that can offer an onsite repair service in only 1 or 2 hours has a significant 
advantage over a competing firm that guarantees service only within 24 hours.
D e l i v e r y  Re l i a b i l i t y :  “ D e l i v e r  I t  W h e n  P r o m i s e d ”  This dimension 
relates to the firm’s ability to supply the product or service on or before a promised delivery 
due date. For an automobile manufacturer, it is very important that its supplier of tires provide 
the needed quantity and types for each day’s car production. If the tires needed for a particular 
car are not available when the car reaches the point on the assembly line where the tires are 
installed, the whole assembly line may have to be shut down until they arrive. For a service 
firm such as Federal Express, delivery reliability is the cornerstone of its strategy.
C o p i n g  w i t h  C h a n g e s  i n  D e m a n d :  “ C h a n g e  I t s  V o l u m e”  In many 
markets, a company’s ability to respond to increases and decreases in demand is important 
to its ability to compete. It is well known that a company with increasing demand can do 
little wrong. When demand is strong and increasing, costs are continuously reduced due to 
economies of scale, and investments in new technologies can be easily justified. But scaling 
back when demand decreases may require many difficult decisions about laying off employees 
and related reductions in assets. The ability to effectively deal with dynamic market demand 
over the long term is an essential element of operations strategy.
F l e x i b i l i ty a n d  N e w - P r o d u c t  I n t r o d u c t i o n  S p e e d :  “ Ch a n g e  I t ”  
Flexibility, from a strategic perspective, refers to the ability of a company to offer a wide 
variety of products to its customers. An important element of this ability to offer different 
products is the time required for a company to develop a new product and to convert its 
processes to offer the new product.
O t h e r  Pr o d u c t - S p e c i f i c  C r i t e r i a :  “ S u p p o r t  I t ”   The competitive dimen­
sions just described are certainly the most common. However, other dimensions often relate 
to specific products or situations. Notice that most of the dimensions listed next are primarily 
service in nature. Often, special services are provided to augment the sales of manufactured 
products.
	1.	 Technical liaison and support. A supplier may be expected to provide technical 
assistance for product development, particularly during the early stages of design and 
manufacturing.
	2.	 Meeting a launch date. A firm may be required to coordinate with other firms on 
a complex project. In such cases, manufacturing may take place while development 
work is still being completed. Coordinating work between firms and working simul-
taneously on a project will reduce the total time required to complete the project.
	3.	 Supplier after-sale support. An important competitive dimension may be the ability 
of a firm to support its product after the sale. This involves availability of replacement 
parts and, possibly, modification of older, existing products to new performance lev-
els. Speed of response to these after-sale needs is often important as well.
Same-day delivery  
of items ordered from 
the Internet is now an 
important competitive 
feature for some 
companies. Keep in 
mind that competitive 
priorities may change 
over time.
KEY IDEA
Often, the services 
that are included with 
a product are key 
differentiators in the 
marketplace.
KEY IDEA

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
29
	4.	 Environmental impact. This dimension is related to criteria such as carbon dioxide 
emissions, use of nonrenewable resources, or other factors that relate to sustainability.
	5.	 Other dimensions. These typically include such factors as colors available, size, 
weight, location of the fabrication site, customization available, and product mix 
options.
The Notion of Trade-Offs
Central to the concept of operations and supply chain strategy is the notion of operations 
focus and trade-offs. The underlying logic is that an operation cannot excel simultaneously 
on all competitive dimensions. Consequently, management has to decide which parameters of 
performance are critical to the firm’s success and then concentrate the resources of the firm 
on these particular characteristics.
For example, if a company wants to focus on speed of delivery, it cannot be very flexible 
in its ability to offer a wide range of products. Similarly, a low-cost strategy is not compat-
ible with either speed of delivery or flexibility. High quality also is viewed as a trade-off to 
low cost.
A strategic position is not sustainable unless there are compromises with other positions. 
Trade-offs occur when activities are incompatible so that more of one thing necessitates less 
of another. An airline can choose to serve meals—adding cost and slowing turnaround time at 
the gate—or it can choose not to, but it cannot do both without bearing major inefficiencies.
Straddling occurs when a company seeks to match the benefits of a successful position 
while maintaining its existing position. It adds new features, services, or technologies onto 
the activities it already performs. The risky nature of this strategy is shown by Continental 
Airlines’ ill-fated attempt to compete with Southwest Airlines. While maintaining its posi-
tion as a full-service airline, Continental set out to match Southwest on a number of point-
to-point routes. The airline dubbed the new service Continental Lite. It eliminated meals and 
first-class service, increased departure frequency, lowered fares, and shortened gate turn-
around time. Because Continental remained a full-service airline on other routes, it continued 
to use travel agents and its mixed fleet of planes and also provide baggage checking and seat 
assignments.
Trade-offs ultimately grounded Continental Lite. The airline lost hundreds of millions of 
dollars, and the chief executive officer lost his job. Its planes were delayed, leaving hub cities 
congested, slowed at the gate by baggage transfers. Late flights and cancellations generated a 
thousand complaints a day. Continental Lite could not afford to compete on price and still pay 
standard travel agent commissions, but neither could it do without agents for its full-service  
business. The airline compromised by cutting commissions for all Continental flights. Sim-
ilarly, it could not afford to offer the same frequent-flier benefits to travelers paying the 
much lower ticket prices for Lite service. It compromised again by lowering the rewards of 
Continental’s entire frequent-flier program. The results: angry travel agents and full-service  
customers. Continental tried to compete in two ways at once and paid an enormous strad-
dling penalty.
Order Winners and Order Qualifiers: The Marketing–
Operations Link
A well-designed interface between marketing and operations is necessary to provide a busi-
ness with an understanding of its markets from both perspectives. The terms order win-
ner and order qualifier describe marketing-oriented dimensions that are key to competitive 
success. An order winner is a criterion, or possibly a set of criteria, that differentiates the 
products or services of one firm from those of another. Depending on the situation, the 
order-winning criteria may be the cost of the product (price), product quality and reliability, 
or any of the other dimensions developed earlier. An order qualifier is a screening criterion 
that permits a firm’s products to even be considered as possible candidates for purchase. 
Oxford Professor Terry Hill states that a firm must “requalify the order qualifiers” every day 
it is in business.
Straddling
When a firm seeks to 
match what a competitor 
is doing by adding new 
features, services, or 
technologies to existing 
activities. This often 
creates problems if trade-
offs need to be made.
Order winners
One or more specific 
marketing-oriented 
dimensions that clearly 
differentiate a product from 
competing products.
Order qualifiers
Dimensions used to screen 
a product or service as a 
candidate for purchase.

30	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
For example, consider your purchase of a notebook computer. You might think that such 
features as screen size, weight, operating system version, and cost are important qualifying 
dimensions. The order-winning feature that actually differentiates those candidate notebook 
computers that qualify is battery life. In doing your search, you develop a list of computers 
that all have 14-inch screens, weigh less than three pounds, run the latest Microsoft Windows 
operating system, and cost less than $1,000. From this list of acceptable computers, you select 
the one that has the longest battery life.
In an industrial setting where a firm is deciding on a supplier, the decision can be quite dif-
ferent. Consider a firm that is deciding on a supplier for its office supplies. Companies such as 
Office Depot, OfficeMax, Quill, or Staples might be candidates. Here, the qualifying dimen-
sions are: Can the company supply the items needed, can the supplier deliver orders within 24 
hours, are the items guaranteed, and is a private Web-based catalog available? Companies that 
have these capabilities would qualify for consideration as possible suppliers. The order winner 
might be the discount schedule that the company offers on the price of the items purchased.
Explain how operations 
and supply chain strategies 
are implemented.
LO 2–3
Used with the permission of Inter IKEA Systems B.V.
STRATEGIES ARE IMPLEMENTED USING OPERATIONS AND 
SUPPLY CHAIN ACTIVITIES—IKEA’S STRATEGY
All the activities that make up a firm’s operation relate to one another. To make these activi-
ties efficient, the firm must minimize its total cost without compromising customers’ needs.
To demonstrate how this works, consider how IKEA, the Swedish retailer of home prod-
ucts, implements its strategy using a set of unique activities. IKEA targets young furniture 
buyers who want style at a low cost. IKEA has chosen to perform activities differently from 
its rivals.
Consider the typical furniture store, where showrooms display samples of the merchan-
dise. One area may contain many sofas, another area displays dining tables, and there are 
many other areas focused on particular types of furniture. Dozens of books displaying fabric 
swatches or wood samples or alternative styles offer customers thousands of product varieties 
from which to choose. Salespeople escort customers through the store, answering questions 
and helping them navigate through the maze of choices. Once a customer decides what he or 
she wants, the order is relayed to a third-party manufacturer. With a lot of luck, the furniture 
will be delivered to the customer’s home within six to eight weeks. This is a supply chain that 
maximizes customization and service, but does so at a high cost.
In contrast, IKEA serves customers who are happy to trade service for cost. In addition 
to using sales associates, IKEA uses a self-service model with roomlike displays where fur-
niture is shown in familiar settings. Rather than relying 
on third-party manufacturers, IKEA designs its own low-
cost, ready-to-assemble furniture. In the store there is a 
self-serve warehouse, where customers can pick up prod-
ucts themselves and take them home the same day. Much 
of its low-cost operation comes from having customers 
service themselves, but IKEA offers extra services, such 
as home delivery, assembly, kitchen planning, and in-
store, by-appointment interior design consultation. Those 
services align well with the needs of its customers, who 
are young, not wealthy, and likely to have children.
Exhibit 2.3 shows how IKEA’s strategy is imple-
mented through a set of activities designed to deliver it. 
Activity-system maps such as the one for IKEA show 
how a company’s strategy is delivered through a set of tailored activities. In companies with 
a clear strategy, a number of higher-order strategic themes (in darker green) can be identified 
and implemented through clusters of tightly linked activities. This type of map can be useful in 
understanding how good the fit is between the system of activities and the company’s strategy. 
Competitive advantage comes from the way a firm’s activities fit with and reinforce one another.
Activity-system maps
Diagrams that show how 
a company’s strategy is 
delivered through a set of 
supporting activities.

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
31
Understand why strategies 
have implications relative 
to business risk.
LO 2–4
Activity-system maps, such as this one for IKEA, show how a company’s strategic position is contained in a set of tailored activities designed to 
deliver it. In companies with a clear strategic position, a number of higher-order strategic themes (in darker green circles) can be identified and 
implemented through clusters of tightly linked activities (in lighter circles). The themes here all relate to reducing operations and supply chain–
related costs, which are important for the firm’s success.
Based on Harvard Business School Press, from On Competition by Michael E. Porter, Boston, MA, 1998, p. 50. 
Explanatory
catalogues,
informative
displays and
labels
Self-transport
by customers
Suburban
locations
with ample
parking
Limited sales
staffing
Increased
likelihood of
future
purchase
In-house
design focused
on cost of
manufacturing
100%
sourcing from
long-term
suppliers
Year-round
stocking
Most
items in
inventory
Ample
inventory
on site
More
impulse
buying
High-traffic
store layout
Self-assembly
by customers
Limited
customer
service
Modular
furniture
design
Low
manufacturing
cost
Self-selection
by customers
Ease of
transport and
assembly
"Knock-down"
kit packaging
Wide variety
with ease of
manufacturing
IKEA—Stylish Low-Cost Furniture
exhibit 2.3
ASSESSING THE RISK ASSOCIATED WITH OPERATIONS 
AND SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGIES
The devastating earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan in March 2011 were a grim reminder 
that managing risk is a critical part of developing an effective operations and supply chain 
strategy.
The uncertainty in the global environment where most supply chains operate requires stra-
tegic planners to evaluate the relative riskiness of their operations and supply chain strategies. 
Supply chain risk is defined as the likelihood of a disruption that would impact the abil-
ity of the company to continuously supply products or services. Supply chain disruptions are 
unplanned and unanticipated events that disrupt the normal flow of goods and materials within 
a supply chain, and which expose firms within the supply chain to operational and financial 
risks. Operations and supply chain strategies must consider the risk in their supply chains and 
develop initiatives to cope with these disruptions and mitigate their impact on the business.
We can categorize risks by viewing the inherent uncertainties related to operations and 
supply chain management along two dimensions: (1) supply chain coordination risks that are 
associated with the day-to-day management of the supply chain, which are normally dealt 
Supply chain risk
The likelihood of a 
disruption that would 
impact the ability of a 
company to continuously 
supply products or 
services.

32	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
A factory building 
collapsed in Sukagawa 
city, Fukushima 
prefecture, in northern 
Japan on March 11, 2011. 
A massive 8.9-magnitude 
earthquake shook 
Japan, unleashing a 
powerful tsunami that 
sent ships crashing 
into the shore and 
carried cars through 
the streets of coastal 
towns.
© FUKUSHIMA MINPO/AFP/
Getty Images/Newscom
with using safety stock, safety lead time, overtime, and so on; and (2) disruption risks, which 
are caused by natural or manmade disasters, such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and terrorism.
In this section, our focus is on the concepts and tools that are useful for managing the 
problems related to disruption risks. The events related to these risks are highly random and 
virtually impossible to predict with any precision.
Other than the Japan earthquake and tsunami mentioned, the following are examples of the 
types of events this section relates to:
∙	 In 1996, General Motors experienced an 18-day labor strike at a brake supplier factory. 
This strike idled workers at 26 assembly plants and led to an estimated $900 million 
reduction in earnings.
∙	 In 1997, a Boeing supplier’s failure to deliver two critical parts led to a loss of $2.6 billion.
∙	 In 2000, a 10-minute fire at a Phillips plant that supplied integrated circuits led to a 
$400 million loss to the firm.
∙	 There are many other examples, including the 2010 Toyota recalls and the British 
Petroleum oil rig fire in the Gulf of Mexico.
Risk Management Framework
The nature of these types of risks lends them to a three-step risk management process that can 
be applied to situations where disruptions are possible. The three steps are as follows:
	1.	 Identify the sources of potential disruptions. Assessing a type of vulnerability is the 
first step in the risk management framework. These are highly situation dependent, but 
the focus should be on highly unlikely events that would cause a significant disruption 
to normal operations. Such types of events include: natural disasters, capacity failures, 
infrastructure failures (air traffic system), terrorists, supplier failure, labor actions, 
equipment failure, commodity price volatility, and military/civil conflict.
	2.	 Assess the potential impact of the risk. Here the goal is to quantify the probability and 
the potential impact of the risk. Depending on the specific incident, this assessment 
could be based on financial impact, environmental impact, ongoing business viability, 
brand image/reputation, potential human lives, and so on.
	3.	 Develop plans to mitigate the risk. A detailed strategy for minimizing the impact of 
the risk could take many different forms, depending on the nature of the problem.
Risk mapping involves assessment of the probability or relative frequency of an event against 
the aggregate severity of the loss. Depending on the evaluation, some risks might be deemed 
acceptable and the related costs considered a normal cost of doing business. In some cases, 

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
33
the firm may find it is possible to insure against the loss. There may be other cases where the 
potential loss is so great that the risk would need to be avoided altogether.
A matrix (see Exhibit 2.4) that maps risks against specific operations and supply chain 
strategies. The matrix helps to understand the impact of different types of supply chain dis-
ruptions when using specific operations and supply chain strategies. For example, the first 
column evaluates the impact of natural hazards. Here we see that sole sourcing, lean practices, 
and the use of distribution hubs can have a major impact on the firm.
Unfortunately, some of the most cost-effective strategies are also the most risky. It is 
important to keep this in mind as you consider each concept. Thus far in the book, we have not 
discussed specific operations and supply chain strategies, such as outsourcing and sole sourc-
ing. You will learn about these as we progress through the book.
Outsourcing
Sole sourcing
Lean
practices
Distribution
hubs
Natural/
manmade
disasters
Country
risks
Supplier
failure
Network
provider
failure
Regulatory
risk
Commodity
price risks
Logistics
failure
Inventory
risks
Quality
risks
High
impact
Moderate
impact
Risks
Risk Mitigation Strategy
Natural disaster (e.g., climate change, weather)
Contingency planning (alternate sites, etc.), insurance 
Country risks
Hedge currency, produce/source locally
Supplier failures
Use multiple suppliers
Network provider failure
Support redundant digital networks
Regulatory risk (e.g., licensing and regulation issues)
Up-front and continuing research; good legal advice, compliance
Commodity price risks
Multisource, commodity hedging
Logistics failure
Safety stock, detailed tracking and alternate suppliers
Inventory risks
Pool inventory, safety stock
Major quality failure
Carefully select and monitor suppliers
Loss of customers
Service/product innovation
Theft and vandalism
Insurance, security precautions, knowledge of likely risks, patent protection, etc.
Risk Mitigation Strategies
exhibit 2.4
Productivity is a common measure of how well a country, industry, or business unit is using 
its resources (or factors of production). Since operations and supply chain management 
focuses on making the best use of the resources available to a firm, productivity measurement 
is fundamental to understanding operations-related performance. In this section, we define 
various measures of productivity. Throughout the rest of the book, many other performance 
measures will be defined as they relate to the material.
PRODUCTIVITY MEASUREMENT
Evaluate productivity in 
operations and supply 
chain management.
LO 2–5
Productivity
A measure of how 
well resources are 
used.  According to 
Goldratt’s definition (see 
Chapter 23), all the actions 
that bring a company 
closer to its goals.

34	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Partial measure
​ Output 
______ 
Labor ​ or ​ Output 
______ 
Capital ​ or ​  Output 
________ 
Materials ​ or ​ Output 
______ 
Energy ​
Multifactor measure
​ 
Output 
 
_____________________ 
 
 
Labor + Capital + Energy ​ or  ​ 
Output 
 
______________________ 
 
 
Labor + Capital + Materials ​
Total measure
​ Output 
______ 
Inputs ​ or ​ Goods and services produced 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
All resources used 
​
Input and Output Production Data ($1,000)
Productivity Measure Examples
Output
Total measure
1.  Finished units 
$ 10,000
​ Total output 
 
_________ 
Total input ​  =  ​ 13, 500 
_____ 
15, 193 ​  =  0.89​​​​​
2.  Work in process

2,500
3.  Dividends

1,000
Multifactor measures:
   Total output
$ 13,500
​​​  Total output 
 
___________ 
 
Labor + Material ​  =  ​ 13, 500 
_____ 
3, 153 ​  =  4.28​
​​  Finished units 
 
_____________ 
 
Labor + Material ​  =  ​ 10, 000 
______ 
3, 153  ​  =  3.17​​​
Input
1.  Labor
$ 3,000
Partial measures:
2.  Material

153
3.  Capital
  10,000
​​ Total output 
 
__________ 
Energy 
​  =  ​ 13, 500 
______ 
540   ​  =  25   ​
4.  Energy

 540
5.  Other expenses

1,500
​​ Total output 
 
__________ 
Energy    ​  =  ​ 13, 500 
______ 
540  ​  =  25   ​
      Total input
$ 15,193
Examples of Productivity Measures
exhibit 2.5
Partial Measures of Productivity
Business
Productivity Measure
Restaurant
Customers (meals) per labor hour 
Retail store 
Sales per square foot 
Chicken farm 
Lb. of meat per lb. of feed 
Utility plant 
Kilowatt hours per ton of coal 
Paper mill 
Tons of paper per cord of wood 
In its broadest sense, productivity is defined as
	
​Productivity = ​ Outputs 
______ 
inputs  ​​
​​[​2.1​]​
To increase productivity, we want to make this ratio of outputs to inputs as large as practical.
Productivity is what we call a relative measure. In other words, to be meaningful, it needs to 
be compared with something else. For example, what can we learn from the fact that we oper-
ate a restaurant and that its productivity last week was 8.4 customers per labor hour? Nothing!
Productivity comparisons can be made in two ways. First, a company can compare itself to 
similar operations within its industry, or it can use industry data when such data are available 
(e.g., comparing productivity among the different stores in a franchise). Another approach is 
to measure productivity over time within the same operation. Here we would compare our 
productivity in one time period with that in the next.
As Exhibit 2.5 shows, productivity may be expressed as partial measures, multifactor mea-
sures, or total measures. If we are concerned with the ratio of some output to a single input, 
we have a partial productivity measure. If we want to look at the ratio of some output to a 
group of inputs (but not all inputs), we have a multifactor productivity measure. If we want to 
express the ratio of all outputs to all inputs, we can use a total factor measure of productivity 
to describe the productivity of an entire organization or even a nation.

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
35
A numerical example of productivity appears in Exhibit 2.5. The data reflect quantitative 
measures of input and output associated with the production of a certain product. Notice that 
for the multifactor and partial measures, it is not necessary to use total output as the numera-
tor. Often, it is desirable to create measures that represent productivity as it relates to some 
particular output of interest. Using Exhibit 2.5 as an example, total units might be the output 
of interest to a production control manager, whereas total output may be of key interest to 
the plant manager. This process of aggregation and disaggregation of productivity measures 
provides a means of shifting the level of the analysis to suit a variety of productivity measure-
ment and improvement needs.
Exhibit 2.5 shows all units in dollars. Often, however, management can better understand 
how the company is performing when units other than dollars are used. In these cases, only 
partial measures of productivity can be used, because we cannot combine dissimilar units 
such as labor hours and pounds of material. Examples of some commonly used partial mea-
sures of productivity are presented in Exhibit 2.5. Such partial measures of productivity give 
managers information in familiar units, allowing them to easily relate these measures to the 
actual operations.
Each summer, USA Today publishes annual reports of productivity gains by the largest 
U.S. firms. Productivity has been on the rise for many years now, which is very good for 
the economy. Productivity often increases in times of recession; as workers are fired, those 
remaining are expected to do more. Increases also come from technological advances. Think 
of what the tractor did for farm productivity.
Concept Connections
LO 2–1   Know what a sustainable business strategy is and how it relates to 
operations and supply chain management.
Summary
	∙	 A strategy that is sustainable needs to create value for 
the firm’s shareholders and stakeholders.
	∙	 The shareholders are equity owners in the company.
	∙	 The stakeholders are those individuals and organiza-
tions that are influenced by the actions of the firm.
	∙	 This view means that a firm’s strategy must focus not 
only on economic viability, but also on the environ-
mental and social impact of its actions.
Key Terms
Sustainability  The ability to meet current resource 
needs without compromising the ability of future  
generations to meet their needs.
Triple bottom line  A business strategy that includes 
social, economic, and environmental criteria.
LO 2–2   Define operations and supply chain strategy.
	∙	 This involves setting the broad policies of a firm and 
creating a plan for using that firm’s resources.
	∙	 The operations and supply chain strategy coordinates 
operational goals with those of the larger organization.
	∙	 A firm’s operational capabilities should match the chang-
ing product or service needs of the firm’s customers.
Major competitive dimensions that form the competitive 
position of a firm include:
	∙	 Cost
	∙	 Quality
	∙	 Delivery speed and reliability
	∙	 Changes in volume
	∙	 Flexibility and new-product introduction speed
	∙	 Other product-specific criteria
Usually there are trade-offs that occur relative to 
these competitive dimensions.
Summary

36	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Key Terms
Operations and supply chain strategy  The setting of broad 
policies and plans that will guide the use of the resources 
needed by the firm to implement its corporate strategy.
Operations effectiveness  Performing activities in a 
manner that best implements strategic priorities at mini-
mum cost.
Straddling  When a firm seeks to match what a com-
petitor is doing by adding new features, services, or 
technologies to existing activities. This often creates 
problems if trade-offs need to be made.
Order winners  One or more specific marketing-oriented 
dimensions that clearly differentiate a product from 
competing products.
Order qualifiers  Dimensions used to screen a product or 
service as a candidate for purchase.
LO 2–3   Explain how operations and supply chain strategies are implemented.
	∙	 Strategies are implemented through a set of activities designed to deliver products and services in a manner consistent 
with the firm’s overall business strategy.
Summary
Key Terms
Activity-system maps  Diagrams that show how a company’s strategy is delivered through a set of supporting activities.
LO 2–4   Understand why strategies have implications relative to business risk.
	∙	 Operations and supply chain strategies need to be 
evaluated relative to their riskiness.
	∙	 Supply chain disruptions are unplanned and unantici-
pated events that disrupt the normal flow of goods and 
materials.
	∙	 Risks can be categorized along two dimensions: sup-
ply chain coordination risks and disruption risks.
	∙	 A three-step risk management framework involves 
identifying the potential disruptions, assessing the 
potential impact of the risk, and developing plans to 
mitigate the risk.
Summary
Key Terms
Supply chain risk  The likelihood of a disruption that would impact the ability of a company to continuously supply 
products or services.
LO 2–5   Evaluate productivity in operations and supply chain management.
	∙	 Productivity measures are used to ensure that the firm 
makes the best use of its resources.
	∙	 Since these are relative measures, they are meaningful 
only if they are compared to something else. Often, 
the comparison is to another company.
Summary
Key Terms
Productivity  A measure of how well resources are used. 
According to Goldratt’s definition (see Chapter 23), all 
the actions that bring a company closer to its goals.
	
​​Productivity = ​ Outputs 
______ 
Inputs ​​​
​
​[2.1]​

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
37
Solved Problem
A furniture manufacturing company has provided the following data (units are $1,000). Com-
pare the labor, raw materials and supplies, and total productivity for the past two years.
LO2–5
Last Year
This Year
Output:
Sales value of production
$22,000
$35,000
Input:
Labor
10,000
15,000
Raw materials and supplies
8,000
12,500
Capital equipment depreciation
 700
1,200
Other
2,200
4,800
Last Year
This Year
Partial productivities
  Labor
2.20
2.33
  Raw materials and supplies
2.75
2.80
Total productivity
1.05
1.04
Solution
Discussion Questions
	1.	 What is meant by a triple bottom line strategy? Give an example of a company that has 
adopted this type of strategy.
	2.	 Find examples where companies have used features related to environmental sustainability 
to win new customers.
	3.	 What are the major priorities associated with operations and supply chain strategy? For 
each major priority, describe the unique characteristics of the market niche with which it is 
most compatible.
	4.	 Why does the proper operations and supply chain strategy keep changing for companies 
that are world-class competitors?
	5.	 What do the expressions order winner and order qualifiers mean? What was the order win-
ner for your last major purchase of a product or service?
	6.	 Pick a company that you are familiar with and describe its operations strategy and how it 
relates to winning customers. Describe specific activities used by the company that sup-
port the strategy (see Exhibit 2.3 for an example).
	7.	 At times in the past, the dollar showed relative weakness with respect to foreign curren-
cies such as the yen, euro, and pound. This stimulates exports. Why would long-term 
reliance on a lower-valued dollar be at best a short-term solution to the competitiveness 
problem?
	8.	 Identify an operations and supply chain–related disruption that recently impacted a com-
pany. What could the company have done to minimize the impact of this type of disruption 
prior to it occurring?
	9.	 What do we mean when we say productivity is a relative measure?
LO2–1
LO2–2
LO2–3
LO2–4
LO2–5
Objective Questions*
	1.	 Shell Oil Company’s motto “People, Planet and Profit” is a real-world implementation of 
what OSCM concept? (Answer in Appendix D)
	2.	 A firm’s strategy should describe how it intends to create and sustain value for what 
entities?
LO2–1
*Special thanks to Bill Ruck of Arizona State University for the problems in this section.

38	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	  3.	 What is the term used to describe individuals or organizations that are influenced by the 
actions of a firm?
	  4.	 How often should a company develop and refine the operations and supply chain 
strategy?
	  5.	 What is the term used to describe product attributes that attract certain customers and can 
be used to form the competitive position of a firm?
	  6.	 What are the two main competitive dimensions related to product delivery?
	  7.	 What are the two characteristics of a product or service that define quality?
	  8.	 What is the diagram that shows how a company’s strategy is delivered by a set of support-
ing activities?
	  9.	 In implementing supply chain strategy, a firm must minimize its total cost without com-
promising the needs of what group of people?
	10.	 What is defined as the likelihood of disruption that would impact the ability of a com-
pany to continuously supply products or services?
	11.	 What are risks caused by natural or manmade disasters, which are impossible to reliably 
predict, called?
	12.	 Match the following common risks with the appropriate mitigation strategy:
LO2–2
LO2–3
LO2–4
	13.	 What is the term used to describe the assessment of the probability of a negative event 
against the aggregate severity of the related loss?
	14.	 As operations manager, you are concerned about being able to meet sales requirements in 
the coming months. You have just been given the following production report:
LO2–5
      Find the average of the monthly productivity figures (units per machine hour).
	15.	 Sailmaster makes high-performance sails for competitive windsurfers. The following is 
information about the inputs and outputs for one model, the Windy 2000. Calculate the 
productivity in sales revenue/labor expense.
	16.	 Live Trap Corporation received the following data for its rodent cage production unit. 
Find the total productivity.
_____ Country risks
A.  Detailed tracking, alternate suppliers
_____ Regulatory risk
B.  Careful selection and monitoring of suppliers
_____ Logistics failure
C.  Contingency planning, insurance
_____ Natural disaster
D.  Good legal advice, compliance
_____ Major quality failure
E.  Currency hedging, local sourcing
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
Units produced
2,300
1,800
2,800
3,000
Hours per machine
325
200
400
320
Number of machines
3
5
4
4
Units sold
1,217
Sale price each
$1,700
Total labor hours
46,672
Wage rate
$12/hour
Total materials
$60,000
Total energy
$4,000
Output
Input
50,000 cages
Production time
620 labor hours
Sales price: $3.50 per unit
Wages
$7.50 per hour
Raw materials (total cost)
$30,000
Component parts (total cost)
$15,350

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
39
	17.	 Two types of cars (Deluxe and Limited) were produced by a car manufacturer last year. 
Quantities sold, price per unit, and labor hours follow. What is the labor productivity for each 
car? Explain the problem(s) associated with the labor productivity. (Answer in Appendix D)
U.S.
LDC
Sales (units)
100,000 
20,000
Labor (hours)
20,000 
15,000
Raw materials (currency)
$20,000 (US)
20,000 (FC)
Capital equipment (hours)
60,000 
5,000
	18.	 A U.S. manufacturing company operating a subsidiary in an LDC (less-developed coun-
try) shows the following results:
	a.	 Calculate partial labor and capital productivity figures for the parent and subsidiary. 
Do the results seem confusing?
	b.	 Compute the multifactor productivity figures for labor and capital together. Do the 
results make more sense?
	c.	 Calculate raw material productivity figures (units/$ where $1 = 10 units of the foreign 
currency). Explain why these figures might be greater in the subsidiary.
	19.	 Various financial data for the past two years follow. Calculate the total productivity mea-
sure and the partial measures for labor, capital, and raw materials for this company for 
both years. What do these measures tell you about this company?
Last Year
This Year
Output:
Sales
$200,000
$220,000
Input:
Labor
30,000
40,000
Raw materials
35,000
45,000
Energy
5,000
6,000
Capital
50,000
50,000
Other
2,000
3,000
	20.	 An electronics company makes communications devices for military contracts. The com-
pany just completed two contracts. The navy contract was for 2,300 devices and took 25 
workers two weeks (40 hours per week) to complete. The army contract was for 5,500 
devices that were produced by 35 workers in three weeks. On which contract were the 
workers more productive?
	21.	 A retail store had sales of $45,000 in April and $56,000 in May. The store employs eight 
full-time workers who work a 40-hour week. In April, the store also had seven part-time 
workers at 10 hours per week, and in May the store had nine part-timers at 15 hours per 
week (assume four weeks in each month). Using sales dollars as the measure of output, 
what is the percentage change in productivity from April to May?
	22.	 A parcel delivery company delivered 103,000 packages last year, when its average 
employment was 84 drivers. This year, the firm handled 112,000 deliveries with 96 driv-
ers. What was the percentage change in productivity over the past two years?
	23.	 A fast-food restaurant serves hamburgers, cheeseburgers, and chicken sandwiches. The res-
taurant counts a cheeseburger as equivalent to 1.25 hamburgers and chicken sandwiches as 
0.8 hamburger. Current employment is five full-time employees who each work a 40-hour 
week. If the restaurant sold 700 hamburgers, 900 cheeseburgers, and 500 chicken sand-
wiches in one week, what is its productivity? What would its productivity have been if it 
had sold the same number of sandwiches (2,100), but the mix was 700 of each type?
Quantity
$/Unit
Deluxe car
4,000 units sold
$8,000/car
Limited car
6,000 units sold
$9,500/car
Labor, Deluxe
20,000 hours
$12/hour
Labor, Limited
30,000 hours
$14/hour

40	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
“Timbuk2 is more than a bag. It’s more than a brand. 
Timbuk2 is a bond. To its owner, a Timbuk2 bag is a 
dependable, everyday companion. We see fierce, emo-
tional attachments form between Timbuk2 customers 
and their bags all the time. A well-worn Timbuk2 bag 
has a certain patina—the stains and scars of everyday 
urban adventures. Many Timbuk2 bags are worn daily 
for a decade or more, accompanying the owner through 
all sorts of defining life events. True to our legend of 
‘indestructibility,’ it’s not uncommon for a Timbuk2 bag 
to outlive jobs, personal relationships, even pets. This is 
the Tao of Timbuk2.”
What makes Timbuk2 so unique? Visit its website 
at www.timbuk2.com and see for yourself. Each bag is 
custom designed by the customer on its Website. After 
the customer selects the basic bag configuration and 
size, colors for each of the various panels are presented; 
various lines, logos, pockets, and straps can be selected 
so that the bag is tailored to the exact specifications of 
the customer. A quick click of the mouse and the bag is 
delivered directly to the customer in only two days. How 
does it do this?
This San Francisco–based company is known for 
producing high-quality custom and classic messenger 
bags according to the customer’s personally customized 
order, using a team of approximately 25 hardworking cut-
ters and sewers. Over the years, it has fine-tuned its plant’s 
production line to make it as efficient as possible, while 
producing the highest-quality messenger bags available.
The local manufacturing is focused on the custom 
messenger bag. For these bags, orders are taken over the 
Internet. The customers are given many configuration, 
size, color, pocket, and strap options. The bag is tailored 
to the exact specifications of the customer on the Tim-
buk2 assembly line in San Francisco and sent via over-
night delivery directly to the customer.
Recently, Timbuk2 has begun making some of its 
new products in China, which is a concern to some of 
its long-standing customers. The company argues that it 
has designed its new products to provide the best pos-
sible features, quality, and value at reasonable prices and 
stresses that these new products are still designed in San 
Francisco. Timbuk2 argues that the new bags are much 
more complex to build and require substantially more 
labor and a variety of very expensive machines to pro-
duce. It argues that the San Francisco factory labor cost 
alone would make the retail price absurdly high. After 
researching a dozen factories in China, Timbuk2 found 
one that it thinks is up to the task of producing these 
new bags. Much as in San Francisco, the China factory 
employs a team of hardworking craftspeople who earn 
good wages. Timbuk2 visits the China factory every four 
to eight weeks to ensure superior quality standards and 
working conditions are met.
On the Timbuk2 website, the company argues it has 
the same hardworking group of bag fanatics designing 
and making great bags, and supporting the local com-
munity and the increasingly competitive global market. 
Case: The Tao of Timbuk2*
* Special thanks to Kyle Cattani of Indiana University for this case.
© Kim Kulish/Corbis

	
Strategy	
Chapter 2 	
41
The company reports that demand is still strong for the 
custom messenger bags made in San Francisco and that 
the new laptop bags sourced from China are receiving 
rave reviews. The additional business is allowing it to 
hire more people in all departments at the San Francisco 
headquarters, creating even more jobs locally.
Questions
	1.	 Consider the two categories of products that 
Timbuk2 makes and sells. For the custom mes-
senger bag, what are the key competitive dimen-
sions that are driving sales? Is its competitive 
priorities different for the new laptop bags 
sourced in China?
	2.	 Compare the assembly line in China to that in 
San Francisco along the following dimensions: 
(1) volume or rate of production, (2) required 
skill of the workers, (3) level of automation, and 
(4) amount of raw materials and finished goods 
inventory.
	3.	 Draw two diagrams, one depicting the supply 
chain for those products sourced in China and the 
other depicting the bags produced in San Fran-
cisco. Show all the major steps, including raw 
material, manufacturing, finished goods, distribu-
tion inventory, and transportation. Other than man-
ufacturing cost, what other costs should Timbuk2 
consider when making the sourcing decision?
Practice Exam
In each of the following statements, name the term 
defined or the items requested. Answers are listed at the 
bottom.
	1.	 A strategy that is designed to meet current needs with-
out compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their needs.
	2.	 The three criteria included in a triple bottom line.
	3.	 The seven operations and supply chain competitive 
dimensions.
	4.	 It is probably most difficult to compete on this major 
competitive dimension.
	5.	 This occurs when a company seeks to match what 
a competitor is doing while maintaining its existing 
competitve position.
	6.	 A criterion that differentiates the products or services 
of one firm from those of another.
	7.	 A screening criterion that permits a firm’s products to 
be considered as possible candidates for purchase.
	8.	 A diagram showing the activities that support a com-
pany’s strategy.
	9.	 A measure calculated by taking the ratio of output to 
input.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Sustainable  2. Social, economic, environmental  3. Cost, quality, delivery speed, delivery reliability, coping with 
changes in demand, flexibility and speed of new product introduction, other product-specific criteria  4. Cost  5. Straddling  6. Order winner  7. Order 
qualifier  8. Activity-system map  9. Productivity

42
3
Design of 
Products and 
Services
Learning Objectives
	LO3–1	 Know the issues associated with product design and the typical processes used by 
companies.
	LO3–2	 Illustrate how different criteria can impact the design of a product.
	LO3–3	 Contrast how service products can have different design criteria compared to manufactured 
products.
	LO3–4	 Evaluate the economic impact of a new product on a company.
	LO3–5	 Illustrate how product development is measured in a company.
IDEO, A DESIGN AND INNOVATION FIRM
IDEO (pronounced “eye-dee-oh”) is the world’s most 
celebrated design and innovation consultancy. Its 
ultimate creation is the process of creativity itself. 
For co-founder David M. Kelley and his colleagues, 
work is play, brainstorming is a science, and the 
most important rule is to break the rules (www.ideo.
com).  The focus of the company is purely on the 
design of new products, services, and other interac-
tive experiences desired by customers.
The scope of work done by the company ranges 
from projects related to Smart Mobility with Ford Motor 
Company to the development of digital healthcare 
apps that give people the ability to track their mood, 
sleep, and breathlessness. Rather than thinking of 
design as a linear process requiring a set of steps, 
IDEO sees the process as overlapping thought spaces. 
These spaces are referred to as follows:
∙  Inspiration—the problem or opportunity that motivates the need for a new design;
∙  Ideation—where model prototypes, visual pictures, or quantitative analysis is 
done to test ideas;
∙  Implementation—where ideas are made into new products and services.
One of many collaborative 
design sessions in IDEO’s 
Munich office. 
Courtesy of IDEO

	
43
Know the issues 
associated with product 
design and typical 
processes used by 
companies.
LO 3–1
Human desirability, business viability, and technical feasibility are the basic tenets 
of the IDEO design thinking process, and innovation requires the integration of these 
tenets. One of IDEO’s early design projects was Apple Computer’s first mouse, a strik-
ing and beautiful design that has endured the test of time.
Designing new products and getting them to market quickly is the challenge facing manufactur-
ers in industries as diverse as computer chips and potato chips. Customers of computer chip 
manufacturers, such as computer companies, need ever-more-powerful semiconductors for 
their evolving product lines. Food producers need to provide their grocery store customers with 
new taste sensations to sustain or enlarge their retail market share. How manufactured products 
are designed and how the process to produce them is selected are the topics of this chapter.
PRODUCT DESIGN
Companies continuously bring new products to market as customer needs and wants change. 
Product design is integral to the success of many companies and differs significantly depend-
ing on the industry. For consumer products, understanding consumer preferences and mar-
ket testing prospective products are very important activities. For pharmaceuticals, extensive 
clinical tests are often required that involve carefully controlled experiments to test both the 
safety and the effectiveness of a potential product. Companies that specialize in the design 
of products have highly developed processes to support the activities needed for an industry.
In today’s world, companies often outsource major functions (such as product design) 
rather than support these functions in-house. Companies that specialize in designing and man-
ufacturing products for other companies have become very successful. The producing compa-
nies are called contract manufacturers, and they have become successful in industries such 
as electronic products, clothing, drugs, plastics, and custom manufacturing. A simple defini-
tion of a contract manufacturer is an organization that performs manufacturing and/or pur-
chasing needed to produce a product or device not for itself, but as a service to another firm.
The use of contract manufacturers has dramatically changed the way traditional manufac-
turing companies now operate. Depending on the situation, contract manufacturers will take 
various roles for a company. For example, in the automobile industry, contract manufacturers 
produce many of the parts and subassemblies, such as the seats and other interior parts, the 
headlight and taillight assemblies, and the electronic equipment such as radio/CD and GPS 
navigation systems. The actual automobiles are often built regionally in the countries where 
the products will be sold to reduce transportation cost and manage currency exchange risk. 
Close coordination is required to manage the network of assembly plants and contract manu-
facturing partners for success.
Given the potential advantages of using contract manufacturers for producing products and 
employing specialized design firms for designing their products, a firm must decide what its 
core competency should be. A company’s core competency is the one thing that it can do 
better than its competitors. A core competency can be anything from product design to sus-
tained dedication of a firm’s employees. The goal is to have a core competency that yields a 
long-term competitive advantage to the company.
As an example, consider Honda’s expertise in engines. Honda has been able to exploit this 
core competency to develop a variety of quality products, from lawn mowers and snow blow-
ers to trucks and automobiles. To take another example from the automotive industry, it has 
been claimed that Volvo’s core competency is safety.
A core competency has three characteristics:
	1.	 It provides potential access to a wide variety of markets.
	2.	 It increases perceived customer benefits.
	3.	 It is hard for competitors to imitate.
Contract manufacturer
An organization that 
performs manufacturing 
and/or purchasing needed 
to produce a product or 
device not for itself, but as 
a service to another firm.
Core competency
The one thing that a firm 
can do better than its 
competitors. The goal is to 
have a core competency 
that yields a long-term 
competitive advantage to 
the company.

44	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
A good example is Black & Decker, the U.S. manu-
facturer of tools. Black & Decker’s core technological 
competency is in 200- to 600-watt electric motors. All 
of its products are modifications of this basic technol-
ogy (with the exception of workbenches, flashlights, 
battery-charging systems, toaster ovens, and coffee 
percolators). The company produces products for three 
markets:
1.  The home workshop market.  In the home work-
shop market, small electric motors are used to pro-
duce drills, circular saws, sanders, routers, rotary 
tools, polishers, and drivers.
2.  The home cleaning and maintenance market.  In 
the home cleaning and maintenance market, small 
electric motors are used to produce handheld and full-size vacuum cleaners, hedge 
trimmers, edge trimmers, lawn mowers, leaf blowers, and pressure sprayers.
	3.	 The kitchen appliance market.  In the kitchen appliance market, small electric motors 
are used to produce can openers, food processors, blenders, breadmakers, and fans.
The real challenge for a firm is to decide exactly how the various functions critical to suc-
cess will be handled. At one extreme is the fully vertically integrated firm where all activities 
from the design to the fabrication of the individual parts are handled in-house. At the other 
extreme is a company that only sells products and outsources all the design and manufactur-
ing functions.
The following are a few examples of what some highly successful companies are doing:
∙∙
Apple Computer designs the iPhone but subcontracts the fabrication of these devices 
(while maintaining ownership of the intellectual property).
∙∙
Tesla Motors has developed an all electric car that has a range of 265 miles, the range 
of a typical gasoline powered car. In the past, electric cars were considered a big fire 
risk due to their large batteries. So Tesla developed small cylindrical batteries that 
are distributed to reduce the risk of fire. In addition, the new Tesla’s supercharging 
technology reduces the time required to recharge the battery to the point where soon it 
may take no longer to recharge a Tesla that it takes to fill the gasoline tank in a regu-
lar car. Tesla’s network of charging stations along major highways makes their cars 
practical for longer road trips. The company’s new innovations related to self-driving 
technology may totally change the way we think about automobile transportation in 
the future.   
∙∙
A pharmaceutical company may purchase information on genetic targets from a 
genomics company, contract with a specialist in combinatorial chemistry for rapid 
synthesis and screening of candidate compounds, and even utilize a contract research 
organization to conduct clinical trials but retain ownership of the intellectual prop-
erty (patents, experimental data, trademarks, etc.) of the drug that eventually comes 
to market.
Product Development Process
We begin by defining a generic product development process that describes the basic steps 
needed to design a product. This process represents the basic sequence of steps or activi-
ties that a firm employs to conceive, design, and bring a product to market. Many of these 
tasks involve intellectual rather than physical activities. Some firms define and follow a 
precise and detailed development process, while others may not even be able to describe 
their processes. Every organization employs a process that is different from that of every 
other organization; in fact, the same organization may follow different processes for differ-
ent product groups.
© Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg/Getty Images
© Victor J. Blue/Bloomberg via Getty Images

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
45
Phase 0: Planning
Phase 1:  
Concept  
Development
Phase 2: System-
Level Design
Phase 3:  
Detail  
Design
Phase 4: Testing 
and Refinement
Phase 5: 
Production 
Ramp-Up
Marketing
•  Articulate market 
opportunity.
•  Define market 
segments.
•  Collect customer 
needs.
•  Identify lead 
users.
•  Identify competi-
tive products.
•  Develop plan for 
product options 
and extended 
product family.
•  Set target sales 
price point(s).
•  Develop mar-
keting plan.
•  Develop 
promotion 
and launch 
materials.
•  Facilitate field 
testing.
•  Place early 
production 
with key 
customers.
Design
•  Consider product 
platform and 
architecture.
•  Assess new 
technologies.
•  Investigate feasi-
bility of product 
concepts.
•  Develop indus-
trial design 
concepts.
•  Build and test 
experimental 
prototypes.
•  Generate alter-
native product 
architectures.
•  Define major 
subsystems and 
interfaces.
•  Refine industrial 
design.
•  Define part 
geometry.
•  Choose 
materials.
•  Assign 
tolerances.
•  Complete 
industrial 
design control 
documentation.
•  Test perfor-
mance, life, 
and reliability.
•  Obtain regula-
tory approvals.
•  Implement 
design 
changes.
•  Evaluate early 
production 
output.
Manufacturing
•  Identify production 
constraints.
•  Set supply chain 
strategy.
•  Estimate manu-
facturing cost.
•  Assess produc-
tion feasibility.
•  Identify sup-
pliers for key 
components.
•  Perform make–
buy analysis.
•  Define final 
assembly 
scheme.
•  Set target costs.
•  Define piece-
part production 
processes.
•  Design tooling.
•  Define quality 
assurance 
processes.
•  Begin procure-
ment of long-
lead tooling.
•  Facilitate sup-
plier ramp-up.
•  Refine fab-
rication and 
assembly 
processes.
•  Train 
workforce.
•  Refine quality 
assurance 
processes.
•  Begin opera-
tion of entire 
production 
system.
Other Functions
•  Research: Dem-
onstrate available 
technologies.
•  Finance: Provide 
planning goals.
•  General Manage-
ment: Allocate 
project resources.
•  Finance: Facili-
tate economic 
analysis.
•  Legal: Inves-
tigate patent 
issues.
•  Finance: Facili-
tate make–buy 
analysis.
•  Service: Identify 
service issues.
•  Sales: Develop 
sales plan.
The Generic Product Development Process. Six phases are shown, including the tasks and 
responsibilities of the key functions of the organization for each phase.
exhibit 3.1
Our generic product development process consists of six phases, as illustrated in 
Exhibit 3.1. The process begins with a planning phase, which is the link to advanced research 
and technology development activities. The output of the planning phase is the project’s mis-
sion statement, which is the input required to begin the concept development phase and serves 
as a guide to the development team. The conclusion of the product development process is the 
product launch, at which time the product becomes available for purchase in the marketplace. 
Exhibit 3.1 identifies the key activities and responsibilities of the different functions of the 
firm during each development phase. Because of their continuous involvement in the process, 
we articulate the roles of marketing, design, and manufacturing. Representatives from other 
functions, such as research, finance, field service, and sales, also play key roles at points in 
the process.

46	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
The six phases of the generic development process are the following:
Phase 0: Planning.  The planning activity is often referred to as “phase zero” because it 
precedes the project approval and launch of the actual product development process. This 
phase begins with corporate strategy and includes assessment of technology developments 
and market objectives. The output of the planning phase is the project mission statement, 
which specifies the target market for the product, business goals, key assumptions, and 
constraints.
Phase 1: Concept development.   In this phase, the needs of the target market are identi-
fied, alternative product concepts are generated and evaluated, and one or more concepts 
are selected for further development and testing. A concept is a description of the form, 
function, and features of a product and is usually accompanied by a set of specifications, an 
analysis of competitive products, and an economic justification of the project.
Phase 2: System-level design.   The system-level design phase includes the definition of 
the product architecture and the decomposition of the product into subsystems and compo-
nents. The final assembly scheme (which we discuss later in the chapter) for the produc-
tion system is usually defined during this phase as well. The output of this phase usually 
includes a geometric layout of the product, a functional specification of each of the prod-
uct’s subsystems, and a preliminary process flow diagram for the final assembly process.
Phase 3: Detail design.   This phase includes the complete specification of the geometry, 
materials, and tolerances of all the unique parts in the product and the identification of 
all the standard parts to be purchased from suppliers. A process plan is established, and 
tooling is designed for each part to be fabricated within the production system. The output 
of this phase is the drawings or computer files describing the geometry of each part and 
its production tooling, the specifications of purchased parts, and the process plans for the 
fabrication and assembly of the product.
Phase 4: Testing and refinement.   The testing and refinement phase involves the con-
struction and evaluation of multiple preproduction versions of the product. Early proto-
types are usually built with parts with the same geometry and material properties as the 
production version of the product but not necessarily fabricated with the actual processes 
to be used in production. Prototypes are tested to determine whether the product will work 
as designed and whether the product satisfies customer needs.
Phase 5: Production ramp-up.   In the production ramp-up phase, the product is made 
using the intended production system. The purpose of the ramp-up is to train the workforce 
and to work out any remaining problems in the production processes. Products produced 
during production ramp-up are sometimes supplied to preferred customers and are care-
fully evaluated to identify any remaining flaws. The transition from production ramp-up 
to ongoing production is usually gradual. At some point in the transition, the product is 
launched and becomes available for widespread distribution.
The development process described in Exhibit 3.1 is generic, and particular processes will 
differ in accordance with a firm’s unique context. The generic process is most like the process 
used in a market-pull situation. This is when a firm begins product development with a market 
opportunity and then uses whatever available technologies are required to satisfy the market 
need (i.e., the market “pulls” the development decisions). In addition to the generic market-
pull processes, several variants are common and correspond to the following: technology-
push products, platform products, process-intensive products, customized products, high-risk 
products, quick-build products, and complex systems. Each of these situations is described 
below. The characteristics of these situations and the resulting deviations from the generic 
process are summarized in Exhibit 3.2.
T e c h n o l o g y- P u s h  P r o d u c t s   In developing technology-push products, a firm 
begins with a new proprietary technology and looks for an appropriate market in which to 
apply this technology (that is, the technology “pushes” development). Gore-Tex, an expanded 
Executing this 
development process 
within a firm is often 
organized using 
project management 
techniques. These 
techniques are 
described in the next 
chapter.
KEY IDEA

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
47
Toyota Hybrid HSD cutaway demonstration car at Paris Motor Show 2010. 
© Focus Technology/Alamy
Summary of Variants of Generic Product Development Process
exhibit 3.2
Teflon sheet manufactured by W. L. Gore 
& Associates, is a good example of tech-
nology push. The company has developed 
dozens of products incorporating Gore-
Tex, including artificial veins for vascular 
surgery, insulation for high-performance 
electric cables, fabric for outerwear, den-
tal floss, and liners for bagpipe bags.
P la t f or m  P r o d u c t s   A platform 
product is built around a preexisting tech-
nological subsystem (a technology plat-
form). Examples include the hybrid motor 
used in the Toyota Prius (as shown in the 
photo to the right), the Apple iOS operat-
ing system, and the video imaging system 
used in Canon cameras. Huge investments 
were made in developing these platforms, 
and therefore every attempt is made to 
Process Type
Description
Distinct Features
Examples
Generic (market-pull products)
The team begins with a 
market opportunity and 
selects appropriate tech-
nologies to meet customer 
needs
Process generally includes dis-
tinct planning, concept develop-
ment, system-level design, detail 
design, testing and refinement, 
and production ramp-up phases
Sporting goods, furniture, 
tools
Technology-push products
The team begins with a 
new technology, then finds 
an appropriate market
Planning phase involves matching 
technology and market; concept 
development assumes a given 
technology
Gore-Tex rainwear, Tyvek 
envelopes
Platform products
The team assumes that 
the new product will be 
built around an established 
technological subsystem
Concept development assumes a 
proven technology platform
Consumer electronics, 
­computers, printers
Process-intensive products
Characteristics of the prod-
uct are highly constrained 
by the production process
Either an existing production pro-
cess must be specified from the 
start or both product and process 
must be developed together from 
the start
Snack foods, breakfast 
cereals, chemicals, 
semiconductors
Customized products
New products are slight 
variations of existing 
configurations
Similarity of projects allows for a 
streamlined and highly structured 
development process
Motors, switches, batteries, 
containers
High-risk products
Technical or market uncer-
tainties create high risks of 
failure
Risks are identified early and 
tracked throughout the process; 
analysis and testing activities take 
place as early as possible
Pharmaceuticals, space 
systems
Quick-build products
Rapid modeling and 
prototyping enables many 
design-build-test cycles
Detail design and testing phases 
are repeated a number of times 
until the product is completed or 
time/budget runs out
Software, cellular phones
Complex systems
System must be decom-
posed into several 
subsystems and many 
components
Subsystems and components 
are developed by many teams 
working in parallel, followed by 
system integration and validation
Airplanes, jet engines, 
automobiles

48	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
incorporate them into several different products. In some sense, platform products are very 
similar to technology-push products in that the team begins the development effort with an 
assumption that the product concept will embody a particular technology. The primary differ-
ence is that a technology platform has already demonstrated its usefulness in the marketplace 
in meeting customer needs. The firm, in many cases, can assume that the technology also 
will be useful in related markets. Products built on technology platforms are much simpler to 
develop than if the technology were developed from scratch. For this reason, and because of 
the possible sharing of costs across several products, a firm may be able to offer a platform 
product in markets that could not justify the development of a unique technology.
P r o c e s s - I n t e n s i v e  P r o d u c t s   Examples of process-intensive products include 
semiconductors, foods, chemicals, and paper. For these products, the production process has 
an impact on properties of the product so that product design cannot be separated from the 
production process design. In many cases, process-intensive products are produced at very 
high volumes and are bulk, rather than discrete, goods. Often, the new product and new process 
are developed simultaneously. For example, creating a new shape of breakfast cereal or snack 
food requires both product and process development activities. In other cases, the existing 
process will constrain the product design by the capabilities of the process. This might be true 
of a new paper product to be made in a particular paper mill or a new semiconductor device to 
be made in an existing wafer fabrication facility, for example.
C u s t o m i z e d  P r o d u c t s  Customized products are slight variations of standard 
configurations and are typically developed in response to a specific order by a customer. 
Examples include switches, motors, batteries, and containers. Developing these products 
consists primarily of setting values of design variables such as physical dimensions and 
materials. Companies can become very good at quickly producing these custom products 
using a highly structured design and development process structured around the capabilities 
of the process to be used.
H i g h - R i s k  P r o d u c t s  High-risk products are those that entail unusually large 
uncertainties related to the technology or market so that there is substantial technical or 
market risk. The generic product development process is modified to face high-risk situations 
by taking steps to address the largest risks in the early stages of product development. This 
usually requires completing some design and test activities earlier in the process. For example, 
if there is high uncertainty related to the technical performance of the product, it makes sense 
to build working models of the key features and to test these earlier in the process. Multiple 
solution paths may be explored in parallel to ensure that one of the solutions succeeds. Design 
reviews must assess levels of risk on a regular basis, with the expectation that risk is being 
reduced over time and not postponed.
Q u i c k - B u i l d  P r o d u c t s  For the development of some products, such as software and 
many electronic products, building and testing prototype models has become such a rapid 
process that the design-build-test cycle can be repeated many times. Following concept 
development in this process, the system-level design phase entails decomposition of the 
product into high-, medium-, and low-priority features. This is followed by several cycles 
of design, build, integrate, and test activities, beginning with the highest-priority items. This 
process takes advantage of the fast prototyping cycle by using the result of each cycle to 
learn how to modify the priorities for the next cycle. Customers may even be involved in the 
testing process. When time or budget runs out, usually all of the high- and medium-priority 
features have been incorporated into the evolving product, and the low-priority features may 
be omitted until the next product generation.
C o m p l e x  S ys t e m s  Larger-scale products such as automobiles and airplanes are 
complex systems composed of many interacting subsystems and components. When developing 
complex systems, modifications to the generic product development process address a number 
The product 
development process 
needs to be adapted 
depending on 
market and product 
characteristics.
KEY IDEA

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
49
of system-level issues. The concept development phase considers the architecture of the entire 
system, and multiple architectures may be considered as competing concepts for the overall 
system. The system-level design becomes critical. During this phase, the system is decomposed 
into subsystems, and these are decomposed further into many components. Teams are assigned 
to develop each component. Additional teams are assigned the special challenge of integrating 
components into the subsystems, and then integrating these into the overall system. Detail 
design of the components is a highly parallel process, often referred to as concurrent 
engineering, with many separate development teams working at once. System engineering 
specialists manage the interactions across the components and subsystems. The testing and 
refinement phase includes not only system integration but extensive testing and validation of 
the product.
PRODUCT DESIGN CRITERIA
In this section, we illustrate how different criteria can impact the design of a product. The 
most fundamental criteria are those that relate directly to what the customer wants. Matching 
a product’s design with the desire of the target customer group is essential from a market-
ing view. Value is another criterion that we address in this section. This criterion involves 
designing the product so that it can be produced at a low cost while maintaining those features 
desired by the customer. Next, criteria related to the manufacturability of the product are 
essential to having a low-cost manufacturing process. Finally, we address the environmental 
impact of a product and how this relates to product design.
Designing for the Customer
Before we detail the hows and whys of designing and producing products, it is useful to reflect 
(or, perhaps more accurately, to editorialize) on the issue of product design from the user’s 
standpoint. In recent years, companies have been so caught up with technological efforts and 
advances—especially in the field of electronics—that somewhere along the line, consumers 
were forgotten. Designing for aesthetics and for the user is generally termed industrial design. 
IDEO is one of the most successful industrial design firms in the world. The unique concepts 
used at the company are described in the chapter’s opening vignette titled “IDEO, A Design 
and Innovation Firm.”
Concurrent 
engineering
Emphasizes cross-
functional integration and 
concurrent development 
of a product and its 
associated processes.
OSCM AT WORK
Google Virtual Reality Cardboard
The Google Cardboard is a simple cardboard viewer that is 
used with your smartphone so you can experience virtual 
reality. The simple $20 product was bought by over 5 mil-
lion people in less than a year. You can virtually travel to 
locations all over the world, even totally imaginary places. 
Special Cardboard apps like Chair In A Room, Vrse, Lamper 
VR: Firefly Rescue, Caaaaardboard!, and Proton Pulse allow 
you to better understand science and nature by putting you 
in the center of the action. The gadget is the winner of many 
design innovation awards.
© Thomas Samson/AFP/Getty Images RF
Illustrate how different 
criteria can impact the 
design of a product.
LO 3–2

50	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Q u a l i t y  F u n c t i o n  D e p l o y m e n t  One approach to getting the voice of the 
customer into the design specification of a product is quality function deployment 
(QFD). This approach, which uses interfunctional teams from marketing, design engineering, 
and manufacturing, has been credited by Toyota Motor Corporation for reducing costs on its 
cars by more than 60 percent by significantly shortening design times.
The QFD process begins with studying and listening to customers to determine the char-
acteristics of a superior product. Through market research, the consumers’ product needs and 
preferences are defined and broken down into categories called customer requirements. One 
example is an auto manufacturer that would like to improve the design of a car door. Through 
customer surveys and interviews, it determines that two important customer requirements in 
a car door are that it “stays open on a hill” and is “easy to close from the outside.” After the 
customer requirements are defined, they are weighted based on their relative importance to 
the customer. Next, the consumer is asked to compare and rate the company’s products with 
the products of competitors. This process helps the company determine the product char-
acteristics that are important to the consumer and to evaluate its product in relation to oth-
ers. The end result is a better understanding and focus on product characteristics that require 
improvement.
Quality function 
deployment (QFD) 
A process that helps a 
company determine the 
product characteristics 
important to the consumer 
and to evaluate its own 
product in relation to 
others.
QFD involves converting 
the expectations and 
demands of customers 
into clear objectives, 
which are then 
translated into vehicle 
specifications. For 
example, TopSpeed found 
that passengers became 
uncomfortable if the 
car rolled more than 
two degrees and side 
acceleration exceeded 
13.2 feet per second 
squared. These data 
were used to help define 
design criteria for the 
chassis engineers.
Courtesy of Topspeed.com/
Ford Images
Customer requirement information forms the basis for a matrix called the house of ­quality 
(see Exhibit 3.3). By building a house of quality matrix, the cross-functional QFD team can 
use customer feedback to make engineering, marketing, and design decisions. The matrix 
helps the team translate customer requirements into concrete operating or engineering goals. 
The important product characteristics and goals for improvement are jointly agreed on and 
detailed in the house. This process encourages the different departments to work closely 
together, and it results in a better understanding of one another’s goals and issues. However, 
the most important benefit of the house of quality is that it helps the team focus on building a 
product that satisfies customers.
The first step in building the house of quality is to develop a list of customer requirements 
for the product. These requirements should be ranked in order of importance. Customers are 
then asked to compare the company’s product to the competition. Next, a set of technical char-
acteristics of the product is developed. These technical characteristics should relate directly 
to customer requirements. An evaluation of these characteristics should support or refute 
House of quality
A matrix that helps a 
product design team 
translate customer 
requirements into 
operating and engineering 
goals.

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
51
Completed House of Quality Matrix for a Car Door
exhibit 3.3
customer perception of the product. These data are then used to evaluate the strengths and 
weaknesses of the product in terms of technical characteristics.
Value Analysis/Value Engineering
Another way to consider customers in designing products is by analyzing the “value” they see 
in the end product. Because it is so important that value be designed into products, we briefly 
describe value analysis and value engineering. The purpose of value analysis/value 
­engineering (VA/VE) is to simplify products and processes. Its objective is to achieve equiva-
lent or better performance at a lower cost while maintaining all functional requirements 
defined by the customer. VA/VE does this by identifying and eliminating unnecessary cost. 
Technically, VA deals with products already in production and is used to analyze product 
specifications and requirements as shown in production documents and purchase requests. 
Typically, purchasing departments use VA as a cost reduction technique. Performed before the 
production stage, value engineering is considered a cost-avoidance method. In practice, how-
ever, there is a looping back and forth between the two for a given product. This occurs because 
new materials, processes, and so forth require the application of VA techniques to products 
Value analysis/value 
engineering (VA/VE)
Analysis with the purpose 
of simplifying products and 
processes by achieving 
equivalent or better 
performance at a lower 
cost.
Correlation:
Strong positive
Positive 
Negative 
Strong negative
Customer 
requirements
Importance to customer
Technical 
characteristics
Energy needed to
open door
Door seal 
resistance
Check force on level 
ground
Energy needed to 
close door
Acoustic 
transmission, window
Water resistance
Competitive 
evaluation
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Importance weighting
Target values
7 
5 
3 
3 
2
6 
6 
9 
2 
3
AB
AB
A
B
AB
A
B
Importance scale:
= 9 
= 3 
= 1
Reduce energy 
level to 7.5 ft/lb
Maintain current 
level
Reduce force to 
9 lb.
Reduce energy to 
7.5 ft/lb
Maintain
current level
Maintain
current level
5 
4 
3 
2 
1
B
A
BA
B 
A
B A
BA
B
A
X
X
X
X = Us
A = Comp. A
B = Comp. B
(5 is best)
Easy to close
Stays open on a hill
Easy to open
Doesn't leak in rain
No road noise
10
Technical evaluation
(5 is best)
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Strong 
Medium 
Small

52	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
that have previously undergone VE. The VA/VE analysis approach involves brainstorming 
such questions as:
∙∙
Does the item have any design features that are not necessary?
∙∙
Can two or more parts be combined into one?
∙∙
How can we cut down the weight?
∙∙
Can any nonstandard parts be eliminated?
In the following section, we describe a more formal approach that is often used to guide the 
process of designing and improving the design of products.
Designing Products for Manufacture and Assembly
The word design has many different meanings. To some, it means the aesthetic design of a 
product, such as the external shape of a car or the color, texture, and shape of the casing of a 
can opener. In another sense, design can mean establishing the basic parameters of a system. 
For example, before considering any details, the design of a power plant might mean estab-
lishing the characteristics of the various units such as generators, pumps, boilers, connecting 
pipes, and so forth.
Yet another interpretation of the word design 
is the detailing of the materials, shapes, and toler-
ance of the individual parts of a product. This is 
the concern of this section. It is an activity that 
starts with sketches of parts and assemblies and 
then progresses to the computer-aided design 
(CAD) workstation (described in Appendix B on 
Operations Technology), where assembly draw-
ings and detailed part drawings are produced. 
Traditionally, these drawings are then passed 
to the manufacturing and assembly engineers, 
whose job it is to optimize the processes used 
to produce the final product. Frequently, at this 
stage manufacturing and assembly problems are 
encountered and requests are made for design 
changes. Often, these design changes are major 
and result in considerable additional expense and 
delays in the final product release.
Traditionally, the attitude of designers has 
been “We design it; you build it.” This has now 
been termed the “over-the-wall approach,” where 
the designer is sitting on one side of the wall and throwing the design over the wall to the 
manufacturing engineers. These manufacturing engineers then have to deal with the prob-
lems that arise because they were not involved in the design effort. One way to overcome 
this problem is to consult the manufacturing engineers during the design stage. The resulting 
teamwork avoids many of the problems that will arise. These concurrent engineering teams 
require analysis tools to help them study proposed designs and evaluate them from the point 
of view of manufacturing difficulty and cost.
H o w  D o e s  De s i g n  f o r  M a n u f a c t u r i n g  a n d  A s s e m b ly  (D F M A ) 
W o r k ?  Let’s follow an example from the conceptual design stage. Exhibit 3.4 represents 
a motor drive assembly that is required to sense and control its position on two steel guide 
rails. This might be the motor that controls a power window in a drive-through window at 
McDonald’s, for example. The motor must be fully enclosed and have a removable cover for 
access to adjust the position sensor. A major requirement is a rigid base designed to slide up 
and down the guide rails, which will both support the motor and locate the sensor. The motor 
and sensor have wires connecting to a power supply and control unit.
CAD designer working at computer monitors in office.
 © Monty Rakusen/Getty Images RF
QFD and VA/VE are 
intended to ensure 
that what the customer 
wants is considered in 
the design of a product.
KEY IDEA
DFMA is oriented 
toward the 
engineering of the 
product with an 
emphasis on reducing 
production cost.
KEY IDEA

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
53
A proposed solution is shown in Exhibit 3.5. The base has two bushing inserts so that the 
holes will not wear out. The motor is secured to the base with two screws, and a hole accepts 
the cylindrical sensor, which is held in place with a set screw. To provide the required covers, 
an end plate is screwed to two stand-offs, which are screwed into the base. To keep the wires 
from shorting out on the metal cover, should they become worn, a plastic bushing is fitted to 
the end plate, through which the wires pass. Finally, a box-shaped cover slides over the whole 
assembly from below the base and is held in place by four screws, two passing into the base 
and two passing into the end cover.
3.25"
Attached to 
screw drive
Guide rails 
Connecting wires 
Motor-driven
assembly inside
cover
Controlled
 gap
Configuration of Required Motor Drive Assembly
exhibit 3.4
Cover 16-gauge
steel, painted
soldered seams
4.5 × 2.75 × 24
Cover screw (4)
0.12 dia × 0.3
Bush (2)
brass, impregnated
powder metal
0.5 dia × 0.8
Motor
2.75 dia × 4.75
Plastic bushing
0.7 dia × 0.4
End plate
l.c. steel, painted
4.5 × 2.5 × 1.3
Motor screw (2)
0.2 dia × 0.6
Set screw
0.06 × 0.12
Base
aluminum, machined
4 × 21.2 × 1
Sensor
0.187 × 1
Stand-off (2)
l.c. steel, machined
0.5 dia × 2
End plate screw (2)
0.2 dia × 0.5
Proposed Motor Drive Design
exhibit 3.5

54	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
The current design has 19 parts that must be assembled to make the motor drive. These parts 
consist of the two subassemblies—the motor and the sensor—an additional eight main parts 
(cover, base, two bushings, two stand-offs, a plastic bushing, and the end plate), and nine screws.
The greatest improvements related to DFMA arise from simplification of the product by 
reducing the number of separate parts. In order to guide the designer in reducing the part 
count, the methodology provides three criteria against which each part must be examined as it 
is added to the product during assembly:
	1.	 During the operation of the product, does the part move relative to all other parts 
already assembled?
	2.	 Must the part be of a different material than, or be isolated from, other parts already 
assembled?
	3.	 Must the part be separate from all other parts to allow the disassembly of the product 
for adjustment or maintenance?
Application of these criteria to the proposed design would proceed as follows:
	  1.	 Base.   Because this is the first part to be assembled, there are no other parts with 
which to combine, so it is theoretically a necessary part.
	  2.	 Bushings (2).   These do not satisfy the second criterion. Theoretically, the base and 
bushings could be of the same material.
	  3.	 Motor.   The motor is a subassembly purchased from a supplier. The criteria do not 
apply.
	  4.	 Motor screws (2).   In most cases, separate fasteners are not needed, because a fas-
tening arrangement integral to the design (for example, snapping the part into place) 
is usually possible.
	  5.	 Sensor.   This is another standard subassembly.
	  6.	 Set screw.   Similar to 4, this should not be necessary.
	  7.	 Standoffs (2).   These do not meet the second criterion; they could be incorporated 
into the base.
  	8.	 End plate.   This must be separate to allow disassembly (apply criterion three).
	  9.	 End plate screws (2).   These should not be necessary.
	10.	 Plastic bushing.   Could be of the same material as, and therefore combined with, 
the end plate.
	11.	 Cover.   Could be combined with the end plate.
	12.	 Cover screws (4).   Not necessary.
From this analysis, it can be seen that if the motor and sensor subassemblies could be 
arranged to snap or screw into the base, and if a plastic cover could be designed to snap on, 
only 4 separate items would be needed instead of 19. These four items represent the theoreti-
cal minimum number needed to satisfy the constraints of the product design.
At this point, it is up to the design team to justify why the parts above the minimum should 
be included. Justification may be based on practical, technical, or economic considerations. 
In this example, it could be argued that two screws are needed to secure the motor and that 
one set screw is needed to hold the sensor, because any alternatives would be impractical for 
a low-volume product such as this. However, the design of these screws could be improved by 
providing them with pilot points to facilitate assembly.
Exhibit 3.6 is a drawing of a redesigned motor drive assembly that uses only seven separate 
parts. Notice how the parts have been eliminated. The new plastic cover is designed to snap on 
to the base plate. This new product is much simpler to assemble and should be much less 
expensive due to the reduced number of parts.
Ecodesign  Ecodesign is the incorporation of environmental considerations in the design 
and development of products or services. Ecodesign is an extension of the other important 
Ecodesign
The incorporation 
of environmental 
considerations into the 
design and development 
of products or services. 
These concerns relate 
to the entire life cycle, 
including materials, 
manufacturing, distribution, 
and the eventual disposal 
of waste.

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
55
requirements considered in the design process such as quality, 
costs, manufacturability, functionality, durability, ergonomics, and 
aesthetics. As a result, ecodesigned products are innovative, have 
better environmental performance, and are of a quality at least equal 
to the market standard. This makes the use of ecodesign increasingly 
important for business and leads to clear advantages for those 
companies incorporating ecodesign. Ecodesign adopts an integrated 
approach to the relationship between products and services and the 
environment on three levels:
∙∙
The whole life cycle of the product or service is considered. 
The environmental impacts of a product arise not only during 
its manufacturing and use or when it has become waste, but 
throughout its entire life cycle. It includes the extraction and 
transport of resources needed to manufacture the product, the 
manufacturing processes, distribution, use and maintenance, 
reuse, and the treatment of its waste.
∙∙
The product is considered as a system. All the elements needed 
to develop the product’s function (consumables, packaging, 
energy networks) must also be taken into account.
∙∙
A multicriteria approach is considered. All different environ-
mental impacts that can be generated by a product system along 
its life cycle are assessed in order to avoid trade-offs between 
different impact categories (for example, resource depletion, 
greenhouse effect, and toxicity).
The application of ecodesign can benefit business, users, and soci-
ety at the same time because it responds to the common interest of 
obtaining more efficient products in an economic as well as envi-
ronmental dimension. The producer manufactures a product using 
fewer materials; using less water, energy, and so on; and generating 
less waste to be managed. Consequently, the manufacturing costs are 
reduced. The user buys a more reliable and durable product that will 
need less energy or consumables to function and can be easily repaired when necessary. Soci-
ety will benefit by increasing the future availability of resources for other products or services 
and by preventing possible environmental damage, thereby saving any corresponding treat-
ment or remediation costs.
Redesign of Motor Drive Assembly Following Design for Assembly 
(DFA) Analysis
exhibit 3.6
BioBag biodegradable and compostable plastic 
bags on a roll are used for carrying produce at 
Berkeley’s Farmers’ Market. Text on the bag says 
"This Bag Is Certified Compostable. Use, Reuse, Then 
Compost." Ecology Center’s Berkeley Farmers’ 
Market prides itself on being a "Zero Waste Zone" 
and prohibiting genetically modified foods.
© Green Stock Media/Alamy

56	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
In addition, European regulations recognize and emphasize producers’ responsibility in 
minimizing the environmental impacts of their products and services. Ecodesign can help 
producers to manage that responsibility and comply with product-related legislation.
As we saw in the last section, the detailed design of manufactured products is focused on 
reducing the number of parts in the item and designing the item in such a way that it can be 
efficiently produced. Service products are very different because direct customer involvement 
in the process introduces significant variability in the process in terms of both the time that it 
takes to serve a customer and the level of knowledge required of the firm’s employees. Ques-
tions that should be addressed in the design of a service include: How will this variability 
be addressed? and What are the implications for operational cost and the customer service 
experience?
An important issue when developing a new service or changing an existing one is the ques-
tion of how different the new service is compared to the current services offered by the firm. 
Here are three general factors to consider when determining this:
	1.	 Similarity to current services.   This means that the new service should fit into the 
current service experience for the customer. For example, Disneyland has started 
positioning employees with cameras around the park at memorable locations offer-
ing to take pictures of visitors that can be viewed online later. As a part of the greater 
service experience of making dreams come true and recording them, this has a good 
service experience fit. However, some services, like a car wash with a restaurant in 
the waiting area, are less complementary.
2.  Similarity to current processes.   Even the greatest service 
ideas require operational support to execute. One example of 
this is when grocery stores decided to offer home delivery. Even 
though this seemed like a logical extension of the service expe-
rience, it required completely new operational skills, such as 
selecting perishables for customers and delivering frozen foods.
3.  Financial justification.   Designing and implementing a new 
service is costly and should be financially justified. Although 
this is often thought of in a positive sense of making a profit, it 
can just as well be introducing a new service in order to keep 
from losing valued customers.
C o m p l e x i t y  a n d  D i v e r g e n c e  A useful way of analyzing 
the process similarity for new service development is by specifying 
the complexity and divergence of the proposed service process 
relative to the basic service process. Complexity is the number 
of steps involved in a service and the possible actions that can be 
taken at each step. Divergence is the number of ways a customer/
service provider interaction can vary at each step according to the 
needs and abilities of each. The result may be a combination of 
higher complexity/divergence on some steps and lower complexity/
divergence on others. This can be used to determine different resource 
requirements such as worker skills, layout, and process controls. For 
example, the hypothetical family restaurant considered in Exhibit 3.7 
is considering whether to change the service to create a new process 
format. Relative to the current process, a minimum service format 
would have lower complexity/divergence, while an upscale format 
would have higher complexity/divergence.
DESIGNING SERVICE PRODUCTS
Contrast how service 
products can have different 
design criteria compared 
to manufactured products.
LO 3–3
Guests have their autograph books signed and 
pictures taken with Mickey Mouse at Walt Disney 
World’s Magic Kingdom in Lake Buena Vista, 
Florida.
© imagebroker/Alamy

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
57
Process Name
Lower Complexity / 
Divergence
Current Process
Higher Complexity / Divergence
Reservations
No reservations
Take reservation
Specific table selection
Seating
Guests seat themselves
Host shows guests 
the table
Maitre d escorts guests to seats, pulls out 
chairs, and places napkins in their laps
Menus
No menu
Menus on the table
Recite menu; describe entrees and specials
Bread
No bread offered at the 
table
Serve bread and 
butter
Assortment of hot breads and hors  
d’oeuvres
Ordering
Guests select their food 
from buffet line
Take orders
At table; taken personally by maitre d
Salads
Salad bar
Prepare orders
Individually prepared at table
Entrees
Entrees offered on the 
buffet
Entree (15 choices)
Expand to 20 choices; add flaming or sizzling 
dishes, deboning fish at the table
Desserts
Dessert bar
Dessert (6 choices)
Expand to 12 choices
Beverages
Guests get their drinks from 
the drink station
Beverage (6 
choices)
Add exotic coffees, wine list, liqueurs
Service during the meal
No service
Serve orders
Separate-course service; hand-grind pepper
Payment
Paid at entry to buffet
Collect payment
Choice of payment, including house 
accounts
Table clearing
Guests are asked to clear 
the table themselves
Table attendant 
clears table at the 
end
Table attendant clears table throughout the 
meal
Process Alternatives for a Family Restaurant
exhibit 3.7
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF PRODUCT  
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Consider the case of a product development team in the midst of developing a new photo-
graph printer, the CI-700. The CI-700 would produce large-scale, full-color pictures from 
digital images. The primary markets for the product are the graphic arts, insurance, and real 
estate industries. During the CI-700’s development, the team faces several decisions that it 
knows could have a significant impact on the product’s profitability:
∙∙
Should the team take more time for development in order to make the product available 
on multiple computer “platforms,” or would a delay in bringing the CI-700 to market 
be too costly?
∙∙
Should the product use proprietary print media or commonly available premium-­
quality print media?
∙∙
Should the team increase development spending in order to increase the reliability of 
the CI-700?
It is important to remember that economic analysis can capture only those factors that are mea-
surable and that projects often have both positive and negative implications that are difficult to 
quantify. Also, it is difficult for an economic analysis to capture the characteristics of a dynamic 
and competitive environment. Economic analysis is useful in at least two different circumstances:
	1.	 Go/no-go milestones. For example: Should we try to develop a product to address a 
new market opportunity? Should we proceed with the implementation of a selected 
concept? Should we launch the product we have developed? These decisions typi-
cally arise at the end of each phase of development.
Evaluate the economic 
impact of a new product on 
a company
LO 3–4

58	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	2.	 Operational design and development decisions. Operational decisions involve ques-
tions such as: Should we spend $100,000 to hire an outside firm to develop this 
component in order to save two months of development time? Should we launch the 
product in four months at a unit cost of $450 or wait six months, when we can reduce 
the cost to $400?
We recommend that a base-case financial model be initially built to understand the finan-
cial implications of a product development project. In the following, we describe how to con-
struct this model.
Build a Base-Case Financial Model
Constructing the base-case model consists of estimating the timing and magnitude of future 
cash flows and then computing the net present value (NPV) of those cash flows. The timing 
and magnitude of the cash flows are estimated by merging the project schedule with the proj-
ect budget, sales volume forecasts, and estimated production costs. The level of detail of cash 
flows should be coarse enough to be convenient to work with, yet contain enough detail to 
facilitate effective decision making. The most basic categories of cash flow for a typical new 
product development project are:
∙∙
Development cost (all remaining design, testing, and refinement costs up to production 
ramp-up)
∙∙
Ramp-up cost
∙∙
Marketing and support cost
∙∙
Production cost
∙∙
Sales revenue
The financial model we use is simplified to include only the major cash flows that are typi-
cally used in practice, but conceptually it is identical to more complex models. The numerical 
values of the cash flows come from budgets and other estimates obtained from the develop-
ment team, the manufacturing organization, and the marketing organization. We will illustrate 
the approach by using data similar to what might have been used by the Canon team develop-
ing the CI-700.
The following are cost estimates that we will use for our sample model:
In developing these 
models, it is best to 
start with a simple 
model and then expand 
the analysis if needed.
KEY IDEA
Development cost
$5 million
Ramp-up cost
$2 million
Marketing and support cost
$1 million/year
Unit production cost
$400/unit
Sales and production volume
20,000 units/year
Unit price
$800/unit
For our model, we assume that all revenue and expenses that have occurred prior to today are 
sunk costs and are irrelevant to NPV calculations. For those of you not familiar with NPV 
calculations, see Appendix C at the end of the book.
To complete the model, the financial estimates must be merged with timing information. 
This can be done by considering the project schedule and sales plan. Exhibit 3.8 shows the 
project timing information in Gantt chart form for the CI-700. For most projects, a time incre-
ment of months or quarters is most appropriate. The remaining time to market is estimated to 
be 5 quarters, and the product sales are anticipated to last 11 quarters.
A simple method of organizing project cash flow is with a spreadsheet. The rows of the 
spreadsheet are the different cash flow categories, while the columns represent successive 
time periods. To keep things simple, we assume that the rate of cash flow for any category is 
constant across any time period. For example, total development spending of $5 million over 
one year is allocated equally to each of the four quarters. In practice, of course, the values can 
In this section, we 
assume you have 
done this type of 
analysis before. If you 
are not familiar with 
this analysis process, 
you should study 
Appendix C to learn 
how it works.
KEY IDEA

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
59
be arranged in any way that best represents the team’s forecast of the cash flows. We multiply 
the unit sales quantity by the unit price to find the total product revenues in each period. We 
also multiply the unit production quantity by the unit production cost to find the total produc-
tion cost in each period. Exhibit 3.9 illustrates the resulting spreadsheet.
Computing the NPV requires that the net cash flow for each period be determined, and then 
that this cash flow be converted to its present value (its value in today’s dollars), as shown in the 
last few rows of Exhibit 3.10. Consider, for example, the calculations for year 3, first quarter:
	1.	 The period cash flow is the sum of inflows and outflows. 
CI-700 Project Schedule from Inception through Market Withdrawal
exhibit 3.8
Marketing cost
−$   250,000
Product revenues
4,000,000
Production cost
  − 2,000,000
Period cash flow
$ 1,750,000
	2.	 The present value of this period cash flow discounted at 10 percent per year (2.5 
percent per quarter) back to the first quarter of year 1 (a total of nine quarters) is 
$1,401,275. (The concepts and spreadsheet functions for calculating present value, 
net present value, and discount rate are reviewed in Appendix C.) 
​ $1, 750, 000 
_________ 
​1.025​ 9​ 
​   =  $1, 401, 275​
	3.	 The project NPV is the sum of the discounted cash flows for each of the periods, or 
$8,002,819. (Note that in the spreadsheet we have rounded the numbers to the nearest 
$1,000.)
Merging the Project Financials and Schedule into a Cash Flow Report
exhibit 3.9

60	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
The NPV of this project, according to the base-case model, is positive, so the model sup-
ports and is consistent with the decision to proceed with development. Such modeling also 
can be used to support major investment decisions. Say, for example, the development team 
was deciding between two different production facilities with different ramp-up, production, 
and support costs. The team could develop a model for each of the two scenarios and then 
compare the NPVs. The scenario with the higher NPV would better support the investment 
decision. We now consider sensitivity analysis as a technique for studying multiple scenarios 
for ongoing product development decisions.
Sensitivity Analysis to Understand Project Trade-Offs
Sensitivity analysis uses the financial model to answer “what if” questions by calculating the 
change in NPV corresponding to a change in the factors included in the model. As an exam-
ple, consider the sensitivity of NPV to changes in development cost. By making incremental 
changes to development cost while holding other factors constant, we can see the incremental 
impact on project NPV. For example, what will be the change in NPV if the development cost 
is decreased by 20 percent? A 20 percent decrease would lower the total development spend-
ing from $5 million to $4 million. If development time remains one year, then the spending 
per quarter would decrease from $1.25 million to $1 million. This change is simply entered in 
the model, and the resulting NPV is calculated.
A 20 percent decrease in development cost will increase NPV to $9,167,000. This rep-
resents a dollar increase of $964,000 and a percentage increase of 11.8 in NPV. This is an 
extremely simple case: We assume we can achieve the same project goals by spending $1 
million less on development, and we therefore have increased the project value by the present 
value of $1 million in savings accrued over a one-year period of time. The CI-700 develop-
ment cost sensitivity analysis for a range of changes is shown in Exhibit 3.10.
Many other scenarios can be developed for the project, including the following:
	1.	 Project development time.   Consider the impact of a 25 percent increase in the proj-
ect development time. This would raise the development time from four to five quarters 
and delay the start of the production ramp-up, marketing efforts, and product sales.
	2.	 Sales volume.   Increasing sales is a powerful way to increase profit. Of course, a 
decrease in sales can result in significant loss. Consider, for example, the impact of a 
25 percent increase and a 25 percent decrease on the profitability of the new product.
	3.	 Product cost or sales price.   Consider that a $1 increase in price or a $1 decrease in cost 
results in a $1 increase in profit. Of course, the $1 increase in price may have a significant 
impact on demand. Scenarios relating to these parameters are often useful to study.
	4.	 Development cost.   A dollar spent or saved on development cost is worth the pres-
ent value of that dollar to the value of the project.
Change in
 Development
 Cost (%)
Development Cost
 ($ thousands)
Change in
 Development Cost
 ($ thousands)
Change in
 NPV (%)
NPV
($ thousands)
Change
 in NPV
 ($ thousands)
            50
7,500
      2,500
−29.4
  5,793
−2,410
            20
6,000
      1,000
−11.8
  7,239
  −964
            10
5,500
         500
  −5.9
  7,721
  −482
Base case
5,000
Base case
     0.0
  8,203
        0
         −10
4,500
       −500
     5.9
  8,685
    482
         −20
4,000
     −1,000
   11.8
  9,167
    964
         −30
2,500
     −2,500
   29.4
10,613
  2,410
CI-700 Development Cost Sensitivity
exhibit 3.10
Some companies 
call this “what if” 
analysis. Answering 
these “what if” 
questions can be useful 
for understanding how 
sensitive an analysis 
is to cost and profit 
assumptions.
KEY IDEA

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
61
Financial modeling and sensitivity analysis are powerful tools for supporting prod-
uct development decisions, but these techniques have important limitations. Many argue 
that rigorous financial analyses are required to bring discipline and control to the prod-
uct development process. Others argue that financial analysis only focuses on measurable 
quantities and that it is often extremely difficult to predict these values accurately. The 
analysis is only as good as the assumptions built into the model, so these limitations must 
be considered. Then there are those that argue, perhaps more significantly, that activities 
associated with economic modeling can be very expensive and may significantly reduce 
the productivity associated with the real product development activities. Their point is that 
potentially productive development time is devoted to preparation of analyses and meet-
ings and the cumulative effect of this planning and review time can significantly increase 
development costs.
Development teams must understand the strengths and limitations of the techniques and 
refrain from developing a stifling bureaucracy around the development of new products. 
New-product development should be a process that nurtures innovation and creativity. The 
purpose of economic modeling is simply to ensure that the team is making decisions that are 
economically sound.
MEASURING PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PERFORMANCE
There is strong evidence that generating a steady stream of new products to market is 
extremely important to competitiveness. To succeed, firms must respond to changing cus-
tomer needs and the moves of their competitors. The ability to identify opportunities, mount 
the development effort, and bring to market new products and processes quickly is critical. 
Firms also must bring new products and processes to market efficiently. Because the number 
of new products and new process technologies has increased while model lives and life cycles 
have shrunk, firms must mount more development projects than previously, and these projects 
must use substantially fewer resources per project.
In the U.S. automobile market, for example, the growth of models and market seg-
ments over the last 25 years has meant that an auto firm must initiate close to four times 
as many development projects simply to maintain its market share position. But smaller 
volumes per model and shorter design lives mean resource requirements must drop dra-
matically. Remaining competitive requires efficient engineering, design, and develop-
ment activities.
Measures of product development success can be categorized into those that relate to 
the speed and frequency of bringing new products online, to the productivity of the actual 
development process, and to the quality of the actual products introduced. The following are 
generic descriptions of typical measures:
∙  Time to market—There are two aspects to this, the frequency of new product intro-
ductions and the time from initial concept to market introduction.
∙  Productivity—Such measures as the number of engineering hours, the cost of materi-
als, and tooling costs are used in these measures. Often, comparison of actual versus 
planned costs are used.
∙  Quality—Measures that relate to the reliability of the product in use (referred to as  
conformance quality), the product’s performance features compared to customer 
expectations (referred to as design quality), and the ability of a factory or service pro-
cess to produce the product (defects per million opportunities or time-to-market, for 
example). 
Taken together, time, productivity, and quality define the performance of development, and in 
combination with other activities—sales, manufacturing, advertising, and customer service—
determine the market impact of the project and its profitability.
Illustrate how product 
development is measured 
in a company.
LO 3–5
Quality
Measures that relate to the 
reliability of the product 
in use (referred to as 
conformance quality), the 
product’s performance 
features compared to 
customer expectations 
(referred to as design 
quality), and the ability of a 
factory or service process 
to produce the product 
(defects per million 
opportunities or delivery 
speed, for example).   
Conformance quality
The degree to which the 
product or service design 
specifications are met.
Design quality
The inherent value of the 
product in the marketplace.
Defects per million 
opportunities (DPMO)
A metric used to describe 
the variability of a process.
Productivity
A measure of how 
well resources are 
used.  According to 
Goldratt’s definition (see 
Chapter 23), all the actions 
that bring a company 
closer to its goals.
Time-to-market 
A measure of product 
development success. 
There are two measures 
here: the frequency of 
new product introductions, 
and the time from initial 
concept to market 
introduction.  

62	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Concept Connections
LO 3–1   Know the issues associated with product design and the typical processes used by companies.
Summary
	∙	 Product development is a major challenge that directly 
impacts the long-range success of a firm. 
	∙	 Effectively managing the process requires an integrated 
effort involving all the functional areas of the firm. 
	∙	 Many companies today outsource product design to 
companies that specialize in different industries. The 
use of contract manufacturers has changed the way 
many companies now operate. 
	∙	 An issue is often deciding what a firm’s core com-
petency should be to yield a long-term competitive 
advantage to the company. 
	∙	 Product development is a multistep process that is 
unique to each organization. Typical steps in the pro-
cess are planning, concepts development, system-level 
design, design detail, testing and refinement, and pro-
duction ramp-up.
Key Terms
Contract manufacturer  An organization that performs 
manufacturing and/or purchasing needed to produce 
a product or device not for itself, but as a service to 
another firm.
Core competency  The one thing that a firm can do 
better than its competitors. The goal is to have a core 
competency that yields a long-term competitive advan-
tage to the company.
Concurrent engineering  Emphasizes cross-functional 
integration and concurrent development of a product and 
its associated processes.
Key Terms
Quality function deployment (QFD)  A process that helps 
a company determine the product characteristics impor-
tant to the consumer and to evaluate its own product in 
relation to others.
House of quality  A matrix that helps a product design 
team translate customer requirements into operating and 
engineering goals.
Value analysis / value engineering (VA/VE)  Analysis 
with the purpose of simplifying products and processes 
by achieving equivalent or better performance at a lower 
cost.
Ecodesign  The incorporation of environmental consid-
erations into the design and development of products or 
services. These concerns relate to the entire life cycle, 
including materials, manufacturing, distribution, and the 
eventual disposal of waste.
LO 3–2   Illustrate how different criteria can impact the design of a product.
Summary
	∙	 Different sets of criteria drive the design of a prod-
uct. Criteria that relate to customer wants are funda-
mental, while other criteria related to the cost of the 
product, its manufacturability, and the impact on the 
environment are also important.
LO 3–3   Contrast how service products can have different design criteria compared to  
manufactured products.
Summary
	∙	 Service products are different because direct customer 
involvement in the process introduces variability in 
terms of both the time it takes to serve a customer and 
the level of knowledge required of the firm’s employees. 
	∙	 Fitting the service experience to the expectations of 
the customer will drive what needs to be done opera-
tionally to provide the service. 
	∙	 Financial justification of service features must be 
done to ensure that customers can be retained while 
the company is making a profit from expected 
activities.

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
63
LO 3–4   Evaluate the economic impact of a new product on a company.
Summary
	∙	 Economic analysis that consists of estimating the 
timing and magnitude of future cash flows is used 
to understand the financial implications of a prod-
uct development project. Typical flows include 
development cost, ramp-up cost, marketing and sup-
port cost, production cost, and sales revenue. 
	∙	 Sensitivity analysis can be used to answer “what if” 
questions that relate to project timing and costs.
Key Terms
time-to-market  A measure of product development suc-
cess. There are two measures here: the frequency of new 
product introductions, and the time from initial concept 
to market introduction.  
Productivity  A measure of how well resources are 
used.  According to Goldratt’s definition (see Chapter 
23), all the actions that bring a company closer to its 
goals.
quality  Measures that relate to the reliability of the 
product in use (referred to as conformance quality), the 
product’s performance features compared to customer 
expectations (referred to as design quality), and the 
ability of a factory or service process to produce the 
product (defects per million opportunities or delivery 
speed, for example).   
Conformance quality  The degree to which the product 
or service design specifications are met.
Design quality  The inherent value of the product in the 
marketplace.
Defects per million opportunities (DPMO)  A metric 
used to describe the variability of a process.
LO 3–5 Illustrate how product development is measured in a company.
Summary
	∙	 Generating a steady stream of new products to market 
is important to the competitiveness of the firm. 
	∙	 Measures that relate to the time it takes to bring a 
product to market, costs related to engineering and 
production, and the quality of the product can be used 
to evaluate product development success.
Solved Problem
VidMark, a manufacturer of cell phones, is currently developing a new model (VidPhone 
X70) that will be released on the market when development is complete. This phone will will 
allow the user to place ultra high definition video phone calls. VidMark is concerned about 
the development cost and time. It is also worried about market estimates of the sales of the 
new VidPhone X70. The cost estimates and forecast are given in the following table. 
LO3–4
Development Cost
$2,000,000
Development Time
2 years
Ramp-up Cost
$750,000
Marketing and Support Cost
$500,000/year
Unit Production Cost
$75
Unit Price
$135
Sales and Production Volume
   Year 3
40,000
   Year 4
50,000
   Year 5
40,000

64	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Use the given data to develop a base-case analysis. The project schedule is shown as follows 
with timings of the cash flows.
Several questions need to be answered for VidMark about this project:
	a.	 What are the yearly cash flows and their present value (discounted at 12 percent) of this 
project? What is the net present value?
	b.	 What is the impact on VidMark if sales estimates are off by 20 percent? (Assume that 
­VidMark reduces production volume to correspond to the new sales numbers.)
	c.	 What is the impact on VidMark if unit production cost is $85? (Assume sales estimates are 
accurate.)
	d.	 VidMark thinks it can cut the development time in half by spending an extra $1,500,000 
on development for this project. If the product is launched a year earlier, then the product 
will still have a 3-year life but the forecasts starting in year 2 will be 48,000, 60,000, and 
50,000. Is it worth it to VidMark to spend the extra money on development? (Assume the 
ramp-up, marketing and support costs will start in year 1.)
Solution
	a.	 Start by building the base-case scenario (analysis is in 000s).
	 	 The cash flows and present value of the cash flows are shown. The project NPV under the 
base case is $1.333 million.
	b.	 If sales are reduced by 20 percent, then project NPV drops to $337,000.
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
 1
Year
 2
Year
 3
Year
 4
Year
 5
Period Cash Flow
−$1,000
−$2,250
$1,420
$1,900
$1,420
PV Year 1 (r = 12%)
−$893
−$1,794
$1,011
$1,207
   $806
Project NPV
      $337
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
1
Year
2
Year
3
Year
4
Year
5
Development
Ramp-up
Marketing and Support
Production Volume
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
1
Year
2
Year
3
Year
4
Year
5
Development
−$1,000
−$1,000
Ramp-up
−$750
Marketing and Support
−$500
−$500
−$500
−$500
Production Volume
40
50
40
Unit Production Cost (dollars)
−$75
−$75
−$75
Production Costs
−$3,000
−$3,750
−$3,000
Sales Volume
40
50
40
Unit Price (dollars)
$135
$135
$135
Sales Revenue
$5,400
$6,750
$5,400
Period Cash Flow
−$1,000
−$2,250
$1,900
$2,500
$1,900
PV Year 1 (r = 12%)
−$893
−$1,794
$1,352
$1,589
$1,078
Project NPV
$1,333

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
65
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
 1
Year
 2
Year
 3
Year
 4
Year
 5
Period Cash Flow
−$1,000
−$2,250
$1,500
$2,000
$1,500
PV Year 1 (r = 12%)
−$893
−$1,794
$1,068
$1,271
$851
Project NPV
$503
	 	 If sales are increased by 20 percent, then project NPV goes up to $2.328 million. A change 
of 20 percent either way has a large impact on the NPV.
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
 1
Year
 2
Year
 3
Year
 4
Year
 5
Period Cash Flow
–$1,000
–$2,250
$2,380
$3,100
$2,380
PV Year 1 (r = 12%)
–$893
–$1,794
$1,694
$1,970
$1,350
Project NPV
 $2,328
	c.	 Increased unit production costs: 
	 	 The cash flows are severely affected by the increased unit production cost. Increased future 
cash outflow of $1.3 million (130,000 units * $10 increase) causes a decrease in net present 
value of $830,000 ($1.333 million − $0.503 million). However, it still appears to be worth 
developing the new phone.
	d.	 Here are the changes proposed by VidMark:
Development Cost
$3,500,000
Development Time
1 year
Ramp-up Cost
$750,000
Marketing and Support Cost
$500,000/year
Unit Production Cost
$75
Unit Price
$135
Sales and Production Volume
    Year 2
48,000
    Year 3
60,000
    Year 4
50,000
	 	 Use this data to develop a base-case analysis. The project schedule is shown as follows with 
timings of cash flows.
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year 
1
Year
2
Year 
3
Year
4
Development
Ramp-up
Marketing and Support
Production Volume

66	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	 	 It appears that VidMark is better off to take a fast approach to develop its new VidPhone 
X70 because the NPV of the base case is $1.333 million versus the fast development NPV 
of $1.452 million (see the following table).
Project Schedule
VidPhone X70
Year
 1
Year
 2
Year
 3
Year
 4
Development
−$3,500
Ramp-up
−$750
Marketing and Support
−$500
−$500
−$500
−$500
Production Volume
48
60
50
Unit Production Cost (dollars)
−$75
−$75
−$75
Production Costs
−$3,600
−$4,500
−$3,750
Sales Volume
48
60
50
Unit Price (dollars)
$135
$135
$135
Sales Revenue
$6,480
$8,100
$6,750
Period Cash Flow
−$4,750
$2,380
$3,100
$2,500
PV Year 1 (r = 12%)
−$4,241
$1,897
$2,207
$1,589
Project NPV
$1,452
Discussion Questions
	1.	 Describe the generic product development process described in the chapter. How does the 
process change for technology-push products?
	2.	 How does the QFD approach help? What are some limitations of this approach?
	3.	 Discuss the product design philosophy behind industrial design and design for manufac-
ture and assembly. Which one do you think is more important in a customer-focused prod-
uct development?
	4.	 Discuss design-based incrementalism, which is frequent product redesign throughout the 
product’s life. What are the pros and cons of this idea?
	5.	 Do the concepts of complexity and divergence apply to an online sales company such as 
Dell Computer?
	6.	 What factors must be traded off in the product development process before introducing a 
new product?
	7.	 Coca-Cola is a well-established consumer products company with a strong position in 
the global market. The sales of its core soda products have remained relatively stable for 
decades, yet the company has continued to grow and has remained extremely profitable. 
Discuss Coca-Cola’s history in light of the statement that “generating a steady stream of 
new products to market is extremely important to competitiveness.” Does Coca-Cola’s suc-
cess disprove that statement? Is the company an exception to the rule or an example of its 
application?
LO3–1
LO3–2
LO3–3
LO3–4
LO3–5
Objective Questions
	1.	 Which phase of the generic development process involves construction and evaluation of 
multiple preproduction versions of the product? (Answer in Appendix D)
	2.	 A process that emphasizes cross-functional integration and concurrent development of a 
product and its associated processes is known as _____.
	3.	 Match the following product types to the appropriate product development description.
LO3–1

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
67
_____ Technology-push  
products
A. Entail unusually large uncertainties about the technology or 
market. The development process takes steps to address 
those uncertainties.
_____ Platform products
B. A firm with a new proprietary technology seeks out a 
­market where that technology can be applied.
_____ Process-intensive products
C. Uses a repeated prototyping cycle. Results from one cycle 
are used to modify priorities in the ensuing cycle.
_____ High-risk products
D. The production process has an impact on the product 
properties. Therefore, product design and process design 
cannot be separated.
_____ Quick-build products
E. Products are designed and built around a preexisting tech-
nological subsystem.
	  4.	 Designing products for aesthetics and with the user in mind is generally called what?
	  5.	 The first step in developing a house of quality is to develop a list of _____.
	  6.	 The purpose of value analysis/value engineering is to _____.
	  7.	 What is it about service processes that makes their design and operation so different from 
manufacturing processes?
	  8.	 What are the three general factors that determine the fit of a new or revised service 
process?
	  9.	 Measures of product development success can be organized into what three categories? 
(Answer in Appendix D)
	10.	 Tuff Wheels was getting ready to start its development project for a new product to be 
added to its small motorized vehicle line for children. The new product is called the Kiddy 
Dozer. It will look like a miniature bulldozer, complete with caterpillar tracks and a blade. 
Tuff Wheels has forecasted the demand and the cost to develop and produce the new 
Kiddy Dozer. The following table contains the relevant information for this project.
LO3–2
LO3–3
LO3–5
Development Cost
$1,000,000
Estimated Development Time
9 months
Pilot Testing
$200,000
Ramp-up Cost
$400,000
Marketing and Support Cost
$150,000 per year
Sales and Production Volume
60,000 per year
Unit Production Cost
$100
Unit Price
$170
Interest Rate
8%
Tuff Wheels also has provided the project plan shown as follows. As can be seen in the 
project plan, the company thinks that the product life will be three years until a new prod-
uct must be created.
Project Schedule
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Kiddy Dozer
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Development
Pilot Testing
Ramp-up
Marketing and  
Support
Production and  
Sales

68	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
a.  What are the yearly cash flows and their present value (discounted at 8 percent) of this 
project? What is the net present value?
b.  What is the impact on NPV for the Kiddy Dozer if the actual unit sales are 50,000 per 
year or 70,000 per year?
c.  What is the effect caused by changing the discount rate to 9, 10, or 11 percent?
	11.	 Perot Corporation is developing a new CPU chip based on a new type of technology.  Its 
new chip, the Patay2 chip, will take two years to develop. However, because other chip 
manufacturers will be able to copy the technology, it will have a market life of two years 
after it is introduced. Perot expects to be able to price the chip higher in the first year, and 
it anticipates a significant production cost reduction after the first year as well.  The rel-
evant information for developing and selling the Patay2 is given as follows.
Patay2 Chip Product Estimates
Development Cost
$20,000,000
Pilot Testing
$5,000,000
Debug
$3,000,000
Ramp-up Cost
$3,000,000
Advance Marketing
$5,000,000
Marketing and Support Cost
$1,000,000 per year
Unit Production Cost Year 1
$655.00
Unit Production Cost Year 2
$545.00
Unit Price Year 1
$820.00
Unit Price Year 2
$650.00
Sales and Production Volume Year 1
250,000
Sales and Production Volume Year 2
150,000
Interest Rate
10%
Patay2 Chip Project Timing
Project Schedule
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Patay2 Chip
1st
half
2nd
half
1st
half
2nd
half
1st
half
2nd
half
1st
half
2nd
half
Development
Pilot Testing
Debug
Ramp-up
Advance Marketing
Marketing and Support
Production and Sales
	a.  What are the yearly cash flows and their present value (discounted at 10 percent) of 
this project? What is the net present value?
	b.  Perot’s engineers have determined that spending $10 million more on development will 
allow them to add even more advanced features. Having a more advanced chip will allow 
them to price the chip $50 higher in both years ($870 for year 1 and $700 for year 2).  
Is it worth the additional investment?
	c.  If sales are only 200,000 the first year and 100,000 the second year, would Perot still do 
the project?
	12.	 Pick a product and list issues that need to be considered in its design and manufacture. 
The product can be something like a stereo, cell phone, desk, or kitchen appliance. Con-
sider the functional and aesthetic aspects of design as well as the important concerns for 
manufacturing.

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
69
	13.	 The following chart is a partial house of quality for a golf country club. Provide  
an importance weighting from your perspective (or that of a golfing friend) in the 
unshaded areas. If you can, using the QFD approach, compare it to a club where you or 
your friends play.
Physical Aspects
    Manicured grounds
    Easy access
    Challenging
Service Facilities
    Restaurant facilities
        Good food
        Good service
        Good layout
    Plush locker room
    Helpful service attendants
Tournament Facilities
    Good tournament prize
    Types of players
    Fair handicapping system
Perception Issues
    Prestigious
Physical Aspects
    Course location
    Grounds maintenance
    Landscaping
    Pin placement
    Course tuning
Tee placement
Service Facilities
    Customer-trained attendants
Top-quality food
    Highly rated chefs
Attractive restaurant
Tournament Activities
    Calloway handicapping
    Exciting door prizes
Perception Issues
    Invitation only
Types of guests
        Income level
        Celebrity
WHATs versus HOWs
Strong Relationship:
Medium Relationship:
Weak Relationship:
The Swedish retailer dominates markets in 32 countries, 
and now it’s poised to conquer North America. Its battle 
plan: Keep making its offerings less expensive, without 
making them cheap.
	
Above all else, one factor accounts for IKEA’s suc-
cess: good quality at a low price. IKEA sells house-
hold items that are cheap but not cheapo, at prices that 
typically run 30 to 50 percent below the competition’s. 
While the price of other companies’ products tends to 
rise over time, IKEA says it has reduced its retail prices 
by a total of about 20 percent during the past four years. 
At IKEA, the process of driving down costs starts the 
moment a new item is conceived and continues relent-
lessly throughout its production run. The price of a basic 
Pöang chair, for example, has fallen from $149 in 2000 to 
$99 in 2001 to $79 today. IKEA expects the most recent 
price cut to increase Pöang sales by 30 to 50 percent.
	
IKEA’s corporate mantra is “Low price with mean-
ing.” The goal is to make things less expensive without 
ever making customers feel cheap. Striking that balance 
demands a special kind of design, manufacturing, and 
distribution expertise. But IKEA pulls it off in its own 
distinctive way: tastefully, methodically, even cheerfully, 
and yet somehow differently than any other company 
anywhere. Here’s a step-by-step guide to how IKEA 
designs, builds, and distributes the items that the entire 
world wants to buy.
	
The Trofé mug is one of the most popular IKEA prod-
ucts. The story of the mug is an example of how IKEA 
works, from a co-worker’s bright idea through to produc-
tion and sales. It is also a story about all the demands 
that customers place on IKEA. A low price tag is the 
obvious one, but other requirements include function, 
modern design, environmental considerations, and mak-
ing sure products have been manufactured under accept-
able working conditions. Both customers and co-workers 
must be able to rely on IKEA.
Case: IKEA: Design and Pricing

70	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Step 1. Pick a Price
Product Development—A sketch for a new product? Yes, 
but it’s also a calculation of what that product will cost. 
The low price begins at the drawing board.
	
The team behind each product consists of designers, 
product developers, and purchasers who get together to 
discuss design, materials, and suitable suppliers. Everyone 
contributes with their specialist knowledge. Purchasers, 
for example, use their contacts with suppliers all over the 
world via IKEA Trading Service Offices. Who can make 
this at the best quality for the right price at the right time?
	
When product developers were given the task of creat-
ing a new mug over five years ago, they were told how 
much it should cost in the stores. In the case of Trofé, 
the price had to be incredibly low—five Swedish kronor! 
This mug had to have a real knockout price.
	
To produce the right mug at the right price, the devel-
opers had to take into account materials, colors, and 
design. For example, the mug is made in green, blue, yel-
low, or white because these pigments cost less than other 
shades, such as red.
Step 2. Choose a Manufacturer
Suppliers and Purchasing—The task of developing 
products never ends. Working with suppliers, the mug 
was shortened and the handle changed so it stacks more 
efficiently, saving space for transport, warehousing, and 
store display—and, not least, in the customers’ cupboards 
at home. IKEA is always keen to banish as much air as 
possible from its packaging. Packages should preferably 
be flat for efficient transport and storage.
	
One supplier, a factory in Romania, has worked with 
IKEA for 15 years. Long-term relationships help both par-
ties to build up a huge fund of knowledge about demands 
and expectations. That is why products are often devel-
oped in close cooperation with suppliers. In the case of 
Trofé, for example, the new size has rationalized produc-
tion by making better use of the space in the kiln during 
the firing process. That’s cost-effective and saves time.
	
IKEA has introduced a code of conduct govern-
ing working conditions and environmental awareness 
among suppliers. This deals with matters such as health 
and safety in the workplace and forbids the use of child 
labor. The practical work of implementing this code of 
conduct is carried out by co-workers in IKEA Trading 
Service Offices worldwide. Many suppliers already meet 
the demands; others are working together with IKEA to 
carry out the necessary improvements. IKEA also works 
closely with external quality control and audit compa-
nies that check that IKEA and its suppliers live up to the 
requirements of the code of conduct.
	
The low price tag is crucial to the vision IKEA has of 
creating a better everyday life for many people. That is 
why IKEA works nonstop to reduce costs. But it’s also 
a question of saving raw materials and, ultimately, the 
environment. The low-cost mug is one example of how 
environmental considerations can influence the develop-
ment of products. For example, the new mug is lighter in 
color—a move that cuts costs and is more environmen-
tally friendly. The less pigment that is used, the better. 
The mug is also lead- and cadmium-free.
Step 3. Design the Product
With a price point and a manufacturer in place, IKEA 
once again uses internal competition to find a designer 
and select a design for production. The designer begins 
the design process by writing a brief that explains the 
product’s price, its function, the materials to be used, 
and the fabricator’s capabilities. The designer then sends 
the brief to IKEA’s staff designers and freelancers, and 
refines promising designs until settling on the one to pro-
duce. The designer wants products to be like Swiss Army 
knives—to get maximum functionality at minimum cost.
Step 4. Ship It
Distribution and logistics are the lifeblood of IKEA and 
important pieces of the puzzle on the road to a low price. 
IKEA strives to deliver the right number of goods to 
the right stores at the right time. It calculates the goods 
requirements and makes sure that deliveries are efficient.
Each pallet holds 2,024 mugs, which are transported 
from Romania by rail, road, and sea to IKEA distribution 
centers around the world. Transportation does, of course, 
have an effect on the environment, but IKEA is working 
toward reducing environmental impact.
	
Many of IKEA’s products are bulky—for example, 
tables and chairs. IKEA pioneered the concept of flat. 
The company’s eureka moment occurred in 1956, when 
one of IKEA’s first designers watched a customer trying 
to fit a table into his car. There was only one way to do 
it: Remove the legs. From that day forward, most IKEA 
products have been designed to ship disassembled, flat 
enough to be slipped into the cargo hatch of a station 
wagon or safely tied down on an auto’s roof rack.
	
In IKEA’s innately frugal corporate culture, where 
waste has been declared a “deadly sin,” the flat pack-
age is also an excellent way to lower shipping costs by 
maximizing the use of space inside shipping containers. 
The company estimates transport volume would be six 
times greater if its items were shipped assembled. From 
the design studio to the warehouse floor, IKEA employ-
ees’ mantra is always the same: “We don’t want to pay to 
ship air.”
	
Making things flat is an IKEA obsession. How many 
times can you redesign a simple fired-clay coffee mug? 
IKEA’s mug was redesigned three times—simply to 
maximize the number of them that could be stored on a 
pallet. Originally, only 864 mugs would fit. A redesign 
added a rim such as you’d find on a flowerpot, so that 
each pallet could hold 1,280 mugs. Yet another redesign 
created a shorter mug with a new handle, allowing 2,024 
to squeeze onto a pallet. While the mug’s sales price has 

	
Design of Products and Services	
Chapter 3	
71
remained at 50 cents, shipping costs have been reduced 
by 60 percent, which is a significant savings, given that 
IKEA sells about 25 million of the mugs each year. Even 
better, the cost of production at IKEA’s Romanian factory 
also has fallen because the more compact mugs require 
less space in the kiln.
	
When you ship 25 million cubic meters of goods all 
over the globe, flat-pack frugality adds up. IKEA now 
uses a 65 percent average fill-rate target for all the con-
tainers it ships, and it hopes to increase that to 75 percent. 
Meeting that goal will require further design changes and 
sometimes even sucking the air out of items (like IKEA’s 
shrink-wrapped pillows, which look like giant crackers on 
store shelves). And, of course, flat packing shifts the cost 
of product assembly to the customer, saving even more.
	
As IKEA has shifted more of its buying from Europe 
to the Far East, shipping time and costs have become an 
even more critical concern. Last year, China tied ­Sweden 
atop IKEA’s list of supplier countries. The company 
has responded by creating a global network of distribu-
tion centers, most of which are near container ports and 
major truck and rail routes. There are 18 IKEA distribu-
tion centers worldwide—which handle about 70 percent 
of IKEA’s total product line—and 4 more are under con-
struction. The other 30 percent of IKEA’s products travel 
directly from supplier to store.
	
Sometimes, however, product components actually 
come together for the first time in the store. In the case of 
the Pöang chair, the cushion comes from Poland and the 
frame from China. The two pieces are united only when 
the customer pulls each one off the shelf.
Step 5. Sell It
IKEA sells a lot of expensive furniture, and in a traditional 
store this is relatively easy: Put a piece in a lush setting, 
let the customer fall prey to visions of wealth and comfort, 
then offer plenty of easy credit. But to keep prices low, 
IKEA needs to sell furniture and other products such as 
the mug without salespeople or conspicuous price reduc-
tions. The company asks customers to assemble their fur-
niture themselves. And IKEA doesn’t want to ship it to you 
either. By any conventional measure, these are formidable 
hurdles to overcome. Yet they also explain why IKEA 
has worked so hard to create a separate world inside its 
stores—a kind of theme park masquerading as a furniture 
outlet—where normal rules and expectations don’t apply.
	
The Trofé mugs arrive at IKEA stores packed on pal-
lets. Any transportation packaging is collected for recy-
cling. Price tags have already been placed on the mugs at 
the suppliers. In-store display is important. It’s not just a 
question of displaying mugs and other products. It’s also 
about providing inspiration for smart interior solutions. 
Customers contribute to the low prices at IKEA by select-
ing and collecting the products from the self-serve area, 
taking them home, and using the instructions enclosed to 
assemble them. Many will have already chosen the prod-
ucts from the IKEA catalog, of which 110 million copies 
are printed in 34 different language versions.
	
When you walk through the door of an IKEA store, you 
enter a meticulously constructed virtual Sweden. The first 
thing you encounter is a company-sponsored child-care 
facility. Hungry? Have some of those Swedish meatballs 
and lingonberries. The layout of an IKEA store guides 
shoppers in a predetermined path past several realistic 
model homes, which convey an eerily lived-in impression 
but are open for customers to sit in. Information kiosks 
provide advice on home decor. Color-coordinated cards 
offer plenty of suggestions on offbeat uses for products.
	
But the emphasis is always on price. Low-priced prod-
ucts that IKEA calls BTIs (“breathtaking items”) are 
often perched on risers, framed by a huge yellow price 
tag. Nearby, shoppers will find other products—pricier, 
more design-oriented—as substitutes for the BTI.
	
The model homes suggest cheerful young people 
throwing dinner parties in hallways, using mismatched 
office chairs and narrow side tables. These aren’t the 
aspirational images you’ll find at Pottery Barn or Crate 
& Barrel. These are people who are living well in mod-
est circumstances—frugal folks who know the value of a 
comfortable place to sit.
	
IKEA says its biggest selling point is the price tag, 
but it can’t hurt that getting through one of IKEA’s 
huge stores takes a lot of time. The layout is blatantly 
­manipulative—though in a friendly, knowing way, not 
unlike at Disneyland—but when customers finally arrive 
at the checkout counter, they’ve had plenty of time to 
fully consider their purchases.
	
IKEA products broadcast an ethos for living in the 
modern world: Don’t buy an ugly pitcher if you can get a 
stylish one for the same price. If you organize your plas-
tic bags, you’ll feel more in control of your life. It’s left-
brain logic applied to the right-brain art of living well. 
And if happiness involves dragging a cumbersome flat 
package off the shelf, standing in line at the checkout, 
hauling the box home, and spending hours assembling a 
kitchen cabinet, well, 260 million customers a year are 
willing to make that trade-off.
	
And, of course, next year it will be even cheaper.
Questions
	1.	 What are IKEA’s competitive priorities?
	2.	 Describe IKEA’s process for developing a new 
product.
	3.	 What are additional features of the IKEA concept 
(beyond its design process) that contribute to creat-
ing exceptional value for the customer?
	4.	 What would be important criteria for selecting a 
site for an IKEA store?
Source: Information about the Trofé coffee mug was obtained from www.ikea.com.

72	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Would a warm paraffin hand treatment during your 
dental cleaning or dental treatment put you at ease and 
make the process more bearable? That is the idea behind 
the new “dental spa” services opening in major cities 
throughout the United States. Beyond calming music and 
comfortable chairs and flat-screen TVs mounted on the 
ceiling with sound from the noise-canceling headphones 
that block unpleasant dental noises, at the same time foot 
scrubs, pedicures, or other spa services are sometimes 
possible. Two major trends have helped fuel the growth 
of dental spas: lessening of the painful associations of 
dentistry and the increased cosmetic focus of dentistry 
that goes along with other spa treatments. 
Questions
	1.	 Which one of the three new service requirements 
would a dental spa least likely pass: service experi-
ence fit, operational fit, or financial impact? Why?
	2.	 What are some of the main areas of complexity and 
divergence in this kind of operation relative to the 
standard dental clinic?
Case: Dental Spa
Practice Exam
In each of the following statements, name the term 
defined or the items requested. Answers are listed at the 
bottom.
	1.	 An organization capable of manufacturing or purchas-
ing all the components needed to produce a finished 
product or device.
	2.	 The one thing that a company can do better than its 
competitors.
	3.	 The six phases of the product development process.
	4.	 A useful tool for the economic analysis of a product 
development project.
	5.	 An approach that uses interfunctional teams to get 
input from the customer in design specification.
	6.	 A matrix of information that helps a team translate 
customer requirements into operating or engineering 
goals.
	7.	 The greatest improvements from this arise from sim-
plification of the product by reducing the number of 
separate parts.
	8.	 The incorporation of environmental considerations 
into the design and development of products or 
services.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Contract manufacturer  2. Core competency  3. Planning, concept development, system-level design, detail design, 
testing, production ramp-up  4. Net present value  5. Quality function development  6. House of quality  7. Design for manufacturing and assembly  
8. Ecodesign

	
73
CAN A 15-STORY HOTEL BE BUILT IN LESS 
THAN A WEEK?
A Chinese construction company recently built a 15-story hotel in just six days. To show 
this was not a fluke, it then built a 30-story hotel in only 15 days! The company believes it 
can construct buildings that are 150 stories tall using the same high-speed techniques. 
Using these techniques, construction takes less than one-third the time it would take on 
a normal schedule.
The company uses many workers during the short construction period, and detailed 
schedules coordinate the many teams working simultaneously and around the clock on 
the building. Materials are prefabricated ahead of time 
in a factory. Premade modules are carried to the con-
struction site on large trucks where they are placed in 
the steel structure with cranes. Special inspection and 
review processes are used to eliminate these delays in 
the construction process.
Learning Objectives
	LO 4–1	 Explain what projects are and how projects are organized.
	LO 4–2	 Analyze projects using network-planning models.
	LO 4–3	 Evaluate projects using earned value management.
	LO 4–4	 Exemplify how network-planning models and earned value management are implemented in 
commercial software packages.
Projects
4
Chinese workers 
manufacture steel 
frames to be used in 
building the 15-story 
New Ark Hotel, which 
was built in six days. 
© Chinafotopress/Gu Liliang/
ZUMApress/Newscom

74	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
WHAT IS PROJECT MANAGEMENT?
Although most of the material in this chapter focuses on the technical aspects of project manage-
ment (structuring project networks and calculating the critical path), the management aspects 
are certainly equally important. Success in project management is very much an activity that 
requires careful control of critical resources. We spend much of the time in this book focused on 
the management of nonhuman resources such as machines and material; for projects, however, 
the key resource is often our employees’ time. Human resources are frequently the most expen-
sive, and those people involved in the projects critical to the success of the firm are often the 
most valuable managers, consultants, and engineers.
At the highest levels in an organization, management often involves juggling a portfolio of 
projects. There are many different types of projects, ranging from the development of totally 
new products, to revisions of old products, to new marketing plans, as well as a vast array of 
projects for better serving customers and reducing costs.
Most companies deal with projects individually—pushing each through the pipeline as 
quickly and cost-effectively as possible. Many of these same companies are very good at 
applying the techniques described in this chapter in a manner where myriad tasks are exe-
cuted flawlessly, but the projects just do not deliver the expected results. Worse, what often 
happens is that the projects consuming the most resources have the least connection to the 
firm’s strategy.
Projects can be categorized based on the type of change being planned. For example, a 
­development project might be looking at ways to change the product in response to market 
feedback, or it might be looking at ways to change the process in order to improve efficiency or 
quality. The four major types of change are product change, process change, research and devel-
opment, and alliance and partnership. Projects can also be categorized based on the amount of 
change that is planned. In the case of a project that will make changes to the product itself, it 
might involve just some minor tweaks to the product—as often happens from year to year with 
automobiles—or it could be a complete redesign of the product that might happen once or twice 
a decade, as in the case of a new automobile model. The three categories based on the amount 
of change are derivative (incremental changes such as new packaging or no-frills versions), 
platform (fundamental improvements to existing products), and breakthrough (major changes 
that create entirely new markets). Exhibit 4.1 relates these two dimensions of projects with 
some examples.
In this chapter, we only scratch the surface in our introduction to the topic of project 
management. Professional project managers are individuals skilled at not only the technical 
aspects of calculating such things as early start and early finish time but, just as important, 
Explain what projects 
are and how projects are 
organized.
LO 4–1
Product Change
New core
product
New core
process
New core
technology
Outsource of
major activity
Addition to
product family
Process
upgrade
Technology
upgrade
Selection of
new partner
Product
enhancement
Breakthrough
Projects
Types of
Change
More
Less
Platform
Projects
Amount of Change
Derivative
Projects
Incremental
change
Incremental
change
Incremental
change
Process Change
Research &
Development
Alliance &
Partnership
Types of Development Projects
exhibit 4.1

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
75
the people skills related to motivation. In addition, the ability to resolve conflicts as key 
decision points occur in the project is a critical skill. Without a doubt, leading successful 
projects is the best way to prove your promotability to the people who make promotion deci-
sions. Virtually all project work is teamwork, and leading a project involves leading a team. 
Your success at leading a project will spread quickly through the individuals in the team. As 
organizations flatten (through reengineering, downsizing, outsourcing), more will depend 
on projects and project leaders to get work done, work that previously was handled within 
departments.
A project may be defined as a series of related jobs usually directed toward some major 
output and requiring a significant period of time to perform. Project management can be 
defined as planning, directing, and controlling resources (people, equipment, material) to meet 
the technical, cost, and time constraints of the project.
Although projects are often thought to be one-time occurrences, the fact is that many 
projects can be repeated or transferred to other settings or products. The result will be another 
project output. A contractor building houses or a firm producing low-volume products such 
as supercomputers, locomotives, or jet airliners can effectively consider these as projects.
Organizing the Project Team
Before the project starts, senior management must decide which of three organizational 
structures will be used to tie the project to the parent firm: pure project, functional project, or 
matrix project. We next discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the three main forms.
Pure Project
Tom Peters predicts that most of the world’s work will be “brainwork,” done in semipermanent 
networks of small project-oriented teams, each one an autonomous, entrepreneurial center of 
opportunity, where the necessity for speed and flexibility dooms the hierarchical management 
structures we and our ancestors grew up with. Thus, out of the three basic project organizational 
structures, Peters favors the pure project (nicknamed skunkworks), where a self-contained 
team works full time on the project.
Advantages
∙	 The project manager has full authority over the project.
∙	 Team members report to one boss. They do not have to worry about dividing loyalty with 
a functional-area manager.
∙	 Lines of communication are shortened. Decisions are made quickly.
∙	 Team pride, motivation, and commitment are high.
Disadvantages
∙	 Duplication of resources. Equipment and people are not shared across projects.
∙	 Organizational goals and policies are ignored, as team members are often both physically 
and psychologically removed from headquarters.
∙	 The organization falls behind in its knowledge of new technology due to weakened func-
tional divisions.
∙	 Because team members have no functional area home, they worry about life-after-­project, 
and project termination is delayed.
Functional Project
At the other end of the project organization spectrum is the functional project, housing the 
project within a functional division.
Advantages
∙	 A team member can work on several projects.
∙	 Technical expertise is maintained within the functional area even if individuals leave the 
project or organization.
Pure project
A structure for organizing 
a project where a self-
contained team works full 
time on the project.
Functional project
In this structure, team 
members are assigned 
from the functional units of 
the organization. The team 
members remain a part of 
their functional units and 
typically are not dedicated 
to the project.
Project
A series of related jobs 
usually directed toward 
some major output and 
requiring a significant 
period of time to perform.
Project management
Planning, directing, and 
controlling resources 
(people, equipment, 
material) to meet the 
technical, cost, and time 
constraints of a project.

76	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
∙	 The functional area is a home after the project is completed. Functional specialists can 
advance vertically.
∙	 A critical mass of specialized functional-area experts creates synergistic solutions to a 
project’s technical problems.
Disadvantages
∙	 Aspects of the project that are not directly related to the functional area get shortchanged.
∙	 Motivation of team members is often weak.
∙	 Needs of the client are secondary and are responded to slowly.
Matrix Project
The classic specialized organizational form, the matrix project, attempts to blend properties of 
functional and pure project structures. Each project utilizes people from different functional 
areas. The project manager (PM) decides what tasks will be performed and when, but the func-
tional managers control which people and technologies are used. If the matrix form is chosen, 
different projects (rows of the matrix) borrow resources from functional areas (columns). Senior 
management must then decide whether a weak, balanced, or strong form of a matrix is to be 
used. This establishes whether project managers have little, equal, or more authority than the 
functional managers with whom they negotiate for resources.
Matrix project
A structure that blends the 
functional and pure project 
structures. Each project 
uses people from different 
functional areas. A 
dedicated project manager 
decides what tasks need 
to be performed and 
when, but the functional 
managers control which 
people to use.
President
Research
and
Development
Engineering
Manufacturing
Project
A
Project
B
Project
C
Project
D
Project
E
Project
F
Project
G
Project
H
Project
I
Manager
Project A
Manager
Project B
Manager
Project C
Research
and
Development
Engineering
Manufacturing
Marketing
President
Advantages
∙	 Communication between functional divisions is enhanced.
∙	 A project manager is held responsible for successful completion of the project.
∙	 Duplication of resources is minimized.
∙	 Team members have a functional “home” after project completion, so they are less wor-
ried about life-after-project than if they were a pure project organization.
∙	 Policies of the parent organization are followed. This increases support for the project.

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
77
Disadvantages
∙	 There are two bosses. Often the functional manager will be listened to before the project 
manager. After all, who can promote you or give you a raise?
∙	 It is doomed to failure unless the PM has strong negotiating skills.
∙	 Suboptimization is a danger, because PMs hoard resources for their own project, thus 
harming other projects.
Note that regardless of which of the three major organizational forms is used, the project 
manager is the primary contact point with the customer. Communication and ­flexibility 
are greatly enhanced because one person is responsible for successful completion of 
the project.
Organizing Project Tasks
A project starts out as a statement of work (SOW). The SOW may be a written description of 
the objectives to be achieved, with a brief statement of the work to be done and a proposed 
schedule specifying the start and completion dates. It also could contain performance measures 
in terms of budget and completion steps (milestones) and the written reports to be supplied.
A task is a further subdivision of a project. It is usually not longer than several months in 
duration and is performed by one group or organization. A subtask may be used if needed to 
further subdivide the project into more meaningful pieces.
A work package is a group of activities combined to be assignable to a single organiza-
tional unit. It still falls into the format of all project management; the package provides a 
description of what is to be done, when it is to be started and completed, the budget, mea-
sures of performance, and specific events to be reached at points in time. These specific 
events are called project milestones. Typical milestones might be the completion of the 
design, the production of a prototype, the completed testing of the prototype, and the 
approval of a pilot run.
The work breakdown structure (WBS) defines the hierarchy of project tasks, subtasks, 
and work packages. Completion of one or more work packages results in the completion of a 
subtask; completion of one or more subtasks results in the completion of a task; and, finally, the 
completion of all tasks is required to complete the project. A representation of this structure is 
shown in Exhibit 4.2.
Exhibit 4.3 shows the WBS for an optical scanner project. The WBS is important in organiz-
ing a project because it breaks the project down into manageable pieces. The number of levels 
Project milestone
A specific event in a 
project.
Work breakdown 
structure (WBS)
The hierarchy of project 
tasks, subtasks, and work 
packages.
Level
1
2
3
4
Program
Project 1
Project 2
Task 1.1
Task 1.2
Subtask 1.1.1
Subtask 1.1.2
Work package 1.1.1.1
Work package 1.1.1.2
An Example of a Work Breakdown Structure
exhibit 4.2

78	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
will vary depending on the project. How much detail or how many levels to use depends on the 
following:
∙	 The level at which a single individual or organization can be assigned responsibility and 
accountability for accomplishing the work package.
∙	 The level at which budget and cost data will be collected during the project.
There is not a single correct WBS for any project, and two different project teams might 
develop different WBSs for the same project. Some experts have referred to project manage-
ment as an art rather than a science, because there are so many different ways that a project can 
be approached. Finding the correct way to organize a project depends on experience with the 
particular task.
Activities are defined within the context of the work breakdown structure and are pieces 
of work that consume time. Activities do not necessarily require the expenditure of effort by 
people, although they often do. For example, waiting for paint to dry may be an activity in a 
project. Activities are identified as part of the WBS. From our sample project in Exhibit 4.3, 
activities would include telescope design and fabrication (1.1.1), telescope/simulator optical 
interface (1.1.2), and data recording (1.2.4). Activities need to be defined in such a way that 
when they are all completed, the project is done.
1
2
3
4
Optical simulator design
Optical design
Telescope design/fab
Telescope/simulator optical interface
Simulator zoom system design
Ancillary simulator optical component specification 
System performance analysis
Overall system firmware and software control
Logic flow diagram generation and analysis
Basic control algorithm design
Far beam analyzer
System inter- and intra-alignment method design
Data recording and reduction requirements
System integration
Cost analysis
Cost/system schedule analysis
Cost/system performance analysis
Management
System design/engineering management
Program management
Long lead item procurement
Large optics
Target components
Detectors
Level
x
x     
       
 
   
   
x
x
x
x 
x 
x 
x  
   
x 
   
x 
x  
x 
x 
x
x
x
x
x
x
x 
x
x
x
1
1.1
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.1.3
1.1.4
1.2
1.2.1
1.2.1.1
1.2.1.2
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.4
1.3
1.4
1.4.1
1.4.2
1.5
1.5.1
1.5.2
1.6
1.6.1
1.6.2
1.6.3
Work Breakdown Structure, Large Optical Scanner Design
exhibit 4.3
NETWORK-PLANNING MODELS
The two best-known network-planning models were developed in the 1950s. The Critical Path 
Method (CPM) was developed for scheduling maintenance shutdowns at chemical processing 
plants owned by DuPont. Since maintenance projects are often performed in this industry, rea-
sonably accurate time estimates for activities are available. CPM is based on the assumptions 
that project activity times can be estimated accurately and that they do not vary. The Program 
Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) was developed for the U.S. Navy’s Polaris mis-
sile project. This was a massive project involving over 3,000 contractors. Because most of the 
Activities
Pieces of work within a 
project that consume time. 
The completion of all the 
activities of a project marks 
the end of the project.
Analyze projects using 
network-planning models.
LO 4–2

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
79
activities had never been done before, PERT was developed to handle uncertain time estimates. 
As years passed, features that distinguished CPM from PERT have diminished, so in our treat-
ment here we just use the term CPM.
In a sense, the CPM techniques illustrated here owe their development to their widely used 
predecessor, the Gantt chart. Although the Gantt chart is able to relate activities to time in a 
usable fashion for small projects, the interrelationship of activities, when displayed in this form, 
becomes extremely difficult to visualize and to work with for projects that include more than 
about 25 activities.
The critical path of activities in a project is the sequence of activities that form the longest 
chain in terms of their time to complete. If any one of the activities in the critical path is 
delayed, then the entire project is delayed. It is possible and it often happens that there are 
multiple paths of the same length through the network so there are multiple critical paths. 
Determining scheduling information about each activity in the project is the major goal of 
CPM techniques. The techniques calculate when an activity must start and end, together with 
whether the activity is part of the critical path.
Critical Path Method (CPM)
Here is a procedure for scheduling a project. In this case, a single time estimate is used because 
we are assuming that the activity times are known. A very simple project will be scheduled to 
demonstrate the basic approach.
Consider that you have a group assignment that requires a decision on whether you should 
invest in a company. Your instructor has suggested that you perform the analysis in the follow-
ing four steps:
	A.	 Select a company.
	B.	 Obtain the company’s annual report and perform a ratio analysis.
	C.	 Collect technical stock price data and construct charts.
	D.	 Individually review the data and make a team decision on whether to buy the stock.
Your group of four people decides that the project can be 
divided into four activities as suggested by the instructor. You 
decide that all the team members should be involved in select-
ing the company and that it should take one week to complete 
this activity. You will meet at the end of the week to decide 
what company the group will consider. During this meeting, 
you will divide up your group: Two people will be responsible 
for the annual report and ratio analysis, and the other two will 
collect the technical data and construct the charts. Your group 
expects it to take two weeks to get the annual report and per-
form the ratio analysis, and a week to collect the stock price 
data and generate the charts. You agree that the two groups 
can work independently. Finally, you agree to meet as a team 
to make the purchase decision. Before you meet, you want to 
allow one week for each team member to review all the data.
This is a simple project, but it will serve to demonstrate the 
approach. The following are the appropriate steps.
	1.	 Identify each activity to be done in the project and 
estimate how long it will take to complete each 
activity.    This is simple, given the information from 
your instructor. We identify the activities as follows: 
A(1), B(2), C(1), D(1). The number is the expected 
duration of the activity.
	2.	 Determine the required sequence of activities and construct a network reflecting 
the precedence relationships.    An easy way to do this is to first identify the  
immediate predecessors associated with an activity. The immediate predecessors  
Critical path
The sequence(s) of 
activities in a project that 
form the longest chain 
in terms of their time 
to complete. This path 
contains zero slack time. It 
is possible for there to be 
multiple critical paths in a 
project. Techniques used 
to find the critical path are 
called CPM, or critical path 
method, techniques.
Immediate predecessor
Activities that need to be 
completed immediately 
before another activity.
New Zealand’s Te Apiti Wind Farm Project constructed 
the largest wind farm in the southern hemisphere, within 
one year from commission to completion, on-time and 
within budget. Employing effective project management 
and using the correct tools and techniques, Meridian 
Energy Company provided a viable option for renewable 
energy in New Zealand and the project acts as a 
benchmark for later wind farm projects. 
© Wernher Krutein/Corbis

80	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
are the activities that need to be completed immediately before an activity. Activity  
A needs to be completed before activities B and C can start. B and C need to be  
completed before D can start. The following table reflects what we know so far:
Activity
Designation
Immediate  
Predecessors
Time  
(Weeks)
Select company
A
None
1
Obtain annual report and perform 
ratio analysis
B
A
2
Collect stock price data and perform 
technical analysis
C
A
1
Review data and make a decision
D
B and C
1
Here is a diagram that depicts these precedence relationships:
A(1)
B(2)
Report and Ratio Analysis
Make
Decision
Technical Analysis
Select
Company
C(1)
D(1)
Activity
(duration)
Early
start
Early
finish
Late
finish
Late
start
3.	 Determine the critical path.    Consider each sequence of activities that runs from the 
beginning to the end of the project. For our simple project, there are two paths: A–B–D 
and A–C–D. The critical path is the path where the sum of the activity times is the lon-
gest. A–B–D has a duration of four weeks and A–C–D has a duration of three weeks. The 
critical path, therefore, is A–B–D. If any activity along the critical path is delayed, then 
the entire project will be delayed.
4.	 Determine the early start/finish and late start/finish schedule.    To schedule the 
project, find when each activity needs to start and when it needs to finish. For some 
activities in a project there may be some leeway in when an activity can start and finish. 
This is called the slack time in an activity. For each activity in the project, we calculate 
four points in time: the early start, early finish, late start, 
and late finish times. The early start and early finish are the 
earliest times that the activity can start and be finished. 
Similarly, the late start and late finish are the latest times 
the activities can start and finish without delaying the proj-
ect. The difference between the late start time and early 
start time is the slack time. To help keep all of this straight, 
we place these numbers in special places around the nodes 
that represent each activity in our network diagram, as 
shown here. 
To calculate numbers, start from the beginning of the network and work to the end, calculat-
ing the early start and early finish numbers. Start counting with the current period, designated 
as period 0. Activity A has an early start of 0 and an early finish of 1. Activity B’s early start 
is A’s early finish or 1. Similarly, C’s early start is 1. The early finish for B is 3, and the early 
Slack time
The time that an activity 
can be delayed without 
delaying the entire project; 
the difference between the 
late and early start times of 
an activity.

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
81
finish for C is 2. Now consider activity D. D cannot start until both B and C are done. Because 
B cannot be done until 3, D cannot start until that time. The early start for D, therefore, is 3, and 
the early finish is 4. Our diagram now looks like this.
A(1)
B(2)
C(1)
D(1)
0
1
0
1
1
3
1
3
1
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
To calculate the late finish and late start times, start from the end of the network and work 
toward the front. Consider activity D. The earliest it can be done is at time 4; and if we do not 
want to delay the completion of the project, the late finish needs to be set to 4. With a duration 
of 1, the latest that D can start is 3. Now consider activity C. C must be done by time 3 so that D 
can start, so C’s late finish time is 3 and its late start time is 2. Notice the difference between the 
early and late start and finish times: This activity has one week of slack time. Activity B must 
be done by time 3 so that D can start, so its late finish time is 3 and late start time is 1. There is 
no slack in B. Finally, activity A must be done so that B and C can start. Because B must start 
earlier than C, and A must get done in time for B to start, the late finish time for A is 1. Finally, 
the late start time for A is 0. Notice there is no slack in activities A, B, and D. The final network 
looks like this. (Hopefully the stock your investment team has chosen is a winner!)
0
1
0
1
1
3
1
3
1
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
B(2)
A(1)
C(1)
D(1)
EXAMPLE 4.1: Critical Path Method 
Many firms that have tried to enter the notebook computer market have failed. Suppose 
your firm believes there is a big demand in this market because existing products have not 
been designed correctly. They are too heavy, too large, or too small to have standard-size 
­keyboards. Your intended computer will be small enough to carry inside a jacket pocket 
if need be. The ideal size will be no larger than 5 inches × 9½ inches × 1 inch with a fold-
ing keyboard. It should weigh no more than 15 ounces and have an LCD display, a solid 
state drive, and a wireless bluetooth connection. This should appeal to traveling business-
people, but it could have a much wider market, including students. It should be priced in the  
$175 to $200 range.

82	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	
The project, then, is to design, develop, and produce a prototype of this small computer. 
In the rapidly changing computer industry, it is crucial to hit the market with a product of 
this sort in less than a year. Therefore, the project team has been allowed approximately eight 
months (35 weeks) to produce the prototype.
SOLUTION
The first charge of the project team is to develop a project network chart and determine if the 
prototype computer can be completed within the 35-week target. Let’s follow the steps in the 
development of the network.
	1.	 Activity identification. The project team decides that the following activities are 
the major components of the project: design of the computer, prototype construction, 
prototype testing, methods specification (summarized in a report), evaluation studies 
of automatic assembly equipment, an assembly equipment study report, and a final 
report summarizing all aspects of the design, equipment, and methods.
	2.	 Activity sequencing and network construction. On the basis of discussion with 
staff, the project manager develops the precedence table and sequence network 
shown in Exhibit 4.4. When constructing a network, take care to ensure that the 
activities are in the proper order and that the logic of their relationships is main-
tained. For example, it would be illogical to have a situation where Event A precedes 
Event B, B precedes C, and C precedes A.
	3.	 Determine the critical path. The critical path is the longest sequence of con-
nected activities through the network and is defined as the path with zero slack 
time. This network has four different paths: A–C–F–G, A–C–E–G, A–B–D–F–G, 
and A–B–D–E–G. The lengths of these paths are 38, 35, 38, and 35 weeks. Note 
that this project has two different critical paths; this might indicate that this would 
be a fairly difficult project to manage. Calculating the early start and late start 
schedules gives additional insight into how difficult this project might be to com-
plete on time.
A(21)
C(7)
B(5)
D(2)
E(5)
G(2)
F(8)
Design
Build prototype
Evaluate equipment
Test prototype
Write equipment report
Write methods report
Write final report
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G
–
A
A
B
C, D
C, D
E, F
21
5
7
2
5
8
2
Activity
Designation
Immediate
Predecessors
Time
(Weeks)
CPM Activity Designations And Time Estimates
CPM Network for Computer Design Project
exhibit 4.4

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
83
Early Start and Late Start Schedules  An early start schedule is one that 
lists all of the activities by their early start times. For activities not on the critical path, there is 
slack time between the completion of each activity and the start of the next activity. The early 
start schedule completes the project and all its activities as soon as possible.
A late start schedule lists the activities to start as late as possible without delaying the 
completion date of the project. One motivation for using a late start schedule is that savings are 
realized by postponing purchases of materials, the use of labor, and other costs until necessary. 
These calculations are shown in Exhibit 4.5. From this, we see that the only activity that has 
slack is activity E. This certainly would be a fairly difficult project to complete on time.
CPM with Three Activity Time Estimates
If a single estimate of the time required to complete an activity is not reliable, the best procedure is 
to use three time estimates. These three times not only allow us to estimate the activity time but also 
let us obtain a probability estimate for completion time for the entire network. Briefly, the procedure 
is as follows: The estimated activity time is calculated using a weighted average of a minimum, 
maximum, and most likely time estimate. The expected completion time of the network is computed 
using the procedure described previously. Using estimates of variability for the activities on the criti-
cal path, the probability of completing the project by particular times can be estimated. (Note that the 
probability calculations are a distinguishing feature of the classic PERT approach.)
Early start schedule
A project schedule that 
lists all activities by their 
early start times.
Late start schedule
A project schedule that 
lists all activities by their 
late start times. This 
schedule may create 
savings by postponing 
purchases of material and 
other costs associated with 
the project.
CPM Network for Computer Design Project with Slack Calculations
exhibit 4.5
A(21)
C(7)
B(5)
D(2)
E(5)
G(2)
F(8)
Slack Calculations and Critical Path Determinations
Activity
LS–Es
Slack
On Critical Path
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G
0 
0 
0 
0 
3 
0 
0
31–28
28–28
36–36
26–26
21–21
21–21
0–0
36
36
38
38
0
0
21
21
28
28
36
36
28
31
33
36
26
26
28
28
21
21
28
28
21
21
26
26
EXAMPLE 4.2: Three Time Estimates 
We use the same information as in Example 4.1 with the exception that activities have three 
time estimates.
SOLUTION
	1.	 Identify each activity to be done in the project.
	2.	 Determine the sequence of activities and construct a network reflecting the prece-
dence relationships.

84	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	3.	 The three estimates for an activity time are
		 a = Optimistic time: The minimum reasonable period of time in which the ­activity 
can be completed. (There is only a small probability, typically assumed to be 
1 ­percent, that the activity can be completed in less time.)
		 m = Most likely time: The best guess of the time required. Since m would be the time 
thought most likely to appear, it is also the mode of the beta distribution dis-
cussed in step 4.
		 b = Pessimistic time: The maximum reasonable period of time the activity would take 
to be completed. (There is only a small probability, typically assumed to be 1 per-
cent, that it would take longer.)
		 Typically, this information is gathered from those people who are to perform the activity.
	4.	 Calculate the expected time (ET) for each activity. The formula for this calculation is
​ET = ​ a + 4m + b 
________ 
6 
​  ​
		 This is based on the beta statistical distribution and weights the most likely time (m) 
four times more than either the optimistic time (a) or the pessimistic time (b). The 
beta distribution is extremely flexible. It can take on the variety of forms that typi-
cally arise; it has finite end points (which limit the possible activity times to the area 
between a and b); and, in the simplified version, it permits straightforward computa-
tion of the activity mean and standard deviation.
	5.	 Determine the critical path. Using the expected times, a critical path is calculated in 
the same way as the single time case.
	6.	 Calculate the variances (σ2) of the activity times. Specifically, this is the variance, σ2, 
associated with each ET and is computed as follows:
​	
σ2 =​( ​ b − a 
____ 
6  ​ ) ​ 
2
​​​
		 As you can see, the variance is the square of one-sixth the difference between the two 
extreme time estimates. Of course, the greater this difference, the larger the variance.
	7.	 Determine the probability of completing the project on a given date, based on the 
application of the standard normal distribution. A valuable feature of using three time 
estimates is that it enables the analyst to assess the effect of uncertainty on project 
completion time. (If you are not familiar with this type of analysis, see the box titled 
Probability Analysis.) The mechanics of deriving this probability are as follows:
	a.	 Sum the variance values associated with each activity on the critical path.
	b.	 Substitute this figure, along with the project due date and the project expected 
completion time, into the Z transformation formula. This formula is
​Z =  ​ 
​D − T​ E​ 
______ 
​√ 
_____ 
​Σ σ​ cp​ 
2 ​ ​
 ​
		
where
​D  =  Desired completion date for the project  
 ​T​ E​   =  Expected completion time for the project
∑ ​​σ​ 2​​ cp​  =  Sum of the variances along the critical path​
	c.	 Calculate the value of Z, which is the number of standard deviations (of a standard 
normal distribution) that the project due date is from the expected completion time.
	d.	 Using the value of Z, find the probability of meeting the project due date (using a 
table of normal probabilities such as Appendix G). The expected completion time is 
the starting time plus the sum of the activity times on the critical path.
	
Following the steps just outlined, we developed Exhibit 4.6 showing expected times and 
variances. The project network was created the same way we did previously. The only differ-
ence is that the activity times are weighted averages. We determine the critical path as before, 
​[4 . 1]​
​[4 . 2]​
​[4.1]​

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
85
using these values as if they were single numbers. The difference between the single time 
estimate and the three times (optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic) is in computing prob-
abilities of completion. Exhibit 4.7 shows the network and critical path.
	
Because there are two critical paths in the network, we must decide which variances to 
use in arriving at the probability of meeting the project due date. A conservative approach 
dictates using the critical path with the largest total variance to focus management’s attention 
on the activities most likely to exhibit broad variations. On this basis, the variances associ-
ated with activities A, C, F, and G would be used to find the probability of completion. Thus  
​∑ ​σ​ 2​  cp​ = 9 + 2 . 7778 + 0 . 1111 + 0 = 11 . 8889.​ Suppose management asks for the probabil-
ity of completing the project in 35 weeks. D, then, is 35. The expected completion time was 
found to be 38. Substituting into the Z equation and solving, we obtain
​Z = ​ 
D −  ​T​ E​ 
_____ 
​√ 
______ 
∑ ​σ​ 2​ cp​ ​
 ​ = ​  35 − 38 
_______ 
​√ 
________ 
11 . 8889 ​ ​ = − 0 . 87​
	
Looking at Appendix G, we see that a Z value of -0.87 yields a probability of 0.1922, 
which means that the project manager has only about a 19 percent chance of completing the 
project in 35 weeks. Note that this probability is really the probability of completing the criti-
cal path A–C–F–G. Because there is another critical path and other paths that might become 
critical, the probability of completing the project in 35 weeks is actually less than 0.19.
Activity
Activity 
Designation
Time Estimates
 a    m     b
Expected Times (ET)
​ a + 4m + b 
__________ 
6 
​
Activity Variance (σ 2)
​( ​ b – a 
_____ 
6  ​ ) ​ 
2
​
Design
A
10     22    28
21
9
Build prototype
B
   4     4    10
  5
1
Evaluate equipment
C
   4     6    14
  7
2.7778
Test prototype
D
   1     2      3
  2
0.1111
Write report
E
   1     5      9
  5
1.7778
Write methods report
F
   7     8      9
  8
0.1111
Write final report
G
   2     2      2
  2
0
Activity Expected Times and Variances
exhibit 4.6
ET = 7
σ2 = 2.7778
A
C
B
D
E
G
F
0
21
26
28
28
33
36
38
36
28
28
21
26
21
ET = 21
σ2 = 9
ET = 5
σ2 = 1
ET = 5
σ2 = 1.7778
ET = 2
σ2 5 0
ET = 8
σ2 = 0.1111
ET = 2
σ2 = 0.1111
Legend
ES
EF
LS
LF
0
21
26
21
28
26
31
36
36
38
36
28
28
21
Computer Design Project with Three Time Estimates
exhibit 4.7

86	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Time–Cost Models and Project Crashing
In practice, project managers are as much concerned with the cost to complete a project as with 
the time to complete the project. For this reason, time–cost models have been devised. These 
models—extensions of the basic critical path method—attempt to develop a minimum-cost 
schedule for an entire project and to control expenditures during the project.
Minimum-Cost 
Scheduling 
(Time–Cost 
Trade-Off)  The 
basic 
assumption in minimum-cost scheduling, also known as “crashing,” is that there is a relationship 
between activity completion time and the cost of a project. Crashing refers to the compression 
or shortening of the time to complete the project. On one hand, it costs money to expedite an 
activity; on the other, it costs money to sustain (or lengthen) the project. The costs associated 
with expediting activities are termed activity direct costs and add to the project direct cost. Some 
may be worker-related, such as requiring overtime work, hiring more workers, and transferring 
workers from other jobs; others are resource-related, such as buying or leasing additional or 
more efficient equipment and drawing on additional support facilities.
The costs associated with sustaining the project are termed project indirect costs: overhead, 
facilities, and resource opportunity costs, and, under certain contractual situations, penalty costs 
or lost incentive payments. Because activity direct costs and project indirect costs are oppos-
ing costs dependent on time, the scheduling problem is essentially one of finding the project 
duration that minimizes their sum or, in other words, finding the optimum point in a time–cost 
trade-off.
Time–cost models
Extension of the critical 
path models that considers 
the trade-off between the 
time required to complete 
an activity and the cost. 
This is often referred to as 
“crashing” the project.
The three-time-estimate approach introduces the ability to 
consider the probability that a project will be completed 
within a particular amount of time. The assumption needed 
to make this probability estimate is that the activity dura-
tion times are independent random variables. If this is true, 
the central limit theorem can be used to find the mean and 
the variance of the sequence of activities that form the criti-
cal path. The central limit theorem says that the sum of a 
group of independent, identically distributed random vari-
ables approaches a normal distribution as the number of 
random variables increases. In the case of project manage-
ment problems, the random variables are the actual times 
for the activities in the project. (Recall that the time for each 
activity is assumed to be independent of other activities and 
to follow a beta statistical distribution.) For this, the 
expected time to complete the critical path activities 
is the sum of the activity times.
Likewise, because of the assumption of activity 
time independence, the sum of the variances of the 
activities along the critical path is the variance of 
the expected time to complete the path. Recall that 
the standard deviation is equal to the square root 
of the variance.
To determine the actual probability of complet-
ing the critical path activities within a certain amount 
of time, we need to find where on our probability 
distribution the time falls. Appendix G shows the 
areas of the cumulative standard normal distribution for 
different values of Z. Z measures the number of standard 
deviations either to the right or to the left of zero in the dis-
tribution. The values correspond to the cumulative probabil-
ity associated with each value of Z. For example, the first 
value in the table, −4.00, has a G(z) equal to .00003. This 
means that the probability associated with a Z value of −4.0 
is only .003 percent. Similarly, a Z value of 1.50 has a G(z) 
equal to .93319 or 93.319 percent. The Z values are calcu-
lated using Equation (4.3) given in Step 7b of the “Three 
Time Estimates” example solution. These cumulative prob-
abilities also can be obtained by using the NORMSDIST (Z) 
function built into Microsoft Excel.
PROBABILITY ANALYSIS
Negative values of Z
Positive values of Z
Probability
of Z
0

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
87
EXAMPLE 4.3: Time–Cost Trade-off Procedure
The procedure for project crashing consists of the following five steps. It is explained by using 
the simple four-activity network shown in Exhibit 4.8. Assume that indirect costs are $10 per 
day for the first eight days of the project. If the project takes longer than eight days, indirect 
costs increase at the rate of $5 per day.
SOLUTION
	1.	 Prepare a CPM-type network diagram.  For each activity, this diagram should list:
	a.	 Normal cost (NC): the lowest expected activity costs. (These are the lesser of the 
cost figures shown under each node in Exhibit 4.8.)
	b.	 Normal time (NT): the time associated with each normal cost.
	c.	 Crash time (CT): the shortest possible activity time.
	d.	 Crash cost (CC): the cost associated with each crash time.
	2.	 Determine the cost per unit of time (assume days) to expedite each activity.  The 
relationship between activity time and cost may be shown graphically by plotting CC 
and CT coordinates and connecting them to the NC and NT coordinates by a concave, 
convex, or straight line—or some other form, depending on the actual cost structure of 
activity performance, as in Exhibit 4.8. For activity A, we assume a linear relationship 
between time and cost. This assumption is common in practice and helps us derive the 
cost per day to expedite because this value may be found directly by taking the slope 
of the line using the formula Slope = (CC − NC) ÷ (NT − CT). (When the assumption 
of linearity cannot be made, the cost of expediting must be determined graphically for 
each day the activity may be shortened.)
		 	
The calculations needed to obtain the cost of expediting the remaining activities are 
shown in Exhibit 4.9A.
	3.	 Compute the critical path.  For the simple network we have been using, this sched-
ule would take 10 days. The critical path is A–B–D.
Step 1. Prepare CPM Diagram with Activity Costs
2, 1
$6, $10
3, 1
5, 2
$9, $18
4, 3
$6, $8
$5, $9
CC
Step 2. Determine Cost per Unit of Time
Activity 
cost
$10 
8 
6
Activity A
CC, CT
NC, NT
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
Step 3. Compute the Critical Path
Time
7
7
10
10
0
0
2
2
2
2
7
7
2
3
6
7
CC Crash cost
CT Crash time
NC Normal cost
NT Normal time
NC
A
B
C
D
B(5)
D(3)
A(2)
C(4)
CT
NT
Example of Time–Cost Trade-Off Procedure
exhibit 4.8

88	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	4.	 Shorten the critical path at the least cost. The easiest way to proceed is to start with 
the normal schedule, find the critical path, and reduce the path time by one day using 
the lowest-cost activity. Then, recompute and find the new critical path and reduce it by 
one day also. Repeat this procedure until the time of completion is satisfactory, or until 
there can be no further reduction in the project completion time. Exhibit 4.9B shows 
the reduction of the network one day at a time.
		 	
Working through Exhibit 4.9B might initially seem difficult. In the first line, all activi-
ties are at their normal time, and costs are at their lowest value. The critical path is A–B–
D, cost for completing the project is $26, and the project completion time is 10 days.
		 	
The goal in line two is to reduce the project completion time by one day. We know it 
is necessary to reduce the time for one or more of the activities on the critical path. In 
the second column, we note that activity A can be reduced one day (from two days to 
on), activity B can be reduced three days (from five to two days), and activity D can be 
reduced two days (from three days to one). The next column tracks the cost to reduce 
each of the activities by a single day. For example, for activity A, it normally costs $6 to 
complete in two days. It could be completed in one day at a cost of $10, a $4 increase. 
So we indicate the cost to expedite activity A by one day is $4. For activity B, it nor-
mally costs $9 to complete in five days. It could be completed in two days at a cost of 
$18. Our cost to reduce B by three days is $9, or $3 per day. For C, it normally costs 
$5 to complete in three days. It could be completed in one day at a cost of $9; a two-
day reduction would cost $4 ($2 per day). The least expensive alternative for a one-day 
Activity
CC − NC
NT − CT
​ CC − NC 
______ 
NT − CT ​
Cost per Day  
To Expedite
Maximum Number of Days 
Activity May Be Shortened
A
$10 − $6
2 − 1
​ $10 − $6 
_______ 
2 − 1 ​
$4
1
B
$18 − $9
5 − 2
​ $18 − $9 
_______ 
5 − 2  ​
$3
3
C
$8 − $6
4 − 3
​ $8 − $6 
______ 
4 − 3  ​
$2
1
D
$9 − $5
3 − 1
​ $9 − $5 
______ 
3 − 1  ​
$2
2
A. Calculation of Cost per Day to Expedite Each Activity
exhibit 4.9
Current  
Critical  
Path(s)
Remaining Number of 
Days Activity
May Be Shortened
Cost per Day
to Expedite  
Each Activity
Least-Cost
Activity to  
Expedite
Total Cost of
All Activities  
in Network
Project
Completion  
Time
ABD
All activity times and costs are normal.
$26
10
ABD
A–1, B–3, D–2
A–4, B–3, D–2
D
  28
9
ABD
A–1, B–3, D–1
A–4, B–3, D–2
D
  30
8
ABD
A–1, B–3
A–4, B–3
B
  33
7
ABD ACD
A–1, B–2, C–1
A–4, B–3, C–2
A*
  37
6
ABD ACD
B–2, C–1
B–3, C–2
B&C†
  42
5
ABD ACD
B–1
B–3
B†
  45
5
B. Reducing the Project Completion Time One Day at a Time 
*To reduce the critical path by one day, reduce either A alone or B and C together at the same time (either 
B or C by itself just modiﬁes the critical path without shortening it).
†B and C must be crashed together to reduce the path by one day.
+Crashing activity B does not reduce the length of the project, so this additional cost would not be incurred.

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
89
reduction in time is to expedite activity D at a cost of $2. Total cost for the network 
goes up to $28 and the project completion time is reduced to nine days.
		 	
Our next iteration starts in line three, where the goal is to reduce the project com-
pletion time to eight days. The nine-day critical path is A–B–D. We could shorten 
activity A by one day, B by three days, and D by one day (note D has already been 
reduced from three to two days). Cost to reduce each activity by one day is the same 
as in line two. Again, the least expensive activity to reduce is D. Reducing activity D 
from two days to one results in the total cost for all activities in the network going up 
to $30 and the project completion time being reduced to eight days.
		 	
Line four is similar to line three, but now only A and B are on the critical path and 
can be reduced. B is reduced, which takes our cost up $3 to $33 and reduces the proj-
ect completion time to seven days.
		 	
In line five (actually our fourth iteration in solving the problem), activities A, B, C, 
and D are all critical. D cannot be reduced, so our only options are activities A, B, and C. 
Note that B and C are in parallel, so it does not help to reduce B without reducing C. Our 
options are to reduce A alone at a cost of $4 or B and C together at a cost of $5 ($3 for B 
and $2 for C), so we reduce A in this iteration.
		 	
In line six, we take the B and C option that was considered in line five. Finally, in 
line seven, our only option is to reduce activity B. Since B and C are in parallel and 
we cannot reduce C, there is no value in reducing B alone. We can reduce the project 
completion time no further.
	5.	 Plot project direct, indirect, and total-cost curves and find the minimum-cost 
schedule. Exhibit 4.10 shows the indirect cost plotted as a constant $10 per day for up 
to eight days and increasing $5 per day thereafter (as stated in the problem). The direct 
costs are plotted from Exhibit 4.9B, and the total project cost is shown as the total of 
the two costs.
Summing the values for direct and indirect costs for each day yields the project total cost 
curve. As you can see, this curve is at its minimum with an eight-day schedule, which costs 
$40 ($30 direct + $10 indirect).
Cost
($)
60
 
50
 
40
 
30
 
20
 
10 
Project total costs
Project direct costs
Project indirect costs
Minimum cost schedule (days)
10
9
8
7
6
5
0
Plot of Costs and Minimum-Cost Schedule
exhibit 4.10
After seeing the arithmetic used when projects are being planned, we now look at how projects 
are actually managed while they are being completed. Charts and various types of standard 
forms are useful because their visual presentations are easily understood. Computer programs 
are available to quickly generate the charts, and we discuss these later in the chapter.
MANAGING PROJECTS
Evaluate projects using 
earned value management.
LO 4–3

90	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Exhibit 4.11 is a sample Gantt chart, sometimes referred to as a bar chart, showing both 
the amount of time involved and the sequence in which activities can be performed. The chart 
is named after Henry L. Gantt, who won a presidential citation for his application of this type 
of chart to shipbuilding during World War I. In the example in Exhibit 4.11A, “long lead 
Contract 
negotiated
Contract
signed
Long lead
procurement
Manufacturing
schedules
Bill of
materials
Short lead
procurement
Material
specifications
Manufacturing
plans
Start-up
A. Gantt Chart for Single Activities
Activity
C. Divisional Breakdown of Costs and Labor Hours
Percentage of labor hours
15
10
5
E. Bar/Milestone Chart
Weeks after start of project
9
10
11
Manufacturing
Finance 
Engineering
Overhead 
Personnel
Percentage of cost
40
10
15
25
10
Total 
program 
costs $
B. Total Program Cost Breakdown
Dollars ($)
Total $
Overhead $
Material $
Labor $
Time
D. Cost and Performance Tracking Schedule
Projected 
Completed
Time
Projected 
Actual
Overruns
Tracking date line
Weeks after start of 
Milestones
1. Purchasing order release
2. Invoices received
3. Material received
Time
Project 1 
Project 2 
Project 3
1
2
3
Short lead
procurement
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
20
40
60
40
20
0
20
50
Sample of Graphic Project Reports
exhibit 4.11

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
91
procurement” and “manufacturing schedules” are independent activities and can occur simul-
taneously. All other activities must be done in the sequence from top to bottom. Exhibit 4.11B 
graphs the amounts of money spent on labor, material, and overhead. Its value is its clarity in 
identifying sources and amounts of cost.
Exhibit 4.11C shows the percentage of the project’s labor hours that come from the various 
areas of manufacturing, finance, and so on. These labor hours are related to the proportion of 
the project’s total labor cost. For example, manufacturing is responsible for 50 percent of the 
project’s labor hours, but this 50 percent has been allocated just 40 percent of the total labor 
dollars charged.
The top half of Exhibit 4.11D shows the degree of completion of these projects. The dot-
ted vertical line signifies today. Project 1, therefore, is already late because it still has work to 
be done. Project 2 is not being worked on temporarily, so there is a space before the projected 
work. Project 3 continues to be worked on without interruption. The bottom of Exhibit 4.11D 
compares actual total costs and projected costs. As we see, two cost overruns occurred, and the 
current cumulative costs are over the projected cumulative costs.
Exhibit 4.11E is a milestone chart. The three milestones mark specific points in the project 
where checks can be made to see if the project is on time and where it should be. The best place 
to locate milestones is at the completion of a major activity. In this exhibit, the major activities 
completed were “purchase order release,” “invoices received,” and “material received.”
Other standard reports can be used for a more detailed presentation comparing cost to prog-
ress (such as cost schedule status report—CSSR) or reports providing the basis for partial pay-
ment (such as the earned value report, which we discuss next).
Earned Value Management (EVM)
Earned value management (EVM) is a technique for measuring project progress in an objec-
tive manner. EVM has the ability to combine measurements of scope, schedule, and cost in a 
project. When properly applied, EVM provides a method for evaluating the relative success of a 
project at a point in time. The measures can be applied to projects focused on either revenue 
generation or cost, depending on the type of project.
Essential features of any EVM implementation include:
	1.	 A project plan that identifies the activities to be accomplished.
	2.	 A valuation of each activity work. In the case of a project that generates revenue, this 
is called the Planned Value (PV) of the activity. In the case where a project is evaluated 
based on cost, this is called the Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS) for the 
activity.
	3.	 Predefined earning or costing rules (also called metrics) to quantify the accom-
plishment of work, called Earned Value (EV) or Budgeted Cost of Work Performed 
(BCWP).
The terminology used in the features is general since the valuations could be based on either a 
value measure (revenue or profit) or a cost measure. EVM implementations for large or com-
plex projects include many more features, such as indicators and forecasts of cost performance 
(overbudget or underbudget) and schedule performance (behind schedule or ahead of schedule). 
However, the most basic requirement of an EVM system is that it quantifies progress using PV 
(or BCWS) and EV (or BCWP).
Project Tracking without EVM  It is helpful to see an example of project tracking 
that does not include earned value performance management. Consider a project that has been 
planned in detail, including a time-phased spend plan for all elements of work. This is a case 
where the project is evaluated based on cost. Exhibit 4.12A shows the cumulative cost budget 
for this project as a function of time (the blue line, labeled BCWS). It also shows the cumulative 
actual cost of the project (red line) through week 8. To those unfamiliar with EVM, it might 
appear that this project was over budget through week 4 and then under budget from week 6 
through week 8. However, what is missing from this chart is any understanding of how much 
Earned value 
management (EVM)
Technique that combines 
measures of scope, 
schedule, and cost 
for evaluating project 
progress.
Gantt chart
Shows in a graphic 
manner the amount of time 
involved and the sequence 
in which activities can be 
performed. Often referred 
to as a bar chart.
Comparing the 
work that has been 
completed in a project 
to the work that should 
have been completed 
according to the project 
plan is the key idea 
behind EVM analysis.
KEY IDEAS

92	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
work has been accomplished during the project. If the project was actually completed at week 
8, then the project would actually be well under budget and well ahead of schedule. If, on the 
other hand, the project is only 10 percent complete at week 8, the project is significantly over 
budget and behind schedule. A method is needed to measure technical performance objectively 
and quantitatively, and that is what EVM accomplishes.
Project Tracking with EVM  Consider the same project, except this time the project plan 
includes predefined methods of quantifying the accomplishment of work. At the end of each 
week, the project manager identifies every detailed element of work that has been completed, 
and sums the Budgeted Cost of Work Performed for each of these completed elements by 
estimating the percent complete of the activity and multiplying by the activity budgeted cost. 
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP) may be accumulated monthly, weekly, or as 
progress is made.
Exhibit 4.12B shows the BCWS curve (in orange) along with the BCWP curve from Chart 
C. The chart indicates that technical performance (i.e., progress) started more rapidly than 
planned, but slowed significantly and fell behind schedule at week 7 and 8. This chart illustrates 
the schedule performance aspect of EVM. It is complementary to critical path schedule man-
agement (described in the next section).
Exhibit 4.12C shows the same BCWP curve (blue) with the actual cost data from Chart A 
(in green). It can be seen that the project was actually under budget, relative to the amount of 
work accomplished, since the start of the project. This is a much better conclusion than might 
be derived from Chart A.
$200,000
Chart A
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
7
8
AC
9
Project
Tracking
without
Earned Value
Is Inconclusive
10 11 12
Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS)
Actual Cost (AC)
BCWS
$200,000
Chart B
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
7
8
BCWP
9
Schedule
Variance ($)
Behind
Schedule
Schedule
Variance (Time)
10 11 12
BCWS
Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS)
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP)
$200,000
Chart C
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
7
8
BCWP
AC
9
Cost
Variance ($)
Under Budget
10 11 12
Actual Cost (AC)
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP)
$200,000
Chart D
$150,000
$100,000
$50,000
$0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (weeks)
7
8
BCWP
BCWS
AC
9
10 11 12
Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS)
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP)
Actual Cost (AC)
Earned Value Management Charts
exhibit 4.12

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
93
Exhibit 4.12D shows all three curves together—which is a typical EVM line chart. The 
best way to read these three-line charts is to identify the BCWS curve first, then compare it 
to BCWP (for schedule performance) and AC (for cost performance). It can be seen from this 
illustration that a true understanding of cost performance and schedule performance relies first 
on measuring technical performance objectively. This is the foundational principle of EVM.
EXAMPLE 4.4: Earned Value Management
The figure illustrates how to determine the Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled by summing 
the dollar values (in $1,000s) of the work scheduled for accomplishment at the end of period 
X. The Budgeted Cost of Work Performed is determined by summing the earned value for the 
work actually accomplished, shown in red shading.
SOLUTION
From the diagram, the budgeted cost of all the project work is the following: Activity  
A = $18K, B = $10K, C = $20K, D = $40K. This is the cost of each activity when they are 
100% completed.
	
The project is currently at day X, and so from the diagram, 100% of activity A should be com-
pleted, and it is; 100% of activity B should be completed, but only 80% is; 80% of activity C should 
be completed, but only 70% is; and 15% of activity D should be completed, but it has not started.
Step 1: Calculate the Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS) given the current state of the 
project. This is the value or cost of the project that is expected, given the project is at time X:
Activity A	
100% of $18K = $18K
Activity B	
100% of $10K = $10K
Activity C	
80% of $20K = $16K
Activity D	
15% of $40K = $6K
BCWS = $18K + $10K + $16K + $6K = $50K
Step 2: Calculate the Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP) given the current state of 
the project. This is the actual value or cost of the project to date, given the project is at time X:
Activity A	
100% of $18K = $18K
Activity B	
80% of $10K = $8K
Activity C	
70% of $20K = $14K
Activity D	
0% of $40K = $0
BCWP = $18K + $8K + $14K + $0K = $40K
Activity A
$18K
X
X
$20K
$40K
Time
15%
$10K
Activity B
Activity C
Activity D
(Actual) 70%–80% (Expected)
(Actual) 80%

94	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Step 3: Obtain the Actual Cost (AC) of the work performed. This would need to be obtained 
from accounting records for the project. Assume that the AC for this project to date is $45K.
AC = $45K (Data from Acct. System)
Step 4: Calculate key performance measures for the project:
Schedule Variance: This is the difference between the Budgeted Cost of Work Performed 
(BCWP) and the Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled (BCWS) for the project:
Schedule Variance = BCWP – BCWS
Schedule Variance = $40K – $50K = –$10K
Greater than 0 is generally good because it implies the project is ahead of schedule.
Schedule Performance Index: This is the ratio of the BCWP versus the BCWS for the project:
Schedule Performance Index = BCWP/BCWS
Schedule Performance Index = $40K /$50K = 0.8
Greater than 1 is generally good because it implies the project is ahead of schedule.
Cost Variance: This is the difference between BCWP and the Actual Cost (AC):
Cost Variance = BCWP – AC
Cost Variance = $40K – $45K = –$5K
Greater than 0 is generally good because it implies under budget.
Cost Performance Index: This is the ratio of the BCWP versus the AC for the project to date:
Cost Performance Index = BCWP/AC
Cost Performance Index = $40K/$45K = 0.89
< 1 means the cost of completing the work is higher than planned, which is bad.
= 1 means the cost of completing the work is right on plan, which is good.
> 1 means the cost of completing the work is lower than planned, which is usually good.
That CPI means the project is spending about $1.13 for every $1.00 of budgeted work accom-
plished. This is not very good because the project is overbudget and tasks are not being com-
pleted on time or on budget. A Schedule Performance Index and a Cost Performance Index 
greater than 1 are desirable.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS
Interest in the techniques and concepts of project management has exploded in the past  
10 years. This has resulted in a parallel increase in project management software offerings. 
Now there are over 100 companies offering project management software. For the most up-to-
date information about software available, check out the website of the Project Management 
Institute (www.pmi.org). Two of the leading companies are Microsoft, with Microsoft Proj-
ect, and Primavera, with Primavera Project Planner.
The Microsoft Project program comes with an excellent online tutorial, which is one reason 
for its overwhelming popularity with project managers tracking midsized projects. This pack-
age is compatible with the Microsoft Office Suite, which opens all the communications and 
Internet integration capability that Microsoft offers. The program includes features for schedul-
ing, allocating, and leveling resources, as well as controlling costs and producing presentation-
quality graphics and reports.
Exemplify how network-
planning models and 
earned value management 
are implemented in 
commercial software 
packages.
LO 4–4

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
95
For managing very large projects or programs having several projects, Primavera Project 
Planner is often the choice. Primavera was the first major vendor of this type of software and 
has possibly the most sophisticated capability.
In addition to scheduling tasks, a major capability of all these software packages is assign-
ing resources to competing tasks and projects. For example, the systems can schedule back 
labor and equipment for a project. Mid- to high-level project management information systems 
(PMIS) software can also resolve overallocations through a “leveling” feature. Several rules 
of thumb can be used. You can specify that low-priority tasks should be delayed until higher-
priority ones are complete, or that the project should end before or after the original deadline.
The real action starts after the project gets under way. Actual progress will differ from your 
original, or baseline, planned progress. Software can hold several different baseline plans, so 
you can compare monthly snapshots.
A tracking Gantt chart superimposes the current schedule onto a baseline plan so deviations 
are easily noticed. If you prefer, a spreadsheet view of the same information could be output. 
Deviations between planned start/finish and newly scheduled start/finish also appear, and a 
“slipping filter” can be applied to highlight or output only those tasks that are scheduled to fin-
ish at a later date than the planned baseline. Management by exception also can be applied to 
find deviations between budgeted costs and actual costs.
Concept Connections
LO 4–1   Explain what projects are and how projects are organized.
Summary
	∙	 Projects can be categorized into four major types: prod-
uct change, process change, research and development, 
and alliance and partnerships.
	∙	 Even though some projects are often thought to be one-
time occurrences, they are sometimes repeated.
	∙	 The project team can be organized in different ways. 
The most common are pure project, where the team 
works full time on the project; functional project, where 
team members stay in their functional group and work 
on many different projects at the same time; and matrix 
project, which blends the pure project and functional 
project structures.
	∙	 The activities of the projects are organized according to 
the work breakdown structure, which groups them into 
subtasks and work packages. Completion of a work 
package results in the completion of a subtask, and 
completion of all of the subtasks is required to com-
plete the project.

96	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Key Terms
Project  A series of related jobs usually directed toward 
some major output and requiring a significant period of 
time to perform.
Project management  Planning, directing, and control-
ling resources (people, equipment, material) to meet the 
technical, cost, and time constraints of a project.
Pure project  A structure for organizing a project where 
a self-contained team works full time on the project.
Functional project  In this structure, team members are 
assigned from the functional units of the organization. 
The team members remain a part of their functional 
units and typically are not dedicated to the project.
Matrix project  A structure that blends the functional and 
pure project structures. Each project uses people from 
different functional areas. A dedicated project manager 
decides what tasks need to be performed and when, but 
the functional managers control which people to use.
Project milestone  A specific event in a project.
Work breakdown structure (WBS)  The hierarchy of 
project tasks, subtasks, and work packages.
Activities  Pieces of work within a project that consume 
time. The completion of all the activities of a project 
marks the end of the project.
LO 4–2   Analyze projects using network-planning models.
	∙	 The critical path method (CPM) is the most widely 
used approach to scheduling projects. There are a num-
ber of variations on the basic approach.
	∙	 The goal is to find the earliest time that the entire proj-
ect can be completed.
	∙	 The techniques also identify what activities are  
critical, meaning that there cannot be delays with-­ 
out delaying the earliest time that the project can be 
completed.
	∙	 The three techniques studied in the chapter are the fol-
lowing: CPM with a single activity time, CPM with 
three activity time estimates, and time–cost models 
with project crashing.
Summary
Key Terms
Critical path  The sequence(s) of activities in a project 
that form the longest chain in terms of their time to com-
plete. This path contains zero slack time. It is possible 
for there to be multiple critical paths in a project. Tech-
niques used to find the critical path are called CPM, or 
critical path method, techniques.
Immediate predecessor  Activities that need to be com-
pleted immediately before another activity.
Slack time  The time that an activity can be delayed with-
out delaying the entire project; the difference between the 
late and early start times of an activity.
Early start schedule  A project schedule that lists all 
activities by their early start times.
Late start schedule  A project schedule that lists all activ-
ities by their late start times. This schedule may create 
savings by postponing purchases of material and other 
costs associated with the project.
Time–cost models  Extension of the critical path models 
that considers the trade-off between the time required to 
complete an activity and the cost. This is often referred to 
as “crashing” the project.
​ET = ​ a + 4m + b 
_______ 
6 
​​  
​  ​[​4.1​]​​
​​σ​ 2​ = ​(​ ​ b − a 
____ 
6  ​)​ 
2
​​  ​​  ​ ​​
[4.2]
​Z = ​  D − T 
_____ 
​√ 
_____ 
∑ ​σ​ cp​ 
2 ​ ​
 ​​  ​​   ​
[4.3]
LO 4–3   Evaluate projects using earned value management.
Summary
	∙	 A key aspect to managing a project is understanding 
the current status of its activities.
	∙	 Simple graphical techniques are often augmented 
with standard reports that give a detailed analysis of 
the work completed together with what is left to be 
done.
	∙	 Earned value management (EVM) is a technique com-
monly used for measuring project progress.

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
97
Key Terms
Gantt chart  Shows in a graphic manner the amount of 
time involved and the sequence in which activities can 
be performed. Often referred to as a bar chart.
Earned value management (EVM)  Technique that com-
bines measures of scope, schedule, and cost for evaluat-
ing project progress.
LO 4–4   Exemplify how network-planning models and earned value management are imple-
mented in commercial software packages.
Summary
	∙	 The techniques and concepts described in this chapter 
are implemented in commercially available software 
packages.
	∙	 Two of the most common packages are Microsoft Proj-
ect and Primavera Project Planner.
	∙	 These packages are capable of managing multiple proj-
ects at the same time and can help resolve resource 
usage conflicts of competing projects.
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1 
A project has been defined to contain the following list of activities, along with their required 
times for completion:
LO4–2
Activity
Time (days)
Immediate Predecessors
A
1
—  
B
4
A    
C
3
A    
D
7
A    
E
6
B    
F
2
C, D
G
7
E, F
H
9
D    
I
4
G, H
	a.	 Draw the critical path diagram.
	b.	 Show the early start, early finish, late start, and late finish times.
	c.	 Show the critical path.
	d.	 What would happen if activity F was revised to take four days instead of two?
Solution
The answers to a, b, and c are shown in the following diagram.
G(7)
E(6)
D(7)
B(4)
A(1)
F(2)
0
1
0
1
1
5
1
5
5 11
5 11
11 18
11 18
8 10
9 11
H(9)
8 17
9 18
1
8
2
9
C(3)
1
4
6
9
I(4)
18 22
18 22
Critical path:
A–B–E–G–I

98	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Path
Length (days)
A-B-E-G-I
22 (critical path)
A-C-F-G-I
17
A-D-F-G-I
21
A-D-H-I
21
	d.	 New critical path: A–D–F–G–I. Time of completion is 23 days.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2 
A project has been defined to contain the following activities, along with their time estimates 
for completion:
LO4–3
b.
A(4.0)
B(5.5)
F(9.00)
C(4.17)
D(11.33)
E(6.50)
G(4.50)
0
0
4
4
4
4
4
9.5
14
19.50
15.33
19.50
19.50
15.33
15.33
15.33
22
21.83
15.33
19.50
28.5
28.5
28.5
Critical path - ADCFG,
33 weeks
28.5
28.5
33
33
19.50
Activity
​Expected Time  ​ a + 4m + b 
_______ 
6 
​
​Activity Variance   ​(​ ​ b − a 
____ 
6  ​)​ 
2
​
A
4.00
1
B
5.50
0.6944
C
4.17
0.2500
D
11.33
1.7778
E
6.50
2.2500
F
9.00
2.7778
G
4.50
0.6944
Time Estimates (weeks)
Activity
a
m
b
Immediate Predecessor
A
1
 4
 7
—  
B
2
 6
 7
A    
C
3
 4
 6
D    
D
6
12
14
A    
E
3
 6
12
D    
F
6
 8
16
B, C
G
1
 5
 6
E, F
	a.	 Calculate the expected time and the variance for each activity.
	b.	 Draw the critical path diagram.
	c.	 Show the early start, early finish times, and late start, late finish times.
	d.	 Show the critical path.
	e.	 What is the probability that the project can be completed in 34 weeks?
Solution
	a.	

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
99
	c.	 Shown on diagram.
	d.	 Shown on diagram.
Path
Length (weeks)
A-B-F-G
23
A-D-C-F-G
33 (critical 
path)
A-D-E-G
26.33
	e.	 ​Z = ​ 
D − ​T​ E​ 
_____ 
​√ 
____ 
Σ ​σ​ cp​ 
2 ​ ​
 ​ = ​ 
34 − 33 
 
______________________ 
 
 
​√ 
__________________________ 
 
 
1 + 1.7778 + .25 + 2.7778 + .6944 ​
 ​ = ​ 
1 
_____ 
2.5495 ​ = .3922​
Look up that value in Appendix E and we see that there is about a 65 percent chance of com-
pleting the project by that date.
SOLVED PROBLEM 3 
Here are the precedence requirements, normal and crash activity times, and normal and crash 
costs for a construction project:
LO 4–2
Required Time (weeks)
Cost
Activity
Preceding  
Activities
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
A
—  
4
2
$10,000
$11,000
B
A    
3
2
    6,000
9,000
C
A    
2
1
    4,000
6,000
D
B    
5
3
  14,000
18,000
E
B, C
1
1
    9,000
9,000
F
C    
3
2
    7,000
8,000
G
E, F
4
2
  13,000
25,000
H
D, E
4
1
  11,000
18,000
I 
H, G
6
5
  20,000
29,000
	a.	 What are the critical path and the estimated completion time?
	b.	 To shorten the project by three weeks, which tasks would be shortened and what would the 
final total project cost be?
Solution
The construction project network is shown as follows:
H(4)
D(5)
C(2)
B(3)
A(4)
0
4
4
7
7 12
F(3)
6
9
12 16
G(4)
9 13
4
6
E(1)
7
8
I(6)
16 22

100	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
(1)  1st week: CP = A–B–D–H–I. A is least expensive at $500. Critical path stays the same.
(2)  2nd week: A is still the least expensive at $500. Critical path stays the same.
(3)  3rd week: Because A is no longer available, the choices are B (at $3,000), D (at $2,000), 
H (at $2,333), or I (at $9,000). Therefore, choose D at $2,000.
The total project cost if shortened by three weeks is
A
$11,000
B
6,000
C
4,000
D
16,000
E
9,000
F
7,000
G
13,000
H
11,000
I
   20,000
$97,000
SOLVED PROBLEM 4 
You have been asked to calculate the Cost Performance Index for a project using earned value 
management techniques. It is currently day 20 of the project and the following summarizes 
the current status of the project:
LO4–3
Activity
Expected  
Cost
Activity  
Duration
Expected  
Start Date
Expected 
Completion  
Date
Expected % 
Complete
Actual %  
Complete
Actual  
Cost to  
Date
Startup
$100,000
10 days
  0
10
100%
100%
$105,000
Construction
 325,000
14 days
  8
22
12/14 = 85.714%
  90%
  280,000
Finishing
50,000
12 days
18
30
   2/12 = 16.667%
  25%
2,500
Activity
Crash Cost
Normal Cost
Normal Time
Crash Time
Cost per Week
Weeks
A
$11,000
$10,000
4
2
$   500 
2
B
9,000
6,000
3
2
3,000
1
C
6,000
4,000
2
1
2,000
1
D
18,000
14,000
5
3
2,000
2
E
9,000
9,000
1
1
0
F
8,000
7,000
3
2
1,000
1
G
25,000
13,000
4
2
6,000
2
H
18,000
11,000
4
1
2,333
3
I 
29,000
20,000
6
5
9,000
1
	b.	
	a.	 Path
Length
A-B-D-H-I
22 (critical path)
A-B-E-H-I
18
A-B-E-G-I
18
A-C-E-H-I
17
A-C-E-G-I
17
A-C-F-G-I
19
Normal completion time is 22 weeks.

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
101
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What was the most complex project you have been involved in? Give examples of the fol-
lowing as they pertain to the project: the work breakdown structure, tasks, subtasks, and 
work package. Were you on the critical path? Did it have a good project manager?
	  2.	 What are some reasons project scheduling is not done well?
	  3.	 Which characteristics must a project have for critical path scheduling to be applicable? 
What types of projects have been subjected to critical path analysis?
	  4.	 What are the underlying assumptions of minimum-cost scheduling? Are they equally 
realistic?
	  5.	 “Project control should always focus on the critical path.” Comment.
	  6.	 Why would subcontractors for a government project want their activities on the critical 
path? Under what conditions would they try to avoid being on the critical path?
	  7.	 Discuss the graphic presentations in Exhibit 4.11. Are there any other graphic outputs 
you would like to see if you were project manager?
	  8.	 Why is it important to use earned value management (EVM) in the overall management 
of projects? Compare this to the use of baseline and current schedules only.
	  9.	 Consider the EVM charts in Exhibit 4.12. Are there any other measures you might want 
to use in the management of a project? What are some controllable variables that may 
affect the costs being tracked?
	10.	 What do you think might be some barriers to the successful, effective use of the project 
management software packages discussed in the chapter?
LO4–1
LO4–2
LO4–3
LO4–4
Calculate the Schedule Variance, Schedule Performance Index, and Cost Performance Index 
for the project.
Solution
Step 1: Calculate Budgeted Cost of the Work Scheduled (BCWS) to date:
Startup is 100 percent complete and we are beyond the expected completion date, so budgeted 
cost is $100,000 for this activity.
Would expect Construction to be 85.714 percent complete and cost $278,571 to date.
Would expect Finishing to be 16.667 percent complete at a cost of $8,333 to date.
​Budgeted Cost of Work Scheduled  =  $100,000 + $278,571 + $8,333  =  $386,904​
Step 2: Calculate the Budgeted Cost of the Work Performed (BCWP) to date:
Startup is 100 percent complete, so budgeted cost is $100,000.
Construction is actually only 90 percent complete, so budgeted cost for this much of the activ-
ity is (325,000 × .9) = $292,500.
Finishing is now 25 percent complete, so budgeted cost is ($50,000 × .25) = $12,500.
​Budgeted Cost of Work Performed  =  $100,000 + $292,500 + $12,500  =  $405,000​
Step 3: Actual Cost (AC) of the project to date is $105,000 + $280,000 + $2,500 = $387,500.
Step 4: Calculate performance measures:
​
Schedule Variance  =  $405,000 − $386,904  =  $18,096
​ 
 
 
 
 
Schedule Performance Index  =  $405,000/$386,904  =  1.05​ 
 
 
 
 
Cost Performance Index  =  $405,000/$387,500  =  1.05
 
​
The project looks good because it is both ahead of schedule and below the budgeted cost.

102	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	
a.  Draw the network.
	
b.  What is the critical path?
	
c.  How many weeks will it take to complete the project?
	
d.  How much slack does activity B have?
	  6.	 Schedule the following activities using CPM:
Activity
Immediate Predecessor
Time (weeks)
A
—  
1
B
A    
4
C
A    
3
D
B    
2
E
C, D
5
F
D    
2
G
F    
2
H
E, G
3
	
a.  Draw the network.
	
b.  What is the critical path?
	
c.  How many weeks will it take to complete the project?
	
d.  Which activities have slack, and how much?
	  7.	 The R&D department is planning to bid on a large project for the development of a new 
communication system for commercial planes. The accompanying table shows the activi-
ties, times, and sequences required (answers in Appendix D).
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What are the three types of projects based on the amount of change involved?
	  2.	 What are the four major categories of projects based on the type of change involved?
	  3.	 Match the following characteristics with their relevant project team organizational 
structures:
LO4–1
____ The project is housed within a functional division of the firm.
A. Pure project
____ A project manager leads personnel from different  
functional areas.
B. Functional project
____ Personnel work on a dedicated project team.
C. Matrix project
____ A team member reports to two bosses.
____ Team pride, motivation, and commitment are high.
____ Team members can work on several projects.
____ Duplication of resources is minimized.
	  4.	 What is the term for a group of project activities that are assigned to a single organiza-
tional unit?
	  5.	 The following activities are part of a project to be scheduled using CPM:
LO4–2
Activity
Immediate Predecessor
Time (weeks)
A
—  
6
B
A    
3
C
A    
7
D
C    
2
E
B, D
4
F
D    
3
G
E, F
7

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
103
	
a.  Draw the network.
	
b.  What is the critical path?
	
c.  What is the expected project completion time?
	
d.  What is the probability of completing this project within 16 days?
	  9.	 There is an 82 percent chance the following project can be completed in X weeks or less. 
What is X?
Activity
Immediate Predecessor
Time (weeks)
A
—      
3
B
A         
2
C
A         
4
D
A         
4
E
B         
6
F
C, D    
6
G
D, F    
2
H
D         
3
I
E, G, H
3
	
a.  Draw the network diagram.
	
b.  What is the critical path?
	
c.  Suppose you want to shorten the completion time as much as possible, and you have 
the option of shortening any or all of B, C, D, and G each one week. Which would you 
shorten?
	
d.  What is the new critical path and earliest completion time?
	  8.	 The following represents a project that should be scheduled using CPM:
Times (days)
Activity
Immediate Predecessors
a
m
b
A
—  
1
3
5
B
—  
1
2
3
C
A    
1
2
3
D
A    
2
3
4
E
B    
3
4
11
F
C, D
3
4
5
G
D, E
1
4
6
H
F, G
2
4
5
C
B
D
E
A
Activity
Most Optimistic
Most Likely
Most Pessimistic
A
2
5
11
B
3
3
3
C
1
3
5
D
6
8
10
E
4
7
10

104	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	11.	 A construction project is broken down into the following 10 activities:
Activity
Immediate Predecessor
Time (weeks)
1
—
4
2
1
2
3
1
4
4
1
3
5
2, 3
5
6
3
6
7
4
2
8
5
3
9
6, 7
5
10
8, 9
7
	
a.  Draw the network diagram.
	
b.  Find the critical path.
	
c.  If activities 1 and 10 cannot be shortened, but activities 2 through 9 can be shortened 
to a minimum of one week each at a cost of $10,000 per week, which activities would 
you shorten to cut the project by four weeks?
	12.	 Here is a CPM network with activity times in weeks (answers in Appendix D):
G(3)
E(4)
B(5)
A(7)
F(8)
C(6)
D(6)
	10.	 The following table represents a plan for a project:
Times (days)
Job No.
Predecessor Job(s)
a
m
b
1
—
2
3
  4
2
1
1
2
  3
3
1
4
5
12
4
1
3
4
11
5
2
1
3
  5
6
3
1
2
  3
7
4
1
8
  9
8
5, 6
2
4
  6
9
8
2
4
12
10
7
3
4
  5
11
9, 10
5
7
  8
	
a.  Construct the appropriate network diagram.
	
b.  Indicate the critical path.
	
c.  What is the expected completion time for the project?
	
d.  You can accomplish any one of the following at an additional cost of $1,500:
(1)  Reduce job 5 by two days.
(2)  Reduce job 3 by two days.
(3)  Reduce job 7 by two days.
	
	     If you will save $1,000 for each day that the earliest completion time is reduced, which 
action, if any, would you choose?
	
e.  What is the probability that the project will take more than 30 days to complete?

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
105
Job  
and Description
Immediate  
Predecessors
Time  
(hours)
A
Start
—
  0
B
Get computer printouts of customer purchases
A
10
C
Get stock records for the month
A
20
D
Reconcile purchase printouts and stock records
B, C
30
E
Total stock records by department
B, C
20
F
Determine reorder quantities for coming period
E
40
G
Prepare stock reports for purchasing agents
D, F
20
H
Finish
G
  0
	
a.  Determine the critical path.
	
b.  How many weeks will the project take to complete?
	
c.  Suppose F could be shortened by two weeks and B by one week. How would this 
affect the completion date?
	13.	 Here is a network with the activity times shown in days: 
	
a.  Find the critical path.
	
b.  The following table shows the normal times and the crash times, along with the asso-
ciated costs for each activity.
Activity
Normal Time
Crash Time
Normal Cost
Crash Cost
A
7
6
$7,000
$ 8,000
B
2
1
  5,000
  7,000
C
4
3
  9,000
10,200
D
5
4
  3,000
  4,500
E
2
1
  2,000
  3,000
F
4
2
  4,000
  7,000
G
5
4
  5,000
  8,000
	 	 	 If the project is to be shortened by four days, show which activities, in order of reduction, 
would be shortened and the resulting cost.
	14.	 The home office billing department of a chain of department stores prepares monthly 
inventory reports for use by the stores’ purchasing agents. Given the following informa-
tion, use the critical path method to determine:
	
a.  How long the total process will take.
	
b.  Which jobs can be delayed without delaying the early start of any subsequent activity.
G(5)
F(4)
E(2)
D(5)
C(4)
B(3)
A(7)

106	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	
a.  Identify the critical path.
	
b.  What is the length of time to complete the project?
	
c.  Which activities have slack, and how much?
	
d.  Here is a table of normal and crash times and costs. Which activities would you 
shorten to cut two weeks from the schedule in a rational fashion? What would be the 
incremental cost? Is the critical path changed?
Activity
Normal Time
Crash Time
Normal Cost
Crash Cost
A
7
6
$7,000
$8,000
B
3
2
  5,000
  7,000
C
4
3
  9,000
10,200
D
5
4
  3,000
  4,500
E
2
1
  2,000
  3,000
F
4
2
  4,000
  7,000
G
5
4
  5,000
  8,000
	17.	 Bragg’s Bakery is building a new automated bakery in downtown Sandusky. Here are the 
activities that need to be completed to get the new bakery built and the equipment installed.
	15.	 For the network shown:
G(4)
D(6)
C(8)
B(10)
A(5)
E(7)
F(4)
	
a.  Determine the critical path and the early completion time in weeks for the project.
	
b.  For the data shown, reduce the project completion time by three weeks. Assume a lin-
ear cost per week shortened, and show, step by step, how you arrived at your schedule.
Activity
Normal Time
Normal Cost
Crash Time
Crash Cost
A
5
$ 7,000 
3
$13,000
B
10
12,000
7
18,000
C
8
5,000
7
  7,000
D
6
4,000
5
  5,000
E
7
3,000
6
  6,000
F
4
6,000
3
  7,000
G
4
7,000
3
  9,000
	16.	 The following CPM network has estimates of the normal time in weeks listed for the 
activities:
A(7)
B(2)
D(5)
F(4)
G(5)
E(2)
C(4)

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
107
Activity
Normal  
Time (weeks)
Normal  
Cost
Crash  
Time (weeks)
Crash  
Cost
Immediate  
Predecessors
A
2
$ 50
1
$70
—
B
4
80
2
160
A
C
8
70
4
110
A
D
6
60
5
80
A
E
7
100
6
130
B
F
4
40
3
100
D
G
5
100
4
150
C, E, F
	
a.  Draw the project diagram.
	
b.  What is the normal project length?
	
c.  What is the project length if all activities are crashed to their minimum?
	
d.  Bragg’s loses $3,500 in profit per week for every week the bakery is not completed. 
How many weeks will the project take if we are willing to pay crashing cost as long as 
it is less than $3,500?
	18.	 Assume the network and data that follow:
Activity
Predecessor
Normal  
Time (weeks)
Crash  
Time (weeks)
Expediting  
Cost/Week
A
—  
  9
  6
$3,000
B
A    
  8
  5
  3,500
C
A    
15
10
  4,000
D
B, C
  5
  3
  2,000
E
C    
10
  6
  2,500
F
D, E
  2
  1
  5,000
	
a.  Construct the network diagram.
	
b.  Indicate the critical path when normal activity times are used.
	
c.  Compute the minimum total direct cost for each project duration based on the cost 
associated with each activity. Consider durations of 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18 weeks.
	
d.  If the indirect costs for each project duration are $400 (18 weeks), $350 (17 weeks), 
$300 (16 weeks), $250 (15 weeks), $200 (14 weeks), and $150 (13 weeks), what 
is the total project cost for each duration? Indicate the minimum total project cost 
duration.
	19.	 Your project to obtain charitable donations is now 30 days into a planned 40-day proj-
ect. The project is divided into three activities. The first activity is designed to solicit 
individual donations. It is scheduled to run the first 25 days of the project and to bring 
in $25,000. Even though we are 30 days into the project, we still see that we have only 
90 percent of this activity complete. The second activity relates to company donations 
and is scheduled to run for 30 days starting on day 5 and extending through day 35. We 
estimate that, even though we should have 83 percent (25/30) of this activity complete, 
it is actually only 50 percent complete. This part of the project was scheduled to bring in 
$150,000 in donations. The final activity is for matching funds. This activity is sched-
uled to run the last 10 days of the project and has not started. It is scheduled to bring in 
an additional $50,000. So far, $175,000 has actually been brought in on the project.
	 	 	 	
Calculate the Schedule Variance, Schedule Performance Index, and Cost (actually 
value in this case) Performance Index. How is the project going? (Hint: Note that this 
problem is different since revenue rather than cost is the relevant measure. Use care in 
how the measures are interpreted.)
	20.	 A project to build a new bridge seems to be going very well because the project is well 
ahead of schedule and costs seem to be running very low. A major milestone has been 
reached where the first two activities have been totally completed and the third activ-
ity is 60 percent complete. The planners were expecting to be only 50 percent through 
LO4–3

108	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
the third activity at this time. The first activity involves prepping the site for the bridge. 
It was expected that this would cost $1,420,000 and it was done for only $1,300,000. 
The second activity was the pouring of concrete for the bridge. This was expected to 
cost $10,500,000 but was actually done for $9,000,000. The third and final activity is 
the actual construction of the bridge superstructure. This was expected to cost a total of 
$8,500,000. To date, they have spent $5,000,000 on the superstructure.
	 	 	 Calculate the Schedule Variance, Schedule Performance Index, and Cost Performance 
Index for the project to date. How is the project going?
	21.	 What feature in project management information systems can be used to resolve over-
allocation of project resources?
	22.	 What was the first major project management information system that is now commonly 
used for managing very large projects?
	23.	 What type of chart compares the current project schedule with the original baseline 
schedule so that deviations from the original plan can be easily noticed?
LO4–3
You work for Nokia in its global cell phone group. You have 
been made project manager for the design of a new cell 
phone. Your supervisors have already scoped the project, 
so you have a list showing the work breakdown structure, 
and this includes major project activities. You must plan 
the project schedule and calculate project duration. Your 
boss wants the schedule on his desk tomorrow morning!
You have been given the information in Exhibit 4.13. 
It includes all the activities required in the project and the 
duration of each activity. Also, dependencies between the 
activities have been identified. Remember that the pre-
ceding activity must be fully completed before work on 
the following activity can be started.
Your project is divided into five major subprojects. 
Subproject “P” involves developing specifications for the 
new cell phone. Here, decisions related to such things as 
battery life, size of the phone, and features need to be 
made. These details are based on how a customer uses 
the cell phone. These user specifications are redefined in 
terms that have meaning to the subcontractors that will 
actually make the new cell phone in subproject “S” sup-
plier specifications. These involve engineering details for 
how the product will perform.
The individual components that make up the product 
are the focus of subproject “D.” Subproject “I” brings all 
the components together, and a working prototype is built 
and tested.
Finally, in subproject “V,” suppliers are selected and 
contracts are negotiated.
	1.	 Draw a project network that includes all the 
activities.
	2.	 Calculate the start and finish times for each activ-
ity and determine the minimum number of weeks 
for completing the project. Find the activities that 
are on the critical path for completing the project 
in the shortest time.
	3.	 Identify slack in the activities not on the project 
critical path.
	4.	 Your boss would like you to study the impact of 
making two changes to how the project is orga-
nized. The first change involves using dedicated 
teams that would work strictly in parallel on the 
activities in each subproject. For example, in sub-
project P (product specifications) the team would 
work on P1, P2, P3, and P4 all in parallel. In other 
words, there would be no precedence relationships 
within a subproject—all tasks within a subproject 
would be worked on at the same time and each 
would take the same amount of time as originally 
specified. With this new design, all the subprojects 
would be done sequentially with P done first, then 
S, D, I, and finally V. What would be the expected 
impact on how long it would take to complete the 
project if this change were made?
	5.	 The second change your boss would like you to 
consider would be to select the suppliers during 
subproject P and have them work directly with the 
dedicated teams as described in step 4. This would 
involve adding an additional activity to subproject 
P called supplier selection and contract negotiation 
(P5) with a duration of 12 weeks. This new activ-
ity would be done in parallel with P1, P2, P3, and 
P4. Subprojects S and V would be eliminated from 
the project. What would be the expected impact on 
how long it would take to complete the project if 
this additional change were made?
	6.	 Evaluate the impact of making these changes using 
criteria other than just the time to complete the 
project. Do you think it would be in Nokia’s best 
interest to try to make these changes in how it runs 
this and future cell phone design projects?
Analytics Exercise: Product Design Project

	
Projects	
Chapter 4	
109
Practice Exam
Name the term defined in each of the following state-
ments. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 A project structured where a self-contained team 
works full time on the project.
	2.	 Specific events that upon completion mark important 
progress toward completing a project.
	3.	 This defines the hierarchy of project tasks, subtasks, 
and work packages.
	4.	 Pieces of work in a project that consume time to 
complete.
	5.	 A chart that shows both the time and sequence for 
completing the activities in a project.
	  6.	 Activities that in sequence form the longest chain in 
a project.
	  7.	 The difference between the late and early start time 
for an activity.
	  8.	 When activities are scheduled with probabilistic task 
times.
	  9.	 The procedure used to reduce project completion 
time by trading off time versus cost.
	10.	 A key assumption related to the resources needed 
to complete activities when using the critical path 
method.
Major Subprojects/Activities
Activity Identification
Dependency
Duration (weeks)
Product specifications (P)
Market research
P1
—
  2
Overall product specifications
P2
P1
  4
Hardware
P3
P2
  5
Software
P4
P3
  5
Supplier specifications (S)
Hardware
S1
P4
  5
Software
S2
P4
  6
Product design (D)
Battery
D1
S1
  1
Display
D2
S1
  2
Camera
D3
S1
  1
Outer cover
D4
D1, D2, D3
  4
Product integration (I)
Hardware
I1
D4
  3
User interface
I2
D2
  4
Software coding
I3
I2
  4
Prototype testing
I4
I1, I3
  4
Subcontracting (V)
Suppliers selection
V1
S1, S2
10
Contract negotiation
V2
I4, V1
  2
Work Breakdown Structure and Activities for the Cell Phone Design 
Project
exhibit 4.13
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Pure project or skunkworks 2. Milestones 3. Work breakdown structure  4. Activities 5. Gantt chart 6. Critical path(s)  
7. Slack  8. The Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) 	
9. Crashing  10. Resources are always available.

110
5
Strategic 
Capacity 
Management
Learning Objectives
	LO 5–1	 Explain what capacity management is and why it is strategically important.
	LO 5–2	 Exemplify how to plan capacity.
	LO 5–3	 Evaluate capacity alternatives using decision trees.
	LO 5–4	 Compare capacity planning in services to capacity planning in manufacturing.
ECONOMIES OF SCALE MADE OF STEEL
The Eleonora Maersk, almost 400m long is one of the E Series container ships oper­
ated by the Danish A. P. Moller-Maersk Group. These ships can carry 7,500 40-foot 
shipping containers.  Given that each of these containers can hold 70,000 T-shirts 
allowing a T-shirt made in China to be sent to the Netherlands for just 2.5 cents.
These large ships and the even larger ones currently being launched, allow goods 
to be shipped around the world at very low cost. Of course, the only downside is the 
time that it takes these ships to make the 
long journeys as they move the goods from 
the factories in countries such as China, 
India and Indonesia to the large consumer 
markets in the United States, Canada, 
­Australia, and Western Europe.
The Eleonora Maersk leaving the Rotterdam 
Harbor. The Triple-E vessels (Economy of 
scale, Efficiency, Environment) will set new 
standards for size, fuel, and cost efficiency 
as well as reduce CO2 emissions. The capacity 
of the new vessels is 18,000 TEU, exceeding 
the capacity of the world’s largest 
container vessels currently, which are 
Maersk Line’s PS-class vessels of 15,550 TEU.
© imagebroker/Alamy

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
111
A dictionary definition of capacity is “the ability to hold, receive, store, or accommodate.” In 
a general business sense, it is most frequently viewed as the amount of output that a system is 
capable of achieving over a specific period of time. In a service setting, this might be the 
number of customers that can be handled between noon and 1:00 P.M. In manufacturing, this 
might be the number of automobiles that can be produced in a single shift.
When looking at capacity, operations managers need to look at both resource inputs and 
product outputs. For planning purposes, real (or effective) capacity depends on what is to be 
produced. For example, a firm that makes multiple products inevitably can produce more of 
one kind than of another with a given level of resource inputs. Thus, while the managers of an 
automobile factory may state that their facility has 6,000 production hours available per year, 
they are also thinking that these hours can be used to make either 150,000 two-door models 
or 120,000 four-door models (or some mix of the two- and four-door models). This reflects 
their knowledge of what their current technology and labor force inputs can produce and the 
product mix that is to be demanded from these resources.
While many industries measure and report their capacity in terms of outputs, those whose 
product mix is very uncertain often express capacity in terms of inputs. For example, hospital 
capacity is expressed as the number of beds because the number of patients served and the 
types of services provided will depend on patient needs.
An operations and supply chain management view also emphasizes the time dimension 
of capacity. That is, capacity must also be stated relative to some period of time. This is evi­
denced in the common distinction drawn between long-range, intermediate-range, and short-
range capacity planning.
Capacity planning is generally viewed in three time durations:
Long range—greater than one year. Where productive resources (such as buildings, equip­
ment, or facilities) take a long time to acquire or dispose of, long-range capacity planning 
requires top management participation and approval.
Intermediate range—monthly or quarterly plans for the next 6 to 18 months. Here, capac­
ity may be varied by such alternatives as hiring, layoffs, new tools, minor equipment pur­
chases, and subcontracting.
Short range—less than one month. This is tied into the daily or weekly scheduling process 
and involves making adjustments to eliminate the variance between planned and actual 
output. This includes alternatives such as overtime, personnel transfers, and alternative 
production routings.
In this chapter, our focus is on capacity planning related to the long-term decisions. These 
involve the purchase of highly capital-intensive items, such as buildings, equipment, and other 
assets. The medium-term capacity-related decisions are considered as part of the aggregate 
operations planning decisions, which are the topic of Chapter 19. Short-term capacity planning 
is discussed in the context of the different types of processes discussed in the book: manufac­
turing in Chapter 7, service in Chapter 9, and material requirements planning in Chapter 21.
Although there is no one person with the job title “capacity manager,” there are several 
managerial positions charged with the effective use of capacity. Capacity is a relative term; in 
an operations management context, it may be defined as the amount of resource inputs avail­
able relative to output requirements over a particular period of time.
The objective of strategic capacity planning is to provide an approach for determining 
the overall capacity level of capital-intensive resources—facilities, equipment, and overall 
labor force size—that best supports the company’s long-term competitive strategy. The capac­
ity level selected has a critical impact on the firm’s response rate, its cost structure, its inven­
tory policies, and its management and staff support requirements. If capacity is inadequate, a 
company may lose customers through slow service or by allowing competitors to enter the 
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT IN OPERATIONS  
AND SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT
Strategic capacity 
planning
Finding the overall capacity 
level of capital-intensive 
resources to best support 
the firm’s long-term 
strategy.
Explain what capacity 
management is and why it 
is strategically important.
LO 5–1

112	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
market. If capacity is excessive, a company may have to reduce prices to stimulate demand; 
underutilize its workforce; carry excess inventory; or seek additional, less profitable products 
to stay in business.
Capacity Planning Concepts
The term capacity implies an attainable rate of output, for example, 480 cars per day, but says 
nothing about how long that rate can be sustained. Thus, we do not know if this 480 cars per 
day is a one-day peak or a six-month average. To avoid this problem, the concept of best 
operating level is used. This is the level of capacity for which the process was designed and 
thus is the volume of output at which average unit cost is minimized. Determining this mini­
mum is difficult because it involves a complex trade-off between the allocation of fixed over­
head costs and the cost of overtime, equipment wear, defect rates, and other costs.
An important measure is the capacity utilization rate, which reveals how close a firm is 
to its best operating level:
​Capacity utilization rate = ​ 
Capacity used 
 
______________ 
 
Best operating level ​​
​Capacity utilization rate = ​ 480 
___ 
500 ​ = .96 or 96%​
The capacity utilization rate is expressed as a percentage and requires that the numerator and 
denominator be measured in the same units and time periods (such as machine hours/day, bar­
rels of oil/day, or dollars of output/day).
Economies and Diseconomies of Scale
The basic notion of economies of scale is that as a plant gets larger and volume increases, the 
average cost per unit of output drops. This is partially due to lower operating and capital cost, 
because a piece of equipment with twice the capacity of another piece typically does not cost 
twice as much to purchase or operate. Plants also gain efficiencies when they become large 
enough to fully utilize dedicated resources (people and equipment) for information technol­
ogy, material handling, and administrative support.
At some point, the size of a plant becomes too large and diseconomies of scale become a 
problem. These diseconomies may surface in many different ways. For example, maintain­
ing the demand required to keep the large facility busy may require significant discounting 
of the product. The U.S. automobile manufacturers continually face this problem. Another 
typical example involves using a few large-capacity pieces of equipment. Minimizing equip­
ment downtime is essential in this type of operation. M&M 
Mars, for example, has highly automated, high-volume equip­
ment to make M&Ms. A single packaging line moves 2.6 mil­
lion M&Ms each hour. Even though direct labor to operate 
the equipment is very low, the labor required to maintain the 
equipment is high.
In many cases, the size of a plant may be influenced by fac­
tors other than the internal equipment, labor, and other capi­
tal expenditures. A major factor may be the cost to transport 
raw materials and finished product to and from the plant. A 
cement factory, for example, would have a difficult time serv­
ing customers more than a few hours from its plant. Similarly, 
automobile companies such as Ford, Honda, Nissan, and Toy­
ota have found it advantageous to locate plants within specific 
international markets. The anticipated size of these intended 
markets will largely dictate the size and capacity of the plants.
Jaguar, the luxury automobile producer, recently found it had 
too many plants. Jaguar was employing 8,560 workers in three 
plants that produced 126,122 cars, about 15 cars per employee. 
Capacity
The output that a system is 
capable of achieving over 
a period of time.
Best operating level
The level of capacity for 
which the process was 
designed and the volume 
of output at which average 
unit cost is minimized.
Capacity utilization 
rate
Measure of how close the 
firm’s current output rate is 
to its best operating level 
(percent).
[5.1]
Economies of scale
Idea that as the plant 
gets larger and volume 
increases, the average 
cost per unit drops. At 
some point, the plant gets 
too large and cost per unit 
increases.
The production of M&M’s. 
M&M’S® is a registered trademark of Mars, Incorporated. 
This trademark and the photograph depicting M&M’S® 
chocolate candies are used with permission. Mars, 
Incorporated is not associated with McGraw-Hill.
© Patrick Hertzog/AFP/Getty Images

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
113
In comparison, Volvo’s plant in Torslanda, Sweden, was nearly twice as productive, building 
158,466 cars with 5,472 workers, or 29 cars per employee. By contrast, BMW AG’s Mini unit 
made 174,000 vehicles at a single British plant with just 4,500 workers, or 39 cars per employee.
Capacity Focus
The concept of a focused factory holds that a production facility works best when it focuses 
on a fairly limited set of production objectives. This means, for example, that a firm should 
not expect to excel in every aspect of manufacturing performance: cost, quality, delivery 
speed and reliability, changes in demand, and flexibility to adapt to new products. Rather, it 
should select a limited set of tasks that contribute the most to corporate objectives. Typically, 
the focused factory would produce a specific product or related group of products. A focused 
factory allows capacity to be focused on producing those specific items.
The capacity focus concept can be operationalized through the mechanism of plant within 
a plant—or PWP. A focused factory (Exhibit 5.1) may have several PWPs, each of which may 
have separate suborganizations, equipment and process policies, workforce management poli­
cies, production control methods, and so forth, for different products—even if they are made 
under the same roof. This, in effect, permits finding the best operating level for each depart­
ment of the organization and thereby carries the focus concept down to the operating level.
Capacity Flexibility
Capacity flexibility means having the ability to rapidly increase or decrease production levels, 
or to shift production capacity quickly from one product or service to another. Such flexibility 
is achieved through flexible plants, processes, and workers, as well as through strategies that 
use the capacity of other organizations. Increasingly, companies are taking the idea of flex­
ibility into account as they design their supply chains. Working with suppliers, they can build 
capacity into their whole systems.
F le x i b l e P l a n t s   Perhaps the ultimate in plant flexibility is the zero-changeover-time 
plant. Using movable equipment, knockdown walls, and easily accessible and reroutable 
utilities, such a plant can quickly adapt to change. An analogy to a familiar service business 
captures the flavor well: a plant with equipment that is easy to install and easy to tear down 
and move—like the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus in the old tent-circus days.
F le x i b l e Pr o c e s s e s  Flexible processes are epitomized by flexible manufacturing 
systems on the one hand and simple, easily set up equipment on the other. Both of these 
Plant within a plant 
(PWP)
An area in a larger 
facility that is dedicated 
to a specific production 
objective (for example, 
product group). This can be 
used to operationalize the 
focused factory concept.
This company needs to produce two different 
products. Product A is high volume and 
standard (there is no variation in how it is 
made). Product B is low volume and needs 
to be customized to each order. This plant is 
divided into three distinct areas that operate 
independently. The Product Line A area 
is a high-volume assembly line designed 
to produce A. B Machine Shop is an area 
where custom parts are made for product B. 
Assembly B is where product B is assembled 
based on each customer order. This factory, 
with its plants within a plant, can operate more 
efficiently than if both products were made 
with a single common production process.
Product Line A
Assembly
– High Volume
– Low Variety
– Low Skill
– Low Volume
– High Variety
– High Skill
B
Machine Shop
Product Line B
Assembly
Focused Factories—Plant within a Plant
exhibit 5.1
Focused factory
A facility designed around 
a limited set of production 
objectives. Typically, the 
focus would relate to a 
specific product or product 
group.

114	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
technological approaches permit rapid low-cost switching from one product to another, 
enabling what are sometimes referred to as economies of scope. (By definition, economies of 
scope exist when multiple products can be combined and produced at one facility at a lower 
cost than they can be produced separately.)
F l e x i b l e  W o r ke r s  Flexible workers have multiple skills and the ability to switch easily 
from one kind of task to another. They require broader training than specialized workers and 
need managers and staff support to facilitate quick changes in their work assignments.
Economies of scope
When multiple products 
can be produced at lower 
cost in combination than 
they can be separately.
Employees work on a production line of Dell notebook 
computers at a new plant of Wistron Group, which is the 
main partner of Dell and Lenovo, in Chengdu, Sichuan 
Province of China.
© ChinaFotoPress/ChinaFotoPress/Newscom
CAPACITY PLANNING
Considerations in Changing Capacity
Many issues must be considered when adding or decreasing capacity. Three important ones 
are maintaining system balance, frequency of capacity additions or reductions, and use of 
external capacity.
M a i n t a i n i n g  S ys t e m  B a l a n c e  In a perfectly balanced plant with three production 
stages, the output of stage 1 provides the exact input requirement for stage 2. Stage 2’s output 
provides the exact input requirement for stage 3, and so on. In practice, however, achieving 
such a “perfect” design is usually both impossible and undesirable. One reason is that the best 
operating levels for each stage generally differ. For instance, department 1 may operate most 
efficiently over a range of 90 to 110 units per month, whereas department 2, the next stage in 
the process, is most efficient at 75 to 85 units per month, and department 3 works best over a 
range of 150 to 200 units per month. Another reason is that variability in product demand and 
the processes themselves may lead to imbalance.
There are various ways of dealing with imbalance. One is to add capacity to stages that are 
bottlenecks. This can be done by temporary measures, such as scheduling overtime, leasing 
equipment, or purchasing additional capacity through subcontracting. A second way is through 
the use of buffer inventories in front of the bottleneck stage to ensure it always has something to 
work on. A third approach involves duplicating or increasing the facilities of one department on 
which another is dependent. All these approaches are increasingly being applied to supply chain 
design. This supply planning also helps reduce imbalances for supplier partners and customers.
F r e q u e n c y o f C a p a c i t y  A d d i t i o n s  There are two types of costs to consider 
when adding capacity: the cost of upgrading too frequently and that of upgrading too 
infrequently. Upgrading capacity too frequently is expensive. Direct costs include removing 
and replacing old equipment and training employees on the 
new equipment. In addition, the new equipment must be 
purchased, often for considerably more than the selling price 
of the old. Finally, there is the opportunity cost of idling the 
plant or service site during the changeover period.
Conversely, upgrading capacity too infrequently is also 
expensive. Infrequent expansion means that capacity is pur­
chased in larger chunks. Any excess capacity that is purchased 
must be carried as overhead until it is utilized. (Exhibit 5.2 
illustrates frequent versus infrequent capacity expansion.)
E x t e r n a l  
S o u r c e s  
o f  
O p e r atio n s  
a n d 
S u p p l y  C a p a c i t y  In some cases, it may be cheaper 
not to add capacity at all, but rather to use some existing 
external source of capacity. Two common strategies used 
by organizations are outsourcing and sharing capacity. An 
example of outsourcing is Dell Computer using a Chinese 
company to assemble its notebook computers. An example 
of sharing capacity is two domestic airlines flying different 
Exemplify how to plan 
capacity.
LO 5–2

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
115
routes with different seasonal demands exchanging aircraft (suitably repainted) when one’s 
routes are heavily used and the other’s are not. A new twist is airlines sharing routes—using 
the same flight number even though the airline company may change through the route. 
Outsourcing is covered in more depth in Chapter 16.
D e cr eas i n g  C a p a c i t y  Although we normally think in terms of expansions, 
shedding capacity in response to decreased demand can create significant problems for a firm. 
Temporary strategies such as scheduling fewer hours or scheduling an extended shutdown 
period are often used. More permanent reductions in capacity would typically require the sale 
of equipment or possibly even the liquidation of entire facilities.
Determining Capacity Requirements
In determining capacity requirements, we must address the demands for individual product 
lines, individual plant capabilities, and allocation of production throughout the plant network. 
Typically, this is done according to the following steps:
	1.	 Use forecasting techniques (see Chapter 18) to predict sales for individual products 
within each product line.
	2.	 Calculate equipment and labor requirements to meet product line forecasts.
	3.	 Project labor and equipment availabilities over the planning horizon.
Often, the firm then decides on some capacity cushion that will be maintained between 
the projected requirements and the actual capacity measured as a percentage in excess of 
the expected demand. A capacity cushion is an amount of capacity in excess of expected 
demand. For example, if the expected annual demand on a facility is $10 million in prod­
ucts per year and the design capacity is $12 million per year, it has a 20 percent capacity 
­cushion. A 20 percent capacity cushion equates to an 83 percent utilization rate 
(100 ­percent/120 percent).
When a firm’s design capacity is less than the capacity required to meet its demand, it is 
said to have a negative capacity cushion. If, for example, a firm has a demand of $12 million 
in products per year but can produce only $10 million per year, it has a negative capacity 
cushion of 16.7 percent.
We now apply these three steps to an example.
Capacity cushion
Capacity in excess of 
expected demand.
Volume
Capacity level 
(infrequent expansion)
Years
Capacity level 
(frequent expansion)
Small chunk
Large chunk
Demand
forecast
Frequent versus Infrequent Capacity Expansion
exhibit 5.2

116	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
EXAMPLE 5.1: Determining Capacity Requirements 
Stewart Company produces two brands of salad dressings: Paul’s and Newman’s. Each is 
available in bottles and single-serving plastic bags. Management would like to determine 
yearly equipment and labor requirements for its packing operation for the next five years. The 
details related to the exact weekly and monthly scheduling of the operations are done at dif­
ferent levels in the planning process.
	
The demand for the two flavors and for each packaging option is given in this table. The 
company has three machines that can each package 150,000 bottles each year (each machine 
has two operators). It also has five machines that can each package 250,000 plastic bags per 
year (each of these machines has three operators). These capacity numbers have been adjusted 
for expected downtime and quality problems. Will the company have enough yearly packag­
ing capacity to meet future demand?
Year
1
2
3
4
5
Paul’s
Bottles (000s)
  60
100
150
200
250
Plastic bags (000s)
100
200
300
400
500
Newman’s
Bottles (000s)
  75
  85
  95
  97
  98
Plastic bags (000s)
200
400
600
650
680
Year
1
2
3
4
5
Bottles (000s)
135
185
245
  297
  348
Plastic bags (000s)
300
600
900
1,050
1,180
SOLUTION
Step 1. Use forecasting techniques to predict sales for individual products within each product 
line. The marketing department, which is now running a promotional campaign for Newman’s 
dressing, provided the forecast demand values given in the previous table (in thousands) for 
the next five years. The campaign is expected to continue for the next two years. 
	
Step 2. Calculate equipment and labor requirements to meet product line forecasts. Cur­
rently, three machines that can package up to 150,000 bottles each per year are available. 
Each machine requires two operators and can produce bottles of both Newman’s and Paul’s 
dressings. Six bottle machine operators are available. Also, five machines that can package 
up to 250,000 plastic bags each per year are available. Three operators are required for each 
machine, which can produce plastic bags of both Newman’s and Paul’s dressings. Currently, 
15 plastic bag machine operators are available.
	
Total product line forecasts can be calculated from the preceding table by adding the yearly 
demand for bottles and plastic bags as follows.
	
We can now calculate equipment and labor requirements for the current year (year 1). 
Because the total available capacity for packaging bottles is 450,000/year (3 machines 
× 150,000 each), we will be using 135,000/450,000 = 0.3 or 30 percent of the available 
capacity for the current year, or 135,000/150,000 = 0.9 machine. Similarly, we will need 
300,000/1,250,000 = 0.24 or 24 percent of the available capacity for plastic bags for the cur­
rent year, or 300,000/250,000 = 1.2 machines. The total number of crew required to support 
our forecast demand for the first year will equal the crew required for the bottle machine plus 
the crew required for the plastic bag machine.
	
The labor requirement for year 1 is
​ 0.9 bottle machine × 2 operators = 1.8 operators​ 
 
 
 
  1.2 bag machines × 3 operators = 3.6 operators​

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
117
EXAMPLE 5.2: Decision Trees 
The owner of Hackers Computer Store is considering what to do with his business over the 
next five years. Sales growth over the past couple of years has been good, but sales could grow 
substantially if a major proposed electronics firm is built in his area. Hackers’ owner sees three 
options. The first is to enlarge his current store, the second is to locate at a new site, and the 
third is to simply wait and do nothing. The process of expanding or moving would take little 
time, and, therefore, the store would not lose revenue. If nothing were done the first year and 
strong growth occurred, then the decision to expand could be reconsidered. Waiting longer than 
one year would allow competition to move in and would make expansion no longer feasible.
Step 3. Project labor and equipment availabilities over the planning horizon. We repeat the 
preceding calculations for the remaining years.
Year
1
2
3
4
5
Bottle Operation
Percentage machine capacity utilized
30%
41%
54.4%
66%
77.3%
Machine requirement
0.9
1.23
1.63
1.98
2.32
Labor requirement
1.8
2.46
3.26
3.96
4.64
Plastic Bag Operation
Percentage machine capacity utilized
24%
48%
72%  
84%
94%
Machine requirement
1.2
2.4 
3.6 
4.2 
4.7
Labor requirement
3.6
7.2 
10.8  
12.6 
14.1
A positive capacity cushion exists for all five years relative to the availability of machines 
because the available capacity for both operations always exceeds the expected demand. 
Stewart Company can now begin to develop the intermediate-range sales and operations plan 
for the two production lines. This operations plan would need to address the issue of how 
these machines might actually be scheduled relative to the use of overtime and/or multiple 
shifts over weekly and monthly time intervals.
A convenient way to lay out the steps of a capacity problem is through the use of decision 
trees. The tree format helps not only in understanding the problem but also in finding a solu­
tion. A decision tree is a schematic model of the sequence of steps in a problem and the con­
ditions and consequences of each step. In recent years, a few commercial software packages 
have been developed to assist in the construction and analysis of decision trees. These pack­
ages make the process quick and easy.
Decision trees are composed of decision nodes with branches extending to and from them. 
Usually squares represent decision points and circles represent chance events. Branches from 
decision points show the choices available to the decision maker; branches from chance events 
show the probabilities for their occurrence.
In solving decision tree problems, we work from the end of the tree backward to the start 
of the tree. As we work back, we calculate the expected values at each step. In calculating the 
expected value, the time value of money is important if the planning horizon is long.
Once the calculations are made, we prune the tree by eliminating from each decision point 
all branches except the one with the highest payoff. This process continues to the first deci­
sion point, and the decision problem is thereby solved.
We now demonstrate an application of capacity planning for Hackers Computer Store.
USING DECISION TREES TO EVALUATE 
CAPACITY ALTERNATIVES
Evaluate capacity 
alternatives using decision 
trees.
LO 5–3

118	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Alternative
Revenue
Cost
Value
Move to new location, strong growth
$195,000 × 5 yrs
$210,000
$765,000
Move to new location, weak growth
$115,000 × 5 yrs
$210,000
$365,000
Expand store, strong growth
$190,000 × 5 yrs
$87,000
$863,000
Expand store, weak growth
$100,000 × 5 yrs
$87,000
$413,000
Do nothing now, strong growth, expand next year
$170,000 × 1 yr + 
$190,000 × 4 yrs
$87,000
$843,000
Do nothing now, strong growth, do not expand next year
$170,000 × 5 yrs
$0
$850,000
Do nothing now, weak growth
$105,000 × 5 yrs
$0
$525,000
The assumptions and conditions are as follows:
	1.	 Strong growth as a result of the increased population of computer fanatics from the 
new electronics firm has a 55 percent probability.
	2.	 Strong growth with a new site would give annual returns of $195,000 per year. Weak 
growth with a new site would mean annual returns of $115,000.
	3.	 Strong growth with an expansion would give annual returns of $190,000 per year. 
Weak growth with an expansion would mean annual returns of $100,000.
	4.	 At the existing store with no changes, there would be returns of $170,000 per year if 
there is strong growth and $105,000 per year if growth is weak.
	5.	 Expansion at the current site would cost $87,000.
	6.	 The move to the new site would cost $210,000.
	7.	 If growth is strong and the existing site is enlarged during the second year, the cost 
would still be $87,000.
	8.	 Operating costs for all options are equal.
SOLUTION
We construct a decision tree to advise Hackers’ owner on the best action. Exhibit 5.3 shows 
the decision tree for this problem. There are two decision points (shown with the square 
nodes) and three chance occurrences (round nodes).
	
The values of each alternative outcome shown on the right of the diagram in Exhibit 5.4 
are calculated as follows.
Hackers Computer 
Store
Move
Expand
Do nothing
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Expand
Do nothing
Revenue – Move_Cost
Revenue – Move_Cost
Revenue – Expansion_Cost
Revenue – Expansion_Cost
Revenue – Expansion_Cost
Revenue
.55
.45
.55
.55
.45
.45
Revenue
Decision Tree for Hackers Computer Store Problem
exhibit 5.3

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
119
Hackers Computer 
Store
Move
Expand
Do nothing
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Expand
Do nothing
Revenue – Move_Cost = $365,000
Revenue – Move_Cost = $765,000
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $413,000
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $863,000
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $843,000
Revenue = $850,000
0.550
0.450
0.550
0.550
0.450
0.450
Revenue = $525,000
$660,500
Do nothing; $703,750
$703,750
Do nothing; $850,000
$585,000
Decision Tree Analysis 
exhibit 5.4
Decision Tree Analysis Using Net Present Value Calculations 
exhibit 5.5
Hackers Computer
Store
Move
Expand
Do nothing
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Strong growth
Weak growth
Expand
Do nothing
Revenue – Move_Cost = $166,544
Revenue – Move_Cost = $428,487
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $240,429
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $535,116
Revenue – Expansion_Cost = $529,874
Revenue = $556,630
0.550
0.450
0.550
0.550
0.450
0.450
Revenue = $343,801
$402,507
$460,857
Do nothing; $556,630
$310,613
NPV Analysis
Rate = 16%
	
Working from the rightmost alternatives, which are associated with the decision of whether 
to expand, we see that the alternative of doing nothing has a higher value than the expansion 
alternative. We therefore eliminate the expansion in the second year alternatives. What this 
means is that if we do nothing in the first year and we experience strong growth, then in the 
second year it makes no sense to expand.
	
Now we can calculate the expected values associated with our current decision alternatives. 
We simply multiply the value of the alternative by its probability and sum the values. The 
expected value for the alternative of moving now is $585,000. The expansion alternative has 
an expected value of $660,500, and doing nothing now has an expected value of $703,750. 
Our analysis indicates that our best decision is to do nothing (both now and next year)!
	
Due to the five-year time horizon, it may be useful to consider the time value of the rev­
enue and cost streams when solving this problem. If we assume a 16 percent interest rate, 
the first alternative outcome (move now, strong growth) has a discounted revenue valued at 
$428,487 (195,000 × 3.274293654) minus the $210,000 cost to move immediately. Exhibit 5.5 

120	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
shows the analysis considering the discounted flows. Details of the calculations are given as 
follows. The present value table in Appendix E can be used to look up the discount factors. In 
order to make our calculations agree with those completed by Excel—in Excel, calculate the 
discount factor = (1 + interest rate)(–years)—we have used discount factors that are calculated 
to 10 digits of precision. The only calculation that is a little tricky is the one for revenue when 
we do nothing now and expand at the beginning of next year. In this case, we have a revenue 
stream of $170,000 the first year, followed by four years at $190,000. The first part of the cal­
culation (170,000 × .862068966) discounts the first-year revenue to the present. The next part 
(190,000 × 2.798180638) discounts the next four years to the start of year 2. We then discount 
this four-year stream to the present value.
Alternative
Revenue
Cost
Value
Move to new location, strong
  growth
$195,000 × 3.274293654
$210,000
$428,487
Move to new location, weak
  growth
$115,000 × 3.274293654
$210,000
$166,544
Expand store, strong growth
$190,000 × 3.274293654
$87,000
$535,116
Expand store, weak growth
$100,000 × 3.274293654
$87,000
$240,429
Do nothing now, strong growth,
  expand next year
$170,000 × .862068966 + $190,000 
× 2.798180638 × .862068966
$87,000 × 
.862068966
$529,874
Do nothing now, strong growth,
  do not expand next year
$170,000 × 3.274293654
$0
$556,630
Do nothing now, weak growth
$105,000 × 3.274293654
$0
$343,801
PLANNING SERVICE CAPACITY
Capacity Planning in Services versus Manufacturing
Although capacity planning in services is subject to many of the same issues as manufactur­
ing capacity planning, and facility sizing can be done in much the same way, there are several 
important differences. Service capacity is more time- and location-dependent, it is subject to 
more volatile demand fluctuations, and utilization directly impacts service quality.
T i m e  Unlike goods, services cannot be stored for later use. As such, in services, managers 
must consider time as one of their supplies. The capacity must be available to produce a service 
when it is needed. For example, a customer cannot be given a seat that went unoccupied on a 
previous airline flight if the current flight is full. Nor can the customer purchase a seat on a 
particular day’s flight and take it home to be used at some later date.
L o c a t i o n  In face-to-face settings, the service capacity must be located near the customer. 
In manufacturing, production takes place, and then the goods are distributed to the customer. 
With services, however, the opposite is true. The capacity to deliver the service must first be 
distributed to the customer (either physically or through some communications medium, such 
as the telephone), then the service can be produced. A hotel room or rental car that is available 
in another city is not much use to the customer—it must be where the customer is when that 
customer needs it.
V o l a t i l i t y  o f D e m a n d  The volatility of demand on a service delivery system 
is much higher than that on a manufacturing production system for three reasons. First, as 
just mentioned, services cannot be stored. This means that inventory cannot smooth the 
demand as in manufacturing. The second reason is that the customers interact directly with 
Compare capacity planning 
in services to capacity 
planning in manufacturing.
LO 5–4

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
121
the production system—and these customers often have different needs, will have different 
levels of experience with the process, and may require a different number of transactions. This 
contributes to greater variability in the processing time required for each customer and hence 
greater variability in the minimum capacity needed. The third reason for the greater volatility 
in service demand is that it is directly affected by consumer behavior. Influences on customer 
behavior ranging from the weather to a major event can directly affect demand for different 
services. Go to any restaurant near your campus during spring break and it will probably be 
almost empty. This behavioral effect can be seen over even shorter time frames, such as the 
lunch-hour rush at a fast-food restaurant’s drive-through window. Because of this volatility, 
service capacity is often planned in increments as small as 10 to 30 minutes, as opposed to the 
one-week increments more common in manufacturing.
Capacity Utilization and Service Quality
Planning capacity levels for services must consider the day-to-day relationship between ser-
vice utilization and service quality. Exhibit 5.6 shows a service situation using waiting line 
terms (arrival rates and service rates). The term arrival rate refers to the average number of 
customers that come to a facility during a specific period of time. The service rate is the aver-
age number of customers that can be processed over the same period of time when the facility 
is operating at maximum capacity. The best operating point is near 70 percent of the maxi-
mum capacity. This is enough to keep servers busy but allows enough time to serve customers 
individually and keep enough capacity in reserve so as not to create too many managerial 
headaches. In the critical zone, customers are processed through the system, but service qual-
ity declines. Above the critical zone, where customers arrive at a rate faster than they can be 
served, the line builds up and it is likely that many customers may never be served. (Details 
related to how waiting lines operate relative to capacity are presented in Chapter 10, “Waiting 
Line Analysis and Simulation.”)
The optimal utilization rate is very context specific. Low rates are appropriate when both 
the degree of uncertainty and the stakes are high. For example, hospital emergency rooms and 
fire departments should aim for low utilization because of the high level of uncertainty and 
the life-or-death nature of their activities. Relatively predictable services such as commuter 
trains or service facilities without customer contact (for example, postal sorting operations) 
can plan to operate much nearer to 100 percent utilization. Interestingly, there is a third group 
for which high utilization is desirable. All sports teams like sellouts, not only because of the 
virtually 100 percent contribution margin of each customer, but because a full house creates 
an atmosphere that pleases customers, motivates the home team to perform better, and boosts 
future ticket sales. Stage performances and bars share this phenomenon.
Typically, a firm can 
run a factory at a 
much higher capacity 
utilization rate than a 
service facility such 
as a call center. Less 
predictable demand 
requires a lower 
capacity operating 
point for good service.
KEY IDEAS
Mean arrival 
rate (λ)
Zone of nonservice 
(μ < λ)
Critical 
zone
Zone of service
Mean service rate (μ)
ρ = 100%
ρ = 70%
μ
λ
Relationship between the Rate of Service Utilization (ρ) and Service 
Quality
exhibit 5.6
J. Haywood–Farmer and J. Nollet, Services 
Plus: Effective Service Managment  
(Boucherville, Quebec, Canada: G. Morin 
Publisher Ltd., 1991), p. 59.

122	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Ohio State fans cheer 
the Buckeyes on 
during the first half 
of their game against 
Youngstown State.
© Jamie Sabau/Getty Images
Concept Connections
LO 5–1   Explain what capacity management is and why it is strategically important.
Summary
	∙	 An operations and supply chain management view of 
capacity emphasizes the time dimension of capacity.
	∙	 Three time horizons are generally used: long range 
(greater than a year), intermediate range (next 6 to 18 
months), and short range (less than a month).
	∙	 To distinguish between the absolute maximum capac­
ity of the system (the highest output rate attainable) 
and the rate that is sustainable by the system (that it 
can be run at efficiently and for a long period of time), 
the term best operating level is used. The utilization 
of the system is a measure of how close the system is 
operating relative to the best level.
	∙	 When a producing resource, such as a manufactur­
ing plant, gets larger and volume increases while the 
average cost per unit of output simultaneously drops, 
then the resource is exhibiting economies of scale.
	∙	 At some point, the resource may be too large and the 
average cost will start to rise. This is when disecono­
mies of scale are a problem.
	∙	 Focused manufacturing plants are designed to produce 
multiple products using a concept called plant within a 
plant to improve economies of scale even though mul­
tiple products are produced in the same facility. This 
type of facility demonstrates the concept of economies 
of scope.
	∙	 Having capacity flexibility is often important to meet­
ing the needs of a firm’s customers.
Key Terms
Strategic capacity planning  Finding the overall capacity 
level of capital-intensive resources to best support the 
firm’s long-term strategy.
Capacity  The output that a system is capable of achiev­
ing over a period of time.
Best operating level  The level of capacity for which the 
process was designed and the volume of output at which 
average unit cost is minimized.
Capacity utilization rate  Measure of how close the 
firm’s current output rate is to its best operating level 
(percent).
Economies of scale  Idea that as the plant gets larger 
and volume increases, the average cost per unit drops. 
At some point, the plant gets too large and cost per unit 
increases.

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
123
Focused factory  A facility designed around a limited 
set of production objectives. Typically, the focus would 
relate to a specific product or product group.
Plant within a plant (PWP)  An area in a larger facility 
that is dedicated to a specific production objective (for 
example, product group). This can be used to operation­
alize the focused factory concept.
Economies of scope  When multiple products can be 
produced at lower cost in combination than they can be 
separately.
​Capacity utilization rate  =  ​ 
Capacity used 
 
______________ 
 
Best operating level ​​  ​​​[5 . 1]​
LO 5–2   Exemplify how to plan capacity.
	∙	 From a strategic, long-term view, capacity additions 
or reductions come in chunks (fixed amounts). For 
example, an additional machine of a certain type is 
added to the existing pool of machines. Issues involve 
how frequently and how much capacity is added or 
removed over time.
Summary
Key Terms
Capacity cushion  Capacity in excess of expected 
demand.
LO 5–3   Evaluate capacity alternatives using decision trees.
	∙	 A useful technique for analyzing capacity problems is 
the decision tree.
	∙	 With this format, the sequences of decisions are orga­
nized like branches in a tree.
	∙	 The potential consequences of the decisions are enu­
merated and evaluated based on their probability of 
occurrence and corresponding expected value.
Summary
LO 5–4   Compare capacity planning in services to capacity planning in manufacturing.
	∙	 Often, services require that capacity be available 
immediately and that it be near where the customer 
resides. For example, a bank needs automated teller 
machines (ATMs) close to where customers want 
immediate cash, and enough of them so customers 
will not have to wait in long lines.
	∙	 Also, firms that offer services often need to deal 
with dramatic changes in customer demand over time 
(for example, the lunch-hour rush at a bank’s drive-
through window).
Summary
Solved Problem
E-Education is a new startup that develops and markets MBA courses offered over the Inter­
net. The company is currently located in Chicago and employs 150 people. Due to strong 
growth, the company needs additional office space. The company has the option of leasing 
additional space at its current location in Chicago for the next two years, but after that will 
need to move to a new building. Another option the company is considering is moving the 
entire operation to a small Midwest town immediately. A third option is for the company to 
lease a new building in Chicago immediately. If the company chooses the first option and 
leases new space at its current location, it can, at the end of two years, either lease a new 
building in Chicago or move to the small Midwest town.
LO 5–3

124	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
The following are some additional facts about the alternatives and current situation:
	1.	 The company has a 75 percent chance of surviving the next two years.
	2.	 Leasing the new space for two years at the current location in Chicago would cost $750,000 
per year.
	3.	 Moving the entire operation to a Midwest town would cost $1 million. Leasing space 
would run only $500,000 per year.
	4.	 Moving to a new building in Chicago would cost $200,000, and leasing the new building’s 
space would cost $650,000 per year.
	5.	 The company can cancel the lease at any time.
	6.	 The company will build its own building in five years, if it survives.
	7.	 Assume all other costs and revenues are the same no matter where the company is located.
What should E-Education do?
Solution
	 	 Step 1: Construct a decision tree that considers all of E-Education’s alternatives. The fol­
lowing shows the tree that has decision points (with the square nodes) followed by chance 
occurrences (round nodes). In the case of the first decision point, if the company survives, 
two additional decision points need consideration.
E-Education
Stay in Chicago
Lease current space for
two years
Survive (.75)
Survive (.75)
Lease new space
in Chicago
Stay in Chicago
Lease new space
Move to Midwest
town
Move to Midwest
$3,650,000
$3,450,000
$3,112,500
$2,962,500
Fail (.25)
Fail (.25)
$4,000,000
$1,500,000
$1,500,000
Survive (.75)
$3,500,000
$3,125,000
Fail (.25)
$2,000,000
	 	 Step 2: Calculate the values of each alternative as follows.
Alternative
Calculation
Value
Stay in Chicago, lease current space for two years, 
  survive, lease new building in Chicago
(750,000) × 2 + 200,000 + 
(650,000) × 3 =
$3,650,000
Stay in Chicago, lease current space for two years, 
  survive, move to Midwest
(750,000) × 2 + 1,000,000 + 
(500,000) × 3 =
$4,000,000
Stay in Chicago, lease current space for two years, fail 
(750,000) × 2 =
$1,500,000
Stay in Chicago, lease new building in Chicago, survive
200,000 + (650,000) × 5 =
$3,450,000
Stay in Chicago, lease new building in Chicago, fail
200,000 + (650,000) × 2 =
$1,500,000
Move to Midwest, survive
1,000,000 + (500,000) × 5 =
$3,500,000
Move to Midwest, fail
1,000,000 + (500,000) × 2 =
$2,000,000
Working from our rightmost alternatives, the first two alternatives end in decision nodes. If we 
fail after the first two years, represented by the third alternative, the cost is only $1,500,000. 
The expected value of the first option of staying in Chicago and leasing space for the first two 
years is .75 × 3,650,000 + .25 × 1,500,000 = $3,112,500.

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
125
The second option, staying in Chicago and leasing a new building now, has an expected 
value of .75 × 3,450,000 + .25 × 1,500,000 = $2,962,500.
Finally, the third option of moving to the Midwest immediately has an expected value of 
.75 × 3,500,000 + .25 × 2,000,000 = $3,125,000.
From this, it looks like the best alternative is to stay in Chicago and lease a new building 
immediately.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What capacity problems are encountered when a new drug is introduced to the market?
	  2.	 List some practical limits to economies of scale. In other words, when should a plant stop 
growing?
	  3.	 What are some capacity balance problems faced by the following organizations or 
facilities?
	a.  An airline terminal
	b.  A university computing lab
	c.  A clothing manufacturer
	  4.	 At first glance, the concepts of the focused factory and capacity flexibility may seem to 
contradict each other. Do they really?
	  5.	 Management may choose to build up capacity in anticipation of demand or in response to 
developing demand. Cite the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches.
	  6.	 What is capacity balance? Why is it hard to achieve? What methods are used to deal with 
capacity imbalances?
	  7.	 What are some reasons for a plant to maintain a capacity cushion? How about a negative 
capacity cushion?
	  8.	 Will the use of decision tree analysis guarantee the best decision for a firm? Why or why 
not? If not, why bother using it?
	  9.	 Consider the example in Exhibit 5.5. Can you think of anything else you might do with 
that example that would be helpful to the ultimate decision maker?
	10.	 What are some major capacity considerations in a hospital? How do they differ from 
those of a factory?
	11.	 Refer to Exhibit 5.6. Why is it that the critical zone begins at a utilization rate of about 
70 percent in a typical service operation? Draw upon your own experiences as either a 
customer or a server in common service establishments.
LO5–1
LO5–2
LO5–3
LO5–4
Objective Questions
	1.	 A manufacturing shop is designed to operate most efficiently at an output of 550 units per 
day. In the past month, the plant averaged 490 units per day. What was its capacity utiliza­
tion rate last month? (Answer in Appendix D)
	2.	 A company has a factory that is designed so that it is most efficient (average unit cost is 
minimized) when producing 15,000 units of output each month. However, it has an abso­
lute maximum output capability of 17,250 units per month, and can produce as little as 
7,000 units per month without corporate headquarters shifting production to another plant. 
If the factory produces 10,925 units in October, what is the capacity utilization rate in 
October for this factory?
	3.	 Hoosier Manufacturing operates a production shop that is designed to have the lowest unit 
production cost at an output rate of 100 units per hour. In the month of July, the company 
operated the production line for a total of 175 hours and produced 16,900 units of output. 
What was its capacity utilization rate for the month?
	4.	 AlwaysRain Irrigation, Inc. would like to determine capacity requirements for the next four 
years. Currently, two production lines are in place for making bronze and plastic sprin­
klers. Three types of sprinklers are available in both bronze and plastic: 90-degree nozzle 
LO5–1
LO5–2

126	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
sprinklers, 180-degree nozzle sprinklers, and 360-degree nozzle sprinklers. Management 
has forecast demand for the next four years as follows.
Yearly Demand
1 (in 000s)
2 (in 000s)
3 (in 000s)
4 (in 000s)
Plastic 90
32
44
55
56
Plastic 180
15
16
17
18
Plastic 360
50
55
64
67
Bronze 90
11
15
18
23
Bronze 180
  6
  5
  6
  9
Bronze 360
15
16
17
20
Yearly Demand
1 (in 000s)
2 (in 000s)
3 (in 000s)
4 (in 000s)
Plastic 90
32
44
55
56
Plastic 180
15
16
17
18
Plastic 360
50
55
64
67
Bronze 90
  7
  8
  9
10
Bronze 180
  3
  4
  5
  6
Bronze 360
11
12
15
18
	 	 Both production lines can produce all the different types of nozzles. The bronze machines 
needed for the bronze sprinklers require two operators and can produce up to 12,000 sprin­
klers. The plastic injection molding machine needed for the plastic sprinklers requires four 
operators and can produce up to 200,000 sprinklers. Three bronze machines and only one 
injection molding machine are available. What are the capacity requirements for the next 
four years? (Assume that there is no learning.)
	5.	 Suppose that AlwaysRain Irrigation’s marketing department will undertake an intense ad 
campaign for the bronze sprinklers, which are more expensive but also more durable than 
the plastic ones. Forecast demand for the next four years is as follows.
	 	 What are the capacity implications of the marketing campaign (assume no learning)?
	6.	 In anticipation of the ad campaign, AlwaysRain bought an additional bronze machine. Will 
this be enough to ensure that adequate capacity is available?
	7.	 Suppose that operators have enough training to operate both the bronze machines and 
the injection molding machine for the plastic sprinklers. Currently, AlwaysRain has 10 
such employees. In anticipation of the ad campaign described in problem 5, management 
approved the purchase of two additional bronze machines. What are the labor requirement 
implications?
	8.	 Expando, Inc. is considering the possibility of building an additional factory that would 
produce a new addition to its product line. The company is currently considering two 
options. The first is a small facility that it could build at a cost of $6 million. If demand for 
new products is low, the company expects to receive $10 million in discounted revenues 
(present value of future revenues) with the small facility. On the other hand, if demand is 
high, it expects $12 million in discounted revenues using the small facility. The second 
option is to build a large factory at a cost of $9 million. Were demand to be low, the com­
pany would expect $10 million in discounted revenues with the large plant. If demand is 
high, the company estimates that the discounted revenues would be $14 million. In either 
case, the probability of demand being high is .40, and the probability of it being low is 
.60. Not constructing a new factory would result in no additional revenue being generated 
because the current factories cannot produce these new products. Construct a decision tree 
to help Expando make the best decision. (Answer in Appendix D)
LO5–3

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
127
	  9.	 A builder has located a piece of property that she would like to buy and eventually build 
on. The land is currently zoned for four homes per acre, but she is planning to request 
new zoning. What she builds depends on approval of zoning requests and your analysis 
of this problem to advise her. With her input and your help, the decision process has been 
reduced to the following costs, alternatives, and probabilities:
	 	     Cost of land: $2 million
	 	     Probability of rezoning: .60
	 	     If the land is rezoned, there will be additional costs for new roads, lighting, and so on, 
of $1 million.
	 	     If the land is rezoned, the contractor must decide whether to build a shopping cen­
ter or 1,500 apartments that the tentative plan shows would be possible. If she builds a 
shopping center, there is a 70 percent chance that she can sell the shopping center to a 
large department store chain for $4 million over her construction cost, which excludes the 
land; and there is a 30 percent chance that she can sell it to an insurance company for $5 
million over her construction cost (also excluding the land). If, instead of the shopping 
center, she decides to build the 1,500 apartments, she places probabilities on the profits 
as follows: There is a 60 percent chance that she can sell the apartments to a real estate 
investment corporation for $3,000 each over her construction cost; there is a 40 percent 
chance that she can get only $2,000 each over her construction cost. (Both exclude the 
land cost.)
	 	     If the land is not rezoned, she will comply with the existing zoning restrictions and 
simply build 600 homes, on which she expects to make $4,000 over the construction cost 
on each one (excluding the cost of land).
	 	     Draw a decision tree of the problem and determine the best solution and the expected 
net profit.
	10.	 Owners of a local restaurant are concerned about their ability to provide quality service 
as they continue to grow and attract more customers. They have collected data from Fri­
day and Saturday nights, their busiest times of the week. During these time periods, about 
75 customers arrive per hour for service. Given the number of tables and chairs, and the 
typical time it takes to serve a customer, the owners estimate they can serve, on average, 
about 100 customers per hour. During these nights, are they in the zone of service, the 
critical zone, or the zone of nonservice? (Answer in Appendix D)
	11.	 Owners of the restaurant in the prior problem anticipate that in one year their demand 
will double as long as they can provide good service to their customers. How much will 
they have to increase their service capacity to stay out of the critical zone?
LO5–4
“Shouldice Hospital, the house that hernias built, is a 
converted country estate which gives the hospital ‘a 
country club’ appeal.”
A quote from American Medical News
Shouldice Hospital in Canada is widely known for one 
thing—hernia repair! In fact, that is the only operation 
it performs, and it performs a great many of them. Over 
the past two decades this small 90-bed hospital has aver­
aged 7,000 operations annually. Last year, it had a record 
year and performed nearly 7,500 operations. Patients’ 
ties to Shouldice do not end when they leave the hospital. 
Every year, the gala Hernia Reunion dinner (with com­
plimentary hernia inspection) draws in over 1,000 former 
patients, some of whom have been attending the event for 
over 30 years.
	
A number of notable features in Shouldice’s service 
delivery system contribute to its success: (1) Shouldice 
accepts only patients with uncomplicated external her­
nias, and uses a superior technique developed for this 
type of hernia by Dr. Shouldice during World War II. 
(2) Patients are subject to early ambulation, which pro­
motes healing. (Patients literally walk off the operating 
table and engage in light exercise throughout their stay, 
which lasts only three days.) (3) Its country club atmo­
sphere, gregarious nursing staff, and built-in socializing 
make a surprisingly pleasant experience out of an inher­
ently unpleasant medical problem. Regular times are set 
aside for tea, cookies, and socializing. All patients are 
paired up with a roommate with a similar background 
and interests.
Case: Shouldice Hospital—A Cut Above

128	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
The Production System
The medical facilities at Shouldice consist of five oper­
ating rooms, a patient recovery room, a laboratory, and 
six examination rooms. Shouldice performs, on average, 
150 operations per week, with patients generally staying 
at the hospital for three days. Although operations are 
performed only five days a week, the remainder of the 
hospital is in operation continuously to attend to recover­
ing patients.
	
An operation at Shouldice Hospital is performed by 
one of the 12 full-time surgeons, and assisted by one 
of  seven part-time assistant surgeons. Surgeons gener­
ally take about one hour to prepare for and perform each 
hernia operation, and they operate on four patients per 
day. The surgeons’ day ends at 4 P.M., although they can 
expect to be on call every 14th night and every 10th 
weekend.
The Shouldice Experience
Each patient undergoes a screening exam prior to setting 
a date for his or her operation. Patients in the Toronto 
area are encouraged to walk in for the diagnosis. Exami­
nations are done between 9 A.M. and 3:30 P.M. Monday 
through Friday, and between 10 A.M. and 2 P.M. on Sat­
urday. Out-of-town patients are mailed a medical infor­
mation questionnaire (also available over the Internet), 
which is used for the diagnosis. A small percentage of the 
patients who are overweight or otherwise represent an 
undue medical risk are refused treatment. The remaining 
patients receive confirmation cards with the scheduled 
dates for their operations. A patient’s folder is transferred 
to the reception desk once an arrival date is confirmed.
	
Patients arrive at the clinic between 1 and 3 P.M. the 
day before their surgery. After a short wait, they receive a 
brief preoperative examination. They are then sent to an 
admissions clerk to complete any necessary paperwork. 
Patients are next directed to one of the two nurses’ sta­
tions for blood and urine tests and then are shown to their 
rooms. They spend the remaining time before orienta­
tion getting settled and acquainting themselves with their 
roommates.
	
Orientation begins at 5 P.M., followed by dinner in 
the common dining room. Later in the evening, at 9 P.M., 
patients gather in the lounge area for tea and cookies. 
Here, new patients can talk with patients who have already 
had their surgery. Bedtime is between 9:30 and 10 P.M.
	
On the day of the operation, patients with early opera­
tions are awakened at 5:30 A.M. for preoperative sedation. 
The first operations begin at 7:30 A.M. Shortly before an 
operation starts, the patient is administered a local anes­
thetic, leaving him or her alert and fully aware of the pro­
ceedings. At the conclusion of the operation, the patient 
is invited to walk from the operating table to a nearby 
wheelchair, which is waiting to return the patient to his 
or her room. After a brief period of rest, the patient is 
encouraged to get up and start exercising. By 9 P.M. that 
day, he or she is in the lounge having cookies and tea and 
talking with new, incoming patients.
	
The skin clips holding the incision together are loos­
ened, and some even removed, the next day. The remain­
der are removed the following morning just before the 
patient is discharged.
	
When Shouldice Hospital started, the average hospi­
tal stay for hernia surgery was three weeks. Today, many 
institutions push “same day surgery” for a variety of rea­
sons. Shouldice Hospital firmly believes that this is not 
in the best interests of patients and is committed to its 
three-day process. Shouldice’s postoperative rehabilita­
tion program is designed to enable the patient to resume 
normal activities with minimal interruption and discom­
fort. Shouldice patients frequently return to work in a few 
days; the average total time off is eight days.
	
“It is interesting to note that approximately 1 out of 
every 100 Shouldice patients is a medical doctor.”
Future Plans
The management of Shouldice is thinking of expanding 
the hospital’s capacity to serve considerable unsatisfied 
demand. To this effect, the vice president is seriously 
considering two options. The first involves adding one 
more day of operations (Saturday) to the existing five-
day schedule, which would increase capacity by 20 per­
cent. The second option is to add another floor of rooms 
to the hospital, increasing the number of beds by 50 per­
cent. This would require more aggressive scheduling of 
the operating rooms.
	
The administrator of the hospital, however, is con­
cerned about maintaining control over the quality of the 
service delivered. He thinks the facility is already getting 
very good utilization. The doctors and the staff are happy 
with their jobs, and the patients are satisfied with the 
service. According to him, further expansion of capacity 
might make it hard to maintain the same kind of working 
relationships and attitudes.
Questions
Exhibit 5.7 is a room-occupancy table for the existing 
system. Each row in the table follows the patients who 
checked in on a given day. The columns indicate the 
number of patients in the hospital on a given day. For 
example, the first row of the table shows that 30 peo­
ple checked in on Monday and were in the hospital for 
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. By summing the col­
umns of the table for Wednesday, we see that there are 90 
patients staying in the hospital that day.
	1.	 How well is the hospital currently utilizing its beds?
	2.	 Develop a similar table to show the effects of adding 
operations on Saturday. (Assume that 30 operations 

	
Strategic Capacity Management	
Chapter 5	
129
would still be performed each day.) How would this 
affect the utilization of the bed capacity? Is this 
capacity sufficient for the additional patients?
	3.	 Now look at the effect of increasing the number of 
beds by 50 percent. How many operations could the 
hospital perform per day before running out of bed 
capacity? (Assume operations are performed five 
days per week, with the same number performed 
on each day.) How well would the new resources be 
utilized relative to the current operation? Could the 
hospital really perform this many operations? Why? 
(Hint: Look at the capacity of the 12 surgeons and the 
five operating rooms.)
	4.	 Although financial data are sketchy, an estimate from a 
construction company indicates that adding bed capac­
ity would cost about $100,000 per bed. In addition, the 
rate charged for the hernia surgery varies between about 
$900 and $2,000 (U.S. dollars), with an average rate of 
$1,300 per operation. The surgeons are paid a flat $600 
per operation. Due to all the uncertainties in govern­
ment health care legislation, Shouldice would like to 
justify any expansion within a five-year time period.
Beds Required
Check-in Day
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Monday
30
30
30
Tuesday
30
30
30
Wednesday
30
30
30
Thursday
30
30
30
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
30
30
30
  Total
60
90
90
90
60
30
30
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 The level of capacity for which a process was designed 
and at which it operates at minimum cost.
	2.	 A facility has a maximum capacity of 4,000 units 
per day using overtime and skipping the daily main­
tenance routine. At 3,500 units per day, the facility 
operates at a level where average cost per unit is mini­
mized. Currently, the process is scheduled to operate 
at a level of 3,000 units per day. What is the capacity 
utilization rate?
	3.	 The concept that relates to gaining efficiency through 
the full utilization of dedicated resources, such as peo­
ple and equipment.
	4.	 A facility that limits its production to a single product 
or a set of very similar products.
	5.	 When multiple (usually similar) products can be 
produced in a facility less expensively than a single 
product.
	6.	 The ability to serve more customers than expected.
	7.	 In considering a capacity expansion, we have two 
alternatives. The first alternative is expected to cost 
$1,000,000 and has an expected profit of $500,000 
over the next three years. The second alternative has 
an expected cost of $800,000 and an expected profit of 
$450,000 over the next three years. Which alternative 
should we select, and what is the expected value of the 
expansion? Assume a 10 percent interest rate.
	8.	 In a service process such as the checkout counter in a 
discount store, what is a good target percent for capac­
ity utilization?
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Best operating level 2. 85.7 percent 3. Economies of scale 4. Focused factory 5. Economies of scope 6. Capacity cush­
ion 7. Alternative 1: Present value = 500,000 × (.909 + .826 + .751) − 1,000,000 = $243,000; Alternative 2: Present value = 450,000 × (.909 + .826 
+ .751) − 800,000 = $318,700; Alternative 2 is best. 8. 70 percent.
Operations with 90 Beds (30 patients per day)
exhibit 5.7

BOEING SPEEDS UP 737 OUTPUT
To boost production of its best-selling 737 jetliner to meet surging airline demand, 
Boeing Co. plans to increase production at its Renton, Washington, plant from 42 per 
month now, to 47 in 2017, and then up to 57 airplanes in 2019. To achieve this, Boeing 
will rely on its engineers to streamline work and make jets more efficiently. Expanding 
the factory is not an option due to the limited space at the plant. 
Executives say they are studying ways to eventually reach quantities in the low 
60s each month as they plan a retooled version of the plane called the 737 Max, a 
jet that Boeing expects to begin delivering in 2017. The company is trying to 
address an order backlog of some 4,300 jetliners, including about 3,000 of its 
best-selling 737s.
Boeing has reported that it currently takes about 11 days for the final assem-
bly of a 737 at the Renton, Washington, plant. That’s down from 22 days about 
a decade ago. The company’s near-term goal is to reduce that number to nine 
days. Clearly, learning curves (the topic of this chapter) are important to the suc-
cess of Boeing.
Source: Boeing earnings call on January 27, 2016.
130
6
Learning Curves
Learning Objectives
	LO 6–1	 Understand what a learning curve is and where learning curves are applicable.
	LO 6–2	 Plot and analyze learning curves.
	LO 6–3	 Compare the impact of learning on different industries.
The jet turbines of a 
Lufthansa passenger plane 
undergo maintenance 
during a scheduled 
inspection service.
© Monty Rakusen/Getty Images RF

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
131
A learning curve is a line displaying the relationship between unit production time and the 
cumulative number of units produced. Learning (or experience) curve theory has a wide range 
of applications in the business world. In manufacturing, it can be used to estimate the time for 
product design and production, as well as costs. Learning curves are also an integral part in 
planning corporate strategy, such as decisions concerning pricing, capital investment, and 
operating costs based on experience curves.
Learning curves can be applied to individuals or organizations. Individual learning is 
improvement that results when people repeat a process and gain skill or efficiency from their 
own experience. That is, “practice makes perfect.” Organizational learning results from 
practice as well, but it also comes from changes in administration, equipment, and product 
design. In organizational settings, we expect to see both kinds of learning occurring simulta-
neously and often describe the combined effect with a single learning curve.
Learning curve theory is based on three assumptions:
	1.	 The amount of time required to complete a given task or unit of a product will be less 
each time the task is undertaken.
	2.	 The unit time will decrease at a decreasing rate.
	3.	 The reduction in time will follow a predictable pattern.
Each of these assumptions was found to hold true in the airplane industry, where learn-
ing curves were first applied. In this application, it was observed that, as output doubled, 
there was a 20 percent reduction in direct production worker-hours per unit between doubled 
units. Thus, if it took 100,000 hours for Plane 1, it would take 80,000 hours for Plane 2, 
64,000 hours for Plane 4, and so forth. Because the 20 percent reduction meant that, say, Unit 
4 took only 80 percent of the production time required for Unit 2, the line connecting the coor-
dinates of output and time was referred to as an “80 percent learning curve.” (By convention, 
the percentage learning rate is used to denote any given exponential learning curve.)
A learning curve may be developed from an arithmetic tabulation, by logarithms, or by 
some other curve-fitting method, depending on the amount and form of the available data.
There are two ways to think about the improved performance that comes with learning 
curves: time per unit (as in Exhibit 6.1A) or units of output per time period (as in Exhibit 6.1B). 
Time per unit shows the decrease in time required for each successive unit. Cumulative average 
time shows the cumulative average performance times as the total number of units increases. 
Time per unit and cumulative average times are also called progress curves or product learning 
and are useful for complex products or products with a longer cycle time. Units of output per 
time period is also called industry learning and is generally applied to high-volume production 
(short cycle time).
Learning curve
A line displaying the 
relationship between unit 
production time and the 
cumulative number of units 
produced.
WHAT ARE LEARNING CURVES?
Understand what a 
learning curve is and 
where learning curves are 
applicable.
LO 6–1
Organizational learning
Improvement that comes 
both from experience 
and from changes in 
administration, equipment, 
and product design.
Individual learning
Improvement that results 
when people repeat a 
process and gain skill or 
efficiency from their own 
experience.
Average output during
a time period in
the future
A Progress Curve
Industrial Learning
Time 
per 
unit
Output per
time period
Observed
data
Fitted line
Cumulative average time
A.
B.
Unit number
Time
Learning Curves Plotted as Times and Numbers of Units
exhibit 6.1

132	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Note in Exhibit 6.1A that the cumulative average curve does not decrease as fast as the 
time per unit because the time is being averaged. For example, if the time for Units 1, 2, 3, 
and 4 were 100, 80, 70, and 64, they would be plotted that way on the time per unit graph, but 
would be plotted as 100, 90, 83.3, and 78.5 on the cumulative average time graph.
Plot and analyze  
learning curves.
LO 6–2
There are many ways to analyze past data to fit a useful trend line. We will use the simple 
exponential curve first as an arithmetic procedure and then by a logarithmic analysis. In an 
arithmetical tabulation approach, a column for units is created by doubling, row by row, as 
1, 2, 4, 8, 16 . . . The time for the first unit is multiplied by the learning percentage to obtain 
the time for the second unit. The second unit is multiplied by the learning percentage for the 
fourth unit, and so on. Thus, if we are developing an 80 percent learning curve, we would 
arrive at the figures listed in column 2 of Exhibit 6.2. Because it is often desirable for plan-
ning purposes to know the cumulative direct labor hours, column 3, which lists this informa-
tion, is also provided. Column 4, the cumulative average direct labor hours, is found by 
dividing the entry in column 3 by the column 1 entry. (See the next section for the exploration 
of how to do these calculations for each individual unit.)
Exhibit 6.3A shows three curves with different learning rates: 90 percent, 80 percent, and 
70 percent. Note that if the cost of the first unit was $100, the 30th unit would cost $59.63 at 
the 90 percent rate and $17.37 at the 70 percent rate. Differences in learning rates can have 
dramatic effects.
In practice, learning curves are plotted using a graph with logarithmic scales. The unit 
curves become linear throughout their entire range, and the cumulative curve becomes linear 
after the first few units. The property of linearity is desirable because it facilitates extrapola-
tion and permits a more accurate reading of the cumulative curve. This type of scale is an 
option in Microsoft Excel. Simply generate a regular scatter plot in your spreadsheet and 
then select each axis and format the axis with the logarithmic option. Exhibit 6.3B shows the 
80 percent unit cost curve and average cost curve on a logarithmic scale. Note that the cumu-
lative average cost is essentially linear after the eighth unit.
Although the arithmetic tabulation approach is useful, direct logarithmic analysis of 
learning curve problems is generally more efficient because it does not require a complete 
enumeration of successive time–output combinations. Moreover, where such data are not 
HOW ARE LEARNING CURVES MODELED?
(1)  
Unit  
Number
(2)  
Unit Direct  
Labor Hours
(3)  
Cumulative Direct  
Labor Hours
(4)  
Cumulative Average 
Direct Labor Hours
    1
100,000
   100,000
100,000
    2
  80,000
   180,000
  90,000
    4
  64,000
   314,210
  78,553
    8
  51,200
   534,591
  66,824
  16
  40,960
   892,014
  55,751
  32
  32,768
1,467,862
  45,871
  64
  26,214
2,392,447
  37,382
128
  20,972
3,874,384
  30,269
256
  16,777
6,247,572
  24,405
Unit, Cumulative, and Cumulative Average Direct Labor Worker-
Hours Required for an 80 Percent Learning Curve
exhibit 6.2

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
133
available, an analytical model that uses logarithms may be the most convenient way of obtain-
ing output estimates.
Logarithmic Analysis
The normal form of the learning curve equation is
	
​​​Y​ x​  =  K ​x​ n​​	
​​[​6.1​]​
where
We can solve this mathematically or by using a table, as shown in the next section. Math-
ematically, to find the labor-hour requirement for the eighth unit in our example (Exhibit 6.2) 
where the 1st unit took 100,000 hours to produce and there is 80 percent learning, we would 
substitute as follows:
​Y​ 8​  =  ​(​100,000​)​(​8​)​ n​
Using logarithms:
	
​​
​Y​ 8​
​ 
= 100,000 ​(​8​)​ log 0.8/log 2​
​ 
 
​​ 
= 100,000 ​(​8​)​ −0.322​  =  ​ 100,000 
______ 
​(​8​)​ 0.322​ ​​ 
 
 
​
​ 
= ​ 100,000 
______ 
1.9534 ​  =  51,193
 
​	
Therefore, it would take 51,193 hours to make the eighth unit. Your answer may vary slightly 
due to rounding. To get the exact answer, use the Excel formula = 100000 × 8 (Log (0.8)/Log (2)), 
for example. (See Exhibit 6.2 in spreadsheet).
Learning Curve Tables
When the learning percentage is known, Exhibits 6.4 and 6.5 can be used to easily calculate esti-
mated labor hours for a specific unit or for cumulative groups of units. We need only multiply 
the initial unit labor hour figure by the appropriate tabled value. An alternative way to obtain 
the unit and cumulative improvement factors is from the OSCM Tools application available at 
http://oscm-pro.com/tools/.
Production cost ($)
90% Learning
        curve
$100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
6
4
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
Unit number
80% 
70% 
A. Arithmetic Plot of 70, 80, and 90 Percent Learning Curves
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
20
1
2
3 4 5 6 78910  
20
30
Unit number
40 50 60 80 100 200 300 400600 1,000
Average cost/unit
(cumulative)
Cost for a
particular unit
B. Logarithmic Plot of an 80 Percent Learning Curve
Learning Curve Plots
exhibit 6.3
x = Unit number
Yx = Number of direct labor hours required to produce the xth unit
K = Number of direct labor hours required to produce the first unit
n = log b/log 2, where b = Learning decimal percentage (i.e. .8 for 80%)

134	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Unit Improvement Factor
Unit
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
      1
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
      2
  .6000
  .6500
  .7000
  .7500
  .8000
  .8500
  .9000
  .9500
      3
  .4450
  .5052
  .5682
  .6338
  .7021
  .7729
  .8462
  .9219
      4
  .3600
  .4225
  .4900
  .5625
  .6400
  .7225
  .8100
  .9025
      5
  .3054
  .3678
  .4368
  .5127
  .5956
  .6857
  .7830
  .8877
      6
  .2670
  .3284
  .3977
  .4754
  .5617
  .6570
  .7616
  .8758
      7
  .2383
  .2984
  .3674
  .4459
  .5345
  .6337
  .7439
  .8659
      8
  .2160
  .2746
  .3430
  .4219
  .5120
  .6141
  .7290
  .8574
      9
  .1980
  .2552
  .3228
  .4017
  .4930
  .5974
  .7161
  .8499
    10
  .1832
  .2391
  .3058
  .3846
  .4765
  .5828
  .7047
  .8433
    12
  .1602
  .2135
  .2784
  .3565
  .4493
  .5584
  .6854
  .8320
    14
  .1430
  .1940
  .2572
  .3344
  .4276
  .5386
  .6696
  .8226
    16
  .1290
  .1785
  .2401
  .3164
  .4096
  .5220
  .6561
  .8145
    18
  .1188
  .1659
  .2260
  .3013
  .3944
  .5078
  .6445
  .8074
    20
  .1099
  .1554
  .2141
  .2884
  .3812
  .4954
  .6342
  .8012
    22
  .1025
  .1465
  .2038
  .2772
  .3697
  .4844
  .6251
  .7955
    24
  .0961
  .1387
  .1949
  .2674
  .3595
  .4747
  .6169
  .7904
    25
  .0933
  .1353
  .1908
  .2629
  .3548
  .4701
  .6131
  .7880
    30
  .0815
  .1208
  .1737
  .2437
  .3346
  .4505
  .5963
  .7775
    35
  .0728
  .1097
  .1605
  .2286
  .3184
  .4345
  .5825
  .7687
    40
  .0660
  .1010
  .1498
  .2163
  .3050
  .4211
  .5708
  .7611
    45
  .0605
  .0939
  .1410
  .2060
  .2936
  .4096
  .5607
  .7545
    50
  .0560
  .0879
  .1336
  .1972
  .2838
  .3996
  .5518
  .7486
    60
  .0489
  .0785
  .1216
  .1828
  .2676
  .3829
  .5367
  .7386
    70
  .0437
  .0713
  .1123
  .1715
  .2547
  .3693
  .5243
  .7302
    80
  .0396
  .0657
  .1049
  .1622
  .2440
  .3579
  .5137
  .7231
    90
  .0363
  .0610
  .0987
  .1545
  .2349
  .3482
  .5046
  .7168
  100
  .0336
  .0572
  .0935
  .1479
  .2271
  .3397
  .4966
  .7112
  120
  .0294
  .0510
  .0851
  .1371
  .2141
  .3255
  .4830
  .7017
  140
  .0262
  .0464
  .0786
  .1287
  .2038
  .3139
  .4718
  .6937
  160
  .0237
  .0427
  .0734
  .1217
  .1952
  .3042
  .4623
  .6869
  180
  .0218
  .0397
  .0691
  .1159
  .1879
  .2959
  .4541
  .6809
  200
  .0201
  .0371
  .0655
  .1109
 .1816
  .2887
  .4469
  .6757
  250
  .0171
  .0323
  .0584
  .1011
.1691
  .2740
  .4320
  .6646
  300
  .0149
  .0289
  .0531
  .0937
.1594
  .2625
  .4202
  .6557
  350
  .0133
  .0262
  .0491
  .0879
.1517
  .2532
  .4105
  .6482
  400
  .0121
  .0241
  .0458
  .0832
.1453
  .2454
  .4022
  .6419
Improvement Curves: Table of Unit Values
exhibit 6.4

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
135
Unit Improvement Factor
Unit
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
   450
  .0111
  .0224
  .0431
  .0792
.1399
  .2387
  .3951
  .6363
   500
  .0103
  .0210
  .0408
  .0758
.1352
  .2329
  .3888
  .6314
   600
  .0090
  .0188
  .0372
  .0703
.1275
  .2232
  .3782
  .6229
   700
  .0080
  .0171
  .0344
  .0659
.1214
  .2152
  .3694
  .6158
   800
  .0073
  .0157
  .0321
  .0624
.1163
  .2086
  .3620
  .6098
   900
  .0067
  .0146
  .0302
  .0594
.1119
  .2029
  .3556
  .6045
1,000
  .0062
  .0137
  .0286
  .0569
.1082
  .1980
  .3499
  .5998
1,200
  .0054
  .0122
  .0260
  .0527
.1020
  .1897
  .3404
  .5918
1,400
  .0048
  .0111
  .0240
  .0495
.0971
  .1830
  .3325
  .5850
1,600
  .0044
  .0102
  .0225
  .0468
.0930
  .1773
  .3258
  .5793
1,800
  .0040
  .0095
  .0211
  .0446
.0895
  .1725
  .3200
  .5743
2,000
  .0037
  .0089
  .0200
  .0427
.0866
  .1683
  .3149
  .5698
2,500
  .0031
  .0077
  .0178
  .0389
.0806
  .1597
  .3044
  .5605
3,000
  .0027
  .0069
  .0162
  .0360
.0760
  .1530
  .2961
  .5530
(Continued)
exhibit 6.4
Cumulative Improvement Factor
Unit
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
      1
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
      2
1.600
1.650
1.700
1.750
1.800
1.850
1.900
1.950
      3
2.045
2.155
2.268
2.384
2.502
2.623
2.746
2.872
      4
2.405
2.578
2.758
2.946
3.142
3.345
3.556
3.774
      5
2.710
2.946
3.195
3.459
3.738
4.031
4.339
4.662
      6
2.977
3.274
3.593
3.934
4.299
4.688
5.101
5.538
      7
3.216
3.572
3.960
4.380
4.834
5.322
5.845
6.404
      8
3.432
3.847
4.303
4.802
5.346
5.936
6.574
7.261
      9
3.630
4.102
4.626
5.204
5.839
6.533
7.290
8.111
    10
3.813
4.341
4.931
5.589
6.315
7.116
7.994
8.955
    12
4.144
4.780
5.501
6.315
7.227
8.244
9.374
10.62
    14
4.438
5.177
6.026
6.994
8.092
9.331
10.72
12.27
    16
4.704
5.541
6.514
7.635
8.920
10.38
12.04
13.91
    18
4.946
5.879
6.972
8.245
9.716
11.41
13.33
15.52
    20
5.171
6.195
7.407
8.828
10.48
12.40
14.61
17.13
    22
5.379
6.492
7.819
9.388
11.23
13.38
15.86
18.72
    24
5.574
6.773
8.213
9.928
11.95
14.33
17.10
20.31
    25
5.668
6.909
8.404
10.19
12.31
14.80
17.71
21.10
Improvement Curves: Table of Cumulative Values
exhibit 6.5
(Continued)

136	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Cumulative Improvement Factor
Unit
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
    30
6.097
7.540
9.305
11.45
14.02
17.09
20.73
25.00
    35
6.478
8.109
10.13
12.72
15.64
19.29
23.67
28.86
    40
6.821
8.631
10.90
13.72
17.19
21.43
26.54
32.68
    45
7.134
9.114
11.62
14.77
18.68
23.50
29.37
36.47
    50
7.422
9.565
12.31
15.78
20.12
25.51
32.14
40.22
    60
7.941
10.39
13.57
17.67
22.87
29.41
37.57
47.65
    70
8.401
11.13
14.74
19.43
25.47
33.17
42.87
54.99
    80
8.814
11.82
15.82
21.09
27.96
36.80
48.05
62.25
    90
9.191
12.45
16.83
22.67
30.35
40.32
53.14
69.45
  100
9.539
13.03
17.79
24.18
32.65
43.75
58.14
76.59
  120
10.16
14.11
19.57
27.02
37.05
50.39
67.93
90.71
  140
10.72
15.08
21.20
29.67
41.22
56.78
77.46
104.7
  160
11.21
15.97
22.72
32.17
45.20
62.95
86.80
118.5
  180
11.67
16.79
24.14
34.54
49.03
68.95
95.96
132.1
  200
12.09
17.55
25.48
36.80
52.72
74.79
105.0
145.7
  250
13.01
19.28
28.56
42.05
61.47
88.83
126.9
179.2
  300
13.81
20.81
31.34
46.94
69.66
102.2
148.2
212.2
  350
14.51
22.18
33.89
51.48
77.43
115.1
169.0
244.8
  400
15.14
23.44
36.26
55.75
84.85
127.6
189.3
277.0
  450
15.72
24.60
38.48
59.80
91.97
139.7
209.2
309.0
  500
16.26
25.68
40.58
63.68
98.85
151.5
228.8
340.6
  600
17.21
27.67
44.47
70.97
112.0
174.2
267.1
403.3
  700
18.06
29.45
48.04
77.77
124.4
196.1
304.5
465.3
  800
18.82
31.09
51.36
84.18
136.3
217.3
341.0
526.5
  900
19.51
32.60
54.46
90.26
147.7
237.9
376.9
587.2
1,000
20.15
31.01
57.40
96.07
158.7
257.9
412.2
647.4
1,200
21.30
36.59
62.85
107.0
179.7
296.6
481.2
766.6
1,400
22.32
38.92
67.85
117.2
199.6
333.9
548.4
884.2
1,600
23.23
41.04
72.49
126.8
218.6
369.9
614.2
1001
1,800
24.06
43.00
76.85
135.9
236.8
404.9
678.8
1116
2,000
24.83
44.84
80.96
144.7
254.4
438.9
742.3
1230
2,500
26.53
48.97
90.39
165.0
296.1
520.8
897.0
1513
3,000
27.99
52.62
98.90
183.7
335.2
598.9
1047
1791
(Continued)
exhibit 6.5

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
137
To illustrate, suppose we want to double-check the figures in Exhibit 6.2 for unit and 
cumulative labor hours for Unit 16. From Exhibit 6.4, the unit improvement factor for Unit 16 
at 80 percent is .4096. This multiplied by 100,000 (the hours for Unit 1) gives 40,960, the 
same as in Exhibit 6.2. From Exhibit 6.5, the cumulative improvement factor for cumulative 
hours for the first 16 units is 8.920. When multiplied by 100,000, this gives 892,000, which is 
reasonably close to the exact value of 892,014 shown in Exhibit 6.2.
The following is a more involved example of the application of a learning curve to a pro-
duction problem.
EXAMPLE 6.1: Sample Learning Curve Problem
Captain Nemo, owner of Suboptimum Underwater Boat Company (SUB), is puzzled. He 
has a contract for 12 boats and has completed 4 of them. He has observed that his produc-
tion manager, young Mr. Overick, has been reassigning more and more people to torpedo 
assembly after the construction of the first four boats. The first boat, for example, required 
225 workers, each working a 40-hour week, while 45 fewer workers were required for the 
second boat. Overick has told them that “this is just the beginning” and that he will complete 
the last boat in the current contract with only 100 workers!
Overick is banking on the learning curve, but has he gone overboard?
SOLUTION
Because the second boat required 180 workers, a simple exponential curve shows that the 
learning percentage is 80 percent (180 ÷ 225). To find out how many workers are required 
for the 12th boat, we look up Unit 12 for an 80 percent improvement ratio in Exhibit 6.4 and 
multiply this value by the number required for the first boat. The improvement ratio is equal to 
.4493. This yields 101.0925 workers (.4493 × 225). (Note, the spreadsheet can be used to find 
values that are not included in the tables, they can be calculated directly from Equation 6.1.) 
Thus, Overick’s estimate missed the boat by only one person.
EXAMPLE 6.2: Estimating Cost Using Learning Curves
SUB has produced the first unit of a new line of minisubs at a cost of $500,000: $200,000 for 
materials and $300,000 for labor. It has agreed to accept a 10 percent profit, based on cost, 
and it is willing to contract on the basis of a 70 percent learning curve. What will be the con-
tract price for three minisubs? (Assume that the cost of materials does not change.)
SOLUTION
If the operation is interrupted, then some relearning must occur. How far to go back up the 
learning curve can be estimated in some cases.
Cost of first sub
$   500,000
Cost of second sub
   Materials
$200,000
   Labor: $300,000 × .70
  210,000
     410,000
Cost of third sub
   Materials
  200,000
   Labor: $300,000 × .5682
  170,460
     370,460
       Total cost
  1,280,460
Markup: $1,280,460 × .10
     128,046
Selling price
$1,408,506

138	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Estimating the Learning Percentage
If production has been underway for some time, the learning percentage is easily obtained 
from production records. Generally speaking, the longer the production history, the more 
accurate the estimate. Because a variety of other problems can occur during the early stages 
of production, most companies do not begin to collect data for learning curve analysis until 
some units have been completed.
If production has not started, estimating the learning percentage becomes enlightened 
guesswork. In such cases, the analyst has these options:
1.	 Assume that the learning percentage will be the same as it has been for previous 
applications within the same industry.
2.	 Assume that it will be the same as it has been for the same or similar products.
3.	 Analyze the similarities and differences between the proposed startup and previ-
ous startups and develop a revised learning percentage that appears to best fit the 
situation.
How Long Does Learning Go On?
Does output stabilize, or is there continual improvement? Some areas can be shown to 
improve continually even over decades (radios, computers, and other electronic devices; and, 
if we allow for the effects of inflation, also automobiles, washing machines, refrigerators, and 
most other manufactured goods). If the learning curve has been valid for several hundreds 
or thousands of units, it will probably be valid for several hundreds or thousands more. On 
the other hand, highly automated systems may have a near-zero learning curve because, after 
installation, they quickly reach a constant volume.
Here we offer guidelines for two categories of “learners”: individuals and organizations.
Individual Learning
A number of factors affect an individual’s performance and rate of learning. Remem-
ber that two elements are involved: the rate of learning and the initial starting level. To 
explain this more clearly, compare the two learning curves in Exhibit 6.6. Suppose these 
were the times for two individuals who performed a simple mechanical test administered 
by the personnel department as part of their application for employment in the assembly 
area of manufacturing.
Which applicant would you hire? Applicant A had a much lower starting point but a 
slower learning rate. Applicant B, although starting at a much higher point, is clearly the 
better choice. This points out that performance times are important—not just the learning 
rate by itself.
Some general guidelines to improve individual performance based on learning curves 
include the following:
	1.	 Proper selection of workers.    A test should be administered to help choose the 
workers. These tests should be representative of the planned work: a dexterity test for 
assembly work, a mental ability test for mental work, tests for interaction with cus-
tomers for front office work, and so on.
	2.	 Proper training.    The more effective the training, the faster the learning rate.
	3.	 Motivation.    Productivity gains based on learning curves are not achieved unless 
there is a reward. Rewards can be money (individual or group incentive plans) or 
nonmonetary (employee of the month awards, etc.).
	4.	 Work specialization.    As a general rule, the simpler the task, the faster the learning. 
Be careful that boredom doesn’t interfere; if it does, redesign the task.
IN PRACTICE, HOW MUCH LEARNING OCCURS?
Compare the impact 
of learning on different 
industries.
LO 6–3
Individual learning  
can vary greatly  
across different 
employees. This can 
create challenges when 
estimating expected 
production rates.
KEY IDEA

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
139
	5.	 Do one or very few jobs at a time.    Learning is faster on each job if completed one 
at a time, rather than working on all jobs simultaneously.
	6.	 Use tools or equipment that assists or supports performance.
	7.	 Provide quick and easy access for help.    The benefits from training are realized 
and continue when assistance is available.
	8.	 Allow workers to help redesign their tasks.    Taking more performance factors 
into the scope of the learning curve can, in effect, shift the curve downward.
The following guidelines are useful for estimating the impact of learning on manufacturing 
tasks. These guidelines use estimates of the percentage of time spent on manual work (i.e., hand 
assembly) versus the time spent on machine-controlled work (i.e., machining).
∙	 75 percent hand assembly/25 percent machining = 80 percent learning
∙	 50 percent hand assembly/50 percent machining = 85 percent
∙	 25 percent hand assembly/75 percent machining = 90 percent
Organizational Learning
Organizations learn as well. It has been argued that organizational learning is critical to sus-
taining a competitive advantage. For the individual, it is easy to conceptualize how knowledge 
is acquired and retained and how this results in an individual learning effect. Certainly, a main 
source of organizational learning is the individual learning of the employees. An organiza-
tion also acquires knowledge in its technology, its structure, documents that it retains, and 
standard operating procedures. For example, as a manufacturing unit becomes experienced, 
knowledge is embedded in software and in tooling used for production. Knowledge also can 
be embedded in the organization’s structure. For example, when an organization shifts its 
industrial engineering group from a functional organization centralized in one area to a decen-
tralized organization where individuals are deployed to particular parts of the plant floor, 
knowledge about how to become more productive is embedded in the organization’s structure.
A set of guidelines based on what is seen in specific industries is the following:
∙	 Aerospace, 85 percent
∙	 Shipbuilding, 80 to 85 percent
∙	 Complex machine tools for new models, 75 to 85 percent
∙	 Repetitive electronics manufacturing, 90 to 95 percent
∙	 Repetitive machining or punch-press operations, 90 to 95 percent
∙	 Repetitive electrical operations (wiring and circuit board fabrication), 75 to 85 percent
Time
(minutes)
Employee Applicant A
Repetition number
Employee Applicant B
Repetition number
2.0
1.5
1.0
.5
2
4
6
8
10
2.0
1.5
1.0
.5
2
4
6
8
10
Test Results of Two Job Applicants
exhibit 6.6

140	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
∙	 Repetitive welding operations, 90 percent
∙	 Raw materials manufacturing, 93 to 96 percent
∙	 Purchased parts fabrication, 85 to 88 percent
There are two reasons for disparities between a firm’s learning rate and that of its indus-
try. First, differences in operating characteristics between any two firms, stemming from the 
equipment, methods, product design, plant organization, and so forth, are inevitable. Second, 
procedural differences are manifested in the development of the learning percentage itself, 
such as whether the industry rate is based on a single product or on a product line, and the 
manner in which the data were aggregated.
M a n a g e r i a l  C o n s i d e r a t i o n s  i n  U s i n g  L e a r n i n g  C u r v es   Managers 
should be aware of the following factors when using and interpreting learning curves.
	1.	 Individual learning and incentives.    Extensive research indicates a rather obvi-
ous fact: In order to enhance worker learning, there must be adequate incentives for 
the worker and the organization. (It should be noted, however, that the concept of 
incentives may be broadened to include any of the positive or negative administrative 
options available to managers.)
	2.	 Learning on new jobs versus old jobs.    The newer the job, the greater will be the 
improvement in labor hours and cost. Conversely, when production has been under-
way for a long time, improvement will be less discernible. For example, for an 80 
percent learning curve situation, the improvement between the first and second units 
will be 20 percent. However, if the product has been manufactured for 50 years, it 
will take another 50 years to reduce labor hours by 20 percent, assuming that yearly 
production volume remains the same.
	3.	 Improvement comes from working smarter, not harder.    While incentives must be 
included to motivate the individual worker, most improvement in output comes from 
better methods and effective support systems rather than simply increased worker effort.
	4.	 Built-in production bias through suggesting any learning rate.    If a manager 
expects an 80 percent improvement factor, he or she may treat this percentage as a goal 
rather than as an unbiased measure of actual learning. In short, it may be a “self-fulfill-
ing prophecy.” This, however, is not necessarily undesirable. What is wrong with setting 
a target improvement factor and then attempting to control production to achieve it?
	5.	 Preproduction versus postproduction adjustments.    The amount of learning 
shown by the learning curve depends both on the initial unit(s) of output and on the 
learning percentage. If there is much preproduction planning, experimentation, and 
adjustment, the early units will be produced more rapidly than if improvements are 
made after the first few units—other things being equal. In the first case, therefore, 
the apparent learning will be less than in the second case, even though subsequent 
“actual” learning may be the same in each instance.
	6.	 Changes in indirect labor and supervision.    Learning curves represent direct 
labor output, but if the mix of indirect labor and supervision changes, it is likely 
that the productivity of direct labor will be altered. We expect, for example, that 
more supervisors, repairpersons, and material handlers would speed up production, 
whereas a reduction in their numbers would slow it down.
	7.	 Changes in purchasing practices, methods, and organization structure.    Obvi-
ously, significant adjustments in any of these factors will affect the production rate 
and, hence, the learning curve. Likewise, the institution of preventive maintenance 
programs, zero-defect programs, and other schemes designed to improve efficiency 
or product quality generally would have some impact on the learning phenomenon.
	8.	 Contract phase-out.    Though not relevant to all contract situations, the point should 
be made that the learning curve may begin to turn upward as a contract nears comple-
tion. This may result from transferring trained workers to other projects, nonreplace-
ment of worn tooling, and reduced attention to efficiency on the part of management.
Learning curves 
are most valuable 
to companies that 
produce complex 
products at low volume 
levels, and when there 
are major changes to a 
product or the product 
is new.
KEY IDEA

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
141
Concept Connections
LO 6–1   Understand what a learning curve is and where learning curves are applicable.
Summary
	∙	 A learning curve maps the relationship between unit 
production time and the cumulative number of units 
produced. 
	∙	 These curves are useful for estimating the time 
required to produce a product and to estimate cost. 
	∙	 It is particularly useful for large-scale, capital- and 
labor-intensive products, such as airplanes. 
	∙	 The fundamental idea is that as output doubles, there 
is a fixed percentage reduction in the time needed to 
produce each unit. 
	∙	 Learning can be due to improvements as people repeat 
a process and gain skill. Learning can also come from 
bigger picture improvements in a firm’s administra-
tion, equipment and technology, and product design.
Learning curve  A line displaying the relationship 
between unit production time and the cumulative num-
ber of units produced.
Individual learning  Improvement that results when 
people repeat a process and gain skill or efficiency from 
their own experience.
Organizational learning  Improvement that comes both 
from experience and from changes in administration, 
equipment, and product design.
Key Terms
LO 6–2   Plot and analyze learning curves.
	∙	 Learning curves can be analyzed using graphs or by 
mathematically using the learning curve equations. 
	∙	 When a spreadsheet is not available, learning curve 
tables are used to simplify the calculations so they can 
be done with a calculator. 
	∙	 The most common calculations are made to estimate 
the time to make a particular unit in the future, and 
also the cumulative time to make a number of units in 
the future.
Summary
Key Formula
Logarithmic curve:
​[6.1]​ ​    ​​Y​ x​  =  K ​x​ n​​
LO 6–3   Compare the impact of learning on different industries.
Summary
	∙	 In practice, individual learning can be estimated by 
administering simple tests to job applicants. Different 
types of manual tasks typically have different expected 
learning rates. 
	∙	 Expected organizational learning rates differ depend-
ing on the industry. If a firm can sustain a higher 
learning rate than other firms in the industry, they may 
have a significant competitive advantage.
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
A job applicant is being tested for an assembly-line position. Management feels that steady-
state times have been approximately reached after 1,000 performances. Regular assembly-line 
workers are expected to perform the task within four minutes.
	a.	 If the job applicant performed the first test operation in 10 minutes and the second one in 
9 minutes, should this applicant be hired?
LO6–2

142	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	b.	 What is the expected time that the job applicant would take to finish the 10th unit?
	c.	 What is a significant limitation of this analysis?
Solution
	a.	 Learning rate = 9 minutes/10 minutes = 90%
	 	 From Exhibit 6.4, the time for the 1,000th unit is .3499 × 10 minutes = 3.499 minutes. Yes, 
hire the person.
	b.	 From Exhibit 6.4, unit 10 at 90% is .7047. Therefore, the time for the 10th unit = .7047 × 
10 = 7.047 minutes.
	c.	 More data should be collected on the job applicant’s performance.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Boeing Aircraft collected the following cost data on the first 8 units of its new business jet.
Unit Number
Cost ($ millions)
Unit Number
Cost ($ millions)
1
$100
5
    60
2
    83
6
    57
3
    73
7
    53
4
    62
8
    51
	a.	 Estimate the learning curve for the new business jet.
	b.	 Estimate the average cost for the first 1,000 units of the jet.
	c.	 Estimate the cost to produce the 1,000th jet.
Solution
	a.	 First, estimate the learning curve rate by calculating the average learning rate with each 
doubling of production.
​
Units 1 to 2
​ 
= 83/100 = 83%
​ 
 
 
Units 2 to 4​ = 62/83 = 74.7%​ 
 
 
Units 4 to 8​ = 51/62 = 82.26%​ 
 
 
Average
​ 
= (83 + 74.7 + 82.26)/3 = 80%
​
	b.	 The average cost of the first 1,000 units can be estimated using Exhibit 6.5. The cumula-
tive improvement factor for the 1,000th unit at 80% learning is 158.7. The cost to produce 
the first 1,000 units is
​$100M × 158.7 = $15,870M​
The average cost for each of the first 1,000 units is
​$15,870M/1,000 = $15.9M​
	c.	 To estimate the cost to produce the 1,000th unit, use Exhibit 6.4.
	 	 The unit improvement factor for the 1,000th unit at 80% is .1082.
	 	 The cost to produce the 1,000th unit is
​$100M × .1082 = $10.82M​
Discussion Questions
	1.	 How might the following business specialists use learning curves: accountants, marketers, 
financial analysts, personnel managers, and computer programmers?
	2.	 What relationship is there between learning curves and productivity measurement?
	3.	 What relationship is there between learning curves and capacity analysis?
LO 6–1

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
143
	  4.  Do you think learning curve analysis has an application in a service business like a restau-
rant? Why or why not?
	  5.  As shown in the chapter, the effect of learning in a given system eventually flattens out 
over time. At that point in the life of a system, learning still exists, though its effect con-
tinues to diminish. Beyond that point, is it impossible to significantly reduce the time to 
produce a unit? What would it take to do that?
	  6.  The learning curve phenomenon has been shown in practice to be widely applicable. Once a 
company has established a learning rate for a process, they can use it to predict future system 
performance. Would there be any reason to reevaluate the process’s learning rate once it has 
been initially established?
  7.  As a manager, which learning percentage would you prefer (other things being equal), 
110 percent or 60 percent? Explain.
	  8.  Will the Human Resource Management (HRM) policies of a firm have much of an effect 
on the learning rates the firm may be able to achieve?
	  9.  One manufacturer has seen a typical learning percentage of 90 percent in the firm. It has 
recently found out that a competitor has a percentage of 85 percent. What do you think 
about this?
	10.  What difference does it make if a customer wants a 10,000-unit order produced and deliv-
ered all at one time or in 2,500-unit batches?
LO 6–2
LO 6–3
Objective Questions
	 1.	 Firm A typically sees a learning percentage of 85 percent in its processes. Firm B has a 
learning percentage of 80 percent. Which firm has the faster learning rate?
	 2.	 Company Z is just starting to make a brand new product it has never made before. It has 
completed two units so far. The first unit took 12 hours to complete and the next unit took 
11 hours. Based only on this information, what would be the estimate of the learning 
percentage in this process?
	 3.	 Omega Technology is starting production of a new supercomputer for use in large 
research universities. It has just completed the first unit, which took 120 labor hours to 
produce. Based on its experience, it estimates its learning percentage to be 80 percent. 
How many labor hours should it expect in manufacturing the second unit?
	 4.	 You’ve just completed a pilot run of 10 units of a major product and found the processing 
time for each unit was as follows:
LO 6–1
LO 6–2
Unit Number
Time (hours)
  1
970
  2
640
  3
420
  4
380
  5
320
  6
250
  7
220
  8
207
  9
190
10
190
	a.	 According to the pilot run, what would you estimate the learning rate to be?
	b.	 Based on (a), how much time would it take for the next 190 units, assuming no loss of 
learning?
	c.	 How much time would it take to make the 1,000th unit?

144	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
	 5.	 Jack Simpson, contract negotiator for Nebula Airframe Company, is currently involved 
in bidding on a follow-up government contract. In gathering cost data from the first three 
units, which Nebula produced under a research and development contract, he found that 
the first unit took 2,000 labor hours, the second took 1,800 labor hours, and the third took 
1,692 hours.
	
	   In a contract for three more units, how many labor hours should Simpson plan for? 
(Answer in Appendix D)
	 6.	 Lazer Technologies Inc. (LTI) has produced a total of 20 high-power laser systems that 
could be used to destroy any approaching enemy missiles or aircraft. The 20 units have 
been produced, funded in part as private research within the research and development 
arm of LTI, but the bulk of the funding came from a contract with the U.S. Department of 
Defense (DoD).
	
	   Testing of the laser units has shown that they are effective defense weapons, and if rede-
signed to add portability and easier field maintenance, the units could be truck-mounted.
	
	   The DoD has asked LTI to submit a bid for 100 units.
	
	   The 20 units that LTI has built so far cost the following amounts and are listed in the 
order in which they were produced.
	a.	 Based on past experience, what is the learning rate?
	b.	 What bid should LTI submit for the total order of 100 units, assuming that learning 
continues?
	c.	 What is the cost expected to be for the last unit under the learning rate you estimated?
	 7.	 Johnson Industries received a contract to develop and produce four high-intensity long-
distance receiver/transmitters for cellular telephones. The first took 2,000 labor hours and 
$39,000 worth of purchased and manufactured parts; the second took 1,500 labor hours 
and $37,050 in parts; the third took 1,450 labor hours and $31,000 in parts; and the fourth 
took 1,275 labor hours and $31,492 in parts.
	
	   Johnson was asked to bid on a follow-on contract for another dozen receiver/transmit-
ter units. Ignoring any forgetting factor effects, what should Johnson estimate time and 
parts costs to be for the dozen units? (Hint: There are two learning curves—one for labor 
and one for parts.) (Answer in Appendix D)
Unit Number
Cost ($ millions)
Unit Number
Cost ($ millions)
  1
$12
11
      3.9
  2
10
12
      3.5
  3
6
13
      3.0
  4
6.5
14
      2.8
  5
5.8
15
      2.7
  6
6
16
      2.7
  7
5
17
      2.3
  8
3.6
18
      3.0
  9
3.6
19
      2.9
10
4.1
20
      2.6

	
Learning Curves	
Chapter 6	
145
	 8.	 Lambda Computer Products competed for and won a contract to produce two prototype 
units of a new type of computer that is based on laser optics rather than on electronic 
binary bits.
	
	   The first unit produced by Lambda took 5,000 hours to produce and required 
$250,000 worth of material, equipment usage, and supplies. The second unit took 
3,500 hours and used $200,000 worth of materials, equipment usage, and supplies. 
Labor is $30 per hour.
	a.	 Lambda was asked to present a bid for 10 additional units as soon as the second unit 
was completed. Production would start immediately. What would this bid be?
	b.	 Suppose there was a significant delay between the contracts. During this time, person-
nel and equipment were reassigned to other projects. Explain how this would affect 
the subsequent bid.
	 9.	 Honda Motor Company has discovered a problem in the exhaust system of one of its 
automobile lines and has voluntarily agreed to make the necessary modifications to con-
form with government safety requirements. Standard procedure is for the firm to pay a 
flat fee to dealers for each modification completed.
	
	   Honda is trying to establish a fair amount of compensation to pay dealers and has 
decided to choose a number of randomly selected mechanics and observe their per-
formance and learning rate. Analysis demonstrated that the average learning rate was 
90 percent, and Honda then decided to pay a $60 fee for each repair (3 hours × $20 per 
flat-rate hour).
	
	   Southwest Honda, Inc., has complained to Honda Motor Company about the fee. Six 
mechanics, working independently, have completed two modifications each. All took 
9 hours, on average, to do the first unit and 6.3 hours to do the second. Southwest refuses 
to do any more unless Honda allows at least 4.5 hours. The dealership expects to perform 
the modification to approximately 300 vehicles.
	
	   What is your opinion of Honda’s allowed rate and the mechanics’ performance?
	10.	 United Research Associates (URA) had received a contract to produce two units of a 
new cruise missile guidance control. The first unit took 4,000 hours to complete and 
cost $30,000 in materials and equipment usage. The second took 3,200 hours and cost 
$21,000 in materials and equipment usage. Labor cost is charged at $18 per hour.
	
	   The prime contractor has now approached URA and asked to submit a bid for the cost 
of producing another 20 guidance controls.
	a.	 What will the last unit cost to build?
	b.	 What will be the average time for the 20 missile guidance controls?
	c.	 What will the average cost be for guidance control for the 20 in the contract?
	11.	 Which type of system is likely to have a faster learning rate—one with primarily highly 
automated equipment or one that is very labor intensive?
	12.	 Which industry will typically have a faster learning rate: a repetitive electronics manufac-
turer or a manufacturer of large complex products such as a shipbuilder?
	13.	 True or False: The only learning for an organization comes from the individual learning 
of its employees.
	14.	 A company has just tested the skills of two applicants for the same job. They found that 
applicant A had a higher learning rate than applicant B. Should they definitely hire appli-
cant A?
LO 6–3

146	
Section 1	
Strategy, Products, and Capacity
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 The line that shows the relationship between the time 
to produce a unit and the cumulative number of units 
produced.
	2.	 Improvement that derives from people repeating a 
process and gaining skill or efficiency.
	3.	 Improvement that comes from changes in administra-
tion, equipment, and product design.
	4.	 Assuming an 80 percent learning rate, if the 4th unit 
takes 100 hours to produce, the 16th unit should take 
how long to produce?
	5.	 The resulting plot of a learning curve when logarith-
mic scales are used.
	6.	 Systems that have this characteristic usually have 
near-zero learning.
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Learning curve 2. Individual learning 3. Organizational learning 4. 64 hours 5. A straight line 6. Highly automated 
systems

	
147
The second section of Operations and Supply Chain 
Management is centered on the design and analy-
sis of business processes. Have you ever wondered 
why you always have to wait in line at one store but 
another one seems to be on top of the crowds? The 
key to serving customers well, whether with prod-
ucts or with services, is having a great process.
Companies also need to develop a quality philos-
ophy and integrate it into their processes. Actually, 
quality and process efficiency are closely related. 
Have you ever done something but then had to do 
it again because it was not done properly the first 
time? This section considers these subjects in man-
ufacturing and service businesses.
	 7	 Manufacturing Processes
	 8	 Facility Layout
	 9	 Service Processes
	10	 Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation
	11	 Process Design and Analysis
	12	 Six Sigma Quality
	13	 Statistical Quality Control
Manufacturing and Service 
Processes
Manufacturing and 
Service Processes
SECTION
TWO

148
This ratchet wrench 
was made using a 
3-D printer on the 
International Space 
Station in about four 
hours.
© NASA/Sipa USA/
Newscom
THREE-DIMENSIONAL PRINTING—THE 
TECHNOLOGY COULD BE USED TO 
MAKE PARTS THAT PERFORM BETTER 
AND COST LESS
The technology for printing three-dimensional objects has existed for 
decades, but its application has been largely limited to novelty items 
and specialized custom fabrication, such as making personalized pros-
thetics. The technology has now improved to the point where these 
printers can make intricate objects out of durable materials, including 
ceramics and metals (such as titanium and aluminum), with a resolution 
on the scale of tens of micrometers.
The impact of advanced manufacturing technology on productiv-
ity is dramatic. Every year, U.S. manufacturing firms invest millions of 
dollars to convert manufacturing plants into computerized environments in an effort 
to improve the firm’s competitive position. Companies in other major manufacturing 
countries such as Germany, Japan, and South Korea are making similar investments. 
Chinese companies, though, are the productivity leaders, with the country’s combina-
tion of advanced technology and low labor costs.
Learning Objectives
	LO 7–1	 Understand what a manufacturing process is.
	LO 7–2	 Explain how manufacturing processes are organized.
	LO 7–3	 Analyze simple manufacturing processes.
Manufacturing 
Processes
7

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
149
WHAT ARE MANUFACTURING PROCESSES?
In this chapter, we consider processes used to make tangible goods. Manufacturing processes 
are used to make everything that we buy ranging from the apartment building in which we 
live to the ink pens with which we write. The high-level view of what is required to make 
something can be divided into three simple steps. The first step is sourcing the parts we need, 
followed by actually making the item, and then sending the item to the customer. As discussed 
in Chapter 1, a supply chain view of this may involve a complex series of players where sub-
contractors feed suppliers, suppliers feed manufacturing plants, manufacturing plants feed 
warehouses, and finally warehouses feed retailers. Depending on the item being produced, the 
supply chain can be very long with subcontractors and manufacturing plants spread out over 
the globe (such as an automobile or computer manufacturer) or short where parts are sourced 
and the product is made locally (such as a house builder).
Consider Exhibit 7.1, which illustrates the Source step where parts are procured from one 
or more suppliers, the Make step where manufacturing takes place, and the Deliver step where 
the product is shipped to the customer. Depending on the strategy of the firm, the capabilities 
of manufacturing, and the needs of customers, these activities are organized to minimize cost 
while meeting the competitive priorities necessary to attract customer orders. For example, in 
the case of consumer products such as televisions or clothes, customers normally want these 
products “on-demand” for quick delivery from a local department store. As a manufacturer of 
these products, we build them ahead of time in anticipation of demand and ship them to the 
retail stores where they are carried in inventory until they are sold. At the other end of the 
spectrum are custom products, such as military airplanes, that are ordered with very specific 
uses in mind and that need to be designed and then built to the design. In the case of an air-
plane, the time needed to respond to a customer order, called the lead time, could easily be 
years compared to only a few minutes for the television.
A key concept in manufacturing processes is the customer order decoupling point which 
determines where inventory is positioned to allow processes or entities in the supply chain to 
operate independently. For example, if a product is stocked at a retailer, the customer pulls the 
item from the shelf and the manufacturer never sees a customer order. Inventory acts as a 
Lead time
The time needed to 
respond to a customer 
order.
Customer order 
decoupling point
Where inventory is 
positioned in the 
supply chain.
Understand what a 
manufacturing process is.
LO 7–1
Long
Make-to-Stock
Customer Lead Time
Short
Inventory Investment
The inverted triangles represent customer order decoupling points.
Assemble-to-Order
Make-to-Order
Engineer-to-Order
Source
Make
Deliver
Low
High
Positioning Inventory in the Supply Chain
exhibit 7.1

150	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
buffer to separate the customer from the manufacturing process. Selection of decoupling 
points is a strategic decision that determines customer lead times and can greatly impact 
inventory investment. The closer this point is to the customer, the quicker the customer can be 
served. Typically, there is a trade-off where quicker response to customer demand comes at 
the expense of greater inventory investment because finished goods inventory is more expen-
sive than raw material inventory. An item in finished goods inventory typically contains all 
the raw materials needed to produce the item. So, from a cost view it includes the cost of the 
material, plus the cost to fabricate the finished item.
Positioning of the customer order decoupling point is important to understanding manu-
facturing environments. Firms that serve customers from finished goods inventory are known 
as make-to-stock firms. Those that combine a number of preassembled modules to meet 
a customer’s specifications are called assemble-to-order firms. Those that make the cus-
tomer’s product from raw materials, parts, and components are make-to-order firms. An 
­engineer-to-order firm will work with the customer to design the product, and then make it 
from purchased materials, parts, and components. Of course, many firms serve a combination 
of these environments and a few will have all simultaneously. Depending on the environment 
and the location of the customer order decoupling point, one would expect inventory concen-
trated in finished goods, work-in-process (this is inventory in the manufacturing process), 
manufacturing raw material, or at the supplier as shown in Exhibit 7.1.
The essential issue in satisfying customers in the make-to-stock environment is to bal-
ance the level of finished inventory against the level of service to the customer. Examples 
of products produced by these firms include televisions, clothing, and packaged food prod-
ucts. If unlimited inventory were possible and free, the task would be trivial. Unfortunately, 
that is not the case. Providing more inventory increases costs, so a trade-off between the 
costs of the inventory and the level of customer service must be made. The trade-off can 
be improved by better estimates (or knowledge) of customer demand, by more rapid trans-
portation alternatives, by speedier production, and by more flexible manufacturing. Many 
make-to-stock firms invest in lean manufacturing programs in order to achieve higher 
service levels for a given inventory investment. Regardless of the trade-offs involved, the 
focus in the make-to-stock environment is on providing finished goods where and when the 
customers want them.
In the assemble-to-order environment, a primary task is to define a customer’s order in 
terms of alternative components and options since it is these components that are carried in 
inventory. A good example is the way Dell Computer makes desktop computers. The num-
ber of combinations that can be made may be nearly infinite (although some might not be 
feasible). One of the capabilities required for success in the assemble-to-order environment 
is an engineering design that enables as much flexibility as possible in combining compo-
nents, options, and modules into finished products. Simi-
lar to make-to-stock, many assemble-to-order companies 
have applied lean manufacturing principles to dramatically 
decrease the time required to assemble finished goods. By 
doing so, they are delivering customers’ orders so quickly 
that they appear to be make-to-stock firms from the per-
spective of the customer.
When assembling-to-order, there are significant advan-
tages from moving the customer order decoupling point 
from finished goods to components. The number of finished 
products is usually substantially greater than the number 
of components combined to produce the finished product. 
Consider, for example, a computer for which there are four 
processor alternatives, three hard disk drive choices, four 
DVD alternatives, two speaker systems, and four monitors 
available. If all combinations of these 17 components are 
valid, they can be combined into a total of 384 different 
final configurations. This can be calculated as follows.
Make-to-stock
A production environment 
where the customer is 
served “on-demand” from 
finished goods inventory.
Assemble-to-order
A production 
environment where pre-
assembled components, 
subassemblies, and 
modules are put together 
in response to a specific 
customer order.
Make-to-order
A production environment 
where the product is 
built directly from raw 
materials and components 
in response to a specific 
customer order.
Engineer-to-order
Here the firm works with 
the customer to design 
the product, which is then 
made from purchased 
material, parts, and 
components.
Lean manufacturing
To achieve high customer 
service with minimum 
levels of inventory 
investment.
Latasha Bell, a Dell Inc. employee, assembles a Dell 
OptiPlex desktop computer at the company’s facility in 
Lebanon, Tennessee.
© Harrison McClary/Bloomberg/Getty Images

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
151
If Ni is the number of alternatives for component i, the total number of combinations of n 
components (given all are viable) is:
	
​​Total number of combinations  =  ​N​ 1​ × ​N​ 2​ × . . . × ​N​ n​​ 
 
 
 
 
        Or 384  =  4 × 3 × 4 × 2 × 4 for this example. 
​	
​ ​[7.1]​ ​
It is much easier to manage and forecast the demand for 17 components than for 384 computers.
In the make-to-order and engineer-to-order environments, the customer order decoupling 
point could be in either raw materials at the manufacturing site or possibly even with the sup-
plier inventory. Boeing’s process for making commercial aircraft is an example of make-to-
order. The need for engineering resources in the engineer-to-order case is somewhat different 
than make-to-order because engineering determines what materials will be required and what 
steps will be required in manufacturing. Depending on how similar the products are, it might 
not even be possible to pre-order parts. Rather than inventory, the emphasis in these environ-
ments may be more toward managing capacity of critical resources such as engineering and 
construction crews. Lockheed Martin’s Satellite division uses an engineer-to-order strategy.
Process selection refers to the strategic decision of selecting which kind of production processes 
to use to produce a product or provide a service. For example, in the case of Toshiba notebook 
computers, if the volume is very low, we may just have a worker manually assemble each com-
puter by hand. In contrast, if the volume is higher, setting up an assembly line is appropriate.
The format by which a facility is arranged is defined by the general pattern of workflow; 
there are five basic structures (project, workcenter, manufacturing cell, assembly line, and con-
tinuous process).
In a project layout, the product (by virtue of its bulk or weight) remains in a fixed loca-
tion. Manufacturing equipment is moved to the product rather than vice versa. Construction 
sites (houses and bridges) and movie shooting lots are examples of this format. Items pro-
duced with this type of layout are typically managed using the project management tech-
niques described in Chapter 4. Areas on the site will be designated for various purposes, 
such as material staging, subassembly construction, site access for heavy equipment, and a 
management area.
In developing a project layout, visualize the product as the hub of a wheel, with materials 
and equipment arranged concentrically around the production point in the order of use and 
movement difficulty. Thus, in building commercial aircraft, for example, rivets that are used 
throughout construction would be placed close to or in the fuselage; heavy engine parts, which 
must travel to the fuselage only once, would be placed at a 
more distant location; and cranes would be set up close to 
the fuselage because of their constant use.
In a project layout, a high degree of task ordering is com-
mon. To the extent that this task ordering, or precedence, 
determines production stages, a project layout may be 
developed by arranging materials according to their assem-
bly priority. This procedure would be expected in making a 
layout for a large machine tool, such as a stamping machine, 
where manufacturing follows a rigid sequence; assembly is 
performed from the ground up, with parts being added to 
the base in almost a building-block fashion.
A workcenter layout, sometimes referred to as a job 
shop, is where similar equipment or functions are grouped 
together, such as all drilling machines in one area and all 
stamping machines in another. A part being worked on 
HOW MANUFACTURING PROCESSES ARE ORGANIZED
Explain how manufacturing 
processes are organized.
LO 7–2
Project Layout
© Ingram Publishing RF
Project layout
A setup in which the 
product remains at one 
location, and equipment is 
moved to the product.
Workcenter
Often referred to as a job 
shop, a process structure 
suited for low-volume 
production of a great 
variety of nonstandard 
products.  Workcenters 
sometimes are referred to 
as departments and are 
focused on a particular 
type of operation.

152	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
travels, according to the established sequence of opera-
tions, from workcenter to workcenter, where the proper 
machines are located for each operation.
The most common approach to developing this type of 
layout is to arrange workcenters in a way that optimizes 
the movement of material. A workcenter sometimes is 
referred to as a department and is focused on a particular 
type of operation. Examples include a workcenter for drill-
ing holes, one for performing grinding operations, and a 
painting area. The workcenters in a low-volume toy fac-
tory might consist of shipping and receiving, plastic mold-
ing and stamping, metal forming, sewing, and painting. 
Parts for the toys are fabricated in these workcenters and 
then sent to the assembly workcenter, where they are put 
together. In many installations, optimal placement often 
means placing workcenters with large amounts of interde-
partmental traffic adjacent to each other.
A manufacturing cell layout is a dedicated area where 
products that are similar in processing requirements are produced. These cells are designed 
to perform a specific set of processes, and the cells are dedicated to a limited range of prod-
ucts. A firm may have many different cells in a production area, each set up to produce a 
single product or a similar group of products efficiently, 
but typically at lower volume levels. These cells typically 
are scheduled to produce “as needed” in response to cur-
rent customer demand.
Manufacturing cells are formed by allocating dissimilar 
machines to cells that are designed to work on products that 
have similar shapes and processing requirements. Manu-
facturing cells are widely used in metal fabricating, com-
puter chip manufacture, and assembly work.
An assembly line is where work processes are arranged 
according to the progressive steps by which the product is 
made. These steps are defined so that a specific production 
rate can be achieved. The path for each part is, in effect, a 
straight line. Discrete products are made by moving from 
workstation to workstation at a controlled rate, follow-
ing the sequence needed to build the product. Examples 
include the assembly of toys, appliances, and automobiles. 
These are typically used in high-volume items where the 
specialized process can be justified.
The assembly line steps are done in areas referred to 
as “stations,” and typically the stations are linked by some 
form of material handling device. In addition, usually 
there is some form of pacing by which the amount of time 
allowed at each station is managed. Rather than develop 
the process for designing assembly at this time, we will 
devote the entire next section of this chapter to the topic 
of assembly line design because these designs are used so 
often by manufacturing firms around the world. A continu-
ous or flow process is similar to an assembly line except 
that the product continuously moves through the process. 
Often, the item being produced by the continuous process 
is a liquid or chemical that actually “flows” through the 
system; this is the origin of the term. A gasoline refinery is 
a good example of a flow process.
Manufacturing Cell
Source: Official US Navy photo
Assembly Line
© Jeff Kowalsky/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Workcenter
©  David Parker/Science Source
Manufacturing cell
Dedicated area where a 
group of similar products 
are produced.

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
153
A continuous process is similar to an assembly line in that production follows a pre-
determined sequence of steps, but the flow is continuous (such as with liquids) rather than 
discrete. Such structures are usually highly automated and, in effect, constitute one integrated 
“machine” that may operate 24 hours a day to avoid expensive shutdowns and startups. Con-
version and processing of undifferentiated materials such as petroleum, chemicals, and drugs 
are good examples.
The relationship between layout structures is often depicted on a product–process matrix 
similar to the one shown in Exhibit 7.2. Two dimensions are shown. The horizontal dimension 
relates to the volume of a particular product or group of standardized products. Standardiza-
tion is shown on the vertical axis and refers to variations in the product that is produced. 
These variations are measured in terms of geometric differences, material differences, and so 
on. Standardized products are highly similar from a manufacturing processing point of view, 
whereas low standardized products require different processes.
Exhibit 7.2 shows the processes approximately on a diagonal. In general, it can be argued that 
it is desirable to design processes along the diagonal. For example, if we produce nonstandard 
products at relatively low volumes, workcenters should be used. A highly standardized product 
(commodity) produced at high volumes should be produced using an assembly line or a continu-
ous process, if possible. As a result of the advanced manufacturing technology available today, 
we see that some of the layout structures span relatively large areas of the product–process 
matrix. For example, manufacturing cells can be used for a very wide range of applications, 
and this has become a popular layout structure that often is 
employed by manufacturing engineers.
Break-Even Analysis
The choice of which specific equipment to use in a process 
often can be based on an analysis of cost trade-offs. There 
is often a trade-off between more and less specialized 
equipment. Less specialized equipment is referred to as 
“general-purpose,” meaning it can be used easily in many 
different ways if it is set up in the proper manner. More 
specialized equipment, referred to as “special-purpose,” 
is often available as an alternative to a general-purpose 
machine. For example, if we need to drill holes in a piece 
of metal, the general-purpose option may be to use a sim-
ple hand drill. An alternative special-purpose drill is a drill 
press. Given the proper setup, the drill press can drill holes 
Manufacturing
Cell
Project
Inefficient
Processes
Mass Customization
Low
Product Volume
High
Low—
one-of-a-kind
High—
standardized
commodity
product
Product
Standardization
Workcenter
Assembly
Line
Continuous
Process
Product–Process Matrix: Framework Describing Layout Strategies
exhibit 7.2
Assembly line
A setup in which an  item is 
produced through a fixed 
sequence of workstations, 
designed to achieve a 
specific production rate.
Continuous process
A process that converts 
raw materials into finished 
product in one contiguous 
process.
Product–process 
matrix
A framework depicting 
when the different 
production process 
types are typically 
used, depending on 
product volume and how 
standardized the product is.
An Example of a Continuous Process
© Andrew Holt/Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images

154	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
much quicker than the hand drill can. The trade-offs involve the cost of the equipment (the 
manual drill is inexpensive, and the drill press expensive), the setup time (the manual drill is 
quick, while the drill press takes some time), and the time per unit (the manual drill is slow, 
and the drill press quick).
A standard approach to choosing among alternative processes or equipment is break-even 
analysis. A break-even chart visually presents alternative profits and losses due to the number 
of units produced or sold. The choice obviously depends on anticipated demand. The method 
is most suitable when processes and equipment entail a large initial investment and fixed cost, 
and when variable costs are reasonably proportional to the number of units produced.
EXAMPLE 7.1: Break-Even Analysis
Suppose a manufacturer has identified the following options for obtaining a machined part: It 
can buy the part at $200 per unit (including materials); it can make the part on a numerically 
controlled semiautomatic lathe at $75 per unit (including materials); or it can make the part on 
a machining center at $15 per unit (including materials). There is negligible fixed cost if the 
item is purchased; a semiautomatic lathe costs $80,000; and a machining center costs $200,000.
The total cost for each option is
​ 
Purchase cost
​ 
=
​ 
$200 × Demand
​ 
 
 
 
Produce-using-lathe cost​  =​  $80,000 + $75 × Demand​ 
 
 
 
 
 
Produce-using-machining-center cost
​ 
=
​ 
$200,000 + $15 × Demand
​
SOLUTION
Whether we approach the solution to this problem as cost minimization or profit maximiza-
tion really makes no difference as long as the revenue function is the same for all alternatives. 
Exhibit 7.3 shows the break-even point for each process. If demand is expected to be more 
than 2,000 units (point A), the machine center is the best choice because this would result in 
the lowest total cost. If demand is between 640 (point B) and 2,000 units, the semiautomatic 
lathe is the cheapest. If demand is less than 640 (between 0 and point B), the most economical 
course is to buy the product.
($000)
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0
Number of units
Revenue at $300/unit
Buy at $200/unit
Make on machine 
center at $15/unit
Make on semiautomatic lathe at $75/unit
C
B
D
A
0
250
500
750
1,250
1,500
1,750
2,000
2,250
2,500
1,000
Break-Even Chart of Alternative Processes
exhibit 7.3

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
155
MANUFACTURING PROCESS  
FLOW DESIGN
Manufacturing process flow design is a method to evaluate the specific processes that raw 
materials, parts, and subassemblies follow as they move through the plant. The most common 
production management tools used in planning and designing the process flow are assembly 
drawings, assembly charts, route sheets, and flow process charts. Each of these charts is a use-
ful diagnostic tool and can be used to improve operations during the steady state of the pro-
duction system. Indeed, the standard first step in analyzing any production system is to map 
the flows and operations using one or more of these techniques. These are the “organization 
charts” of the manufacturing system.
An assembly drawing (Exhibit 7.4) is simply an exploded view of the product showing 
its component parts. An assembly chart (Exhibit 7.5) uses the information presented in 
the assembly drawing and defines (among other things) how parts go together, their order 
of assembly, and often the overall material flow pattern. An operation and route sheet 
(Exhibit 7.6), as its name implies, specifies operations and process routing for a particular 
part. It conveys such information as the type of equipment, tooling, and operations required 
to complete the part.
The break-even point A calculation is
​$80,000 + $75 × Demand = $200,000 + $15 × Demand​ 
 
 
 
 
          Demand (point A) = 120,000/60 = 2,000 units  ​
The break-even point B calculation is
​   $200 × Demand​  =​  $80,000 + $75 × Demand​ 
 
 
 
Demand (point B)​  =​  80,000/125 = 640 units 
​
Consider the effect of revenue, assuming the part sells for $300 each. As Exhibit 7.3 shows, 
profit (or loss) is the vertical distance between the revenue line and the alternative process 
cost at a given number of units. At 1,000 units, for example, maximum profit is the differ-
ence between the $300,000 revenue (point C) and the semiautomatic lathe cost of $155,000 
(point D). For this quantity, the semiautomatic lathe is the cheapest alternative available. The 
optimal choices for both minimizing cost and maximizing profit are the lowest segments of 
the lines: origin to B, to A, and to the right side of Exhibit 7.3 as shown in green.
Plug Assembly Drawing
exhibit 7.4
Analyze simple 
manufacturing processes.
LO 7–3

156	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
A process flowchart such as that shown in Exhibit 7.7 denotes what happens to the product 
as it progresses through the productive facility. Process flowcharting is covered in Chapter 11. 
The focus in analyzing a manufacturing operation should be the identification of activities 
that can be minimized or eliminated, such as movement and storage within the process. As a 
rule, the fewer the moves, delays, and storages in the process, the better the flow.
1
2
3
SA-1
SA-2
A-2
A-1
A-4
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
A-5
A-6
A-7
A-8
A-3
Plug housing
Retaining ring
Oxygen valve probe
Probe washer
Probe retaining ring
Cap
Spring-detent
Rivets (2)
Spacer, detent spring
Lock-ring
Air outlet
subassembly
Air outlet
Flange-air connection
Assemble
air outlet 
subassembly
to plug
housing
Key
Inspection
Component
or assembly
operation
Assemble lock-ring
subassembly to 
plug housing
Inspect
Inspect
Retaining ring
to air outlet
Assemble oxygen
valve probe to
plug housing
Cover air outlet
plug with cap plug
Final inspection
Assembly (or Gozinto) Chart for Plug Assembly
exhibit 7.5
Purchased Stock Size
Usage
Pcs. Per Pur Size
Assy. No.
Weight
Sub.Assy. No.
Part No.
Date Issued
Date Supplied
Issued By
Oper. No.
20
30
40
50
60
80
70 
90
95
Operation Description
Dept.
Machine
Tools
Setup
Hr.
Rate
Pc. Hr.
Broach keyway to remove thread burrs  
Hone thread I.D. .822/ .828 
Hone .7600/ .7625
Deburr    .005  to.010 both sides, 
hand feed to hard stop
Drill hole  .32 
+ .015
–.005
Deburr .312   
dia. hole  
+ .015
–.005
 .009/875. bore .878/.875 dia
(2 passes). bore .7600/7625 (1 pass)
Chamfer 
Tap hole as designated 1/4 min. full  thread 
Bore hole 1.33 to 1.138 dia.
Drill 
Drill 
Plug Housing
Plug Assembly
TA 1279
TA 1274
Drill 
Grind 
Grind 
Grinder 
Grinder 
Mach. 507
drill
Mach. 510
Drill
Mach. 513
Drill
Mach. 517
drill tap
Mach. D 109
lathe
Lathe 
Lathe 
Lathe 
E162
lathe 
H&H  E107
Tap 
1.5
254
Drill fixture L-76
Jig # 10393
Multitooth burring
tool
Ramet-1,  TPG 221,
chamfer tool
Fixture #CR-353
tap. 4 Flute sp.
Collect  CR #179
1327 RPM
L44 turret fixture
Hartford
Superspacer, pl. #45
holder #L46
FDTW-100, insert #21
chk. fixture
B87 fixture, L59 broach
tap.  .875120 G-H6
424
44
180
158
175
91
120
120
.1
1.0
2.0
3.0
.3
.4
1.5
1.5
Material Specs
Part Name
Operation and Route Sheet for Plug Assembly
exhibit 7.6

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
157
Material
received
from
supplier
Raw
material
storage
Set up
drill press
90 minutes
Operation 20
Set up deburr
machine
6 minutes
Operation 30
Drill holes
.236 min/hole
Operation 20
Deburr
.142 min/unit
Operation 30
Inspect
.250 min/unit
Move to
drill press
40 feet
Move to
deburr machine
94 feet
Move to
lathe
65 feet
Move to finish
department
95 feet
Apply corrosive
treatment
.06 min/unit
Move to raw
material storage
60 feet
Process Flowchart for the Plug Housing (partial)
exhibit 7.7
EXAMPLE 7.2: Manufacturing Process Analysis
A process usually consists of (1) a set of tasks, (2) a flow of material and information that con-
nects the set of tasks, and (3) storage of material and information.
	1.	 Each task in a process accomplishes, to a certain degree, the transformation of input 
into the desired output.
	2.	 The flow in a process consists of material flow, as well as flow of information. The 
flow of material transfers a product from one task to the next task. The flow of infor-
mation helps in determining how much of the transformation has been done in the 
previous task and what exactly remains to be completed in the present task.
	3.	 When neither a task is being performed nor a part is being transferred, the part has to 
be stored. Goods in storage, waiting to be processed by the next task, are often called 
work-in-process inventory.
Process analysis involves adjusting the capacities and balance among different parts of the 
process to maximize output or minimize the costs with available resources. Our company sup-
plies a component from our emerging plant to several large auto manufacturers. This component 
is assembled in a shop by 15 workers working an eight-hour shift on an assembly line that moves 
at the rate of 150 components per hour. The workers receive their pay in the form of a group 
incentive amounting to 30 cents per completed good part. This wage is distributed equally among 
the workers. Management believes that it can hire 15 more workers for a second shift if necessary.
Parts for the final assembly come from two sources. The molding department makes one 
very critical part, and the rest come from outside suppliers. There are 11 machines capable of 

158	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
molding the one part done in-house; however, historically, one machine is being overhauled 
or repaired at any given time. Each machine requires a full-time operator. The machines 
could each produce 25 parts per hour, and the workers are paid on an individual piece rate 
of 20 cents per good part. The workers will work overtime at a 50 percent increase in rate, or 
for 30 cents per good part. The workforce for molding is flexible; currently, only six work-
ers are on this job. Four more are available from a labor pool within the company. The raw 
materials for each part molded cost 10 cents per part; a detailed analysis by the accounting 
department has concluded that 2 cents of electricity is used in making each part. The parts 
purchased from the outside cost 30 cents for each final component produced.
This entire operation is located in a rented building costing $100 per week. Supervision, 
maintenance, and clerical employees receive $1,000 per week. The accounting department 
charges depreciation for equipment against this operation at $50 per week.
The following process flow diagram describes the process. The tasks have been shown as 
rectangles and the storage of goods (inventories) as triangles.
SOLUTION
a.  Determine the capacity (number of components produced per week) of the entire 
­process. Are the capacities of all the processes balanced?
Capacity of the molding process:
Only six workers are employed for the molding process, each working as a full-time opera-
tor for one machine. Thus, only 6 of the 11 machines are operational at present.
​Molding capacity = 6 machines × 25 parts per hour per machine × 8 hours per day ×  
5 days per week
= 6,000 parts per week​
Capacity of the assembly process:
​Assembly capacity = 150 components per hour × 8 hours per day × 5 days per week 
= 6,000 components per week​
Because capacity of both the tasks is 6,000 units per week, they are balanced.
b.  If the molding process were to use 10 machines instead of 6, and no changes were to be 
made in the final assembly task, what would be the capacity of the entire process?
Molding capacity with 10 machines:
​Molding capacity = 10 machines × 25 parts per hour per machine × 8 hours per day ×  
5 days per week
= 10,000 parts per week​
Mold parts
Purchase parts
from vendors
Purchased parts
inventory
Final assembly
Inputs
Components
Finished
goods
XYZ Component Operation
Molded parts
inventory

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
159
Because no change has been made in the final assembly task, the capacity of the assem-
bly process remains 6,000 components per week. Thus, even though the molding capacity is 
10,000 per week, the capacity of the entire process is only 6,000 per week because in the long 
run the overall capacity cannot exceed the slowest task.
c.  If our company went to a second shift of eight more hours on the assembly task, what 
would be the new capacity?
A second shift on the assembly task:
As calculated in the previous section, the molding capacity is 10,000.
​Assembly capacity = 150 components per hour × 16 hours per day × 5 days per week  
= 12,000 components per week​
Here, even though the assembly capacity is 12,000 per week, the capacity of the entire pro-
cess remains at 10,000 per week because now the slowest task is the molding process, which 
has a capacity of 10,000 per week. Thus, we can note here that capacity of a process is not a 
constant factor; it depends on the availability of inputs and the sequence of tasks. In fact, it 
depends on several other factors not covered here.
d.  Determine the cost per unit output when the capacity is (1) 6,000 per week or 
(2) 10,000 per week.
1. Cost per unit when output per week = 6,000
First, we calculate the cost of producing all the 6,000 parts per week:
Item
Calculation
Cost
Raw material for molding
$0.10 per part × 6,000 =
$   600
Parts purchased from outside
$0.30 per component × 6,000 =
1,800
Electricity
$0.02 per part × 6,000 =
120
Molding labor
$0.20 per part × 6,000 =
1,200
Assembly labor
$0.30 per part × 6,000 =
1,800
Rent
$100 per week
100
Supervision
$1,000 per week
1,000
Depreciation
$50 per week
        50
    Total cost
$6,670
Item
Calculation
Cost
Raw material for molding
$0.10 per part × 10,000 =
$  1,000
Parts purchased from outside
$0.30 per component × 10,000 =
3,000
Electricity
$0.02 per part × 10,000 =
200
Molding labor
$0.20 per part × 10,000 =
2,000
Assembly labor
$0.30 per part × 10,000 =
3,000
Rent
$100 per week
100
Supervision
$1,000 per week
1,000
Depreciation
$50 per week
          50
        Total cost
$10,350
​Cost per unit  =  ​ 
Total cost per week 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
Number of units produced per week ​  =  ​ $6,670 
_____ 
6,000 ​  =  $1.11​
2. Cost per unit when output per week = 10,000
Next, we calculate the cost of producing all the 10,000 parts per week:
​Cost per unit  =  ​ 
Total cost per week 
 
_________________________ 
 
 
Number of units produced per week ​  =  ​ $10,350 
______ 
10,000 ​  =  $1.04​
As you can see, our cost per unit has been reduced by spreading the fixed cost over a greater 
number of units.
Such process analysis calculations are required for many production decisions discussed 
throughout this book.

160	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Concept Connections
LO 7–1   Understand what a manufacturing process is.
Summary
	∙	 Manufacturing processes are used to make tangible 
items. 
	∙	 At a high level, these processes can be divided into 
three steps: (1) sourcing the parts needed, (2) making 
the item, and (3) sending the item to the customer. 
	∙	 In order to allow parts of the process to operate inde-
pendently, inventory is strategically positioned in the 
process. These places in the process are called decou-
pling points. 
	∙	 Positioning the decoupling points has an impact on 
how fast a customer can be served, the flexibility the 
firm has in responding to specific customer requests, 
and many other trade-offs.
Key Terms
Lead time  The time needed to respond to a customer order.
Customer order decoupling point  Where inventory is 
positioned in the supply chain.
Make-to-stock  A production environment where the 
customer is served “on-demand” from finished goods 
inventory.
Assemble-to-order  A production environment where 
pre-assembled components, subassemblies, and modules 
are put together in response to a specific customer order.
Make-to-order  A production environment where 
the product is built directly from raw materials and 
­components in response to a specific customer order.
Engineer-to-order  Here the firm works with the 
­customer to design the product, which is then made 
from purchased material, parts, and components.
Lean manufacturing  To achieve high customer service 
with minimum levels of inventory investment.
Key Formulas
​[7 . 1]​    ​Total number of combinations ​= ​​N​ 1​  ×  ​N​ 2​  × · · · ×  ​N​ n​​  
            Or 384 = 4 × 3 × 4 × 2 × 4 for this example.​
LO 7–2   Explain how manufacturing processes are organized.
	∙	 Manufacturing layouts are designed based on the nature 
of the product, the volume needed to meet demand, and 
the cost of equipment. 
	∙	 The trade-offs are depicted in the product–process 
matrix, which shows the type of layout relative to 
product volume and the relative standardization of the 
product. 
	∙	 Break-even analysis is useful for understanding the 
cost trade-offs between alternative equipment choices.
Summary
Key Terms
Project layout  A setup in which the product remains at 
one location, and equipment is moved to the product.
Workcenter  Often referred to as a job shop, a process 
structure suited for low-volume production of a great 
variety of nonstandard products.  Workcenters some-
times are referred to as departments and are focused on a 
particular type of operation.
Manufacturing cell  Dedicated area where a group of 
similar products are produced.
Assembly line  A setup in which an  item is produced 
through a fixed sequence of workstations, designed to 
achieve a specific production rate.
Continuous process  A process that converts raw materi-
als into finished product in one contiguous process.
Product–process matrix  A framework depicting when 
the different production process types are typically used, 
depending on product volume and how standardized the 
product is.

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
161
LO 7–3   Analyze simple manufacturing processes.
	∙	 Visual charts can be used to document manufactur-
ing process flows. Some common charts are assem-
bly drawings, assembly charts, route sheets, and 
flowcharts. 
	∙	 Flowcharts are often very informative in business 
endeavors. They provide a simple but insightful analy-
sis of the capacity of a process and the variable cost to 
produce each unit of product.
Summary
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
An automobile manufacturer is considering a change in an assembly line that should save 
money by reducing labor and material cost. The change involves the installation of four new 
robots that will automatically install windshields. The cost of the four robots, including instal-
lation and initial programming, is $400,000. Current practice is to amortize the initial cost of 
robots over two years on a straight-line basis. The process engineer estimates that one full-
time technician will be needed to monitor, maintain, and reprogram the robots on an ongoing 
basis. This person will be paid approximately $60,000 per year. Currently, the company uses 
four full-time employees on this job and each makes about $52,000 per year. One of these 
employees is a material handler, and this person will still be needed with the new process. To 
complicate matters, the process engineer estimates that the robots will apply the windshield 
sealing material in a manner that will result in a savings of $0.25 per windshield installed. 
How many automobiles need to be produced over the next two years to make the new robots 
an attractive investment? Due to the relatively short time horizon, do not consider the time 
value of money.
Solution
The cost of the current process over the next two years is just the cost of the four full-time 
employees.
​$52,000/employee × 4 employees × 2 years = $416,000​
The cost of the new process over the next two years, assuming the robot is completely costed 
over that time, is the following:
​($52,000/material handler + $60,000/technician) × 2 + $400,000/robots  −  $0.25 × autos​
Equating the two alternatives:
​$416,000 = $624,000  −  $0.25 × autos​
Solving for the break-even point:
​− $208,000/ − $0.25 = 832,000 autos​
This indicates that, to break even, 832,000 autos would need to be produced with the robots 
over the next two years.
LO 7–1
LO 7–3
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
A contract manufacturer makes a product for a customer that consists of two items, a cable 
with standard RCA connectors and a cable with a mini-plug, which are then packaged together 
as the final product (each product sold contains one RCA and one mini-plug cable). The man-
ufacturer makes both cables on the same assembly line and can only make one type at a time: 
either it can make RCA cables or it can make mini-plug cables. There is a setup time when 
switching from one cable to the other. The assembly line costs $500/hour to operate, and this 
rate is charged whether it is being set up or actually making cables.

162	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Current plans are to make 100 units of the RCA cable, then 100 units of the mini-plug 
cable, then 100 units of the RCA cable, then 100 units of the mini-plug cable, and so on, 
where the setup and run times for each cable are given as follows.
Assume the packaging of the two cables is totally automated and takes only two seconds 
per unit of the final product and is done as a separate step from the assembly line. Since the 
packaging step is quick and the time required does not depend on the assembly-line batch size, 
its cost does not vary and need not be considered in the analysis.
What is the average hourly output in terms of the number of units of packaged product 
(which includes one RCA cable and one mini-plug cable)? What is the average cost per unit 
for assembling the product? If the batch size were changed from 100 to 200 units, what would 
be the impact on the assembly cost per unit?
Solution
The average hourly output rate when the batch size is 100 units is calculated by first calculating 
the total time to produce a batch of cable. The time consists of the setup + the run time for a batch:
​5 + 10 + 0.2(100) + 0.1(100) = 15 + 30 = 45 minutes/100 units​
So if we can produce 100 units in 45 minutes, we need to calculate how many units can be 
produced in 60 minutes; we can find this with the following ratio:
​45/100 = 60/X​
Solving for X:
​X = 133.3 units/hour​
The cost per unit is then
​$500/133.3 = $3.75/unit​
If the batch size were increased to 200 units:
​
5 + 10 + 0.2(200) + 0.1(200)
​ 
=
​ 
15 + 60 = 75 minutes/200 units
​ 
 
 
 
75/200​ =​ 60/X​ 
X​ =​ 160/hour​ 
 
$500/160
​ 
=
​ 
$3.125/unit
 
​
Component
Setup/Changeover Time
Run Time/Unit
RCA cable
5 minutes
0.2 minute
Mini-plug cable
10 minutes
0.1 minute
Discussion Questions
	1.	 What is meant by a process? Describe its important features.
	2.	 What is a customer order decoupling point? Why is it important?
	3.	 What’s the relationship between the design of a manufacturing process and the firm’s stra-
tegic competitive dimensions (Chapter 2)?
LO 7–1
LO 7–2
	4.	 What does the product–process matrix tell us? How should the kitchen of a Chinese restau-
rant be structured?
	5.	 It has been noted that, during World War II, Germany made a critical mistake by having 
its formidable Tiger tanks produced by locomotive manufacturers, while the less formi-
dable U.S. Sherman tank was produced by American car manufacturers. Use the product–­
process matrix to explain that mistake and its likely result.
	6.	 How does the production volume affect break-even analysis?
LO 7–3
	7.	 What is meant by manufacturing process flow?
	8.	 Why is it that reducing the number of moves, delays, and storages in a manufacturing pro-
cess is a good thing? Can they be completely eliminated?

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
163
Objective Questions
LO 7–1
LO 7–2
	 1.	 What is the first of the three simple steps in the high-level view of manufacturing?
	 2.	 The customer order decoupling point determines the position of what in the supply chain?
	 3.	 Dell Computer’s primary consumer business takes orders from customers for specific 
configurations of desktop and laptop computers. Customers must select from a certain 
model line of computer and choose from available parts, but within those constraints they 
may customize the computer as they desire. Once the order is received, Dell assembles 
the computer as ordered and delivers it to the customer. What type of manufacturing pro-
cess is described here?
	 4.	 What term is used to mean manufacturing designed to achieve high customer satisfaction 
with minimum levels of inventory investment?
	 5.	 How would you characterize the most important difference for the following issues when 
comparing a workcenter (job shop) and an assembly line?
	 6.	 The product–process matrix is a convenient way of characterizing the relationship 
between product volumes (one-of-a-kind to continuous) and the processing system 
employed by a firm at a particular location. Characterize the nature of the intersection 
between the type of shop (column) and process dimension (row) in the following table.
	 7.	 For each of the following variables, explain the differences (in general) as one moves 
from a workcenter to an assembly line environment.
	
a.	 Throughput time (time to convert raw material into product)
	
b.	 Capital/labor intensity
	
c.	 Bottlenecks
	 8.	 A book publisher has fixed costs of $300,000 and variable costs per book of $8.00. The 
book sells for $23.00 per copy.
	
a.	 How many books must be sold to break even?
	
b.	 If the fixed cost increased, would the new break-even point be higher or lower?
	
c.	 If the variable cost per unit decreased, would the new break-even point be higher or lower?
	 9.	 A manufacturing process has a fixed cost of $150,000 per month. Each unit of product 
being produced contains $25 worth of material and takes $45 of labor. How many units are 
needed to break even if each completed unit has a value of $90? (Answer in Appendix D)
	10.	 Assume a fixed cost of $900, a variable cost of $4.50, and a selling price of $5.50.
	
a.	 What is the break-even point?
	
b.	 How many units must be sold to make a profit of $500.00?
	
c.	 How many units must be sold to average $0.25 profit per unit? $0.50 profit per unit? 
$1.50 profit per unit?
	11.	 Aldo Redondo drives his own car on company business. His employer reimburses him 
for such travel at the rate of 36 cents per mile. Aldo estimates that his fixed costs per 
­year—­such as taxes, insurance, and depreciation—are $2,052. The direct or variable 
costs—such as gas, oil, and maintenance—average about 14.4 cents per mile. How many 
miles must he drive to break even?
Workcenter
Assembly Line
Engineering emphasis
General workforce skill
Facility layout
WIP inventory level
Issue
Workcenter (Job Shop)
Assembly Line
Number of setups/job changeovers
Labor content of product
Flexibility

164	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	12.	 A firm is selling two products—chairs and bar stools—each at $50 per unit. Chairs have 
a variable cost of $25, and bar stools $20. The fixed cost for the firm is $20,000.
	
a.	 If the sales mix is 1:1 (one chair sold for every bar stool sold), what is the break-even 
point in dollars of sales? In units of chairs and bar stools?
	
b.	 If the sales mix changes to 1:4 (one chair sold for every four bar stools sold), what is 
the break-even point in dollars of sales? In units of chairs and bar stools?
LO 7–3
	13.	 Owen Conner works part-time packaging software for a local distribution company in Indi-
ana. The annual fixed cost is $10,000 for this process, direct labor is $3.50 per package, 
and material is $4.50 per package. The selling price will be $12.50 per package. How much 
revenue do we need to take in before breaking even? What is the break-even point in units?
	14.	 AudioCables, Inc., is currently manufacturing an adapter that has a variable cost of 
$.50 per unit and a selling price of $1.00 per unit. Fixed costs are $14,000. Current sales 
volume is 30,000 units. The firm can substantially improve the product quality by add-
ing a new piece of equipment at an additional fixed cost of $6,000. Variable costs would 
increase to $.60, but sales volume should jump to 50,000 units due to a higher-quality 
product. Should AudioCables buy the new equipment?
	15.	 The Goodparts Company produces a component that is subsequently used in the aerospace 
industry. The component consists of three parts (A, B, and C) that are purchased from 
outside and cost 40, 35, and 15 cents per piece, respectively. Parts A and B are assembled 
first on assembly line 1, which produces 140 components per hour. Part C undergoes a 
drilling operation before being finally assembled with the output from assembly line 1. 
There are, in total, six drilling machines, but at present only three of them are operational. 
Each drilling machine drills part C at a rate of 50 parts per hour. In the final assembly, 
the output from assembly line 1 is assembled with the drilled part C. The final assembly 
line produces at a rate of 160 components per hour. At present, components are produced 
eight hours a day and five days a week. Management believes that if the need arises, it can 
add a second shift of eight hours for the assembly lines.
	
	   The cost of assembly labor is 30 cents per part for each assembly line; the cost of drill-
ing labor is 15 cents per part. For drilling, the cost of electricity is one cent per part. The 
total overhead cost has been calculated as $1,200 per week. The depreciation cost for 
equipment has been calculated as $30 per week.
	
a.	 Draw a process flow diagram and determine the process capacity (number of compo-
nents produced per week) of the entire process.
	
b.	 Suppose a second shift of eight hours is run for assembly line 1 and the same is done 
for the final assembly line. In addition, four of the six drilling machines are made 
operational. The drilling machines, however, operate for just eight hours a day. What is 
the new process capacity (number of components produced per week)? Which of the 
three operations limits the capacity?
	
c.	 Management decides to run a second shift of eight hours for assembly line 1, plus 
a second shift of only four hours for the final assembly line. Five of the six drilling 
machines operate for eight hours a day. What is the new capacity? Which of the three 
operations limits the capacity?
	
d.	 Determine the cost per unit output for questions (b) and (c).
	
e.	 The product is sold at $4.00 per unit. Assume that the cost of a drilling machine (fixed 
cost) is $30,000 and the company produces 8,000 units per week. Assume that four 
drilling machines are used for production. If the company had an option to buy the 
same part at $3.00 per unit, what would be the break-even number of units?
	16.	 The following diagram represents a process where two components are made at stations 
A1 and A2 (one component is made at A1 and the other at A2). These components are 
then assembled at station B and moved through the rest of the process, where some addi-
tional work is completed at stations C, D, and E.
	
	   Assume that one and only one person is allowed at each station. Assume that the times 
given for each station represent the amount of work that needs to be done at that station 
by that person, with no processing time variation. Assume that inventory is not allowed to 
build in the system.

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
165
	
	 What is the average hourly output of the process when it is in normal operation? (Answer 
in Appendix D)
	17.	 A certain custom engraving shop has traditionally had orders for between 1 and 50 units 
of whatever a customer orders. A large company has contacted this shop about engrav-
ing “reward” plaques (which are essentially identical to each other). It wants the shop to 
place a bid for this order. The volume is expected to be 12,000 units per year and will 
most likely last four years. To successfully bid (low enough price) for such an order, what 
will the shop likely have to do?
A1
0.3 min.
B
0.75 min.
C
0.65 min.
D
0.60 min.
E
0.55 min.
A2
0.4 min.
Circuit Board Fabricators, Inc. (CBF), is a small manu-
facturer of circuit boards located in California near San 
Jose. Companies such as Apple Computer and Hewlett-
Packard use the company to make boards for prototypes 
of new products. It is important that CBF give quick and 
very high-quality service. The engineers working on 
the new products are on a tight schedule and have little 
patience with sloppy work or missed delivery dates.
Circuit boards are a rigid flat surface where elec-
tronic components are mounted. Electronic components 
such as integrated circuits, resistors, capacitors, and 
diodes are soldered to the boards. Lines called “traces” 
are etched on the board and electronically connect the 
components. Since the electronic traces cannot cross, 
holes through the circuit board are used to connect traces 
on both sides of the boards, thus allowing complex cir-
cuits to be implemented. These boards often are designed 
with 40 to 50 components that are connected through 
hundreds of traces on a small four-by six-inch board.
CBF has developed a good business plan. It has four 
standard-size board configurations and has automated 
much of its process for making these standard boards. 
Fabricating the boards requires CBF’s numerically con-
trolled (NC) equipment to be programmed. This is largely 
an automated process that works directly from engineering 
drawings that are formatted using industry standard codes.
Currently, the typical order is for 60 boards. Engi-
neers at customer companies prepare a computer-aided 
design (CAD) drawing of the board. This CAD drawing 
precisely specifies each circuit trace, circuit pass-through 
holes, and component mounting points on the board. An 
electronic version of the drawing is used by a CBF pro-
cess engineer to program the NC machines used to fabri-
cate the boards.
Due to losses in the system, CBF has a policy of 
increasing the size of an order by 25 percent. For exam-
ple, for a typical order consisting of 60 boards, 75 boards 
would be started through the process. Fifteen percent 
of the boards are typically rejected during an inspec-
tion that occurs early in the manufacturing process and 
another 5 percent of the remaining boards are rejected in 
the final test.
Board Fabrication Process
CBF purchases circuit board blanks from a vendor. These 
boards are made from woven fiberglass cloth that is 
impregnated with epoxy. A layer of copper is laminated 
onto each side to form a blank board. The blank board 
comes from the vendor trimmed to the standard sizes that 
CBF’s numerically controlled equipment can handle.
The following is a description of the steps involved 
in processing an order at CBF:
	1.	 Order acceptance.    Check to verify that the 
order fits within the specification of boards that 
can be produced with CBF equipment. The pro-
cess engineer at CBF works with the customer 
engineer to resolve any problems with the order.
	2.	 NC machine programming.    CAD information 
is used to program the machines to produce the 
order.
	3.	 Board fabrication.
a.	 Clean.    Each board is manually loaded into 
this machine by an operator. The machine then 
cleans the boards with a special chemical. Each 
board is then automatically transferred to the 
coating machine.
b.	 Coat.    A liquid plastic coating is deposited on 
both sides of the board. Following this process, 
Case: Circuit Board Fabricators, Inc.

166	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
an operator places the boards on a cart. Each 
cart, with a complete order of boards, is then 
moved immediately to the “clean room.”
c.	 Expose.    This photographic process makes 
the exposed plastic coating resistant to dis-
solving in the areas where the copper traces are 
needed. An operator must attend to this machine 
100  percent of the time, and load and unload 
each individual board.
d.	 Develop.    Each board is manually loaded onto 
this machine. The boards are dipped by the 
machine, one-at-a-time, in a chemical bath that 
dissolves the plastic and the underlying copper 
in the proper areas. After dipping, the machine 
places each board on a conveyor.
e.	 Inspect.    Each board is picked from the con-
veyor as it comes from the developer. The board 
is optically checked for defects using a machine 
similar to a scanner. Approximately 15 percent 
of the boards are rejected at this point. Boards 
that pass inspection are placed back on the con-
veyor that feeds the bake oven. Two inspectors 
are used at this station.
f.	 Bake.    Boards travel through a bake oven that 
hardens the plastic coating, thus protecting the 
traces. Boards are then manually unloaded and 
placed on a cart. When all the boards for an order 
are on the cart, it is moved to the drilling machines.
g.	 Drilling.    Holes are drilled using an NC 
machine to connect circuits on both sides of 
the board. The boards are manually loaded and 
unloaded. The machines are arranged so that one 
person can keep two machines going simultane-
ously. The cart is used to move the boards to the 
copper plate bath.
h.	 Copper plate.    Copper is deposited inside 
the holes by running the boards through a spe-
cial copper plating bath. This copper connects 
the traces on both sides of the board. Each 
board is manually loaded on a conveyor that 
passes through the plating bath. Two people 
are needed for this process, one loading and a 
second unloading the conveyor. On completion 
of plating, boards are moved on the cart to the 
final test machines.
i.	 Final test.    Using a special NC machine, a 
final electrical test of each board is performed 
to check the integrity of the circuits. On aver-
age, approximately 5 percent of the boards fail 
this test. The boards are manually loaded and 
unloaded. One person is needed to operate each 
machine and sort the good and bad boards. The 
Process/Machine
Number of Machines
Number of Employees
Setup (minutes per job)
Run (minutes per part)
Load
1
1
  5
0.33
Clean
1
0.5  
Coat
1
0.5  
Unload
1
1
0.33
Expose
5
5
15
1.72
Load
1
1
  5
0.33
Develop
1
0.33
Inspect
2
2
0.5  
Bake
1
0.33
Unload
1
1
0.33
Drilling
6
3
15
1.5  
Copper plate
1
2
  5
0.2  
Final test
6
6
15
2.69
Required output per shift
1,000
Average job size (boards)
60
Production hours per day
7.5
Working days per week
5
Circuit Board Fabricators—Process Data
exhibit 7.8

	
Manufacturing Processes	
Chapter 7	
167
cart is used to move the good boards to the 
shipping area. The bad boards are scrapped.
	4.	 Shipping.    The completed order is packed and 
shipped to the customer.
The plant was designed to run 1,000 boards per day 
when running five days a week and one eight-hour shift 
per day. Unfortunately, to date, it has not come near that 
capacity, and on a good day it is able to produce only 
about 700 boards. Data concerning the standard setup 
and run times for the fabrication process are given in 
Exhibit 7.8. These times include allowances for morn-
ing and afternoon breaks, but do not include time for the 
half-hour lunch period. In addition, data on current staff-
ing levels also are provided. The CBF process engineer 
insists that the capacity at each process is sufficient to 
run 1,000 boards per day.
In order to help understand the problem, CBF hired a 
consulting company to help solve the problem.
Questions
CBF hired you to help determine why it is not able to 
produce the 1,000 boards per day.
	1.	 What type of process flow structure is CBF using?
	2.	 Diagram the process in a manner similar to 
Exhibit 7.7.
	3.	 Analyze the capacity of the process.
	4.	 What is the impact of losses in the process in the 
inspection and final test?
	5.	 What recommendations would you make for a 
short-term solution to CBF’s problems?
	6.	 What long-term recommendations would you 
make?
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 A firm that makes predesigned products directly to fill 
customer orders has this type of production environment.
	2.	 A point where inventory is positioned to allow the 
production process to operate independently of the 
customer order delivery process.
	3.	 A firm that designs and builds products from scratch 
according to customer specifications would have this 
type of production environment.
	4.	 If a production process makes a unit every two hours 
and it takes 42 hours for the unit to go through the entire 
process, what is the expected work-in-process equal to?
	5.	 A finished goods inventory, on average, contains 
10,000 units. Demand averages 1,500 units per week. 
Given that the process runs 50 weeks a year, what is 
the expected inventory turn for the inventory? Assume 
that each item held in inventory is valued at about the 
same amount.
	6.	 This is a production layout where similar products are 
made. Typically, it is scheduled on an as-needed basis 
in response to current customer demand.
	7.	 The relationship between how different layout struc-
tures are best suited depending on volume and product 
variety characteristics is depicted on this type of graph.
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Make-to-order. 2. Customer order decoupling point. 3. Engineer-to-order. 4. 21 units = 42/2.  
5. 7.5 turns = (1,500 × 50)/10,000. 6. Manufacturing cell. 7. Product–process matrix.

168
Learning Objectives
	LO 8–1	 Analyze the common types of manufacturing layouts.
	LO 8–2	 Illustrate layouts used in nonmanufacturing settings.
Facility  
Layout
8 
TOSHIBA: PRODUCER OF THE FIRST 
NOTEBOOK COMPUTER
Tokyo Shibaura Denki (Tokyo Shibaura Electric Co. Ltd.) was formed in 1939 by 
a merger of two highly innovative Japanese companies: Shibaura Seisaku-sho 
(Shibaura Engineering Works), which manufactured transformers, electrical motors, 
hydroelectric generators, and X-ray tubes, and Tokyo Electric Company, which pro-
duced light bulbs, radio receivers, and cathode-ray tubes. The company was soon 
after known as “Toshiba,” which became its official 
name in 1978. Toshiba became the first company in 
Japan to make fluorescent lamps (1940), radar (1942), 
broadcasting equipment (1952), and digital computers 
(1954). Toshiba also became the first in the world to 
produce the powerful 1-megabit DRAM chip and the 
first laptop computer, the T3100, both in 1985.
Toshiba has built its strength in the notebook PC 
market by beating its competitors to the market with 
aggressively priced, technologically innovative prod-
ucts. Competition in the notebook PC market is fierce, 
and Toshiba can retain its position as a market leader 
only by relentlessly improving its manufacturing pro-
cesses and lowering its costs.
Dell Computer is a formidable competitor and seeks 
to minimize its costs by assembling to order and sell-
ing directly to customers. Toshiba has some significant 
advantages over Dell that stem largely from huge investments in technologies, such 
as thin-film transistor (TFT) color displays, hard disk drives, lithium-ion batteries, and 
DVD drives. In addition, by forming partnerships and joint ventures with other industry 
giants, Toshiba can share the risk of developing expensive new technologies.
A man inspects Toshiba 
Corp.’s new line of 
dynabook SS RX PCs at the 
launch of the company’s 
new series of Note PCs in 
Tokyo.
© Graham Crouch/Bloomberg 
via Getty Images

	
169
Put yourself in the position of Toshihiro Nakamura, the production supervisor at 
Toshiba’s Ome Works plant. Production of Toshiba’s latest subnotebook computer is 
scheduled to begin in only 10 days. As he wends his way through a maze of desks, 
heading to the factory floor, he wonders if it is really feasible to get the line designed 
in time.
Read the details related to designing the new assembly line in the Analytics Exer-
cise at the end of this chapter titled “Designing a Manufacturing Process.”
Layout decisions entail determining the placement of departments, work groups within the 
departments, workstations, machines, and stock-holding points within a production facility. 
The objective is to arrange these elements in a way that ensures a smooth work flow (in a 
factory) or a particular traffic pattern (in a service organization). In general, the inputs to the 
layout decision are as follows:
	1.	 Specification of the objectives and corresponding criteria to be used to evaluate the 
design. The amount of space required and the distance that must be traveled between 
elements in the layout are common basic criteria.
	2.	 Estimates of product or service demand on the system.
	3.	 Processing requirements in terms of number of operations and amount of flow 
between the elements in the layout.
	4.	 Space requirements for the elements in the layout.
	5.	 Space availability within the facility itself or, if this is a new facility, possible build-
ing configurations.
In our treatment of layout, we examine how layouts are developed under various formats 
(or workflow structures). Our emphasis is on quantitative techniques, but we also show exam-
ples of how qualitative factors are important in the design of the layout. Both manufacturing 
and service facilities are covered in this chapter.
Analyze the common types 
of manufacturing layouts.
LO 8–1
Overview of an 
engineering factory 
floor workcenter.
© Monty Rakusen Cultura/
Getty Images RF

170	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
The formats by which departments are arranged in a facility are defined by the general pattern 
of workflow. There are three basic types (workcenter, assembly line, and project layout) and 
one hybrid type (manufacturing cell).
A workcenter (also called a job-shop or functional layout) is a format in which similar 
equipment or functions are grouped together, such as all lathes in one area and all stamp-
ing machines in another. A part being worked on then travels, according to the established 
sequence of operations, from area to area, where the proper machines are located for each 
operation. This type of layout is typical in hospitals, for example, where areas are dedicated to 
particular types of medical care, such as maternity wards and intensive care units.
An assembly line (also called a flow-shop layout) is one in which equipment or work pro-
cesses are arranged according to the progressive steps by which the product is made. The path 
for each part is, in effect, a straight line. Assembly lines for shoes, chemical plants, and car 
washes are all product layouts.
A manufacturing cell groups dissimilar machines to work on products that have similar 
shapes and processing requirements. A manufacturing cell is similar to a workcenter in that 
cells are designed to perform a specific set of processes, and it is similar to an assembly line 
in that the cells are dedicated to a limited range of products. (Group technology refers to the 
parts classification and coding system used to specify machine types that go into a cell.)
In a project layout, the product (by virtue of its bulk or weight) remains at one location. 
Manufacturing equipment is moved to the product rather than vice versa. Construction sites 
and movie lots are examples of this format.
Many manufacturing facilities present a combination of two layout types. For example, a 
given production area may be organized as a workcenter, while another area may be an assembly 
line. It is also common to find an entire plant arranged according to product flow—for example, 
a parts fabrication area followed by a subassembly area, with a final assembly area at the end 
of the process. Different types of layouts may be used in each area, with workcenters used in 
fabrication, manufacturing cells in subassembly, and an assembly line used in final assembly.
Workcenters (Job Shops)
The most common approach to developing a workcenter layout is to arrange workcenters 
consisting of like processes in a way that optimizes their relative placement. For example, the 
workcenters in a low-volume toy factory might consist of the shipping and receiving workcen-
ter, the plastic molding and stamping workcenter, the metal forming workcenter, the sewing 
workcenter, and the painting workcenter. Parts for the toys are fabricated in these workcenters 
and then sent to assembly workcenters where they are put together. In many installations, 
optimal placement often means placing workcenters with large amounts of interdepartment 
traffic adjacent to one another.
EXAMPLE 8.1: Workcenter Layout Design
Suppose we want to arrange the eight workcenters of a toy factory to minimize the interde-
partmental material handling cost. Initially, let us make the simplifying assumption that all 
workcenters have the same amount of space (say, 40 feet by 40 feet) and that the building is 
80 feet wide and 160 feet long (and thus compatible with the workcenter dimensions). The 
first things we would want to know are the nature of the flow between workcenters and how 
the material is transported. If the company has another factory that makes similar products, 
information about flow patterns might be abstracted from the records. On the other hand, if 
this is a new-product line, such information would have to come from routing sheets or from 
estimates by knowledgeable personnel such as process or industrial engineers. Of course, 
these data, regardless of their source, will have to be modified to reflect the nature of future 
orders over the projected life of the proposed layout.
ANALYZING THE FOUR MOST COMMON 
LAYOUT FORMATS
Manufacturing cell
Groups dissimilar machines 
to work on products that 
have similar shapes and 
processing requirements.
Project layout
A setup in which the 
product remains at one 
location, and equipment is 
moved to the product.
Assembly line
A setup in which an item is 
produced through a fixed 
sequence of workstations, 
designed to achieve a 
specific production rate.
Workcenter
Often referred to as a job 
shop, a process structure 
suited for low-volume 
production of a great 
variety of nonstandard 
products. Workcenters 
sometimes are referred to 
as departments and are 
focused on a particular 
type of operation.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
171
	
Let us assume that this information is available. We find that all material is transported in a stan-
dard-size crate by forklift truck, one crate to a truck (which constitutes one “load”). Now suppose 
that transportation costs are $1 to move a load between adjacent workcenters and $1 extra for each 
workcenter in between. The expected loads between workcenters for the first year of operation are 
tabulated in Exhibit 8.1; available plant space is depicted in Exhibit 8.2. Note that, in our example, 
diagonal moves are permitted so that workcenters 2 and 3, and 3 and 6, are considered adjacent.
Lotus Evora manufacturing facility in Hethel, United Kingdom. Top row; assembly line, paint shop. Bottom row; assembly  
line, test track.
Courtesy of Group Lotus Plc.
Activity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8
Shipping and receiving
Plastic molding and stamping
Metal forming
Sewing
Small toy assembly
Large toy assembly
Painting
Mechanism assembly
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8
175
50 
0 
0 
100 
17
30 
75 
88 
20
200 
90 
125 
5
0
20 
80 
99 
0 
180 
374
25 
90 
180 
25 
187 
103 
7
Workcenter
Flow between Workcenters (Number of Moves)
Interworkcenter Flow
exhibit 8.1

172	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
SOLUTION
Given this information, our first step is to illustrate the interworkcenter flow by a model, such 
as Exhibit 8.3. This provides the basic layout pattern, which we will try to improve.
	
The second step is to determine the cost of this layout by multiplying the material handling 
cost by the number of loads moved between each pair of workcenters. Exhibit 8.4 presents this 
information, which is derived as follows: The annual material handling cost between Work-
centers 1 and 2 is $175 ($1 × 175 moves), $60 between Workcenters 1 and 5 ($2 × 30 moves), 
$60 between Workcenters 1 and 7 ($3 × 20 moves), $240 between diagonal Workcenters 2 and 
7 ($3 × 80), and so forth. (The “distances” are taken from Exhibit 8.2 or 8.3, not Exhibit 8.4.)
	
The third step is a search for workcenter location changes that will reduce costs. On the 
basis of the graph and the cost matrix, it seems desirable to place Workcenters 1 and 6 closer 
together to reduce their high move-distance costs. However, this requires shifting several other 
workcenters, thereby affecting their move-distance costs and the total cost of the second solu-
tion. Exhibit 8.5 shows the revised layout resulting from relocating Workcenter 6 and an adja-
cent workcenter. (Workcenter 4 is arbitrarily selected for this purpose.) The revised cost matrix 
for the exchange, showing the cost changes, is given in Exhibit 8.6. Note the total cost is $262 
greater than in the initial solution. Clearly, doubling the distance between Workcenters 6 and 7 
accounted for the major part of the cost increase. This points out the fact that, even in a small 
problem, it is rarely easy to decide the correct “obvious move” on the basis of casual inspection.
	
Thus far, we have shown only one exchange among a large number of potential exchanges; 
in fact, for an eight-workcenter problem, there are 8! (or 40,320) possible arrangements. 
Therefore, the procedure we have employed would have only a remote possibility of achieving 
an optimal combination in a reasonable number of tries. Nor does our problem stop here.
160'
80'
Loading 
dock
1
3
5
7
2
4
6
8
Building Dimensions and Workcenters
exhibit 8.2
Interworkcenter Flow Graph with Number of Annual Movements
exhibit 8.3
25
20
1
175
2
80
90
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
50
88
180
100
5
103
90
25
7
374
187
180
125
20
17
200
75
99

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
173
Cost Matrix—First Solution
exhibit 8.4
Revised Interworkcenter Flowchart (Only interworkcenter flow with 
effect on cost is depicted.)
exhibit 8.5
Cost Matrix—First Solution
exhibit 8.6
	
Suppose that we do arrive at a good solution solely on the basis of material handling cost, 
such as that shown in Exhibit 8.7 (whose total cost is $3,550). We would note, first of all, that 
our shipping and receiving workcenter is near the center of the factory—an arrangement that 
probably would not be acceptable. The sewing workcenter is next to the painting workcenter, 
175
50
0 
0
100
17
60
150
88
20
400
180
125
5
0
60
240
198
0
180
374
75
270
360
50
187
103
7
$
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Total cost: $3,474
200
374
25
103
100
90
1
3
5
7
2
6
4
8
Net cost change
175
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
206
7
187
25
360
270
75
+ $374, + $103
–     25
+    10
–$200
60
240
198
0
180
200
90
125
5
60
150
88
0
200
50
0
17
20
0
748
+  $262
Total cost: $3,736

174	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Systematic Layout Planning
In certain types of layout problems, numerical flow of items between workcenters either 
is impractical to obtain or does not reveal the qualitative factors that may be crucial to the 
placement decision. In these situations, the venerable technique known as systematic layout 
­planning (SLP) can be used. It involves developing a relationship chart showing the degree 
of importance of having each workcenter located adjacent to every other workcenter. From 
this chart, an activity relationship diagram, similar to the flow graph used for illustrating 
material handling between workcenters, is developed. The activity relationship diagram is 
then adjusted through trial and error until a satisfactory adjacency pattern is obtained. This 
pattern, in turn, is modified workcenter by workcenter to meet building space limitations. 
Exhibit 8.8 illustrates the technique with a simple five-workcenter problem involving laying 
out a floor of a department store.
Assembly Lines
The term assembly line refers to progressive assembly linked by some material handling device. 
The usual assumption is that some form of pacing is present and the allowable processing time 
is equivalent for all workstations. Within this broad definition, there are important differences 
among line types. A few of these are material handling devices (belt or roller conveyor, over-
head crane); line configuration (U-shape, straight, branching); pacing (mechanical, human); 
product mix (one product or multiple products); workstation characteristics (workers may sit, 
stand, walk with the line, or ride the line); and length of the line (few or many workers).
The range of products partially or completely assembled on lines includes toys, appliances, 
autos, planes, guns, garden equipment, clothing, and a wide variety of electronic components. 
In fact, it is probably safe to say that virtually any product that has multiple parts and is pro-
duced in large volume uses assembly lines to some degree. Clearly, lines are an important 
technology. To really understand their managerial requirements, we should have some famil-
iarity with how a line is balanced.
Assembly-Line Design
The most common assembly line is a moving conveyor that passes a series of workstations 
in a uniform time interval called the workstation cycle time (which is also the time between 
successive units coming off the end of the line). At each workstation, work is performed on a 
introducing the hazard that lint, thread, and cloth particles might drift onto painted items. 
Further, small toy assembly and large toy assembly are located at opposite ends of the plant, 
which would increase travel time for assemblers (who very likely would be needed in both 
workcenters at various times of the day) and for supervisors (who might otherwise supervise 
both workcenters simultaneously). Often, factors other than material handling cost need to be 
considered in finalizing a layout.
A Feasible Layout
exhibit 8.7
Systematic layout 
planning (SLP)
A technique for solving 
process layout problems 
when the use of numerical 
flow data between 
departments is not 
practical. The technique 
uses an activity relationship 
diagram that is adjusted 
by trial and error until a 
satisfactory adjacency 
pattern is obtained.
Workstation cycle time
The time between 
successive units coming 
off the end of an assembly 
line.
Small toy
assembly
Mechanism
assembly
Shipping and
receiving
Large toy
assembly
Metal
forming
Plastic
molding and
stamping
Sewing
Painting
5
8
1
6
3
2
4
7

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
175
2 
3 
4 
5 
From
1. Credit department
2. Toy department
3. Wine department
4. Camera department 
5. Candy department
I
6
To
Area (sq. ft.)
U
—
U
—
E
4
I
1
U
—
U
—
A
1,6
X
1
X
1
100
400
300
100
100
A. Relationship Chart (based on Tables B and C)
Closeness rating
Reason for rating
B.
CODE
1
2
3
4
5
6
REASON*
Type of customer
Ease of supervision
Common personnel
Contact necessary
Share same space
Psychology
*Others may be used.
C.
VALUE
A
E
I
O
U
X
CLOSENESS
Absolutely necessary
Especially important
Important
Ordinary closeness OK
Unimportant
Undesirable
*Used for example purposes only.
LINE
CODE*
NUMERICAL
WEIGHTS
2
1
5
4
3
Final layout adjusted by square 
footage and building size
20 ft.
50 ft.
Initial layout based on 
relationship diagram
(ignoring space and 
building constraints)
4
1
2
3
5
5
1
4
3
2
E
I
I
U
U
Initial relationship diagram
(based on Tables A and C)
Letter
Number
A
16
8
4
2
0
80
–
Systematic Layout Planning for a Floor of a Department Store
exhibit 8.8
product either by adding parts or by completing assembly operations. The work performed at 
each station is made up of many bits of work, termed tasks. Normally, the concern is for the 
work that is performed by people, and the task times would reflect this work.
The total work to be performed at a workstation is equal to the sum of the tasks assigned to 
that workstation. The assembly-line balancing problem is one of assigning all tasks to a series 
of workstations so that each workstation has no more than can be done in the workstation cycle 
time and so that the unassigned (that is, idle) time across all workstations is minimized.
The problem is complicated by the relationships among tasks imposed by product design 
and process technologies. This is called the precedence relationship, which specifies the 
order in which tasks must be performed in the assembly process.
The steps in balancing an assembly line are straightforward:
	1.	 Specify the sequential relationships among tasks using a precedence diagram. The dia-
gram consists of circles and arrows. Circles represent individual tasks; arrows indicate the 
order of task performance. This is similar to the project network diagram in Chapter 5.
	2.	 Determine the required workstation cycle time (C), using the formula
​C = ​ 
Production time per day 
 
 
________________________ 
 
 
Required output per day (in units) ​​
​[​8.1​]​
Assembly-line 
balancing
The problem of assigning 
tasks to a series of 
workstations so that the 
required cycle time is met 
and idle time is minimized.
Precedence 
relationship
The required order in 
which tasks must be 
performed in an assembly 
process.

176	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	3.	 Determine the theoretical minimum number of workstations (Nt) required to sat-
isfy the workstation cycle time constraint using the formula (note that this must be 
rounded up to the next highest integer)
​​N​ t​ = ​ Sum of task times (T) 
 
________________ 
 
Cycle time (C) 
​​
	4.	 Select a primary rule by which tasks are to be assigned to workstations and a second-
ary rule to break ties. For example, the primary rule might be the longest task time, 
and the secondary rule, the task with the longest number of following tasks. In this 
case, for the tasks that can be assigned, pick the one with the longest task time. If 
there is a tie, pick the one that has the greatest number of following tasks.
	5.	 Assign tasks, one at a time, to the first workstation until the sum of the task times is 
equal to the workstation cycle time or no other tasks are feasible because of time or 
sequence restrictions. Every time a task is assigned, re-create the list of tasks that are 
feasible to assign and then pick one based on the rule defined in 4. Repeat the pro-
cess for workstation 2, workstation 3, and so on, until all tasks are assigned.
	6.	 Evaluate the efficiency of the balance derived using the formula
​Efficiency = ​ 
Sum of task times (T) 
 
 
 
______________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Actual number of workstations ( ​N​ a​ ) × Workstation cycle time (C) ​​
	 	
Here we assume there is one worker per workstation. When, for some reason, the 
number of workstations does not equal the number of workers, we would usually 
substitute the number of workers for number of workstations since the concern is 
normally related to the use of labor. Often, it is the case that the line is run at a cycle 
time different than the time calculated in equation 8.1. In this case, the actual cycle 
time used by the assembly line should be used in the efficiency calculation.
	7.	 If efficiency is unsatisfactory, re-balance using a different decision rule. Keep in 
mind that the efficiency cannot be improved if the current solution uses the theoreti-
cal number of workstations calculated in step 3.
​[​8.2​]​
​[​8.3​]​
EXAMPLE 8.2: Assembly-Line Balancing
The Model J Wagon is to be assembled on a conveyor belt. Five hundred wagons are required 
per day. Production time per day is 420 minutes, and the assembly steps and times for the 
wagon are given in Exhibit 8.9A. Assignment: Find the balance that minimizes the number of 
workstations, subject to cycle time and precedence constraints.
SOLUTION
	1.	 Draw a precedence diagram. Exhibit 8.9B illustrates the sequential relationships iden-
tified in Exhibit 8.9A. (The length of the arrows has no meaning.)
	2.	 Determine workstation cycle time. Here we have to convert to seconds because our 
task times are in seconds.
​C = ​ Production time per day 
 
____________________ 
 
Output per day  
​ = ​ 60 sec . × 420 min . 
 
________________ 
 
500 wagons 
​ = ​ 25, 200 
__________ 
500​  ​ =​ 50.4​
	3.	 Determine the theoretical minimum number of workstations required (the actual 
­number may be greater):
​N​ t​ = ​ T 
__ 
C ​ = ​ 195 seconds 
_________ 
50.4 seconds ​ = 3.87 = 4 ​(​rounded up​)​
	4.	 Select assignment rules. In general, the strategy is to use a rule assigning tasks that 
either have many followers or are of long duration because they effectively limit the 
balance achievable. In this case, we use the following as our primary rule.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
177
		 a.	Prioritize tasks in order of the largest number of following tasks.
Task
Number of  
Following Tasks
A
6
B or D
5
C or E
4
F, G, H, or I
2
J
1
K
0
	      Our secondary rule, to be invoked where ties exist from our primary rule, is:
		 b.	Prioritize tasks in order of longest task time (shown in Exhibit 8.10). Note that D 
should be assigned before B, and E assigned before C due to this tiebreaking rule.
Task
Task Time  
(in seconds)
Description
Tasks That  
Must Precede
A
45
Position rear axle support and hand fasten four 
screws to nuts.
—
B
11
Insert rear axle.
A
C
 9
Tighten rear axle support screws to nuts.
B
D
50
Position front axle assembly and hand fasten with 
four screws to nuts.
—
E
15
Tighten front axle assembly screws.
D
F
12
Position rear wheel #1 and fasten hubcap.
C
G
12
Position rear wheel #2 and fasten hubcap.
C
H
12
Position front wheel #1 and fasten hubcap.
E
I
12
Position front wheel #2 and fasten hubcap.
E
J
  8
Position wagon handle shaft on front axle assembly 
and hand fasten bolt and nut.
F, G, H, I
K
    9  
Tighten bolt and nut.
J
 
195 
 
 
A. Assembly Steps and Times for Model J Wagon
exhibit 8.9
B. Precedence Graph for Model J Wagon
A
45 sec.
11 sec.
9 sec.
12 sec.
8 sec.
9 sec.
12 sec.
15 sec.
50 sec.
12 sec.
12 sec.
B
C
F
G
J
K
H
E
I
D
	5.	 Make task assignments to form Workstation 1, Workstation 2, and so forth, until all 
tasks are assigned. The actual assignment is given in Exhibit 8.10A and is shown 
graphically in Exhibit 8.10B. To understand this, it is best to trace through the task 

178	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
assignments in sequence in Exhibit 8.10A. See that when an assignment is made, the 
feasible remaining assignments are updated along with the priority rules. It is impor-
tant to meet precedence and cycle time requirements as the assignments are made.
	6.	 Calculate the efficiency. This is shown in Exhibit 8.10C.
	7.	 Evaluate the solution. An efficiency of 77 percent indicates an imbalance or idle time 
of 23 percent (1.0–.77) across the entire line. From Exhibit 8.10A we can see that 
there are 57 total seconds of idle time, and the “choice” job is at Workstation 5.
	
Is a better balance possible? In this case, yes. Try balancing the line with rule (b) and 
breaking ties with rule (a). (This will give you a feasible four-station balance.)
A. Balance Made According to Largest-Number-of-Following-Tasks Rule
exhibit 8.10
Station 1
Station 3
Station 4
Station 2
Station 5
 
K
A
B
E
C
F*
G
H*
I
J
D
Task
45
11
15
 9
12
12
12
12
 8
50
9
Task Time
(in seconds)
E
F, G, H, I
H, I
Task with Longest
Operation Time
C, E
C
F, G, H, I
H, I
Task with Most
Followers
None
C, E
C, H, I
F, G, H, I
None
H, I
I
J
None
None
None
Feasible
Remaining Tasks
5.4 idle
39.4
24.4
15.4
3.4 idle
38.4
26.4
14.4
6.4 idle
0.4 idle
41.4 idle
Remaining Unassigned
Time (in seconds)
*Denotes task arbitrarily selected where there is a tie between longest operation times.
B. Precedence Graph for Model J Wagon
A
45 sec.
11 sec.
9 sec.
12 sec.
8 sec.
9 sec.
12 sec.
15 sec.
50 sec.
12 sec.
12 sec.
B
C
F
G
J
K
H
E
D
I
WS 1
WS 2
WS 3
WS 4
WS 5
C. Efficiency Calculation
​Efficiency = ​  T 
____ 
​N​ a​ C ​ = ​ 
195 
_______ 
​(​5​)​(​50.4​)​ ​ = .77, or 77%​
Splitting Tasks
Often, the longest required task time defines the shortest possible workstation cycle time for 
the production line. This task time is the lower time bound unless it is possible to split the task 
into two or more workstations.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
179
Consider the following illustration: Suppose that an assembly line contains the follow-
ing task times in seconds: 40, 30, 15, 25, 20, 18, 15. The line runs for 7½ hours per day and 
demand for output is 750 per day.
The workstation cycle time required to produce 750 per day is 36 seconds ([7½ hours ×  
60 minutes × 60 seconds]/750). Our problem is that we have one task that takes 40 seconds. 
How do we deal with this task?
There are several ways we may be able to accommodate the 40-second task in a 36-second 
cycle. Possibilities are
	1.	 Split the task. Can we split the task so that complete units are processed in two 
workstations?
	2.	 Share the task. Can the task somehow be shared so an adjacent workstation does 
part of the work? This differs from the split task in the first option because the adja-
cent station acts to assist, not to do some units containing the entire task.
	3.	 Use parallel workstations. It may be necessary to assign the task to two worksta-
tions that would operate in parallel.
	4.	 Use a more skilled worker. Because this task exceeds the workstation cycle time by 
just 11 percent, a faster worker may be able to meet the 36-second time.
	5.	 Work overtime. Producing at a rate of one every 40 seconds would create 675 per 
day, 75 short of the needed 750. The amount of overtime required to produce the 
additional 75 is 50 minutes (75 × 40 seconds/60 seconds).
	6.	 Redesign. It may be possible to redesign the product to reduce the task time slightly.
Other possibilities to reduce the task time include an equipment upgrade, a roaming helper 
to support the line, a change of materials, and multiskilled workers to operate the line as a 
team rather than as independent workers.
Flexible and U-Shaped Line Layouts
As we saw in the preceding example, assembly-line balances frequently result in unequal 
workstation times. Flexible line layouts, such as those shown in Exhibit 8.11, are a common 
way of dealing with this problem. In our toy company example, the U-shaped line with work-
sharing at the bottom of the figure could help resolve the imbalance.
Mixed-Model Line Balancing
Mixed-model line balancing involves scheduling several different models to be produced over 
a given day or week on the same line in a cyclical fashion. This approach is used by JIT manu-
facturers such as Toyota. Its objective is to meet the demand for a variety of products and to 
avoid building high inventories.
EXAMPLE 8.3: Mixed-Model Line Balancing
To illustrate how this is done, suppose our toy company has a fabrication line to bore holes in 
its Model J wagon frame and its Model K wagon frame. The time required to bore the holes is 
different for each wagon type.
	
Assume that the final assembly line downstream requires equal numbers of Model J and 
Model K wagon frames. Assume also that we want to develop a cycle time for the fabrica-
tion line that is balanced for the production of equal numbers of J and K frames. Of course, 
we could produce Model J frames for several days and then produce Model K frames until 
an equal number of frames have been produced. However, this would build up unnecessary 
work-in-process inventory.
	
If we want to reduce the amount of in-process inventory, we could develop a cycle mix that 
greatly reduces inventory buildup while keeping within the restrictions of equal numbers of J 
and K wagon frames.
	
Process times: 6 minutes per J and 4 minutes per K.
	
The day consists of 480 minutes (8 hours × 60 minutes).

180	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
SOLUTION
6J + 4K = 480
Because equal numbers of J and K are to be produced (or J = K), produce 48J and 48K per 
day, or 6J and 6K per hour.
The following shows one balance of J and K frames.
	
This line is balanced at 6 frames of each type per hour with a minicycle time of 12 minutes.
	
Another balance is J K K J K J, with times of 6, 4, 4, 6, 4, 6. This balance produces 3J and 
3K every 30 minutes with a minicycle time of 10 minutes (JK, KJ, KJ).
Material
Bad: Operators caged. No chance
         to trade elements of work
         between them.
         (Subassembly-line layout
         common in American plants.)
Better: Operators can trade elements of
            work. Can add and subtract
            operators. Trained ones can
            nearly self-balance at different
            output rates.
Bad: Operators birdcaged. No
         chance to increase output
         with a third operator.
Better: Operators can help
             each other. Might
             increase output with
             a third operator.
Bad: Straight line difficult to balance.
Better: One of several advantages
            of U-line is better operator
            access. Here, five operators
            were reduced to four.
Material flow
Material flow
Flexible Line Layouts
exhibit 8.11
Balanced Mixed-Model Sequence
Model sequence
Operation time
Minicycle time
Total cycle time
J J
6 6
12
K K K
4 4 4
12
J J
6 6
12
J J
6 6
12
60
Repeats 
8 times 
per day
K K K
4 4 4
12

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
181
Cells
Cellular layouts allocate dissimilar machines into cells to work on products that have similar 
shapes and processing requirements. Manufacturing cell layouts are now widely used in metal 
fabricating, computer chip manufacture, and assembly work. The overall objective is to gain 
the benefits of assembly lines in workcenter kinds of production. These benefits include
	1.	 Better human relations. Cells consist of a few workers who form a small work 
team; a team turns out complete units of work.
	2.	 Improved operator expertise. Workers see only a limited number of different parts 
in a finite production cycle, so repetition means quick learning.
	3.	 Less in-process inventory and material handling. A cell combines several produc-
tion stages, so fewer parts travel through the shop.
	4.	 Faster production setup. Fewer jobs mean reduced tooling and hence faster tooling 
changes.
D e v el op i n g  a  M a n u f a c t u r i n g  C e l l  Shifting from a workcenter layout to a 
cellular layout entails three steps:
	1.	 Grouping parts into families that follow a common sequence of steps. This step 
requires developing and maintaining a computerized parts classification and coding 
system. This is often a major expense with such systems, although many companies 
have developed shortcut procedures for identifying parts families.
	2.	 Identifying dominant flow patterns of parts families as a basis for location or reloca-
tion of processes.
	3.	 Physically grouping machines and processes into cells. Often, there will be parts that 
cannot be associated with a family, and specialized machinery that cannot be placed 
in any one cell because of its general use. These unattached parts and machinery are 
placed in a “remainder cell.”
Exhibit 8.12 illustrates the cell development process for four part families. Part A shows 
the original workcenter layout. Part B shows a routing matrix based on flow of parts. Part C 
illustrates the final organization of cells, with equipment organized in the traditional U shape. 
The example assumes that there are multiple lathes, mills, and so forth, so that each cell will 
have the requisite number of each type physically located within it.
V i r t u al  M a n u f a c t u r i n g  C e l l s  When equipment is not easily movable, many 
companies dedicate a given machine out of a set of identical machines in a workcenter layout. 
A virtual manufacturing cell for, say, a two-month production run for the job might consist of 
Drill 1 in the drills area, Mill 3 in the mill area, and Assembly Area 1 in the machine assembly 
area. To approximate cell flow, all work on the particular part family would be done only on 
these specific machines.
Project Layouts
Project layouts are characterized by a relatively low number of production units in compari-
son with workcenter and assembly-line formats. In developing a project layout, visualize the 
product as the hub of a wheel with materials and equipment arranged concentrically around 
the production point in their order of use and movement difficulty. Thus, in building custom 
yachts, for example, rivets that are used throughout construction would be placed close to or in 
the hull; heavy engine parts, which must travel to the hull only once, would be placed at a more 
distant location; and cranes would be set up close to the hull because of their constant use.
In a project layout, a high degree of task ordering is common, and to the extent that this 
precedence determines production stages, a project layout might be developed by arranging 
materials according to their technological priority. This procedure would be expected in mak-
ing a layout for a large machine tool, such as a stamping machine, where manufacture follows 
a rigid sequence. Assembly is performed from the ground up, with parts being added to the 
base in almost a building-block fashion.

182	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Raw
Materials
Part
Family
Lathes
Mills
Drills
Grinders
To
Heat
Treating
Gear
Cutting
Assembly
Mills
(M)
Drills
(D)
Grind
(G)
Lathes
(L)
Heat Treat
(HT)
Gear Cutting
(GC)
R
a
w
M
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
s
A
s
s
e
m
b
l
y
Families
of
Parts
Development of Manufacturing Cell 
exhibit 8.12
A. Original workcenter layout
B. Routing matrix based upon flow of parts 
C. Reallocating machines to form cells according to part family processing requirements.
L
M
GC
HT
D
I
n
v
e
n
t
o
r
y
Cell One
M
D
GC
Cell Four
L
Cell Three
M
D
G
HT
Cell Two
M
G
HT
As far as quantitative layout techniques are concerned, there is little in the literature devoted 
to project formats, even though they have been utilized for thousands of years. In certain situ-
ations, however, it may be possible to specify objective criteria and develop a project layout 
through quantitative means. For instance, if the material handling cost is significant and the 
construction site permits more or less straight-line material movement, the workcenter layout 
technique might be advantageously employed.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
183
RETAIL SERVICE LAYOUT
The objective of a retail service layout (as is found in stores, banks, and restaurants) is to 
maximize net profit per square foot of store space. A company that has been very success-
ful leveraging every inch of its layout space to achieve this objective is Apple Computer. ­ 
Exhibit 8.13 illustrates an Apple retail store layout. Customers enter and exit the store from 
the “cashwrap” area. The entry-level products (Macs and iPods) are located in the first section 
on the left and right in counter and wall displays. Accessories for these products are located 
in the center area of the store.
All Apple stores feature a Genius bar, where customers can receive technical advice or set 
up service and repair for their products. To address increasing numbers of iPod customers at 
the Genius bar, some new stores also feature an iPod bar. Most stores feature a station called 
The Studio, a Genius bar–like setting where customers can meet with a “Creative” and receive 
help with projects ranging from organizing a photo album to music composition to film edit-
ing. The areas for trying out the products and “experimenting” are located toward the rear of 
the store. Software and books also are located in the rear of the store. A special area for kids, 
with low seating and a round table, provides an area for trying out popular products.
Servicescapes
As previously noted, the broad objective of layout in retail services is generally to maxi-
mize net profit per square foot of floor space. Operationally, this goal is often translated 
into such criteria as “minimize handling cost” or “maximize product exposure.” However, 
Illustrate layouts used in 
nonmanufacturing settings.
LO 8–2
Software,
books
iPod bar
Genius bar
Hardware
accessories
Kids
Accessories
Cashwrap
iPod
Mac
iPod
Mac
Studio
bar
Apple Retail Store Layout
exhibit 8.13

184	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
employing these and similar criteria in service layout planning results in stores that look 
like warehouses and requires shoppers to approach the task like order pickers or display case 
­stockers. Of course, Walmart and Home Depot customers gladly accept such arrangements for 
price savings.
Other, more humanistic aspects of the service also must be considered in the layout. The 
term servicescape refers to the physical surroundings in which the service takes place and 
how these surroundings affect customers and employees. An understanding of the service-
scape is necessary to create a good layout for the service firm (or the service-related portions 
of the manufacturing firm). The servicescape has three elements that must be considered: the 
ambient conditions; the spatial layout and functionality; and the signs, symbols, and artifacts.
The term ambient conditions refers to background characteristics such as the noise level, 
music, lighting, temperature, and scent that can affect employee performance and morale as 
well as customers’ perceptions of the service, how long they stay, and how much money they 
spend. Although many of these characteristics are influenced primarily by the design of the 
building (such as the placement of light fixtures, acoustic tiles, and exhaust fans), the layout 
within a building also can have an effect. Areas near food preparation will smell like food, 
lighting in a hallway outside a theater must be dim, tables near a stage will be noisy, and loca-
tions near an entrance will be drafty.
Two aspects of the spatial layout and functionality are especially important: planning the 
circulation path of the customers and grouping the merchandise. The goal of circulation plan-
ning is to provide a path for the customers that exposes them to as much of the merchandise 
as possible while placing any needed services along this path in the sequence they will be 
needed. For example, IKEA furniture stores are designed to ensure that customers pass every 
product before they pay and leave. They also place snack bars along the way so that shoppers 
can grab a bite to eat without getting off the path. Aisle characteristics are of particular impor-
tance. Aside from determining the number of aisles to be provided, decisions must be made as 
to the width of the aisles because this is a direct function of expected or desired traffic. Aisle 
width also can affect the direction of flow through the service. Some retail stores are designed 
so that turning around a shopping cart once you have entered the shopping flow path is virtu-
ally impossible. Focal points that catch the customers’ attention in the layout also can be used 
to draw the customers in the desired direction. The famous blue light at Kmart is an example.
To enhance shoppers’ view of merchandise as they proceed down a main aisle, secondary 
and tertiary aisles may be set at an angle. Consider the two layouts in Exhibit 8.14. The rectan-
gular layout would probably require less expensive fixtures and contain more display space. If 
storage considerations are important to the store management, this would be the more desirable 
layout. On the other hand, the angular layout provides the shopper with a much clearer view of 
the merchandise and, other things being equal, presents a more desirable selling environment.
It is common practice now to base merchandise groupings on the shopper’s view of related 
items, as opposed to the physical characteristics of the products or shelf space and servicing 
requirements. This grouping-by-association philosophy is seen in boutiques in department 
stores and gourmet sections in supermarkets.
In a retail setting, the 
layout is designed 
to increase sales 
rather than minimize 
cost, as done in a 
manufacturing layout.
KEY IDEA
Store
Entrance
Tertiary 
Aisles
Main Aisle
Secondary Aisle
Secondary Aisle
Rectangular Layout
Store
Entrance
Store
Entrance
Tertiary Aisle
Main Aisle
Angular Layout
Secondary Aisle
Incoming Traffic Flow
Incoming Traffic Flow
Merchandise Counters
Alternative Store Layouts
exhibit 8.14

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
185
Special mention is in order for a few guidelines derived from marketing research and relat-
ing to circulation planning and merchandise grouping:
	1.	 People in supermarkets tend to follow a perimeter pattern in their shopping behavior. 
Placing high-profit items along the walls of a store will enhance their probability of 
purchase.
	2.	 Sale merchandise placed at the end of an aisle in supermarkets almost always sells 
better than the same sale items placed in the interior portion of an aisle.
	3.	 Credit and other nonselling departments that require customers to wait for the com-
pletion of their services should be placed either on upper floors or in “dead” areas.
	4.	 In department stores, locations nearest the store entrances and adjacent to front-­
window displays are most valuable in terms of sales potential.
Signs, Symbols, and Artifacts
Signs, symbols, and artifacts refer to the parts of the service that have social significance. 
As with the ambiance, these are often a characteristic of the design of the building, although 
the orientation, location, and size of many objects and areas can carry special meaning. As 
examples,
∙	 Bank loan officers are easily identified because their desks are typically located in 
glass-walled offices in the bank.
∙	 A person seated at the standup desk closest to the entrance is usually in charge of greet-
ing customers and directing them to their destination.
∙	 In a workcenter store, the tiled areas may indicate the aisles for travel, while carpeted 
areas indicate departments for browsing.
As you might have gathered from these examples, the influence of behavioral factors 
makes the development of hard-and-fast rules for servicescape layout rather difficult. Suffice 
it to say that determining the layout choice is not simply a matter of choosing between the 
amount of display space given for a product and the flow of customers through the space. It is 
a much more complex design issue due to these behavioral factors.
Office Layout
The trend in office layout is toward more open offices, with personal work spaces separated 
only by low divider walls. Companies have removed fixed walls to foster greater communi-
cation and teamwork. Signs, symbols, and artifacts, as discussed in the section on service 
­layout, are possibly even more important in office layout than in retailing. For instance, the 
size and orientation of desks can indicate the importance or professionalism of the people 
behind them.
Central administration offices are often designed and laid out to convey the desired image 
of the company. For example, Scandinavian Airlines System’s (SAS) administrative office 
complex outside Stockholm is a two-story collection of glass-walled pods that provide the 
feeling of the open communication and flat hierarchy (few levels of organization) that charac-
terize the company’s management philosophy.
Apple’s new headquarters in Cupertino, California, is often referred to as the “spaceship” 
due to its flying saucer–like design. The environmentally conscious design and methods 
of construction include the use of recycled water to flush toilets, and gigantic arrays of 
solar panels to meet much of the building’s energy needs. Much of the material from the 
old building on the site was recycled into new material used to make the new building. All 
of this reflects Apple’s core focus on environmentally friendly products and trend-setting 
innovation. 

186	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Concept Connections
LO 8–1 Analyze the common types of manufacturing layouts.
Summary
	∙	 The focus is on understanding the quantitative tech-
niques used to design manufacturing layouts. The four 
most common types of layouts employed for manufac-
turing are the workcenter, assembly line, manufactur-
ing cell, and project layouts. 
	∙	 Workcenter layouts (often referred to as job shops) 
involve arranging functional workcenters (areas where 
a specific type of work is done) to optimize the flow 
between these areas. 
	∙	 The assembly-line design is centered on defining the 
work content of workstations that are typically spaced 
along the line. This technique is called assembly-line 
balancing. The workstations need to be defined so 
that efficiency is maximized while meeting maxi-
mum cycle times and precedence constraints. In many 
settings, it is desirable to make similar items on the 
same assembly line. This is called mixed-model line 
balancing. 
	∙	 Manufacturing cells are used for lower volume set-
tings (compared to assembly lines). The idea is to allo-
cate dissimilar general-purpose machines (like those 
used in a workcenter) to an area that is designed to 
produce similar items. Typically, a team of workers 
perform the work in a cell.
Key Terms
Workcenter  Often referred to as a job shop, a process 
structure suited for low-volume production of a great 
variety of nonstandard products. Workcenters sometimes 
are referred to as departments and are focused on a par-
ticular type of operation.
Assembly line  A setup in which an item is produced 
through a fixed sequence of workstations, designed to 
achieve a specific production rate.
Manufacturing cell  Groups dissimilar machines to work 
on products that have similar shapes and processing 
requirements.
Project layout  A setup in which the product remains at 
one location, and equipment is moved to the product.
Systematic layout planning (SLP)  A technique for solv-
ing process layout problems when the use of numerical 
flow data between departments is not practical. The 
technique uses an activity relationship diagram that is 
adjusted by trial and error until a satisfactory adjacency 
pattern is obtained.
Workstation cycle time  The time between successive 
units coming off the end of an assembly line.
Assembly-line balancing  The problem of assigning 
tasks to a series of workstations so that the required 
cycle time is met and idle time is minimized.
Precedence relationship  The required order in which 
tasks must be performed in an assembly process.
Key Formulas
Minimum number of workstations required to satisfy the workstation cycle time constraint
​​N​ t​ = ​ Sum of task times (T) 
 
________________ 
 
Cycle time (C) 
​​
Efficiency
​Efficiency = ​ 
Sum of task times (T) 
 
 
 
______________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Actual number of workstations ( ​N​ a​ ) × Workstation cycle time (C) ​​
​ ​[8 . 2]​ ​
​ ​[8 . 3]​ ​
Workstation cycle time
[8.1]
                Production time per day
C = Required output per day (in units)
LO 8–2 Illustrate layouts used in nonmanufacturing settings.
	∙	 Other types of layouts include those used in retail 
stores and offices. 
	∙	 In the case of a retail store, the objective is often based 
on maximizing the net profit per square foot of floor 
space.
Summary

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
187
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
A university advising office has four rooms, each dedicated to specific problems: petitions 
(Room A), schedule advising (Room B), grade complaints (Room C), and student counseling 
(Room D). The office is 80 feet long and 20 feet wide. Each room is 20 feet by 20 feet. The 
present location of rooms is A, B, C, D—that is, a straight line. The load summary shows the 
number of contacts that each adviser in a room has with other advisers in the other rooms. 
Assume that all advisers are equal in this value.
​Load summary:​  AB = 10, AC = 20, AD = 30,​ 
 
 
 
​​ 
BC = 15, BD = 10, CD = 20.​
	a.	 Evaluate this layout according to the material handling cost method.
	b.	 Improve the layout by exchanging functions within rooms. Show your amount of improve-
ment using the same method as in a.
Solution
a.
LO 8–1
10
A
D
C
B
10
20
15
30
20
A
B
C
D
80'
20'
20
D
C
B
A
30
15
10
20
10
Using the material handling cost method shown in the toy company example (see  
­Exhibits 8.1 through 8.7), we obtain the following costs, assuming that every nonadjacency 
doubles the initial cost/unit distance:
​
AB = 10 × 1 = 10
​ 
 
AC = 20 × 2 = 40
​ 
 
AD = 30 × 3 = 90
​ 
 
BC = 15 × 1 = 15​ 
 
BD = 10 × 2 = 20
​ 
 
CD = 20 × 1 = 20
​ 
 
Current cost = 195
​
b. A better layout would be BCDA.
  AB = 10 × 3 = 30
   AC = 20 × 2 = 40
  AD = 30 × 1 = 30
   BC = 15 × 1 = 15
  BD = 10 × 2 = 20
 CD = 20 × 1 = 20
Improved cost = 155

188	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
The following tasks must be performed on an assembly line in the sequence and times 
specified.
Task
Task Time (Seconds)
Tasks That Must Precede Other Tasks 
A 
50
–
B
40
–
C
20
A
D
45
C
E
20
C
F
25
D
G
10
E
H
35
B, F, G
	a.	 Draw the schematic diagram.
	b.	 What is the theoretical minimum number of stations required to meet a forecast demand of 
400 units per eight-hour day?
	c.	 Use the longest-task-time rule and balance the line in the minimum number of stations to 
produce 400 units per day.
Solution
a.
25
50
20
45
40
20
A
C
D
E
B
10
G
F
35
H
b. The theoretical minimum number of stations to meet D = 400 is
​N​ t​ = ​ T 
__ 
C ​ = ​ 
245 seconds 
 
______________________ 
 
 
​(​ 60  seconds × 480 minutes 
 
___________________ 
 
400 units 
​)​
 ​ = ​ 245 
___ 
72 ​ = 3.4 stations​
c.
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Remaining  
Unassigned  
Time
Feasible  
Remaining  
Task
Station 1
A 
C
50
20
22
  2
C
None
Station 2
D 
F
45
25
27
  2
E, F
None
Station 3
​B 
E 
G​
40
20
10
32
12
  2
E
G
None
Station 4
H
35
37
None
{
{
{
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
The manufacturing engineers at Suny Manufacturing were working on a new remote-­
controlled toy monster truck. They hired a production consultant to help them determine 
the best type of production process to meet the forecasted demand for this new product. The 

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
189
consultant recommended that they use an assembly line. He told the manufacturing engi-
neers that the line must be able to produce 600 monster trucks per day to meet the demand 
forecast. The workers in the plant work eight hours per day. The task information for the new 
monster truck is given as follows.
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Tasks That  
Must Precede 
Other Tasks 
A 
28
–
B
13
–
C
35
B
D
11
A
E
20
C
F
6
D, E
G
23
F
H
25
F
I
37
G
J
11
G, H
K
  27
I, J
Total
236
	a.	 Draw the schematic diagram.
	b.	 What is the required cycle time to meet the forecasted demand of 600 trucks per day based 
on an eight-hour workday?
	c.	 What is the theoretical minimum number of workstations given the answer in part (b)?
	d.	 Use longest task time, with alphabetical order as the tie breaker, and balance the line in the 
minimum number of stations to produce 600 trucks per day.
	e.	 Use shortest task time, with largest number of following tasks as the tie breaker, and bal-
ance the line in the minimum number of stations to produce 600 trucks per day.
Solution
a.
A
D
28
11
G
23
I
37
J
11
K
27
F
6
B
C
13
35
E
20
H
25
b.	
​C = ​ Production time per day 
 
_________________ 
 
Output per day 
​ = ​ 60 seconds × 480 minutes 
 
__________________ 
 
600 trucks 
​ = ​ 28, 800 
______ 
600  ​ = 48 seconds​
c.	
​​N​ t​ = ​ T 
__ 
C ​ = ​ 236 seconds 
_________ 
48 seconds ​ = 4.92 = 5​(​rounded up​)​

190	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Feasible  
Tasks
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Remaining  
Unassigned Time
Station 1
A, B
B, D
A
B
28
13
20
7
Station 2
C, D
D
C
D
35
11
13
2
Station 3
E
F
E
F
20
6
28
22
Station 4
G, H
G
H
G
25
23
23
0
Station 5
I, J
J
I
J
37
11
11
0
Station 6
K
K
27
21
d.
e.
Task
Number of  
Following Tasks
A
7
B
8
C
7
D
6
E
6
F
5
G
3
H
2
I
1
J
1
K
0
Feasible  
Tasks
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Remaining  
Unassigned Time
Station 1
A, B
A, C
B
A
13
28
35
  7
Station 2
C, D
C
D
C
11
35
37
  2
Station 3
E
F
E
F
20
  6
28
22
Station 4
G, H
H, I
G
H
23
25
25
  0
Station 5
I, J
I
J
I
11
37
37
  0
Station 6
K
K
27
21
Discussion Questions
	1.	 What kind of layout is used in a physical fitness center?
	2.	 What is the objective of assembly-line balancing? How would you deal with the situation 
where one worker, although trying hard, is 20 percent slower than the other 10 people on a 
line?
LO 8–1

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
191
	3.	 How do you determine the idle time percentage from a given assembly-line balance?
	4.	 What is the essential requirement for mixed-model lines to be practical?
	5.	 Why might it be difficult to develop a manufacturing cell?
	6.	 In what respects is facility layout a marketing problem in services? Give an example of 
a service system layout designed to maximize the amount of time the customer is in the 
system.
	7.	 Consider a department store. Which departments probably should not be located near each 
other? Would any departments benefit from close proximity?
	8.	 How would a flowchart help in planning the servicescape layout? What sorts of features 
would act as focal points or otherwise draw customers along certain paths through the 
service? In a supermarket, what departments should be located first along the customers’ 
path? Which should be located last?
LO 8–2
Objective Questions
	  1.	 Cyprus Citrus Cooperative ships a high volume of individual orders for oranges to north-
ern Europe. The paperwork for the shipping notices is done in the accompanying layout. 
Revise the layout to improve the flow and conserve space if possible.
LO 8–1
Typist
Files
Order clerk
Bookkeeper
Billing 
clerk
Office 
supervisor
Files
Safe
Incoming notice
Outgoing notice
Price and
extension clerk
	  2.	 S. L. P. Craft would like your help in developing a layout for a new outpatient clinic to 
be built in California. From analysis of another recently built clinic, she obtains the data 
shown in the following diagram. This includes the number of trips made by patients 
between departments on a typical day (shown above the diagonal line) and the lettered 
weights (defined in Exhibit 8.8C) between departments, as specified by the new clinic’s 
physicians (below the diagonal). The new building will be 60 feet by 20 feet. (Assume 
distances are measured from the center of the departments and “straight line” to the other 
department centers.)
	
a.  Develop an interdepartmental flow graph that considers patient travel trips.
	
b.  Develop a “good” relationship diagram using systematic layout planning.
	
c.  Choose either of the layouts obtained in (a) or (b) and sketch the departments to scale 
within the building.
	
d.  Will this layout be satisfactory to the nursing staff? Explain.

192	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Two-Way Flows (Units per Period)
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
—
2
0
0
5
0
0
0
B
—
0
0
0
3
0
2
C
—
0
0
0
0
3
D
—
4
0
0
0
E
—
1
0
0
F
—
1
0
G
— 
4
H
—
Distances between Offices (Feet)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
—
10
20
30
15
18
25
34
2
—
10
20
18
15
18
25
3
—
10
25
18
15
18
4
—
34
25
18
15
5
—
10
20
30
6
—
10
20
7
— 
10
8
—
DEPARTMENTS
AREA REQUIREMENT
(SQ. FT.)
100
100
200
500
100
100
1 Reception
2 X-ray
3 Surgery
4 Examining rooms (5)
5 Lab
6 Nurses’ station
A
2
O
E
U
O
O
U
U
U
A
O
I
I
I
E
5
10
200
300
100
10
0
0
0
0
8
4
15
3
2
3
4
5
6
	  3.	 The Dorton University president has asked the OSCM department to assign eight biology 
professors (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H) to eight offices (numbered 1 to 8 in the diagram) 
in the new biology building.
Courtyard
North wing
South wing
New
biology
building
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
	 	 	 The following distances and two-way flows are given:
	
a.  If there are no restrictions (constraints) on the assignment of professors to offices, 
how many alternative assignments are there to evaluate?
	
b.  The biology department has sent the following information and requests to the OSCM 
department:
Offices 1, 4, 5, and 8 are the only offices with windows.
A must be assigned Office 1.
D and E, the biology department co-chairpeople, must have windows.
H must be directly across the courtyard from D.
A, G, and H must be in the same wing.
F must not be next to D or G or directly across from G.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
193
Path
Flow
Path
Flow
Path
Flow
Path
Flow
Path
Flow
A–B
2
B–C
0
C–D
0
D–E
4
E–F
1
A–C
0
B–D
0
C–E
0
D–F
0
E–G
0
A–D
0
B–E
0
C–F
0
D–G
0
E–H
0
A–E
5
B–F
3
C–G
0
D–H
0
F–G
1
A–F
0
B–G
0
C–H
3
F–H
0
A–G
0
B–H
2
G–H
4
A–H
0
	 	 	 Find the optimal assignment of professors to offices that meets all the requests of the 
biology department and minimizes total material handling cost. You may use the path 
flow list as a computational aid.
	  4.	 An assembly line makes two models of trucks: a Buster and a Duster. Busters take  
12 minutes each and Dusters take 8 minutes each. The daily output requirement is 24 of 
each per day. Develop a perfectly balanced mixed-model sequence to satisfy demand.
	  5.	 An assembly line is to operate eight hours per day with a desired output of 240 units per 
day. The following table contains information on this product’s task times and prece-
dence relationships.
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Immediate  
Predecessor
A
60
–
B
80
A
C
20
A
D
50
A
E
90
B, C
F
30
C, D
G
30
E, F
H
60
G
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Immediate  
Predecessor
A
30
–
B
35
A
C
30
A
D
35
B
E
15
C
F
65
C
G
40
E, F
H
25
D, G
	
a.  Draw the precedence diagram. (Answers in Appendix D)
	
b.  What is the workstation cycle time required to produce 240 units per day?
	
c.  Balance this line using the longest task time.
	
d.  What is the efficiency of your line balance, assuming it is running at the cycle time 
from part (b)?
	6.	 The desired daily output for an assembly line is 360 units. This assembly line will operate 
450 minutes per day. The following table contains information on this product’s task times 
and precedence relationships.

194	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	
a.	 Draw the precedence diagram.
	
b.	
What is the workstation cycle time required to produce 360 units per day?
	
c.	
Balance this line using the largest number of following tasks. Use the longest task 
time as a secondary criterion.
	
d.	
What is the efficiency of your line balance, assuming it is running at the cycle time 
from part (b)?
	  7.	 Some tasks and the order in which they must be performed according to their assembly 
requirements are shown in the following table. These are to be combined into worksta-
tions to create an assembly line. The assembly line operates 7½ hours per day. The output 
requirement is 1,000 units per day.
Task
Preceding  
Tasks
Time  
(Seconds)
A
–
15
B
A
24
C
A
  6
D
B
12
E
B
18
F
C
  7
G
C
11
H
D
  9
I
E
14
J
F, G
  7
K
H, I
15
L
J, K
10
	
a.  What is the workstation cycle time required to produce 1,000 units per day?
	
b.  Balance the line using the longest task time based on the 1,000-unit forecast, stating 
which tasks would be done in each workstation.
	
c.  For (b), what is the efficiency of your line balance, assuming it is running at the cycle 
time from part (a)?
	
d.  After production was started, Marketing realized that it understated demand and must 
increase output to 1,100 units. What action would you take? Be specific and quantita-
tive in your answer.
	  8.	 An initial solution has been given to the following workcenter layout problem. Given the 
flows described and a cost of $2.00 per unit per foot, compute the total cost for the layout. 
Each location is 100 feet long and 50 feet wide as shown in the following figure. Use the 
centers of departments for distances and measure distance using metropolitan-rectilinear 
distance.
	
Department
	
A	
B	
C	
D
A	
0	
10	
25	
55	
	
100′	
100′	
100′
Department    B	
	
 0	
 10	
 5	
50′	
A	
B	
C	
50′
C	
	
	
 0	
15	
	
	
	
D	
50′
	D	
	
	
	
 0

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
195
Task
Seconds
Tasks That  
Must Precede It
A
20
–
B
  7
A
C
20
B
D
22
B
E
15
C
F
10
D
G
16
E, F
H
 8
G
	  9.	 An assembly line is to be designed to operate 7½ hours per day and supply a steady 
demand of 300 units per day. Here are the tasks and their performance times:
Task
Preceding  
Tasks
Performance  
Time (Seconds)
a
–
70
b
–
40
c
–
45
d
a
10
e
b
30
f
c
20
g
d
60
h
e
50
i
f
15
j
g
25
k
h, i
20
l
j, k
25
	
a.  Draw the precedence diagram.
	
b.  What is the workstation cycle time required to produce 300 units per day?
	
c.  What is the theoretical minimum number of workstations?
	
d.  Assign tasks to workstations using the longest operating time.
	
e.  What is the efficiency of your line balance, assuming it is running at the cycle time 
from part (b)?
	
f.  Suppose demand increases by 10 percent. How would you react to this? Assume you 
can operate only 7½ hours per day.
	10.	 The following tasks are to be performed on an assembly line.
	 	 	 The workday is seven hours long. The demand for the completed product is 750 per 
day. (Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  Find the cycle time required to produce 750 units per day.
	
b.  What is the theoretical number of workstations?
	
c.  Draw the precedence diagram.
	
d.  Balance the line using sequential restrictions and the longest-operating-time rule.
	
e.  What is the efficiency of the line balanced as in part (d), assuming it is running at the 
cycle time from part (a)?
	
 f.  Suppose that demand rose from 750 to 800 units per day. What would you do? Show 
any amounts or calculations.
	
g.  Suppose that demand rose from 750 to 1,000 units per day. What would you do? Show 
any amounts or calculations.

196	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Task
Performance  
Time (Minutes)
Tasks  
That Must Follow
1
0.1 
–
2
0.1 
1
3
0.1 
2
4
0.2 
2
5
0.1 
2
6
0.2 
3, 4, 5
7
0.1 
1
8
0.15
7
9
0.3 
8
10
0.5 
9
11
0.2 
6
12
0.2 
10, 11
13
0.1 
12
	11.	 The flow of materials through eight departments is shown as follows. Even though the 
table shows flows into and out of the different departments, assume that the direction of 
flow is not important. In addition, assume that the cost of moving material depends only 
on the distance moved.
Departments
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
–
20
2
15
–
25
  4
3
  5
–
40
  5
4
  5
–
10
5
1
20
–
30
6
–
20
7
  3
–
10
8
5
–
	
a.  Construct a schematic layout where the departments are arranged on a 2 × 4 grid with 
each cell representing a 10-by-10-meter square area.
	
b.  Evaluate your layout using a distance-times-flow measure. Assume that distance 
is measured rectilinearly (in this case, departments that are directly adjacent are  
10 meters apart and those that are diagonal to one another are 20 meters apart).
	12.	 A firm uses a serial assembly system and needs answers to the following:
	
a.  An output of 900 units per shift (7.5 hours) is desired for a new processing system. 
The system requires product to pass through four stations where the work content at 
each station is 30 seconds. What is the required cycle time for such a system?
	
b.  How efficient is your system with the cycle time you calculated?
	
c.  Station 3 changes and now requires 45 seconds to complete. What will need to be done 
to meet demand (assume only 7.5 hours are available)? What is the efficiency of the 
new system?
	13.	 The Sun River beverage company is a regional producer of teas, exotic juices, and energy 
drinks. With an interest in healthier lifestyles, there has been an increase in demand for its 
sugar-free formulation.
	 	 	 	
The final packing operation requires 13 tasks. Sun River bottles its sugar-free prod-
uct 5 hours a day, 5 days a week. Each week, there is a demand for 3,000 bottles of this 
product. Using the following data, solve the assembly-line balancing problem and calcu-
late the efficiency of your solution, assuming the line runs at the cycle time required to 
meet demand. Use the longest task time for your decision criteria. Use the largest number 
of following tasks as a secondary criterion.

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
197
Task  
Element
Time  
(Minutes)
Element  
Predecessor
A
1
–
B
1
A
C
2
B
D
1
B
E
3
C, D
F
1
A
G
1
F
H
2
G
I
1
E, H
	14.	 Consider the following tasks, times, and predecessors for an assembly of set-top cable 
converter boxes. 
	 	 	 Given a cycle time of four minutes, develop two alternative layouts. Use the longest task 
time rule and the largest number of following tasks as a secondary criterion.
	 	 	 What is the efficiency of your layouts, assuming the 4-minute cycle time?
Advanced Problems
	15.	 Francis Johnson’s plant needs to design an efficient assembly line to make a new prod-
uct. The assembly line needs to produce 15 units per hour, and there is room for only 
four workstations. The tasks and the order in which they must be performed are shown 
in the following table. Tasks cannot be split, and it would be too expensive to duplicate 
any task.
Task
Task Time  
(Minutes)
Immediate  
Predecessor
A
1
–
B
2
–
C
3
–
D
1
A, B, C
E
3
C
F
2
E
G
3
E
	
a.  Draw the precedence diagram.
	
b.  What is the workstation cycle time required to produce 15 units per hour?
	
c.  Balance the line so that only four workstations are required. Use whatever method you 
feel is appropriate.
	
d.  What is the efficiency of your line balance, assuming the cycle time from part (b)?
	16.	 In manufacturing layout design, the key concern is the resulting efficiency of the opera-
tion. In retail service operations, what is the primary concern or objective?
	17.	 What is the term used to refer to the physical surroundings in which service operations 
occur and how these surroundings affect customers and employees?
	18.	 What are the three terms used to describe the parts of a service operation that have social 
significance?
LO 8–2

198	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Toshihiro Nakamura, manufacturing engineering section 
manager, is examining the prototype assembly process 
sheet (shown in Exhibit 8.15) for the newest subnote-
book computer model. With every new model introduced, 
management felt that the assembly line had to increase 
productivity and lower costs, usually resulting in changes 
to the assembly process. When a new model is designed, 
considerable attention is directed toward reducing the 
number of components and simplifying parts production 
and assembly requirements. This new computer was a 
marvel of high-tech, low-cost innovation and should give 
Toshiba an advantage during the upcoming fall/winter 
selling season.
Production of the subnotebook is scheduled to begin 
in 10 days. Initial production for the new model is to be 
150 units per day, increasing to 250 units per day the fol-
lowing week (management thought that eventually pro-
duction would reach 300 units per day). Assembly lines 
at the plant normally are staffed by 10 operators who 
work at a 14.4-meter-long assembly line. The line is orga-
nized in a straight line with workers shoulder to shoulder 
on one side. The line can accommodate up to 12 opera-
tors if there is a need. The line normally operates for 7.5 
hours a day (employees work from 8:15 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. 
and regular hours includes one hour of unpaid lunch and 
15 minutes of scheduled breaks). It is possible to run one, 
two, or three hours of overtime, but employees need at 
least three days’ notice for planning purposes.
The Assembly Line
At the head of the assembly line, a computer displays 
the daily production schedule, consisting of a list of 
model types and corresponding lot sizes scheduled to be 
assembled on the line. The models are simple variations 
of hard disk size, memory, and battery power. A typical 
production schedule includes seven or eight model types 
in lot sizes varying from 10 to 100 units. The models are 
assembled sequentially: All the units of the first model 
are assembled, followed by all the units of the second, 
and so on. This computer screen also indicates how far 
along the assembly line is in completing its daily sched-
ule, which serves as a guide for the material handlers who 
supply parts to the assembly lines.
The daily schedules are shared with the nearby 
­Fujihashi Parts Collection and Distribution Center. Parts 
are brought from Fujihashi to the plant within two hours 
of when they are needed. The material supply system is 
very tightly coordinated and works well.
Analytics Exercise: Designing a Manufacturing Process
Toshiba’s Notebook Computer Assembly Line
Task
Task Time  
(Seconds)
Tasks That Must  
Precede This Task
1.  Assemble Cover
75
None
2.  Install LCD in Cover
61
Task 1
3.  Prepare Base Assembly
24
None
4.  Install M-PCB in Base
36
Task 3
5.  Install CPU
22
Task 4
6.  Install Backup Batteries and Test
39
Task 4
7.  Install Accupoint Pointing Device and Wrist Rest
32
Task 4
8.  Install Speaker and Microphone
44
Task 4
9.  Install Auxiliary Printed Circuit Board (A-PCB) on 
M-PCB
29
Task 4
10.  Prepare and Install Keyboard
26
Task 9
11.  Prepare and Install Digital Video Drive (DVD) and 
Hard Disk Drive (HDD)
52
Task 10
12.  Install Battery Pack
  7
Task 11
13.  Insert Memory Card
  5
Task 12
14.  Start Software Load
11
Tasks 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13
15.  Software Load (labor not required)
310 
Task 14
16.  Test Video Display
60
Task 15
17. Test Keyboard
60
Task 16
Notebook Computer Assembly Process Sheet
exhibit 8.15

	
Facility Layout 	
Chapter 8 	
199
The assembly line consists of a 14.4-meter con-
veyor belt that carries the computers, separated at 1.2-
meter intervals by white stripes on the belt. Workers 
stand shoulder to shoulder on one side of the conveyor 
and work on the units as they move by. In addition to the 
assembly workers, a highly skilled worker, called a “sup-
porter,” is assigned to each line. The supporter moves 
along the line, assisting workers who are falling behind 
and replacing workers who need to take a break. Support-
ers also make decisions about what to do when problems 
are encountered during the assembly process (such as a 
defective part). The line speed and the number of workers 
vary from day to day, depending on production demand 
and the workers’ skills and availability. Although the 
assembly line has 12 positions, often they are not all used.
Exhibit 8.16 provides details of how the engineers 
who designed the new subnotebook computer felt that the 
new line should be organized. These engineers designed 
the line assuming that one notebook would be assembled 
every two minutes by six line workers.
The following is a brief description of what is done 
at each workstation:
Workstation 1: The first operator lays out the major 
components of a computer between two white 
lines on the conveyor. The operator then prepares 
the cover for accepting the LCD screen by install-
ing fasteners and securing a cable.
Workstation 2: The second operator performs two 
different tasks. First, the LCD screen is installed 
in the cover. This task needs to be done after the 
cover is assembled (task 1). A second indepen-
dent task done by the operator is the preparation 
of the base so that the main printed circuit board 
(M-PCB) can be installed.
Workstation 3: Here the M-PCB is installed in the 
base. After this is done, the central processing 
unit (CPU) and backup batteries are installed and 
tested.
Workstation 4: The Accupoint Pointing Device (touch 
pad) and wrist rest are installed, the speaker and 
Assembly-Line  
Position
Tasks
Workstation  
Number
Labor Time  
(seconds)
  1
  1.  Assemble Cover (75)
1
75
  2
  2.  Install LCD in Cover (61)
  3.  Prepare Base Assembly (24)
2
61 + 24 = 85
  3
  4.  Install Main Printed Circuit Board 
(M-PCB) in Base (36)
  5.  Install CPU (22)
  6.  Install Backup Batteries and Test (39)
3
36 + 22 + 39 = 97
  4
  7.  Install Accupoint Pointing Device and 
Wrist Rest (32)
  8.  Install Speaker and Microphone (44)
  9.  Install Auxiliary Printed Circuit Board 
(A-PCB) on M-PCB (29)
4
32 + 44 + 29 = 105
  5
10.  Prepare and Install Keyboard (26)
11.  Prepare and Install Digital Video 
Drive (DVD) and Hard Disk Drive 
(HDD) (52)
12.  Install Battery Pack (7)
13.  Insert Memory Card (5)
14.  Start Software Load (11)
15.  Software Load (19)
5
26 + 52 + 7 + 5 + 11 = 101
  6
Software Load (120)
 
 
  7
Software Load (120)
 
 
  8
Software Load (51)
 
 
  9
16.  Test Video Display (60)
17.  Test Keyboard (60)
6
60 + 60 = 120
10
Empty
 
 
11
Empty
 
 
12
Empty
 
 
Engineers’ Initial Design of the Assembly Line
exhibit 8.16

200	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 Three terms commonly used to refer to a layout where 
similar equipment or functions are grouped together.
	2.	 A layout where the work to make an item is arranged 
in progressive steps and work is moved between the 
steps at fixed intervals of time.
	3.	 A measure used to evaluate a workcenter layout.
	4.	 This is a way to shorten the cycle time for an assembly 
line that has a task time that is longer than the desired 
cycle time. Assume that it is not possible to speed up the 
task, split the task, use overtime, or redesign the task.
	5.	 This involves scheduling several different models of 
a product to be produced over a given day or week on 
the same line in a cyclical fashion.
	6.	 If you wanted to produce 20 percent of one product 
(A), 50 percent of another (B), and 30 percent of a 
third product (C) in a cyclic fashion, what schedule 
would you suggest?
	7.	 A term used to refer to the physical surroundings in 
which a service takes place and how these surround-
ings affect customers and employees.
	8.	 A firm is using an assembly line and needs to pro-
duce 500 units during an eight-hour day. What is the 
required cycle time in seconds?
	9.	 What is the efficiency of an assembly line that has 25 
workers and a cycle time of 45 seconds? Each unit pro-
duced on the line has 16 minutes of work that needs 
to be completed based on a time study completed by 
engineers at the factory.
microphone installed, and the auxiliary printed cir-
cuit board (A-PCB) installed. These are all inde-
pendent tasks that can be done after the M-PCB is 
installed.
Workstation 5: Here tasks are performed in a 
sequence. First, the keyboard is installed, followed 
by the DVD and hard disk drive (HDD). The bat-
tery pack is then installed, followed by the memory 
card. The computer is then powered up and a pro-
gram started that loads software that can be used 
to test the computer. Actually loading the software 
takes 310 seconds, and this is done while the com-
puter travels through positions 6, 7, and 8 on the 
assembly line. Computers that do not work are sent 
to a rework area where they are fixed. Only about  
1 percent of the computers fail to start, and these 
are usually quickly repaired by the supporter.
Workstation 6: The video display and keyboard are 
tested in this workstation.
After assembly, the computers are moved to a separate 
burn-in area that is separate from the assembly line. Here, 
computers are put in racks for a 24-hour, 25°C “burn-in” 
of the circuit components. After burn-in, the computer is 
tested again, software is installed, and the finished note-
book computer is packaged and placed on pallets for ship-
ment to Toshiba distribution centers around the world.
Tweaking the Initial Assembly-Line Design
From past experience, Toshihiro has found that the ini-
tial assembly-line design supplied by the engineers often 
needs to be tweaked. Consider the following questions 
that Toshihiro is considering:
	1.	 What is the daily capacity of the assembly-line 
designed by the engineers? Assume that the assem-
bly line has a computer at every position when it is 
started at the beginning of the day.
	2.	 The line designed by the engineers is running at 
maximum capacity. What is the efficiency of the 
line relative to its use of labor? Assume that the 
supporter is not included in efficiency calculations.
	3.	 How should the line be redesigned to operate at the 
initial 250 units per day target, assuming that no 
overtime will be used? What is the efficiency of 
your new design relative to its use of labor?
	4.	 What about running the line at 300 units per day? 
If overtime were used with the engineers’ initial 
design, how much time would the line need to be 
run each day?
	5.	 Design an assembly line that can produce 300 units 
per day without using overtime (specify the tasks at 
each position in the line as done in Exhibit 8.16)?
	6.	 What other issues might Toshihiro consider when 
bringing the new assembly line up to speed?
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Workcenter, job-shop, or functional  2. Assembly line  3. Number of annual movements multiplied by the distance of 
each movement, and then multiplied by the cost  4. Use parallel workstations  5. Mixed-model line balancing  6. AABBBBBCCC (then repeat)   
7. Servicescape  8. 57.6 seconds = (8 × 60 × 60)/500  9. 85% = (16 × 60)/(25 × 45)

	
201
PAYING WITH A WAVE OF YOUR PHONE
Futurists have long predicted that shoppers at retail stores would soon pay with the 
waving of a cellphone instead of credit cards. Starbucks, in its stores in the United 
States, has done this for many years using a special Starbucks card app where cus-
tomers hold their smartphone in front of a scanner at the cash register. The money 
is then deducted from their Starbucks account, which they load with credit cards or 
PayPal funds.
A much more convenient approach from Apple Computer called Apple 
Pay now allows this to be done at virtually any store. All users have to do 
is position their iPhone near a reader at the store and hold their finger 
on the touch ID. A special “near field” antenna, built into the iPhone, con-
nects and completes the transaction. A quick vibration and beep lets the 
user know the checkout is complete.
Paying with these quick cellphone apps simplifies and quickens the 
transaction and could reduce waiting in line for everyone.
Learning Objectives
	LO 9–1	 Understand the characteristics of service processes.
	LO 9–2	 Explain how service systems are organized.
	LO 9–3	 Analyze simple service systems.
	LO 9–4	 Contrast different service designs.
Service  
Processes
9 
© Philippe Huguen/AFP/
Getty Images

202	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
A glance at the management book section in your local bookstore gives ample evidence of the 
concern for service among practitioners. The way we now view service parallels the way we 
view quality: The customer is (or should be) the focal point of all decisions and actions of the 
service organization. This philosophy is captured nicely in the service triangle in Exhibit 9.1. 
Here, the customer is the center of things—the service strategy, the systems, and the employ-
ees who serve him or her. From this view, the organization exists to serve the customer, and 
the systems and the employees exist to facilitate the process of service. Some suggest that the 
service organization also exists to serve the workforce because they generally determine how 
the service is perceived by the customers. Relative to the latter point, the customer gets the 
kind of service that management deserves; in other words, how management treats the worker 
is how the worker will treat the public. If the workforce is well trained and well motivated by 
management, they will do good jobs for their customers.
The role of operations in the triangle is a major one. Operations is responsible for service 
systems (procedures, equipment, and facilities) and is responsible for managing the work of 
the service workforce, who typically make up the majority of employees in large service orga-
nizations. But before we discuss this role in depth, it is useful to classify services to show how 
the customer affects the operations function.
Every service has a service package, which is defined as a bundle of goods and services 
that is provided in some environment. This bundle consists of five features:
	1.	 Supporting facility: The physical resources that must be in place before a service can 
be offered. Examples are an Internet website, a golf course, a ski lift, an airline, and 
an auto repair facility.
	2.	 Facilitating goods: The material purchased or consumed by the buyer or the items 
provided to the customer. Examples are golf clubs, skis, beverages, auto parts, and 
services sold by the firm.
	3.	 Information: Operations data or information that is provided to the customer, to 
enable efficient and customized services. Examples include detailed descriptions of 
the items offered, tee-off times, weather reports, medical records, seat preferences, 
and item availability.
	4.	 Explicit services: The benefits that are readily observable by the senses and that consist 
of the essential or intrinsic features of the service. Examples are the response time of an 
ambulance, air conditioning in a hotel room, and a smooth-running car after a tune-up.
	5.	 Implicit services: Psychological benefits that the customer may sense only vaguely, 
or the extrinsic features of the service. Examples are the status of a degree from an 
Ivy League school, the privacy of a loan office, and worry-free auto repair.
Service package
A bundle of goods and 
services that is provided in 
some environment.
THE NATURE OF SERVICES
Understand the 
characteristics of service 
processes.
LO 9–1
The Service Triangle
exhibit 9.1
The service 
strategy
Support
systems
The 
customer
Employees

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
203
An Operational Classification of 
Services
Service organizations are generally classified according to 
who the customer is, for example, individuals or other busi-
nesses, and to the service they provide (financial services, 
health services, transportation services, and so on). These 
groupings, though useful in presenting aggregate economic 
data, are not particularly appropriate for OSCM purposes 
because they tell us little about the process. Manufac-
turing, by contrast, has fairly evocative terms to classify 
production activities (such as intermittent and continuous 
production). When applied to a manufacturing setting, they 
readily convey the essence of the process. Although it is 
possible to describe services in these same terms, we need 
one additional item of information to reflect the fact that 
the customer is involved in the production system. That 
item, which we believe operationally distinguishes one ser-
vice system from another in its production function, is the 
extent of customer contact in the creation of the service.
Customer contact refers to the physical presence of the customer in the system, and cre-
ation of the service refers to the work process involved in providing the service itself. Extent 
of contact here may be roughly defined as the percentage of time the customer must be in the 
system relative to the total time needed to perform the customer service. Generally speaking, 
the greater the percentage of contact time between the service system and the customer, the 
greater the degree of interaction between the two during the production process.
From this conceptualization, it follows that service systems with a high degree of 
­customer contact are more difficult to control and more difficult to rationalize than those 
with a low degree of customer contact. In high-contact systems, the customer can affect 
the time of demand, the exact nature of the service, and the quality, or perceived quality, of 
service because the customer is involved in the process.
Exhibit 9.2 describes the implications of this distinction. Here we see that each design 
decision is impacted by whether the customer is present during service delivery. We also 
see that when work is done behind the scenes (in this case, in a bank’s processing center), it 
is performed on customer surrogates—reports, databases, and invoices. We can thus design 
it according to the same principles we would use in designing a factory—to maximize the 
amount of items processed during the production day.
There can be tremendous diversity of customer influence and, hence, system variability 
within high-contact service systems. For example, a bank branch offers both simple services 
such as cash withdrawals that take just a minute or so and complicated services such as loan 
application preparation that can take in excess of an hour. Moreover, these activities may 
range from being self-service through an ATM, to coproduction where bank personnel and 
the customer work as a team to develop the loan application.
Waitress serving a pizza to teenagers in a restaurant. 
© Anderson Ross/Blend Images LLC RF
High and low degrees 
of customer contact
The physical presence of 
the customer in the system 
and the percentage of 
time the customer must 
be in the system relative 
to the total time it takes to 
perform the service.
Explain how service 
systems are organized.
LO 9–2
DESIGNING SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS
In designing service organizations we must remember one distinctive characteristic of ser-
vices: We cannot inventory services. Unlike manufacturing, where we can build up inventory 
during slack periods for peak demand and thus maintain a relatively stable level of employ-
ment and production planning, in services we must (with a few exceptions) meet demand 
as it arises. Consequently, in services, capacity becomes a dominant issue. Think about the 
many service situations you find yourself in—for example, eating in a restaurant or going to 
a ­Saturday night movie. Generally speaking, if the restaurant or the theater is full, you will 
decide to go someplace else. So, an important design parameter in services is “What capacity 
should we aim for?” Too much capacity generates excessive costs. Insufficient capacity leads 

204	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Design Decision
High-Contact System (A Branch Office)
Low-Contact System (A Check 
Processing Center)
Facility location
Operations must be near the customer.
Operations may be placed near supply, 
transport, or labor.
Facility layout
The facility should accommodate the cus-
tomer’s physical and psychological needs 
and expectations.
The facility should focus on production 
efficiency.
Product design
The environment, as well as the physical 
product, define the nature of the service.
The customer is not in the service 
environment, so the product can be 
defined by fewer attributes.
Process design
Stages of production process have a 
direct, immediate effect on the customer.
The customer is not involved in the 
majority of processing steps.
Scheduling
The customer is in the production sched-
ule and must be accommodated.
The customer is concerned mainly with 
completion dates.
Production 
planning
Orders cannot be stored, so smoothing 
production flow will result in loss of 
business.
Both backlogging and production 
smoothing are possible.
Worker skills
The direct workforce constitutes a major 
part of the service product and so must 
be able to interact well with the public.
The direct workforce need only have 
technical skills.
Quality control
Quality standards are often in the eye of 
the beholder and, thus, are variable.
Quality standards are generally mea-
surable and, thus, fixed.
Time standards
Service time depends on customer 
needs, so time standards are inherently 
loose.
Work is performed on customer 
surrogates (such as forms), so time 
standards can be tight.
Wage payment
Variable output requires time-based wage 
systems.
“Fixable” output permits output-based 
wage systems.
Capacity planning
To avoid lost sales, capacity must be set 
to match peak demand.
Major Differences between High- and Low-Contact Systems  
in a Bank
exhibit 9.2
to lost customers. In these situations, of course, we seek the assistance of marketing to influ-
ence demand. This is one reason we have discount airfares, hotel specials on weekends, and so 
on. This is also a good illustration of why it is difficult to separate the operations management 
functions from marketing in services.
Waiting line models, which are discussed in Chapter 10, provide a powerful mathematical 
tool for analyzing many common service situations. Questions such as how many tellers we 
should have in a bank or how many telephone lines we need in an Internet service operation 
can be analyzed with these models, and they can easily be implemented using spreadsheets.
Several major factors distinguish service design and development from typical manufac-
tured product development. First, the process and the product must be developed simultane-
ously; indeed, in services, the process is the product. (We say this with the general recognition 
that many manufacturers are using such concepts as concurrent engineering and DFM [design 
for manufacture] as approaches to more closely link product design and process design.)
Second, although equipment and software that support a service can be protected by pat-
ents and copyrights, a service operation itself lacks the legal protection commonly available 
to goods production. Third, the service package, rather than a definable good, constitutes 
the major output of the development process. Fourth, many parts of the service package are 
often defined by the training individuals receive before they become part of the service orga-
nization. In particular, in professional service organizations (PSOs) such as law firms and 
hospitals, prior certification is necessary for hiring. Fifth, many service organizations can 
change their service offerings virtually overnight. Routine service organizations (RSOs) such 
as barbershops, retail stores, and restaurants have this flexibility.

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
205
Structuring the Service Encounter: The Service-System 
Design Matrix
Service encounters can be configured in a number of different ways. The service-system 
design matrix in Exhibit 9.3 identifies six common alternatives.
The top of the matrix shows the degree of customer/server contact: the buffered core, 
which is physically separated from the customer; the permeable system, which is penetrable 
by the customer via phone or face-to-face contact; and the reactive system, which is both pen-
etrable and reactive to the customer’s requirements. The left side of the matrix shows what we 
believe to be a logical marketing proposition—namely, that the greater the amount of contact, 
the greater the sales opportunity; the right side shows the impact on production efficiency as 
the customer exerts more influence on the operation.
The entries within the matrix list the ways in which service can be delivered. At one 
extreme, service contact is by mail; customers have little interaction with the system. At the 
other extreme, customers “have it their way” through face-to-face contact. The remaining four 
entries in the matrix contain varying degrees of interaction.
As one would guess, process efficiency decreases as the customer has more contact (and 
therefore more influence) on the system. To offset this, the face-to-face contact provides a high 
sales opportunity to sell additional products. Conversely, low contact, such as mail, allows 
the system to work more efficiently because the customer is unable to significantly affect (or 
disrupt) the system. However, there is relatively little opportunity for additional product sales.
When reflecting on the 
effectiveness of service 
encounters, consider 
your experiences with 
servers who try to 
sell you something in 
addition to what you 
are already purchasing. 
Additionally, consider 
“self-service” where 
the customer does the 
work. How does this fit 
into the matrix? This is 
discussed later in the 
chapter.
KEY IDEAS
High
Low
High
Process
efficiency
Degree of customer/server contact
Buffered
core (none)
Permeable
system (some)
Reactive
system (much)
Mail 
contact
Internet and
on-site
technology
Face-to-face 
tight specs
Face-to-face 
loose specs
Face-to-face
total 
customization
Phone 
contact
Low
High
Low
Sales
opportunity
Degree of customer/server contact
Low
High
Worker
requirements
Technological
innovations
Focus of
operations
Clerical
skills
Paper
handling
Office
automation
Helping
skills
Demand
management
Routing
methods
Verbal
skills
Scripting
calls
Computer
databases
Procedural
skills
Flow
control
Electronic
aids
Trade
skills
Capacity
management
Self-serve
Diagnostic
skills
Client mix
Client/worker
teams
Characteristics of Workers, Operations, and Innovations Relative to the Degree of Customer/
Service Contact
Service-System Design Matrix
exhibit 9.3

206	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
There can be some shifting in the positioning of each entry. For our first example, consider 
the “Internet and on-site technology” entry in the matrix. The Internet clearly buffers the 
company from the customer, but interesting opportunities are available to provide relevant 
information and services to the customer. Because the website can be programmed to intel-
ligently react to the inputs of the customer, significant opportunities for new sales may be pos-
sible. In addition, the system can be made to interface with real employees when the customer 
needs assistance that goes beyond the programming of the website. The Internet is truly a 
revolutionary technology when applied to the services that need to be provided by a company.
Another example of shifting in the positioning of an entry can be shown with the “face-to-
face tight specs” entry in the matrix. This entry refers to those situations where there is little 
variation in the service process—neither customer nor server has much discretion in creating 
the service. Fast-food restaurants and Disneyland come to mind. Face-to-face loose specs 
refer to situations where the service process is generally understood but there are options in 
how it will be performed or in the physical goods that are part of it. A full-service restau-
rant and a car sales agency are examples. Face-to-face total customization refers to service 
encounters whose specifications must be developed through some interaction between the 
customer and server. Legal and medical services are of this type, and the degree to which the 
resources of the system are mustered for the service determines whether the system is reac-
tive, possibly to the point of even being proactive, or merely permeable. Examples would be 
the mobilization of an advertising firm’s resources in preparation for an office visit by a major 
client or an operating team scrambling to prepare for emergency surgery.
The changes in workers, operations, and types of technical innovations as the degree of 
customer/service system contact changes are described in the bottom of Exhibit 9.3. For 
worker requirements, the relationships between mail contact and clerical skills, Internet tech-
nology and helping skills, and phone contact and verbal skills are self-evident. Face-to-face 
tight specs require procedural skills in particular, because the worker must follow the routine 
in conducting a generally standardized, high-volume process. Face-to-face loose specs fre-
quently call for trade skills (bank teller, draftsperson, maitre d’, dental hygienist) to finalize 
the design for the service. Face-to-face total customization tends to call for diagnostic skills of 
the professional to ascertain the needs or desires of the client.
S t r a t e g i c  U s e s  o f  t h e  M a t r i x  The matrix in Exhibit 9.3 has both operational and 
strategic uses. The operational uses are reflected in their identification of worker requirements, 
focus of operations, and innovations previously discussed. The strategic uses include
	1.	 Enabling systematic integration of operations and marketing strategy. Trade-offs 
become more clear-cut, and, more important, at least some of the major design vari-
ables are crystallized for analysis purposes. For example, the matrix indicates that 
it would make little sense relative to sales for a service firm to invest in high-skilled 
workers if it plans to operate using tight specs.
	2.	 Clarifying exactly which combination of service delivery the firm is in fact provid-
ing. As the company incorporates the delivery options listed on the diagonal, it is 
becoming diversified in its production process.
	3.	 Permitting comparison with how other firms deliver specific services. This helps to 
pinpoint a firm’s competitive advantage.
	4.	 Indicating evolutionary or life cycle changes that might be in order as the firm grows. 
Unlike the product–process matrix for manufacturing, however, where natural growth 
moves in one direction (from workcenter to assembly line as volume increases), evo-
lution of service delivery can move in either direction along the diagonal as a func-
tion of a sales–efficiency trade-off.
Virtual Service: The New Role of the Customer  The service–system 
design matrix was developed from the perspective of the production system’s utilization of 
company resources. With the advent of virtual services through the Internet, we need to account 
not just for a customer’s interactions with a business, but for his or her interaction with other 

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
207
customers as well. As suggested by Brigham Young University professor Scott Sampson, we 
have two categories of contact: pure virtual customer contact where companies such as eBay 
and Second Life enable customers to interact with one another in an open environment; and 
mixed virtual and actual customer contact where customers interact with one another in a server-
moderated environment such as product discussion groups, YouTube, and Wikipedia. In these 
environments, the operations management challenge is to keep the technology functioning and 
up to date and to provide a policing function through monitoring the encounters that take place.
Managing Customer-Introduced Variability
Among the decisions that service managers must make is how much they should accom-
modate the variation introduced by the customer into a process. The standard approach is 
to treat this decision as a trade-off between cost and quality. More accommodation implies 
more cost; less accommodation implies less-satisfied customers. This narrow type of analy-
sis overlooks ways that companies can accommodate the customer while at the same time 
control cost. To develop these, a company must first determine which of five types of vari-
ability is causing operational difficulties and then select which of four types of accommoda-
tion would be most effective.
The five basic types of variability, along with examples, are arrival variability—the arrival 
time of customers at a restaurant may be inconsistent with average demand, leading to times 
when servers are overloaded or underutilized (this is the type of variability that is dealt with 
in the waiting line analysis in Chapter 10); request variability—travelers requesting a room 
with a view at a crowded hotel; capability variability—a patient being unable to explain his 
or her symptoms to a doctor; effort variability—shoppers not bothering to put their shopping 
carts in a designated area in a supermarket parking lot; and subjective preference variability—
one bank customer interpreting a teller addressing him by his first name as a sign of warmth, 
while another customer feels that such informality is unbusinesslike.
The four basic accommodation strategies are classic accommodation, which entails, for 
example, extra employees or additional employee skills to compensate for variations among 
customers; low-cost accommodation, which uses low-cost labor, outsourcing, and self-service 
to cut the cost of accommodation; classic reduction, which requires, for example, custom-
ers to engage in more self-service, use reservation systems, or adjust their expectations; and 
uncompromised reduction, which uses knowledge of the customer to develop procedures that 
enable good service, while minimizing the variation impact on the service delivery system. 
Exhibit 9.4 illustrates the tactics that are useful in each of the four accommodation categories.
As we can see from Exhibit 9.4, effective management of variability generally requires a 
company to influence customer behavior. Redbox provides an example of what can be done 
to reduce variability.  It charges on a per-day basis for the rental of movie DVDs. Thus, a cus-
tomer has a strong incentive to return the rented DVD in 24 hours, and if it is not returned, the 
company still has a revenue stream from the DVDs that are not available for rental and being 
held by the customer. In contrast, the Netflix subscription model allows customers to keep the 
DVD for as long as they want. A customer’s incentive to return them is being able to get the next 
movie on his or her request list. The Netflix approach might better accommodate the customer’s 
behavior, but the Redbox approach assures revenues on DVDs being held by customers.
Applying Behavioral Science to Service Encounters
Effective management of service encounters requires that managers understand customer per-
ceptions as well as the technical features of service processes. Chase and Dasu, professors at 
Southern California University, suggest applying behavioral concepts to enhance customer per-
ceptions of three aspects of the encounter: the flow of the service experience (what’s happen-
ing), the flow of time (how long it seems to take), and judging of encounter performance (what 
you thought about it later). Looking at the service encounter from this perspective has led to 
the following six behaviorally based principles for service encounter design and management.
	1.	 The front end and the back end of the encounter are not created equal. It is 
widely believed that the start and finish of a service, or the so-called service book-
ends, are equally weighted in the eyes of the customer. A good deal of research 
Variability is the major 
problem with services 
that require direct 
customer contact. 
Innovative approaches 
are needed to manage 
this variability.
KEY IDEAS
The customer’s 
perception related to a 
poor encounter may be 
changed if the problem 
is addressed quickly.
KEY IDEAS

208	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Classic
Accommodation
Low-Cost
Accommodation
Classic
Reduction
Uncompromised 
Reduction
Arrival rate variability 
•  Make sure plenty of 
employees are on 
hand
•  Hire lower-cost labor
•  Automate tasks
•  Outsource customer 
contact
•  Create self-service 
options
•  Require reservations
•  Provide off-peak 
pricing
•  Limit service 
availability
•  Create comple-
mentary demand 
to smooth arrivals 
without requiring cus-
tomers to change their 
behavior
Variability in the ser-
vices requested by the 
customers 
•  Make sure many 
employees with 
specialized skills are 
on hand
•  Train employees to 
handle many kinds of 
requests
•  Hire lower-cost spe-
cialized labor
•  Automate tasks
•  Create self-service 
options
•  Require customers 
to make reservations 
for specific types of 
service
•  Persuade customers 
to compromise their 
requests
•  Limit service breadth
•  Limit service breadth
•  Target customers 
on the basis of their 
requests
Variability in customer 
capability
•  Make sure employees 
are on hand who can 
adapt to customers’ 
varied skill levels
•  Do work for customers
•  Hire lower-cost labor
•  Create self-service 
options that require 
no special skills
•  Require customers to 
increase their level of 
capability before they 
use the service
•  Target customers 
on the basis of their 
capability
Variability in the effort 
customers are willing to 
expend
•  Make sure employees 
are on hand who can 
compensate for cus-
tomers’ lack of effort
•  Do work for customers
•  Hire lower-cost labor
•  Create self-service 
options with exten-
sive automation
•  Use rewards and 
penalties to get 
customers to increase 
their effort
•  Target customers on 
the basis of motivation
•  Use a normative 
approach to get 
customers to increase 
their effort
Variability in customer 
preferences and 
expectations
•  Make sure employees 
are on hand who can 
diagnose differences 
in expectations and 
adapt accordingly
•  Create self-service 
options that permit 
customization
•  Persuade customers 
to adjust their expec-
tations to match the 
value proposition
•  Target customers on 
the basis of their sub-
jective preferences
Strategies for Managing Customer-Introduced Variability 
exhibit 9.4
indicates this is not the case, however. While it is essential to achieve a base level of 
satisfactory performance at the beginning so that the customer remains throughout 
the service, a company is likely to be better off with a relatively weak start and a 
modest upswing on the end than having a great start and a so-so ending. This ties 
in with two important findings from behavioral decision theory: the preference for 
improvement and the dominant effect of the ending in our recollections. The dispro-
portionate influence of the ending gives rise to a corollary principle—that is, end on 
an up note. The following are examples of companies that “finish strong”: Malaysian 
Airlines, which lavishes attention on baggage collection and ground transportation in 
order to leave the customer with a good feeling; a kitchen cabinet company that ties 
bright bows on all the installed work and leaves behind a vase of flowers; cruise lines 
that end each day with raffles, contests, and shows end the cruise with the captain’s 
dinner, and pass out keepsakes or bottles of wine upon reaching the home port. All 
of these strategies are designed to make the final interaction a good one. In a similar 
vein, relative to unpleasant experiences, researchers have found that prolonging a 
colonoscopy by painlessly leaving the colon scope in place for about a minute after 
the procedure was completed produced significant improvements in how patients 
perceived the procedure. (Note here that we are actually extending the duration 
of discomfort, yet the overall perception is superior to immediate cessation of the 
procedure!)
	2.	 Segment the pleasure; combine the pain. Breaking up may be hard to do, but depend-
ing upon the type of encounter, it might be the best thing to do. Events seem longer 
when they are segmented. This suggests that we want to break pleasant experiences into 

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
209
multiple stages and combine unpleasant ones into a single stage. Thus, 
it makes sense to, say, reduce the number of stages in a visit to a clinic, 
even if it extends the time of the visit somewhat, and to provide two 
90-second rides at Disneyland rather than one three-minute ride.
	3.	 Let the customer control the process. Giving people control over 
how a process is to be conducted enhances their satisfaction with it. 
In the medical area, allowing people to choose which arm a blood 
sample is drawn from reduces the perceived pain of the procedure. For 
certain repair jobs, allowing people to select a future date they want it 
to be scheduled may be preferred to doing it right away.
	4.	 Pay attention to norms and rituals. Deviations from norms are 
likely to be overly blamed for failures. This is particularly true for 
professional services whose processes and outcomes are not clearly 
ascertainable by the client, and hence adherence to norms is the central 
basis for evaluation. Consulting firms are expected to make presenta-
tions to the boss, even if he or she has little or nothing to do with the 
problem being studied. At such presentations, all members of the client 
team are to be lauded for their assistance even if they were less than 
helpful in accomplishing the work.
	5.	 People are easier to blame than systems. When things go wrong, 
people’s gut reaction is to blame the server rather than the system. 
We want to put a human face on the problem. This is seen especially 
in complex services where what goes on behind the scenes or in the 
system is difficult for the customer to untangle. The gate agent is fre-
quently blamed for not allowing a late arrival to get on the plane, even though it is a 
rule of the airline association that no one can board 15 minutes before departure. (A 
corollary to this principle is that “a miss is worse than a mile.” That is, if someone 
arrives late for a service, it’s better not to say, “too bad, you just missed it.”)
	6.	 Let the punishment fit the crime in service recovery. How do you make up for an 
encounter error? Research suggests that the most appropriate recovery action depends 
upon whether it is a task (outcome) error or a treatment (interpersonal process) error. 
A botched task calls for material compensation, while poor treatment from a server 
calls for an apology. Reversing these recovery actions is unlikely to be effective. 
For example, having a copying job done poorly at a copy store, of course, calls for 
a quick apology, but more importantly, it calls for quick rework and perhaps some 
compensation for the customer’s inconvenience. On the other hand, if the copying job 
is done correctly but the clerk is rude, a sincere apology from the store manager and 
the clerk is far more likely to result in a satisfied customer than giving the customer a 
free coupon or some other minor tangible form of compensation.
S e r v i c e Gu a r a n t e e s  a s  D e s i g n  D r i v e r s  The phrase “Positively, absolutely, 
overnight” is an example of a service guarantee most of us know by heart. Hiding behind 
such marketing promises of service satisfaction is a set of actions that must be taken by the 
operations organization to fulfill these promises.
Thousands of companies have launched service guarantees as a marketing tool designed to 
provide peace of mind for customers unsure about trying their service. From an operations perspec-
tive, a service guarantee can be used not only as an improvement tool but also at the design stage 
to focus the firm’s delivery system squarely on the things it must do well to satisfy the customer.
Even professional service firms such as Rath and Strong Consulting have service guaran-
tees. (Theirs allows the client to choose from a menu of payouts if they do not, for example, 
cut lead time by x percent. Menu options include refunds and no charge for overtime work to 
get the job done.)
The elements of a good service guarantee are that it is unconditional (no small print); 
meaningful to the customer (the payoff fully covers the customer’s dissatisfaction); easy to 
Flowers and a Note Welcome Customers 
to their Hotel Suite.
© Glow Images, Inc/Getty Images
Service guarantees
A promise of service 
satisfaction backed up by a 
set of actions that must be 
taken to fulfill the promise.

210	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
understand and communicate (for employees as well as customers); and painless to invoke 
(given proactively).
Some guidelines for using service guarantees are the following:
	1.	 Any guarantee is better than no guarantee. The most effective guarantees are big 
deals. They put the company at risk in the eyes of the customer.
	2.	 Involve the customer as well as employees in the design.
	3.	 Avoid complexity or legalistic language. Use big print, not small print.
	4.	 Do not quibble or wriggle when a customer invokes the guarantee.
	5.	 Make it clear that you are happy for customers to invoke the guarantee.
An issue of growing importance in service relates to the ethical and possibly legal respon-
sibility of a company to actually provide the service that is promised. For example, is an 
airline responsible for transporting a passenger with a guaranteed reservation, even though 
the flight has been overbooked? These are difficult issues because having excess capacity is 
expensive. Demand can be nearly impossible to predict with great accuracy, thus making the 
estimates of needed capacity difficult.
Failure: Customer 
forgets the need for 
service.
Poka-yoke: Send 
automatic ­reminders 
with a 5 percent 
­discount.
Failure: Customer 
cannot find service 
area, or does not 
­follow proper flow. 
Poka-yoke: Clear and 
­informative signage 
directing customers.
Failure: Customer has 
difficulty ­communicating 
problem.
Poka-yoke: Joint inspection—
service adviser repeats his/
her understanding of the 
problem for confirmation or 
elaboration by the customer.
Failure: Customer 
arrival ­unnoticed.
Poka-yoke: Use a bell 
chain to ­signal arrivals.
Failure: Customers not served 
in order of arrival.
Poka-yoke: Place numbered 
­markers on cars as they arrive.
Failure: Vehicle information 
­incorrect and process is 
time-­consuming.
Poka-yoke: Maintain customer 
database and print forms with 
­historical information.
Failure: Incorrect 
diagnosis of the 
problem.
Poka-yoke: High-tech 
checklists, such as 
expert systems and 
diagnostic equipment.
Failure: Incorrect 
estimate.
Poka-yoke: Checklists 
itemizing costs by 
common repair types.
Failure: Customer does 
not ­understand the 
necessary service.
Poka-yoke: Preprinted 
material for most 
services, detailing work, 
­reasons, and possibly a 
graphic ­representation.
Stage 1 – Preliminary Activities
Customer calls for 
service appointment
Customer arrives 
with vehicle
Line of
Visibility
Greet customer
Obtain vehicle 
information
Service department
schedules appointment
Stage 2 – Problem Diagnosis
Customer 
specifies problem
Detailed problem 
diagnosis
Customer 
approves service
 Prepare cost 
and time estimate
Yes
No
Preliminary 
diagnosis: Is the 
cause clear?
Fail-Safing an Automotive Service Operation
exhibit 9.5

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
211
SERVICE BLUEPRINTING AND FAIL-SAFING
Just as is the case with manufacturing process design, the standard tool for service process 
design is the flowchart. Recently, the service gurus have begun calling the flowchart a service 
blueprint to emphasize the importance of process design. A unique feature of the service 
blueprint is the distinction made between the high customer contact aspects of the service (the 
parts of the process that the customer sees) and those activities that the customer does not see. 
This distinction is made with a “line of visibility” on the flowchart.
Exhibit 9.5 is a blueprint of a typical automobile service operation. Each activity that 
makes up a typical service encounter is mapped into the flowchart. To better show the entity 
Analyze simple service 
systems.
LO 9–3
A very powerful tool—waiting line analysis—is available to help better understand the 
relationships between the factors that drive a service system. These factors include the aver-
age number of customers that arrive over a period of time, the average time that it takes to 
serve each customer, the number of servers, and information about the size of the customer 
population. Waiting line models have been developed that allow the estimation of expected 
waiting time and expected resource utilization. This is the topic of ­Chapter 10.
Failure: Service shuttle is inconvenient.
Poka-yoke: Seating in available shuttles is 
allocated when scheduling appointments. 
Lack of free space ­indicates that customers 
needing shuttle service should be 
scheduled for another time.
Failure: Parts are not in stock.
Poka-yoke: Limit switches activate signal 
lamps when part level falls below order 
point.
Failure: Vehicle not cleaned 
correctly. 
Poka-yoke: Person retrieving 
vehicle inspects, orders a 
touch-up if necessary, and 
removes floor mat in presence 
of customer.
Failure: Vehicle takes too long to 
arrive. 
Poka-yoke: When cashier 
enters customer’s name to 
print the bill, information is 
­electronically sent to runners 
who retrieve ­vehicle while the 
customer is paying.
Failure: Customer not 
located.
Poka-yoke: Issue beepers 
to ­customers who wish 
to leave ­facility.
Failure: Bill is illegible.
Poka-yoke: Top copy 
to ­customer, or plain 
paper bill.
Failure: Feedback not 
obtained.
Poka-yoke: Customer 
satisfaction postcard 
given to customer with 
keys to vehicle.
Stage 3 – Perform Work
Customer waits or 
departs facility
Customer 
notified
Schedule and perform 
required work
Stage 4 – Billing and Vehicle Retrieval
Customer pays bill
Customer departs
Vehicle is 
retrieved
Work 
verified
Vehicle 
cleaned
Customer invoice 
prepared
Waiting room or shuttle 
service provided
Service blueprint
The flowchart of a service 
process, emphasizing what 
is visible and what is not 
visible to the customer.

212	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
THREE CONTRASTING SERVICE DESIGNS
Three contrasting approaches to delivering on-site service are the production-line approach, 
made famous by McDonald’s Corporation; the self-service approach, made famous by ATMs 
and gas stations; and the personal-attention approach, made famous by Nordstrom Depart-
ment Stores and the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company.
The Production-Line Approach
The production-line approach pioneered by McDonald’s refers to more than just the steps 
required to assemble a Big Mac. Rather, McDonald’s treats the delivery of fast food as a 
manufacturing process rather than a service process. The value of this philosophy is that it 
overcomes many problems inherent in the concept of service itself. That is, service implies sub-
ordination or subjugation of the server to the served; manufacturing, on the other hand, avoids 
this connotation because it focuses on things rather than people. Thus, in manufacturing and 
Contrast different service 
designs.
LO 9–4
that controls the activities, levels are shown in the flowchart. 
The top level consists of activities that are under the control 
of the customer. Next are those activities performed by the 
service manager in handling the customer. The third level is 
the repair activities performed in the garage; the lowest level 
is the internal accounting activity.
Basic blueprinting describes the features of the service 
design but does not provide any direct guidance for how to 
make the process conform to that design. An approach to 
this problem is the application of poka-yokes—procedures 
that block the inevitable mistake from becoming a service 
defect. Poka-yokes (roughly translated from the Japanese as 
“avoid mistakes”) are common in factories (see Chapter 12, 
“Six Sigma Quality,” for examples) and consist of such things 
as fixtures to ensure that parts can be attached only in the right 
way, electronic switches that automatically shut off equipment 
if a mistake is made, kitting of parts prior to assembly to make 
sure the right quantities are used, and checklists to ensure that 
the right sequence of steps is followed.
There are many applications of poka-yokes to services as 
well. These can be classified into warning methods, physical 
or visual contact methods, and what we call the Three Ts—the Task to be done (Was the 
car fixed right?), the Treatment accorded to the customer (Was the service manager courte-
ous?), and the Tangible or environmental features of the service facility (Was the waiting area 
clean and comfortable?). Finally (unlike in manufacturing), service poka-yokes often must be 
applied to fail-safing the actions of the customer as well as the service worker.
Poka-yoke examples include height bars at amusement parks; indented trays used by sur-
geons to ensure that no instruments are left in the patient; chains to configure waiting lines; 
take-a-number systems; turnstiles; alarms on ATMs to warn people to take their cards out 
of the machine; beepers at restaurants to make sure customers do not miss their table calls; 
mirrors on telephones to ensure a “smiling voice”; reminder calls for appointments; locks on 
airline lavatory doors that activate lights inside; small gifts in comment card envelopes to 
encourage customers to provide feedback about a service; and pictures of what “a clean room” 
looks like for kindergarten children.
Exhibit 9.5 illustrates how a typical automobile service operation might be fail-safed 
using poka-yokes. As a final comment, although these procedures cannot guarantee the level 
of error protection found in the factory, they still can reduce such errors in many service 
situations.
Children at an amusement park, measuring up to the 
height bar. 
© Image Source/Getty Images RF
Poka-yokes
Procedures that prevent 
mistakes from becoming 
defects. They are 
commonly found in 
manufacturing but also 
can be used in service 
processes.

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
213
at McDonald’s, the orientation is toward the efficient 
and quick production of the food. McDonald’s carefully 
controls the execution of each outlet’s central func-
tion—the rapid delivery of a uniform, high-quality mix 
of prepared foods in an environment of obvious clean-
liness, order, and cheerful courtesy. The firm makes 
extensive use of specialized equipment and information 
technology that enables McDonald’s to attract and hold 
customers at rates that are much higher than other fast-
food restaurants.
Several aspects of McDonald’s operations illustrate 
these concepts. Note the extensive use of what we term 
poka-yokes.
∙	 The McDonald’s French fryer allows cooking of 
the optimum number of French fries at one time.
∙	 A wide-mouthed scoop is used to pick up the pre-
cise amount of French fries for each order size. 
(The employee never touches the product.)
∙	 Storage space is expressly designed for a prede-
termined mix of prepackaged and premeasured 
products.
∙	 Cleanliness is pursued by providing ample trash 
cans in and outside each facility. (Larger outlets 
have motorized sweepers for the parking area.)
∙	 Hamburgers are wrapped in color-coded paper.
∙	 Through painstaking attention to total design and 
facilities planning, everything is built integrally 
into the (McDonald’s) machine itself—into the 
technology of the system. The only choice avail-
able to the attendant is to operate it exactly as the 
designers intended. Using our service-system design matrix (Exhibit 9.3), we would 
categorize this as a face-to-face tight spec service.
The Self-Service Approach
In contrast to the production-line approach, the service process can be enhanced by having the 
customer take a greater role in the production of the service. Company websites, automatic teller 
machines, self-service gas stations, salad bars, and e-tickets are approaches that shift the service 
burden to the consumer. Based on our service-system design matrix, these are great examples 
of the use of Internet and on-site technology. Many customers like self-service because it puts 
them in control. For others, this philosophy might not be attractive and require some incentive to 
make the approach attractive. Incentives such as the benefit of reduced cost, quicker speed, and 
convenience can be used. Also, following up to make sure that the procedures are being effec-
tively used is important. In essence, this turns customers into “partial employees” who must be 
trained in what to do and, as noted earlier, must be “fail-safed” in case of a mistake.
The Personal-Attention Approach
An interesting contrast in the way personal attention is provided can be seen in Nordstrom 
Department Stores and the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company.
At Nordstrom, a rather loose, unstructured process relies on developing a relationship 
between the individual salesperson and the customer (this is a face-to-face with total cus-
tomization service). At the Ritz-Carlton, the process is virtually scripted, and the information 
system rather than the employee keeps track of the guest’s (customer’s) personal preferences 
(this is a face-to-face loose spec example).
© Martin Meissner/AP Images

214	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
The Ritz-Carlton approach is best captured in the 
company’s Gold Standards, which cover the values and 
philosophy by which the company operates. Exhibit 9.6 
shows the formalized service procedure (the Three Steps 
of Service).
The frontline providers of this good service are well 
paid. Nordstrom’s salespersons earn a couple of bucks an 
hour more than competitors, plus a significant commission. 
Its top salesperson moves over $2 million a year in mer-
chandise. Nordstrom lives for its customers and salespeo-
ple. Its only official organization chart puts the customer at 
the top, followed by sales and sales support people. Next 
come department managers, then store managers, and the 
board of directors at the very bottom.
Salespersons religiously carry a “personal book,” where 
they record information about each of their customers. The 
system helps in the goal of getting one new personal cus-
tomer a day. Each salesperson has a budget to send cards, 
flowers, and thank-you notes to customers. They are also 
encouraged to shepherd his or her customer to any department in the store to assist in a suc-
cessful shopping trip.
Exhibit 9.7 displays the information system used to capture data about guests (“The 
­Ritz-Carlton Repeat Guest History Program”). Note that the three steps of service are 
­integrated into the guest history information system.
He also is abetted by what may be the most liberal returns policy in this or any other busi-
ness: Return anything, no questions asked. No bureaucracy gets in the way of serving the 
customer. Employees are encouraged to use their own judgment at all times. 
Shoppers enter the Nordstrom store on Michigan Avenue in 
Chicago.
© Scott Olsen/Staff/Getty Images
Warm
welcome
Anticipation
and
compliance
Complete “incident form”
and/or “guest preference
pad” when appropriate
for each guest
Enter guest
preferences or
complaint into guest
history profile
Daily quality
report analysis
Fulfill need
or wish
Fond
farewell
3
2
1
Break away to
achieve instant
pacification
Break away
to respond
Snap back to
routine duties
Lateral
service
Complaint or
dissatisfaction
Routine
Dissatisfied
Satisfied
Identify
need or
wish
Verify guest
satisfaction
by guest
reaction
The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company (Three Steps of Service)
exhibit 9.6
Good employee 
training, information 
systems and processes, 
and a supportive 
reward structure are 
essential to exemplary 
service.
KEY IDEAS

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
215
Seven Characteristics of a Well-Designed Service 
System
No matter what approach is taken to design a service, the following are typical characteristics 
of a well-designed system.
	1.	 Each element of the service system is consistent with the operating focus of the 
firm. For example, when the focus is on speed of delivery, each step in the process 
should help foster speed.
	2.	 It is user-friendly. This means that the customer can interact with it easily—that is, 
it has good signage, understandable forms, logical steps in the process, and service 
workers available to answer questions.
	3.	 It is robust. That is, it can cope effectively with variations in demand and resource 
availability. For example, if the computer goes down, effective backup systems are in 
place to permit service to continue.
	4.	 It is structured so that consistent performance by its people and systems is easily 
maintained. This means the tasks required of the workers are doable, and the sup-
porting technologies are truly supportive and reliable.
	5.	 It provides effective links between the back office and the front office so that 
nothing falls between the cracks. In football parlance, there should be “no fumbled 
handoffs.”
	6.	 It manages the evidence of service quality in such a way that customers see the 
value of the service provided. Many services do a great job behind the scenes but 
fail to make this visible to the customer. This is particularly true where a service 
improvement is made. Unless customers are made aware of the improvement through 
explicit communication about it, the improved performance is unlikely to gain maxi-
mum impact.
	7.	 It is cost-effective. There is minimum waste of time and resources in delivering the 
service. Even if the service outcome is satisfactory, customers are often put off by a 
service company that appears inefficient.
K D
Guest
Ritz-Carlton and 
Reservation 
Supplier Partner
COVIA 
reservation 
agent
Reservation
Confirmation
Daily guest 
arrivals 
report
COVIA 
central 
reservations
Reservation
Repeat guest information
Hotel guest 
recognition 
coordinator
Daily guest 
recognition and 
preference report
Hotel 
employee
Automated hotel 
reservation records
Service delivery
Three steps 
of service
Personal
preferences
Travel
Arrival
Travel 
planner or 
repeat
guest
Personalized 
service
The Ritz-Carlton Repeat Guest History Program (An Aid to Highly Personalized Service 
Delivery)
exhibit 9.7

216	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
LO 9–2 Explain how service systems are organized.
	∙	 Service systems differ from manufacturing systems in a 
number of significant ways, including: (1) typically ser-
vices cannot be placed in inventory for later use, (2) the 
process is the product, (3) patents and copyrights typi-
cally cannot be obtained, (4) a service is not a tangible 
item, and (5) specific training and certifications are often 
required (for example, for law offices and hospitals). 
	∙	 The service-system design matrix explores the trade-
offs between sales opportunity, efficiency, and charac-
teristics of workers. 
	∙	 A challenge in managing service systems, which is 
not as great in manufacturing, is the great variability 
introduced by a customer interacting directly with the 
system. Special strategies are available for managing 
this variability. 
	∙	 Service guarantees are designed to provide a customer 
with a clear idea of what to expect from a service.
Summary
Key Terms
Service guarantees  A promise of service satisfaction 
backed up by a set of actions that must be taken to fulfill 
the promise.
LO 9–3 Analyze simple service systems.
	∙	 Service blueprints are a unique type of flowchart tool 
that places special emphasis on identifying the high 
customer contact and low customer contact aspects of 
a service. 
	∙	 The distinction is made with a “line of visibility” on 
the flowchart.
Summary
Key Terms
Service blueprint  The flowchart of a service process, 
emphasizing what is visible and what is not visible to 
the customer.
Poka-yokes  Procedures that prevent mistakes from 
becoming defects. They are commonly found in manu-
facturing but also can be used in service processes.
Concept Connections
LO 9–1 Understand the characteristics of service processes.
Summary
	∙	 A service package is the bundle of goods and services 
that is provided to the customer in some environment. 
	∙	 Services can be conveniently classified according to 
the degree of “contact” or physical presence of the 
customer in the system. 
	∙	 In some cases, the customer need not be present at 
all—for example, when a customer order is processed 
from an online transaction. In other cases, the cus-
tomer is directly involved—for instance, when a tooth 
is removed at a dentist’s office.
Key Terms
Service package  A bundle of goods and services that is 
provided in some environment.
High and low degrees of customer contact  The physi-
cal presence of the customer in the system and the per-
centage of time the customer must be in the system 
relative to the total time it takes to perform the service.

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
217
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What is the service package of your college or university?
	  2.	 Relative to the behavioral science discussion, what practical advice do you have for a 
hotel manager to enhance the ending of a guest’s stay in the hotel?
	  3.	 List some occupations or sporting events where the ending is a dominant element in 
evaluating success.
	  4.	 Behavioral scientists suggest that we remember events as snapshots, not movies. How 
would you apply this to designing a service?
	  5.	 Some suggest that customer expectation is the key to service success. Give an example 
from your own experience to support or refute this assertion.
	  6.	 Where would you place a drive-in church, a campus food vending machine, and a bar’s 
automatic mixed drink machine on the service-system design matrix?
	  7.	 Can a manufacturer have a service guarantee in addition to a product guarantee?
	  8.	 Suppose you were the manager of a restaurant and you were told honestly that a couple 
eating dinner had just seen a mouse. What would you say to them? How would you 
recover from this service crisis?
	  9.	 What strategy do the following organizations seem to use to manage customer-introduced 
variability?
	
a.  eBay
	
b.  Ritz-Carlton Hotels
	
c.  New airline check-in procedures
	10.	 How have price and variety competition changed McDonald’s basic formula for success?
	11.	 Could a service firm use a production-line approach or self-service design and still keep a 
high customer focus (personal attention)? Explain and support your answer with examples.
	12.	 Why should a manager of a bank home office be evaluated differently from a manager of 
a bank branch?
	13.	 Identify the high-contact and low-contact operations of the following services:
	
a.  A dental office
	
b.  An airline
	
c.  An accounting office
	
d.  An automobile agency
	
e.  Amazon.com
	14.	 At first glance, asking customers to provide their own service in the self-service approach 
may not seem very consumer friendly. What are some of the characteristics of self-­service 
operations that have led to their acceptance and significant popularity?
	15.	 Do you think a service operation can be successful by developing a system that combines 
characteristics from the three contrasting service designs presented in the chapter? Why 
or why not? Please provide examples.
LO9–1
LO9–2
LO9–3
LO9–4
LO 9–4 Contrast different service designs.
	∙	 Contrasting service designs include: (1) the production-
line approach used by McDonald’s, (2) the self-service 
approach used by gas stations, and (3) the personal-
attention approach used by Nordstrom’s Department 
Stores and the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company. 
	∙	 Well-designed service systems have the following 
characteristics: They have consistent elements, are 
user-friendly, are robust, are consistent, have inte-
grated front- and back-office operations, generate 
value for the customer, and are cost-effective.
Summary

218	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What is the term used for the bundle of goods and services that are provided in some 
environment by every service operation? (Answer in Appendix D)
	  2.	 Are service operations with a high degree of customer contact more or less difficult to 
control than those with a low degree of customer contact?
	  3.	 List at least three significant ways in which service systems differ from manufacturing 
systems.
	  4.	 A ride at an amusement park is an example of a service operation where there is direct 
contact between the customer and server, but little variation in the service process—nei-
ther the customer nor server has much discretion in how the service will be provided. As 
shown on the service-system design matrix, which type of service is being delivered? 
(Answer in Appendix D)
	  5.	 As the degree of customer contact increases in a service operation, what generally hap-
pens to the efficiency of the operation?
	  6.	 As the degree of customer contact increases in a service system, what worker skills would 
be more important, clerical skills or diagnostic skills?
	  7.	 An important difference between service and manufacturing operations is that customers 
introduce far more variability into the operations in a service system. Name at least three 
of the basic types of variation that customers bring to a service system.
	  8.	 Flowcharts are a common process design and analysis tool used in both manufacturing 
and services. What is a key feature on flowcharts used in service operations that differen-
tiates between the front-office and back-office aspects of the system?
	  9.	 What are the Three Ts relevant to poka-yokes in service systems?
	10.	 List at least four characteristics of a well-designed service system.
	11.	 A psychological therapist treats patients according to their individual needs. Patients are 
all treated in the same office on a scheduled basis. Each patient’s treatment is devel-
oped and customized for the individual according to the therapist’s professional training. 
Which of the contrasting service designs in the chapter would best describe the thera-
pist’s service operation?
LO9–1
LO9–2
LO9–3
LO9–4
A central theme of contemporary operations man-
agement is focus on the customer. This is commonly 
understood to mean that if a company does focus on its 
customers and if it is able to consistently deliver what 
the customer wants in a cost-effective manner, then 
the company should be successful. The hard part is to 
be able to truly understand what the customer wants. 
Translating what the customer wants into a deliverable 
product (meaning some combination of goods and ser-
vices) and designing a set of processes that will consis-
tently deliver the product in a cost-effective manner are 
every bit as difficult. Finally, connecting the manage-
ment of these products and processes to obtain desired 
business outcomes of the organization is a further 
challenge.
	
The following exercise will try to illustrate how dif-
ficult all of this can be.
The Setting
Pizza USA is a chain of pizza restaurants that currently 
offers sit-down and take-out service. Many custom-
ers have said they would buy more pizzas from Pizza 
USA if it offered a delivery service. This exercise is 
in two parts. In Part I, you play the customer. In Part 
II, you play the manager at Pizza USA who is respon-
sible for developing the pizza delivery process design 
requirements.
Part I
To start with, you have to think like a customer. This 
should be easy since you probably have experience with 
ordering pizza to be delivered. Put that experience to 
work! Make a list of the attributes of pizza delivery that 
are important to you AS A CUSTOMER!
Case: Pizza USA: An Exercise in Translating Customer Requirements into 
Process Design Requirements

	
Service Processes 	
Chapter 9 	
219
As we said, this should be easy. Right? Or is it? In devis-
ing your list, consider the following:
What must a pizza delivery service accomplish 
so that you are reasonably satisfied? Beyond 
your being reasonably satisfied, what could a 
pizza delivery service do that would make it 
really unique and create a differential advantage? 
In other words, what could a pizza delivery ser-
vice do that might cause you to ALWAYS order 
from one particular service (and, perhaps, to pay 
more for the privilege)?
As you develop your list, remember that you are consid-
ering only the delivery service and NOT the pizza itself. 
Assume that this pizza restaurant can make whatever 
kind of pizza (and side items) that you want.
Part II
Now, put on your “Pizza USA manager’s hat.” For this 
part of the exercise, you will be teamed with some other 
students. First, using the lists of all of your team mem-
bers, create a master list. Next, try to group the items on 
your list under a series of major headings; for example, 
“condition of the delivered pizza” or “quick, on-time 
delivery” or “order accuracy,” and so on. Finally, make 
a list of the “pizza delivery process design require-
ments” that your pizza delivery process will have to 
meet. As you do this, think about measurable standards. 
In other words, what would you measure in order to 
ensure that your process is operating effectively and 
efficiently? Why do you think that these measures will 
be useful?
	
Here’s an example of how a part of this analysis could 
go. One customer requirement may be that the pizza 
should be hot when it is delivered. The fact is that as 
soon as the pizza comes out of the oven, it starts to cool. 
So, how could you keep the pizza from dropping below 
some minimum temperature before you hand it to your 
customer?
Questions
	1.	 Make a list of pizza delivery attributes that are 
important to you as a customer.
	2.	 Combine your list with the lists of a few other 
class members and categorize the items under a 
series of major headings.
	3.	 Make a list of pizza delivery process design 
requirements. Associate with each requirement a 
measure that would ensure that the process meets 
the requirement.
	4.	 Design a process that meets your requirements. 
Describe it by using a flowchart similar to that 
shown in Exhibit 9.5.
© Steve Mason/Getty Images RF

220	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined. Answers 
are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 Service systems can generally be categorized 
­according to this characteristic that relates to the 
customer.
	2.	 A service triangle consists of these four features.
	3.	 This framework relates to the customer service system 
encounter.
	4.	 This is the key feature that distinguishes a service 
blueprint from a normal flowchart.
	  5.	 Having your luggage arrive on time when you land at an 
airport is what type of service in the service package?
	  6.	 SecondLife would be this type of virtual service.
	  7.	 These procedures are done to make a system 
mistake-proof.
	  8.	 These are the three steps of service at Nordstrom.
	  9.	 What are the four strategies for managing customer-
induced variability?
	10.	 The front end and the back end of a service encounter 
are referred to as what?
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Customer contact  2. Service strategy, support systems, employees, customer  3. Service-system design matrix  4. Line 
of visibility  5. Implicit service  6. Pure virtual customer contact  7. Poka-yokes  8. Warm Welcome, Anticipation and Compliance, Fond Farewell   
9. Classic accommodation, low-cost accommodation, classic reduction, uncompromised reduction  10. Service bookends

	
221
DOES WAITING IN LINE DRIVE YOU CRAZY?
Most of us are very impatient, and standing in line can be one of the most frustrating 
things we must deal with. At times, its seems we are confronted with waiting in lines 
nearly everywhere we go. In the grocery store, at the restaurant, and at the doctor’s 
office, we usually need to wait in line.  
Have you ever noticed that when you have nothing to 
do, that time seems to pass less quickly? So if you are wait-
ing in line, try to think about something. Review the menu 
at a restaurant or read a book at the doctor’s office. Do any-
thing to keep your mind from thinking about waiting.  
It is natural that people want to get started. Waiting can 
often create anxiety when having such thoughts as: Why 
did I get into the slowest line? Will there still be a ticket left 
when I get to the teller? Will I have everything I need when 
it is my turn to be served?
We can easily spend two to three years of our life wait-
ing in lines. Given this, it probably makes sense to spend a 
little time learning how waiting lines work and what can be 
done to manage them. Some quick math can go a long way 
toward understanding the problem.  
The technology deployed at order stations and pick-up 
windows at a high volume restaurant like McDonald’s or 
Taco Bell is amazing. Every step is measured, every movement calculated, every word 
scripted. Taco Bell, with more than 6,500 locations in the United States, currently 
operates some of the fastest and most accurate drive-thru windows in the industry. 
We analyze how the service delivery process works at Taco Bell in our Analytics Exer-
cise at the end of the chapter.
Learning Objectives
	LO 10–1	  Understand what a waiting line problem is.
	LO 10–2	  Analyze waiting line problems.
	LO 10–3	  Analyze complex waiting lines using simulation.
Waiting Line 
Analysis and 
Simulation
10
A drive-thru customer 
gets lunch from a 
Taco Bell in San Jose, 
California.
© Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP 
Images

222	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
 Understand what a waiting 
line problem is.
LO 10–1
A central problem in many service settings is the management of waiting time. The manager 
must weigh the added cost of providing more rapid service (more traffic lanes, additional 
landing strips, more checkout stands) against the inherent cost of waiting.
Frequently, the cost trade-off decision is straightforward. For example, if we find that the 
total time our employees spend in line waiting to use a copying machine would otherwise be 
spent in productive activities, we could compare the cost of installing one additional machine 
to the value of employee time saved. The decision could then be reduced to dollar terms and 
the choice easily made.
On the other hand, suppose that our waiting line problem centers on demand for beds in 
a hospital. We can compute the cost of additional beds by summing the costs for building 
construction, additional equipment required, and increased maintenance. But what is on 
the other side of the scale? Here, we are confronted with the problem of trying to place a 
dollar figure on a patient’s need for a hospital bed that is unavailable. While we can esti-
mate lost hospital income, what about the human cost arising from this lack of adequate 
hospital care?
The Practical View of Waiting Lines
Before we proceed with a technical presentation of waiting line theory, it is useful to look 
at the intuitive side of the issue to see what it means. Exhibit 10.1 shows arrivals at a ser-
vice facility (such as a bank) and service requirements at that facility (such as tellers and 
loan officers). One important variable is the number of arrivals over the hours that the 
service system is open. From the service delivery viewpoint, customers demand varying 
amounts of service, often exceeding normal capacity. We can control arrivals in a variety 
of ways. For example, we can have a short line (such as a drive-in at a fast-food restaurant 
with only several spaces), we can establish specific hours for specific customers, or we can 
run specials. For the server, we can affect service time by using faster or slower servers, 
faster or slower machines, different tooling, different material, different layout, faster setup 
time, and so on.
THE WAITING LINE PROBLEM
© Rubberball/Getty Images RF

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
223
The essential point is waiting lines are not a fixed condition of a productive system but are 
to a very large extent within the control of the system management and design. Useful sugges-
tions for managing queues based on research in the banking industry are the following.
∙	 Segment the customers. If a group of customers need something that can be done very 
quickly, give them a special line so they do not have to wait for the slower customers. This 
is commonly done at grocery stores where checkout lines are designated for “12 items or 
less.”
∙	 Train your servers to be friendly. Greeting the customer by name or providing another 
form of special attention can go a long way toward overcoming the negative feeling of 
a long wait. Psychologists suggest that servers be told when to invoke specific friendly 
actions such as smiling when greeting customers, taking orders, and giving change (for 
example, in a convenience store). Tests using such specific behavioral actions have 
shown significant increases in the perceived friendliness of the servers in the eyes of 
the customer.
∙	 Inform your customers of what to expect. This is especially important when the wait-
ing time will be longer than normal. Tell them why the waiting time is longer than usual 
and what you are doing to alleviate the wait.
∙	 Try to divert the customer’s attention when waiting. Providing music, a video, or 
some other form of entertainment may help distract the customers from the fact that 
they are waiting.
∙	 Encourage customers to come during slack periods. Inform customers of times 
when they usually would not have to wait; also tell them when the peak periods are—
this may help smooth the load.
The Queuing System
The queuing system consists essentially of three major components: (1) the source popula-
tion and the way customers arrive at the system, (2) the servicing system, and (3) the con-
dition of the customers exiting the system (back to source population or not?), as seen in 
Exhibit 10.2. The following sections discuss each of these areas.
C u s t om er  A r r i v a l s   Arrivals at a service system may be drawn from a finite or an 
infinite population. The distinction is important because the analyses are based on different 
premises and require different equations for their solution.
F i n it e Pop u l a t i o n   A finite population refers to the limited-size customer pool that 
will use the service and, at times, form a line. The reason this finite classification is important 
is that when a customer leaves their position as a member of the population (due to a machine 
breaking down and requiring service, for example), the size of the user group is reduced 
Arrivals
Service Requirements
Number
of arrivals
Service
time
Normal
capacity
Time
Time
Arrival and Service Profiles
exhibit 10.1
Population
source
Infinite
Finite
Queuing system
A process where 
customers wait in line for 
service.

224	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
by one, which reduces the probability of the next occurrence. Conversely, when a customer 
is serviced and returns to the user group, the population increases and the probability of a 
user requiring service also increases. This finite class of problems requires a separate set of 
formulas from that of the infinite population case.
As an example, consider a group of six machines maintained by one repairperson. In this 
case, the machines are the customers of the repairperson. When one machine breaks down, 
the source population is reduced to five, and the chance of one of the remaining five break-
ing down and needing repair is certainly less than when six machines were operating. If two 
machines are down with only four operating, the probability of another breakdown is again 
changed. Conversely, when a machine is repaired and returned to service, the machine popu-
lation increases, thus raising the probability of the next breakdown.
I n f i n i t e  P o p u l a t i o n   An infinite population is large enough in relation to the service 
system so that the population size caused by subtractions or additions to the population 
(a customer needing service or a serviced customer returning to the population) does not 
significantly affect the system probabilities. If, in the preceding finite explanation, there were 
100 customer machines instead of 6, then if 1 or 2 machines broke down, the probabilities for 
the next breakdowns would not be very different and the assumption could be made without 
a great deal of error that the population (for all practical purposes) was infinite. Nor would 
the formulas for “infinite” queuing problems cause much error if applied to a physician with 
1,000 patients or a department store with 10,000 customers.
D i s t r i b u ti o n  o f A r r i v a l s  When describing a waiting system, we need to define the 
manner in which customers or the waiting units are arranged for service.
Waiting line formulas generally require an arrival rate, or the number of units per period 
(such as an average of one every six minutes). A constant arrival distribution is periodic, with 
exactly the same time between successive arrivals. In productive systems, the only arrivals 
that truly approach a constant interval period are those subject to machine control. Much more 
common are variable (random) arrival distributions.
In observing arrivals at a service facility, we can look at them from two viewpoints: First, 
we can analyze the time between successive arrivals to see if the times follow some statistical 
distribution. Usually, we assume that the time between arrivals is exponentially distributed. 
Second, we can set some time length (T) and try to determine how many arrivals might enter 
the system within T. We typically assume that the number of arrivals per time unit is Poisson 
distributed.
Customer
arrivals
Exit
Arrival rate
The expected number of 
customers that arrive each 
period.
Components of a Queuing System
exhibit 10.2

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
225
E x p onen t i a l  D i s t r i b u t i o n
In the first case, when arrivals at a service facility occur in a purely random fashion, a plot of 
the interarrival times yields an exponential distribution such as that shown in Exhibit 10.3. 
The probability function is
​​f(t ) = λ​e​ −λt​​​
where λ is the mean number of arrivals per time period.
The cumulative area beneath the curve in Exhibit 10.3 is the summation of Equation 10.1 
over its positive range, which is e−λt. This integral allows us to compute the probabilities of 
arrivals within a specified time. For example, for the case of one arrival per minute to a waiting 
line (λ = 1), the following table can be derived either by solving e−λt or by using Appendix D.  
Column 2 shows the probability that it will be more than t minutes until the next arrival, while 
column 3 shows the probability of the next arrival within t minutes (computed as 1 minus 
column 2).
​[10 . 1]​
Exponential 
distribution
A probability distribution 
associated with the time 
between arrivals.
(1)
(2)
(3)
t  
(Minutes)
Probability that the Next  
Arrival Will Occur in  
t Minutes or More (from  
Appendix D or Solving e−t)
Probability that the Next  
Arrival Will Occur in  
t Minutes or Less  
[1 − Column (2)]
  0
100%
  0%
0.5
  61%
39%
1.0
  37%
63%
1.5
  22%
78%
2.0
  14%
86%
f(t)
t
Exponential Distribution
exhibit 10.3
P o i s s on  D i s t r i b u t i o n
In the second case, where one is interested in the number of arrivals during some time period T,  
the distribution appears as in Exhibit 10.4 and is obtained by finding the probability of exactly 
n arrivals during T. If the arrival process is random, the distribution is the Poisson, and the 
formula is
​​P​ T​(n ) = ​ ​(λT )​ n​ ​e​ −λT​ 
_______ 
n ! 
​​
Equation 10.2 shows the probability of exactly n arrivals in time T. (Note that n! is defined as 
n(n-1)(n-2). . .(2)(1).) For example, if the mean arrival rate of units into a system is three per 
​[10 . 2]​
Poisson distribution
Probability distribution 
for the number of arrivals 
during each time period.

226	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
minute (λ = 3) and we want to find the probability that exactly five units will arrive within a 
one-minute period (n = 5, T = 1), we have
​P​ 1​(​5​)​ = ​ ​(​3 × 1​)​ 5​ ​e​ −3×1​ 
__________ 
5 ! 
​ = ​ ​3​ 5​ ​e​ −3​ 
____ 
120 ​ = 2.025 ​e​ −3​ = 0.101​
That is, there is a 10.1 percent chance that there will be five arrivals in any one-minute interval.
Although often shown as a smoothed curve, as in Exhibit 10.4, the Poisson is a discrete 
distribution. (The curve becomes smoother as n becomes large.) The distribution is discrete 
because, in our example, n refers to the number of arrivals in a system, and this must be an 
integer. (For example, there cannot be 1.5 arrivals.)
Also note that the exponential and Poisson distributions can be derived from one another. 
The mean and variance of the Poisson are equal and denoted by λ. The mean of the exponen-
tial is 1/λ and its variance is 1/λ2. (Remember that the time between arrivals is exponentially 
distributed and the number of arrivals per unit of time is Poisson distributed.)
Other arrival characteristics include arrival patterns, size of arrival units, and degree of 
patience. (See Exhibit 10.5.)
∙	 Arrival patterns. The arrivals at a system are far more controllable than is generally 
recognized. Barbers may decrease their Saturday arrival rate (and supposedly shift it 
to other days of the week) by charging an extra $1 for adult haircuts or charging adult 
prices for children’s haircuts. Department stores run sales during the off-season or hold 
one-day-only sales in part for purposes of control. Airlines offer excursion and off-­
season rates for similar reasons. The simplest of all arrival-control devices is the post-
ing of business hours.
	
	
Some service demands are clearly uncontrollable, such as emergency medical 
demands on a city’s hospital facilities. But even in these situations, arrivals at emergency 
rooms in specific hospitals are controllable to some extent by, say, keeping ambulance 
drivers in the service region informed of the status of their respective host hospitals.
∙	 Size of arrival units. A single arrival may be thought of as one unit. (A unit is 
the smallest number handled.) A single arrival on the floor of the New York Stock 
Exchange (NYSE) is 100 shares of stock; a single arrival at an egg-processing plant 
might be a dozen eggs or a flat of 2½ dozen; a single arrival at a restaurant is a single 
person.
	
	
A batch arrival is some multiple of the unit, such as a block of 1,000 shares on the 
NYSE, a case of eggs at the processing plant, or a party of five at a restaurant.
∙	 Degree of patience. A patient arrival is one who waits as long as necessary until the 
service facility is ready to serve him or her. (Even if arrivals grumble and behave 
Smoothed curve
Number of arrivals (n)
.149
.224
.224
.168
.102
.050
Probability
of n arrivals
in time T
.10 
.05 
0
.20 
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
12
Mean = λ = 3
Variance = λ = 3
Poisson Distribution for λT = 3
exhibit 10.4

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
227
impatiently, the fact that they wait is sufficient to label them as patient arrivals for 
­purposes of waiting line theory.)
	
	
There are two classes of impatient arrivals. Members of the first class arrive, survey 
both the service facility and the length of the line, and then decide to leave. Those in the 
second class arrive, view the situation, join the waiting line, and then, after some period 
of time, depart. The behavior of the first type is termed balking, while the second is 
termed reneging. To avoid balking and reneging, companies that provide high service 
levels typically try to target server utilization levels (the percentage of time busy) at no 
more than 70 to 80 percent.
W a i t i n g L i n e s  a n d  S e r v e r s   The queuing system consists primarily of the waiting 
line(s) and the available number of servers. Here, we discuss issues pertaining to waiting 
line characteristics and management, line structure, and service rate. Factors to consider with 
waiting lines include the line length, number of lines, and queue discipline.
	
Length. In a practical sense, an infinite line is simply one that is very long in terms of 
the capacity of the service system. Examples of infinite potential length are a line of 
vehicles backed up for miles at a bridge crossing and customers who must form a line 
around the block as they wait to purchase tickets at a theater.
	
	
Gas stations, loading docks, and parking lots have limited line capacity caused by 
legal restrictions or physical space characteristics. This complicates the waiting line 
problem not only in service system utilization and waiting line computations but also 
in the shape of the actual arrival distribution. The arrival denied entry into the line 
because of lack of space may rejoin the population for a later try or may seek service 
elsewhere. Either action makes an obvious difference in the finite population case.
	
Number of lines. A single line or single file is, of course, one line only. The term mul-
tiple lines refers to the single lines that form in front of two or more servers or to single 
lines that converge at some central redistribution point. The disadvantage of multiple 
lines in a busy facility is that arrivals often shift lines if several previous services have 
been of short duration or if those customers currently in other lines appear to require a 
short service time.
Impatient
Controllable
Uncontrollable
Single
Batch
Constant
Exponential or Poisson
Other
Patient (in line and stay)
Pattern
Size of arrival
Distribution
Degree of patience
Arrive, wait awhile, then leave
Arrive, view, and leave
Customer Arrivals in Queues
exhibit 10.5

228	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	Queue discipline. A queue discipline is a priority rule 
or set of rules for determining the order of service to cus-
tomers in a waiting line. The rules selected can have a 
dramatic effect on the system’s overall performance. The 
number of customers in line, the average waiting time, the 
range of variability in waiting time, and the efficiency of 
the service facility are just a few of the factors affected by 
the choice of priority rules.
Probably the most common priority rule is first come, 
first served (FCFS). This rule states that customers in line 
are served on the basis of their chronological arrival; no 
other characteristics have any bearing on the selection 
process. This is popularly accepted as the fairest rule, 
although in practice it discriminates against the arrival 
requiring a short service time.
Reservations first, emergencies first, highest-profit 
customer first, largest orders first, best customers first, 
longest waiting time in line, and soonest promised date 
are other examples of priority rules. There are two major 
practical problems in using any rule: One is ensuring that 
customers know and follow the rule. The other is ensuring 
that a system exists to enable employees to manage the 
line (such as take-a-number systems).
S e r v i c e  T i m e  D i s t r i b u t i o n   Another important feature of the waiting structure is 
the time the customer or unit spends with the server once the service has started. Waiting line 
formulas generally specify service rate as the capacity of the server in number of units per 
time period (such as 12 completions per hour) and not as service time, which might average 
five minutes each. A constant service time rule states that each service takes exactly the same 
time. As in constant arrivals, this characteristic is generally limited to machine-controlled 
operations.
When service times are random, they can be approximated by the exponential distribution. 
When using the exponential distribution as an approximation of the service times, we will 
refer to μ as the average number of units or customers that can be served per time period.
L i n e  S t r u c t u r e s  As Exhibit 10.6 shows, the flow of items to be serviced may go 
through a single line, multiple lines, or some mixture of the two. The choice of format depends 
partly on the volume of customers served and partly on the restrictions imposed by sequential 
requirements governing the order in which service must be performed.
	1.	 Single channel, single phase. This is the simplest type of waiting line structure, and 
straightforward formulas are available to solve the problem for standard distribution 
patterns of arrival and service. When the distributions are nonstandard, the prob-
lem is easily solved by computer simulation. A typical example of a single-channel, 
single-phase situation is the one-person barbershop.
	2.	 Single channel, multiphase. A car wash is an illustration because a series of ser-
vices (vacuuming, wetting, washing, rinsing, drying, window cleaning, and parking) 
is performed in a fairly uniform sequence. A critical factor in the single-channel case 
with service in series is the amount of buildup of items allowed in front of each ser-
vice, which in turn constitutes separate waiting lines.
	3.	 Multichannel, single phase. Tellers’ windows in a bank and checkout counters in 
high-volume department stores exemplify this type of structure. The difficulty with 
this format is that the uneven service time given each customer results in unequal 
speed or flow among the lines. This results in some customers being served before 
Infinite potential length
Limited capacity
Line length
Number of lines
Multiple
Single
Queue discipline
First come, first served
Shortest processing time
Reservations first
Emergencies first
Limited needs
Other
Service rate
The number of customers 
a server can handle during 
a given time period.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
229
others who arrived earlier, as well as in some degree of line shifting. Varying this 
structure to ensure the servicing of arrivals in chronological order would require 
forming a single line, from which, as a server becomes available, the next customer 
in the queue is assigned.
	 	
The major problem of this structure is that it requires rigid control of the line to 
maintain order and to direct customers to available servers. In some instances, assign-
ing numbers to customers in the order of their arrival helps alleviate this problem.
	4.	 Multichannel, multiphase. This case is similar to the preceding one except that two 
or more services are performed in sequence. The admission of patients in a hospital 
uses this pattern because a specific sequence of steps is usually followed: initial con-
tact at the admissions desk, filling out forms, making identification tags, obtaining 
a room assignment, escorting the patient to the room, and so forth. Because several 
servers are usually available for this procedure, more than one patient at a time may 
be processed.
	5.	 Mixed. Under this general heading, we consider two subcategories: (1) multiple-to-
single channel structures and (2) alternative path structures. Under (1), we find either 
lines that merge into one for single-phase service, as at a bridge crossing where two 
lanes merge into one, or lines that merge into one for multiphase service, such as 
subassembly lines feeding into a main line. Under (2), we encounter two structures 
that differ in directional flow requirements. The first is similar to the multichannel–­
multiphase case, except that (a) there may be switching from one channel to the next 
after the first service has been rendered and (b) the number of channels and phases 
may vary—again—after performance of the first service.
Structure
Multichannel
Mixed
Single
Single phase
Single phase
Multiphase
Single phase
Multiphase
Multiphase
Multi-to-single channel
Alternative paths, such as:
Line Structures
exhibit 10.6

230	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Exiting the Queuing System  Once a customer is served, two exit fates are 
possible: (1) The customer may return to the source population and immediately become a 
competing candidate for service again or (2) there may be a low probability of reservice. The 
first case can be illustrated by a customer machine that has been routinely repaired and returned 
to duty but may break down again; the second can be illustrated by a customer machine that 
has been overhauled or modified and 
has a low probability of reservice over 
the near future. In a lighter vein, we 
might refer to the first as the “recurring-
common-cold case” and to the second 
as the “appendectomy-only-once case.”
It should be apparent that when the population source is finite, any change in the service 
performed on customers who return to the population modifies the arrival rate at the service 
facility. This, of course, alters the characteristics of the waiting line under study and neces-
sitates reanalysis of the problem.
Low probability of reservice
Return to source population
Exit
WAITING LINE MODELS
In this section, we present four sample waiting line problems followed by their solutions. Each 
has a slightly different structure (see Exhibit 10.7) and solution equation (see Exhibit 10.8). 
There are more types of models than these four, but the formulas and solutions become quite 
complicated, and those problems are generally solved using computer simulation. Also, in 
using these formulas, keep in mind they are steady-state formulas derived on the assump-
tion that the process under study is ongoing. Thus, they may provide inaccurate results when 
applied to processes where the arrival rates and/or service rates change over time. A handy 
app available at that can be used to solve these problems. In addition, a spreadsheet “10 Wait-
ing Line Analysis.xls” is available.
Here is a quick preview of our four problems to illustrate each of the four waiting line mod-
els in Exhibits 10.7 and 10.8.
Problem 1: Customers in line. A bank wants to know how many customers are waiting 
for a drive-in teller, how long they have to wait, the utilization of the teller, and what the 
service rate would have to be so that 95 percent of the time there would not be more than 
three cars in the system at any time.
Problem 2: Equipment selection. A franchise for Robot Car Wash must decide which 
equipment to purchase out of a choice of three. Larger units cost more but wash cars faster. 
To make the decision, costs are related to revenue.
Problem 3: Determining the number of servers. An auto agency parts department must 
decide how many clerks to employ at the counter. More clerks cost more money, but there 
is a savings because mechanics wait less time.
Analyze waiting line 
problems.
LO 10–2
Model
Layout
Service  
Phase
Source  
Population
Arrival  
Pattern
Queue  
Discipline
Service  
Pattern
Permissible  
Queue Length
Typical Example
1
Single channel
Single
Infinite
Poisson
FCFS
Exponential
Unlimited
Drive-in teller at bank;  
one-lane toll bridge
2
Single channel
Single
Infinite
Poisson
FCFS
Constant
Unlimited
Roller coaster rides in 
amusement park
3
Multichannel
Single
Infinite
Poisson
FCFS
Exponential
Unlimited
Parts counter in auto 
agency
4
Single channel
Single
Finite
Poisson
FCFS
Exponential
Unlimited
Machine breakdown and 
repair in a factory
Properties of Some Specific Waiting Line Models
exhibit 10.7

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
231
Simple system
Model 1
​​{
​​
​       L​ q​​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
_ 
μ​(​​μ − λ​)​​ ​
​ 
​          W​ q​​ = ​ 
​L​ q​​
 
_ 
λ ​
​ 
​P​ n​​ = ​(​​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​​(​​ λ _ 
μ ​)​​ 
n
​ 
​ 
 
 
 
 
​       L  ​ s​​ = ​  λ 
_ 
μ − λ ​
​ 
​            W​ s​​ = ​ 
​L​ s​​
 
_ 
λ ​
​ 
ρ = ​ λ _ 
μ ​
 
​​	
[10.3]
Constant service time system
Model 2
​​{
​​
​       L​ q​​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
_ 
2μ​(​​μ − λ​)​​ ​
​ 
​W​ q​​ = ​ 
​L​ q​​
 
_ 
λ ​
​ 
 
​        L​ s​​ = ​L​ q​​ + ​ λ _ 
μ ​
​ 
​ W​ s​​ = ​ 
​L​ s​​
 
_ 
λ ​
 ​​	
[10.4]
Multichannel system
Model 3
​​{
​​
​        L​ s​​ = ​L​ q​​ + λ ∕ μ
​ 
​ W​ s​​ = ​L​ s​​ ∕ λ
​ 
 
​W​ q​​ = ​L​ q​​ ∕ λ
​ 
​  P​ w​​ = ​L​ q​​(​​ 
Sμ 
_ 
λ ​ − 1​)​​
​​	
[10.5]
(Exhibit 10.9 provides the value of Lq given λ/μ and the number of servers S.)
Finite customer system
Model 4
​​{
​​
       X = ​  T 
_ 
T + U ​
​ 
H = FNX
​ 
L = N​(​​1 − F​)​​
​ 
n = L + H
​ 
 
 
 
 
​     P​ n​​ = ​ 
N ! 
_ 
​(​​N − n​)​​ ! ​ ​X​ n​ ​P​ o​​​ 
​​ 
J = NF​(​​1 − X​)​​​ 
​​ 
 
 
 
 
     W  = ​ L​(​​T + U​)​​ 
_ 
N − L  ​ = ​ LT 
_ 
H ​
​ 
​
​ 
F = ​  T + U 
_ 
T + U + W ​
​ 
​
 
​​	
[10.6]
Exhibit 10.10 provides values for S, D, and F given X.
Infinite Queuing Notation: Models 1–3
Finite Queuing Notation: Model 4
λ = Arrival rate
μ = Service rate
​ 1 
__ 
 μ ​ = Average service time
​ 1 
__ 
 λ ​ = Average time between arrivals
ρ = Ratio of total arrival rate to service rate for 
a single server ​( ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​  )​*
L q = Average number waiting in line
Ls = Average number in system (including any 
being served)
Wq = Average time waiting in line
Ws = Average total time in system (including 
any being served)
n = Number of units in the system
S = Number of identical service channels
Pn = Probability of exactly n units in system
Pw = Probability of waiting in line
	 D = Probability that an arrival must wait in line
	 F = Efficiency factor, a measure of the effect of  
having to wait in line
	 H = Average number of units being serviced
	 J = Population source less those in queuing system 
(N − n)
	 L = Average number of units in line
	 S = Number of service channels
	 n = Average number of units in queuing system 
(including the one being served)
	 N = Number of units in population source
	Pn = Probability of exactly n units in queuing system
	 T = Average time to perform the service
	 U = Average time between customer service  
requirements
	W = Average waiting time in line
	 X = Service factor, or proportion of service time 
required
Equations for Solving Four Model Problems
Problem 4: Finite population source. Whereas the previous models assume a large popu-
lation, finite queuing employs a separate set of equations for those cases where the calling 
customer population is small. In this last problem, mechanics must service four weaving 
machines to keep them operating. Based on the costs associated with machines being idle and 
the costs of mechanics to service them, the problem is to decide how many mechanics to use.
Notations for Equations
exhibit 10.8
*For single-server queues, this is equivalent to utilization.
​P​ 0​ = ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​​)​​

232	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
EXAMPLE 10.1: Customers in Line
Western National Bank is considering opening a drive-thru window for customer service. 
Management estimates that customers will arrive at the rate of 15 per hour. The teller who 
will staff the window can service customers at the rate of one every three minutes.
Part 1   Assuming Poisson arrivals and exponential service, find
	1.	 Utilization of the teller.
	2.	 Average number in the waiting line.
	3.	 Average number in the system.
	4.	 Average waiting time in line.
	5.	 Average waiting time in the system, including service.
SOLUTION—PART 1
	1.	 The average utilization of the teller is (using Model 1)
​ρ = ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​ = ​ 15 
__ 
20 ​ = 75 percent​
	2.	 The average number in the waiting line is
​L​ q​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
______ 
μ​(​μ − λ​)​ ​ = ​ 
​(​15​)​ 2​ 
________ 
20​(​20 − 15​)​ ​ = 2.25 customers​
	3.	 The average number in the system is
​L​ s​ = ​  λ 
____ 
μ − λ ​ = ​ 
15 
_____ 
20 − 15 ​ = 3 customers​
	4.	 Average waiting time in line is
​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 2.25 
____ 
15  ​ = 0.15 hour, or 9 minutes​
	5.	 Average waiting time in the system is
​W​ s​ = ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 3 
__ 
15 ​ = 0.2 hour, or 12 minutes​
Part 2   Because of limited space availability and a desire to provide an acceptable level of 
service, the bank manager would like to ensure, with 95 percent confidence, that no more than 
three cars will be in the system at any time. What is the present level of service for the three-
car limit? What level of teller use must be attained and what must be the service rate of the 
teller to ensure the 95 percent level of service?
SOLUTION—PART 2
The present level of service for three or fewer cars is the probability that there are 0, 1, 2, or 3 
cars in the system. From Model 1, Exhibit 10.8,
​P​ n​ = ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ λ _ 
μ ​)​ 
n
​
at n = 0, P0 = (1 − 15/20)
(1 − 15/20)(15/20)0 = 0.250
at n = 1, P1 = (1/4)
(1 − 15/20)(15/20)1 = 0.188
at n = 2, P2 = (1/4)
(1 − 15/20)(15/20)2 = 0.141
at n = 3, P3 = (1/4)
(1 − 15/20)(15/20)3 = 0.105
0.684
or
68.4 percent

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
233
	
The probability of having more than three cars in the system is 1.0 minus the probability of 
three or fewer cars (1.0 – 0.684 = 31.6 percent).
	
For a 95 percent service level of three or fewer cars, this states that P0 + P1 + P2 + P3 = 95 
percent.
​
0.95
​ 
= ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​)​ 
0
​ + ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​​)​ 
1
​ + ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​)​ 
2
​ + ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​​)​ 
3
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
0.95
​ 
= ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​[​1 + ​ λ _ 
μ ​ + ​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​)​ 
2
​ + ​(​ ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​)​ 
3
​]​
 
​
We can solve this by trial and error for values of λ/μ. If λ/μ = 0.50,
​0 . 95​ ​=​ 
? ​​ ​0 . 5​(​1 + 0 . 5 + 0 . 25 + 0 . 125​)​​ 
 
 
0 . 95​ ≠​ 0 . 9375 
​
With λ/μ = 0.45,
​0 . 95​ ​=​ 
? ​​ ​(​1 – 0 . 45​)​(​1 + 0 . 45 + 0 . 203 + 0 . 091​)​​ 
 
 
 
0 . 95​ ≠​ 0 . 96 
​
With λ/μ = 0.47,
​0 . 95​ ​=​ 
? ​​ ​(​1 – 0 . 47​)​(​1 + 0 . 47 + 0 . 221 + 0 . 104​)​ = 0 . 95135​​ 
 
 
 
 
0 . 95
​ 
≈
​ 
0 . 95135 
​
Therefore, with the utilization ρ = λ/μ of 47 percent, the probability of three or fewer cars in 
the system is 95 percent.
	
To find the rate of service required to attain this 95 percent service level, we simply solve 
the equation λ/μ = 0.47, where λ = number of arrivals per hour. This gives μ = 32 per hour. 
That is, the teller must serve approximately 32 people per hour (a 60 percent increase over the 
original 20-per-hour capability) for 95 percent confidence that not more than three cars will 
be in the system. Perhaps service may be sped up by modifying the method of service, adding 
another teller, or limiting the types of transactions available at the drive-thru window. Note 
that, with the condition of 95 percent confidence, three or fewer cars will be in the system, 
and the teller will be idle 53 percent of the time.
EXAMPLE 10.2: Equipment Selection
Robot Company franchises combination gas and car wash stations throughout the United 
States. Robot gives a free car wash for a gasoline fill-up or, for a wash alone, charges $0.50. 
Past experience shows that the number of customers that have car washes following fill-ups is 
about the same as for a wash alone. The average profit on a gasoline fill-up is about $0.70, and 
the cost of the car wash to Robot is $0.10. Robot stays open 14 hours per day.
	
Robot has three power units and drive assemblies, and a franchisee must select the unit 
preferred. Unit I can wash cars at the rate of one every five minutes and is leased for $12 per 
day. Unit II, a larger unit, can wash cars at the rate of one every four minutes but costs $16 per 
day. Unit III, the largest, costs $22 per day and can wash a car in three minutes.
	
The franchisee estimates that customers will not wait in line more than five minutes for a 
car wash. A longer time will cause Robot to lose the gasoline sales as well as the car wash sale.
	
If the estimate of customer arrivals resulting in washes is 10 per hour, which wash unit 
should be selected?
SOLUTION
Using unit I, calculate the average waiting time of customers in the wash line (μ for unit I = 
12 per hour). From the Model 2 equations (Exhibit 10.8),
​ 
​L​ q​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
_______ 
2μ(μ − λ ) ​ = ​ 
​10​ 2​ 
__________ 
 
2(12 ) (12 − 10 ) ​ = 2.08333
​ 
 
 
 
​     W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 2.08333 
______ 
10 
​ = 0.208 hour, or 12​ 1 
__ 2 ​ minutes
​

234	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
For unit II at 15 per hour,
​
  ​L​ ​q ¯ ​​ = ​ 
​10​ 2​ 
__________ 
 
2​(​15​)​(​15 − 10​)​ ​ = 0.667
​ 
 
 
​  W​ q​ = ​ 0.667 
_____ 
10  ​ = 0.0667 hour, or 4 minutes
​
	
If waiting time is the only criterion, unit II should be purchased. But before we make the 
final decision, we must look at the profit differential between both units.
	
With unit I, some customers would balk and renege because of the 12½-minute wait. 
And, although this greatly complicates the mathematical analysis, we can gain some esti-
mate of lost sales with unit I by increasing Wq = 5 minutes or ½ hour (the average length 
of time customers will wait) and solving for λ. This would be the effective arrival rate of 
customers:
​
​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​(​ ​λ​ 2​ / 2μ(μ − λ ) 
___________ 
λ 
​)​
​ 
 
 
​W​ q​ = ​ 
λ 
_______ 
2μ(μ − λ ) ​
​ 
 
λ = ​ 
2 ​W​ q​ ​μ​ 2​ 
_______ 
1 + 2 ​W​ q​ μ ​ = ​ 
2​(​ 1 _ 
12 ​)​(12 )​ 2​ 
 
_________ 
 
1 + 2​(​ 1 _ 
12 ​)​(12 )
 ​ = 8 per hour
​
Therefore, because the original estimate of λ was 10 per hour, an estimated 2 customers per 
hour will be lost. Lost profit of 2 customers per hour × 14 hours × ​​ 1 
__ 
2 ​ ($0.70 fill-up profit + 
$0.40 wash profit) = $15.40 per day.
	
Because the additional cost of unit II over unit I is only $4 per day, the loss of $15.40 profit 
obviously warrants installing unit II.
	
The original five-minute maximum wait constraint is satisfied by unit II. Therefore, unit III 
is not considered unless the arrival rate is expected to increase.
EXAMPLE 10.3: Determining the Number of Servers
In the service department of the Glenn-Mark Auto Agency, mechanics requiring parts for auto 
repair or service present their request forms at the parts department counter. The parts clerk 
fills a request while the mechanic waits. Mechanics arrive in a random (Poisson) fashion at 
the rate of 40 per hour, and a clerk can fill requests at the rate of 20 per hour (exponential). 
If the cost for a parts clerk is $30 per hour and the cost for a mechanic is $60 per hour, deter-
mine the optimum number of clerks to staff the counter. (Because of the high arrival rate, an 
infinite source may be assumed.)
SOLUTION
First, assume that three clerks will be used because having only one or two clerks would create 
infinitely long lines (since λ = 40 and μ = 20). The equations for Model 3 from Exhibit 10.8 
will be used here. But first we need to obtain the average number in line using the table in 
Exhibit 10.9. (Note the table is located at the end of the chapter.) Using the table and values 
λ/μ = 2 and S = 3, we obtain Lq = 0.8889 mechanic.
Expected Number of People Waiting in Line (Lq) for Various Values of S and λ/μ
At this point, we see that we have an average of 0.8889 mechanic waiting all day. For an eight-
hour day at $60 per hour, there is a loss of mechanic’s time worth 0.8889 mechanic × $60 per 
hour × 8 hours = $426.67.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
235
EXAMPLE 10.4: Finite Population Source
Studies of a bank of four weaving machines at the Loose Knit textile mill have shown that, on 
average, each machine needs adjusting every hour and that the current repair person averages 
7½ minutes per adjustment. Assuming Poisson arrivals, exponential service, and a machine 
idle time cost of $80 per hour, determine if a second servicer (who also averages 7½ minutes 
per adjustment) should be hired at a rate of $14 per hour.
SOLUTION
This is a finite queuing problem that can be solved by using finite queuing tables. (See Exhibit 
10.10 that is located at the end of the chapter.) The approach in this problem is to compare 
the cost of machine downtime (either waiting in line or being serviced) and of one repairer to 
the cost of machine downtime and two repairers. We do this by finding the average number of 
machines that are in the service system and multiplying this number by the downtime cost per 
hour. To this we add the repairers’ cost.
	
Before we proceed, we first define some terms:
	
N = Number of machines in the population 
	
S = Number of repairers 
	
T = Time required to service a machine 
	
U = Average time a machine runs before requiring service 
	
X = Service factor , or proportion of service time required for each machine  
(X = T/(T + U)) 
	
L = Average number of machines waiting in line to be serviced 
	
H = Average number of machines being serviced
The values to be determined from the finite tables are
D = Probability that a machine needing service will have to wait
F = Efficiency factor, which measures the effect of having to wait in line to be serviced
	
The tables are arranged according to three variables: N, population size; X, service factor; 
and S, the number of service channels (repairers in this problem). To look up a value, first find 
the table for the correct N size, then search the first column for the appropriate X, and finally 
find the line for S. Then, read off D and F. (In addition to these values, other characteristics 
about a finite queuing system can be found by using the finite formulas.)
	
Our next step is to reobtain the waiting time if we add another parts clerk. We then com-
pare the added cost of the additional employee with the time saved by the mechanics. Again, 
using the table in Exhibit 10.9 at the end of the chapter but with S = 4, we obtain
	
This problem could be expanded to consider the addition of runners to deliver parts to 
mechanics; the problem then would be to determine the optimal number of runners. This, 
however, would have to include the added cost of lost time caused by errors in parts receipts. 
For example, a mechanic would recognize a wrong part at the counter and obtain immediate 
correction, whereas the parts runner might not.
Lq = 0.1739 mechanic in line
0.1739 × $60 × 8 hours = $83.47 cost of a mechanic waiting in line
Value of mechanic’s time saved is $426.67 − $83.47
= $342.20
Cost of an additional parts clerk is 8 hours × $30/hour
=   240.00
Cost of reduction by adding fourth clerk
= $102.20

236	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
N = 4
S = 1
T = 7½ minutes
U = 60 minutes
​X = ​  T 
____ 
T + U ​ = ​ 
7.5 
______ 
7.5 + 60 ​ = 0.111​
	
From Exhibit 10.10, which displays the table for N = 4, F is interpolated as being approxi-
mately 0.957 at X = 0.111 and S = 1.
	
The number of machines waiting in line to be serviced is L, where
L = N(1 − F) = 4(1 − 0.957) = 0.172 machine
	
The number of machines being serviced is H, where
H = FNX = 0.957(4)(0.111) = 0.425 machine
	
Exhibit 10.11 shows the cost resulting from unproductive machine time and the cost of the 
repairer.
	
Case II: Two repairers. From Exhibit 10.10, at X = 0.111 and S = 2, F = 0.998.
	
The number of machines waiting in line, L, is
L = N(1 − F) = 4(1 − 0.998) = 0.008 machine
	
The number of machines being serviced, H, is
H = FNX = 0.998(4)(0.111) = 0.443 machine
The costs for the machines being idle and for the two repairers are shown in Exhibit 10.11. 
The final column of that exhibit shows that retaining just one repairer is the better choice.
Number of  
Repairers
Number of Machines  
Down (H + L)
Cost per Hour for Machines 
Down [(H + L) × $80/Hour]
Cost of Repairers  
($14/Hour Each)
Total Cost  
per Hour
1
0.597  
$47.76
$ 14.00
$61.76
2
0.451  
36.08
28.00  
64.08 
A Comparison of Downtime Costs for Service and Repair of Four Machines
exhibit 10.11
Approximating Customer Waiting Time
Good news for managers. All you need is the mean and standard deviation to compute average 
waiting time! Some good research has led to a “quick and dirty” mathematical approximation 
to the queuing models illustrated earlier in the chapter. What’s nice about the approximation is 
that it does not assume a particular arrival rate or service distribution. All that is needed is the 
mean and standard deviation of the interarrival time and the service time. We will not burden 
you with all the details of how the approximations were derived, just how to use the formulas.
First, you will need to collect some data on your service time. The service time is the 
amount of time it takes to serve each customer. Keep in mind that you want to collect your 
data during a period of time that fairly represents what you expect to happen during the period 
you are concerned about. For example, if you want to know how many bank tellers you should 
have to service customers on Friday around the lunch period, collect your data during that 

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
237
period. This will ensure the transactions being performed are similar to those you expect in 
the future. You can use a stopwatch to time how long it takes to serve each customer. Using 
these data, calculate the mean and standard deviation of the service time.
Recall from your statistics that the mean is
​​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​∑ 
i=1​ 
N
 ​ ​x​ i​ / N​
where xi = observed value and N = total number of observed values.
The standard deviation is
​s = ​√ 
__________
 
​ 
​∑ 
i=1​ 
N
 ​ ​(​x​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
X ​ )​ 2​ 
__________ 
N − 1 
​ ​​
Next, capture data on the amount of time between the arrivals of each new customer ­during 
the period of time you are studying. This is called the interarrival time. From the data, ­ 
calculate the mean and standard deviation of the interarrival time. From these calculations, 
we have
​ 
​ ¯ 
X​ s​
​ 
= Mean service time
​ 
 
​ ¯ 
X​ a​​ = Mean interarrival time​ 
 
 
​S​ s​​ = Standard deviation of the service time sample​ 
 
 
 
​S​ a​
​ 
= Standard deviation of the interarrival time sample
​
Next, define the following:
​ 
​C​ s​
​ 
= Coefficient of variation of service time =  ​ 
​S​ s​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​C​ a​
​ 
= Coefficient of variation of interarrival time =  ​ 
​S​ a​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​
​ 
 
 
 
 
λ
​ 
= Customer arrival rate = ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
μ
​ 
= Customer service rate = ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​
​ 
​
​
​
Now, we can calculate some statistics about our system. First, define S as the number of serv-
ers that we intend to use. Then,
​ 
ρ
​ 
= Utilization of the servers = ​ λ 
___ 
Sμ ​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​L​ q​
​ 
= Expected length of the waiting line =  ​ ​ρ​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​s+1​)​ ​​ 
____ 
1 − ρ ​ × ​ 
​C​ a​ 
2 ​ + ​C​ s​ 
2​ 
_____ 
2 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​L​ s​​  = ​Expected number of people in the system = L​ q​ + Sρ​ 
​​ 
 
 
 
 
​W​ q​
​ 
= Expected time waiting in line =  ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​  
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​W​ s​
​ 
= Expected time in the system =  ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​  
​ 
​
​
The utilization (ρ) is the percentage of time that the servers are expected to be busy. Often, 
companies that provide high service target this number at between 70 and 80 percent depend-
ing on the amount of variance there is in the customer arrival and service rates. Lq is how long 
the queue is expected to be, and Wq is how long a customer is expected to have to wait in the 
queue. Ls and Ws are the expected number of customers in the system and the expected time 
that a customer is in the system. These statistics consider that the total number of customers 
and the total waiting time must include those that are actually being served.
​[10.7]​
​[10.8]​
​[10.9]​
​[10.10]​

238	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
EXAMPLE 10.5: Waiting Line Approximation
Let’s consider an example of a call center that takes orders for a mail order business. Dur-
ing the peak period, the average time between call arrivals (​ ¯ 
X​ a​) is 0.5 minute with a standard 
deviation (Sa) of 0.203 minute. The average time to service a call (​ ¯ 
X​ s​) is 4 minutes and the 
standard deviation of the service time (Ss) is 2.5 minutes. If the call center is using nine opera-
tors to service calls, how long would you expect customers to wait before being serviced? 
What would be the impact of adding an additional operator?
SOLUTION
Wq is the time we expect a customer to wait before being served. The best way to do these 
calculations is with a spreadsheet. The spreadsheet “Queue_Models.xls” can be easily used. 
The following steps are needed for the calculation of the customer wait time.
	
Step 1. Calculate expected customer arrival rate (λ), service rate per server (μ), and coef-
ficient of variation for the interarrival time (Ca) and service time (Cs).
​
                    λ = ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​ = ​  1 
___ 
0.5 ​
​ 
= 2 customers per minute
​ 
 
 
μ
​ 
= ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​ = ​ 1 
__ 4 ​ = 0.25 customer per minute
​ 
 
 
 
​C​ a​
​ 
= ​ 
​S​ a​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​ = ​ 0.203 
_____ 
0.5  ​ = 0.406
​ 
 
​C​ s​
​ 
= ​ 
​S​ s​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​ = ​ 2.5 
___ 
4  ​ = 0.625
 
​
	
Step 2. Calculate the expected server utilization (ρ).
​ρ = ​ λ 
___ 
Sμ ​ = ​ 
2 
______ 
9 × 0.25 ​ = 0.888889​   (Operators are expected to be busy 89 percent of the time.)
	
Step 3. Calculate the expected number of people waiting (Lq) and the length of the wait (Wq).
​L​ q​ = ​ ​ρ​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​s+1​)​ ​​ 
____ 
1 − ρ ​ × ​ 
​C​ a​ 
2 ​ + ​C​ s​ 
2​ 
_____ 
2 
​ = ​ ​0.888889​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​9+1​)​ ​​ 
 
__________ 
 
1 − 0.888889 ​ × ​ ​0.406​ 2​ + ​0.625​ 2​ 
 
___________ 
2 
​ = 1.476064 customers​
	
(This is the number of customers that we expect to be waiting on hold.)
​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 1.476064 
_______ 
2 
​ = 0.738032 minute​
On average, we expect customers to wait 44 seconds (0.738032 × 60) before talking to an 
operator.
	
For 10 operators, the calculations are as follows:
​ 
ρ
​ 
= ​ λ 
___ 
Sμ ​ = ​ 
2 
_______ 
10 × 0.25 ​ = 0.8  (Operators are expected to be busy 80 percent of the time.)
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​L​ q​​  = ​ ​ρ​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​s+1​)​ ​​ 
____ 
1 − ρ ​ × ​ 
​C​ a​ 
2 ​ + ​C​ s​ 
2​ 
_____ 
2 
​ = ​ ​0.8​ ​√ 
_______ 
2​(​10+1​)​ ​​ 
______ 
1 − 0.8  ​ × ​ ​0.406​ 2​ + ​0.625​ 2​ 
 
___________ 
2 
​ = 0.487579 customer​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​W​ q​
​ 
= ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 0.487579 
_______ 
2 
​ + 0.24379 minute
 
​
With 10 operators, the waiting time is cut about 66 percent to 14.6 seconds. If you add two 
operators (bringing the total to 11), the waiting time in queue is 6.4 seconds. Adding the first 
additional operator has a significant impact on customer wait time.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
239
Analyze complex waiting 
lines using simulation.
LO 10–3
This approximation is useful for many typical queuing situations. It is easy to imple-
ment using a spreadsheet such as the “10 Waiting Line Analysis.xls” spreadsheet. Keep in 
mind that the approximation assumes that the population to be served is large and custom-
ers arrive one at a time. The approximation can be useful for a quick analysis of a queuing 
situation.
SIMULATING WAITING LINES
Some waiting line problems that seem simple on first impression turn out to be extremely 
difficult or impossible to solve. Throughout this chapter, we have been treating waiting line 
situations that are independent; that is, either the entire system consists of a single phase or 
else each service that is performed in a series is independent. (This could happen if the output 
of one service location is allowed to build up in front of the next one so that, in essence, it 
becomes a calling population for the next service.) When a series of services is performed in 
sequence where the output rate of one becomes the input rate of the next, we can no longer 
use the simple formulas. This is also true for any problem where conditions do not meet the 
requirements of the equations, as specified in Exhibit 10.8. The technique best suited to solv-
ing this type of problem is computer simulation.
Waiting lines that occur in series and parallel (such as in assembly lines and workcen-
ters) usually cannot be solved mathematically. Often, they can be easily simulated using a 
spreadsheet.
Example: A Two-Stage Assembly Line
Consider an assembly line that makes a product of significant physical size, such as a refrig-
erator, stove, car, boat, TV, or furniture. Exhibit 10.12 shows two workstations on such a line.
The size of the product is an important consideration in assembly-line analysis and 
design because the number of products that can exist at each workstation affects worker 
performance. If the product is large, then the workstations are dependent on each other. 
Exhibit 10.12, for example, shows Bob and Ray working on a two-stage line where Bob’s 
output in Station 1 is fed to Ray in Station 2. If the workstations are adjacent, leaving no 
room for items between them, then Bob, by working slowly, would cause Ray to wait. Con-
versely, if Bob completes a product quickly (or if Ray takes longer to finish the task), then 
Bob must wait for Ray.
In this simulation, assume that Bob, the first worker on the line, can pull over a new item 
to work on whenever needed. We concentrate our analysis on the interactions between Bob 
and Ray.
Station 1
Station 2
Bob
Ray
Two Workstations on an Assembly Line
exhibit 10.12

240	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Seconds to  
Complete Task
Bob
Ray
Totals
Totals
  5–14.99
4
  4
15–24.99
6 
  5
25–34.99
10 
  6
35–44.99
20 
  7
45–54.99
40 
10
55–64.99
11 
  8
65–74.99
5 
  6
75–84.99
4 
  4
100
50
Data Collection Form for Worker Observation
exhibit 10.13
O b j e c t i v e  o f t h e  S t u d y
We would like to answer a number of questions about the assembly line from this study. A 
partial list would be
∙	 What is the average performance time of each worker?
∙	 What is the output rate of product through this line?
∙	 How much time does Bob wait for Ray?
∙	 How much time does Ray wait for Bob?
∙	 If the space between the two stations were increased so that items could be stored there and 
give workers some independence, how would this affect output rates, wait times, and so on?
D a t a  C o l le c t i o n
To simulate this system, we need the performance times of Bob and Ray. One way to collect 
these data is to divide the range of performance times into segments and then observe each 
worker. A simple check or tally mark in each of these segments results in a useful histogram 
of data.
Exhibit 10.13 shows the data collection form used to observe the performances of Bob and 
Ray. To simplify the procedure, performance time was divided into 10-second intervals. Bob 
was observed for 100 repetitions of the work task and Ray was observed just 50 times. The 
number of observations does not have to be the same, but the more there are and the smaller 
the size of the time segments, the more accurate the study will be. The trade-off is that more 
observations and smaller segments take more time and more people (as well as more time to 
program and run a simulation).
Collecting data in this way defines an empirical frequency distribution that can be used for 
the simulation. As shown with our example, an empirical distribution is derived from observ-
ing the relative frequency of some event. In this case, the time to complete a task was observed. 
Other examples that could be observed are the number of arrivals of customers in a line over 
some interval of time, demand for a product, and the time needed to serve a customer.
For a simulation, random numbers are matched to the frequency of a particular event. A 
random number is one that is totally uncorrelated to other numbers in a sequence. Appendix 
H contains a table of totally random digits. If we wanted to have random numbers that were 
between 00 and 99, numbers would be drawn from the table in the exact order they appear 
in the table. For example, 56, 97, 08, 31, and 25 would be the first five two-digit random 
numbers in the table. The spreadsheet function RAND() returns a number between zero and 
one, and the function RANDBETWEEN (minimum, maximum) returns numbers between the 
minimum and maximum values).
For this example, random numbers between 00 and 99 are used. If an event occurs ­ 
10 percent of the time, 10 numbers would be assigned; if an event occurs 32 percent of the 

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
241
Seconds
Time Frequencies for  
Bob (Operation 1)
RN  
Intervals
Time Frequencies for  
Ray (Operation 2)
RN  
Intervals
10
4
00–03
4
00–07
20
6
04–09
5
08–17
30
10
10–19
6
18–29
40
20
20–39
7
30–43
50
40
40–79
10
44–63
60
11
80–90
8
64–79
70
5
91–95
6
80–91
80
4
96–99
4
92–99
100
50
Random Number Intervals for Bob and Ray
exhibit 10.14
Bob
Ray
Item  
Number
Random 
Number
Start  
Time
Performance 
Time
Finish  
Time
Wait  
Time
Storage 
Space
Random 
Time
Start  
Time
Performance 
Time
Finish  
Time
Wait  
Time
1
56
  00
50
  50
0
83
  50
70
120
50
2
55
  50
50
100
20
0
47
120
50
170
3
84
120
60
180
0
08
180
20
200
10
4
36
180
40
220
0
05
220
10
230
20
5
26
220
40
260
0
42
260
40
300
30
6
95
260
70
330
0
95
330
80
410
30
7
66
330
50
380
30
0
17
410
20
430
8
03
410
10
420
10
0
21
430
30
460
9
57
430
50
480
0
31
480
40
520
20
10  
69
480
50
530
0
90
530
70
600
10
470  
60
430  
170  
Simulation of Bob and Ray—Two-Stage Assembly Line
exhibit 10.15
time, 32 numbers would be assigned; and so forth. In this way, the random numbers are 
matched to the empirical frequency distribution obtained from our observations.
Exhibit 10.14 contains the random number intervals assigned that correspond to the same ratio 
as the actual observed data. For example, Bob had 4 out of 100 times at 10 seconds. Therefore, if 
we used 100 numbers, we would assign 4 of those numbers as corresponding to 10 ­seconds. We 
could have assigned any four numbers, for example, 42, 18, 12, and 93. However, these would be 
a nuisance to search for, so we assign consecutive numbers, such as 00, 01, 02, and 03.
There were 50 observations of Ray, and there are two ways we could assign random 
­numbers. First, we could use just 50 numbers (say, 00 to 49) and ignore any numbers over 
that. However, this is wasteful because we would discard 50 percent of all the numbers from 
the list. Another choice would be to double the frequency number. For example, rather than 
assign, say, numbers 00 to 03 to account for the 4 observations out of 50 that took 10 seconds, 
we could assign numbers 00 to 07 to represent 8 observations out of 100, which is double the 
observed number but the same frequency. Actually, for this example and the speed of comput-
ers, the savings of time by doubling is insignificant.
Exhibit 10.15 shows a hand simulation of 10 items processed by Bob and Ray. The random 
numbers used were from Appendix H, starting at the first column of two numbers and work-
ing downward.

242	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Assume that we start out at time 00 and run it in continuous seconds (not bothering to 
convert this to hours and minutes). The first random number is 56 and corresponds to Bob’s 
performance at 50 seconds on the first item. The item is passed to Ray, who starts at 50 sec-
onds. Relating the next random number, 83, to Exhibit 10.14, we find that Ray takes 70 sec-
onds to complete the item. In the meantime, Bob starts on the next item at time 50 and takes  
50 seconds (random number 55), finishing at time 100. However, Bob cannot start on the 
third item until Ray gets through with the first item at time 120. Bob, therefore, has a wait 
time of 20 seconds. (If there was storage space between Bob and Ray, this item could have 
been moved out of Bob’s workstation, and Bob could have started the next item at time 100.) 
The remainder of the exhibit was calculated following the same pattern: obtaining a random 
number, finding the corresponding processing time, noting the wait time (if any), and comput-
ing the finish time. Note that, with no storage space between Bob and Ray, there was consid-
erable waiting time for both workers.
We can now answer some questions and make some statements about the system. For 
example,
∙	 The output time averages 60 seconds per unit (the complete time 600 for Ray divided 
by 10 units).
∙	 Utilization of Bob is ​ 470 
___ 
530 ​ = 88.7​ percent.
∙	 Utilization of Ray is ​ 430 
___ 
550 ​ = 78.2​ percent (disregarding the initial startup wait for the first 
item of 50 seconds).
∙	 The average performance time for Bob is ​ 470 
___ 
10 ​ = 47​ seconds.
∙	 The average performance time for Ray is ​ 430 
___ 
10 ​ = 43​ seconds.
We have demonstrated how this problem would be solved in a simple manual simulation. 
A sample of 10 is really too small to place much confidence in, so this problem should be run 
on a computer for several thousand iterations. (We extend this same problem further in the 
next section of this chapter.)
It is also vital to study the effect of item storage space between workers. The problem 
would be run to see what the throughput time and worker utilization times are with no stor-
age space between workers. A second run should increase this storage space to one unit, with 
the corresponding changes noted. Repeating the runs for two, three, four, and so on, offers 
management a chance to compute the additional cost of space compared with the increased 
use. Such increased space between workers may require a larger building, more materials and 
parts in the system, material handling equipment, and a transfer machine, plus added heat, 
light, building maintenance, and so on.
These also would be useful data for management to see what changes in the system would 
occur if one worker position was automated. The assembly line could be simulated using data 
from the automated process to see if such a change would be cost justified.
Spreadsheet Simulation
As we have stated throughout this book, spreadsheets are very useful for a variety of prob-
lems. Exhibit 10.16 shows Bob and Ray’s two-stage assembly line on an Excel spreadsheet. 
The procedure follows the same pattern as our manual display in Exhibit 10.15.
The total simulation on Excel passed through 1,200 iterations (shown in Exhibit 10.17); 
that is, 1,200 parts were finished by Ray. Simulation, as an analytic tool, has an advantage 
over quantitative methods in that it is dynamic, whereas analytic methods show long-run aver-
age performance. As you can see in Exhibit 10.17A, there is an unmistakable startup (or 
transient) phase. We could even raise some questions about the long-term operation of the line 
because it does not seem to have settled to a constant (steady state) value, even after the 1,200 
items. Exhibit 10.17A shows 100 items that pass through the Bob and Ray two-stage system. 
Notice the wide variation in time for the first units completed. These figures are the average 
time that units take. It is a cumulative number; that is, the first unit takes the time generated 

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
243
Bob
Ray
Item
RN
Start  
Time
Perf.  
Time
Finish 
Time
Wait  
Time
RN
Start  
Time
Perf.  
time
Finish 
Time
Wait  
Time
Average 
Time/Unit
Total  
Time
Average 
Time in 
System
  1
93
  0
70
  70
  0
  0
  70
10
  80
70
80.0
80
80.0
  2
52
  70
50
120
  0
44
120
50
170
40
85.0
100  
90.0
  3
15
120
30
150
20
72
170
60
230
  0
76.7
110  
96.7
  4
64
170
50
220
10
35
230
40
270
  0
67.5
100  
97.5
  5
86
230
60
290
  0
  2
290
10
300
20
60.0
70
92.0
  6
20
290
40
330
  0
82
330
70
400
30
66.7
110  
95.0
  7
83
330
60
390
10
31
400
40
440
  0
62.9
110  
97.1
  8
89
400
60
460
  0
13
460
20
480
20
60.0
80
95.0
  9
69
460
50
510
  0
53
510
50
560
30
62.2
100  
95.6
10
41
510
50
560
  0
48
560
50
610
  0
61.0
100  
96.0
11
32
560
40
600
10
13
610
20
630
  0
57.3
70
93.6
12
  1
610
10
620
10
67
630
60
690
  0
57.5
80
92.5
13
11
630
30
660
30
91
690
70
760
  0
58.5
130  
95.4
14
  2
690
10
700
60
76
760
60
820
  0
58.6
130  
97.9
15
11
760
30
790
30
41
820
40
860
  0
57.3
100  
98.0
16
55
820
50
870
  0
34
870
40
910
10
56.9
90
97.5
17
18
870
30
900
10
28
910
30
940
  0
55.3
70
95.9
18
39
910
40
950
  0
53
950
50
1000  
10
55.6
90
95.6
19
13
950
30
980
20
41
1000  
40
1040  
  0
54.7
90
95.3
20
  7
1000  
20
1020  
20
21
1040  
30
1070  
  0
53.5
70
94.0
21
29
1040  
40
1080  
  0
54
1080  
50
1130  
10
53.8
90
93.8
22
58
1080  
50
1130  
  0
39
1130  
40
1170  
  0
53.2
90
93.6
23
95
1130  
70
1200  
  0
70
1200  
60
1260  
30
54.8
130  
95.2
24
27
1200  
40
1240  
20
60
1260  
50
1310  
  0
54.6
110  
95.8
25
59
1260  
50
1310  
  0
93
1310  
80
1390  
  0
55.6
130  
97.2
26
85
1310  
60
1370  
20
51
1390  
50
1440  
  0
55.4
130  
98.5
27
12
1390  
30
1420  
20
35
1440  
40
1480  
  0
54.8
90
98.1
28
34
1440  
40
1480  
  0
51
1480  
50
1530  
  0
54.6
90
97.9
29
60
1480  
50
1530  
  0
87
1530  
70
1600  
  0
55.2
120  
98.6
30
97
1530  
80
1610  
  0
29
1610  
30
1640  
10
54.7
110  
99.0
Bob and Ray Two-Stage Assembly Line on Microsoft Excel 
exhibit 10.16
by the random numbers. The average time for two units is the average time of the sum of the 
first and second units. The average time for three units is the average time for the sum of the 
first three units, and so on. This display could have almost any starting shape, not necessarily 
what we have shown. It all depends on the stream of random numbers. What we can be sure of 
is that the times do oscillate for a while until they settle down as units are finished and smooth 
the average.
Exhibit 10.17B shows the average time that parts spend in the system. At the start, the 
display shows an increasing amount of time in the system. This can be expected because the 
system started empty and there are no interruptions for parts passing from Bob to Ray. Often, 
parts enter the system and may have to wait between stages as work-in-process; this causes 
delays for subsequent parts and adds to the waiting time. As time goes on, however, stability 

244	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
C. Results of Simulating 1,200 Units Processed by Bob and Ray
Items
120
60
180
300
420
540
660
780
900
1020
1140
240
360
480
600
720
840
960
1080
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
104
102
106
108
110
A. Average Time per Unit of Output (Finish Time/Number 
of Units)
Items
Seconds
52
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
56
60
64
68
72
76
80
84
88
B. Average Time the Product Spends  
in the System
Bob
Ray
Unit
Utilization
   0.81
   0.85
Average wait time
10.02
   9.63
Average performance time
46.48
46.88
Average time per unit
57.65
Average time in system
103.38  
exhibit 10.17
should occur unless the capacity of the second stage is less than the first stage’s. In our present 
case, we did not allow space between them. Therefore, if Bob finished first, he had to wait for 
Ray. If Ray finished first, he had to wait for Bob.
Exhibit 10.17C shows the results of simulating Bob and Ray completing 1,200 units of 
product. Compare these figures to those we obtained simulating 10 items by hand. Not too 
bad, is it? The average performance time for Bob is shown as 46.48 seconds. This is close to 
the weighted average of what you would expect in the long run. For Bob, it is (10 × 4 + 20 ×  
6 + 30 × 10, etc.) 100 = 45.9 seconds. Ray’s expected time is (10 × 4 + 20 × 5 + 30 × 6, etc.) 
50 = 46.4 seconds.
The two-stage assembly line simulation is a good example of a specially designed spread-
sheet for analyzing this problem. More general simulation programs built within Excel are 
available. John McClain, professor of operations management at Cornell University, has 
developed two simulation spreadsheets that can be used to demonstrate a variety of common 
systems. These spreadsheets have been included on this book’s website.
The first spreadsheet, titled “LineSim,” is designed to analyze a simple serial production 
line. This is a system with a series of machines; the output of one machine goes to a storage 
area, which is the input to the next machine. The spreadsheet can be easily configured for 
different numbers of machines, different buffer sizes, and numerous processing time distribu-
tions. In addition, machine breakdowns and repairs can be modeled. The second spreadsheet, 
“CellSim,” is similar but allows machines to be arranged more generally. We thank Professor 
McClain for making these spreadsheets available.
Simulation Programs and Languages
Simulation models can be classified as continuous or discrete. Continuous models are 
based on mathematical equations and therefore are continuous, with values for all points 

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
245
in time. In contrast, discrete simulation occurs only at specific points. For example, cus-
tomers arriving at a bank teller’s window would be discrete simulation. The simulation 
jumps from point to point: the arrival of a customer, the start of service, the ending of 
service, the arrival of the next customer, and so on. Discrete simulation also can be trig-
gered to run by units of time (daily, hourly, minute by minute). This is called event simu-
lation; points in between either have no value to our simulation or cannot be computed 
because of the lack of some sort of mathematical relationship to link the succeeding 
events. Operations and supply management applications almost exclusively use discrete 
(event) simulation.
Simulation programs also can be categorized as general purpose and special purpose. 
General-purpose software allows programmers to build their own models. Special-purpose 
software simulation programs are specially built to simulate specific applications. In a spe-
cialized simulation for manufacturing, for example, provisions in the model allow for specify-
ing the number of workcenters, their description, arrival rates, processing time, batch sizes, 
quantities of work in process, and available resources including labor, sequences, and so on. 
Additionally, the program may allow the observer to watch the animated operation and see the 
quantities and flows throughout the system as the simulation is running. Data are collected, 
analyzed, and presented in a form most suitable for that type of application. The software 
package called ExtendSim is featured in the Breakthrough box titled “Animation and Simula-
tion Software.”
As a last comment on simulation programs, do not rule out spreadsheets for simulation. As 
you noticed, we simulated Bob and Ray on a spreadsheet in the preceding section. The sim-
plicity in using a spreadsheet for simulation may well compensate for any needed reduction in 
the complexity of the problem in order to use the spreadsheet.
@RISK is an add-in program that works with Microsoft Excel. The program adds many 
useful simulation-related functions to the spreadsheet. Using @RISK automates the process 
of taking random values from a specified distribution function, automates the recalculation 
of the spreadsheet with the new random values, and captures output values and statistics. @
RISK simplifies the process of building and running spreadsheet simulations.
Animation and Simulation Software
Call centers are a good application for simulation. They are 
easy to model, and information is available about the service 
time, arrival rates, renege times, and the paths that the calls 
take through the center. In this call center, there are four 
types of calls arriving at random intervals and four types of 
agents who are able to answer the calls. Each agent type is 
specialized in a particular call type. However, some agents 
are able to answer calls of different types.
This was quickly modeled using ExtendSim, a product 
of the Imagine That! company. The product makes exten-
sive use of animation so that the user can actually watch the 
call center operate. You can learn more about this product 
at www.extendsim.com.
OSCM AT WORK

246	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Concept Connections
LO 10–1   Understand what a waiting line problem is.
Summary
	∙	 The study of waiting in line is the essence of this prob-
lem. Queuing theory is the mathematical analysis of 
the waiting line. 
	∙	 A queuing (or waiting line) system is composed of 
three major parts: (1) the customers arriving to the 
system, (2) the servicing of the customers, and (3) 
how customers exit the system. 
	∙	 Queuing theory assumes that customers arrive accord-
ing to a Poisson arrival distribution and are served 
according to an exponential service time distribution. 
These are specific probability distributions that often 
match well with actual situations.
Key Terms
Queues  A line of waiting persons, jobs, things, or the 
like.
Queuing system  A process where customers wait in line 
for service.
Arrival rate  The expected number of customers that 
arrive each period.
Exponential distribution  A probability distribution asso-
ciated with the time between arrivals.
Poisson distribution  Probability distribution for the 
number of arrivals during each time period.
Service rate  The number of customers a server can 
handle during a given time period.
Key Formulas
Exponential distribution
​​[10.1]​​  f(t ) = λ ​e​ −λt​​  ​
Poisson distribution
​​[10.2]​​  ​P​ T​(n ) = ​ ​(λT)​ n​ ​e​ −λT​ 
_______ 
n ! 
​​ ​
LO 10–2   Analyze waiting line problems.
Summary
	∙	 There are many different waiting line models, and 
in this chapter, four of the most common ones are 
covered. 
	∙	 Model 1 is useful for a simple situation where there 
is a single line of customers who arrive according to 
a Poisson distribution, and who are processed by a 
single server that serves each customer in the order 
they came according to an exponential distribution 
(for example, an automatic teller machine). 
	∙	 Model 2 is similar to Model 1 with the difference 
being that it takes exactly the same time to serve each 
customer (i.e., there is no service time variability) (for 
example, a robot making the same part over and over 
again). 
	∙	 Model 3 is like Model 1 but two or more servers are 
available (for example, a bank lobby with multiple 
tellers). 
	∙	 Model 4 differs in that only a small number of custom-
ers exist (for example, a mechanic that services four 
specific printing presses when they break down). 
	∙	 In addition to the four models, a simpler model that 
approximates waiting times is also covered.
Key Formulas
Model 1 (See Exhibit 10.8.)
​
​L​ q​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
______ 
μ(μ − λ ) ​     ​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​     ​P​ n​ = ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​(​ λ 
__ 
μ ​)​ 
n
​     ​P​ 0​ = ​(​1 − ​ λ _ 
μ ​)​
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
​L​ s​ = ​  λ 
____ 
μ − λ ​     ​W​ s​ = ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​ ρ = ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​
​
​
​[10 . 3]​ ​

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
247
Model 2
​
​
​ 
​L​ q​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
_______ 
2μ(μ − λ) ​     ​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
​L​ s​ = ​L​ q​ + ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​     ​W​ s​ = ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​
  ​
Model 3
​
​
​ 
​L​ s​ = ​L​ q​ + λ / μ     ​W​ s​ = ​L​ s​ / λ
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
​W​ q​ = ​L​ q​ / λ ​    P​ ​w​  ​​ = ​L​ q​(​ Sμ 
_ 
λ ​ − 1​)​
​
Model 4
​
​
​ 
X = ​  T 
____ 
T + U ​     H = FNX    L = N(1 − F )     n = L + H
​ 
 
 
 
 
​​ 
​P​ n​ = ​ 
N ! 
______ 
(N − n ) ! ​ ​X​ n​ ​P​ 0​     J = NF(1 − X)​ 
 
 
 
​
​ 
W = ​ L(T + U) 
______ 
N − L  ​ = ​ LT 
___ 
H ​     F = ​  T + U 
_______ 
T + U + W ​
 
​
Waiting time approximation
​​X​ = ​∑ 
i=1​ 
N
 ​ ​x​ i​ ∕ N​     (mean)
​s = ​√ 
__________
 
​ 
​∑ 
i=1​ 
N
 ​ ​(​x​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
X ​ )​ 2​ 
__________ 
N − 1 
​ ​​     (standard deviation)
​ ​
​ρ =  ​ λ 
___ 
Sμ ​    ​L​ q​ =  ​ ​ρ​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​S+1​)​ ​​ 
____ 
1 − ρ ​ × ​ 
​C​ a​ 
2 ​ + ​C​ s​ 
2​ 
_____ 
2 
​    ​L​ s​ = ​L​ q​ + Sρ
​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​      ​W​ s​ = ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​ ​
​[10.7]​
​[10.8]​
​C​ s​ = ​ 
​S​ s​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​    ​C​ a​ = ​ 
​S​ a​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​    λ = ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ a​ ​    μ = ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ s​ ​ ​
​[10.10]​
​ ​[10.4]​ ​
​ ​[10.5]​ ​
​[10.6]​ ​
LO 10–3   Analyze complex waiting lines using simulation.
Summary
	∙	 A more general way to analyze waiting lines is simula-
tion. The advantage of using simulation over the queu-
ing models is that fewer assumptions need to be made. 
Also, much more complex situations can be analyzed 
using simulation. 
	∙	 A simple two-stage assembly line is analyzed to show 
an example of using simulation. The simulation is per-
formed manually and also with a spreadsheet.
[10.9]

248	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Quick Lube Inc. operates a fast lube and oil change garage. On a typical day, customers arrive 
at the rate of three per hour and lube jobs are performed at an average rate of one every 15 
minutes. The mechanics operate as a team on one car at a time.
Assuming Poisson arrivals and exponential service, find
	a.	 Utilization of the lube team.
	b.	 The average number of cars in line.
	c.	 The average time a car waits before it is lubed.
	d.	 The total time it takes to go through the system (that is, waiting in line plus lube time).
Solution
λ = 3, μ = 4
	a.	 Utilization ​ρ = ​ λ 
__ 
μ ​ = ​ 3 
__ 4 ​ = 75%​.
	b.	 ​L​ q​ = ​ 
​λ​ 2​ 
________ 
μ(μ − λ) ​ = ​ 
​3​ 2​ 
________ 
4(4 − 3) ​ = ​ 9 
__ 4 ​ = 2.25​ cars in line.
	c.	 ​W​ q​ = ​ 
​L​ q​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 2.25 
____ 
3  ​ = 0.75​ hour, or 45 minutes.
	d.	 ​W​ s​ = ​ 
​L​ s​
 
__ 
λ ​ = ​  λ 
_____ 
μ − λ ​ ╱ λ = ​  3 
_____ 
4 − 3 ​ ╱ 3 = 1​ hour (waiting + lube).
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
American Vending Inc. (AVI) supplies vended food to a large university. Because students often 
kick the machines out of anger and frustration, management has a constant repair problem. The 
machines break down on an average of three per hour, and the breakdowns are distributed in a 
Poisson manner. Downtime costs the company $25 per hour per machine, and each maintenance 
worker gets $16 per hour. One worker can service machines at an average rate of five per hour, 
distributed exponentially; two workers working together can service seven per hour, distributed 
exponentially; and a team of three workers can do eight per hour, distributed exponentially.
What is the optimal maintenance crew size for servicing the machines?
Solution
Case I—One worker:
λ = 3/hour Poisson, μ = 5/hour exponential
The average number of machines in the system is
​L​ s​ = ​  λ 
____ 
μ − λ ​ = ​  3 
____ 
5 − 3 ​ = ​ 3 
__ 2 ​ = 1​1 ⁄ 2​ machines​
Downtime cost is $25 × 1.5 = $37.50 per hour; repair cost is $16.00 per hour; and total cost 
per hour for 1 worker is $37.50 + $16.00 = $53.50.
LO10–2
Downtime cost is 1.5 × $25 = $37.50
Labor (1 worker × $16)
=   16.00
     $53.50
Downtime (0.75 × $25) = $18.75
Labor (2 workers × $16) =   32.00
     $50.75
Case II—Two workers:
λ = 3, μ = 7
​L​ s​ = ​  λ 
____ 
μ − λ ​ = ​  3 
____ 
7 − 3 ​ = 0.75 machine​

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
249
Case III—Three workers:
λ = 3, μ = 8
​L​ s​ = ​  λ 
____ 
μ − λ ​ = ​  3 
____ 
8 − 3 ​ = ​ 3 
__ 5 ​ = 0.60 machine​
Downtime (0.60 × $25) = $15.00
Labor (3 workers × $16) =   48.00
     $63.00
Comparing the costs for one, two, or three workers, we see that Case II with two workers is 
the optimal decision.
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
American Bank has a single automated teller machine (ATM) located in a shopping center. 
Data were collected during a period of peak usage on Saturday afternoon, and it was found 
that the average time between customer arrivals is 2.1 minutes with a standard deviation of 
0.8 minute. It also was found it takes an average of 1.9 minutes (with a standard deviation of 
2 minutes) for a customer to complete a transaction. Approximately how long will customers 
need to wait in line during the peak usage period?
Solution
Step 1. Calculate expected customer arrival rate (λ), service rate per server (µ), and coefficient 
of variation for the arrival distribution (Ca) and service distribution (Cs).
​ 
λ
​ 
= ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
​X​ a​ ​
​ 
= ​  1 
___ 
2.1 ​
​ 
= 0.47619 customer per minute
​ 
 
 
 
μ
​ 
= ​ 1 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X​ s​ ​
​ 
= ​  1 
___ 
1.9 ​
​ 
= 0.526316 customer per minute
​ 
 
 
 
​C​ a​
​ 
= ​ 
​S​ a​ 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X​ a​ ​
​ 
= ​ 0.8 
___ 
2.1 ​
​ 
= 0.380952
​ 
 
 
​C​ s​
​ 
= ​ 
​S​ s​
 
__ 
​ ¯ 
X​ s​ ​
​ 
= ​  2 
___ 
1.9 ​
​ 
= 1.052632
 
​
Step 2. Calculate the expected server utilization (ρ).
​ρ = ​ λ 
___ 
Sμ ​ = ​ 
0.47619 
__________ 
 
1 × 0.526316 ​ = 0.904762    (Operators are expected to be busy  
90.5 percent of the time.)​
Step 3. Calculate the expected number of people waiting (Lq) and the length of the wait (Wq).
​
​L​ q​
​ 
= ​ ​ρ​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​S+1​)​ ​​ 
____ 
1 − ρ ​ × ​ 
​C​ a​ 
2 ​ + ​C​ s​ 
2​ 
_____ 
2 
​ = ​ ​0.904762​ ​√ 
______ 
2​(​1+1​)​ ​​ 
 
__________ 
 
1 − 0.904762 ​ × ​ ​0.380952​ 2​ + ​1.052632​ 2​ 
 
________________ 
2 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= 5.355596 customer    (This is the number of customers we expect to be waiting  
on hold.)
​
Wq = ​ 
Lq 
__ 
λ ​ = ​ 5.385596 
________ 
0.47619 ​ = 11.30975 minutes
On average, we expect customers to wait 11 minutes and 19 seconds (11 minutes plus 0.30975 
minutes × 60 seconds/minute) before having access to the ATM.
SOLVED PROBLEM 4
A rural clinic receives a delivery of fresh plasma once each week from a central blood bank. 
The supply varies according to demand from other clinics and hospitals in the region but 
ranges between four and nine pints of the most widely used blood type, type O. The num-
ber of patients per week requiring this blood varies from zero to four, and each patient may 

250	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
need from one to four pints. Given the following delivery quantities, patient distribution, and 
demand per patient, what would be the number of pints in excess or lacking for a six-week 
period? Use simulation to derive your answer. Consider that plasma is storable and there is 
currently none on hand.
Delivery
Number of Patients
Patient Demand
Pints
Probability
Random 
Number
Blood
Probability
Random 
Number
Pints
Random 
Probability
Number
4
.15
00–14  
0
.25
00–24
1
.40 
00–39
5
.20
15–34  
1
.25
25–49
2
.30 
40–69
6
.25
35–59  
2
.30
50–79
3
.20 
70–89
7
.15
60–74  
3
.15
80–94
4
.10 
90–99
8
.15
75–89  
4
.05
95–99
9
.10
90–99  
Patient Distribution
Delivery Quantities
Patients per Week 
Requiring Blood
Probability
Demand per Patient
Pints per Week
Probability
Pints
Probability
4
0.15
0
0.25
1
0.40
5
0.20
1
0.25
2
0.30
6
0.25
2
0.30
3
0.20
7
0.15
3
0.15
4
0.10
8
0.15
4
0.05
9
0.10
Week  
No.
Beginning 
Inventory
Quantity  
Delivered
Total  
Blood  
on Hand
Patients  
Needing Blood
Patient
Quantity  
Needed
Number 
of Pints 
Remaining
RN
Pints
RN
Patients
RN
Pints
1
  0
 74
7
  7
85
3
First
21
1
  6
Second
06
1
  5
Third
71
3
  2
2
  2
 31
5
  7
28
1
96
4
  3
3
  3
 02
4
  7
72
2
First
12
1
  6
Second
67
2
  4
4
  4
 53
6
10
44
1
23
1
  9
5
  9
 16
5
14
16
0
14
6
14
 40
6
20
83
3
First
65
2
18
Second
34
1
17
Third
82
3
14
7
14
Solution
First, develop a random number sequence, and then simulate.
At the end of six weeks, there were 14 pints on hand.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
251
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Distinguish between a channel and a phase.
	  2.	 In what way might the first-come, first-served rule be unfair to the customer waiting for 
service in a bank or hospital?
	  3.	 Define, in a practical sense, what is meant by an exponential service time.
	  4.	 Would you expect the exponential distribution to be a good approximation of service 
times for
	
a.  Buying an airline ticket at the airport?
	
b.  Riding a merry-go-round at a carnival?
	
c.  Checking out of a hotel?
	
d.  Completing a midterm exam in your OSCM class?
	  5.	 Would you expect the Poisson distribution to be a good approximation of
	
a.  Runners crossing the finish line in the Boston Marathon?
	
b.  Arrival times of the students in your OSCM class?
	
c.  Arrival times of the bus to your stop at school?
	  6.	 What major cost trade-off must be made in managing waiting line situations?
	  7.	 Which assumptions are necessary to employ the formulas given for Model 1?
	  8.	 Why is simulation often called a technique of last resort?
	  9.	 Must you use a computer to get good information from a simulation? Explain.
	10.	 What methods are used to analyze time in a simulation model? How do they work?
	11.	 What are the pros and cons of starting a simulation with the system empty? With the 
system in equilibrium?
	12.	 Distinguish between known mathematical distributions and empirical distributions. What 
information is needed to simulate using a known mathematical distribution?
LO 10–1
LO 10–2
LO 10–3
Objective Questions
	  1.	 The exponential distribution is often used to model what in a queuing system?
	  2.	 If the average time between customer arrivals is eight minutes, what is the hourly arrival 
rate?
	  3.	 How much time, on average, would a server need to spend on a customer to achieve a 
service rate of 20 customers per hour?
	  4.	 What is the term used for the situation where a potential customer arrives at a service 
operation and decides to leave upon seeing a long line?
	  5.	 What is the most commonly used priority rule for setting queue discipline, likely because 
it is seen as most fair?
	  6.	 Students arrive at the Administrative Services Office at an average of one every 15 min-
utes, and their requests take, on average, 10 minutes to be processed. The service counter 
is staffed by only one clerk, Judy Gumshoes, who works eight hours per day. Assume 
Poisson arrivals and exponential service times. (Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  What percentage of time is Judy idle?
	
b.  How much time, on average, does a student spend waiting in line?
	
c.  How long is the (waiting) line, on average?
	
d.  What is the probability that an arriving student (just before entering the Administra-
tive Services Office) will find at least one other student waiting in line?
	  7.	 Burrito King (a new fast-food franchise opening up nationwide) has successfully auto-
mated burrito production for its drive-up fast-food establishments. The Burro-Master 
9000 requires a constant 45 seconds to produce a batch of burritos. It has been estimated 
that customers will arrive at the drive-up window according to a Poisson distribution at 
an average of one every 50 seconds. To help determine the amount of space needed for 
the line at the drive-up window, Burrito King would like to know the expected average 
LO 10–1
LO 10–2

252	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
time in the system, the average line length (in cars), and the average number of cars in the 
system (both in line and at the window).
	  8.	 The Bijou Theater shows vintage movies. Customers arrive at the theater line at the rate 
of 100 per hour. The ticket seller averages 30 seconds per customer, which includes plac-
ing validation stamps on customers’ parking lot receipts and punching their frequent 
watcher cards. (Because of these added services, many customers don’t get in until after 
the feature has started.)
	
a.  What is the average customer time in the system?
	
b.  What would be the effect on customer time in the system of having a second ticket 
taker doing nothing but validations and card punching, thereby cutting the average 
service time to 20 seconds?
	
c.  Would system waiting time be less than you found in (b) if a second window was 
opened with each server doing all three tasks?
	  9.	 To support National Heart Week, the Heart Association plans to install a free blood pres-
sure testing booth in El Con Mall for the week. Previous experience indicates that, on 
average, 10 persons per hour request a test. Assume arrivals are Poisson distributed from 
an infinite population. Blood pressure measurements can be made at a constant time of 
five minutes each. Assume the queue length can be infinite with FCFS discipline.
	
a.  What average number in line can be expected?
	
b.  What average number of persons can be expected to be in the system?
	
c.  What is the average amount of time a person can expect to spend in line?
	
d.  On average, how much time will it take to measure a person’s blood pressure, includ-
ing waiting time?
	
e.  On weekends, the arrival rate can be expected to increase to over 12 per hour. What 
effect will this have on the number in the waiting line?
	10.	 A cafeteria serving line has a coffee urn from which customers serve themselves. Arriv-
als at the urn follow a Poisson distribution at the rate of three per minute. In serving 
themselves, customers take about 15 seconds, exponentially distributed.
	
a.  How many customers would you expect to see, on average, at the coffee urn?
	
b.  How long would you expect it to take to get a cup of coffee?
	
c.  What percentage of time is the urn being used?
	
d.  What is the probability that three or more people are in the cafeteria?
	
e.  If the cafeteria installs an automatic vendor that dispenses a cup of coffee at a constant 
time of 15 seconds, how does this change your answers to (a) and (b)?
	11.	 An engineering firm retains a technical specialist to assist four design engineers working 
on a project. The help that the specialist gives engineers ranges widely in time consump-
tion. The specialist has some answers available in memory, others require computation, 
and still others require significant search time. On average, each request for assistance 
takes the specialist one hour.
	 	 	   The engineers require help from the specialist on the average of once each day. Because 
each assistance takes about an hour, each engineer can work for seven hours, on average, 
without assistance. One further point: Engineers needing help do not interrupt if the spe-
cialist is already involved with another problem.
Treat this as a finite queuing problem and answer the following questions:
	
a.  How many engineers, on average, are waiting for the technical specialist for help?
	
b.  What is the average time an engineer has to wait for the specialist?
	
c.  What is the probability an engineer will have to wait in line for the specialist?
	12.	 L. Winston Martin (an allergist) has an excellent system for handling his regular patients 
who come in just for allergy injections. Patients arrive for an injection and fill out a 
name slip, which is then placed in an open slot that passes into another room staffed 
by one or two nurses. The specific injections for a patient are prepared, and the patient 
is called through a speaker system into the room to receive the injection. At certain 
times during the day, patient load drops and only one nurse is needed to administer the 
injections.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
253
	 	 	   Let’s focus on the simpler case of the two—namely, when there is one nurse. Also, 
assume that patients arrive in a Poisson fashion and the service rate of the nurse is expo-
nentially distributed. During this slower period, patients arrive with an interarrival time 
of approximately three minutes. It takes the nurse an average of two minutes to prepare 
the patients’ serum and administer the injection.
	
a.  What is the average number you would expect to see in Dr. Martin’s facilities?
	
b.  How long would it take for a patient to arrive, get an injection, and leave?
	
c.  What is the probability that there will be three or more patients on the premises?
	
d.  What is the utilization of the nurse?
	
e.  Assume three nurses are available. Each takes an average of two minutes to prepare 
the patients’ serum and administer the injection. What is the average total time of a 
patient in the system?
	13.	 A graphics reproduction firm has four units of equipment that are automatic but occasion-
ally become inoperative because of the need for supplies, maintenance, or repair. Each 
unit requires service roughly twice each hour, or, more precisely, each unit of equipment 
runs an average of 30 minutes before needing service. Service times vary widely, ranging 
from a simple service (such as pressing a restart switch or repositioning paper) to more 
involved equipment disassembly. The average service time, however, is five minutes.
  Equipment downtime results in a loss of $60 per hour. The one equipment attendant is 
paid $18 per hour.
  Using finite queuing analysis, answer the following questions:
	
a.  What is the average number of units in line?
	
b.  What is the average number of units still in operation?
	
c.  What is the average number of units being serviced?
	
d.  The firm is considering adding another attendant at the same $18 rate. Should the firm 
do it?
	14.	 Benny the Barber owns a one-chair shop. At barber college, they told Benny that his cus-
tomers would exhibit a Poisson arrival distribution and that he would provide an expo-
nential service distribution. His market survey data indicate that customers arrive at a rate 
of two per hour. It will take Benny an average of 20 minutes to give a haircut. Based on 
these figures, find the following:
	
a.  The average number of customers waiting.
	
b.  The average time a customer waits.
	
c.  The average time a customer is in the shop.
	
d.  The average utilization of Benny’s time.
	15.	 Bobby, another enterprising barber, is thinking about advertising in the local newspaper 
because he is idle 45 percent of the time. Currently, customers arrive, on average, every 
40 minutes. What does the arrival rate need to be for Bobby to be busy 85 percent of the 
time?
	16.	 Customers enter the camera department of a store at the average rate of six per hour. The 
department is staffed by one employee, who takes an average of six minutes to serve each 
arrival. Assume this is a simple Poisson arrival, exponentially distributed service time 
situation.
	
a.  As a casual observer, how many people would you expect to see in the camera depart-
ment (excluding the clerk)? How long would a customer expect to spend in the camera 
department (total time)?
	
b.  What is the utilization of the clerk?
	
c.  What is the probability that there are more than two people in the camera department 
(excluding the clerk)?
	
d.  Another clerk has been hired for the camera department who also takes an average of 
six minutes to serve each arrival. How long would a customer expect to spend in the 
department now?
	17.	 An office employs several clerks who create documents and has one operator who enters 
the document information in a computer system. The group creates documents at a rate 

254	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
of 25 per hour. The operator can enter the information with an average exponentially dis-
tributed time of two minutes. Assume the population is infinite, arrivals are Poisson, and 
queue length is infinite with FCFS discipline.
	
a.  Calculate the percentage utilization of the operator.
	
b.  Calculate the average number of documents in the system.
	
c.  Calculate the average time in the system.
	
d.  Calculate the probability of four or more documents being in the system.
	
e.  If another clerk were added, the document origination rate would increase to 30 per hour. 
What would the expected average number of documents in the system become? Show why.
	18.	 A study-aid desk staffed by a graduate student has been established to answer students’ 
questions and help in working problems in your OSCM course. The desk is staffed eight 
hours per day. The dean wants to know how the facility is working. Statistics show that 
students arrive at a rate of four per hour and the distribution is approximately Poisson. 
Assistance time averages 10 minutes, distributed exponentially. Assume population and 
line length can be infinite and queue discipline is FCFS.
	
a.  Calculate the percentage utilization of the graduate student.
	
b.  Calculate the average number of students in the system, excluding the graduate stu-
dent service.
	
c.  Calculate the average time in the system.
	
d.  Calculate the probability of four or more students being in line or being served.
	
e.  Before a test, the arrival of students increases to six per hour, on average. What will 
the new average line length be?
	19.	 At a border inspection station, vehicles arrive at the rate of 10 per hour in a Poisson dis-
tribution. For simplicity in this problem, assume there is only one lane and one inspector, 
who can inspect vehicles at the rate of 12 per hour in an exponentially distributed fashion.
	
a.	 What is the average length of the waiting line?
	
b.	
What is the average time that a vehicle must wait to get through the system?
	
c.	
What is the utilization of the inspector?
	
d.	
What is the probability that when you arrive there will be three or more vehicles 
ahead of you?
	20.	 During the campus Spring Fling, the bumper car amusement attraction has a problem of 
cars becoming disabled and in need of repair. Repair personnel can be hired at the rate 
of $20 per hour, but they only work as one team. Thus, if one person is hired, he or she 
works alone; two or three people work together on the same repair.
  One repairer can fix cars in an average time of 30 minutes. Two repairers take 20 min-
utes, and three take 15 minutes. While these cars are down, lost income is $40 per hour. 
Cars tend to break down at the rate of two per hour.
	 	 	   How many repairers should be hired?
	21.	 A toll tunnel has decided to experiment with the use of a debit card for the collection of 
tolls. Initially, only one lane will be used. Cars are estimated to arrive at this experimental 
lane at the rate of 750 per hour. It will take exactly four seconds to verify the debit card. 
(Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  In how much time would you expect the customer to wait in line, pay with the debit 
card, and leave?
	
b.  How many cars would you expect to see in the system?
	22.	 You are planning employees for a bank. You plan for six tellers. Tellers take 15 minutes  
per customer, with a standard deviation of seven minutes. Customers will arrive one every 
three minutes according to an exponential distribution (recall that the standard deviation 
is equal to the mean). Every customer who arrives eventually gets serviced.
	
a.  On average, how many customers would be waiting in line?
	
b.  On average, how long would a customer spend in the bank?
	
c.  If a customer arrived, saw the line, and decided not to get in line, that customer has 
________.
	
d.  A customer who enters the line but decides to leave the line before getting service is 
said to have ________.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
255
	23.	 You are planning the new layout for the local branch of the Sixth Ninth Bank. You are 
considering separate cashier windows for the three different classes of service. Each class 
of service would be separate, with its own cashiers and customers. Oddly enough, each 
class of service, while different, has exactly the same demand and service times. People 
for one class of service arrive every four minutes and arrival times are exponentially 
distributed (the standard deviation is equal to the mean). It takes seven minutes to ser-
vice each customer, and the standard deviation of the service times is three minutes. You 
assign two cashiers to each type of service.
	
a.  On average, how long will each line be at each of the cashier windows?
	
b.  On average, how long will a customer spend in the bank (assume they enter, go directly 
to one line, and leave as soon as service is complete)?
	
	  You decide to consolidate all the cashiers so they can handle all types of customers 
without increasing the service times.
	
c.  What will happen to the amount of time each cashier spends idle? (increase, decrease, 
stay the same, depend on ________)
	
d.  What will happen to the average amount of time a customer spends in the bank? 
(increase, decrease, stay the same, depend on ________)
	24.	 A local fast-food restaurant wants to analyze its drive-thru window. At this time, the only 
information known is the average number of customers in the system (4.00) and the aver-
age time a customer spends at the restaurant (1.176 minutes). What are the arrival rate 
and the service rate?
	25.	 The manager of a small post office is concerned that the growing township is overloading 
the one-window service being offered. Sample data are collected on 100 individuals who 
arrive for service.
LO 10–3
Interarrival  
Time (Hours)
P(X)
RN
Service Time  
(Hours)
P(X)
RN
   .5
  .30
 0–29
 .5
  .25
  0–24
1.0
  .22
30–51
1.0
  .20
25–44
1.5
  .16
52–67
2.0
  .25
45–69
2.0
  .10
68–77
3.0
  .15
70–84
3.0
  .14
78–91
4.0
  .10
85–94
4.0
  .08
92–99
5.0
  .05
95–99
1.00
1.00
Time between  
Arrivals (Minutes)
Frequency
Service Time  
(Minutes)
Frequency
1
    8
1.0
  12
2
  35
1.5
  21
3
  34
2.0
  36
4
  17
2.5
  19
5
    6
3.0
    7
100
3.5
    5
100
  Using the following random number sequence, simulate six arrivals; estimate the aver-
age customer waiting time and the average idle time for clerks.
  RN: 08, 74, 24, 34, 45, 86, 31, 32, 45, 21, 10, 67, 60, 17, 60, 87, 74, 96
	26.	 A bank of machines in a manufacturing shop breaks down according to the following 
interarrival time distribution. The time it takes one repairperson to complete the repair of 
a machine is given in the service time distribution.

256	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Simulate the breakdown of five machines. Calculate the average machine downtime 
using two repairpersons and the following random number sequence. (Both repairpersons 
cannot work on the same machine.)
RN: 30, 81, 02, 91, 51, 08, 28, 44, 86, 84, 29, 08, 37, 34, 99
The American College of Surgeons has developed cri-
teria for determining operating room standards in the 
United States. Level I and II trauma centers are required 
to have in-house operating room (OR) staff 24 hours per 
day. So a base level of a single OR team available 24 
hours a day is mandatory. During normal business hours, 
a hospital will typically have additional OR teams avail-
able because surgery is scheduled during these times and 
these additional teams can be used in an emergency. An 
important decision, though, must be made concerning the 
availability of a backup team during the evening hours.
	
A backup team is needed during the evening hours if 
the probability of having two or more cases simultaneously 
is significant. “Significant” is difficult to judge, but for the 
purposes of this case assume that a backup OR team should 
be employed if the expected probability of two or more 
cases occurring simultaneously is greater than 1 percent.
	
A real application was studied by doctors at a hospital 
in Stamford, Connecticut. The doctors studied emergency 
OR patients that arrived after 11 P.M. and before 7 A.M. 
during a one-year period. During this time period, there 
were 62 patients that required OR treatment. The average 
service time was 80.79 minutes.
	
In analyzing the problem, think about this as a single-
channel, single-phase system with Poisson arrivals and 
exponential service times.
Questions
	1.	 Calculate the average customer arrival rate and 
service rate per hour.
	2.	 Calculate the probability of zero patients in the 
system (P0), probability of one patient (P1), and 
the probability of two or more patients simultane-
ously arriving during the night shift.
	3.	 Using a criterion that if the probability is greater 
than 1 percent, a backup OR team should be 
employed, make a recommendation to hospital 
administration.
Case: Community Hospital Evening Operating Room
The following scenario was written by a reporter who 
became a Taco Bell worker for a few hours to experi-
ence what it’s like to work at one of the most high-tech 
quick-serve restaurant chains in the world. As you read, 
visualize how you could analyze a Taco Bell using the 
queuing models we discussed in this chapter. After the 
scenario, we will give you some hints related to how you 
can model the Quick Service (QS) restaurant and then 
ask a series of questions related to your model.
It must always be, “Hi, how are you today?” 
Never, “Hi, how are you?” “Hi, how’s it 
going?” or “Welcome to Taco Bell.” Never, 
“What will it be today?” or, even worse, “What 
do you want?” Every Taco Bell Service Cham-
pion memorizes the order script before his first 
shift. The folks who work the drive-thru win-
dows at the Taco Bell here in Tustin, Califor-
nia, about 35 miles south of Los Angeles, and 
everywhere else, are called Service Champions. 
Those who work the food production line are 
called Food Champions.
You think you know it—“Hi, how are 
you today?” It seems easy enough. And you 
follow that with, “You can order when you’re 
ready,” never “Can I take your order?” The lat-
ter puts pressure on the driver, who might be 
a distracted teenager busy texting her friend 
or a soccer mom with a half-dozen kids in the 
van. “They don’t need the additional pressure 
of a disembodied voice demanding to know 
their order,” explains Mike Harkins. Harkins, 
49, is vice president of One System Operations 
for Taco Bell, which means he spends all day, 
every day, thinking about the kitchen and the 
drive-thru.
He has been prepping me for my debut at 
the window. Getting ready, I wash my hands, 
scrubbing for the mandated 20 seconds; slide 
on rubber gloves; and don the three-channel 
headset that connects me to the ordering station 
out in the lot, as well as to my fellow Champi-
ons. I take my place at the window. I hear the 
ding indicating a customer has pulled into the 
loop around the restaurant, and I immediately 
ask, “Hi, how’s it going?”
It gets worse from there. As a Service 
Champion, my job is to say my lines, input the 
Analytics Exercise: Processing Customer Orders
Analyzing a Taco Bell Restaurant

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
257
order into the proprietary point of sale (POS) 
system, prepare and make drinks like Limeade 
Sparklers and Frutista Freezes, collect bills or 
credit cards, and make change. I input Beefy 
Crunch Burritos, Volcano Burritos, Chalupas, 
and Gorditas. My biggest worry is that some-
one will order a Crunchwrap Supreme, a fast-
food marvel made up of two kinds of tortillas, 
beef, cheese, lettuce, tomatoes, and sauces, all 
scooped, folded, and assembled into a handheld, 
multiple-food-group package, which then gets 
grilled for 27 seconds. This actually doubles the 
time it takes to prepare a normal order. An order 
for a Crunchwrap Supreme, the most complex 
item on the menu, sometimes requires the Ser-
vice Champion to take up a position on the food 
production line to complete it in anything like 
the 164 seconds that Taco Bell averages for each 
customer, from driving up to the ordering sta-
tion to pulling away from the pick-up window.
Above me on the wall, a flat-screen display 
shows the average time of the last five cars at 
either the order station or the pick-up window, 
depending on which is slowest. If the number is 
red, as it is now, that means one, or both, of the 
waits is exceeding 50 seconds, the target during 
peak periods. It now shows 53 seconds, on its way 
to 60, 70 . . . and then I stop looking. The high-
pitched ding that announces each new customer 
becomes steady, unrelenting, and ­dispiriting—85 
cars will roll through over the peak lunch rush. 
And I keep blowing the order script.
I fall behind so quickly and completely that 
restaurant manager Amanda Mihal, a veteran of 
12 years in the QSR business (Quick Serve Res-
taurant, the acronym for an industry that makes 
acronyms for everything), has to step in. “You’ll 
get it,” Amanda says as she fixes an order that I 
have managed to screw up. “Eventually.”
Every Taco Bell has two food production 
lines, one dedicated to the drive-thru and the 
other to servicing the walk-up counter. Work-
ing those lines is no easier than wearing the 
headset. The back of the restaurant has been 
engineered so that the Steamers, Stuffers, and 
Expeditors, the names given to the Food Cham-
pions who work the pans, take as few footsteps 
as possible during a shift. There are three prep 
areas: the hot holding area, the cold holding 
area, and the wrapping expediting area. The 
Stuffer in the hot holding area stuffs the meat 
into the tortillas, ladling beef with Taco Bell’s 
proprietary tool, the BPT, or beef portion-
ing tool. The steps for scooping the beef have 
been broken down into another acronym, SST, 
for stir, scoop, and tap. Flour tortillas must be 
cooked on one side for 15 seconds and the other 
for five.
When I take my place on the line and start 
to prepare burritos, tacos, and chalupas—they 
won’t let me near a Crunchwrap Supreme—it is 
immediately clear that this has been engineered 
to make the process as simple as possible. The 
real challenge is the wrapping. Taco Bell once 
had 13 different wrappers for its products. That 
has been cut to six by labeling the corners of 
each wrapper differently. The paper, designed 
to slide off a stack in single sheets, has to be 
angled with the name of the item being made 
at the upper corner. The tortilla is placed in the 
middle of the paper and the item assembled 
from there until you fold the whole thing up in 
the wrapping expediting area next to the grill. 
“We had so many wrappers before, half a dozen 
stickers; it was all costing us seconds,” says 
Harkins. In repeated attempts, I never get the 
proper item name into the proper place. And 
my burritos just do not hold together.
With me on the line are Carmen Franco, 
60, and Ricardo Alvarez, 36. The best Food 
Champions can prepare about 100 burritos, 
tacos, chalupas, and gorditas in less than half 
an hour, and they have the 78-item menu 
memorized. Franco and Alvarez are a precise 
and frighteningly fast team. Ten orders at a 
time are displayed on a screen above the line, 
five drive-thrus and five walk-ins. Franco is a 
blur of motion as she slips out wrapping paper 
and tortillas, stirs, scoops, and taps, then slides 
the items down the line while looking up at 
the screen. The top Food Champions have an 
ability to scan through the next five orders 
and identify those that require more prepara-
tion steps, such as Grilled Stuffed Burritos and 
Crunchwrap Supremes, and set those up before 
returning to simpler tacos and burritos. When 
Alvarez is bogged down, Franco slips around 
him, and slides Crunchwrap Supremes into 
their boxes.
At the drive-thru window in Tustin, I 
would have shaken off the headset many orders 
ago had it not been for manager Mihal’s sup-
port, but I’m hanging in there. After a while, I 
do begin to detect a pleasing, steady rhythm to 
the system, the transaction, the delivery of the 
food. Each is a discrete, predictable, scripted 
interaction. When the order is input correctly, 
the customer drives up to the window, the 
money is paid, the Frutista Freeze or Atomic 
Bacon Bomber (a test item specific to this Taco 
Bell) handed over, and you send people on their 
way with a smile and a “Thank you for coming 

258	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
to Taco Bell,” you feel a moment of accom-
plishment. And so does Harkins, for it has all 
gone exactly as he has planned.
Then a ding in my headset.
“Um, hello?”
Idiot, I think to myself, I’ve blown the 
script again.
Source: Karl Taro Greenfeld, Bloomberg BusinessWeek, Features Section, 
May 5, 2011.
Modeling the Restaurant
In the scenario, they indicate that it takes about 164 sec-
onds, on average, to serve a customer during the busy 
lunch-hour period. Put yourself in the seat of your car 
getting food at the QS restaurant. Let’s assume you are 
using the drive-thru window and that you will pick up the 
food and take it home to eat with some friends.
You drive into the restaurant lot and notice a line of 
cars has formed at the order kiosk. You wait for your turn 
to talk to the Customer Service Champion so you can 
place your order. The menu is clearly in view, so you can 
see exactly what you want. Soon it is your turn and you 
quickly place your order, learn what the bill will be, and 
move your car to the line at the drive-thru window. While 
waiting, you get your money out and count out the exact 
change you will need. After a short time, it’s your turn 
at the window and you give the Service Champion your 
money, take your drink and food, and carefully drive out 
of the parking lot.
Think about what happened at the restaurant. First, 
you waited in two lines. The first was at the order kiosk 
and the second at the drive-thru window. Next, consider 
the work the restaurant needed to complete to process your 
order. The Service Champion took your order and entered 
it in the POS system, prepared your drink, and then, when 
the food was ready, collected your money, and delivered 
your drink and food. One of the Food Champions prepared 
your food using information from a screen that shows 
orders as they are entered by the Service Champion.
The total time it takes between when you arrive at 
the restaurant until you leave is made up of the following 
elements:
	1.	 The service time for the Service Champion to pro-
cess your order.
	2.	 The service time for the Food Champion to prepare 
your order.
	3.	 The waiting while the Service Champion and Food 
Champion serve other customers.
To model this using the queuing models in the chap-
ter, assume you have two totally independent service 
processes. The first process is the Service Champion 
and the second is the Food Champion. Each process has 
potentially a different mean service time per customer. 
The Service Champion must serve each customer, and 
they arrive at a particular rate. The Food Champion 
prepares the individual items on the order such as a bur-
rito, taco, chalupa, or gorditas taco. As the orders are 
taken, each individual item appears on a monitor telling 
the Food Champion what should be made next. The aver-
age time for a customer to run through the system is the 
sum of the average service times (time to take the order 
by the Service Champion and time to make the order by 
the Food Champion) plus the sum of the expected wait-
ing times for the two processes. This assumes these pro-
cesses operate totally independent of each other, which 
might not be exactly true. But we leave that to a later 
discussion.
Assume that the queues in front of each process are 
large, meaning there is plenty of room for cars in the line 
before and after the order kiosk. Also, assume there are a 
single Service Champion and two Food Champions each 
operating independently and working just on the drive-
thru orders. Also, assume that the arrival pattern is Pois-
son, customers are handled first come, first served, and 
the service pattern is exponential.
Given this, answer the following questions:
	1.	 Draw a diagram of the process using the format in 
Exhibit 9.5.
	2.	 Consider a base case where a customer arrives 
every 40 seconds and the Customer Service Cham-
pion can handle 120 customers per hour. There are 
two Food Champions, each capable of handling 
100 orders per hour. How long should it take to be 
served by the restaurant (from the time a customer 
enters the kiosk queue until her food is delivered)? 
Use queuing models to estimate this.
	3.	 On average, how busy are the Customer Service 
Champions and the two Food Champions?
	4.	 On average, how many cars do you expect to have 
in the drive-thru line? (Include those waiting to 
place orders and those waiting for food.)
	5.	 If the restaurant runs a sale and the customer 
arrival rate increases by 20 percent, how would 
this change the total time expected to serve a cus-
tomer? How would this change the average number 
of cars in the drive-thru line?
	6.	 Currently, relatively few customers (less than ½ 
percent) order the Crunchwrap Supreme. What 
would happen if the restaurant ran the sale, 
demand jumped on the Crunchwrap Supreme, and 
30 percent of the orders were for this item? Take 
a quantitative approach to answering this ques-
tion. Assume that the Customer Service Champion 
never helps the Food Champions and that these 
two processes remain independent.
	7.	 For the type of analysis done in this case, what are 
the key assumptions? What would be the impact 
on our analysis if these assumptions were not true?
	8.	 Could this type of analysis be used for other ser-
vice-type businesses? Give examples to support 
your answer.

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
259
Practice Exam
Answer the following questions. Answers are listed at the 
end of this section.
	  1.	 The queuing models assume that customers are 
served in what order?
	  2.	 Consider two identical queuing systems except for 
the service time distribution. In the first system, the 
service time is random and Poisson distributed. The 
service time is constant in the second system. How 
would the waiting time differ in the two systems?
	  3.	 What is the average utilization of the servers in a sys-
tem that has three servers? On average, 15 custom-
ers arrive every 15 minutes. It takes a server exactly 
three minutes to wait on each customer.
	  4.	 What is the expected waiting time for the system 
described in question 3?
	  5.	 Firms that desire high service levels where custom-
ers have short wait times should target server utiliza-
tion levels at no more than this percentage.
	  6.	 In most cases, if a firm increases its service capac-
ity by 10 percent, it would expect waiting times to 
be reduced by what percentage? Assume customer 
arrivals and service times are random.
	  7.	 An ice cream stand has a single window and one 
employee to serve customers. During their busy sea-
son, 30 customers arrive each hour, on average. It 
takes 1.5 minutes, on average, to serve a customer. 
What is the utilization of the employee?
	  8.	 How long would customers have to wait in line, on 
average, at the ice cream shop discussed in question 7?
	  9.	 Random service times can be modeled by this.
	10.	 A bank teller takes 2.4 minutes, on average, to serve 
a customer. What would be the hourly service rate 
used in the queuing formulas?
	11.	 There are three teller windows in the bank described 
in the prior question. On average, 60 customers per 
hour arrive at the bank. What will be the average 
number of customers in line at the bank?
Answers to Practice Exam  1. First come, first served  2. Waiting time in the first system is two times the second.  3. 100%  4. Infinite   
5. 70–80%  6. Greater than 10%  7. 75%  8. .075 hours, or 4.5 minutes  9. Exponential distribution  10. 25 customers per hour  11. 2.5888  
(from Exhibit 10.9) 
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
0.15
  1
0.026
0.850
  2
0.001
0.860
0.20
  1
0.050
0.800
  2
0.002
0.818
0.25
  1
0.083
0.750
  2
0.004
0.778
0.30
  1
0.129
0.700
  2
0.007
0.739
0.35
  1
0.188
0.650
  2
0.011
0.702
0.40
  1
0.267
0.600
  2
0.017
0.667
0.45
  1
0.368
0.550
  2
0.024
0.633
  3
0.002
0.637
0.50
  1
0.500
0.500
  2
0.033
0.600
  3
0.003
0.606
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
0.55
  1
0.672
0.450
  2
0.045
0.569
  3
0.004
0.576
0.60
  1
0.900
0.400
  2
0.059
0.538
  3
0.006
0.548
0.65
  1
1.207
0.350
  2
0.077
0.509
  3
0.008
0.521
0.70
  1
1.633
0.300
  2
0.098
0.481
  3
0.011
0.495
0.75
  1
2.250
0.250
  2
0.123
0.455
  3
0.015
0.471
0.80
  1
3.200
0.200
  2
0.152
0.429
  3
0.019
0.447
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
0.85
  1
4.817
0.150
  2
0.187
0.404
  3
0.024
0.425
  4
0.003
0.427
0.90
  1
8.100
0.100
  2
0.229
0.379
  3
0.030
0.403
  4
0.004
0.406
0.95
  1
18.050  
0.050
  2
0.277
0.356
  3
0.037
0.383
  4
0.005
0.386
1.00
  2
0.333
0.333
  3
0.045
0.364
  4
0.007
0.367
1.10
  2
0.477
0.290
  3
0.066
0.327
  4
0.011
0.332
Excel: Expected Length
exhibit 10.9
(Continued)

λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
1.20
  2
0.675
0.250
  3
0.094
0.294
  4
0.016
0.300
  5
0.003
0.301
1.30
  2
0.951
0.212
  3
0.130
0.264
  4
0.023
0.271
  5
0.004
0.272
1.40
  2
1.345
0.176
  3
0.177
0.236
  4
0.032
0.245
  5
0.006
0.246
1.50
  2
1.929
0.143
  3
0.237
0.211
  4
0.045
0.221
  5
0.009
0.223
1.60
  2
2.844
0.111
  3
0.313
0.187
  4
0.060
0.199
  5
0.012
0.201
1.70
  2
4.426
0.081
  3
0.409
0.166
  4
0.080
0.180
  5
0.017
0.182
1.80
  2
7.674
0.053
  3
0.532
0.146
  4
0.105
0.162
  5
0.023
0.165
1.90
  2
17.587  
0.026
  3
0.688
0.128
  4
0.136
0.145
  5
0.030
0.149
  6
0.007
0.149
2.00
  3
0.889
0.111
  4
0.174
0.130
  5
0.040
0.134
  6
0.009
0.135
2.10
  3
1.149
0.096
  4
0.220
0.117
  5
0.052
0.121
  6
0.012
0.122
2.20
  3
1.491
0.081
  4
0.277
0.105
  5
0.066
0.109
  6
0.016
0.111
2.30
  3
1.951
0.068
  4
0.346
0.093
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
  5
0.084
0.099
  6
0.021
0.100
2.40
  3
2.589
0.056
  4
0.431
0.083
  5
0.105
0.089
  6
0.027
0.090
  7
0.007
0.091
2.50
  3
3.511
0.045
  4
0.533
0.074
  5
0.130
0.080
  6
0.034
0.082
  7
0.009
0.082
2.60
  3
4.933
0.035
  4
0.658
0.065
  5
0.161
0.072
  6
0.043
0.074
  7
0.011
0.074
2.70
  3
7.354
0.025
  4
0.811
0.057
  5
0.198
0.065
  6
0.053
0.067
  7
0.014
0.067
2.80
  3
12.273  
0.016
  4
1.000
0.050
  5
0.241
0.058
  6
0.066
0.060
  7
0.018
0.061
2.90
  3
27.193  
0.008
  4
1.234
0.044
  5
0.293
0.052
  6
0.081
0.054
  7
0.023
0.055
3.00
  4
1.528
0.038
  5
0.354
0.047
  6
0.099
0.049
  7
0.028
0.050
  8
0.008
0.050
3.10
  4
1.902
0.032
  5
0.427
0.042
  6
0.120
0.044
  7
0.035
0.045
  8
0.010
0.045
3.20
  4
2.386
0.027
  5
0.513
0.037
  6
0.145
0.040
  7
0.043
0.040
  8
0.012
0.041
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
3.30
  4
3.027
0.023
  5
0.615
0.033
  6
0.174
0.036
  7
0.052
0.037
  8
0.015
0.037
3.40
  4
3.906
0.019
  5
0.737
0.029
  6
0.209
0.032
  7
0.063
0.033
  8
0.019
0.033
3.50
  4
5.165
0.015
  5
0.882
0.026
  6
0.248
0.029
  7
0.076
0.030
  8
0.023
0.030
  9
0.007
0.030
3.60
  4
7.090
0.011
  5
1.055
0.023
  6
0.295
0.026
  7
0.019
0.027
  8
0.028
0.027
  9
0.008
0.027
3.70
  4
10.347  
0.008
  5
1.265
0.020
  6
0.349
0.023
  7
0.109
0.024
  8
0.034
0.025
  9
0.010
0.025
3.80
  4
16.937  
0.005
  5
1.519
0.017
  6
0.412
0.021
  7
0.129
0.022
  8
0.041
0.022
  9
0.013
0.022
3.90
  4
36.859  
0.002
  5
1.830
0.015
  6
0.485
0.019
  7
0.153
0.020
  8
0.050
0.020
  9
0.016
0.020
4.00
  5
2.216
0.013
  6
0.570
0.017
  7
0.180
0.018
  8
0.059
0.018
  9
0.019
0.018
4.10
  5
2.703
0.011
  6
0.668
0.015
(Continued)
exhibit 10.9
260

(Continued)
exhibit 10.9
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
λ/μ
M
Lq
P0
  7
0.212
0.016
  8
0.070
0.016
  9
0.023
0.017
4.20
  5
3.327
0.009
  6
0.784
0.013
  7
0.248
0.014
  8
0.083
0.015
  9
0.027
0.015
10
0.009
0.015
4.30
  5
4.149
0.008
  6
0.919
0.012
  7
0.289
0.130
  8
0.097
0.013
  9
0.033
0.014
10
0.011
0.014
4.40
  5
5.268
0.006
  6
1.078
0.010
  7
0.337
0.012
  8
0.114
0.012
  9
0.039
0.012
10
0.013
0.012
4.50
  5
6.862
0.005
  6
1.265
0.009
  7
0.391
0.010
  8
0.134
0.011
  9
0.046
0.011
10
0.015
0.011
4.60
  5
9.289
0.004
  6
1.487
0.008
  7
0.453
0.009
  8
0.156
0.010
  9
0.054
0.010
10
0.018
0.010
4.70
  5
13.382  
0.003
  6
1.752
0.007
  7
0.525
0.008
  8
0.181
0.009
  9
0.064
0.009
10
0.022
0.009
4.80
  5
21.641  
0.002
  6
2.071
0.006
  7
0.607
0.008
  8
0.209
0.008
  9
0.074
0.008
10
0.026
0.008
4.90
  5
46.566  
0.001
  6
2.459
0.005
  7
0.702
0.007
  8
0.242
0.007
  9
0.087
0.007
10
0.031
0.007
11
0.011
0.007
5.00
  6
2.938
0.005
  7
0.810
0.006
  8
0.279
0.006
  9
0.101
0.007
10
0.036
0.007
11
0.013
0.007
5.10
  6
3.536
0.004
  7
0.936
0.005
  8
0.321
0.006
  9
0.117
0.006
10
0.042
0.006
11
0.015
0.006
5.20
  6
4.301
0.003
  7
1.081
0.005
  8
0.368
0.005
  9
0.135
0.005
10
0.049
0.005
11
0.018
0.006
5.30
  6
5.303
0.003
  7
1.249
0.004
  8
0.422
0.005
  9
0.155
0.005
10
0.057
0.005
11
0.021
0.005
12
0.007
0.005
5.40
  6
6.661
0.002
  7
1.444
0.004
  8
0.483
0.004
  9
0.178
0.004
10
0.066
0.004
11
0.024
0.005
12
0.009
0.005
5.50
  6
8.590
0.002
  7
1.674
0.003
  8
0.553
0.004
  9
0.204
0.004
10
0.077
0.004
11
0.028
0.004
12
0.010
0.004
5.60
  6
11.519  
0.001
  7
1.944
0.003
  8
0.631
0.003
  9
0.233
0.004
10
0.088
0.004
11
0.033
0.004
12
0.012
0.004
5.70
  6
16.446  
0.001
  7
2.264
0.002
  8
0.721
0.003
  9
0.266
0.003
10
0.102
0.003
11
0.038
0.003
12
0.014
0.003
5.80
  6
26.373  
0.001
  7
2.648
0.002
  8
0.823
0.003
  9
0.303
0.003
10
0.116
0.003
11
0.044
0.003
12
0.017
0.003
5.90
  6
56.300  
0.000
  7
3.113
0.002
  8
0.939
0.002
  9
0.345
0.003
10
0.133
0.003
11
0.051
0.003
12
0.019
0.003
	
261

262	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Population 4
X
S
D
F
.015
1
.045
.999
.022
1
.066
.998
.030
1
.090
.997
.034
1
.102
.996
.038
1
.114
.995
.042
1
.126
.994
.046
1
.137
.993
.048
1
.143
.992
.052
1
.155
.991
.054
1
.161
.990
.058
1
.173
.989
.060
1
.179
.988
.062
1
.184
.987
.064
1
.190
.986
.066
1
.196
.985
.070
2
.014
.999
1
.208
.984
.075
2
.016
.999
1
.222
.981
.080
2
.018
.999
1
.237
.978
.085
2
.021
.999
1
.251
.975
.090
2
.023
.999
1
.265
.972
.095
2
.026
.999
1
.280
.969
.100
2
.028
.999
1
.294
.965
.105
2
.031
.998
1
.308
.962
.110
2
.034
.998
1
.321
.958
.115
2
.037
.998
1
.335
.954
.120
2
.041
.997
1
.349
.950
.125
2
.044
.997
1
.362
.945
.130
2
.047
.997
1
.376
.941
.135
2
.051
.996
Finite Queuing Tables 
exhibit 10.10
1
.389
.936
.140
2
.055
.996
1
.402
.931
.145
2
.058
.995
1
.415
.926
.150
2
.062
.995
1
.428
.921
.155
2
.066
.994
1
.441
.916
.160
2
.071
.994
1
.454
.910
.165
2
.075
.993
1
.466
.904
.170
2
.079
.993
1
.479
.899
.180
2
.088
.991
1
.503
.887
.190
2
.098
.990
1
.526
.874
.200
3
.008
.999
2
.108
.988
.200
1
.549
.862
.210
3
.009
.999
2
.118
.986
1
.572
.849
.220
3
.011
.999
2
.129
.984
1
.593
.835
.230
3
.012
.999
2
.140
.982
1
.614
.822
.240
3
.014
.999
2
.151
.980
1
.634
.808
.250
3
.016
.999
2
.163
.977
1
.654
.794
.260
3
.018
.998
2
.175
.975
1
.673
.780
.270
3
.020
.998
2
.187
.972
Population 4
X
S
D
F

	
Waiting Line Analysis and Simulation	
Chapter 10	
263
Population 4
X
S
D
F
Population 4
X
S
D
F
1
.691
.766
.280
3
.022
.998
2
.200
.968
1
.708
.752
.290
3
.024
.998
2
.213
.965
1
.725
.738
.300
3
.027
.997
2
.226
.962
1
.741
.724
.310
3
.030
.997
2
.240
.958
1
.756
.710
.320
3
.033
.997
2
.254
.954
1
.771
.696
.330
3
.036
.996
2
.268
.950
1
.785
.683
.340
3
.039
.996
2
.282
.945
1
.798
.670
.360
3
.047
.994
2
.312
.936
1
.823
.644
.380
3
.055
.993
2
.342
.926
1
.846
.619
.400
3
.064
.992
2
.372
.915
1
.866
.595
.420
3
.074
.990
2
.403
.903
1
.884
.572
.440
3
.085
.986
2
.435
.891
1
.900
.551
.460
3
.097
.985
2
.466
.878
1
.914
.530
.480
3
.111
.983
2
.498
.864
1
.926
.511
.500
3
.125
.980
2
.529
.850
1
.937
.492
.520
3
.141
.976
2
.561
.835
1
.947
.475
.540
3
.157
.972
2
.592
.820
1
.956
.459
.560
3
.176
.968
2
.623
.805
1
.963
.443
.580
3
.195
.964
2
.653
.789
1
.969
.429
.600
3
.216
.959
2
.682
.774
1
.975
.415
.650
3
.275
.944
2
.752
.734
1
.985
.384
.700
3
.343
.926
2
.816
.695
1
.991
.357
.750
3
.422
.905
2
.871
.657
1
.996
.333
.800
3
.512
.880
2
.917
.621
1
.998
.312
.850
3
.614
.852
2
.954
.587
1
.999
.294
.900
3
.729
.821
2
.979
.555
.950
3
.857
.786
2
.995
.526
(Continued)
exhibit 10.10


	
265
AMAZON—THE MASTER OF EFFICIENCY 
AND LOGISTICS
How does the world’s largest online retailer run the fulfillment centers that process 
the thousands of orders received by the company each hour? They employ more than 
120,000 full-time and part-time workers around the world and use an optimized com-
bination of humans and machines to efficiently process each order.
The fulfillment centers use conveyor belts to transport items and employ machines 
to print and stick mailing labels on them. The company’s computers track every item 
using bar codes. All of this happens with 
the assistance of workers who are as effi-
cient as the machines.
The company’s amazingly efficient pro-
cess allows them to offer free two-day 
delivery for it’s Prime membership custom-
ers. In major cities, Amazon even offers 
same day delivery to some areas.
Amazon is experimenting with the use 
of drones that may someday deliver pack-
ages within 30 minutes. Amazon calls the 
service Prime Air. With no human interven-
tion, a small plastic package containing 
your items are loaded under the drone, 
which then automatically flies to your home. It may be a few years before the Prime 
Air is operational, but it offers an intriguing opportunity for Amazon.
This wildly efficient infrastructure is what sets Amazon apart and ahead of competi-
tors such as  Walmart, Target, and the Chinese Alibaba.com.
Learning Objectives
	LO 11–1	 Exemplify a typical business process and how it can be analyzed.
	LO 11–2	 Compare different types of processes.
	LO 11–3	 Explain how jobs are designed.
	LO 11–4	 Analyze manufacturing, service, and logistics processes to ensure the competitiveness of a firm.
Process Design 
and Analysis
11 
Amazon’s Prime Air 
service may someday 
allow small packages 
to be delivered in 30 
minutes.
© Polaris/Newscom

266	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Understanding how processes work is essential to ensuring the competitiveness of a company. 
A process that does not match the needs of the firm will punish the firm every minute that 
the firm operates. Take, for example, two fast-food restaurants. If one restaurant can deliver 
a quarter-pound hamburger to the customer for $0.50 in direct costs and a second restaurant 
costs $0.75, no matter what the second restaurant does, it will lose $0.25 in profit for every 
hamburger it sells compared to the first restaurant. Many factors need to be considered when 
one sets up the process to make those hamburgers. These factors include the cost of the raw 
materials, the costs associated with how the hamburger is prepared, and the cost of taking the 
order and delivering it to the customer.
What is a process? A process is any part of an organization that takes inputs and trans-
forms them into outputs that, it is hoped, are of greater value to the organization than the 
original inputs. Consider some examples of processes. Honda Motors assembles the Accord 
in a plant in Marysville, Ohio. The assembly plant takes in parts and components that have 
been fabricated for the plant. Using labor, equipment along an assembly line, and energy, 
these parts and components are transformed into automobiles. McDonald’s, at each of its res-
taurants, uses inputs such as hamburger meat, lettuce, tomatoes, and potatoes. To these inputs, 
trained labor is added in the form of cooks and order takers, and capital equipment is used to 
transform the inputs into hamburgers, french fries, and other foods.
In both of these examples, the process makes products as output. However, the outputs of 
many processes are services. In a hospital, for example, specialized equipment and highly 
trained doctors, nurses, and technicians are combined with another input, the patient. The 
patient is transformed through proper treatment and care into a healthy patient. An airline 
is another example of a service organization. The airline uses airplanes, ground equipment, 
flight crews, ground crews, reservation personnel, and fuel to transport customers between 
locations all over the world.
This chapter describes how to analyze a process. Analyzing a process allows some impor-
tant questions to be answered, such as these: How many customers can the process handle 
per hour? How long will it take to serve a customer? What change is needed in the process 
to expand capacity? How much does the process cost? A difficult but important first step 
in process analysis is to clearly define the purpose of the analysis. Is the purpose to solve a 
problem? Is it to better understand the impact of a change in how business will be done in the 
future?
Clearly understanding the purpose of the analysis is critical to setting the level of detail in 
modeling the process. The analysis must be kept as simple as possible. The following sections 
of this chapter discuss the details of constructing flowcharts and measures that are appropriate 
for different types of processes. But first, consider a simple example.
Example—Analyzing a Las Vegas Slot Machine
The slot machine is common in casinos around the world. Let’s use this machine to illustrate 
how a simple process is analyzed.
Assume that we work for a casino where management is considering a new type of elec-
tronic slot machine that is much faster than the current mechanical machine. Management 
has asked how much we can expect to make from the new electronic machine over a 24-hour 
period compared to the old mechanical machine.
S t e p  1 .  An a l yzi n g  t h e  M e c h a n i c a l  S l o t  M a c h i n e  Begin by analyzing 
a mechanical slot machine. The slot machine is activated when the customer puts one or 
more coins in the machine and then pulls the arm on the machine (slot machines are often 
called “one-armed bandits”). Three wheels spin, and after a time each wheel stops and 
displays a particular symbol. The machine pays money when certain combinations of symbols 
simultaneously appear. 
Slot machines are designed to pay back a certain percentage of what they take in. Typi-
cal paybacks would be 90 to 95 percent of what is taken in; the casino keeps 5 to 10 percent. 
Process
Any set of activities 
performed by an 
organization that takes 
inputs and transforms 
them into outputs ideally 
of greater value to the 
organization than the 
original inputs.
Exemplify a typical 
business process and how 
it can be analyzed.
LO 11–1
PROCESS ANALYSIS

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
267
These payback percentages are a function of the number of different symbols on each wheel. 
Each symbol is repeated on each wheel a certain number of times. For example, if a wheel has 
10 symbols, one might be a single bar, one a double bar, and one a lemon; two might be cher-
ries, three lucky sevens, and two liberty bells. Because the wheels stop on a random symbol, 
the probability of lucky sevens coming up on all three wheels is ​​ 3 
__ 
10 ​ × ​ 3 
__ 
10 ​ × ​ 3 
__ 
10 ​  =  0.027​, or 2.7 
percent of the time. The probability of certain combinations of symbols coming up, combined 
with the payout for each combination, sets the average percentage that the machine is expected 
to pay out. Consider a mechanical slot machine that pays out 95 percent of the coins played. 
With this machine, assume the average player feeds coins into the machine at a pace of one 
coin each 15 seconds. This 15-second interval is called the cycle time of the process. The cycle 
time of a repetitive process is the average time between completions of successive units. In the 
case of the slot machine, the unit is a silver dollar. With a 15-second cycle time, our mechani-
cal slot machine can process $4 (60 seconds/15 seconds) per minute, or $240 ($4/minute ×  
60 minutes) per hour. Because our slot machine has a payout of 95 percent, we would expect 
the machine to give the customer 228 (240 × 0.95) of the silver dollars that it took in and keep 
$12 for the casino for each hour that it is in operation. If we started with $100, we could expect 
to play for about 8.3 hours ($100/$12 per hour) before 
we would run out of silver dollars. We might be lucky 
and win the jackpot, or we might be unlucky and lose 
it all in the first hour. However, on average, we would 
expect to lose the entire $100 in 8.3 hours.
S t e p  2 .  A n a l y z i n g  t h e  N e w  E l e c t r o n i c 
S l o t  M ac h i n e   Now consider the new electronic 
slot machine. It operates in exactly the same manner; 
the only difference is that it uses “electronic” coins 
and it takes only 10 seconds to process each bet. With 
a 10-second cycle time, the machine processes $6 (60 
seconds/10 seconds) per minute, or $360 ($6/minute ×  
60 minutes) per hour. With a 95 percent payout, the 
machine would give the customer back 342 (360 × 
0.95) silver dollars and keep $18 for the casino each 
hour. This machine would take our $100 in only 5.6 
hours ($100/$18 per hour).
S t e p  3 .  C o m p a r i s o n  So how much does the electronic slot machine make for the 
casino in 24 hours compared to the mechanical slot machine? One more critical piece of 
information is needed to answer this question: How long will the slot machine operate over 
the 24 hours? The casino feels that the machine will be used 12 out of the 24 hours; this 
12 out of 24 hours is the expected utilization of the machine. Utilization is the ratio of the 
time a resource is actually activated relative to the time it is available for use. Adjusting for 
utilization, the expected revenue from the mechanical machine is $144/day ($12/hour × 24 
hours × 0.5) compared to revenue of $216/day ($18/hour × 24 hours × 0.5) for the electronic 
machine. When an analysis is performed, it is important to qualify the analysis with the 
assumptions made. In this comparison, we assumed that the operator only bets one silver 
dollar at a time and that the utilization would be the same for the mechanical and electronic 
slot machines.
S t e p  4 .  T h e  S l o t  M a c h i n e  I s  O n e  o f  M a n y  C a s i n o  P r o c e s s e s   The 
speed of the slot machine can have a major impact on the casino’s revenue. The single slot 
machine is only a small part of the casino. To really understand how much revenue the casino 
can generate, we need to consider all of the other revenue-generating processes, such as the 
blackjack and poker tables, keno games, craps, and the other games in the casino. Many times, 
analyzing an enterprise involves evaluating a number of independent activities, like our slot 
machine. The aggregate performance of each individual activity may be all that is needed 
Cycle time
The average time between 
completions of successive 
units in a process (this is 
the definition used in this 
book).
Slot Machines aboard the high-speed Cat ferry. 
© David McLain/Getty Images
Utilization
The ratio of the time that 
a resource is actually 
activated relative to the time 
that it is available for use.

268	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
to understand the overall process. On the other hand, there is often significant interaction 
between individual activities or processes that must be considered.
Think about our gambling casino. Many casinos offer great deals on food, which is served 
right in the casino. What do you think would be the main priority of the food operations 
manager in one of these casinos? Would great-tasting food be important? How important is 
the cost of the food? Is speed of service important? Good food certainly is important. If the 
food is unpleasant, the customer will not even consider eating at the casino. This is bad for 
the casino because if the customers leave, they take their money with them. Remember, the 
casino makes money based on how long the customers gamble. The more time spent gam-
bling, the more money the casino makes. What about cost? If the customers think the meals 
are too expensive, they might leave. So it is important to keep the cost of the meals down so 
they can be priced inexpensively. Many casinos even give meals away. How important is it 
to serve the customer quickly? Think about it this way: Every minute that the customers are 
sitting in the restaurant, they are not feeding silver dollars into a slot machine. So speed is 
important because it impacts the revenue generated at the games in the casino.
Process Flowcharting
Activities associated with a process often affect one another, so it is important to consider the 
simultaneous performance of a number of activities, all operating at the same time. A good 
way to start analyzing a process is with a diagram showing the basic elements of a process—
typically tasks, flows, and storage areas. Tasks are shown as rectangles, flows as arrows, 
and the storage of goods or other items as inverted triangles. Sometimes flows through a 
process can be diverted in multiple directions depending on some condition. Decision points 
are depicted as a diamond, with the different flows running from the points on the diamond. 
Exhibit 11.1 displays examples of these symbols. Separating a diagram into different horizon-
tal or vertical bands sometimes is useful because it allows the separation of tasks that are part 
of the process. For example, with the slot machine, the tasks performed by the customer can 
be separated from the tasks performed by the slot machine.
In the slot machine example, the level of abstraction considers the slot machine as a simple 
black box that takes in silver dollars and either keeps them or returns some of them dur-
ing each cycle. Viewing the slot machine as a black box might be fine if the purpose is just 
to analyze how much the machine is expected to make for the casino each hour. In reality, 
more activities are required to support the slot machine. Inside an old-style mechanical slot 
machine are two buckets of silver dollars. One bucket stores coins needed for internal use by 
the slot machine. When a customer wins, the payout comes from this payout bucket. The slot 
machine is designed to automatically keep this payout bucket filled during play. When the 
payout bucket is full, the silver dollars are deposited in a second winnings bucket. The win-
nings bucket must be periodically emptied to claim the winnings for the casino. The flowchart 
in Exhibit 11.1 depicts the external activities of the player and the internal movement of the 
coins within the machine.
Probably the most interesting thing about the payout bucket is how big it should be. The 
slot machine is programmed so that if the payout bucket empties, the machine stops and lights 
on the top of the machine flash, thus notifying casino personnel that a lucky customer has 
emptied the machine. The payout bucket would be sized to keep this a rare occurrence. Think 
of the payout bucket as a buffer or intermediate storage area for silver dollars that allows the 
slot machine to operate on its own. The smaller the payout bucket, the more the casino per-
sonnel need to attend to the machine, and the more time the machine is idle for lack of silver 
dollars. On the other hand, with a larger bucket more money is tied up.
The situation with the winnings bucket in the machine is similar. A small winnings bucket 
will need to be emptied more often. On the other hand, a large winnings bucket means that the 
casino does not deposit the money into its bank account as quickly. The advantage of buffer-
ing operations with the slot machine is easily seen. Large buffers allow the process to operate 
independently, whereas small buffers require more attention. In the case of the slot machine, 
the buffer is composed of the silver dollars. In other situations, where the buffer is other items 
such as a raw material, these items have a value, so they also represent money.
Drawing a picture is 
always the first step in 
analyzing a process. 
Keep the drawing 
simple to start with.
KEY IDEA

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
269
Winnings
bucket
Move coin
to winnings
bucket
Move coin
to payout
bucket
Payout
bucket
Is
payout
bucket
full?
Activate
payout
Pay
winnings
Pull arm
on slot
machine
Quit
Win
or
lose
Insert silver
dollar into
slot machine
Internal slot machine
activities
Player activities
Lose
Win
Yes
Yes
No
No
Play
again
Flowchart Symbols
Tasks or operations
Decision points
Storage areas or
queues (waiting lines)
Flows of material
or customers
Process Flowchart Example
exhibit 11.1
Consider a slot machine that we expect to deposit $12 into the winnings bucket every hour. 
If our winnings bucket can hold 1,000 silver dollars, then we expect to need to empty the win-
nings bucket every 83.3 hours ($1,000/$12 per hour) if the slot machine is used 100 percent 
of the time. What happens when the winnings bucket fills up? If the slot machine is smart 
enough to know that the winnings bucket is full, it might be programmed to just stop working 
with its lights flashing, as they do when the payout bucket empties. This would cause down-
time on the machine and might upset a customer using the machine because the customer 
would have to move to another slot machine. If the slot machine were not programmed to stop 
working, the silver dollars would fill the cavity where the bucket is located in the base of the 
machine. Imagine the mess when the casino worker opens that overflowed machine and all 
those silver dollars come pouring out. How often would you plan on emptying the winnings 
bucket?
An easy way to draw flowcharts is to use the Shapes gallery available in the Microsoft 
Office programs (i.e., Word, Excel, and PowerPoint). To access this gallery, go to the Insert 
tab and then select “Shapes.” This will display a number of flowchart symbols to use in 
creating your flowchart. Text can be added by selecting a symbol and then clicking the right 
mouse button. Select “Add text” to insert text in the symbol. The symbols can be connected 
by using “Connectors” available from the Shapes gallery. Nice flowcharts can be made using 
these tools.

270	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
It is useful to categorize processes to describe how a process is designed. By being able to 
quickly categorize a process, we can show the similarities and differences between processes.
The first way to categorize a process is to determine whether it is a single-stage or a multi-
ple-stage process. If the slot machine were viewed as a simple black box, it would be catego-
rized as a single-stage process. In this case, all of the activities involved 
in the operation of the slot machine would be collapsed and analyzed 
using a single cycle time to represent the speed of the slot machine. A 
multiple-stage process has multiple groups of activities that are linked 
through flows. The term stage is used to indicate that multiple activi-
ties have been pulled together for analysis purposes.
Buffering, Blocking, and Starving
A multiple-stage process may be buffered internally. A buffer refers to a storage area between 
stages where the output of a stage is placed prior to being used in a downstream stage. Buffer-
ing allows the stages to operate independently. If one stage feeds a second stage with no inter-
mediate buffer, then the assumption is that the two stages are directly linked. When a process 
is designed this way, the most common problems that can happen are blocking and starving. 
Blocking occurs when the activities in the stage must stop because there is no place to deposit 
the item just completed. Starving occurs when the activities in a stage must stop because 
there is no work.
Consider a two-stage process where the first stage has a cycle time of 30 seconds and the 
second a cycle time of 45 seconds. If this process needs to produce 100 units, then for each 
unit produced, the first stage would be blocked for 15 seconds.
What would happen if an inventory buffer were placed between the two stages? In 
this case, the first stage would complete the 100 units in 3,000 seconds (30 seconds/
unit × 100 units). During these 3,000 seconds, the second stage would complete only 
66 units ((3,000 – 30) seconds/45 seconds/unit). The 30 seconds are subtracted from the 
3,000 seconds because the second stage is starved for the first 30 seconds. This would 
mean that the inventory would build to 34 units (100 units – 66 units) over that first 
3,000 seconds. All of the units would be produced in 4,530 seconds. The second stage in 
this case is called a ­bottleneck because it limits the capacity of the process.
What would happen if the first stage required 45 seconds and the 
second stage had the 30-second cycle time? In this case, the first 
stage would be the bottleneck, and each unit would go directly from 
the first stage to the second. The second stage would be starved for 
15 ­seconds waiting for each unit to arrive; however, it would still take 
4,530 ­seconds to complete all 100 units. All of this assumes that there 
is no variability in the cycle time. With the relatively low 67 percent 
utilization on the second stage, variability would have little impact on 
the performance of this system, but if the cycle times were closer, some inventory might 
collect in the buffer.
Often, activities, stages, and even entire processes are operated in parallel. For example, 
operating two identical activities in parallel would theoretically double capacity. Or perhaps 
two different sets of activities can be done at the same time on the unit being produced. 
In analyzing a system with parallel activities or stages, it is important to understand the 
context. In the case where parallel processes represent alternatives, for example, a diamond 
should show that flows divert and what percentage of the flow moves in each direction. 
Sometimes two or more processes terminate in a common inventory buffer. This normally 
indicates that the two processes make identical items that are going into this inventory. 
Separate inventories should be used in the diagram if the outputs of the parallel processes 
are different.
Buffer
A storage area between 
stages where the output 
of a stage is placed 
prior to being used in a 
downstream stage.
Blocking
The activities in the stage 
must stop because there 
is no place to deposit the 
item just completed.
Starving
The activities in a stage 
must stop because there is 
no work.
Bottleneck
A resource that limits the 
capacity or maximum 
output of the process.
Multistage process
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Multistage process with buffer
Stage 1
Stage 2
Buffer
UNDERSTANDING PROCESSES
Compare different types of 
processes.
LO 11–2

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
271
Make-to-Stock vs. Make-to-Order
Another useful way to characterize a process is whether the process 
makes to stock or makes to order. To illustrate these concepts, consider 
the processes used to make hamburgers at the three major fast-food 
restaurant chains in the United States: McDonald’s, Burger King, and 
Wendy’s. In the case of McDonald’s, in 1999 the company converted 
to a new make-to-order process, but the company has now revised that 
into a “hybrid” system. We begin our tour of the approaches used by 
the top fast-food restaurants by first reviewing the traditional approach.
Consider a traditional restaurant making hamburgers. Before the 
era of fast food, hamburgers were always made to order. In the tra-
ditional process, the customer places an order specifying the degree 
of doneness (medium or well done) and requests specific condiments 
(pickles, cheese, mustard, onions, catsup). Using this specification, the 
cook takes raw hamburger meat from inventory (typically this inven-
tory is refrigerated and the patties have already been made), cooks 
the hamburger, and warms the bun. The hamburger is then assembled 
and delivered to the customer. The quality of the hamburger is highly 
dependent on the skill of the cook.
This make-to-order process is activated only in response to an 
actual order. Inventory (both work-in-process and finished goods) is 
kept to a minimum. Theoretically, one would expect that response 
time would be slow because all the activities need to be completed 
before the product is delivered to the customer. Services by their very 
nature often use make-to-order processes.
McDonald’s revolutionized the hamburger-making process by 
developing a high-volume approach. A diagram of McDonald’s tradi-
tional process is shown in Exhibit 11.2A. With the old process, ham-
burgers were grilled in batches. Standard hamburgers (for example, 
the “Big Mac” consists of two beef patties, sauce, lettuce, cheese, 
pickles, and onion on a sesame seed bun) were then prepared and stored in a holding bin for 
immediate delivery to the customer. A person that judged current demand and placed orders 
to keep inventory in the bin at an appropriate level controlled the whole process. This is a 
highly efficient make-to-stock process that produces standard products that can be delivered 
quickly to the customer. This quick process appeals to families with small children, for whom 
speed of delivery is important.
In general, a make-to-stock process ends with finished goods inventory; customer orders 
are then served from this inventory. A make-to-stock process can be controlled based on the 
actual or anticipated amount of finished goods inventory. A target stocking level, for example, 
might be set, and the process would be periodically activated to maintain that target stocking 
level. Make-to-stock processes are also used when demand is seasonal. In this case, inventory 
can be built during the slow season and used during the peak season, thus allowing the pro-
cess to run at a constant rate throughout the year.
The unique feature of the Burger King process, shown in Exhibit 11.2B, is a highly spe-
cialized conveyor–broiler. Raw hamburger patties are placed on a moving conveyor that runs 
through a flaming broiler. In exactly 90 seconds, the patties are cooked on both sides with a 
unique broiler taste. To move a patty through the conveyor–broiler in a fixed time, the thick-
ness of the patties must be the same for all the hamburger products. The buns are also warmed 
on a conveyor. This system results in a unique, highly consistent product. The cooked patties 
are stored in a warmed storage container. During periods of high demand, some standard ham-
burgers are prepared and inventoried for immediate delivery. Custom hamburgers with unique 
combinations of condiments are prepared to order. This hybrid process provides flexibility to 
respond to customer preferences through the assemble-to-order backend process—thus, the 
Burger King “have it your way” slogan. In general, hybrid processes combine the features of 
Alternative paths
50%
50%
Different products produced
Simultaneous activities
Make-to-order
A production environment 
where the product is 
built directly from raw 
materials and components 
in response to a specific 
customer order.
Make-to-stock
A production environment 
where the customer is 
served "on-demand" from 
finished goods inventory.
Hybrid
Combines the features of 
both make-to-order and 
make-to-stock.

272	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
A. McDonald’s—Old Process
B. Burger King
Custom
or
standard?
Standard
Custom
D. McDonald’s—Current Process
C. Wendy’s
Cook
Assemble
Deliver
Customer
places order
Cook
Customer
places order
Deliver
Assemble
Assemble
Customer
places order
Cook
Assemble
Deliver
Customer
places order
Cook
Assemble
Deliver
Raw
material
Finished
goods
Raw
material
WIP
Finished
goods
Raw
material
Chili
Raw
material
WIP
Making Hamburgers at McDonald’s, Burger King, and Wendy’s
exhibit 11.2
both make-to-order and make-to-stock. Here, two types of process are parallel alternatives at 
the end of the Burger King process. In the most common hybrid form, a generic product is 
made and stocked at some point in the process. These generic units are then finished in a final 
process based on actual orders.
Continuing with our tour, Wendy’s uses a make-to-order process (as shown in 
Exhibit 11.2C) that is in full view of the customer. Hamburger patties are cooked on a grill. 
During high-volume times, the cook tries to get a little ahead and anticipates the arrival of 

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
273
customers. Patties that are on the grill too long are used 
in the chili soup. On arrival of a customer order, a patty 
is taken from the grill and the hamburger is assembled 
to the exact specifications of the customer. Because the 
process starts with the cooking of the patty, it is a little 
slower. The customer can see what is going on, and the 
perception is of a high-quality custom product.
Finally, the current McDonald’s process introduced 
in 1999 (Exhibit 11.2D) is a hybrid process. Cooked 
hamburger patties are inventoried in a special storage 
device that maintains the moistness of the cooked patties 
for up to 30 minutes. The process makes extensive use of 
the latest cooking technologies. Hamburger patties are 
cooked in less than 45 seconds. Buns are toasted in only 
11 seconds. Individual items on each customer order are 
transmitted immediately to the area where the hamburg-
ers are assembled using a specially designed computer 
system. The assembly process that includes toasting the 
buns is designed to respond to a customer order in only 15 seconds. By 
combining the latest technology and clever process engineering, McDon-
ald’s has developed a very quick response process. The product is fresh, 
delivered quickly, and made to the exact specifications of the customer.
Each of the processes used by these companies has its strengths and 
weaknesses. McDonald’s is the high-volume leader, catering to families 
with young children. Burger King has its unique taste. Wendy’s appeals 
to those who want their hamburgers prepared the old-fashioned way. Each 
company focuses advertising and promotional efforts toward attracting 
the segment of the market its process characteristics best support.
One final method for categorizing a process is by whether it is paced 
or nonpaced. Recall that Burger King uses the conveyor–broiler to cook 
hamburgers in exactly 90 seconds. Pacing refers to the fixed timing of 
the movement of items through the process. In a serial process, the move-
ment of items through each activity (or stage) is often paced in some 
mechanical way in order to coordinate the line. An assembly line may, 
for example, move every 45 seconds. Another mechanism used is a clock 
that counts down the amount of time left in each cycle. When the clock 
reaches zero, the parts are manually moved to the next activity. Dividing 
the time available to produce a certain product by customer demand for 
the product calculates the required cycle time for a process. For example, 
if an automobile manufacturer needs to produce 1,000 automobiles dur-
ing a shift where the assembly line operates 420 minutes, the cycle time 
is 25.2 seconds (420 minutes/1,000 automobiles × 60 seconds/minute = 
25.2 seconds/automobile).
Measuring Process Performance
There is much variation in the way performance metrics are calculated in 
practice. This section defines metrics in a manner consistent with the most 
common use in practice. It is vital, though, to understand exactly how a 
metric coming from a particular company or industry is calculated prior to making any deci-
sions. This would be easier if metrics were calculated more consistently, but this just is not the 
case. So if a manager says that his utilization is 90 percent or her efficiency is 115 percent, a 
standard follow-up question is “How did you calculate that?” Metrics often are calculated in 
the context of a particular process. Metrics used in cases that you are studying may be defined 
slightly differently from what is given here. It is important to understand, within the context 
of the case, how a term is being used.
Wendy’s make-to-order process. 
© John Bazemore/AP Images
A McDonald’s employee adds meat patties 
to a burger bun at a restaurant in London, 
UK. McDonald’s Corp., the world’s largest 
restaurant company, plans to increase its 
number of Russian outlets by 20 percent 
this year to capitalize on its fastest growing 
market in Europe. 
© Jason Alden/Bloomberg/Getty Images
Pacing
Movement of items 
through a process is 
coordinated through a 
timing mechanism.

274	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Comparing the metrics of one company to another, often referred to as benchmarking, 
is an important activity. Metrics tell a firm if progress is being made toward improvement. 
Similar to the value of financial measures to accountants, process performance metrics give 
the operations manager a gauge on how productively a process currently is operating and how 
productivity is changing over time. Often, operations managers need to improve the perfor-
mance of a process or project the impact of a proposed change. The metrics described in this 
section are important for answering these questions. To help in understanding these calcula-
tions, Exhibit 11.3 shows how these metrics relate to one another.
Possibly the most common process metric is utilization. As discussed earlier in the chapter, 
utilization is the ratio of the time that a resource is actually being used relative to the time it is 
available for use. Utilization is always measured in reference to some resource—for example, 
the utilization of direct labor or the utilization of a machine resource. The distinction between 
productivity and utilization is important. Productivity is the ratio of output to input. Total 
factor productivity is usually measured in monetary units—dollars, for example—by taking 
the dollar value of the output (such as goods and services sold) and dividing by the cost of 
all the inputs (that is, material, labor, and capital investment). Alternatively, partial factor 
productivity is measured based on an individual input, labor being the most common. Partial 
factor productivity answers the question of how much output we can get from a given level 
of input; for example, how many computers are made per employee working in the computer 
manufacturing plant? (See Chapter 2 for additional information about productivity.) Utiliza-
tion measures the actual activation of the resource. For example, what is the percentage of 
time that an expensive machine is actually operating?
Efficiency is a ratio of the actual output of a process relative to some standard. For exam-
ple, consider a machine designed to package cereal at a rate of 30 boxes per minute. If during 
a shift the operators actually produce at a rate of 36 boxes per minute, then the efficiency of 
the machine is 120 percent (36/30). An alternative way that the term efficiency is used is to 
measure the loss or gain in a process. For example, if 1,000 units of energy are put into a pro-
cess designed to convert that energy to some alternative form, and the process produces only 
800 units of energy in the new form, then the process is 80 percent efficient.
Run time is the time required to produce a batch of parts. This is calculated by multi-
plying the time required to produce each unit by the batch size. The Setup time is the time 
Setup
time
Batch
size
Time/
unit
Run
time
Operation
time
Flow
time
Queue
time
Flow time = Average time for a
unit to move through
the system
Cycle time = Average time between
completion of units
Operation time = Setup time + Run time
Velocity =Value-added time
Flow time
Throughput rate =
1
Cycle time
Efficiency = Actual output
Standard output
Productivity = Output
Input
Utilization = Time activated
Time available
Throughput
rate
Inputs
Efficiency
Productivity
Time
available
Utilization
Time
activated
Cycle
time
Velocity
Standards
Process Performance Metrics
exhibit 11.3
Productivity
A measure of how well 
resources are used. 
According to Goldratt’s 
definition (see Chapter 23), 
all the actions that bring 
a company closer to its 
goals.
Efficiency
A ratio of the actual output 
of a process relative to 
some standard. Also, being 
"efficient" means doing 
something at the lowest 
possible cost.
Run time
The time required to 
produce a batch of parts.
Setup time
The time required to 
prepare a machine to make 
a particular item.

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
275
required to prepare a machine to make a particular item. 
Machines that have significant setup time will typically 
run parts in batches. The operation time is the sum of 
the setup time and run time for a batch of parts that are 
run on a machine. Consider the cereal-boxing machine 
that is designed to produce at a rate of 30 boxes per min-
ute. The run time for each box is 2 seconds. To switch 
the machine from 16-ounce boxes to 12-ounce boxes 
requires a setup time of 30 minutes. The operation time 
to make a batch of 10,000 12-ounce boxes is 21,800 sec-
onds (30 minutes’ setup × 60 seconds/minute + 2 sec-
onds/box × 10,000 boxes), or 363.33 minutes.
In practice, setup time is often not included in the uti-
lization of the process. In essence, setup time is catego-
rized like the downtime caused by repair or some other 
disruption to the process. This assumption can vary 
from company to company, so it is important when comparing the utilization of a machine or 
other resource to understand exactly how the company categorizes setup time.
The cycle time (also defined earlier in this chapter) is the elapsed time between starting 
and completing a job. Another related term is flow time. Flow time includes the time the unit 
spends actually being worked on, together with the time spent waiting in a queue. In practice, 
the term cycle time is often used to mean flow time. It is important to carefully determine how 
the term is being used in the context of the process being studied. 
As a simple example, consider a paced assembly line that has six stations and runs with a 
cycle time of 30 seconds. If the stations are located one right after another, and every 30 sec-
onds parts move from one station to the next, then the flow time is three minutes (30 seconds ×  
6 stations/60 seconds per minute). 
The throughput rate is the out-
put rate that the process is expected 
to produce over a period of time. The 
throughput rate of the assembly line is 
120 units per hour (60 minutes/hour × 
60 seconds/minute ÷ 30 seconds/unit). 
In this case, the throughput rate is the 
mathematical inverse of the cycle time.
Often units are not worked on 
100 percent of the time as they move 
through a process. Because there often 
is some variability in the cycle time of 
a process, buffers are incorporated in the process to allow individual activities to operate inde-
pendently, at least to some extent. In the six-station assembly line just described, consider the 
impact of having 10 additional buffer positions along the line. Assume that two of these posi-
tions are between the first and second workstations, two are between stations 2 and 3, and so 
forth. If these positions are always occupied, then the flow time would be eight minutes (assum-
ing a total of 16 positions along the assembly line and an average cycle time of 30 seconds).
Process velocity (also known as throughput ratio) is the ratio of the value-added time 
to the flow time. Value-added time is the time in which useful work is actually being done 
on the unit. Assuming that all of the activities included in the process are value-added activi-
ties, value-added time should be the sum of the activity operation times in the process. The 
process velocity (or throughput ratio) for our assembly line with the 10 additional buffer posi-
tions, assuming the positions are used 100 percent of the time, is 0.375 (3 minutes/8 minutes).
Production Process Mapping and Little’s Law
Next, we look at how to quickly develop a high-level map of a process, which can be useful to 
understand how material flows and where inventory is held. The approach used here should 
© Jeff Greenberg/PhotoEdit
2
Units
1
Unit
2
Units
1
Unit
2
Units
1
Unit
2
Units
1
Unit
2
Units
1
Unit
1
Unit
Process velocity 
(throughput ratio)
The ratio of the value-
added time to the flow 
time.
Value-added time
The time in which useful 
work is actually being done 
on the unit.
Operation time
The sum of the setup time 
and run time for a batch 
of parts that are run on a 
machine.
Flow time
The average time it takes 
a unit to move through an 
entire process.
Throughput rate
The output rate that the 
process is expected to 
produce over a period of 
time.

276	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
be the first step in analyzing the flow of material through a production process. This idea will 
be further developed in “Value Stream Mapping” in Chapter 12.
Consider a simple system that might be typical of many make-to-stock companies. As 
shown in Exhibit 11.4, material is purchased from a set of suppliers and initially staged in 
raw material inventory. The material is used in a manufacturing process where the product is 
fabricated. After fabrication, the product is put into finished goods inventory and from here it 
is shipped according to orders received from customers.
Focusing on the Make part of the process, it is useful to analyze how this step operates 
using performance measures that relate to the inventory investment and also how quickly 
material flows through the process. A simplified way of thinking about material in a process 
is that it is in one of two states. The first state is where material is moving or “in transit.” 
The second state is material that is sitting in inventory and acting as a “buffer” waiting to 
be used.
In the first state, material is moving in the process. This is material that is in transit 
between entities in the process—for example, between the vendor and the raw material 
inventory at the manufacturer. Material that is in a manufacturing process in a factory can 
also be considered in transit. Actually, we refer to this material as “work-in-process” inven-
tory. In the second state, material is held in a storage area and waits until it is needed. 
In the case of raw material inventory, the need is dependent on the factory usage of the 
item. This “buffer” inventory allows different entities in the process to operate relatively 
independently.
A common measure is the total average value of inventory in the process. From an 
accounting view, this would be the sum of the value (at cost) of the raw material, work-in-
process, and finished goods inventory. This is commonly tracked in accounting systems and 
reported in the firm’s financial statements. In addition to the total value of this inventory, 
another measure is the firm’s inventory turn, which is the cost of goods sold divided by the 
average inventory value.
Although useful for accounting purposes, the total average value of inventory might not be 
particularly useful for evaluating the performance of a process within a firm. What is better, 
a firm that has $2 million worth of inventory, on average, or one that has $4 million? This 
depends greatly on the size of the firm, the type of strategy being used (make-to-order or 
make-to-stock, for example), and the relative cost of the product being produced.
A better measure than the total value of inventory is inventory turn. Since inventory turn 
scales the amount of inventory relative to the cost of goods sold, this provides a measure 
that has some comparability, at least across similar firms. For two similar consumer products 
manufacturers, an inventory turn of six times per year is certainly much better than a firm 
turning inventory two times per year. A measure directly related is days-of-supply, which is 
the inverse of inventory turn scaled to days. For example, if a firm turns inventory six times 
per year, the days of supply is equal to one-sixth times per year or approximately every 61 
days (this is calculated as 1/6 year × 365 days/year = 60.8 days).
Source
Suppliers
Customers
In Transit
In Transit
Deliver
Make
Raw
Material
Finished
Goods
Factory
Buffer
Buffer
Make-to-Stock Process Map
exhibit 11.4
Total average value of 
inventory
The total average 
investment in raw material, 
work-in-process, and 
finished goods inventory.
Inventory turn
A measure of the expected 
number of times inventory 
is replaced over a year.
Days-of-supply
The number of days of 
inventory of an item.

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
277
Simple systems can be analyzed quickly using a principle known as Little’s law. Little’s 
law says there is a long-term relationship between the inventory, throughput, and flow time of 
a production system in steady state. The relationship is:
​Inventory = Throughput rate × Flow time​
As noted earlier, throughput rate is the long-term average rate that items are flowing through 
the process, and flow time is the time it takes a unit to flow through the process from begin-
ning to end. Consider the factory process in Exhibit 11.4. Raw material is brought into the 
factory and is transformed and then stored in finished goods inventory. The analysis assumes 
that the process is operating in “steady state,” meaning that over a long enough period of time 
the amount that is produced by the factory is equal to the amount shipped to customers. The 
throughput rate of the process is equal to average demand, and the process is not producing any 
excess or shortage. If this was not true and the amount produced by the manufacturing process 
was greater than demand, for example, the finished goods inventory would build over time. So 
if demand averages 1,000 units per day and 20 days are needed for a unit to flow through the 
factory, then the expected work-in-process in the factory would be 20,000 units.
We can think of Little’s law as a relationship between 
units and time. Inventory is measured in pieces, flow 
time in days, and throughput in pieces per day. There-
fore, if we divide inventory by throughput, we get flow 
time. For example, 20,000 units divided by 1,000 units 
per day is 20 days. We can also take inventory and divide 
by flow time and get throughput rate. Here 20,000 units 
divided by 20 days is equal to 1,000 units a day. This con-
version is useful when diagnosing a plant’s performance.
To appreciate a major limitation, suppose a process 
has just started with no inventory on hand. Some of the 
initial production will be used to fill the system, thus 
limiting initial throughput. In this case, Little’s law will 
not hold, but after the process has been operating for a 
while, and there is inventory at every step, the process 
stabilizes, and then the relationship holds.
Little’s law is actually much more general than a 
simple way to convert between units. It can be applied 
to single work stations, multistep production lines, factories, or even entire supply chains. 
Further, it applies to processes with variability in the arrival rate (or demand rate) and pro-
cessing time. It can be applied to single or multiple product systems. It even applies to non-
production systems where inventory represents people, financial orders, or other entities.
For our factory, it is common for accounting systems to capture average work-in-process 
in terms of the value (at cost) of the inventory that is being worked on in the factory. For our 
example, say that work-in-process averages $200,000 and that each unit is valued at cost at 
$10.00. This would imply that there are 20,000 units in the factory (calculated $200,000 ÷ 
$10.00 per unit = 20,000 units).
The following example shows how these concepts can be applied to quickly analyze simple 
processes.
​[​11.1​]​
Workers scanning inventory in a warehouse. 
© DreamPictures/Shannon Faulk/Getty Images RF
EXAMPLE 11.1
An automobile company assembles cars in a plant and purchases batteries from a vendor in 
China. The average cost of each battery is $45. The automobile company takes ownership of 
the batteries when they arrive at the plant. It takes exactly 12 hours to make a car in the plant 
and the plant assembles 200 cars per 8-hour shift (currently the plant operates one shift per 
day). Each car uses one battery. The company holds, on average, 8,000 batteries in raw mate-
rial inventory at the plant as a buffer. 
Little’s law
States a mathematical 
relationship between 
throughput rate, flow time, 
and the amount of work-in-
process inventory

278	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
JOB DESIGN DECISIONS
	
Assignment: Find the total number of batteries in the plant, on average (in work-in-process 
at the plant and in raw material inventory). How much are these batteries worth? How many 
days of supply are held in raw material inventory, on average?
SOLUTION
We can split this into two inventories, work-in-process and raw material. For the work-in-
process, Little’s law can be directly applied to find the amount of work-in-process inventory:
Inventory = Throughput × Flow time
Throughput is the production rate of the plant: 200 cars per 8-hour shift, or 25 cars per hour. 
Since we use one battery per car, our throughput rate for the batteries is 25 per hour. Flow 
time is 12 hours, so the work-in-process is: 
Work-in-process inventory = 25 batteries/hour × 12 hours = 300 batteries
We know from the problem that there are 8,000 batteries in raw material inventory, so the 
total number of batteries in the pipeline, on average, is: 
Total inventory = 8,000 + 300 = 8,300 batteries
These batteries are worth 8,300 × $45 = $373,500.
	
The days of supply in raw material inventory is the “flow time” for a battery in raw mate-
rial inventory (or the average amount of time a battery spends in raw material inventory). 
Here, we need to assume they are used in the same order they arrive. Rearranging our Little’s 
law formula: 
Flow time = Inventory/Throughput
So, flow time = 8,000 batteries/(200 batteries/day) = 40 days, which represents a 40-day sup-
ply of inventory.
Thus far in the chapter, we have assumed that we know how long it takes to perform a task. 
Actually determining this time is a significant task in itself. In this section, concepts that 
relate to designing meaningful jobs are discussed together with the problem of estimating 
how long it should take to do the jobs. Job design may be defined as the function of specify-
ing the work activities of an individual or group in an organizational setting. Its objective is to 
develop job structures that meet the requirements of the organization and its technology and 
that satisfy the jobholders’ personal and individual requirements.
The diversity of the workforce’s cultural and educational background, coupled with fre-
quent organization restructuring, calls for a high level of people management skills. The oper-
ations and supply chain manager uses job design techniques to structure the work so it will 
meet both the physical and psychological needs of the worker. Work measurement methods 
are used to determine the most efficient means of performing a given task, as well as to set 
reasonable standards for performing it.
Behavioral Considerations in Job Design
Specialization of labor is the double-edged sword of job design. On one hand, specialization has 
made possible high-speed, low-cost production, and from a materialistic standpoint, it has greatly 
enhanced our standard of living. On the other hand, extreme specialization (as we see in mass-
production industries) often has serious adverse effects on workers, which in turn are passed on to 
management. In essence, the problem is to determine how much specialization is enough.
Job enrichment generally entails adjusting a specialized job to make it more interest-
ing to the job holder. A job is said to be enlarged horizontally if the worker performs a 
Specialization of labor
Simple, repetitive jobs are 
assigned to each worker.
Job enrichment
Specialized work is made 
more interesting by giving 
the worker a greater 
variety of tasks.
Job design
Specification of the work 
activities of an individual 
or group.
Explain how jobs are 
designed.
LO 11–3

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
279
greater number or variety of tasks, and it is said to be enlarged vertically if the worker 
is involved in planning, organizing, and inspecting his or her own work. Horizontal job 
enrichment is intended to counteract oversimplification and to permit the worker to per-
form a “whole unit of work.” Vertical enrichment attempts to broaden workers’ influence 
in the transformation process by giving them certain managerial powers over their own 
activities.
The organizational benefits of job enrichment occur in both quality and productivity. Qual-
ity in particular improves dramatically because when individuals are responsible for their 
work output, they take ownership of it and simply do a better job. Also, because they have 
a broader understanding of the work process, they are more likely to catch errors and make 
corrections than if the job is narrowly focused. Productivity improvements also occur from 
job enrichment, but they are not as predictable or as large as the improvements in quality. The 
reason is that enriched work invariably contains a mix of tasks that (for manual labor) causes 
interruptions in rhythm and different motions when switching from one task to the next. This 
is not the case for specialized jobs.
Work Measurement and Standards
The fundamental purpose of work measurement is to set time standards for a job. Such stan-
dards are necessary for four reasons:
	1.	 To schedule work and allocate capacity.    All scheduling approaches require some 
estimate of how much time it takes to do the work being scheduled.
	2.	 To provide an objective basis for motivating the workforce and measuring work-
ers’ performance.    Measured standards are particularly critical where output-based 
incentive plans are employed.
	3.	 To bid for new contracts and to evaluate performance on existing ones.    ­Questions 
such as “Can we do it?” and “How are we doing?” presume the existence of standards.
	4.	 To provide benchmarks for improvement.    In addition to internal evaluation, 
benchmarking teams regularly compare work standards in their company with those 
of similar jobs in other organizations.
Work measurement and its resulting work standards have been contro-
versial. Much of this criticism has come from unions, which argue that 
management often sets standards that cannot be regularly achieved. (To 
counter this, in some contracts, the industrial engineer who sets the stan-
dard must demonstrate that he or she can do the job over a representative 
period of time at the rate that was set.) There is also the argument that 
workers who find a better way of doing the job get penalized by having a 
revised rate set. (This is commonly called rate cutting.)
Despite these criticisms, work measurement and standards have proved 
effective. Much depends on sociotechnical aspects of the work. Where the 
job requires work groups to function as teams and create improvements, 
worker-set standards often make sense. On the other hand, where the job 
really boils down to doing the work quickly, with little need for creativity 
(such as delivering packages for UPS), tightly engineered, professionally 
set standards are appropriate.
There are four basic techniques for measuring work and setting stan-
dards. These consist of two direct observational methods and two indirect 
methods: The direct methods are time study, which uses a stopwatch to 
time the work, and work sampling, which entails recording random obser-
vations of a person or teams at work. The two indirect methods are prede-
termined motion-time data systems (PMTS), which sum data from tables of 
generic movement times developed in the laboratory to arrive at a time for 
the job, and elemental data, which sums times from a database of similar 
combinations of movements to arrive at job time. The choice of techniques 
Work measurement pioneer Frank Gilbreth 
holds a physical model of arm motions 
used to analyze assembly tasks. 
© Underwood & Underwood/Corbis
Work measurement
Setting time standards for 
a job.

280	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
depends on the level of detail desired and the nature of the work itself. Highly detailed, repeti-
tive work usually calls for time study and predetermined motion-time data analysis. When 
work is done in conjunction with fixed-processing-time equipment, elemental data are often 
used to reduce the need for direct observation. When work is infrequent or entails a long cycle 
time, work sampling is the tool of choice.
PROCESS ANALYSIS EXAMPLES
In this section, the concepts described thus far in the chapter are illustrated with three exam-
ples. These examples are typical of the types of analysis performed in manufacturing, services, 
and logistics businesses. Keep in mind that the analysis used in each example can be applied 
to many different contexts. Be creative in applying something you have seen in another con-
text to the problem at hand. The first example analyzes a bread-making process. Following 
this, a restaurant operation is evaluated. Finally, a typical logistics operation is appraised.
A Bread-Making Operation
EXAMPLE 11.2: Bread Making
For the manager of a bakery, a first priority is to understand the products made and the pro-
cess steps required. Exhibit 11.5A is a simplified diagram of the bread-making process. Two 
steps are required to prepare the bread. The first is preparing the dough and baking the loaves, 
here referred to as bread making. The second is packaging the loaves. Due to the size of the 
mixers in the bakery, bread is made in batches of 100 loaves. Bread making completes a 
batch of 100 loaves every hour, which is the cycle time for the activity. Packaging needs only  
0.75 hour to place the 100 loaves in bags. We can assume that packaging starts up an hour 
after bread making, otherwise it would be idle for a full hour before getting any work at the 
start of the day.
	
From this, we see that bread making is the bottleneck in the process. A bottleneck is the 
activity in a process that limits the overall capacity of the process. So if we assume that the 
bread making and packaging activities both operate the same amount of time each day, then 
the bakery has a capacity of 100 loaves per hour. Notice that over the course of the day the 
packaging operation will be idle for quarter-hour periods in which the next batch of bread is 
still being made, but packaging has already completed bagging the previous batch. One would 
expect that the packaging operation would be utilized only 75 percent of the time under this 
scenario.
	
Suppose that instead of having only one bread making operation we now have two, as 
shown in Exhibit 11.5B. The cycle time for each individual bread-making operation is still 
one hour per 100 loaves. The cycle time for the two bread-making lines operating together is 
half an hour. Because the packaging operation takes 0.75 hour to bag 100 loaves, the packag-
ing operation now is the bottleneck. If both bread making and packaging were operated the 
same number of hours each day, it would be necessary to limit how much bread was made 
because we do not have the capacity to package it. However, if we operated the packaging 
operation for three eight-hour shifts and bread making for two shifts each day, then the daily 
capacity of each would be identical at 3,200 loaves a day (this assumes that the packaging 
operation starts up one hour after the bread-making operation). Doing this requires building 
up inventory each day as work-in-process. Packaging would bag this during the third shift. So 
what is the flow time of our bakery?
SOLUTION
In the original operation with just the single bread-making process, this is easy to calculate 
because inventory would not build between the bread-making and packaging processes. In 
this case, the flow time would be 1.75 hours. 
Analyze manufacturing, 
service, and logistics 
processes to ensure the 
competitiveness of a firm.
LO 11–4

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
281
	
In the case where we delay the start of the packing operation for one hour, and then oper-
ate it for three shifts, the average wait in work-in-process inventory needs to be considered. If 
both bread-making operations start at the same time, then at the end of the first hour the first 
100 loaves move immediately into packaging while the second 100 loaves wait. The waiting 
time for each 100-loaf batch increases until the baking is done at the end of the second shift.
	
This is a case where Little’s law can estimate the time that the bread is sitting in work-in-
process. To apply Little’s law, we need to estimate the average work-in-process between bread 
making and packaging. During the first two shifts, inventory builds from 0 to 1,200 loaves. 
We can estimate the average work-in-process over this 16-hour period to be 600 loaves (half 
the maximum). Over the last hour of the packaging operation’s second shift, and the final 
eight-hour shift, inventory drops from the 1,200-loaf maximum down to 0. Again, the aver-
age work-in-process is 600 loaves. Given this, the overall average over the 24-hour period 
is simply 600 loaves of bread. The packing process limits the cycle time for the process to  
0.75 hour per 100 loaves (assume that the loaves are packaged in a batch), and this is equiva-
lent to a throughput rate of 133.3 loaves/hour (100/0.75 = 133.3). Little’s law calculates that 
the average time that loaves are in work-in-process is 4.5 hours (600 loaves/133.3 loaves/hour).
	
The total flow time is the time that the loaves are in work-in-process, plus the operations 
time for the bread-making and packaging processes. The total flow time then is 6.25 hours  
(1 hour for bread making + 4.5 hours in inventory + 0.75 hour packaging).
A. Bread making on one line
B. Bread making on two parallel lines
Raw
material
Bread making
Cycle time:
1 hour/100 loaves
WIP
Finished
Goods
Pack
Cycle time:
    hour/100 loaves
Raw
material
Bread making
Cycle time:
1 hour/100 loaves
Bread making
Cycle time:
1 hour/100 loaves
WIP
Finished
Goods
Pack
Cycle time:
    hour/100 loaves
3
4
3
4
Bread-Making Processes
exhibit 11.5
A Restaurant Operation
EXAMPLE 11.3: A Restaurant
Our bakery operates in what is referred to as steady state, meaning that the operation is started 
up and runs at a steady rate during the entire time it is in operation. The output of this steady 
state process is adjusted by setting the amount of time that the operation is run. In the case 
of the bakery, we assumed that bread making worked for two shifts and packaging for three 
shifts.
	
A restaurant cannot run in this manner. The restaurant must respond to varying customer 
demand throughout the day. During some peak times, it may be impossible to serve all 

282	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
customers immediately, and some customers may have to wait to be seated. The restaurant, 
because of this varying demand, is a non–steady state process. Keep in mind that many of the 
menu items in a restaurant can be preprepared. The preprepared items—salads and desserts, 
for example—help speed the processes that must be performed when customers are at the 
restaurant being served.
	
Consider the restaurant in the casino that we discussed earlier. Because it is important that 
customers be served quickly, the managers have set up a buffet arrangement where customers 
serve themselves. The buffet is continually replenished to keep items fresh. To further speed 
service, a fixed amount is charged for the meal, no matter what the customer eats. Assume 
that we have designed our buffet so customers take an average of 30 minutes to get their food 
and eat. Further, assume that they typically eat in groups (or customer parties) of two or three 
to a table. The restaurant has 40 tables. Each table can accommodate four people. What is the 
maximum capacity of this restaurant?
SOLUTION
It is easy to see that the restaurant can accommodate 160 people seated at tables at a time. 
Actually, in this situation, it might be more convenient to measure the capacity in terms of 
customer parties because this is how the capacity will be used. If the average customer party 
is 2.5 individuals, then the average seat utilization is 62.5 percent (2.5 seats/party ÷ 4 seats/
table) when the restaurant is operating at capacity. The cycle time for the restaurant, when 
operating at capacity, is 0.75 minute (30 minutes/table ÷ 40 tables). So, on average, a table 
would become available every 45 seconds. The restaurant could handle 80 customer parties 
per hour (60 minutes ÷ 0.75 minute/party).
	
The problem with this restaurant is that everyone wants to eat at the same time. Manage-
ment has collected data and expects the following profile for customer parties arriving during 
lunch, which runs from 11:30 A.M. until 1:30 P.M. Customers are seated only until 1:00 P.M.
	
Because the restaurant operates for two hours for lunch and the capacity is 80 customer 
parties per hour, the restaurant does not appear to have a problem. In reality, though, the 
uneven flow of customers into the restaurant is a problem. A simple way to analyze the situ-
ation is to calculate how we expect the system to look in terms of number of customers being 
served and number waiting in line at the end of each 15-minute interval. Think of this as tak-
ing a snapshot of the restaurant every 15 minutes.
	
The key to understanding the analysis is to look at the cumulative numbers. The differ-
ence between cumulative arrivals and cumulative departures gives the number of customer 
parties in the restaurant (those seated at tables and those waiting). Because there are only  
40 tables, when the cumulative difference through a time interval is greater than 40, a waiting 
line forms. When all 40 tables are busy, the system is operating at capacity; and, from the pre-
vious calculation, we know the cycle time for the entire restaurant is 45 seconds per customer 
party at this time (this means that, on average, a table empties every 45 seconds or 20 tables 
empty during each 15-minute interval). The last party will need to wait for all of the earlier 
parties to get a table, so the expected waiting time is the number of parties in line multiplied 
by the cycle time.
Time
Parties Arriving
11:30–11:45
15
11:45–12:00
35
12:00–12:15
30
12:15–12:30
15
12:30–12:45
10
12:45–1:00
5
Total parties
110

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
283
	
The analysis shows that by 12 noon, 10 customer parties are waiting in line. This line 
builds to 25 parties by 12:15. The waiting line shortens to only 10 parties by 12:45.
	
So what can we do to solve our waiting line problem? One idea might be to shorten the cycle 
time for a single table, but customers are unlikely to be rushed through their lunch in less than 
30 minutes. Another idea would be to add tables. If the restaurant could add 25 tables, then a 
wait would not be expected. Of course, this would eat into the space used for slot machines, so 
this alternative might not be attractive to casino management. A final idea might be to double 
up parties at the tables, thus getting a higher seat utilization. Doubling up might be the easiest 
thing to try. If 25 out of the 40 tables were doubled up, our problem would be solved.
Time  
Period
Parties  
Arriving  
during  
Period  
(Cumulative)
Parties  
Departing  
during  
Period  
(Cumulative)
Parties Either  
at Table or  
Waiting to Be  
Served (at End  
of Period)
Tables Used  
(at End of 
Period)
Customer  
Parties  
Waiting  
(at End  
of Period)
Expected  
Waiting Time  
(at End of  
Period)
11:30–11:45
15
  0
15
15
11:45–12:00
35 (50)
  0
50
40
10
   7.5 minutes
12:00–12:15
30 (80)
15
65
40
25
18.75 minutes
12:15–12:30
15 (95)
20 (35) 
60
40
20
15 minutes
12:30–12:45
10 (105)
20 (55) 
50
40
10
   7.5 minutes
12:45–1:00 
  5 (110)
20 (75) 
35
35
1:00–1:30
  0 (110)
35 (110)
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
11:45
12:00
12:15 
12:30
Time
Customers in the Restaurant
Tables available in the restaurant
Parties waiting
for tables
12:45
1:00
1:15
1:30
Planning a Transit Bus Operation
EXAMPLE 11.4: Transit Bus Operation
The final example involves a logistics system. The term logistics refers to the movement of 
things such as materials, people, or finished goods. Our example involves a bus route that 
would be typical of one used on campus or in a metropolitan area. A similar analysis could be 
used for analyzing plane routes, truck routes, or ships. Similar to the restaurant, a bus transit 
route does not operate in steady state. There are definite peaks in demand during the day and 
evening. A good approach to take, the same as was done with the restaurant, is to analyze 
distinct periods of time that represent the different types of demand patterns placed on the 

284	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
service. These distinct analyses can be referred to as scenarios. Depending on the situation, it 
might be reasonable to develop either a single solution that covers all the relevant scenarios or 
a set of solutions for the different scenarios.
	
A great bus route is the Balabus, or “tourist bus,” in Paris. This route loops past all the 
major attractions in Paris. Some of the sights along the route include Notre-Dame, the Lou-
vre, Concorde, Champs-Elysées, the Arc de Triomphe, the Eiffel Tower, and others.
	
Consider the problem of planning the number of buses needed to service this route.  
A number of factors need to be considered. Let’s assume that a single bus takes exactly two 
hours to traverse the route during peak traffic. The bus company has designed delays in the 
route so that even though traffic is busy, the bus can keep on schedule. The route has 60 stops, 
although the bus stops only when passengers on the bus request a stop or when the driver sees 
customers waiting to board at a stop. Each bus has seating capacity of about 50 passengers, 
and another 30 passengers can stand. This route is busy much of the day because visitors to 
the city tend to start visiting the sites early and continue until dark. Finally, the transit author-
ity wants to give good service and have enough capacity to handle peak customer loads. The 
following is an analysis of the situation.
SOLUTION
A key measure of service is how long a customer must wait prior to the arrival of a bus. Con-
sider initially the case of only a single bus serving the route. If a person comes to a bus stop 
at a random time, we know that the maximum time that the customer needs to wait is two 
hours. Here we assume that the bus is able to cover the route in exactly two hours. If this cycle 
time varies significantly, the waiting time goes up. We discussed the impact of variability in 
Chapter 10. This would be the case when the unlucky customer just missed the bus. If the bus 
was halfway through the route (relative to where the customer is waiting), then the customer 
needs to wait one hour. Continuing with this logic, we can estimate the average wait time for 
the customer to be one hour. In general, we can say that the average wait time would be half 
the cycle time of the process. If two buses are used, the cycle time is one hour and the average 
wait is 30 minutes. If we want the average wait to be two minutes, then the required cycle time 
is four minutes, and 30 buses are needed (120 minutes ÷ 4 minutes/bus = 30 buses).
	
The next issue relates to the capacity of the system. If we have 30 buses on the route and 
each bus seats 50 passengers with another 30 standing, we know we can accommodate 1,500 
seated or 2,400 passengers in total at one point in time.
	
Assume that the following table is an estimate of the number of passengers that travel the 
route during a typical tourist season day. The table shows calculations of the amount of bus 
capacity required during each hour. If a customer rides the bus for 45 minutes, then one seat is 
needed for 45 minutes, or 0.75 hour, to handle that passenger. Of course, 60 minutes, or a full 
hour’s worth of capacity, is available for each seat we have. At maximum utilization includ-
ing standing, each bus can handle 80 passenger-hours’ worth of load. Dividing the expected 
passenger load during the hour by the maximum load for a single bus calculates the minimum 
number of buses needed. Similarly, dividing the expected passenger load by the number of 
seats on each bus calculates the number of buses needed so that all passengers can be seated.
	
From the analysis, if the Paris transit authority uses only 30 buses throughout the day, 
many people will need to stand. Further, during the morning rush between 10 and 11 A.M. and 
the evening rush between 5 and 6 P.M., not all of the customers can be accommodated. It would 
seem reasonable that at least 40 buses should be used between 9 A.M. and 7 P.M. Even with this 
number of buses, one would expect passengers to be standing most of the time.
	
If the transit authority decided to use 40 buses between the extended hours of 8 A.M. through 
8 P.M., what would be the average utilization of the buses in terms of seats occupied? Over this 
12-hour period, 24,000 seat-hours of capacity would be available (40 buses × 12 hours × 
50 seats/bus). The table indicates that 25,875 seat-hours are needed. The utilization would 
be 107.8 percent (25,875/24,000 × 100). What this means is that, on average, 7.8 ­percent of 
the customers must stand. Of course, this average value significantly understates the severe 
capacity problem that occurs during the peak times of the day.

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
285
Time
Number of  
Customers 
Average Time  
on Bus 
Load  
(Passenger  
Hours) 
Minimum  
Number of  
Buses Needed 
Buses Needed for  
All Passengers  
to Be Seated 
8:00–9:00 a.m.
2,000
45 minutes
1,500
18.75
30
  9:00–10:00 a.m.
4,000
30 minutes
2,000
25
40
10:00–11:00 a.m.
6,000
30 minutes
3,000
37.5
60
11:00 a.m.–12:00 noon
5,000
30 minutes
2,500
31.25
50
12:00–1:00 p.m.
4,000
30 minutes
2,000
25
40
  1:00–2:00 p.m.
3,500
30 minutes
1,750
21.875
35
  2:00–3:00 p.m.
3,000
45 minutes
2,250
28.125
45
  3:00–4:00 p.m.
3,000
45 minutes
2,250
28.125
45
  4:00–5:00 p.m.
3,000
45 minutes
2,250
28.125
45
  5:00–6:00 p.m.
4,000
45 minutes
3,000
37.5
60
  6:00–7:00 p.m.
3,000
45 minutes
2,250
28.125
45
  7:00–8:00 p.m.
1,500
45 minutes
1,125
14.0625
22.5
TOTALS
42,000
25,875
Consider in the preceding example how useful this type of analysis is to the Paris transit 
authority. Data can be collected for each day of the week, and the analysis performed. Inter-
esting questions concerning the design of the route or the capacity of the buses can be evalu-
ated. For example, what would happen if the route were split into two parts. What if larger 
buses that could carry 120 passengers were put into service? The analysis can be extended 
to include the cost of providing the service by considering the wages paid to the operators, 
the cost to maintain and operate the vehicles, and depreciation of the buses. As seen from the 
given example, designing a transit system involves a trade-off between the convenience of the 
service, or how frequently buses arrive at each stop, and the capacity utilization of the buses.
Process Flow Time Reduction
Critical processes are subject to the well-known rule that time is money. For example, the 
longer a customer waits, the more likely the customer is to switch to a different vendor. The 
longer material is kept in inventory, the higher the investment cost. There are exceptions in 
services, where more time in process can lead to more money. See the OSCM at Work box, 
“Efficiency Meets Corporate Goals: A Love Story” later in this section.
Unfortunately, critical processes often depend on specific limited resources, resulting in 
bottlenecks. Flow time can sometimes be reduced without purchasing additional equipment. 
The following are some suggestions for reducing the flow time of a process that do not require 
the purchase of new equipment. Often, a combination of ideas is appropriate.
	1.	 Perform activities in parallel.    Most of the steps in an operations process are per-
formed in sequence. A serial approach results in the flow time for the entire process 
being the sum of the individual steps plus transport and waiting time between steps. 
Using a parallel approach can reduce flow time by as much as 80 percent and pro-
duces a better result.
	 	
	 A classic example is product development, where the current trend is toward con-
current engineering. Instead of forming a concept, making drawings, creating a bill 
of materials, and mapping processes, all activities are performed in parallel by inte-
grated teams. Development time is reduced dramatically, and the needs of all those 
involved are addressed during the development process.
	2.	 Change the sequence of activities.    Documents and products are often transported 
back and forth between machines, departments, buildings, and so forth. For instance, 
Based on “Efficiency Meets 
Corporate Goals: A Love Story,” 
Anonymous, posted July 21, 
2006, on www.pavilion.com.

286	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
an item might be transferred between two machines a number of times for fabrication 
and inspection. If the process can be streamlined, it may be possible to perform all of 
the fabrication before the inspection, thus eliminating the waiting associated with the 
back and forth transfer.
	3.	 Reduce interruptions.    Many processes are performed with relatively large time 
intervals between the activities. For example, purchase orders may be issued only 
every other day. Individuals preparing reports that result in purchase orders should 
be aware of deadlines to avoid missing them, because improved timing in these pro-
cesses can save many days of flow time.
To illustrate these ideas, consider an electronics manufacturer that has been receiving 
customer complaints about a long order lead time of 29 days. An assessment of the order-
processing system revealed 12 instances where managers had to approve employees’ work. It 
was determined that the first 10 approvals were not needed. This saved an average of seven to 
eight days in the order processing.
Many subsystems—each performing the same or similar tasks—had interfered with the pro-
cess. The logical step was to eliminate redundancy, and a detailed flowchart of the process was 
created. At close inspection, 16 steps proved very similar to one another. Changing the sequence 
of activities and creating one company-wide order document removed 13 of these steps.
Over four months, the order system was totally redesigned to allow information to be entered 
once and become available to the entire organization. Due to this adjustment, activities could 
be handled in a parallel manner. After a value-added analysis (focused on eliminating the non–
value-adding activities), the manufacturer was able to reduce the customer order lead time from 
29 days to 9 days, save cost and employee time per order, and increase customer satisfaction.
Process analysis is a basic skill needed to understand how a business operates. Great insight 
is obtained by drawing a simple flowchart showing the flow of materials or information 
through an enterprise. The diagram should include all the operating elements and show how 
Efficiency versus Corporate Goals
Consider the following process improvement idea at a local 
coffee shop.
The process improvement idea is to improve the effi-
ciency with which the coffee shop provides value to their 
customers by reducing the wait time, reducing the length of 
the line, and delivering coffee faster.
The Problem: Why is it that regular coffee drinkers wait in 
the same line as drinkers of a double latte cinnamon frap-
puccino, which takes much longer to prepare?
Idea: Give the regular coffee drinkers their own line. Simple, 
yet brilliant.
So, armed with good intentions, the consultant 
approached the coffee shop owner, and explained the idea 
of having two lines, one for regular coffee drinkers and the 
other for the exotic drinks.
The coffee shop owner agreed that it was indeed his 
goal to make more money at the shop. Further, he explained 
that the consultant needs to understand that it is during this 
pause provided while waiting in line and prior to pouring cof-
fee that patrons peer into the pastry case, and decide they 
want a coffee and a pastry! The consultant was amazed at the 
coffee shop owners perfect logic and very effective process. 
OSCM AT WORK
It was, in fact, a beautiful thing. The consultant learned that 
always being fast did not always maximize profit.
The most efficient process does not always attain your 
business goals. It is imperative that the process and goal be 
aligned. Also, learn to appreciate the process that is in place 
and the businesspeople that designed it. The people that 
designed the current problem may have known what they 
were doing. It is essential for you study all aspects of the 
process before proposing changes that may make no sense.
© Plush Studios/Bill Reitzel/Getty Images RF

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
287
they fit together. Be sure to indicate where material is stored or where orders are queued. Often, 
90 percent or more of the time that is required to serve a customer is spent just waiting. Hence, 
merely eliminating the waiting time can dramatically improve the performance of the process.
Remember this fundamental concept when analyzing a process: What goes into the 
­process must come out of the process. A process taken as a whole is like the funnel shown 
in Exhibit 11.6. The outlet of the funnel restricts the amount that can flow through. In a real 
business process, certain resources limit output. If liquid is poured into the funnel at a rate 
greater than it can exit, the level in the funnel will continue to grow. As the level of liquid in 
the funnel grows, the time needed for the liquid to flow through the funnel increases. If too 
much liquid is poured into the funnel, it just spills over the top and never flows through.
The same is true of a real process. If too many jobs are pumped into the process, the time 
it takes to complete a job will increase because the waiting time will increase. At some point, 
customers will go somewhere else and the business will be lost. When a process is operating at 
capacity, the only way to take on more work without increasing the waiting time is to add more 
capacity. This requires finding what activity is limiting the output of the process and increasing 
the capacity of that activity. In essence, the tube leading out of the funnel needs to be made larger.
New work enters the process
Work waiting to be completed
Flow
time
Process required to complete work
Completed work
What Goes into a Process Must Come Out of the Process. Input Rate 
Must Be Less Than or Equal to the Output Rate; Otherwise, the 
System Will Overflow.
exhibit 11.6
Concept Connections
LO 11–1   Exemplify a typical business process and how it can be analyzed.
Summary
	∙	 Companies get things done with processes. A process 
takes inputs and transforms them into outputs that cre-
ate value for the organization. 
	∙	 Everything from ordering material from vendors on 
the supply side and fabricating a product in a factory 
to shipping goods to customers on the demand side 
is done with processes. A company may have literally 
thousands of different processes. 
	∙	 Designing processes is the focus of this chapter. 
	∙	 Understanding a process usually starts with the prep-
aration of a flowchart that depicts tasks, flows, and 
storage areas.

288	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Key Terms
Process  Any set of activities performed by an organization 
that takes inputs and transforms them into outputs ideally 
of greater value to the organization than the original inputs.
Cycle time  The average time between completions of 
successive units in a process (this is the definition used 
in this book).
Utilization  The ratio of the time that a resource is actu-
ally activated relative to the time that it is available for 
use.
LO 11–2   Compare different types of processes.
	∙	 In the case of a multistage process that has a sequence 
of activities that must be done in a specific order, it is 
often useful to buffer the activities by placing inven-
tory between the activities. This allows the activities 
to operate relatively independently and helps prevent 
starving and blocking. 
	∙	 The bottleneck is the activity or stage in the process 
that limits output the most and limits the capacity of 
the entire process. 
	∙	 A process that is only activated after an actual order 
arrives is called make-to-order. 
	∙	 Make-to-stock processes supply inventory from which 
actual customer orders are filled. 
	∙	 There are many variations related to how the work in a 
process is coordinated to meet demand.
	∙	 Basic process performance is measured by its speed 
and capacity. 
	∙	 Measures that drive cost include the efficiency, produc-
tivity, and utilization of resources used in the process. 
	∙	 Little’s law is a mathematical formula that captures 
the relationship between the amount of inventory of 
all types in the process, the time required to produce a 
unit by the process, and the production rate or capacity 
of the process. 
	∙	 These concepts are important in analyzing how a pro-
cess operates and how quick and costly the process is.
Summary
Key Terms
Buffer  A storage area between stages where the output 
of a stage is placed prior to being used in a downstream 
stage.
Blocking  The activities in the stage must stop because 
there is no place to deposit the item just completed.
Starving  The activities in a stage must stop because 
there is no work.
Bottleneck  A resource that limits the capacity or maxi-
mum output of the process.
Make-to-order  A production environment where the 
product is built directly from raw materials and compo-
nents in response to a specific customer order.
Make-to-stock  A production environment where the 
customer is served “on-demand” from finished goods 
inventory.
Hybrid  Combines the features of both make-to-order 
and make-to-stock.
Pacing  Movement of items through a process is coordi-
nated through a timing mechanism.
Productivity  A measure of how well resources are used. 
According to Goldratt’s definition (see Chapter 23), all 
the actions that bring a company closer to its goals.
Efficiency  A ratio of the actual output of a process rela-
tive to some standard. Also, being “efficient” means 
doing something at the lowest possible cost.
Run time  The time required to produce a batch of parts.
Setup time  The time required to prepare a machine to 
make a particular item.
Operation time  The sum of the setup time and run time 
for a batch of parts that are run on a machine.
Flow time  The average time it takes a unit to move 
through an entire process.
Throughput rate  The output rate that the process is 
expected to produce over a period of time.
Process velocity  The ratio of the value-added time to 
the flow time.
Value-added time  The time in which useful work is 
actually being done on the unit.
Total average value of inventory  The total average 
investment in raw material, work-in-process, and fin-
ished goods inventory.
Inventory turn  A measure of the expected number of 
times inventory is replaced over a year.
Days-of-supply  The number of days of inventory of an 
item.
Little’s law  States a mathematical relationship between 
throughput rate, flow time, and the amount of work-in-
process inventory

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
289
Key Formulas
[11.1] Little’s law
Inventory = Throughput rate × Flow time
LO 11–3   Explain how jobs are designed.
	∙	 Designing each task that must be performed in a pro-
cess is important. Each task takes time and must be 
performed by either a person or a machine. 
	∙	 Job design is the study of how work activities are 
designed for individuals or groups of workers. 
	∙	 A key design decision is the amount of specialization 
that a job entails. 
	∙	 Jobs that are too specialized may be boring and create 
health problems for workers. 
	∙	 Trade-offs exist between the quality and relative pro-
ductivity of a process and depend on how the jobs are 
designed.
Summary
Key Terms
Job design  Specification of the work activities of an 
individual or group.
Specialization of labor  Simple, repetitive jobs are 
assigned to each worker.
Job enrichment  Specialized work is made more inter-
esting by giving the worker a greater variety of tasks.
Work measurement  Setting time standards for a job.
LO 11–4   Analyze manufacturing, service, and logistics processes to ensure the competitiveness  
of a firm.
	∙	 There are many different types of processes. This 
chapter provided examples of a bread-making opera-
tion, a restaurant, and a transit bus operation. 
	∙	 There are many “tricks” for speeding up a process. 
	∙	 A fundamental concept is that what goes into a pro-
cess must come out of the process in some form. If 
inputs such as materials are going into the process 
faster than they are being consumed, then these inputs 
will build up within the process. This can create seri-
ous problems for the firm. 
	∙	 Coordinating the inputs and outputs is important to 
having a good process.
Summary
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Suppose we schedule shipments to our customers so that we expect each shipment to wait 
for two days in finished goods inventory (in essence we add two days to when we expect to 
be able to ship). We do this as protection against system variability to ensure a high on-time 
delivery service. If we ship approximately 2,000 units each day, how many units do we expect 
to have in finished goods inventory after allowing this extra time? If the items are valued at 
$4.50 each, what is the expected value of this inventory?
Solution
Using Little’s law, the expected finished goods inventory is:
Inventory = 2,000 units per day × 2 days = 4,000 units
This would be valued at 4,000 units × $4.50 per unit = $18,000
LO11–2

290	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Daffy Dave’s Sub Shop makes custom submarine sandwiches to order. It is analyzing the 
processes at its shop. The general flow of the process is shown as follows. A different person 
is working at each of the steps in the process.
LO11–4
Take the
Order
1 minute/order
3 minutes/order
4 minutes/order
2 minutes/order
Slice the Bun
and Add the
Meat/Cheese
Add the
Toppings and
Condiments
Bag the Order
Daffy Dave wants to figure out the following for a typical eight-hour work day.
	a.	 What is the current maximum output of the process?
	b.	 If we add another person, where would we add him or her and what is the benefit?
	c.	 Is there a benefit if we can shift one minute from Bun and Meat to Order Taking? Assume 
we do not make the change in part (b).
	d.	 Is there a benefit if we shift one minute of work from Condiments to Bagging? Assume we 
do not make the changes in parts (b) and (c).
Solution
	a.	 Maximum output is 120 subs per day.
Operation
Output
Take Orders
(60 min. per hour/2 min. per order) × 8 hours = 240 subs per day
Bun and Meat
(60 min. per hour/2 min. per order) × 8 hours = 240 subs per day
Toppings/Condiments
(60 min. per hour/4 min. per order) × 8 hours = 120 subs per day
Bag the Order
(60 min. per hour/2 min. per order) × 8 hours = 240 subs per day
Operation
Output
Take Orders
480 subs per day
Bun and Meat
160 subs per day
Toppings/Condiments
120 × 2 = 240 subs per day
Bag the Order
240 subs per day
		 Output per day is determined by the slowest station; therefore, we can only produce 120 
per day because that is the limit of the Toppings/Condiments station.
	b.	 Dave should add the person to the slowest station (Condiments/Toppings) since it is the 
bottleneck.
		 The impact is not a very big one. Even though the Toppings/Condiments station now can 
do 240 subs per day, the Bun and Meat station can only do 160, so that is the maximum 
output.
	c.	 Order Taking station will go from 1 minute to 2 minutes, and Bun and Meat goes from 3 
minutes to 2 minutes.
Operation
Output
Take Orders
(60 min. per hour/1 min. per order) × 8 hours = 480 subs per day
Bun and Meat
(60 min. per hour/3 min. per order) × 8 hours = 160 subs per day
Toppings/Condiments
(60 min. per hour/3 min. per order) × 8 hours = 160 subs per day
Bag the Order
(60 min. per hour/3 min. per order) × 8 hours = 160 subs per day
		 There is no benefit to this change. Dave can still only make 120 subs per day since we can 
only produce 120 per day because that is the limit of the Toppings/Condiments station.

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
291
d.	 Toppings/Condiments station will go from 4 minutes to 3 minutes, and Bagging goes from 
2 minutes to 3 minutes.
Operation
Output
Take Orders
(60 min. per hour/1 min. per order) × 8 hours = 480 subs per day
Bun and Meat
(60 min. per hour/3 min. per order) × 8 hours = 160 subs per day
Toppings/Condiments
(60 min. per hour/4 min. per order) × 8 hours = 120 subs per day
Bag the Order
(60 min. per hour/2 min. per order) × 8 hours = 240 subs per day
		 There is a benefit to this change. Dave can now make 160 subs per day. This will provide 
the same benefit as hiring another worker. However, if Dave wants to increase output fur-
ther, he will have to hire some additional staff.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Define a process in general. Apply this definition in detail to a university, a grocery store, 
and a beer brewing company.
	  2.	 Consider your favorite fast-food restaurant. The next time you are there, pay special 
attention to how the food preparation and delivery process works. Develop a flowchart of 
the process like that in Exhibit 11.1. Try to include as much detail as is needed to explain 
the process, remembering to differentiate between your activities as a customer and those 
of the service process.
	  3.	 Describe cycle time as it relates to business processes. Why is it important to the manage-
ment of business processes? How does it relate to concepts like productivity and capacity 
utilization?
	  4.	 Compare McDonald’s old and current processes for making hamburgers. How valid is 
McDonald’s claim that the new process will produce fresher hamburgers for the cus-
tomer? Comparing McDonald’s current process to the processes used by Burger King 
and Wendy’s, which process would appear to produce the freshest hamburgers?
	  5.	 State in your own words what Little’s law means. Describe an example that you have 
observed where Little’s law applies.
	  6.	 Explain how having more work-in-process inventory can improve the efficiency of a pro-
cess. How can this be bad?
	  7.	 Recently, some operations management experts have begun insisting that simply maxi-
mizing process velocity, which actually means minimizing the time it takes to process 
something through the system, is the single most important measure for improving a 
process. Can you think of a situation in which this might not be true?
	  8.	 What is job enrichment and what has led to its importance in job design?
	  9.	 Why are work measurements and time standards important for a firm? Are there any 
negatives to the implementation of these standards? Are there ways to achieve the same 
objectives without setting firm standards?
	10.	 From your own experiences, compare the processes of your favorite brick-and-mortar 
department store and a comparable online retailer. What advantages does each have over 
the other? What advantages does each offer you, the customer?
	11.	 What is the effect of waiting time on a manufacturing process? Why is it good to reduce 
waiting time? Can it be eliminated altogether?
	12.	 How does seasonal variability in demand affect the flow and waiting time through a pro-
cess? How might a company respond to reduce the effect of this variability?
LO 11–1
LO 11–2
LO 11–3
LO 11–4

292	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Objective Questions
	  1.	 A manufacturing company has a small production line dedicated to making a particular 
product. The line has four stations in serial. Inputs arrive at station 1 and the output from 
station 1 becomes the input to station 2. The output from station 2 is the input to station 3 
and so on. The output from station 4 is the finished product. Station 1 can process 2,700 
units per month, station 2 can process 2,500/month, station 3 can process 2,300/month, 
and station 4 can process 2,100/month. What station sets the maximum possible output 
from this system? What is that maximum output number?
	  2.	 In a flowchart, what is used to represent a storage activity in a process?
	  3.	 A process is part of an organization that takes _____, turns them into _____, and adds 
_____ while doing so.
	  4.	 You are in a line at the bank drive-through and 10 cars are in front of you. You estimate 
that the clerk is taking about five minutes per car to serve. How long do you expect to 
wait in line?
	  5.	 A firm has redesigned its production process so that it now takes 10 hours for a unit to 
be made. Using the old process, it took 15 hours to make a unit. If the process makes one 
unit each hour, on average, and each unit is worth $1,500, what is the reduction in work-
in-process value?
	  6.	 Avis Company is a car rental company that is located three miles from the Los Angeles 
airport (LAX). Avis is dispatching a bus from its offices to the airport every 2 minutes. 
The average traveling time (round-trip) is 20 minutes.
	
a.  How many Avis buses are traveling to and from the airport?
	
b.  The branch manager wants to improve the service and suggests dispatching buses 
every 0.5 minutes. She argues that this will reduce the average traveling time from the 
airport to the Avis offices to 2.5 minutes. Is she correct? If your answer is negative, 
what will the average traveling time be?
	  7.	 At the Children’s Hospital in Seattle there are, on average, 60 births per week. Mother 
and child stay, on average, two days before they leave the hospital. At the Swedish Hospi-
tal (also in Seattle), the average number of births per week is 210. Mothers and children 
stay in the hospital two days, on average.
	
a.  How many new mothers, on average, are staying at the Children’s Hospital?
	
b.  How many new mothers, on average, are staying at the Swedish Hospital?
	
c.  The directors of the two hospitals are negotiating unifying the maternity wards of the 
two hospitals. They believe this will help reduce the number of new mothers staying 
in the unified ward. Are they correct? How many new mothers will stay, on average, in 
the unified ward? You may assume that the average number of births and the length of 
stay of the new mothers will not change.
	  8.	 What are the four basic techniques for measuring work and setting time standards?
	  9.	 Which work measurement technique is most appropriate for tasks that are infrequent or 
have a long cycle time?
	10.	 An enterprising student has set up an internship clearinghouse for business students. 
Each student who uses the service fills out a form and lists up to 10 companies that he 
or she would like to have contacted. The clearinghouse has a choice of two methods to 
use for processing the forms. The traditional method requires about 20 minutes to review 
the form and arrange the information in the proper order for processing. Once this setup 
is done, it takes only two minutes per company requested to complete the processing. 
The other alternative uses an optical scan/retrieve system, which takes only a minute to 
prepare but requires five minutes per company for completing the processing. If it costs 
about the same amount per minute for processing with either of the two methods, when 
should each be used? (Answer in Appendix D)
	11.	 Rockness Recycling refurbishes rundown business students. The process uses a moving 
belt, which carries each student through the five steps of the process in sequence. The 
five steps are as follows.
LO 11–1
LO 11–2
LO 11–3
LO 11–4

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
293
	 	 	 One faculty member is assigned to each of these steps. Faculty members work a 40-hour 
week and rotate jobs each week. Mr. Rockness has been working on a contract from Gen-
eral Eclectic, which requires delivery of 2,000 refurbished students per week. A represen-
tative of the human resources department has just called complaining that the company 
hasn’t been receiving the agreed-upon number of students. A check of finished goods 
inventory by Mr. Rockness reveals that there is no stock left. What is going on?
	12.	 The bathtub theory of operations management is being promoted as the next break-
through for global competitiveness. The factory is a bathtub with 50 gallons of capacity. 
The drain is the outlet to the market and can output three gallons per hour when wide 
open. The faucet is the raw material input and can let material in at a rate of four gallons 
per hour. Now, to test your comprehension of the intricacies of operations (assume the 
bathtub is empty to begin with): (Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  Draw a diagram of the factory and determine the maximum rate at which the market 
can be served if all valves are set to maximum. What happens to the system over time?
	
b.  Suppose that, instead of a faucet, a five-gallon container is used for filling the bathtub 
(assume a full container is next to the tub to begin with); it takes two hours to refill the 
container and return it to the bathtub. What happens to the system over time?
	13.	 A local market research firm has just won a contract for several thousand small projects 
involving data gathering and statistical analysis. In the past, the firm has assigned each 
project to a single member of its highly trained professional staff. This person would both 
gather and analyze the data. Using this approach, an experienced person can complete an 
average of 10 such projects in an eight-hour day.
	 	 	   The firm’s management is thinking of assigning two people to each project in order to 
allow them to specialize and become more efficient. The process would require the data 
gatherer to fill out a matrix on the computer, check it, and transmit it to the statistical 
analysis program for the analyst to complete. Data can be gathered on one project while 
the analysis is being completed on another, but the analysis must be complete before the 
statistical analysis program can accept the new data. After some practice, the new process 
can be completed with a standard time of 20 minutes for the data gathering and 30 min-
utes for the analysis.
	
	a.  What is the production (output per hour) for each alternative? What is the productivity 
(output per labor hour)?
	
b.  How long would it take to complete 1,000 projects with each alternative? What would 
be the labor content (total number of labor hours) for 1,000 projects for each alternative?
	14.	 A processor makes two components, A and B, which are then packaged together as the 
final product (each product sold contains one A and one B). The processor can do only 
one component at a time: Either it can make As or it can make Bs. There is a setup time 
when switching from A to B.
	 	 	   Current plans are to make 100 units of component A, then 100 units of component B, 
then 100 units of component A, then 100 units of component B, and so forth, where the 
setup and run times for each component are given as follows.
Step
Description
Time Required  
per Student
1
Unpack and place on belt
1.0 minute
2
Strip off bad habits
1.5 minutes
3
Scrub and clean mind
0.8 minute
4
Insert modern methods
1.0 minute
5
Polish and pack
1.2 minutes
Component
Setup/Changeover Time
Run Time/Unit
A
  5 minutes
0.2 minute
B
10 minutes
0.1 minute

294	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	 	 	 Assume the packaging of the two components is totally automated and takes only two 
seconds per unit of the final product. This packaging time is small enough that you can 
ignore it. What is the average hourly output, in terms of the number of units of packaged 
product (which includes one component A and one component B)?
	15.	 The following represents a process used to assemble a chair with an upholstered seat. Sta-
tions A, B, and C make the seat; stations J, K, and L assemble the chair frame; station X 
is where the two subassemblies are brought together; and some final tasks are completed 
in stations Y and Z. One worker is assigned to each of the stations. The line is paced 
using a countdown clock to synchronize production at each station. Generally, there is no 
inventory kept anywhere in the system, although there is room for one unit between each 
of the stations that might be used for a brief amount of time.
B
C
A
K
L
J
Y
Z
X
	 	 	 Given the following amount of work in seconds required at each station:
A 38
J
32
X 22
B 34
K 30
Y 18
C 35
L
34
Z
20
	
a.  What is the possible daily output of this “process” if eight hours of processing time is 
available each day?
	
b.  Given your output rate in part (a), what is the efficiency of the process?
	
c.  What is the flow time of the process?
	16.	 Wally’s Widget Warehouse takes orders from 7 A.M. to 7 P.M. The manager wants to analyze 
the process and has provided the following process flow diagram. There are three steps 
required to ship a customer order. The first step is to take the order from a customer. The 
second step is to pick the order for the customer, and then they have to pack the order to 
ready it for shipping. Wally promises that every order placed today gets shipped tomorrow. 
That means the picking and packing operations must finish all orders before they go home.
Customer
Orders
Picked
Orders
Wait for
Shipper
Take
Orders
100 Customers/
hour
80 Customers/
hour
60 Customers/
hour
Pick
Orders
Pack
Orders
Customers
	 	 	 Wally wants to figure out the following:
	
a.  What is the current maximum output of the process assuming that no one works 
overtime?
	
b.  How long will the picking and packing operations have to work if we have a day where 
the order taker works at his maximum capacity?
	
c.  Given b, what is the maximum number of orders waiting to be picked?
	
d.  Given b, what is the maximum number of orders waiting to be packed?
	
e.  If we double the packing capacity (from 60 to 120 orders per hour), what impact does 
this have on your answers in parts (b), (c), and (d)?

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
295
	17.	 The National State Bank is trying to make sure it has enough tellers to handle the Friday 
afternoon rush of workers wanting to cash their paychecks. It is only concerned with the 
last hour of the day from 4:00 to 5:00 P.M. It takes 5 minutes per customer to be processed 
by the tellers. The average customer arrivals are shown in the following table.
Time
Customers Arriving
4:00–4:05
  2
4:05–4:10
  5
4:10–4:15
  6
4:15–4:20
  8
4:20–4:25
10
4:25–4:30
12
4:30–4:35
16
4:35–4:40
12
4:40–4:45
10
4:45–4:50
  6
4:50–4:55
  4
4:55–5:00
  2
5:00–5:05
  0
Total        
93
	 	 The bank currently has eight teller stations, and all are staffed during the Friday after-
noon rush hour.
	
a.  What is the current maximum output at the bank during rush hour?
	
b.  Can the bank process all the customers by 5:00 p.m.?
	
c.  What is the maximum waiting time for customers, and what time period does it occur in?
	18.	 I-mart is a discount optical shop that can fill most prescription orders in around 1 hour. 
The management is analyzing the processes at the store. There currently is one person 
assigned to each task. The optometrist assigned to task B takes an hour off for lunch and 
the other employees work the entire day.
Task
Time
A. Greet/register the patient
 2 minutes/patient
B. Optometrist conducts eye exam
25 minutes/patient
C. Frame/lenses selection
20 minutes/patient
D. Glasses made (process can run 6 pairs  
of glasses at the same time)
60 minutes/patient
E. Final fitting
5 minutes/patient
	 	 For a typical 10-hour retail day (10 A.M. to 8 P.M.), the manager would like to calculate the 
following:
	
a.  What is the current maximum output of the process per day (assuming every patient 
requires glasses)?
	
b.  If another person were added, where would be the logical place?
	
c.  What effect would a mail order lab (where the glasses are made off-site and returned 
in five to seven days) have on the process?
	19.	 A quoting department for a custom publishing house can complete 4 quotes per day, and 
there are 20 quotes in various stages in the department. Applying Little’s law, the current 
lead time for a quote is how many days?

296	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	20.	 A small barber shop has a single chair and an area for waiting, where only one person can 
be in the chair at a time, and no one leaves without getting their hair cut. So the system is 
roughly:
​Entrance  →  Wait  →  Haircut  →  Exit​
Assume customers arrive at the rate of 10 per hour and stay an average of 0.5 hour.
What is the average number of customers in the barber shop?
Advanced Problem
	21.	 Remember Mr. Rockness in Question 11? He now retrains college professors. It is a much 
more challenging task but still involves five steps. He has worked hard to balance the 
line; however, there is a lot of variability. Each stage in the process now handles between 
one and six faculty members per hour depending on how bad the case is. If there is 
some inventory available for every position (do not worry about the startup), what is the 
expected output per hour? Assume that each stage is independent and that it is equally 
likely that one, two, three, four, five, or six faculty members get processed each hour at 
each stage.
Retrieving money from a mechanical slot machine is 
referred to as the drop process. The drop process begins 
with a security officer and the slot drop team leader 
obtaining the slot cabinet keys from the casino cashier’s 
cage. Getting the keys takes about 15 minutes. The slot 
drop team consists of employees from the hard count 
coin room, security, and accounting. The slot drop leader, 
under the observation of a security officer and a person 
from accounting, actually removes the drop bucket from 
the slot machine cabinet. When the drop bucket is pulled 
from the slot cabinet, a tag with the proper slot machine 
number is placed on top of the coins to identify where 
that bucket came from when the weigh process begins. 
Retrieving the drop bucket takes about 10 minutes per 
slot machine. Once a cart is filled with buckets from 20 
different slot machines, the drop team leader and secu-
rity and accounting people deliver the buckets to the hard 
count room. The buckets are securely locked in the hard 
count room to await the start of the hard count process. 
Delivering and securing the buckets takes about 30 min-
utes per cart.
The hard count process is performed at a desig-
nated time known to gaming regulatory authorities. 
The hard count team first tests the weigh scale, which 
takes 10 minutes. The scale determines the dollar value, 
by denomination, for set weights of 10 and 25 pounds. 
These results are compared to calibration results, calcu-
lated when the scale was last serviced, to determine if 
a significant variance exists. If one does exist, the hard 
count supervisor must contact the contractor responsible 
for maintaining the scale and the controller’s office. If 
no significant variance is found, the weigh process can 
continue.
Following the scale check, each drop bucket is emp-
tied into the weigh scale holding hopper. Using informa-
tion from the identification tag, the specific slot machine 
number from which the bucket originated is entered into 
the weigh scale computer. The weigh scale computer is 
programmed to convert the weight of coins, by denomi-
nation, into specific dollar values, which are recorded in 
the weigh journal along with the slot machine number. 
This weighing and recording process takes seven minutes 
per bucket. Once the scale has weighed the contents of 
the drop bucket, the coins automatically drop onto a con-
veyor belt, which transports them to wrapping machines. 
As the coins are wrapped, the rolls of coins drop onto 
another conveyor belt, which takes them to a canning sta-
tion. Twenty-five silver dollars are wrapped in each roll 
at a rate of 10 rolls per minute.
At the canning station, the coin rolls are placed in 
metal or plastic cans that hold specific dollar amounts 
based on coin denomination. The cans are stacked to 
facilitate counting the wrapped coins. Silver dollar cans 
hold $1,000, or 40 rolls, and take five minutes to fill 
and stack. When the weigh process is completed, the 
weigh scale computer runs a summary report totaling the 
weight by denomination. These totals are recorded on the 
weigh/wrap verification report, which takes five minutes 
to produce.
When the wrap portion of the count is completed 
and all of the rolled coins have been canned and stacked, 
they are manually counted by denomination. These totals 
are also recorded on the weigh/wrap verification report. 
The variance in both dollar amounts and percentages, for 
each denomination, is calculated. Variances that exceed 
2 percent of the total or $1,000 (whichever is less) must 
Case: Analyzing Casino Money-Handling Processes

	
Process Design and Analysis	
Chapter 11 	
297
be investigated by the hard count supervisor, who writes 
an explanatory report. If no significant variances exist, 
all members of the hard count team sign the weigh/wrap 
verification report. To complete the hard count process, 
the casino cashier’s cage is then notified that the slot drop 
is ready to be transferred into cage accountability. Manu-
ally counting and verifying the counts take, on average, 
two minutes per can.
In a process separate from the hard count, a cage 
cashier performs an independent count and verification, 
by denomination, of the wrap. If everything balances, 
the main bank cashier signs the weigh/wrap verification 
report, accepting the slot drop into cage accountability. It 
is at this point that the actual slot gross gaming revenue 
is recognized.
Questions
	1.	 Draw a diagram of the drop process. How long 
should it take to empty 300 silver dollar slot 
machines?
	2.	 Draw a diagram of the hard count process. How 
long should this process take to complete for 300 
silver dollar slot machines? Assume that each slot 
machine has an average of 750 silver dollars when 
it is emptied.
	3.	 The casino is considering the purchase of a second 
coin-wrapping machine. What impact would this 
have on the hard count process? Is this the most 
desirable machine to purchase?
	4.	 What would be the impact of purchasing “elec-
tronic” slot machines that do not use coins?
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 This is a part of an organization that takes inputs and 
transforms them into outputs.
	  2.	 This is the ratio of the time that a resource is acti-
vated relative to the time it is available for use.
	  3.	 This is when one or more activities stop because of a 
lack of work.
	  4.	 This is when an activity stops because there is no 
place to put the work that was just completed.
	  5.	 This is a step in a process that is the slowest com-
pared to the other steps. This step limits the capacity 
of the process.
	  6.	 What is the difference between McDonald’s old and 
current processes?
	  7.	 This refers to the fixed timing of the movement of 
items through a process.
	  8.	 This is when one company compares itself to another 
relative to operations performance.
	  9.	 This is the time it takes a unit to travel through the 
process from beginning to end. It includes time wait-
ing in queues and buffers.
	10.	 The relationship between time and units in a process 
is called this.
	11.	 What is the mathematical relationship between time 
and units in a process?
	12.	 What is the major assumption about how a process is 
operating for Little’s law to be valid?
	13.	 What is the double-edged sword of job design?
	14.	 This is when a job is increased vertically or 
horizontally.
	15.	 What are the four basic work measurement 
techniques?
Answers to Practice Exam 1. A process  2. Utilization  3. Starving  4. Blocking  5. Bottleneck  6. Make-to-stock versus make-to-order   
7. Pacing  8. Benchmarking  9. Flow time  10. Little’s law  11. Inventory = Throughput rate × Flow time  12. Process is operating in steady state   
13. Specialization  14. Job enrichment and enlargement  15. Time study, work sampling, predetermined motion-time data systems, elemental data

298
Learning Objectives
	LO 12–1	 Explain the scope of total quality management in a firm.
	LO 12–2	 Understand the Six Sigma approach to improving quality and productivity.
	LO 12–3	 Illustrate globally recognized quality benchmarks.
Six Sigma 
Quality
12 
GE SIX SIGMA SUPPLY CHAIN PROCESSES
General Electric (GE) has been a major advocate of Six Sigma for over 15 years. Jack 
Welch, the legendary and now retired CEO, declared, “The big myth is that Six Sigma 
is about quality control and statistics. It is that—but it’s much more. Ultimately, it drives 
leadership to be better by providing tools to think through tough issues. At Six Sig­
ma’s core is an idea that can turn a company inside out, focusing the organization 
outward on the customer.” GE’s commitment to quality centers on Six Sigma.
So, what is Six Sigma? It’s best to first explain what it 
is not. It is not a secret society, a slogan, or a cliché. Six 
Sigma is a highly disciplined process that helps us focus 
on developing and delivering near-perfect products and 
services. Why “Sigma”? The word is a statistical term that 
measures how far a given process deviates from perfec­
tion. The central idea behind Six Sigma is that if you can 
measure how many “defects” you have in a process, you 
can systematically figure out how to eliminate them and 
get as close to “zero defects” as possible. To achieve 
Six Sigma Quality, a process must produce no more than 
3.4 defects per million opportunities. An “opportunity” is 
defined as a chance for nonconformance, or not meeting 
the required specifications. This means we need to be 
nearly flawless in executing our key processes.
© YASUYOSHI CHIBA/AFP/Getty Images

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
299
Total quality management (TQM) may be defined as managing the entire organization so it 
excels in all dimensions of products and services important to the customer. It has two funda­
mental operational goals, namely
	1.	 Careful design of the product or service.
	2.	 Ensuring that the organization’s systems can consistently produce the design.
These two goals can only be achieved if the entire organization is oriented toward them—
hence, the term total quality management. TQM became a national concern in the United 
States in the 1980s, primarily as a response to Japanese quality superiority in manufactur­
ing automobiles and other durable goods, such as room air conditioners. So severe was the 
quality shortfall in the United States that improving it throughout industry became a national 
priority, with the Department of Commerce establishing the Malcolm Baldrige National 
Quality Award in 1987 to help companies review and structure their quality programs. 
Also gaining major attention at this time was the requirement that suppliers demonstrate 
they were measuring and documenting their quality practices according to specified criteria, 
called ISO standards, if they wished to compete for international contracts. We will discuss 
this more later.
The philosophical leaders of the quality movement, notably Philip Crosby, W. Edwards 
Deming, and Joseph M. Juran—the so-called Quality Gurus—had slightly different defi­
nitions of what quality is and how to achieve it (see Exhibit 12.1), but they all had the 
same general message: To achieve outstanding quality requires quality leadership from 
TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Malcolm Baldrige 
National Quality Award
An award established by 
the U.S. Department of 
Commerce given annually 
to companies that excel in 
quality.
Total quality 
management (TQM)
Managing the entire 
organization so it excels in 
all dimensions of products 
and services important to 
the customer.
Explain the scope of total 
quality management in a 
firm.
LO 12–1
Crosby
Deming
Juran
Definition of quality
Conformance to requirements
A predictable degree of uniformity 
and dependability at low cost and 
suited to the market
Fitness for use (satisfies cus­
tomer’s needs)
Degree of senior man­
agement responsibility
Responsible for quality
Responsible for 94% of quality 
problems
Less than 20% of quality problems 
are due to workers
Performance 
standard/motivation
Zero defects
Quality has many “scales”; use 
statistics to measure performance 
in all areas; critical of zero defects
Avoid campaigns to do perfect 
work
General approach
Prevention, not inspection
Reduce variability by continu­
ous improvement; cease mass 
inspection
General management approach to 
quality, especially human elements
Structure
14 steps to quality improvement
14 points for management
10 steps to quality improvement
Statistical process 
control (SPC)
Rejects statistically acceptable lev­
els of quality [wants 100% perfect 
quality]
Statistical methods of quality con­
trol must be used
Recommends SPC but warns that 
it can lead to tool-driver approach
Improvement basis
A process, not a program; improve­
ment goals
Continuous to reduce variation; 
eliminate goals without methods
Project-by-project team approach; 
set goals
Teamwork
Quality improvement teams; quality 
councils
Employee participation in deci­
sion making; break down barriers 
between departments
Team and quality circle approach
Costs of quality
Cost of nonconformance; quality 
is free
No optimum; continuous 
improvement
Quality is not free; there is not an 
optimum
Purchasing and goods 
received
State requirements; supplier is 
extension of business; most faults 
due to purchasers themselves
Inspection too late; sampling 
allows defects to enter system; 
statistical evidence and control 
charts required
Problems are complex; carry out 
formal surveys
Vendor rating
Yes, quality audits useless
No, critical of most systems
Yes, but help supplier improve
The Quality Gurus Compared
exhibit 12.1

300	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
senior management, a customer focus, total involvement of the workforce, and continuous 
improvement based upon rigorous analysis of processes. Later in the chapter, we will dis­
cuss how these precepts are applied in the latest approach to TQM—Six Sigma. We will 
now turn to some fundamental concepts that underlie any quality effort: quality specifica­
tions and ­quality costs.
Quality Specifications and Quality Costs
Fundamental to any quality program is the determination of quality specifications and the 
costs of achieving (or not achieving) those specifications.
Developing Quality Specifications
The quality specifications of a product or service derive from decisions and actions made 
relative to the quality of its design and the quality of its conformance to that design.
Design quality refers to the inherent value of the product in the marketplace and is thus a 
strategic decision for the firm. The dimensions of quality are listed in Exhibit 12.2. These 
dimensions refer to features of the product or service that relate directly to design issues.
A firm designs a product or service with certain performance characteristics and features 
based on what an intended market expects. Materials and manufacturing process attributes 
can greatly impact the reliability and durability of a product. Here the company attempts to 
design a product or service that can be produced or delivered at reasonable cost. The service­
ability of the product may have a great impact on the cost of the product or service to the 
customer after the initial purchase is made. It also may impact the warranty and repair cost to 
the firm. Aesthetics may greatly impact the desirability of the product or service, in particular 
Design quality
The inherent value of the 
product in the marketplace.
Dimension
Meaning
Performance
Primary product or service characteristics
Features
Added touches, bells and whistles, secondary characteristics
Reliability/durability
Consistency of performance over time, probability of failing, useful life
Serviceability
Ease of repair
Aesthetics
Sensory characteristics (sound, feel, look, and so on)
Perceived quality
Past performance and reputation
The Dimensions of Design Quality
exhibit 12.2
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award
The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award is given to 
organizations that have demonstrated outstanding quality in 
their products and processes. The award program is admin­
istered by the National Institute of Standards and Technol­
ogy, an agency of the U.S. Department of Commerce. A 
total of up to 18 awards may be given annually in these cat­
egories: manufacturing, service, small business, education, 
health care, and not-for-profit.
Candidates for the award must submit an application of 
up to 50 pages that details the approach, deployment, and 
results of their quality activities under seven major catego­
ries: Leadership, Strategic Planning, Customer and Market 
Focus, Information and Analysis, Human Resource Focus, 
OSCM AT WORK
Process Management, and Business Results. These appli­
cations are scored on total points out of 1,000 by examin­
ers and judges. Those who score above roughly 650 are 
selected for site visits. Winners selected from this group are 
then honored at an annual meeting in Washington, D.C. A 
major benefit to all applicants is feedback from the exam­
iners, which is essentially an audit of their practices. Many 
states have used the Baldrige Criteria as the basis of their 
own quality award programs. A report, Building on Baldrige: 
American Quality for the 21st Century, by the private Council 
on Competitiveness, said, “More than any other program, 
the Baldrige Quality Award is responsible for making quality 
a national priority and disseminating best practices across 
the United States.”

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
301
J.D. Power Initial Quality Study
J.D. Power uses concepts similar to those discussed in this 
section to measure the quality of new automobiles during 
the first 90 days of ownership. The study is conducted each 
year and includes vehicles produced by manufacturers from 
around the world. Each year, results from the study are pub­
lished at www.jdpower.com. The study captures problems 
experienced by owners in two distinct categories—design-
related problems and defects and malfunctions. The follow­
ing is a list of its measures:
Powertrain Quality: This score is based on problems 
with the engine or transmission, as well as problems 
that affect the driving experience.  Some of the items 
OSCM AT WORK
checked are ride smoothness, responsiveness of the 
steering system and brakes, and handling/stability.
Body and Interior Quality: This score is based on prob­
lems with the design of the basic car.  Some of the 
items checked are wind noise, water leaks, poor inte­
rior fit/finish, paint imperfection, and squeaks/rattles.
Features, Controls, and Display Quality: This score 
is based on problems with special items such as the 
seats, windshield wipers, navigation system, rear-seat 
entertainment system, heater, air conditioner, stereo 
system, sunroof, and trip computer.
Source: www.jdpower.com.
consumer products. Especially when a brand name is involved, the design often represents the 
next generation of an ongoing stream of products or services. Consistency in the relative per­
formance of the product compared to the state of the art, for example, may have a great impact 
on how the quality of the product is perceived. This may be very important to the long-run 
success of the product or service.
Conformance quality refers to the degree to which the product or service design specifi­
cations are met. The activities involved in achieving conformance are of a tactical, day-to-day 
nature. It should be evident that a product or service can have high design quality but low 
conformance quality, and vice versa.
Quality at the source is frequently discussed in the context of conformance quality. This 
means that the person who does the work takes responsibility for making sure that his or her 
output meets specifications. Where a product is involved, achieving the quality specifications 
is typically the responsibility of manufacturing management; in a service firm, it is usually 
the responsibility of the location operations manager. Exhibit 12.3 shows two examples of 
the dimensions of quality. One is a laser printer that meets the pages-per-minute and print 
density standards; the second is a checking account transaction in a bank.
Both quality of design and quality of conformance should provide products that meet the 
customer’s objectives for those products. This is often termed the product’s fitness for use, 
and it entails identifying the dimensions of the product (or service) that the customer wants 
(that is, the voice of the customer) and developing a quality control program to ensure that 
these dimensions are met.
Cost of Quality
Although few can quarrel with the notion of prevention, management often needs hard numbers 
to determine how much prevention activities will cost. This issue was recognized by Joseph Juran, 
who wrote about it in 1951 in his Quality Control Handbook. Today, cost of quality (COQ) 
analyses are common in industry and constitute one of the primary functions of QC 
departments.
There are a number of definitions and interpretations of the term cost of quality. From the 
purist’s point of view, it means all of the costs attributable to the production of quality that is 
not 100 percent perfect. A less stringent definition considers only those costs that are the differ­
ence between what can be expected from excellent performance and the current costs that exist.
How significant is the cost of quality? It has been estimated at between 15 and 20 percent 
of every sales dollar—the cost of reworking, scrapping, repeated service, inspections, tests, 
warranties, and other quality-related items. It is generally believed that the correct cost for a 
well-run quality management program should be under 2.5 percent.
Cost of quality (COQ)
Expenditures related 
to achieving product or 
service quality, such as 
the costs of prevention, 
appraisal, internal failure, 
and external failure.
Conformance quality
The degree to which the 
product or service design 
specifications are met.
Quality at the source
The philosophy of making 
workers personally 
responsible for the quality 
of their output. Workers 
are expected to make the 
part correctly the first time 
and to stop the process 
immediately if there is a 
problem.
Dimensions of quality
Criteria by which quality is 
measured.

302	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Products with torn or improperly positioned labels reflect poorly on 
the brand and bring into question the quality of the contents. A vision 
sensor is used to check the labels before the bottles are placed in 
cartons for shipment. 
© Omron Electronics LLC
Measures
Dimension
Product Example: 
Laser Printer
Service Example: 
Checking Account at a Bank
Performance
Pages per minute
Print density
Time to process customer requests
Features
Multiple paper trays
Color capability
Automatic bill paying
Reliability/
durability
Mean time between failures
Estimated time to obsolescence
Expected life of major components
Variability of time to process requests
Keeping pace with industry trends
Serviceability
Availability of authorized repair centers
Number of copies per print cartridge
Modular design
Online reports
Ease of getting updated information
Aesthetics
Control button layout
Case style
Courtesy of dealer
Appearance of bank lobby
Courtesy of teller
Perceived quality
Brand name recognition
Rating in Consumer Reports
Endorsed by community leaders
Examples of Dimensions of Quality
exhibit 12.3
Three basic assumptions justify an analysis of the costs of quality: (1) Failures occur, (2) 
prevention is cheaper, and (3) performance can be measured.
The costs of quality are generally classi­
fied into four types:
1.  Appraisal costs. Costs of the inspection, 
testing, and other tasks to ensure that the 
product or process is acceptable.
2.  Prevention costs. The sum of all the 
costs to prevent defects, such as the costs 
to identify the cause of the defect, to 
implement corrective action to eliminate 
the cause, to train personnel, to redesign 
the product or system, and to purchase 
new equipment or make modifications.
3.  Internal failure costs. Costs for defects 
incurred within the system: scrap, 
rework, repair.
4.  External failure costs. Costs for defects 
that pass through the system: customer 
warranty replacements, loss of customers 
or goodwill, handling complaints, and 
product repair.
Exhibit 12.4 illustrates the type of report 
that might be submitted to show the various 
costs by categories. Prevention is the most 
important influence. A rule of thumb says that 
for every dollar you spend in prevention, you 
can save $10 in failure and appraisal costs.
Often, increases in productivity occur as a 
by-product of efforts to reduce the cost of qual­
ity. A bank, for example, set out to improve 

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
303
Current Month’s Cost
Percentage of Total
Prevention costs
  Quality training
  Reliability consulting
  Pilot production runs
  Systems development
    Total prevention
$     2,000
10,000
5,000
8,000
25,000
1.3%
6.5
3.3
5.2
16.3
Appraisal costs
  Materials inspection
  Supplies inspection
  Reliability testing
  Laboratory testing
    Total appraisal
6,000
5,000
3,000
25,000
39,000
3.9
3.3
2.0
16.3
25.5
Internal failure costs
  Scrap
  Repair
  Rework
  Downtime
    Total internal failure
15,000
18,000
12,000
6,000
51,000
9.8
11.8
7.8
3.9
33.3
External failure costs
  Warranty costs
  Out-of-warranty repairs and replacement
  Customer complaints
  Product liability
  Transportation losses
    Total external failure
14,000
6,000
3,000
10,000
5,000
38,000
9.2
3.9
2.0
6.5
3.3
24.8
Total quality costs
$153,000
100.0%
Quality Cost Report
exhibit 12.4
quality and reduce the cost of quality and found that it had also boosted productivity. The bank 
developed this productivity measure for the loan processing area: the number of tickets processed 
divided by the resources required (labor cost, computer time, ticket forms). Before the quality 
improvement program, the productivity index was 0.2661 [2,080/($11.23 × 640 hours + $0.05 × 
2,600 forms + $500 for systems costs)]. After the quality improvement project was completed, 
labor time fell to 546 hours and the number of forms rose to 2,100, for a change in the index to 
0.3106 [2,100/(11.23 × 546 + 2,600 + 500)], an increase in productivity of over 16 percent.
SIX SIGMA QUALITY
Six Sigma refers to the philosophy and methods companies such as General Electric and 
Motorola use to eliminate defects in their products and processes. A defect is simply any 
component that does not fall within the customer’s specification limits. Each step or activity 
in a company represents an opportunity for defects to occur, and Six Sigma programs seek 
to reduce the variation in the processes that lead to these defects. Indeed, Six Sigma advo­
cates see variation as the enemy of quality, and much of the theory underlying Six Sigma is 
devoted to dealing with this problem. A process that is in Six Sigma control will produce no 
more than two defects out of every billion units. Often, this is stated as 3.4 defects per million 
units, which is true if the process is only running somewhere within 1.5 sigma of the target 
specification.
One of the benefits of Six Sigma thinking is that it allows managers to readily describe the 
performance of a process in terms of its variability and to compare different processes using a 
Understand the Six Sigma 
approach to improving 
quality and productivity.
LO 12–2
Six Sigma
A statistical term to 
describe the quality goal of 
no more than 3.4 defects 
out of every million units. 
Also refers to a quality 
improvement philosophy 
and program.

304	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
common metric. This metric is defects per million opportunities (DPMO). This calculation 
requires three pieces of data:
	1.	 Unit. The item produced or being serviced.
	2.	 Defect. Any item or event that does not meet the customer’s requirements.
	3.	 Opportunity. A chance for a defect to occur.
A straightforward calculation is made using the following formula:
​DPMO =  ​ 
Number of defects 
 
 
 
___________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Number of opportunities for error per unit  ×  Number of units ​ × 1, 000, 000​
EXAMPLE 12.1
The customers of a mortgage bank expect to have their mortgage applications processed within 
10 days of filing. This would be called a critical customer requirement, or CCR, in Six Sigma 
terms. Suppose all defects are counted (loans in a monthly sample taking more than 10 days to 
process), and it is determined that there are 150 loans in the 1,000 applications processed last 
month that don’t meet this customer requirement. Thus, the DPMO = 150/1,000 × 1,000,000, 
or 150,000 loans out of every million processed that fail to meet a CCR. Put differently, it 
means that only 850,000 loans out of a million are approved within time expectations. Statisti­
cally, 15 percent of the loans are defective and 85 percent are correct. This is a case where all 
the loans processed in less than 10 days meet our criteria. Often, there are upper and lower 
customer requirements rather than just a single upper requirement as we have here.
In the following section, we describe the Six Sigma process cycle and tools commonly 
used in Six Sigma projects.
Six Sigma Methodology
While Six Sigma’s methods include many of the statistical tools that were employed in other 
quality movements, here they are used in a systematic project-oriented fashion through the 
define, measure, analyze, improve, and control (DMAIC) cycles. The overarching focus of 
the methodology is understanding and achieving what the customer wants, because that is 
seen as key to profitability of a production process. In fact, to get across this point, some use 
the DMAIC as an acronym for “Dumb Managers Always Ignore Customers.”
A standard approach to Six Sigma projects is the following DMAIC methodology:
	1.	 Define (D)
∙	 Identify customers and their priorities.
∙	 Identify a project suitable for Six Sigma efforts based on business objectives as 
well as customer needs and feedback.
∙	 Identify CTQs (critical-to-quality characteristics) that the customer believes have 
the most impact on quality.
	2.	 Measure (M)
∙	 Determine how to measure the process and how it is performing.
∙	 Identify the key internal processes that influence CTQs and measure the defects 
currently generated relative to those processes.
	3.	 Analyze (A)
∙	 Determine the most likely causes of defects.
∙	 Understand why defects are generated by identifying the key variables most likely 
to create process variation.
	4.	 Improve (I)
∙	 Identify means to remove the causes of defects.
∙	 Confirm the key variables and quantify their effects on the CTQs.
Defects per million 
opportunities (DPMO)
A metric used to describe 
the variability of a process.
DMAIC
An acronym for the define, 
measure, analyze, improve, 
and control improvement 
methodology followed by 
companies engaging in Six 
Sigma programs.

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
305
∙	 Identify the maximum acceptance ranges of the key variables and a system for 
measuring deviations of the variables.
∙	 Modify the process to stay within an acceptable range.
	5.	 Control (C)
∙	 Determine how to maintain the improvements.
∙	 Put tools in place to ensure that the key variables remain within the maximum 
acceptance ranges under the modified process.
Analytical Tools for Six Sigma
The analytical tools of Six Sigma have been used for many years in traditional quality 
improvement programs. What makes their application to Six Sigma unique is the integra­
tion of these tools in a corporatewide management system. The tools common to all quality 
efforts are flowcharts, run charts, Pareto charts, histograms, checksheets, cause-and-effect 
diagrams, and control charts. Examples of these, along with an opportunity flow diagram, 
are shown in Exhibit 12.5, arranged according to DMAIC categories where they com­
monly appear.
Flowcharts. There are many types of flowcharts. The one shown in Exhibit 12.5 
depicts the process steps as part of a SIPOC (supplier, input, process, output, cus­
tomer) analysis. SIPOC is essentially a formalized input-output model, used in the 
define stage of a project.
Run charts. They depict trends in data over time, and thereby help in understand­
ing the magnitude of a problem at the define stage. 
Pareto charts. These charts help to break down a problem into the relative con­
tributions of its components. They are based on the common empirical finding 
that a large percentage of problems are due to a small percentage of causes. In the 
example, 80 percent of customer complaints are due to late deliveries, which are 20 
percent of the causes listed.
Checksheets. These are basic forms that help standardize data collection. They are 
used to create histograms such as shown on a Pareto chart.
Cause-and-effect diagrams. Also called fishbone diagrams, they show hypoth­
esized relationships between potential causes and the problem under study. Once 
the C&E diagram is constructed, the analysis would proceed to find out which of 
the potential causes were in fact contributing to the problem.
Opportunity flow diagram. This is used to separate value-added from non–value-
added steps in a process.
Process control charts. These are time-sequenced charts showing plotted values of 
a statistic, including a centerline average and one or more control limits. It is used 
to assure that processes are in statistical control.
Other tools that have seen extensive use in Six Sigma projects are failure mode and effect 
analysis (FMEA) and design of experiments (DOE).
Failure mode and effect analysis. This is a structured approach to identify, esti­
mate, prioritize, and evaluate risk of possible failures at each stage of a process. It 
begins with identifying each element, assembly, or part of the process and listing 
the potential failure modes, potential causes, and effects of each failure. A risk 
priority number (RPN) is calculated for each failure mode. It is an index used to 
measure the rank importance of the items listed in the FMEA chart (see Exhibit 
12.6). These conditions include the probability that the failure takes place (occur­
rence), the damage resulting from the failure (severity), and the probability of 
detecting the failure in-house (detection). High RPN items should be targeted for 
improvement first. The FMEA suggests a recommended action to eliminate the fail­
ure condition by assigning a responsible person or department to resolve the failure 
by redesigning the system, design, or process and recalculating the RPN.

306	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Flowcharts of Major Steps in a Process*
SUPPLIERS
INPUTS
PROCESSES
OUTPUTS
CUSTOMERS
Manufacturer
Office Supply
Company
Yourself
Power
Company
Copier
Paper
Toner
Original
Electricity
Copies
You
File
Others
Making a 
Photocopy
Put original
on glass
Close
lid
Adjust
settings
Press
START
Remove
originals
and copies
PROCESS STEPS
Define
Measure
Jan FebMarApr MayJun Jul Aug SepOct NovDec
0
300
600
900
1,200
1,500
1,800
2,100
2,400
2,700
Run Chart**
Average monthly volume of deliveries
(per shop)
Unit volume
1,951 deliveries
Pareto Chart**
Types of customer complaints
Total = 2,520 October–December
(across 6 shops)
Late deliveries
Wrong order
Cold food
Taste
Other
(87)
(117)
(206)
(220)
0
500
25
50
75
100%
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
(1,890)
Data Collection Forms*
Checksheets are basic forms that help standardize data collection
by providing specific spaces where people should record data.
Reason
Carton Transport
Lists the
characteristics
or conditions
of interest
May want to add
space for tracking
stratification factors
Includes place to
put the data
Has room for
comments
Metal Check
No Product
Sealing Unit
Barcoding
Conveyor Belt
Bad Product
Burned flakes
Low weight
Other
Frequency Comments
Operator:     Wendy
__________
Date     May 19
: __________
Machine Downtime
(Line 13)
Defines what data
are being collected
Illustration note: Delivery time was defined
by the total time from when the order was
placed to when the customer received it.
Total # of customer complaints
Analytical Tools for Six Sigma and Continuous Improvement
exhibit 12.5
*Source: Rath and Strong, Rath & Strong’s Six Sigma Pocket Guide, 2001
**Source: From The Memory Jogger™ II, 2001. Used with permission of GOAL/QPC.

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
307
Unreliable cars
No teamwork
No training
People don’t show up
No money for repairs
Kids own junkers
No capacity for
peak periods
Ovens too small
High turnover
High turnover
High turnover
Lack of experience
Poor handling of
large orders
High
turnover
Poor
dispatching
Many new streets
High
turnover
High turnover
Drivers get lost
Rushed
Poor training Get wrong
information
Don’t know town
Don’t know
town
Poor
training
Poor use
of space
Poor use
of space
Lack of
training
Inaccurate
ordering
Run out of ingredients
Low pay
Low pay
Machinery/Equipment
C & E/Fishbone Diagram**
Reasons for late pizza deliveries
People
Materials
Methods
Late pizza
deliveries on
Fridays &
Saturdays
Analyze
Improve
YES
YES
YES
Place
Original
Select
Size
Select
Orientation
Clean
Paper
Loaded?
Copier
in Use?
Glass
Dirty?
Paper?
Knife?
Wait?
Take
Original
Leave
Select
Number
Find
Paper
Find
Knife
YES
NO
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
Box
Open?
NO
NO
Find
Help
NO
NO
Value-Added
Steps that are essential
even when everything
works correctly move
down the left side
Non–Value-Added
Steps that would not be needed if everything worked right the first time move horizontally
across the right side
Opportunity Flow Diagram*
Organized to separate value-added steps from non–value-added steps.
Open Box
Control
J A S O N D J
F M A M J
J A S O N D J
F M
LCL
UCL
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Basic features same as a time plot
Process Control Chart Features*
Control limits (calculated
from data) added to plot
Centerline usually average
instead of median

308	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Design of experiments (DOE). DOE, sometimes referred to as multivariate testing, 
is a statistical methodology used for determining the cause-and-effect relationship 
between process variables (X’s) and the output variable (Y). In contrast to standard 
statistical tests, which require changing each individual variable to determine the 
most influential one, DOE permits experimentation with many variables simultane­
ously by carefully selecting a subset of them.
Lean Six Sigma combines the implementation and quality control tools of Six Sigma and 
the inventory management concept of lean manufacturing. Lean manufacturing (discussed 
in detail in Chapter 14) achieves high-volume production and minimal waste through the 
use of just-in-time inventory methods. The term lean in this context is a focus on reducing 
cost by lowering raw material, work-in-process, and finished goods inventory to an absolute 
minimum. Lowering inventory requires a high level of quality because processes need to be 
predictable since extra inventory is not available. Reducing variability is a key driver in suc­
cessful lean Six Sigma programs.
Six Sigma Roles and Responsibilities
Successful implementation of Six Sigma is based on using sound personnel practices, as well 
as technical methodologies. The following is a brief summary of the personnel practices com­
monly employed in Six Sigma implementation.
	1.	 Executive leaders, who are truly committed to Six Sigma and who promote it 
throughout the organization, and champions, who take ownership of the processes 
to be improved.    Champions are drawn from the ranks of the executives, and manag­
ers are expected to identify appropriate metrics early in the project and make certain 
that the improvement efforts focus on business results. (See the “What Makes a Good 
Champion?”)
	2.	 Corporatewide training in Six Sigma concepts and tools.    To convey the need 
to vigorously attack problems, professionals in Six Sigma firms are given martial 
arts titles reflecting their skills and roles: black belts, who coach or actually lead 
a Six Sigma improvement team; master black belts, who receive in-depth train­
ing on statistical tools and process improvement (they perform many of the same 
functions as black belts but for a larger number of teams); and green belts, who 
are employees who have received enough Six Sigma training to participate in a 
Project: __________________
Team: ___________________
Date: ________(original)
_________(revised)
Item or
Process
Step
Potential
Failure
Mode
Total Risk Priority Number:
FMEA Analysis
“After” Risk Priority Number:
Potential
Effects of
Failure
Severity
Severity
Occurrence
Occurrence
Detection
Detection
RPN
RPN
Potential
Cause(s)
Current
Controls
Responsibility
and
Target Date
Recommended
Action
“After”
Action Taken
Rath and Strong, Rath & Strong’s Six Sigma Pocket Guide, 2001, p. 31
FMEA Form
exhibit 12.6
Black belts
Individuals with sufficient 
Six Sigma training to lead 
improvement teams.
Master black belts
Individuals with in-depth 
training on statistical tools 
and process improvement.
Green belts
Employees who have 
enough Six Sigma 
training to participate in 
improvement teams.
Lean Six Sigma
Combines the 
implementation and 
quality control tools of Six 
Sigma and the inventory 
management concept of 
lean manufacturing.

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
309
team or, in some companies, to work individually on a small-scale project directly 
related to their own job. Different companies use these “belts” in different combi­
nations with sponsors and champions to guide teams.
	3.	 Setting of stretch objectives for improvement.
	4.	 Continuous reinforcement and rewards.    Before savings from a project are 
declared, the black belt in charge must provide proof that the problems are fixed 
permanently.
The Shingo System: Fail-Safe Design
The Shingo system developed in parallel and in many ways in conflict with the statistically 
based approach to quality control. This system—or, to be more precise, philosophy of produc­
tion management—is named after the co-developer of the Toyota just-in-time system, Shigeo 
Shingo. Two aspects of the Shingo system in particular have received great attention. One is 
how to accomplish drastic cuts in equipment setup times by single-minute exchange of die 
(SMED) procedures. The other, the focus of this section, is the use of source inspection and 
the poka-yoke system to achieve zero defects.
Shingo argued that SQC methods do not prevent defects. Although they provide infor­
mation to tell us probabilistically when a defect will occur, they are after the fact. The way 
to prevent defects from coming out at the end of a process is to introduce controls within 
the process. Central to Shingo’s approach is the difference between errors and defects. 
Defects arise because people make errors. Even though errors are inevitable, defects can 
be prevented if feedback leading to corrective action takes place immediately after the 
errors are made. Such feedback and action require inspection, which should be done on 
100 percent of the items produced. This inspection can be one of three types: successive 
check, self-check, and source inspection. Successive check inspection is performed by the 
next person in the process or by an objective evaluator such as a group leader. Informa­
tion on defects is immediate feedback for the worker who produced the product, who then 
makes the repair. Self-check is done by the individual worker and is appropriate by itself 
on all but items that require sensory judgment (such as existence or severity of scratches, 
or correct matching of shades of paint). These require successive checks. Source inspec­
tion is also performed by the individual worker, except instead of checking for defects, the 
worker checks for the errors that will cause defects. This prevents the defects from ever 
occurring and, hence, requiring rework. All three types of inspection rely on controls con­
sisting of fail-safe procedures or devices called poka-yokes. Poka-yokes includes such 
things as checklists or special tooling that (1) prevents the worker from making an error 
that leads to a defect before starting a process or (2) gives rapid feedback of abnormalities 
in the process to the worker in time to correct them.
What Makes a Good Champion?
At a manufacturing company implementing Six Sigma, a 
designated champion regularly met with his black belts. At 
one report-out meeting, a black belt informed him that she 
needed to purchase and install a table for sorting defects 
offline. It would cost about $17,000, but it would provide an 
alternative to shutting down the entire line, which would 
cost far more. The controller told her to go through the nor­
mal requisition process and she’d have her table in about 
four months. That delay would have killed the project right 
then and there: To submit the project to “business as usual” 
OSCM AT WORK
would have shown little real commitment to supporting Six 
Sigma. So the champion asked for the data that backed up 
her request, analyzed it, agreed with it, and then got imme­
diate executive sign-off on securing a table the following 
week.
This is the stuff of a good champion: removing bar­
riers and sending a clear signal that he or she and upper 
management are aligned and committed to Six Sigma. The 
champion does whatever it takes to support the black belts.
Source: Greg Brue, Six Sigma for Managers (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2002), p. 84
Fail-safe procedures
Simple practices that help 
prevent errors.
Poka-yokes
Procedures that prevent 
mistakes from becoming 
defects. They are 
commonly found in 
manufacturing but also 
can be used in service 
processes.

310	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
There are a wide variety of poka-yokes, ranging from kitting parts from a bin (to ensure 
that the right number of parts are used in assembly) to sophisticated detection and electronic 
signaling devices. An example taken from the writings of Shingo is shown in Exhibit 12.7.
The operation depended on the
worker’s vigilance.
After Improvement
Before Improvement
Device to ensure attachment of labels
The tape fed out by the labeler turns sharply so that the
labels detach and project out from the tape. This is
detected by a photoelectric tube and, if the label is not
removed and applied to the product with 20 seconds, a
buzzer sounds and the conveyor stops.
Effect: Label application failures were eliminated.
Cost:    15,000 ($145)
Labeler
Blank tape
Photoelectric
tube
Label
Poka-Yoke Example (placing labels on parts coming down a conveyor)
exhibit 12.7
ISO 9000 AND ISO 14000
ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 are international standards for quality management and assurance. 
The standards are designed to help companies document that they are maintaining an efficient 
quality system. The standards were originally published in 1987 by the International Organi­
zation for Standardization (ISO), a specialized international agency recognized by affiliates 
in more than 160 countries. ISO 9000 has become an international reference for quality man­
agement requirements in business-to-business dealing, and ISO 14000 is primarily concerned 
with environmental management.
The idea behind the standards is that defects can be prevented through the planning and 
application of best practices at every stage of business—from design through manufacturing 
and then installation and servicing. These standards focus on identifying criteria by which 
any organization, regardless of whether it is manufacturing or service-oriented, can ensure 
that products leaving its facility meet the requirements of its customers. These standards ask 
a company first to document and implement its systems for quality management and then to 
verify, by means of an audit conducted by an independent accredited third party, the compli­
ance of those systems with the requirements of the standards.
The ISO 9000 standards are based on seven quality management principles. These prin­
ciples focus on business processes related to the following areas in the firm: (1) customer 
focus, (2) leadership, (3) involvement of people, (4) process approach, (5) continual improve­
ment, (6) factual approach to decision making, and (7) mutually beneficial supplier rela­
tionships. The ISO documents provide detailed requirements for meeting the standards and 
describe standard tools used for improving quality in the firm. These documents are intended 
to be generic and applicable to any organization producing products or services.
The ISO 14000 family of standards on environmental management addresses the need to 
be environmentally responsible. The standards define a three-pronged approach for dealing 
with environmental challenges. The first is the definition of more than 350 international stan­
dards for monitoring the quality of air, water, and soil. For many countries, these standards 
serve as the technical basis for environmental regulation. The second part of ISO 14000 is a 
strategic approach defining the requirements of an environmental management system that 
can be implemented using the monitoring tools. Finally, the environmental standard encour­
ages the inclusion of environment aspects in product design and encourages the development 
of profitable environment-friendly products and services.
Illustrate globally 
recognized quality 
benchmarks.
LO 12–3
ISO 9000
Formal standards for 
quality certification 
developed by the 
International Organization 
for Standardization.

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
311
In addition to the generic ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 standards, many other specific stan­
dards have been defined. The following are some examples:
∙	 QS-9000 is a quality management system developed by Chrysler, Ford, and General 
Motors for suppliers of production parts, materials, and services to the automotive industry.
∙	 ISO/TS 16949, developed by the International Automotive Task Force, aligns existing 
American, German, French, and Italian automotive quality standards within the global 
automotive industry.
∙	 ISO 14001 environmental standards are applied by automobile suppliers as a require­
ment from Ford and General Motors.
∙	 ANSI/ASQ Z1.4-2003 provides methods for collecting, analyzing, and interpreting 
data for inspection by attributes, while Z1.9-2003 relates to inspection by variables.
∙	 TL 9000 defines the telecommunications quality system requirements for the design, 
development, production, delivery, installation, and maintenance of products and ser­
vices in the telecommunications industry.
New ISO documents are being developed on an ongoing basis. ISO 26000, which offers 
guidance on socially responsible behavior, has recently been adopted. The standard encour­
ages organizations to discuss the social responsibility issues and possible actions with rel­
evant stakeholders. Although not a strict “standard,” the document argues that being socially 
responsible is a requirement for both public- and private-sector organizations.
The ISO standards provide accepted global guidelines for quality. Although certification 
is not required, many companies have found it is essential to be competitive in the global 
markets. Consider the situation where you need to purchase parts for your firm and there are 
several suppliers offering similar parts at similar prices. Assume one of these firms has been 
ISO 9000–certified and the others have not. From whom would you purchase the parts? There 
is no doubt that the ISO 9000–certified company would have the inside track in your decision 
making. Why? Because ISO 9000 specifies the way the supplier firm operates, as well as its 
quality standards, delivery times, service levels, and so on.
There are three forms of certification:
	1.	 First party: A firm audits itself against ISO 9000 standards.
	2.	 Second party: A customer audits its supplier.
	3.	 Third party: A “qualified” national or international standards or certifying agency 
serves as an auditor.
The best certification of a firm is through a third party. Once passed by the third-party 
audit, a firm is certified and may be registered and recorded as having achieved ISO 9000 sta­
tus; thus, it becomes a part of a registry of certified companies. This third-party certification 
also has legal advantages in the European Community. For example, a manufacturer is liable 
for injury to a user of the product.
The firm, however, can free itself from any liability by showing that it has used the appro­
priate standards in its production process and carefully selected its suppliers as part of its pur­
chasing requirements. For this reason, there is strong motivation to choose ISO 9000–­certified 
suppliers.
External Benchmarking for Quality Improvement
The quality improvement approaches described so far are more or less inward looking. They 
seek to make improvements by analyzing in detail the current practices of the company itself. 
External benchmarking, however, goes outside the organization to examine what industry 
competitors and excellent performers outside the industry are doing. Benchmarking typically 
involves the following steps:
Identify processes needing improvement. Identify a firm that is the world leader 
in performing the process. For many processes, this may be a company that is not 
in the same industry. Examples would be Procter & Gamble using Amazon as the 
External benchmarking
Looking outside the 
company to examine what 
excellent performers inside 
and outside the company’s 
industry are doing in the 
way of quality.

312	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
benchmark in evaluating its order entry system, or Ford Motor Company bench­
marking Walmart to improve its distribution system. Many companies select a team 
of workers from the process needing improvement as part of the team of visitors 
sent to the company being benchmarked.
Analyze data. This entails looking at gaps between what your company is doing 
and what the benchmarking company is doing. There are two aspects of the study: 
One is comparing the actual processes; the other is comparing the performance of 
these processes according to a set of measures. The processes are often described 
using flowcharts and subjective evaluations of how workers relate to the process. In 
some cases, companies even permit video recording.
Concept Connections
LO 12–1   Explain the scope of total quality management in a firm.
Summary
	∙	 Total quality management is a comprehensive 
approach to quality, with a focus on what is important 
to the customer. 
	∙	 The concept centers on two major operational goals: 
(1) The design of the product or service, and (2) ensur­
ing that the firm’s processes can consistently produce 
or deliver the design. 
	∙	 Quality specifications are fundamental to a sound 
quality program. These start with making sure that 
features of the design relate to what the intended mar­
ket for the product expects and its inherent value. 
∙		 Processes are designed so that particular design speci­
fications such as size, surface, finish, or delivery speed 
are consistently met when the product is produced or 
the service delivered. 
∙		 Costs related to quality include the expenses related 
to inspection, rework, and repair or warranty; some of 
these costs may be difficult to measure.
Key Terms
Total quality management  Managing the entire orga­
nization so it excels in all dimensions of products and 
services important to the customer.
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award  An award 
established by the U.S. Department of Commerce given 
annually to companies that excel in quality.
Design quality  The inherent value of the product in the 
marketplace.
Conformance quality  The degree to which the product 
or service design specifications are met.
Quality at the source  The philosophy of making work­
ers personally responsible for the quality of their output. 
Workers are expected to make the part correctly the first 
time and to stop the process immediately if there is a 
problem.
Dimensions of quality  Criteria by which quality is 
measured.
Cost of quality  Expenditures related to achieving prod­
uct or service quality, such as the costs of prevention, 
appraisal, internal failure, and external failure.
LO 12–2   Understand the Six Sigma approach to improving quality and productivity.
Summary
	∙	 This is a philosophy and set of tools developed to 
measure and reduce defects. 
	∙	 Six Sigma projects follow five steps: (1) define, 
(2) measure, (3) analyze, (4) improve, and (5) control. 
	∙	 A comprehensive set of analysis tools can be used in 
Six Sigma projects. Many of these tools use statistics 
to analyze performance data. 
	∙	 Training in Six Sigma is recognized using martial arts 
titles that reflect skill levels such as black belts and 
green belts. 
	∙	 Often, procedures can be included in a process that 
guarantees a very high level of quality. These are 
called fail-safe procedures.

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
313
Key Terms
Six Sigma  A statistical term to describe the quality goal 
of no more than 3.4 defects out of every million units. 
Also refers to a quality improvement philosophy and 
program.
Defects per million opportunities (DPMO)  A metric 
used to describe the variability of a process.
DMAIC (define, measure, analyze, improve, and con­
trol)  An acronym for the define, measure, analyze, 
improve, and control improvement methodology fol­
lowed by companies engaging in Six Sigma programs.
Lean Six Sigma  Combines the implementation and qual­
ity control tools of Six Sigma and the inventory manage­
ment concept of lean manufacturing.
Black belts, master black belts, and green belts  Terms 
used to describe different levels of personal skills and 
responsibilities in Six Sigma programs. Black belts have 
sufficient training to lead teams. Master black belts 
have additional in-depth training on statistical tools and 
process improvement, and support the teams with these 
skills. Green belts are employees who have enough train­
ing to participate in the improvement teams.
Fail-safe procedures  Simple practices that help prevent 
errors.
Poka-yokes  Procedures that prevent mistakes from 
becoming defects. They are commonly found in manu­
facturing but also can be used in service processes.
LO 12–3   Illustrate globally recognized quality benchmarks.
Summary
	∙	 The International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) has developed specifications that define best-
quality practices that are accepted internationally. 
	∙	 The two most accepted specifications are ISO 9000, 
which relate to manufacturing and business-to-busi­
ness processes, and ISO 14000, which are concerned 
with environmental management.
Key Terms
ISO 9000  Formal standards for quality certifica­
tion developed by the International Organization for 
Standardization.
External benchmarking  Looking outside the company 
to examine what excellent performers inside and outside 
the company’s industry are doing in the way of quality.
Discussion Questions
	 1.	 Is the goal of Six Sigma realistic for services such as Blockbuster Video stores or Redbox 
DVD kiosks?
	 2.	 “If line employees are required to work on quality improvement activities, their produc­
tivity will suffer.” Discuss.
	 3.	 “You don’t inspect quality into a product; you have to build it in.” Discuss the implica­
tions of this statement.
	 4.	 “Before you build quality in, you must think it in.” How do the implications of this state­
ment differ from those in question 3?
	 5.	 Business writer Tom Peters has suggested that in making process changes, we should 
“Try it, test it, and get on with it.” How does this square with the DMAIC/continuous 
improvement philosophy?
	 6.	 Develop a cause-and-effect (fishbone) diagram to address everything that impacts your 
grade in this course. How much is under your control?
	 7.	 Shingo told a story of a poka-yoke he developed to make sure that the operators avoided 
the mistake of putting fewer than the required four springs in a push-button device. The 
existing method involved assemblers taking individual springs from a box containing 
several hundred and then placing two of them behind an on button and two more behind 
an off button. What was the poka-yoke that Shingo created?
	 8.	 A typical word processing package is loaded with poka-yokes. List three. Are there any 
others you wish the packages had?
LO 12–1
LO 12–2
LO 12–3

314	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Objective Questions
	1.	 What is the name of the national quality award given by the government of the United 
States?
	2.	 Match the quality “guru” with the specific aspects of their teachings. Use C for Crosby, D 
for Deming, and J for Juran.
LO 12–1
___________
Defined quality as “fitness for use.”
___________
Defined quality as “conformance to requirements.”
___________
Set the performance standard as “zero defects.”
___________
Defined 14 points for management to follow.
___________
Emphasized a general management approach to quality, especially the 
human elements.
___________
Rejected the concept of statistically acceptable levels of quality.
___________
Stated that less than 20 percent of quality problems are due to workers.
___________
Recommended continuous improvement to reduce variations.
	 3.	 What is the term that means making the person who does the work responsible for ensur­
ing that specifications are met?
	 4.	 What are the four general categories of quality costs?
	 5.	 What term means managing the entire organization so that it excels on all dimensions of 
products and services that are important to customers?
	 6.	 A manager states that her process is really working well. Out of 1,500 parts, 1,477 
were produced free of a particular defect and passed inspection. Based upon Six Sigma 
theory, how would you rate this performance, other things being equal? (Answer in 
Appendix D)
	 7.	 The following table lists all costs of quality incurred by Sam’s Surf Shop last year. What 
was Sam’s appraisal cost for quality last year?
Annual inspection costs
$ 155,000
Annual cost of scrap materials
286,000
Annual rework cost
34,679
Annual cost of quality training
456,000
Annual warranty cost
1,546,000
Annual testing cost
543,000
	 8.	 The following is a table of data collected over a six-month period in a local grocery store. 
Construct a Pareto analysis of the data and determine the percentage of total complaints 
represented by the two most common categories.
All Other
71
Checker
59
General
58
Service Level
55
Policy/Procedures
40
LO 12–2
	 9.	 Is certification under the ISO standards in this chapter necessary for competing in the 
modern market? What should companies consider when deciding whether or not to 
become certified?
	10.  Do you see any relationship between the ISO standards mentioned in this chapter and the 
competitive strategy concepts mentioned earlier in the text?
Price Marking
45
Product Quality
87
Product Request
105
Checkout Queue
33
Stock Condition
170

	
Six Sigma Quality 	
Chapter 12 	
315
	 9.	 A common problem that many drivers encounter is a car that will not start. Create a fish­
bone diagram to assist in the diagnosis of the potential causes of this problem.
	10.	 A manufacturing company has been inspecting units of output from a process. Each prod­
uct inspected is evaluated on five criteria. If the unit does not meet standards for the 
criteria, it counts as a defect for the unit. Each unit could have as few as zero defects, and 
as many as five. After inspecting 2,000 units, they discovered 33 defects. What is the 
DPMO measure for this process?
	11.	 What is the term for a flowchart that is used to separate value-added from non–
value-added steps in a process? (Answer in Appendix D)
	12.	 What does the acronym DMAIC stand for?
	13.	 A customer call center is evaluating customer satisfaction surveys to identify the most 
prevalent quality problems in their process. Specific customer complaints have been ana­
lyzed and grouped into eight different categories. Every instance of a complaint adds to 
the count in its category. Which Six Sigma analytical tool would be most helpful to man­
agement here?
	14.	 Which international standard has recently been developed to address and encourage 
socially responsible behavior in firms?
	15.	 Which industry-specific standard has been developed by the big three automakers for 
suppliers of parts, materials, and services to the automotive industry?
	16.	 What is it called when a firm examines other companies for examples of best practices?
LO 12–3
On March 31, 2016, Tesla Motors announced the 
release of its new Model 3 electric car. Over 276,000 
people from around the world put down $1,000 reser­
vations for the car within three days. First deliveries of 
the car are expected in late 2017. The innovative new 
car is a follow-up to the much more expensive Model 
S and Model X cars. Tesla delivered about 110,000 of 
these cars prior to the Model 3 announcement. Elon 
Musk, the brilliant CEO of the company, has said that 
he has confidence that the company can sell 500,000 
cars a year by 2020. Given the interest shown at the 
Model 3 announcement, some experts think this might 
be possible.
The fledging Palo Alto, California, automaker has 
struggled with ramping up manufacturing, particularly 
with the Model X sport utility vehicle introduced in 
Case: Tesla’s Quality Challenge
Tesla Model X Falcon-Wing Doors
© Oleksiy Maksymenko Photograph/Alamy

316	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 This refers to the inherent value of the product in the 
marketplace and is a strategic decision for the firm.
	2.	 Relates to how well a product or service meets design 
specifications.
	3.	 Relates to how the customer views the ability of the 
product to meet his or her objectives.
	4.	 The series of international quality standards.
	5.	 What is the enemy of good quality?
	6.	 A Six Sigma process that is running at the center of its 
control limits would expect this defect rate.
	7.	 The standard quality improvement methodology 
developed by General Electric.
2015. The company reported that there were many sourc­
ing changes made late in the process of planning produc­
tion. Tesla tends to make items, such as the middle seats 
in the Model X, in-house rather than outsourcing them, 
which is done by many car manufacturers.
The issues associated with the production of the cars 
are a complex combination of mechanical and computer 
software problems. Popular features of the cars include 
driving-assist autopilot functions, auto-parallel parking, 
and auto-braking. The cars even have an auto-summons 
feature that lets a driver park and retrieve their car with 
no one inside. Many post-production issues have been 
addressed through software updates downloaded to cus­
tomers over wireless connections. Other mechanical 
problems are more difficult to resolve.
Owners have complained that the Model X falcon-
wing doors will not open. When owners have problems 
like this, Tesla typically schedules a time to pick up the 
car for repair and leaves a loaner for use by the customer. 
Another recent issue was a latch on the third-row seat 
that could come undone during a collision. Tesla decided 
to recall 2,700 Model X cars to replace the latches with a 
new design. This recall totally overloaded Tesla’s service 
outlets with waits of more than two weeks to make the 
repair. Some customers were offered rental cars due to 
the long wait.
So far, customers expect the “white-glove” treatment 
that Tesla currently offers, but a big concern is what Tesla 
will do when there are hundreds of thousands of vehi­
cles on the road. Mr. Musk’s Tesla cars have many loyal 
customers, even though problems have been encoun­
tered. But moving from tens of thousands of vehicles to 
hundreds of thousands may be difficult, unless some 
major service improvements are made.
Put yourself in the position of a manager at Tesla 
responsible for quality and customer satisfaction. What 
would you suggest relative to the following questions?
Questions
	1.	 Consumer Reports, the service that reports unbi­
ased testing and ratings on cars (together with 
about everything else we buy), recommends avoid­
ing new cars in their first year of production, espe­
cially those loaded with new technology. What can 
Tesla do to refute this recommendation?
	2.	 How should Tesla “manage” the delivery of the 
new Model 3 during the initial production ramp-
up? Think about this relative to where cars should 
be delivered geographically and how the service 
process should be designed.
	3.	 Should Tesla deliver cars to customers on a first-
come-first-served basis (i.e., in the order of when 
deposits were placed)?
	4.	 What other suggestions would you have for Tesla rel­
ative to ensuring the quality of their new Model 3 car?
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Design quality  2. Conformance quality  3. Fitness for use  4. ISO 9000  5. Variation  6. 2 parts per billion units 
7.  DMAIC cycle

	
317
13 
Statistical  
Quality Control
CONTROL CHARTS SHOW YOU VARIATION 
THAT MATTERS
We all like variation, but when it comes to business it can create major problems. 
Doing business consistently is one key to success, whether it be a service or a manu-
facturing endeavor.
Control charts are an important tool for understanding the variation that we have 
in business processes. Control charts allow us to differentiate whether the variation 
we have is “normal” and acceptable or if it has something “special” happening that 
should be addressed.
When you buy a burger from a fast-food restaurant, 
you want consistency, not unpredictability. Now, the 
pickle on your burger may be closer to the edge of the 
bun today than it was last week—but as long as the 
pickle is there, it’s acceptable.
Businesses use statistical process control (SPC) to 
keep processes stable, consistent, and predictable so 
they can ensure the quality of products and services. 
And one of the most common and useful tools in SPC 
is the control chart.
The control chart shows how a process or output 
attribute varies over time so you can easily distinguish 
between “common cause” and “special cause” varia-
tions. Identifying the different causes of the variation 
in an attribute prompts action to repair a process when 
it is needed.
One example of common cause variation at our 
burger joint would be the number of pickles placed 
on different areas of the buns. Say we expect  
Learning Objectives
	LO 13–1	 Illustrate process variation and explain how to measure it.
	LO 13–2	 Analyze process quality using statistics.
	LO 13–3	 Analyze the quality of batches of items using statistics.
© Baerbel Schmidt/Getty Images RF

318
STATISTICAL QUALITY CONTROL
2 to 4 pickles to be placed randomly on each burger and that the pickles should not 
hang outside the edge of the bun; this is the “common” variation that is expected.
Special cause variation would be a sudden rash of burgers that have 10 pickles 
instead of an average of 3. Clearly, something unusual is causing “special” and unac-
ceptable variation, and it needs to be addressed!
A control chart, used with some type of simple periodic sampling of the burgers, 
can allow us to detect this unacceptable variation when it occurs. This would then 
trigger a look at the process to find what is causing the variation. Possibly a machine 
is not working correctly, the pickles might not be prepared properly, or maybe an 
employee needs some training.
This chapter on statistical quality control (SQC) covers the quantitative aspects of quality 
management. In general, SQC is a number of different techniques designed to evaluate quality 
from a conformance view; that is, how well are we doing at meeting the specifications that 
have been set during the design of the parts or services we are providing? Managing qual-
ity performance using SQC techniques usually involves periodic sampling of a process and 
analysis of these data using statistically derived performance criteria.
As you will see, SQC can be applied to logistics, manufacturing, and service processes. 
Here are some examples of situations where SQC can be applied:
∙	 How many paint defects are there in the finish of a car? Have we improved our painting 
process by installing a new sprayer?
∙	 How long does it take to execute market orders in our Web-based trading system? Has 
the installation of a new server improved the service? Does the performance of the sys-
tem vary over the trading day?
∙	 How well are we able to maintain the dimensional tolerance on our three-inch ball bear-
ing assembly? Given the variability of our process for making this ball bearing, how 
many defects would we expect to produce per million bearings that we make?
∙	 How long does it take for customers to be served from our drive-thru window during 
the busy lunch period?
Processes that provide goods and services usually exhibit some variation in their output. This 
variation can be caused by many factors, some of which we can control and others that are inher-
ent in the process. Variation that is caused by factors that can be clearly identified and possibly 
even managed is called assignable variation. For example, variation caused by workers not being 
equally trained or by improper machine adjustment is assignable variation. Variation that is inherent 
in the process itself is called common variation. Common variation is often referred to as random 
variation and may be the result of the type of equipment used to complete a process, for example.
As the title of this section implies, this material requires an understanding of very basic 
statistics. Recall the definition of the mean and standard deviation from your study of statis-
tics involving numbers that are normally distributed. The mean (​ ¯ 
X ​​) is just the average value of 
a set of numbers. Mathematically, this is
	
​​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​x​ i​
 
____ 
n  ​​	
​​[13.1 ]​
where
xi = Observed value
 n = Total number of observed values
Illustrate process variation 
and explain how to 
measure it.
LO 13–1
Statistical quality 
control (SQC)
A number of different 
techniques designed to 
evaluate quality from a 
conformance view.
Assignable variation
Deviation in the output of a 
process that can be clearly 
identified and managed.
Common variation
Deviation in the output of 
a process that is random 
and inherent in the process 
itself.
Adapted from Eston Martz, 
Control Charts Show You  
Variation That Matters, The 
Minitab Blog, July 29, 2011.

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
319
The standard deviation is
	
​
σ = ​ 
​√ 
__________ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​(​x​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
X ​ )​ 2​ ​ 
 
____________ 
n 
​
​	
​​[13.2 ]​
In monitoring a process using SQC, samples of the process output would be taken and 
sample statistics calculated. The distribution associated with the samples should exhibit the 
same kind of variability as the actual distribution of the process, although the actual variance 
of the sampling distribution would be less. This is good because it allows the quick detection 
of changes in the actual distribution of the process. The purpose of sampling is to find when 
the process has changed in some nonrandom way, so that the reason for the change can be 
quickly determined.
In SQC terminology, sigma (σ) is often used to refer to the sample standard deviation. As 
you will see in the examples, sigma is calculated in a few different ways, depending on the 
underlying theoretical distribution (i.e., a normal distribution or a Poisson distribution).
Understanding and Measuring Process Variation
It is generally accepted that as variation is reduced, quality is improved. Sometimes that 
knowledge is intuitive. If a commuter train is always on time, schedules can be planned more 
precisely. If clothing sizes are consistent, time can be saved by ordering from a catalog. But 
rarely are such things thought about in terms of the value of low variability. When engineer-
ing a mechanical device such as an automobile, the knowledge is better defined. Pistons must 
fit cylinders, doors must fit openings, electrical components must be compatible, and tires 
must be able to handle the required load—otherwise, quality will be unacceptable and cus-
tomers will be dissatisfied.
However, engineers also know that it is impossible to have zero variability. For this rea-
son, designers establish specifications that define not only the target value of something but 
also acceptable limits about the target. For example, if the target value of a dimension is 10 
inches, the design specifications might then be 10.00 inches ± 0.02 inch. This would tell the 
manufacturing department that, while it should aim for exactly 10 inches, anything between 
9.98 and 10.02 inches is OK. These design limits are often referred to as the upper and lower 
specification limits.
A traditional way of interpreting such a specification is that any part that falls within the 
allowed range is equally good, whereas any part falling outside the range is totally bad. This 
Upper and lower 
specification limits
The range of values in a 
measure associated with 
a process that is allowable 
given the intended use of 
the product or service.
The Elmo Chicken 
Dance toy gets a sound 
check at a Mattel lab in 
Shenzhen, China. Mattel 
lobbied to let its labs 
certify toy safety. The 
California company has 
10 labs in 6 countries. 
© Chang W. Lee/The New 
York Times/Redux

320	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
is illustrated in Exhibit 13.1. (Note that the cost is zero over the entire specification range, and 
then there is a quantum leap in cost once the limit is violated.)
Genichi Taguchi, a noted quality expert from Japan, has pointed out that the traditional 
view illustrated in Exhibit 13.1 is nonsense for two reasons:
	1.	 From the customer’s view, there is often practically no difference between a product 
just inside specifications and a product just outside. Conversely, there is a far greater 
difference in the quality of a product that is at the target and the quality of one that is 
near a limit.
	2.	 As customers get more demanding, there is pressure to reduce variability. However, 
Exhibit 13.1 does not reflect this logic.
Taguchi suggests that a more correct picture of the loss is shown in Exhibit 13.2. Notice 
that in this graph the cost is represented by a smooth curve. There are dozens of illustrations 
of this notion: the meshing of gears in a transmission, the speed of photographic film, the 
temperature in a workplace or department store. In nearly anything that can be measured, the 
customer sees not a sharp line, but a gradation of acceptability away from the “Aim” specifi-
cation. Customers see the loss function as Exhibit 13.2 rather than Exhibit 13.1.
Of course, if products are consistently scrapped when they are outside specifications, the 
loss curve flattens out in most cases at a value equivalent to scrap cost in the ranges out-
side specifications. This is because such products, theoretically at least, will never be sold 
so there is no external cost to society. However, in many practical situations, either the pro-
cess is capable of producing a very high percentage of product within specifications and  
100 percent checking is not done, or if the process is not capable of producing within specifi-
cations, 100 percent checking is done and out-of-spec products can be reworked to bring them 
within specs. In any of these situations, the parabolic loss function is usually a reasonable 
assumption.
Incremental 
cost to 
society of 
variability
Lower 
spec
Upper 
spec
Aim 
spec
Zero
High
Taguchi’s View of the Cost of Variability
exhibit 13.2
High 
Zero
Incremental 
cost to 
society of 
variability
Lower 
spec
Upper 
spec
Aim 
spec
A Traditional View of the Cost of Variability
exhibit 13.1

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
321
Measuring Process Capability
Taguchi argues that being within specification is not a yes/no decision, but rather a continu-
ous function. Motorola quality experts, on the other hand, argue that the process used to pro-
duce a good or deliver a service should be so good that the probability of generating a defect 
should be very, very low. Motorola made process capability and product design famous by 
adopting Six Sigma limits. When a part is designed, certain dimensions are specified to be 
within the upper and lower specification limits.
As a simple example, assume engineers are designing a bearing for a rotating shaft—say, 
an axle for the wheel of a car. There are many variables involved for both the bearing and 
the axle—for example, the width of the bearing, the size of the rollers, the size of the axle, 
the length of the axle, how it is supported, and so on. The designer specifies limits for each 
of these variables to ensure that the parts will fit properly. Suppose that initially a design is 
selected and the diameter of the bearing is set at 1.250 inches ± 0.005 inch. This means that 
acceptable parts may have a diameter that varies between 1.245 and 1.255 inches (which are 
the lower and upper specification limits).
Next, consider the process in which the bearing will be made. Consider that many differ-
ent processes for making the bearing are available. Usually, there are trade-offs that need to 
be considered when designing a process for making a part. The process, for example, might 
be fast but not consistent, or alternatively it might be slow but consistent. The consistency of 
a process for making the bearing can be measured by the standard deviation of the diameter 
measurement. A test can be run by making, say, 100 bearings and measuring the diameter of 
each bearing in the sample.
After running the test, the average or mean diameter is found to be 1.250 inches. Another 
way to say this is that the process is “centered” right in the middle of the upper and lower 
specification limits. In reality, it may be difficult to have a perfectly centered process like 
this example. Consider that the diameter values have a standard deviation or sigma equal 
to 0.002 inch. What this means is that the process does not make each bearing exactly the 
same size.
As is discussed later in this chapter, normally a process is monitored using control charts 
such that if the process starts making bearings that are more than three standard deviations  
(± 0.006 inch) above or below 1.250 inches, the process is stopped. This means that the pro-
cess will produce parts that vary between 1.244 (this is 1.250 – 3 × .002) and 1.256 (this is 
1.250 + 3 × .002) inches. The 1.244 and 1.256 are referred to as the upper and lower process 
limits. Be careful and do not get confused with the terminology here. The process limits relate 
to how consistent the process is for making the bearing. The goal in managing the process is 
to keep it within plus or minus three standard deviations of the process mean. The specifica-
tion limits are related to the design of the part. Recall that, from a design view, acceptable 
parts have a diameter between 1.245 and 1.255 inches (which are the lower and upper speci-
fication limits).
As can be seen, process limits are slightly greater than the specification limits given by the 
designer. This is not good because the process will produce some parts that do not meet speci-
fications. Companies with Six Sigma processes insist that a process making a part be capable 
of operating so that the design specification limits are six standard deviations away from the 
process mean. For the bearing process, how small would the process standard deviation need 
to be for it to be Six Sigma capable? Recall that the design specification was 1.250 inches plus 
or minus 0.005 inch. Consider that the 0.005 inch must relate to the variation in the process. 
Divide 0.005 inch by 6, which equals 0.00083, to determine the process standard deviation for 
a Six Sigma process. So for the process to be Six Sigma capable, the mean diameter produced 
by the process would need to be exactly 1.250 inches and the process standard deviation 
would need to be less than or equal to 0.00083 inch.
We can imagine that some of you are really confused at this point with the whole idea of 
Six Sigma. Why doesn’t the company, for example, just check the diameter of each bearing 
and throw out the ones with a diameter less than 1.245 or greater than 1.255? This could 
certainly be done and for many, many parts 100 percent testing is done. The problem is for a 
company that is making thousands of parts each hour, testing each critical dimension of each 
The main point of this is 
that the process should 
be able to make a 
part well within design 
specifications. Here, we 
show how statistics are 
used to evaluate how 
good a process is.
KEY IDEA

322	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
part made can be very expensive. For the bearing, there could easily be 10 or more additional 
critical dimensions in addition to the diameter. These would all need to be checked. Using 
a 100 percent testing approach, the company would spend more time testing than it takes to 
actually make the part! This is why a company uses small samples to periodically check that 
the process is in statistical control. We discuss exactly how this statistical sampling works 
later in the chapter.
We say that a process is capable when the mean and standard deviation of the process are 
operating such that the upper and lower control limits are acceptable relative to the upper and 
lower specification limits. Consider diagram A in Exhibit 13.3. This represents the distribu-
tion of the bearing diameter dimension in our original process. The average or mean value is 
1.250 and the lower and upper design specifications are 1.245 and 1.255, respectively. Process 
control limits are plus and minus three standard deviations (1.244 and 1.256). Notice that 
there is a probability (the red areas) of producing defective parts.
If the process can be improved by reducing the standard deviation associated with the bearing 
diameter, the probability of producing defective parts can be reduced. Diagram B in Exhibit 13.3 
shows a new process where the standard deviation has been reduced to 0.00083 (the area out-
lined in yellow). Even though we cannot see it in the diagram, there is some probability that a 
defect could be produced by this new process, but that probability is very, very small.
Suppose that the central value or mean of the process shifts away from the mean. 
Exhibit 13.4 shows the mean shifted one standard deviation closer to the upper specification 
limit. This, of course, causes a slightly higher number of expected defects, but we can see that 
this is still very, very good. The capability index is used to measure how well our process is 
capable of producing relative to the design specifications. A description of how to calculate 
this index is in the next section.
1.245
1.244
1.244
1.250
1.250
1.256
1.256
1.255
Diagram A
Lower spec
limit
Upper spec
limit
1.245
1.244
1.250
1.250
1.248
1.252
1.256
1.255
Improved
process
Original
process
Diagram B
Process Capability
exhibit 13.3

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
323
Capability Index (Cpk)  The capability index (Cpk) shows how well the parts being 
produced fit into the range specified by the design specification limits. If the specification limits 
are larger than the three sigma allowed in the process, then the mean of the process can be allowed 
to drift off-center before readjustment, and a high percentage of good parts will still be produced.
Referring to Exhibits 13.3 and 13.4, the capability index (Cpk) is the position of the mean 
and tails of the process relative to design specifications. The more off-center, the greater the 
chance to produce defective parts.
Because the process mean can shift in either direction, the direction of shift and its dis-
tance from the design specification set the limit on the process capability. The direction of 
shift is toward the smaller number.
Formally stated, the capability index (Cpk) is calculated as the smaller of the two numbers 
as follows:
	
​​C​ pk​ = min  ​[​ ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − LSL 
________ 
3σ 
​  or ​ USL  − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ 
_________ 
3σ 
​​]​  ​	
​​[13.3 ]​
Working with our example in Exhibit 13.4, let’s assume our process is centered at 1.251 and 
σ = 0.00083 (σ is the symbol for standard deviation).
​
​C​ pk​
​ 
= min  ​[​ ​ 1.251 − 1.245 
 
____________ 
3​(​.00083​)​  ​  or  ​ 1.255 − 1.251 
 
____________ 
3​(​.00083​)​  ​]​
​ 
 
 
 
​​  = min  ​[​ ​  .006 
_ 
.00249 ​ or ​  .004 
_ 
.00249 ​]​​ 
 
 
​C​ pk​
​ 
= min  ​[​2.4 or 1.6​]​
 
​
Cpk = 1.6, which is the smaller number. This is a pretty good capability index because few 
defects will be produced by this process.
This tells us that the process mean has shifted to the right, similar to that shown in 
Exhibit 13.4, but parts are still well within design specification limits.
At times, it is useful to calculate the actual probability of producing a defect. Assuming 
that the process is producing with a consistent standard deviation, this is a fairly straightfor-
ward calculation, particularly when we have access to a spreadsheet. The approach to use is to 
calculate the probability of producing a part outside the lower and upper design specification 
limits given the mean and standard deviation of the process.
Working with our example, where the process is not centered, with a mean of 1.251 inches,  
σ = .00083, LSL = 1.245, and USL = 1.255, we first need to calculate the Z score associated 
with the upper and lower specification limits. Recall from your study of statistics that the Z score 
is the standard deviation either to the right or to the left of zero in a probability distribution.
​​Z​ LSL​ = ​ LSL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ 
________ 
σ 
​​  ​Z​ USL​ = ​ USL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ 
________ 
σ 
​​
Capability index
The ratio of the range of 
values allowed by the 
design specifications 
divided by the range of 
values produced by a 
process.
1.245
1.244
1.250
1.251
1.249
LTL
UTL
1.254
1.256
1.255
Process Capability with a Shift in the Process Mean
exhibit 13.4

324	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
For our example,
​​Z​ LSL​ = ​ 1.245 − 1.251 
 
__________ 
.00083 
​ = − 7.2289​      ​Z​ USL​ = ​ 1.255 − 1.251 
 
__________ 
.00083 
​ = 4.8193​
An easy way to get the probabilities associated with these Z values is to use the NORMS-
DIST function built into Excel (you also can use the table in Appendix G). The format for this 
function is NORMSDIST(Z), where Z is the Z value calculated previously. Excel returns the 
following values. (We have found that you might get slightly different results from those given 
here, depending on the version of Excel you are using.)
​NORMSDIST( − 7.2289 ) = 2.43461E-13​  and​  NORMSDIST(4.8193 ) = .99999928​
Interpreting this information requires understanding exactly what the NORMSDIST func-
tion is providing. NORMSDIST is giving the cumulative probability to the left of the given 
Z value. Since Z = –7.2289 is the number of standard deviations associated with the lower 
specification limit, the fraction of parts that will be produced lower than this is 2.43461E-13.  
This number is in scientific notation and that E-13 at the end means we need to move 
the decimal over 13 places to get the real fraction defective. So the fraction defective is 
.00000000000024361, which is a very small number! Similarly, we see that approximately 
.99999928 of our parts will be below our upper specification limit. What we are really inter-
ested in is the fraction that will be above this limit because these are the defective parts. This 
fraction defective above the upper spec is 1 – .99999928 = .00000072 of our parts.
Adding these two fraction defective numbers together we get .00000072000024361. We 
can interpret this to mean that we expect only about .72 parts per million to be defective. 
Clearly, this is a great process. You will discover as you work the problems at the end of the 
chapter that this is not always the case.
EXAMPLE 13.1
The quality assurance manager is assessing the capability of a process that puts pressurized 
grease in an aerosol can. The design specifications call for an average of 60 pounds per square 
inch (psi) of pressure in each can with an upper specification limit of 65 psi and a lower speci-
fication limit of 55 psi. A sample is taken from production and it is found that the cans average 
61 psi with a standard deviation of 2 psi. What is the capability of the process? What is the 
probability of producing a defect?
SOLUTION
Step 1—Interpret the data from the problem.
​LSL = 55​  USL = 65​  ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = 61​  σ = 2​
Step 2—Calculate the Cpk.
​
​C​ pk​
​ 
= min  ​⎡ 
⎢ ⎣​ ​ ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − LSL 
_ 
3σ 
​, ​ USL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ 
_ 
3σ 
​⎤ 
⎥ ⎦​
​ 
 
 
​C​ pk​​ = min  ​⎡ 
⎢ ⎣​ ​ 61 − 55 
_ 
3​(​2​)​  ​, ​ 65 − 61 
_ 
3​(​2​)​  ​⎤ 
⎥ ⎦​​ 
 
 
​C​ pk​
​ 
= min  ​[​1, .6667​]​ = .6667
 
​
This is not a very good capability index. We see why this is true in Step 3.
Step 3—Calculate the probability of producing a defective can:
Probability of a can with less than 55 psi
​ 
Z = ​ X − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
_____ 
σ  ​ = ​ 55 − 61 
_____ 
2 
​ = − 3​ 
 
 
NORMSDIST(− 3 ) = 0.001349898
​

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
325
The following table is a quick reference for the fraction of defective units for various 
design specification limits (expressed in standard deviations). This table assumes that the 
standard deviation is constant and that the process is centered exactly between the design 
specification limits.
Probability of a can with more than 65 psi
​ 
Z = ​ X − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
______ 
σ  ​ = ​ 65 − 61 
_____ 
2 
​ = 2​ 
 
 
 
1 − NORMSDIST(2 ) = 1 − 0.977249868 = 0.022750132
​
Probability of a can less than 55 psi or more than 65 psi
Probability = 0.001349898 + 0.022750132 = .024100030
Or approximately 2.4 percent of the cans will be defective.
Motorola’s design specification limit of Six Sigma with a shift of the process off the mean 
by 1.5σ (Cpk = 1.5) gives 3.4 defects per million. If the mean is exactly in the center (Cpk = 2), 
then 2 defects per billion are expected, as the table shows.
Process control is concerned with monitoring quality while the product or service is being 
produced. Typical objectives of process control plans are to provide timely information about 
whether currently produced items are meeting design specifications and to detect shifts in 
the process that signal that future products may not meet specifications. Statistical ­process 
­control (SPC) involves testing a random sample of output from a process to determine 
whether the process is producing items within a preselected range.
The examples given so far have all been based on quality characteristics (or variables) 
that are measurable, such as the diameter or weight of a part. Attributes are quality charac-
teristics that are classified as either conforming or not conforming to specification. Goods 
or services may be observed to be either good or bad, or functioning or malfunctioning. 
For example, a lawnmower either runs or it doesn’t; it attains a certain level of torque and 
horsepower or it doesn’t. This type of measurement is known as sampling by attributes. 
Alternatively, a lawnmower’s torque and horsepower can be measured as an amount of 
deviation from a set standard. This type of measurement is known as sampling by vari-
ables. The following section describes some standard approaches to controlling processes: 
first an approach useful for attribute measures and then an approach for variable measures. 
Both of these techniques result in the construction of control charts. Exhibit 13.5 shows 
some examples for how control charts can be analyzed to understand how a process is 
operating.
STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL PROCEDURES
Analyze process quality 
using statistics.
LO 13–2
Attributes
Quality characteristics 
that are classified as 
either conforming or 
not conforming to 
specification.
Statistical process 
control (SPC)
Techniques for testing 
a random sample of 
output from a process to 
determine whether the 
process is producing items 
within a prescribed range.
Design Limits
Cpk
Defective Parts
Fraction Defective
±1σ
 .333
317 per thousand
.3173      
±2σ
 .667
 45 per thousand
.0455      
±3σ
1.0
 2.7 per thousand
.0027      
±4σ
1.333
63 per million   
.000063    
±5σ
1.667
574 per billion    
.000000574
±6σ
2.0
   2 per billion     
.000000002

326	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Process Control with Attribute Measurements:  
Using p-Charts
Measurement by attributes means taking samples and using a single decision—the item is 
good or it is bad. Because it is a yes or no decision, we can use simple statistics to create a 
p-chart with an upper process control limit (UCL) and a lower process control limit (LCL). 
We can draw these control limits on a graph and then plot the fraction defective of each 
individual sample tested. The process is assumed to be working correctly when the samples, 
which are taken periodically during the day, continue to stay between the control limits.
​ ¯ 
p ​ = ​ Total number of defective units from all samples 
 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
 
 
Number of samples × Sample size 
​​
[13.4]
Upper control limit
Central line
Lower control limit
Normal behavior.
One point out above. 
Investigate for cause of high 
value.
One point out below. 
Investigate for cause of 
the low value.
Upper control limit
Central line
Lower control limit
Two points near upper 
control. Investigate for cause 
of poor performance.
Two points near lower 
control. Investigate for 
cause.
Run of five above central line. 
Investigate for cause of 
sustained poor performance.
Upper control limit
Central line
Lower control limit
Run of five below central line. 
Investigate for cause of the 
change.
Trend in either direction. 
Investigate for cause of 
progressive change.
Erratic behavior. 
Investigate.
Upper control limit
Central line
Lower control limit
Sudden change in level. 
Investigate for cause.
Time
Time
Time
Process Control Chart Evidence for Investigation
exhibit 13.5

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
327
Sp = ​√ 
_______
 
​ ​ ¯ p​(1 – ​ ¯ p​) 
_______ 
n 
​ ​
UCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ + zsp
	
	
LCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ – zsp or 0 if less than 0​​ ​
where ​ ¯ 
p ​​ is the fraction defective, sp is the standard deviation, n is the sample size, and z is the 
number of standard deviations for a specific confidence. Typically, z = 3 (99.7 percent confi-
dence) or z = 2.58 (99 percent confidence) is used.
S iz e of  t h e  S a m p l e   The size of the sample must be large enough to allow counting 
of the attribute. For example, if we know that a machine produces 1 percent defective units, 
then a sample size of five would seldom capture a bad unit. A rule of thumb when setting up 
a p-chart is to make the sample large enough to expect to count the attribute twice in each 
sample. So an appropriate sample size, if the defective rate were approximately 1 percent, 
would be 200 units. One final note: In the calculations shown in equations 13.4 through 13.7, 
the assumption is that the sample size is fixed. The calculation of the standard deviation 
depends on this assumption. If the sample size varies, the standard deviation and upper and 
lower process control limits should be recalculated for each sample.
[13.5]
[13.6]
[13.7]
EXAMPLE 13.2: Process Control Chart Design
An insurance company wants to design a control chart to monitor whether insurance claim 
forms are being completed correctly. The company intends to use the chart to see if improve-
ments in the design of the form are effective. To start the process, the company collected 
data on the number of incorrectly completed claim forms over the past 10 days. The insur-
ance company processes thousands of these forms each day, and due to the high cost of 
inspecting each form, only a small representative sample was collected each day. The data 
and analysis are shown in Exhibit 13.6.
SOLUTION
To construct the control chart, first calculate the overall fraction defective from all samples. 
This sets the centerline for the control chart.
​ ¯ 
p ​ = ​ Total number of defective units from all samples 
 
 
 
__________________________________ 
 
 
 
Number of samples  ×  Sample size 
​ = ​  91 
_____ 
3, 000 ​ = .03033​
Next, calculate the sample standard deviation:
​s​ p​ = ​√ 
________ 
​ ​ ¯ 
p ​(1 − ​ ¯ 
p ​ ) 
________ 
n 
​ ​ = ​√ 
_____________ 
 
​ .03033(1 − .03033 ) 
 
_____________ 
300 
​ ​ = .00990​
Finally, calculate the upper and lower process control limits. A z-value of 3 gives 99.7 percent 
confidence that the process is within these limits.
​
UCL
​ 
= ​ ¯ 
p ​ + 3​s​ p​
​ 
= .03033 + 3(.00990 ) = .06003
​ 
 
 
 
LCL​ = ​ ¯ 
p ​ − 3​s​ p​​ = .03033 − 3(.00990 ) = .00063​
The calculations in Exhibit 13.6, including the control chart, are contained in the spreadsheet 
“SPC.xls.”

328	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
EXAMPLE 13.3
The owners of a lumberyard want to design a control chart to monitor the quality of 2 × 4 
boards that come from their supplier. For their medium-quality boards, they expect an average 
of four knotholes per 8-foot board. Design a control chart for use by the person receiving the 
boards using three-sigma (standard deviation) limits.
Sample
Number 
Inspected
Number of  
Forms  
Completed  
Incorrectly
Fraction  
Defective
1
300
10  
0.03333
2
300
8
0.02667
3
300
9
0.03000
4
300
13  
0.04333
5
300
7
0.02333
6
300
7
0.02333
7
300
6
0.02000
8
300
11  
0.03667
9
300
12  
0.04000
10  
300
8
0.02667
Totals   
3,000
91  
0.03033
Sample standard deviation
0.00990
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0.00000
0.00500
0.01000
0.01500
0.02000
0.02500
0.03000
0.03500
0.04000
0.04500
0.05000
0.05500
0.06000
0.06500
Sample
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
Insurance Company Claim Form
exhibit 13.6
Process Control with Attribute Measurements:  
Using c-Charts
In the case of the p-chart, the item was either good or bad. There are times when the product 
or service can have more than one defect. For example, a board sold at a lumberyard may have 
multiple knotholes and, depending on the quality grade, may or may not be defective. When it 
is desired to monitor the number of defects per unit, the c-chart is appropriate.
The underlying distribution for the c-chart is the Poisson, which is based on the assump-
tion that defects occur randomly on each unit. If c is the number of defects for a particular 
unit, then ​ ¯ c ​​ is the average number of defects per unit, and the standard deviation is ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​​. For 
the purposes of our control chart, we use the normal approximation to the Poisson distribution 
and construct the chart using the following control limits.
	
​​​ ¯ c ​ = Average number of defects per unit​	
​​[13.8]​
	
​​​s​ c​ = ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​​	
​​[13.9]​
	
​​UCL = ​ ¯ c ​ + z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​​	
​[13.10]​
	
​​LCL = ​ ¯ c ​ − z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​ or 0 if less than 0​	
​​[13.11]​
Just as with the p-chart, typically z = 3 (99.7 percent confidence) or z = 2.58 (99 percent 
confidence) is used.

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
329
Process Control with Variable Measurements: Using  
X- and R-Charts
​ ¯ 
X ​​- and R- (range) charts are widely used in statistical process control.
In attribute sampling, we determine whether something is good or bad, fits or doesn’t fit—
it is a go/no-go situation. In variables sampling, however, we measure the actual weight, 
volume, number of inches, or other variable measurements, and we develop control charts to 
determine the acceptability or rejection of the process based on those measurements. For 
example, in attribute sampling, we might decide that if something is over 10 pounds, we will 
reject it, and under 10 pounds, we will accept it. In variables sampling, we measure a sample 
and may record weights of 9.8 pounds or 10.2 pounds. These values are used to create or 
modify control charts and to see whether they fall within the acceptable limits.
There are four main issues to address in creating a control chart: the size of the samples, 
number of samples, frequency of samples, and control limits.
S iz e of  S a m p l e s  For industrial applications in process control involving the 
measurement of variables, it is preferable to keep the sample size small. There are two main 
reasons. First, the sample needs to be taken within a reasonable length of time; otherwise, the 
process might change while the samples are taken. Second, the larger the 
sample, the more it costs to take. 
Sample sizes of four or five units seem to be the preferred numbers. The 
means of samples of this size have an approximately normal distribution, 
no matter what the distribution of the parent population looks like. Sample 
sizes greater than five give narrower process control limits and thus more 
sensitivity. For detecting finer variations of a process, it may be necessary, 
in fact, to use larger sample sizes. However, when sample sizes exceed 15 
or so, it would be better to use ​ ¯ 
X ​​-charts with standard deviation σ rather 
than ​ ¯ 
X ​​-charts with the range R, as we use in Example 13.3.
N u m b er  of  S a m p l e s  Once the chart has been set up, each sample 
taken can be compared to the chart and a decision can be made about 
whether the process is acceptable. To set up the charts, however, prudence 
and statistics suggest that 25 or so sample sets be analyzed.
F r e q u enc y  o f  S a m p l e s  How often to take a sample is a trade-
off between the cost of sampling (along with the cost of the unit if it 
is destroyed as part of the test) and the benefit of adjusting the system. 
Usually, it is best to start off with frequent sampling of a process and taper 
off as confidence in the process builds. For example, one might start with 
a sample of five units every half hour and end up feeling that one sample 
per day is adequate.
C o n t r ol  L i m i t s   Standard practice in statistical process control for 
variables is to set control limits three standard deviations above the mean 
Variables
Quality characteristics that 
are measured in actual 
weight, volume, inches, 
centimeters, or other 
measure.
Control check of a car axle at Dana 
Corporation Research and Development 
Center. 
© Jim West/Alamy
SOLUTION
For this problem, ​​ ¯ c ​ = 4, ​s​ c​ = ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​ = 2​
​UCL = ​ ¯ c ​ + z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​ = 4 + 3(2 ) = 10​
​LCL = ​ ¯ c ​ − z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​ = 4 − 3(2 ) = − 2 → 0​ (Zero is 
used since it is not possible to have a negative number of defects.)

330	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
and three standard deviations below. This means that 99.7 percent of the sample means are 
expected to fall within these process control limits (that is, within a 99.7 percent confidence 
interval). Thus, if one sample mean falls outside this obviously wide band, we have strong 
evidence that the process is out of control.
How to Construct X- and R-Charts
If the standard deviation of the process distribution is known, the ​​ ¯ 
X ​-chart may be defined:	
UCL​ ¯ 
X ​ ​= ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ + zS​ ¯ 
X ​     and    LCL​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ – zS​ ¯ 
X ​ ​ ​
where
​S​ ​ ¯ 
X ​​ = s ∕ ​√ 
__ 
n ​ = Standard deviation of sample means	
s = Standard deviation of the process distribution
n = Sample size
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = Average of sample means or a target value set for the process	
z = Number of standard deviations for a specific confidence level (typically, z = 3)
An ​ ¯ 
X ​​-chart is simply a plot of the means of the samples that were taken from a process. ​​ ¯ 
X ​ is 
the average of the means.
In practice, the actual standard deviation of the process is not known. For this reason, an 
approach that uses a substitute measure called the range is used. This practical approach is 
described in the following paragraphs.
An R-chart is a plot of the average of the range within each sample. The range is the differ-
ence between the highest and the lowest numbers in that sample. R values provide an easily 
calculated measure of variation used, like a standard deviation. ​​ ¯ 
R ​ is the average of the range 
of each sample. More specifically defined, these are
	
​​​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​​ ​x​ i​​
 
____ 
n  ​​	
​[Same as 13.1 ]​
where
​ ¯ 
X ​​ = Mean of the sample	
  i = Item number
 n = Total number of items in the sample
​
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = ​ 
​∑ 
j=1
​ 
m
 ​​ ​ ¯ 
X ​ j​
 
____ 
m  ​
​ ​
where
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = The average of the means of the samples	
 j = Sample number
 m = Total number of samples
​
​ ¯ 
R ​ = ​ 
​∑ 
j=1
​ 
m
 ​​ ​R​ j​​
 
____ 
m  ​
​
where
Rj = Difference between the highest and lowest measurement in the sample
​ ¯ 
R ​ = Average of the measurement differences R for all samples
​[13.12]​
​[13.13]​
​[13.14]​

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
331
The table in Exhibit 13.7 allows us to easily compute the upper and lower control limits for 
both the ​​ ¯ 
X ​-chart and the R-chart. These are defined as
​Upper control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ + ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Lower control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Upper control limit for R = ​D​ 4​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Lower control limit for R = D3​ ¯ 
R ​​
​[13.15]​
​[13.16]​
​[13.17]​
​[13.18]​
Number of  
Observations  
in each sample 
n
Factors for R-Chart
Factor for  
​ ¯ 
X​-Chart 
A2
Lower Control  
Limit 
D3
Upper Control  
Limit 
D4
  2
1.88
0     
3.27
  3
1.02
0     
2.57
  4
0.73
0     
2.28
  5
0.58
0     
2.11
  6
0.48
0     
2.00
  7
0.42
0.08
1.92
  8
0.37
0.14
1.86
  9
0.34
0.18
1.82
10
0.31
0.22
1.78
11
0.29
0.26
1.74
12
0.27
0.28
1.72
13
0.25
0.31
1.69
14
0.24
0.33
1.67
15
0.22
0.35
1.65
16
0.21
0.36
1.64
17
0.20
0.38
1.62
18
0.19
0.39
1.61
19
0.19
0.40
1.60
20
0.18
0.41
1.59
Upper control limit for  ​ ¯ 
X​ = ​UCL​ ​ ¯ 
X​​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ + ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R​
Lower control limit for  ​ ¯ 
X​ = ​LCL​ ​ ¯ 
X​​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ − ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R​
Upper control limit for  ​R = ​UCL​ R​ = ​D​ 4​ ¯ 
R​
Lower control limit for  ​R = ​LCL​ R​  = ​D​ 3​ ¯ 
R​
Factor for Determining from ​ ¯ 
R ​​ the Three-Sigma Control Limits  
for ​ ¯ 
X ​​- and R-Charts
exhibit 13.7
Note: All factors are based on the normal distribution.
EXAMPLE 13.4:  ​​ ¯ 
X​-​ and R-Charts
We would like to create ​ ¯ 
X ​-​ and R-charts for a process. Exhibit 13.8 shows measurements for 
all 25 samples. The last two columns show the average of the sample ​ ¯ 
X ​​, and the range, R.
Values for A2, D3, and D4 were obtained from Exhibit 13.7.

332	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
​
​Upper control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ + ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​ = 10.21 + .58​(​.60​)​ = 10.56​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​Lower control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​ = 10.21 − .58​(​.60​)​ = 9.86​​ 
 
 
 
 
​Upper control limit for R = ​D​ 4​ ¯ 
R ​ = 2.11​(​.60​)​ = 1.27​
​ 
 
 
 
​Lower control limit for R = ​D​ 3​ ¯ 
R ​ = 0​(​.60​)​ = 0​
 
​
SOLUTION
Exhibit 13.9 shows the ​ ¯ 
X ​​-chart and R-chart with a plot of all the sample means and ranges of 
the samples. All the points are well within the control limits, although sample 23 is close to 
the ​ ¯ 
X ​​ lower control limit and samples 13 through 17 are above the target.
UCL 10.56
LCL 9.86
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Sample number
2 4 6 8
 10.6 
10.5 
10.4 
10.3 
X
=
 = 10.21
10.1
10.0
9.9
9.8
LCL
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Sample number
2 4 6 8
1.40 
1.20 
1.00 
.80 
.60 
.40 
.20 
0
UCL 1.27
R– =
Sample Number
Each Unit in Sample
Average ​ ¯ 
X​ 
Range R
  1
10.60
10.40
10.30
  9.90
10.20
10.28
.70
  2
  9.98
10.25
10.05
10.23
10.33
10.17
.35
  3
  9.85
  9.90
10.20
10.25
10.15
10.07
.40
  4
10.20
10.10
10.30
  9.90
  9.95
10.09
.40
  5
10.30
10.20
10.24
10.50
10.30
10.31
.30
  6
10.10
10.30
10.20
10.30
  9.90
10.16
.40
  7
  9.98
  9.90
10.20
10.40
10.10
10.12
.50
  8
10.10
10.30
10.40
10.24
10.30
10.27
.30
  9
10.30
10.20
10.60
10.50
10.10
10.34
.50
10
10.30
10.40
10.50
10.10
10.20
10.30
.40
11
  9.90
  9.50
10.20
10.30
10.35
10.05
.85
12
10.10
10.36
10.50
  9.80
  9.95
10.14
.70
13
10.20
10.50
10.70
10.10
  9.90
10.28
.80
14
10.20
10.60
10.50
10.30
10.40
10.40
.40
15
10.54
10.30
10.40
10.55
10.00
10.36
.55
16
10.20
10.60
10.15
10.00
10.50
10.29
.60
17
10.20
10.40
10.60
10.80
10.10
10.42
.70
18
  9.90
  9.50
  9.90
10.50
10.00
  9.96
1.00  
19
10.60
10.30
10.50
  9.90
  9.80
10.22
.80
20
10.60
10.40
10.30
10.40
10.20
10.38
.40
21
  9.90
  9.60
10.50
10.10
10.60
10.14
1.00  
22
  9.95
10.20
10.50
10.30
10.20
10.23
.55
23
10.20
  9.50
  9.60
  9.80
10.30
  9.88
.80
24
10.30
10.60
10.30
  9.90
  9.80
10.18
.80
25
  9.90
10.30
10.60
  9.90
10.10
10.16
.70
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = 10.21
​ ¯ 
R​ = .60
Measurements in Samples of Five from a Process
exhibit 13.8
​ ¯ 
X​-Chart and R-Chart
exhibit 13.9

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
333
Design of a Single Sampling Plan for Attributes
Acceptance sampling is performed on goods that already exist to determine what percentage 
of products conform to specifications. These products may be items received from another 
company and evaluated by the receiving department, or they may be components that have 
passed through a processing step and are evaluated by company personnel either in production 
or later in the warehousing function. Whether inspection should be done at all is addressed in 
the following example.
Acceptance sampling is executed through a sampling plan. In this section, we illustrate 
the planning procedures for a single sampling plan—that is, a plan in which the quality is 
determined from the evaluation of one sample. (Other plans may be developed using two  
or more samples. See comprehensive books focused on Quality Control for a discussion of 
these plans.)
ACCEPTANCE SAMPLING
Analyze the quality of 
batches of items using 
statistics.
LO 13–3
EXAMPLE 13.5: Costs to Justify Inspection
Total (100 percent) inspection is justified when the cost of a loss incurred by not inspecting 
is greater than the cost of inspection. For example, suppose a faulty item results in a $10 loss 
and the average percentage of defective items in the lot is 3 percent.
SOLUTION
If the average percentage of defective items in a lot is 3 percent, the expected cost of faulty 
items is 0.03 × $10, or $0.30 each. Therefore, if the cost of inspecting each item is less than 
$0.30, the economic decision is to perform 100 percent inspection. Not all defective items will 
be removed, however, because inspectors will pass some bad items and reject some good ones.
The purpose of a sampling plan is to test the lot to either (1) find its quality or (2) ensure that 
the quality is what it is supposed to be. Thus, if a quality control supervisor already knows the 
quality (such as the 0.03 given in the example), he or she does not sample for defects. Either 
all of them must be inspected to remove the defects or none of them should be inspected, and 
the rejects pass into the process. The choice simply depends on the cost to inspect and the cost 
incurred by passing a reject.
A single sampling plan is defined by n and c, where n is the number 
of units in the sample and c is the acceptance number. The size of n may 
vary from one up to all the items in the lot (usually denoted as N) from 
which it is drawn. The acceptance number c denotes the maximum num-
ber of defective items that can be found in the sample before the lot is 
rejected. Values for n and c are determined by the interaction of four fac-
tors (AQL, α, LTPD, and β) that quantify the objectives of the product’s 
producer and its consumer. The objective of the producer is to ensure that 
the sampling plan has a low probability of rejecting good lots. Lots are 
defined as high quality if they contain no more than a specified level of 
defectives, termed the acceptable quality level (AQL).The objective of 
the consumer is to ensure that the sampling plan has a low probability 
of accepting bad lots. Lots are defined as low quality if the percentage of 
defectives is greater than a specified amount, termed lot tolerance per-
cent defective (LTPD). The probability associated with rejecting a high-
quality lot is denoted by the Greek letter alpha (α) and is termed the 
producer’s risk. The probability associated with accepting a low-quality 
lot is denoted by the letter beta (β) and is termed the consumer’s risk. The 
selection of particular values for AQL, α, LTPD, and β is an economic 
decision based on a cost trade-off or, more typically, on company policy 
or contractual requirements.
© Thinkstock/Corbis RF

334	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
There is a humorous story supposedly about Hewlett-Packard during its first dealings with 
Japanese vendors, who place great emphasis on high-quality production. HP had insisted on 
2 percent AQL in a purchase of 100 cables. During the purchase negotiations, some heated 
discussion took place wherein the Japanese vendor did not want this AQL specification; HP 
insisted that it would not budge from the 2 percent AQL. The Japanese vendor finally agreed. 
Later, when the box arrived, there were two packages inside. One contained 100 good cables. 
The other package had 2 cables with a note stating: “We have sent you 100 good cables. Since 
you insisted on 2 percent AQL, we have enclosed 2 defective cables in this package, though 
we do not understand why you want them.”
The following example, using an excerpt from a standard acceptance sampling table, illus-
trates how the four parameters—AQL, α, LTPD, and β—are used in developing a sampling plan.
EXAMPLE 13.6: Values of n and c
Hi-Tech Industries manufactures Z-Band radar scanners used to detect speed traps. The 
printed circuit boards in the scanners are purchased from an outside vendor. The vendor pro-
duces the boards to an AQL of 2 percent defectives and is willing to run a 5 percent risk (α) 
of having lots of this level or fewer defectives rejected. Hi-Tech considers lots of 8 percent or 
more defectives (LTPD) unacceptable and wants to ensure that it will accept such poor quality 
lots no more than 10 percent of the time (β). A large shipment has just been delivered. What 
values of n and c should be selected to determine the quality of this lot?
SOLUTION
The parameters of the problem are AQL = 0.02, α = 0.05, LTPD = 0.08, and β = 0.10. We 
can use Exhibit 13.10 to find c and n. First, divide LTPD by AQL (0.08/0.02 = 4). Then, find 
the ratio in column 2 that is equal to or just greater than that amount (4). This value is 4.057, 
which is associated with c = 4. Finally, find the value in column 3 that is in the same row 
as c = 4, and divide that quantity by AQL to obtain n (1.970/0.02 = 98.5). The appropriate 
sampling plan is c = 4, n = 99. Ninety-nine scanners will be inspected and if more than four 
defective units are found, the lot will be rejected.
c
LTPD/AQL
n × AQL
0
44.890
0.052
1
10.946
0.355
2
6.509
0.818
3
4.890
1.366
4
4.057
1.970
5
3.549
2.613
6
3.206
3.286
7
2.957
3.981
8
2.768
4.695
9
2.618
5.426
Excerpt from a Sampling Plan Table for α = 0.05, β = 0.10
exhibit 13.10
Operating Characteristic Curves
While a sampling plan such as the one just described meets our requirements for the extreme 
values of good and bad quality, we cannot readily determine how well the plan discriminates 
between good and bad lots at intermediate values. For this reason, sampling plans are gen-
erally displayed graphically through the use of operating characteristic (OC) curves. These 

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
335
curves, which are unique for each combination of n and c, simply illustrate the probability 
of accepting lots with varying percentages of defectives. The procedure we have followed in 
developing the plan, in fact, specifies two points on an OC curve: one point defined by AQL 
and 1 – α and the other point defined by LTPD and β. Curves for common values of n and c 
can be computed or obtained from tables available in more advanced Quality Control books.
S h a p i ng t h e  O C  C u r v e  A sampling plan discriminating perfectly between good 
and bad lots has an infinite slope (vertical) at the selected value of AQL. In Exhibit 13.11, any 
percentage defective to the left of 2 percent would always be accepted, and those to the right, 
always rejected. However, such a curve is possible only with complete inspections of all units, 
and thus is not a possibility with a true sampling plan.
An OC curve should be steep in the region of most interest (between the AQL and the 
LTPD), which is accomplished by varying n and c. If c remains constant, increasing the sam-
ple size n causes the OC curve to be more vertical. While holding n constant, decreasing c 
(the maximum number of defective units) also makes the slope more vertical, moving closer 
to the origin.
T h e  E f f ec t s  o f  L o t  S i z e  The size of the lot that the sample is taken from has 
relatively little effect on the quality of protection. Consider, for example, that samples—all of 
the same size of 20 units—are taken from different lots ranging from a lot size of 200 units 
to a lot size of infinity. If each lot is known to have 5 percent defectives, the probability of 
accepting the lot based on the sample of 20 units ranges from about 0.34 to about 0.36. This 
means that as long as the lot size is several times the sample size, it makes little difference 
how large the lot is. It seems a bit difficult to accept, but statistically (on the average in the 
long run) whether we have a carload or box full, we’ll get about the same answer. It just 
seems that a carload should have a larger sample size. Of course, this assumes that the lot is 
randomly chosen and that defects are randomly spread through the lot.
Probability of
acceptance
1.00  
0.90 
0.80 
0.70 
0.60 
0.50 
0.40 
0.30 
0.20 
0.10
α = 0.05 (producer's risk)
n = 99
c = 4
∙ = Points specified by sampling plan
β = 0.10 (consumer's risk)
AQL
LTPD
Percentage defective
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Operating Characteristic Curve for AQL = 0.02, α = 0.05, LTPD = 0.08, β = 0.10
exhibit 13.11

336	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Concept Connections
LO 13–1 Illustrate process variation and explain how to measure it.
Summary
	∙	 This chapter covers the quantitative aspect of quality 
management. 
	∙	 Variation is inherent in all processes and can be caused 
by many factors. Variation caused by identifiable fac-
tors is called assignable variation and can possibly 
be managed. Variation inherent in a process is called 
common or random variation. 
	∙	 Statistical quality control (SQC) involves sampling 
output from a process and using statistics to find when 
the process has changed in a nonrandom way. 
	∙	 When a product or service is designed, specifica-
tion limits are assigned relative to critical param-
eters. The process is designed to work so that the 
­probability of output being outside these limits is 
relatively low. 
	∙	 The capability index of a process measures its  
ability to consistently produce within the specification 
limits.
Key Terms
Statistical quality control (SQC)  A number of different 
techniques designed to evaluate quality from a confor-
mance view.
Assignable variation  Deviation in the output of a pro-
cess that can be clearly identified and managed.
Common variation  Deviation in the output of a process 
that is random and inherent in the process itself.
Upper and lower specification limits  The range of val-
ues in a measure associated with a process that is allow-
able given the intended use of the product or service.
Capability index  The ratio of the range of values 
allowed by the design specifications divided by the 
range of values produced by a process.
Key Formulas
Mean or average
​[13.1 ]​
Standard deviation
​[13.2 ]​
​​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​x​ i​
 
____ 
n  ​​
​
σ = ​ 
​√ 
__________ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​(​x​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
X ​ )​ 2​ ​ 
 
____________ 
n 
​
​
Capability index
​[13.3 ]​
​C​ pk​ = min ​⎡ 
⎢ ⎣​ ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − LSL 
________ 
3σ 
​  , ​ USL  − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ 
_________ 
3σ 
​⎤ 
⎥ ⎦​  ​
LO 13–2 Analyze process quality using statistics.
Summary
	∙	 Statistical process control involves monitoring the 
quality of a process as it is operating. 
	∙	 Control charts are used to visually monitor the status 
of a process over time. 
	∙	 Attributes are characteristics that can be evaluated 
as either conforming or not conforming to the design 
specifications. Control charts useful for attribute char-
acteristics are the p-chart and the c-chart. 
	∙	 When the characteristic is measured as a variable 
measure—for example, weight or diameter—​ ¯ 
X ​ and 
R-charts are used.
Key Terms
Statistical process control (SPC)  Techniques for test-
ing a random sample of output from a process to deter-
mine whether the process is producing items within a 
­prescribed range.
Attributes  Quality characteristics that are classified as 
either conforming or not conforming to specification.
Variables  Quality characteristics that are measured in actual 
weight, volume, inches, centimeters, or other measure.

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
337
Key Formulas
Process control charts using attribute measurements
​[13.4]​	
​[13.5]​	
​[13.6]​	
​[13.7]​
​[13.8]​
​[13.9]​
​[13.10]​ 
​[13.11]​
​ ¯ 
p ​ = ​ Total number of defective units from all samples 
 
 
 
_______________________________________ 
 
 
 
Number of samples × Sample size 
​
Sp = ​√ 
_______
 
​ ​ ¯ p​(1 – ​ ¯ p​) 
_______ 
n 
​ ​
UCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ + zsp
LCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ + zsp or 0 if less than 0​
​​s​ c​ = ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​​
​UCL = ​ ¯ c ​ + z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​​
​LCL = ​ ¯ c ​ − z ​√ 
__
 
​ ¯ c ​ ​ or 0 if less than 0​
Process control ​ ¯ 
X ​ and R-charts
​[13.12]​	
​[13 . 13]​	
​[13 . 14]​
​Upper control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ + ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Lower control limit for ​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​ − ​A​ 2​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Upper control limit for R = ​D​ 4​ ¯ 
R ​​
​Lower control limit for R = ​D​ 3​ ¯ 
R ​​
UCL​ ¯ 
X ​ ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ + zS​ ¯ 
X ​     and    LCL​ ¯ 
X ​ = ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X ​​ – zS​ ¯ 
X ​ ​ ​
​​
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = ​ 
​∑ 
j=1
​ 
m
 ​​ ​ ¯ 
X ​ j​
 
____ 
m  ​
​​ ​
​​
​ ¯ 
R ​ = ​ 
​∑ 
j=1
​ 
m
 ​​ ​R​ j​​
 
____ 
m  ​
​​
​[13.15]​
​[13.16]​
​[13.17]​
​[13.18]​
​​ ¯ c ​ = Average number of defects per unit​
LO 13–3 Analyze the quality of batches of items using statistics.
	∙	 Acceptance sampling is used to evaluate if a batch 
of parts—as received in an order, for example—­
conforms to specification limits. This is useful in the 
area where material is received from suppliers. 
	∙	 An acceptance sampling plan is defined by a sample 
size and the number of acceptable defects in the sample. 
	∙	 Since the sampling plan is defined using statistics, 
there is the possibility that a bad lot will be accepted, 
which is the consumer’s risk, and that a good lot will 
be rejected, which is the producer’s risk.
Summary
Solved Problem
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
HVAC Manufacturing produces parts and materials for the heating, ventilation, and air con-
ditioning industry. One of its facilities produces metal ductwork in various sizes for the home 
construction market. One particular product is 6-inch diameter round metal ducting. It is a 
simple product, but the diameter of the finished ducting is critical. If it is too small or large, 
contractors will have difficulty fitting the ducting into other parts of the system. The target 
diameter is 6 inches exactly, with an acceptable tolerance of ±.03 inches. Anything produced 
outside of specifications is considered defective. The line supervisor for this product has data 
showing that the actual diameter of finished product is 5.99 inches with a standard deviation 
of .01 inches.
	a.	 What is the current capability index of this process? What is the probability of producing a 
defective unit in this process?
	b.	 The line supervisor thinks he will be able to adjust the process so that the mean diameter 
of output is the same as the target diameter, without any change in the process variation. 
What would the capability index be if he is successful? What would be the probability of 
producing a defective unit in this adjusted process?
	c.	 Through better training of employees and investment in equipment upgrades, the company 
could produce output with a mean diameter equal to the target and a standard deviation of 
.005 inches. What would the capability index be if this were to happen? What would be the 
probability of producing a defective unit in this case?
LO 13–1

338	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Solution
	a.	  
​
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = 5.99  LSL = 6.00 − .03 = 5.97  USL = 6.00 + .03 = 6.03  σ = .01
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​C​ pk​ = min ​[​ 5.99 − 5.97 
_ 
.03 
​  or  ​ 6.03 − 5.99 
_ 
.03 
​]​ = min  [.667  or   1.333 ] = 0.667
​
	 	 This process is not what would be considered capable. The capability index is based on the 
LSL, showing that the process mean is lower than the target.
	 	 To find the probability of a defective unit, we need to find the Z-scores of the LCL and 
USL with respect to the current process:
​Z​ LSL​ = ​ LSL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
_______ 
σ 
​ = ​ 5.97 − 5.99 
________ 
.01 
​ = − 2.00  NORMSDIST(− 2.00 ) = .02275​
	 	 2.275 percent of output will be too small.
​Z​ USL​ = ​ USL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
________ 
σ 
​ = ​ 6.03 − 5.99 
________ 
.01 
​ = 4.00  NORMSDIST(4.00 ) = .999968​
	 	 The probability of too large a unit is 1 – .999968 = .000032, so .0032 percent of output will 
be too small.
	 	 The probability of producing a defective unit is .02275 + .000032 = .022782, so 2.2782 
percent of output will be defective. As a numerical example, 22,782 out of every million 
units will be defective.
	b.	  
​
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = 6.00  LSL = 6.00 − .03 = 5.97  USL = 6.00 + .03 = 6.03  σ = .01
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​C​ pk​ = min ​⎡ ⎣​ 6.00 − 5.97 
_ 
.03 
​   or   ​ 6.03 − 6.00 
_ 
.03 
​⎤ ⎦​ = min  ​[​1.00 or 1.00​]​ = 1.00​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​Z​ LSL​ = ​ LSL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
_______ 
σ 
​ = ​ 5.97 − 6.00 
________ 
.01 
​ = − 3.00  NORMSDIST(− 3.00 ) = .00135
 ​
	 	 Only 0.135 percent of output will be too small.
	 	 ​Z​ USL​ = ​ USL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
________ 
σ 
​ = ​ 6.03 − 6.00 
________ 
.01 
​ = 3.00  NORMSDIST(3.00 ) = .99865​
	 	 The probability of too large a unit is 1 – .99865 = .00135, so 0.135 percent of output will 
be too large.
	 	 The probability of producing a defective unit is .00135 + .00135 = .0027, so 0.27 percent 
of output will be defective. As a numerical example, 2,700 out of every million units will 
be defective. That’s about a 90 percent reduction in defective output just from adjusting the 
process mean!
	 	 Because the process is exactly centered on the target and the specification limits are three 
standard deviations away from the process mean, this adjusted process has a Cpk = 1.00. In 
order to do any better than that, we would need to reduce the variation in the process, as 
shown in part (c).
	
c.	  
​
​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ = 6.00  LSL = 6.00 − .03 = 5.97  USL = 6.00 + .03 = 6.03  σ = .005
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​C​ pk​ = min  ​[​ 6.00 − 5.97 
_ 
.015 
​   or   ​ 6.03 − 6.00 
_ 
.015 
​]​ = min  [2.00  or  2.00 ] = 2.00
 
​
	 	 We have doubled the process capability index by cutting the standard deviation of the pro-
cess in half. What will be the effect on the probability of defective output?
	 	 ​
​Z​ LSL​ = ​ LSL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
_______ 
σ 
​ = ​ 5.97 − 6.00 
________ 
.005 
​ = − 6.00  NORMSDIST(− 6.00 ) = 0.0000000009866
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​Z​ USL​ = ​ USL − ​ ¯ 
​ ¯ 
X​ 
________ 
σ 
​ = ​ 6.03 − 6.00 
________ 
.005 
​ = 6.00  NORMSDIST(6.00 ) = 0.9999999990134
 
​

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
339
	 	 Following earlier logic, the probability of producing a defective unit in this case is just 
0.000000001973, a very small probability indeed! Using the earlier numerical example, this 
would result in only .001973 defective units out of every million. By cutting the process 
standard deviation in half, we could gain far more than a 50 percent reduction in defective 
output—in this case, essentially eliminating defective units due to the diameter of the duct-
ing. This example demonstrates the power and importance of Six Sigma quality concepts.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Completed forms from a particular department of an insurance company were sampled daily 
to check the performance quality of that department. To establish a tentative norm for the 
department, one sample of 100 units was collected each day for 15 days, with these results:
LO 13–2
Proportion
of 
defectives
Sample number
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
.09 
.08 
.07 
.06 
.05 
.04 
.03 
.02 
.01
UCL = 0.064
LCL = 0.0
p = 0.030
–
–p
Sample
Sample Size
Number of Forms  
with Errors
  1
100
4
  2
100
3
  3
100
5
  4
100
0
  5
100
2
  6
100
8
  7
100
1
  8
100
3
Sample
Sample Size
Number of Forms  
with Errors
  9
100
4
10
100
2
11
100
7
12
100
2
13
100
1
14
100
3
15
100
1
	a.	 Develop a p-chart using a 95 percent confidence interval (z = 1.96).
	b.	 Plot the 15 samples collected.
	c.	 What comments can you make about the process?
Solution
	 	 ​
​ ¯ 
p ​ = ​ 
46 
______ 
15(100 ) ​ = .0307
​ 
 
​s​ p​ = ​√ 
________ 
​ ​ ¯ 
p ​(1 − ​ ¯ p​ ) 
________ 
n 
​ ​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​ .0307(1 − .0307 ) 
 
____________ 
100 
​ ​ = ​√ 
_____ 
.0003 ​ = .017​ 
 
 
 
 
UCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ + 1.96 ​s​ p​ = .031 + 1.96(.017 ) = .064
​ 
 
 
 
LCL = ​ ¯ 
p ​ − 1.96 ​s​ p​ = .031 − 1.96(.017 ) = − .00232 or zero
​
	b.	 The defectives are plotted as follows.
	c.	 Of the 15 samples, 2 were out of the control limits. Because the control limits were estab-
lished as 95 percent, or 1 out of 20, we would say that the process is out of control. It needs 
to be examined to find the cause of such widespread variation.
	a.

340	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
Management is trying to decide whether Part A, which is produced with a consistent 3 ­percent 
defective rate, should be inspected. If it is not inspected, the 3 percent defectives will go 
through a product assembly phase and have to be replaced later. If all Part A’s are inspected, 
one-third of the defectives will be found, thus raising the quality to 2 percent defectives.
	a.	 Should the inspection be done if the cost of inspecting is $0.01 per unit and the cost of 
replacing a defective in the final assembly is $4.00?
	b.	 Suppose the cost of inspecting is $0.05 per unit rather than $0.01. Would this change your 
answer in (a)?
Solution
Should Part A be inspected?
.03 defective with no inspection.
.02 defective with inspection.
	a.	 This problem can be solved simply by looking at the opportunity for 1 percent improvement.
Benefit = .01($4.00) = $0.04
Cost of inspection = $0.01
Therefore, inspect and save $0.03 per unit.
	b.	 A cost of $0.05 per unit to inspect would be $0.01 greater than the savings, so inspection 
should not be performed.
LO 13–3
Discussion Questions
	1.	 The capability index allows for some drifting of the process mean. Discuss what this means 
in terms of product quality output.
	2.	 In an agreement between a supplier and a customer, the supplier must ensure that all parts 
are within specification before shipment to the customer. What is the effect on the cost of 
quality to the customer?
	3.	 In the situation described in question 2, what would be the effect on the cost of quality to 
the supplier?
	4.	 Discuss the purposes of and differences between p-charts and ​ ¯ 
X ​​ and R-charts.
	5.	 The application of control charts is straightforward in manufacturing processes when you 
have tangible goods with physical characteristics you can easily measure on a numerical 
scale. Quality control is also important in service businesses, but you are generally not 
going to want to measure the physical characteristics of your customers! Do you think 
control charts have a place in service businesses? Discuss how you might apply them to 
specific examples.
	6.	 Discuss the trade-off between achieving a zero AQL (acceptable quality level) and a posi-
tive AQL (such as an AQL of 2 percent).
	7.	 The cost of performing inspection sampling moves inversely to the cost of quality failures. 
We can reduce the cost of quality failures by increased levels of inspection, but that of 
course would increase the cost of inspection. Can you think of any methods to reduce the 
cost of quality failures without increasing a company’s cost of inspection? Think specifi-
cally in terms of material purchased from vendors.
LO 13–1
LO 13–2
LO 13–3
Objective Questions
	1.	 A company currently using an inspection process in its material receiving department is 
trying to install an overall cost reduction program. One possible reduction is the elimina-
tion of one inspection position. This position tests material that has a defective content on 
the average of 0.04. By inspecting all items, the inspector is able to remove all defects. 
The inspector can inspect 50 units per hour. The hourly rate including fringe benefits for 
this position is $9. If the inspection position is eliminated, defects will go into product 
LO 13–1

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
341
assembly and will have to be replaced later at a cost of $10 each when they are detected in 
final product testing. (Answer in Appendix D)
	
a.	 Should this inspection position be eliminated?
	
b.	 What is the cost to inspect each unit?
	
c.	 Is there benefit (or loss) from the current inspection process? How much?
	2.	 A metal fabricator produces connecting rods with an outer diameter that has a 1 ± .01–inch 
specification. A machine operator takes several sample measurements over time and determines 
the sample mean outer diameter to be 1.002 inches with a standard deviation of .003 inch.
	
a.	 Calculate the process capability index for this example.
	
b.	 What does this figure tell you about the process?
	3.	 Output from a process contains 0.02 defective unit. Defective units that go undetected into 
final assemblies cost $25 each to replace. An inspection process, which would detect and 
remove all defectives, can be established to test these units. However, the inspector, who 
can test 20 units per hour, is paid $8 per hour, including fringe benefits. Should an inspec-
tion station be established to test all units?
	
a.	 What is the cost to inspect each unit?
	
b.	 What is the benefit (or loss) from the inspection process?
	4.	 There is a 3 percent error rate at a specific point in a production process. If an inspector is 
placed at this point, all the errors can be detected and eliminated. However, the inspector is 
paid $8 per hour and can inspect units in the process at the rate of 30 per hour.
	 	   If no inspector is used and defects are allowed to pass this point, there is a cost of $10 
per unit to correct the defect later on.
	 	   Should an inspector be hired?
	5.	 Design specifications require that a key dimension on a product measure 100 ± 10 units. A 
process being considered for producing this product has a standard deviation of four units.
	
a.	 What can you say (quantitatively) regarding the process capability?
	
b.	 Suppose the process average shifts to 92. Calculate the new process capability.
	
c.	 What can you say about the process after the shift? Approximately what percentage of 
the items produced will be defective?
	6.	 C-Spec, Inc., is attempting to determine whether an existing machine is capable of mill-
ing an engine part that has a key specification of 4 ± .003 inches. After a trial run on this 
machine, C-Spec has determined that the machine has a sample mean of 4.001 inches with 
a standard deviation of .002 inch. (Answer in Appendix D)
	
a.	 Calculate the Cpk for this machine.
	
b.	 Should C-Spec use this machine to produce this part? Why?
	7.	 Ten samples of 15 parts each were taken from an ongoing process to establish a p-chart for 
control. The samples and the number of defectives in each are shown in the following table.
LO 13–2
Sample
n
Number of  
Defective Items  
in the Sample
1
15
3
2
15
1
3
15
0
4
15
0
5
15
0
6
15
2
7
15
0
8
15
3
9
15
1
10
15
0
	
a.	 Develop a p-chart for 95 percent confidence (1.96 standard deviation).
	
b.	 Based on the plotted data points, what comments can you make?

342	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
	  8.	 A shirt manufacturer buys cloth by the 100-yard roll from a supplier. For setting up a con-
trol chart to manage the irregularities (e.g., loose threads and tears), the following data 
were collected from a sample provided by the supplier.
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Irregularities
3
5
2
6
5
4
6
3
4
  5
	
a.  Using these data, set up a c-chart with z = 2.
	
b.  Suppose the next five rolls from the supplier had three, two, five, three, and seven 
irregularities. Is the supplier process under control?
	  9.	 Resistors for electronic circuits are manufactured on a high-speed automated machine. 
The machine is set up to produce a large run of resistors of 1,000 ohms each.
	 	 	   To set up the machine and to create a control chart to be used throughout the run, 15 
samples were taken with four resistors in each sample. The complete list of samples and 
their measured values are as follows.
Sample Number
Readings (in ohms)
  1
1010
991
985
986
  2
995
996
1009
994
  3
990
1003
1015
1008
  4
1015
1020
1009
998
  5
1013
1019
1005
993
  6
994
1001
994
1005
  7
989
992
982
1020
  8
1001
986
996
996
  9
1006
989
1005
1007
10
992
1007
1006
979
11
996
1006
997
989
12
1019
996
991
1011
13
981
991
989
1003
14
999
993
988
984
15
1013
1002
1005
992
	 	 	   Develop an ​ ¯ 
X ​​chart and an R-chart and plot the values. From the charts, what comments 
can you make about the process? (Use three-sigma control limits as in Exhibit 13.7.) 
(Answer in Appendix D)
	10.	 You are the newly appointed assistant administrator at a local hospital, and your first 
project is to investigate the quality of the patient meals put out by the food-service depart-
ment. You conducted a 10-day survey by submitting a simple questionnaire to the 400 
patients with each meal, asking that they simply check off that the meal was either sat-
isfactory or unsatisfactory. For simplicity in this problem, assume that the response was 
1,000 returned questionnaires from the 1,200 meals each day. The results are as follows.
Number of  
Unsatisfactory Meals
Sample Size
December 1
74
  1,000
December 2
42
  1,000
December 3
64
  1,000
December 4
80
  1,000
December 5
40
  1,000
December 6
50
  1,000
December 7
65
  1,000
December 8
70
  1,000
December 9
40
  1,000
December 10
75
  1,000
600
10,000

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
343
	
a.  Construct a p-chart based on the questionnaire results, using a confidence interval of 
95.5 percent, which is two standard deviations.
	
b.  What comments can you make about the results of the survey?
	11.	 The state and local police departments are trying to analyze crime rates so they can shift 
their patrols from decreasing-rate areas to areas where rates are increasing. The city and 
county have been geographically segmented into areas containing 5,000 residences. The 
police recognize that not all crimes and offenses are reported: People do not want to 
become involved, consider the offenses too small to report, are too embarrassed to make 
a police report, or do not take the time, among other reasons. Every month, because of 
this, the police are contacting by phone a random sample of 1,000 of the 5,000 residences 
for data on crime. (Respondents are guaranteed anonymity.) Here are the data collected 
for the past 12 months for one area.
Area
Number of Crimes
Sample Size
Crime Rate
  1
  14
1,000
0.014
  2
   3
1,000
0.003
  3
  19
1,000
0.019
  4
  18
1,000
0.018
  5
  14
1,000
0.014
  6
  28
1,000
0.028
  7
  10
1,000
0.010
  8
  18
1,000
0.018
Month
Crime Incidence
Sample Size
Crime Rate
January
7
1,000
0.007
February
9
1,000
0.009
March
7
1,000
0.007
April
7
1,000
0.007
May
7
1,000
0.007
June
9
1,000
0.009
July
7
1,000
0.007
August
10
1,000
0.010
September
8
1,000
0.008
October
11
1,000
0.011
November
10
1,000
0.010
December
8
1,000
0.008
	 	 	 Construct a p-chart for 95 percent confidence (1.96) and plot each of the months. If the 
next three months show crime incidences in this area as 
January = 10 (out of 1,000 sampled)
February = 12 (out of 1,000 sampled)
March = 11 (out of 1,000 sampled)
	
	 what comments can you make regarding the crime rate?
	12.	 Some citizens complained to city council members that there should be equal protection 
under the law against the occurrence of crimes. The citizens argued that this equal protec-
tion should be interpreted as indicating that high-crime areas should have more police 
protection than low-crime areas. Therefore, police patrols and other methods for prevent-
ing crime (such as street lighting or cleaning up abandoned areas and buildings) should 
be used proportionately to crime occurrence.
	 	 	   In a fashion similar to problem 11, the city has been broken down into 20 geographic 
areas, each containing 5,000 residences. The 1,000 sampled from each area showed the 
following incidence of crime during the past month.
(continued)

344	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Area
Number of Crimes
Sample Size
Crime Rate
  9
  12
1,000
0.012
10
   3
1,000
0.003
11
  20
1,000
0.020
12
  15
1,000
0.015
13
  12
1,000
0.012
14
  14
1,000
0.014
15
  10
1,000
0.010
16
  30
1,000
0.030
17
   4
1,000
0.004
18
  20
1,000
0.020
19
   6
1,000
0.006
20
  30
1,000
0.030
300
	 	   Suggest a reallocation of crime protection effort, if indicated, based on a p-chart analy-
sis. To be reasonably certain in your recommendation, select a 95 percent confidence 
level (that is, Z = 1.96).
	13.	 The following table contains the measurements of the key length dimension from a fuel 
injector. These samples of size five were taken at one-hour intervals.
Observations
Sample Number
1
2
3
4
5
1
.486
.499
.493
.511
.481
2
.499
.506
.516
.494
.529
3
.496
.500
.515
.488
.521
4
.495
.506
.483
.487
.489
5
.472
.502
.526
.469
.481
6
.473
.495
.507
.493
.506
7
.495
.512
.490
.471
.504
8
.525
.501
.498
.474
.485
9
.497
.501
.517
.506
.516
10
.495
.505
.516
.511
.497
11
.495
.482
.468
.492
.492
12
.483
.459
.526
.506
.522
13
.521
.512
.493
.525
.510
14
.487
.521
.507
.501
.500
15
.493
.516
.499
.511
.513
16
.473
.506
.479
.480
.523
17
.477
.485
.513
.484
.496
18
.515
.493
.493
.485
.475
19
.511
.536
.486
.497
.491
20
.509
.490
.470
.504
.512
	 	 	 Construct a three-sigma ​ ¯ 
X ​​ chart and R-chart (use Exhibit 13.7) for the length of the fuel 
injector. What can you say about this process?
	14.	 In the past, Alpha Corporation has not performed incoming quality control inspections 
but has taken the word of its vendors. However, Alpha has been having some unsatisfac-
tory experience recently with the quality of purchased items and wants to set up sampling 
plans for the receiving department to use.
	 	 	   For a particular component, X, Alpha has a lot tolerance percentage defective of 
10 percent. Zenon Corporation, from which Alpha purchases this component, has an 
LO 13–3
(continued)

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
345
Sample No.
Observations
Mean
Range
  1
27.34667
27.50085
29.94412
28.21249
28.25103
2.59745
  2
27.79695
26.15006
31.21295
31.33272
29.12317
5.18266
  3
33.53255
29.32971
29.70460
31.05300
30.90497
4.20284
  4
37.98409
32.26942
31.91741
29.44279
32.90343
8.54130
  5
33.82722
30.32543
28.38117
33.70124
31.55877
5.44605
  6
29.68356
29.56677
27.23077
34.00417
30.12132
6.77340
  7
32.62640
26.32030
32.07892
36.17198
31.79940
9.85168
  8
30.29575
30.52868
24.43315
26.85241
28.02750
6.09553
  9
28.43856
30.48251
32.43083
30.76162
30.52838
3.99227
10
28.27790
33.94916
30.47406
28.87447
30.39390
5.67126
11
26.91885
27.66133
31.46936
29.66928
28.92971
4.55051
12
28.46547
28.29937
28.99441
31.14511
29.22609
2.84574
13
32.42677
26.10410
29.47718
37.20079
31.30221
11.09669  
14
28.84273
30.51801
32.23614
30.47104
30.51698
3.39341
15
30.75136
32.99922
28.08452
26.19981
29.50873
6.79941
16
31.25754
24.29473
35.46477
28.41126
29.85708
11.17004  
17
31.24921
28.57954
35.00865
31.23591
31.51833
6.42911
18
31.41554
35.80049
33.60909
27.82131
32.16161
7.97918
19
32.20230
32.02005
32.71018
29.37620
31.57718
3.33398
20
26.91603
29.77775
33.92696
33.78366
31.10110
7.01093
21
35.05322
32.93284
31.51641
27.73615
31.80966
7.31707
22
32.12483
29.32853
30.99709
31.39641
30.96172
2.79630
23
30.09172
32.43938
27.84725
30.70726
30.27140
4.59213
24
30.04835
27.23709
22.01801
28.69624
26.99992
8.03034
25
29.30273
30.83735
30.82735
31.90733
30.71869
2.60460
Means
30.40289
5.932155
acceptable quality level in its production facility of 3 percent for component X. Alpha has 
a consumer’s risk of 10 percent and Zenon has a producer’s risk of 5 percent.
	
a.  When a shipment of product X is received from Zenon Corporation, what sample size 
should the receiving department test?
	
b.  What is the allowable number of defects in order to accept the shipment?
	15.	 Large-scale integrated (LSI) circuit chips are made in one department of an electronics 
firm. These chips are incorporated into analog devices that are then encased in epoxy. 
The yield is not particularly good for LSI manufacture, so the AQL specified by that 
department is 0.15, while the LTPD acceptable by the assembly department is 0.40.
	
a.  Develop a sampling plan.
	
b.  Explain what the sampling plan means; that is, how would you tell someone to do the 
test?
Plastic keychains are being produced in a company 
named Hot Shot Plastics. The plastic material is first 
molded and then trimmed to the required shape. The 
curetimes (which is the time for the plastic to cool) dur-
ing the molding process affect the edge quality of the 
keychains produced. The aim is to achieve statistical con-
trol of the curetimes using ​ ¯ 
X ​​ and R-charts.
Curetime data of 25 samples, each of size four, have 
been taken when the process is assumed to be in control. 
These are shown as follows. (Note: The spreadsheet “13 
Statistical Process Control” has these data.)
Analytics Exercise: Hot Shot Plastics Company

346	
Section 2	
Manufacturing and Service Processes
Questions
	1.	 Prepare ​ ¯ 
X ​​ and R-charts using these data with the 
method described in the chapter.
	2.	 Analyze the charts and comment on whether the 
process appears to be in control and stable.
	3.	 Twelve additional samples of curetime data from 
the molding process were collected from an actual 
production run.
The data from these new samples are shown as follows. 
Update your control charts and compare the results with 
the previous data. The ​ ¯ 
X ​​ and R-charts are drawn with the 
new data using the same control limits established before. 
Comment on what the new charts show.
Sample 
No.
Observations
Mean
Range
  1
31.65830
29.78330
31.87910
33.91250
31.80830
4.12920
  2
34.46430
25.18480
37.76689
39.21143
34.15686
14.02663  
  3
41.34268
39.54590
29.55710
32.57350
35.75480
11.78558  
  4
29.47310
25.37840
25.04380
24.00350
25.97470
5.46960
  5
25.46710
34.85160
30.19150
31.62220
30.53310
9.38450
  6
46.25184
34.71356
41.41277
44.63319
41.75284
11.53828  
  7
35.44750
38.83289
33.08860
31.63490
34.75097
7.19799
  8
34.55143
33.86330
35.18869
42.31515
36.47964
8.45185
  9
43.43549
37.36371
38.85718
39.25132
39.72693
6.07178
10
37.05298
42.47056
35.90282
38.21905
38.41135
6.56774
11
38.57292
39.06772
32.22090
33.20200
35.76589
6.84682
12
27.03050
33.63970
26.63060
42.79176
32.52314
16.16116  
As part of the process for improving the quality of their 
cars, Toyota engineers have identified a potential improve-
ment to the process that makes a washer that is used in the 
accelerator assembly. The tolerances on the thickness of 
the washer are fairly large since the fit can be loose, but if 
it does happen to get too large, it can cause the accelera-
tor to bind and create a potential problem for the driver. 
(Note: This case has been fabricated for teaching pur-
poses, and none of these data were obtained from Toyota.)
Let’s assume that, as a first step to improving the pro-
cess, a sample of 40 washers coming from the machine 
that produces the washers was taken and the thickness 
measured in millimeters. The following table has the 
measurements from the sample:
thicknesses are distributed normally, what fraction 
of the output is expected to be greater than this 
thickness?
	2.	 If there are upper and lower specifications, where 
the upper thickness limit is 2.4 and the lower thick-
ness limit is 1.4, what fraction of the output is 
expected to be out of tolerance?
	3.	 What is the Cpk for the process?
	4.	 What would be the Cpk for the process if it were 
centered between the specification limits (assume 
the process standard deviation is the same)?
	5.	 What percentage of output would be expected to be 
out of tolerance if the process were centered?
	6.	 Set up ​ ¯ 
X ​​ and range control charts for the current 
process. Assume the operators will take samples of 
10 washers at a time.
	7.	 Plot the data on your control charts. Does the cur-
rent process appear to be in control?
	8.	 If the process could be improved so that the stan-
dard deviation were only about .10 millimeter, 
what would be the best that could be expected with 
the processes relative to fraction defective?
Analytics Exercise: Quality Management—Toyota
Quality Control Analytics at Toyota
1.9
2.0
1.9
1.8
2.2
1.7
2.0
1.9
1.7
1.8
1.8
2.2
2.1
2.2
1.9
1.8
2.1
1.6
1.8
1.6
2.1
2.4
2.2
2.1
2.1
2.0
1.8
1.7
1.9
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.4
1.7
2.2
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.1
2.2
Questions
	1.	 If the specification is such that no washer should 
be greater than 2.4 millimeters, assuming that the 

	
Statistical Quality Control 	
Chapter 13 	
347
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 A Six Sigma process that is running at the center of 
its control limits would expect this defect rate.
	  2.	 Variation that can be clearly identified and possibly 
managed.
	  3.	 Variation inherent in the process itself.
	  4.	 If a process has a capability index of 1 and is running 
normally (centered on the mean), what percentage of 
the units would one expect to be defective?
	  5.	 An alternative to viewing an item as simply good or 
bad due to it falling in or out of the tolerance range.
	  6.	 Quality characteristics that are classified as either 
conforming or not conforming to specification.
	  7.	 A quality characteristic that is actually measured, 
such as the weight of an item.
	  8.	 A quality chart suitable for when an item is either 
good or bad.
	  9.	 A quality chart suitable for when a number of blem-
ishes are expected on each unit, such as a spool of 
yarn.
	10.	 Useful for checking quality when we periodically 
purchase large quantities of an item and it would be 
very costly to check each unit individually.
	11.	 A chart that depicts the manufacturer’s and consum-
er’s risks associated with a sampling plan.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Two parts per billion units  2. Assignable variation  3. Common variation  4. Design limits are at ±3σ or 2.7 defects 
per thousand  5. Taguchi loss function  6. Attributes  7. Variable  8. p-chart  9. c-chart  10. Acceptance sampling  11. Operating characteristic curve


	
349
An important part of sustainability initiatives at 
global organizations is the close examination of 
their supply chain environmental footprint. The term 
environmental footprint relates to the impact that 
running the supply chain has on the environment. 
It is essential that companies orchestrate greening 
efforts across all supply chain processes, starting 
with product development, sourcing, manufacturing, 
packaging, transportation, demand fulfillment, and 
end-of-life management.
Managing logistics, which are transportation-
related processes, is probably one of the more 
discussed greening efforts in supply chain man­
agement. There is a direct relationship between 
transportation efficiency and transportation costs. 
Minimizing miles traveled, using more efficient 
means for moving goods, and improving capacity uti­
lization through consolidation of shipments reduces 
energy consumption and transportation costs, while 
at the same time reducing carbon emissions. 
The Green Supply Chain
	14.	Lean Supply Chains
	15.	Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation
	16.	Global Sourcing and Procurement
Supply Chain 
Processes
SECTION 
THREE

350
FROM LEAN SUPPLY CHAIN TO LEAN 
DESIGN
As seen in the diagram, the just-in-time approach to manufacturing has resulted in 
major reductions in inventory in U.S. companies over the past two decades. As we 
can see in the more recent data, some companies think it has gone too far and that 
having a little extra inventory might be a healthier option.
Although being lean helps companies hold down costs by keeping stockpiles of 
components and finished goods low, it can leave them high and dry if there is some 
disruption in the supply chain, such as an earthquake or some other natural disaster. 
Just-in-time makes sense, but it makes supply chains vulnerable to disruptions, so 
what we are seeing now is how these concepts are being adapted to meet the practi­
cal world.
Toyota Motors, the just-in-time pioneer, is 
adapting as well and has recently announced 
a new process called the Toyota New Global 
Architecture. In an effort to lower costs, Toyota 
is implementing a new global modular assem­
bly program that extends back to the design 
of the vehicles. The new process takes advan­
tage of greatly increased component sharing 
across the product line. Toyota will be able 
to order parts in bulk and save costs through 
greater economies of scale.
Learning Objectives
	LO 14–1	 Explain what lean production is.
	LO 14–2	 Illustrate how lean concepts can be applied to supply chain processes.
	LO 14–3	 Analyze supply chain processes using value stream mapping.
	LO 14–4	 Apply lean concepts to service processes.
Lean Supply 
Chains
14
1.55
1.6
1.5
1.45
1.4
1.35
1.7
1.65
1.3
1992
1997
2002
2007
2012
2017
Inventory-to-sales ratio

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
351
The most significant operations and supply management approach of the past 50 years is lean 
production. In the context of supply chains, lean production refers to a focus on eliminating 
as much waste as possible. Moves that are not needed, unnecessary processing steps, and 
excess inventory in the supply chain are targets for improvement during the leaning process. 
Some consultants in industry have coined the phrase value chain to refer to the concept that 
each step in the supply chain processes that deliver products and services to customers should 
create value. If a step does not create value, it should be removed from the process. Lean pro­
duction may be one of the best tools for implementing green strategies in manufacturing and 
service processes.
The basis of lean thinking came from the just-in-time (JIT) production concepts pioneered 
in Japan at Toyota. Even though JIT gained worldwide prominence in the 1970s, some of 
its philosophy can be traced to the early 1900s in the United States. Henry Ford used JIT 
concepts as he streamlined his moving assembly lines to make automobiles. For example, to 
eliminate waste, he used the bottom of the packing crates for car seats as the floor board of 
the car. Although elements of JIT were being used by Japanese industry as early as the 1930s, 
it was not fully refined until the 1970s when Tai-ichi Ohno of Toyota Motors used JIT to take 
Toyota’s cars to the forefront of delivery time and quality.
Customer value, in the context of lean production, is defined as something for which the 
customer is willing to pay. Value-adding activities transform materials and information into 
something the customer wants. Non–value-adding activities consume resources and do not 
directly contribute to the end result desired by the customer. Waste, therefore, is defined as 
anything that does not add value from the customer’s perspective. Examples of process wastes 
are defective products, overproduction, inventories, excess motion, processing steps, trans­
portation, and waiting.
Waste elimination is a reasonable goal in service operations, just as it is in manufacturing 
operations, but there is a difference in the sources of variation that cause the waste. Manu­
facturing operations, compared to service operations, are far more controllable. Uncertainty 
does result from material and labor inputs, but those can be anticipated and controlled to a 
great extent. The workers, the design of the product, and the production tools are all under the 
control of operations to a very large extent. If sales and marketing are part of the process, the 
demand uncertainty also can be reduced.
In contrast, services operate in a sea of uncertainty and variability that are much harder to 
control. Let’s look at these sources.
∙	 Uncertainty in task times. The nature of service products is that the execution of 
each service delivery has some uniqueness. This variability typically leads to a nega­
tive exponential distribution of task times. Simply put, this means that while most task 
executions will fall within some tight range, some executions will take a long time. 
Consider airplane boarding. There’s uncertainty here, yet Southwest found a way to 
reduce the uncertainty and achieve faster turnaround times at airports, increasing effec­
tive capacity.
∙	 Uncertainty in demand. While service demand can be forecasted, no forecast is 
100 percent perfect. Manufacturers can buffer this forecast uncertainty with some fin­
ished goods inventory. The simultaneous production and consumption in services pre­
cludes this tactic. The capacity must be available when the demand arises. Think about 
the number of available tables needed in a restaurant for peak dining hours.
∙	 Customers’ production roles. Both of the previous uncertainties have much to do 
with customer involvement in service operations. Because customers typically have 
some role to play in the production of a service, variability is introduced based on how 
well the service provider performs his or her role. Customers usually have to provide 
information to service agents to initiate service, and they typically have tangible tasks 
to perform.
LEAN PRODUCTION
Explain what lean 
production is.
LO 14–1
Customer value
In the context of lean 
production, something 
for which the customer is 
willing to pay.
Waste
Anything that does not add 
value from the customer’s 
perspective.
Lean production
Integrated activities 
designed to achieve 
high-volume, high-
quality production using 
minimal inventories of raw 
materials, work-in-process, 
and finished goods.

352	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Lean production and Six Sigma work best in repeatable, standardized operations. While 
many services are repeatable, given the aforementioned, how well can they be truly standard­
ized? Let’s look at the recent experience of the airline industry.
Airline companies such as Southwest have very efficient operations, and they achieve high 
ratings in customer satisfaction—until a major storm causes a disruption. Consider the hor­
rible storms that often strike the eastern third of the United States in the spring. Weather is 
one of those uncertainties that the airlines simply cannot control. Flights will be canceled, and 
passengers will need to be rebooked. This is an extreme example of demand uncertainty that 
leads to huge demand spikes.
At the same time, to eliminate waste and become more efficient, airlines have tended to cut 
capacity and fill flights. Today, you seldom fly on a plane that is not 90 to 100 percent booked. 
With few available seats, it can take days to rebook all passengers from flights canceled due to 
weather. Our point is that there is often a price to pay for being lean, and that price often is at 
the expense of customer service when unlikely events occur. Whether in a service or manufac­
turing business, potential trade-offs exist with lean production and must be dealt with.
This chapter starts by reviewing the evolution of lean concepts from Japan and Toyota. We 
then expand this view to encompass a complete supply chain. The remainder of the chapter is 
devoted to value stream mapping, a tool that can be used to drive out waste and improve the 
efficiency of the supply chain.
Lean production is an integrated set of activities designed to achieve production using 
minimal inventories of raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods. Parts arrive at 
the next workstation “just-in-time” and are completed and move through the process quickly. 
Lean is also based on the logic that nothing will be produced until it is needed. Exhibit 14.1 
illustrates the process. Production need is created by actual demand for the product. When an 
item is sold, in theory the market pulls a replacement from the last position in the ­system—
final assembly in this case. This triggers an order to the factory production line, where a 
worker then pulls another unit from an upstream station in the flow to replace the unit taken. 
This upstream station then pulls from the next station further upstream and so on back to 
the release of raw materials. To enable this pull process to work smoothly, lean production 
demands high levels of quality at each stage of the process, strong vendor relations, and a 
fairly predictable demand for the end product.
The Toyota Production System
In this section, we develop the philosophy and elements of lean production developed in 
Japan and embodied in the Toyota Production System—the benchmark for lean manufactur­
ing. The Toyota Production System was developed to improve quality and productivity and 
is predicated upon two philosophies central to the Japanese culture: elimination of waste and 
respect for people.
Customers
Final assembly
Sub
Sub
Sub = Subassembly
Fab = Fabrication
Each stage of the system
is tightly linked. Material
is pulled through the system
only when there is demand.
Fab
Fab
Fab
Fab
Fab
Fab
Fab
Fab
Vendor
Vendor
Vendor
Vendor
Fab
Lean Production Pull System
exhibit 14.1

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
353
Elimination of Waste  Waste is anything that is not absolutely essential to production. 
An expanded lean definition identifies seven prominent types of waste to be eliminated from the 
supply chain: (1) waste from overproduction, (2) waste of waiting time, (3) transportation waste, 
(4) inventory waste, (5) processing waste, (6) waste of motion, and (7) waste from product 
defects. 
R e s p ec t  f o r  Pe o p l e  Respect for people is key to the Toyota Production System. 
They have traditionally striven to ensure lifetime employment for permanent positions and to 
maintain level payrolls even when business conditions deteriorate. Permanent workers (about 
one-third of the total workforce of Japan) have job security and tend to be more flexible, 
remain with a company, and do all they can to help a firm achieve its goals. (Global recessions 
have caused many Japanese companies to move away from this ideal.)
Company unions at Toyota, as well as elsewhere in Japan, exist to foster a cooperative rela­
tionship with management. All employees receive two bonuses a year in good times. Employ­
ees know that if the company performs well, they will get a bonus. This encourages workers to 
improve productivity. Management views workers as assets, not as human machines. Automa­
tion and robotics are used extensively to perform dull or routine jobs so employees are free to 
focus on important improvement tasks.
Toyota relies heavily on subcontractor networks. Indeed, more than 90 percent of all ­Japanese 
companies are part of this supplier network of small firms. Some suppliers are specialists in a 
narrow field, usually serving multiple customers. Firms have long-term partnerships with their 
suppliers and customers. Suppliers consider themselves part of a customer’s family.
Illustrate how lean 
concepts can be applied to 
supply chain processes.
LO 14–2
Value stream
These are the value-adding 
and non–value-adding 
activities required to 
design, order, and provide 
a product from concept to 
launch, order to delivery, 
and raw materials to 
customers.
Waste reduction
The optimization of value-
adding activities and 
elimination of non–value-
adding activities that are 
part of the value stream.
LEAN SUPPLY CHAINS
The focus of the Toyota Production System is on elimination of waste and respect for people. 
As the concepts have evolved and become applied to the supply chain, the goal of maximizing 
customer value has been added. Customer value when considered from the entire supply chain 
should center on the perspective of the end customer with the goal being to maximize what 
the customer is willing to pay for a firm’s goods or services. The value stream consists of the 
value-adding and non–value-adding activities required to design, order, and provide a product 
or service from concept to launch, order to delivery, and raw materials to customers. This 
all-inclusive view of the system is a significant expansion of the scope of application of the 
lean concepts pioneered by Toyota. When applied to supply chains, waste reduction relates 
to the optimization of the value-adding activities and the elimination of non–value-adding 
activities that are part of the value stream. In the next section, the value stream analysis tool 
is discussed.
In the following paragraphs, we discuss the different components of a supply chain and 
what would be expected using a lean focus.
	
Lean Suppliers    Lean suppliers are able to respond to changes. Their prices are gen­
erally lower due to the efficiency of lean processes, and their quality has improved to 
the point that incoming inspection at the next link is not needed. Lean suppliers deliver 
on time and their culture is one of continuous improvement. To develop lean suppliers, 
organizations should include them in their value stream planning. This will help them 
fix problems and share savings.
	
Lean Procurement    A key to lean procurement is automation. The term e-­procurement 
relates to automatic transaction, sourcing, bidding and auctions using Web-based appli­
cations, and the use of software that removes human interaction and integrates with the 
financial reporting of the firm. The key to lean procurement is visibility. Suppliers must 
be able to “see” into the customers’ operations, and customers must be able to “see” 
into their suppliers’ operations. The overlap of these processes needs to be optimized to 
maximize value from the end-customer perspective.
	
Lean Manufacturing    Lean manufacturing systems produce what the custom­
ers want, in the quantity they want, when they want it, and with minimum resources. 

354	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Applying lean concepts in manufacturing typically presents the greatest opportunities 
for cost reduction and quality improvement.
	
Lean Warehousing    This relates to eliminating non–value-added steps and waste in 
product storage processes. Typical functions include the following: receiving material; 
putting-away/storing; replenishing inventory; picking inventory; packing 
for shipment; and shipping. Waste can be found in many warehousing pro­
cesses including shipping defects, which creates returns; overproduction 
or overshipment of products; excess inventory, which requires extra space 
and reduces warehouse efficiency; excess motion and handling; waiting 
for parts; and inadequate information systems.
Lean Logistics    Lean concepts can be applied to the functions associ­
ated with the movement of material through the system. Some of the key 
areas include optimized mode selection and pooling orders; combined 
multistop truckloads; optimized routing; cross docking; import/export 
transportation processes; and backhaul ­minimization. Just as with the 
other areas, these logistics functions need to be optimized by eliminating 
non–value-adding activities while improving the value-adding activities.
Lean Customers    Lean customers have a great understanding of their 
business needs and specify meaningful requirements. They value speed 
and flexibility and expect high levels of delivery performance. Lean cus­
tomers are interested in establishing effective partnerships with their sup­
pliers. Lean customers expect value from the products they purchase and 
provide value to their customers.
The benefits of a lean supply chain primarily are in the improved 
responsiveness to the customer. As business conditions change, the supply 
chain adapts to dynamic needs. The ideal is a culture of rapid change with 
a bias for change when it is needed. The reduced inventory inherent in a 
lean supply chain reduces obsolescence and reduces flow time through the 
value-added processes. The reduced cost along with improved customer 
service allows the firms using a lean supply chain a significant competi­
tive advantage when competing in the global marketplace.
Here, a worker visually checks cartons of 
ketchup as they move on a spiral conveyor 
and replaces bottles that are not perfect. 
This process could probably be made more 
efficient.
© Ingo Wagner/picture-alliance/dpa/AP Images
© wavebreakmedia/Shutterstock.com

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
355
Value stream mapping (VSM) is a special type of flowcharting tool that is valuable for the 
development of lean processes. The technique is used to visualize product flows through vari­
ous processing steps. The tool also illustrates information flows that result from the process, 
as well as information used to control flow through the process. The aim of this section is to 
provide a brief introduction to VSM and to illustrate its use with an example.
To create a lean process, one needs to have a full understanding of the business, including 
production processes, material flows, and information flows. In this section, we discuss this in the 
context of a production process where a product is being made. VSM is not limited to this context 
and can be readily applied to service, logistics, distribution, or virtually any type of process.
ln the context of a production process such as a manufacturing plant, the technique is used 
to identify all of the value-adding, as well as non–value-adding, processes that materials are 
subjected to within a plant, from raw material coming into the plant through delivery to the 
customer. Exhibit 14.2 is a sample map that depicts a production process. With this map, 
identification of wasteful processes and flows can be made so they can be modified or elimi­
nated, and the manufacturing system made more productive.
Details explaining the symbols will be discussed later in the section, but here it is useful 
to discuss what the information in the map depicted in Exhibit 14.2 actually means. Starting 
from the left, we see that material is supplied on a weekly basis and deposited in a raw mate­
rial inventory indicated by the triangle. The average level for this inventory is 2,500 units. 
This material is run through a five-step process consisting of machining, drilling, cleaning, 
inspection, and packaging. The machining, drilling, inspection, and packaging processes all use 
VALUE STREAM MAPPING
Manufacturing Process Map
Package
Daily
Weekly
10 sec
CT = 10 sec
2,000
C/O = 5 min
Lot = 1,000 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 99%
Customer
Ship
Production
Supervisor
Supplier
Production
Control
I
2,000
I
3,500
I
(−4) 3,360
(−6) 1,680
I
I
Inspect
30 sec
CT = 30 sec
Lead Time = 34 day
Total Cycle Time = 130 sec
Total Work Time = 130 sec
10,080 pcs/month
504 pcs/day
12 containers/day
Monthly
Forecast
Monthly
Forecast
Weekly
Orders
Weekly
Weekly
Orders
Daily
Daily
Daily
Daily
Daily
2,500
C/O = 5 min
Lot = 1,000 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 99%
1
1
1
1
Clean
5 sec
CT = 5 sec
C/O = 00 min
Lot = 1,000 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 80%
Drill
40 sec
CT = 40 sec
C/O = 5 min
Lot = 1,000 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 99%
Machine
45 sec
4 day
CT = 44 sec
C/O = 60 min
Lot = 1,000 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 87%
4 day
4 day
7 day
10 day
5 day
I
2,000
1 Shift/Day (8.5 hrs)
0.5 hr (Lunch)
0.5 hr (Breaks)
Available Time = 450 min/dy
exhibit 14.2
Analyze supply chain 
processes using value 
stream mapping.
LO 14–3
Value stream mapping
A graphical way to analyze 
where value is or is not 
being added as material 
flows through a process.

356	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
a single operator. Under each of these process symbols is the activity cycle time (CT), change­
over time (C/O time to switch from one type of item to another), lot size, available number of 
seconds per day, and percentage of uptime. The cleaning activity is a multistep process where 
items are handled on a first-come-first-served basis. In between each process are inventory buf­
fers, with the average inventory in these buffers depicted in the exhibit. Material flows through 
the process at an average rated 504 pieces per day over 20 days of operations each month. 
Information flows are shown on the map. In Exhibit 14.2, we see that production control 
issues monthly demand forecasts, weekly orders to the supplier, and a weekly production sched­
ule that is managed by the supervisor on a daily basis. Monthly forecasts are provided by the 
customer and it places its orders on a weekly basis. The time line at the bottom shows the pro­
cessing time for each production activity (in seconds) together with the average inventory wait 
time. Adding these times together gives an estimate of the lead time through the entire system.
VSM symbols are somewhat standardized but there are many variations. Several common 
symbols are depicted in Exhibit 14.3. These are categorized as Process, Material, Informa­
tion, and General symbols.
Value stream mapping is a two-part process—first depicting the “current state” of the process 
and second a possible “future state.” Exhibit 14.4 depicts another map of the same process with 
suggested improvements. The map has been annotated using Kaizen bursts that suggest the areas 
for improvement. Kaizen is the Japanese philosophy that focuses on continuous improvement. 
The Kaizen bursts identify specific short-term projects (often referred to as “Kaizen events”) 
that teams work on to implement changes to the process. In this exhibit, we see a totally rede­
signed process where the individual production operations have been combined into a workcell 
operated by three employees. In addition, rather than “pushing” material through the system 
based on weekly schedules generated by production control, the entire process is converted to a 
pull system that is operated directly in response to customer demand. Note that the lead time in 
the new system is only 5 days, compared to the 34-day lead time with the old system.
To study another example using value stream mapping (VSM), consider the Solved Prob­
lem 2 at the end of the chapter. VSM is a great visual way to analyze an existing system and to 
Production
Control
Daily
Process Symbols
I
or
I
Inventory
Shipments
Kanban
Stockpoint
Material Pull
Safety Stock
External Shipment
Material Symbols
Information Symbols
General Symbols
Central Control
Point
Manual Info
Electronic Info
Kaizen Burst
Customer/Supplier
Process
Process
C/T = 
C/O = 
Batch = 
Avail =
Data Box
Workcell
Operator
Monthly
Value-Added,
Non–Value-Added Time
NVA
NVA
NVA
VA
VA
Value Stream Mapping Symbols
exhibit 14.3
Kaizen
Japanese philosophy that 
focuses on continuous 
improvement.

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
357
find areas where waste can be eliminated. Value stream maps are simple to draw and it is pos­
sible to construct the maps totally with paper and pencil. These maps can, however, be more 
easily constructed using standard office software or graphics packages. Additionally, dedi­
cated VSM software is available from Strategos (www.strategosinc.com) and Systems2win 
(www.Systems2win.com).
Twice
Weekly
Daily
Customer
Supplier
Ship
Production
Control
2.5 day
0.5 day
130 sec
3-Month
Forecast
3-Month Forecast
Updated Monthly
Monthly Blanket
Order
Monthly Blanket
Order
1.5 day
0.5 day
1 Shift/Day (8.5 hrs)
0.5 hr (Lunch)
0.5 hr (Breaks)
Available Time = 450 min/day
Lead Time = 5.0 days
Total Work Time = 130 sec
Cycle Time = 44 sec
85% LT Reduction
25%+ Labor Reduction
Takt Time
= 450 min/504 pcs
= 0.89 min
= 54 sec
Machine/Drill/
Clean/Insp/Pkg
CT = 44 sec
C/O = 20 min
Lot = 500 pc
Avail = 27,600
Uptime = 87%
(3)
Design
Workcell
Design
Kanban
Design
Kanban
FAX Twice
Weekly
Daily FAX/PH
Dispatch
504 pcs/day
24 pcs/container
Visual
Bottleneck =
Machining
Lot Size/Setup
Try for Lot = 250
Analysis Showing Potential Areas for Improving a Process
exhibit 14.4
LEAN SUPPLY CHAIN DESIGN PRINCIPLES
Looking for ways to improve supply chain processes should be based on ideas that have been 
proven over time. In the following, we review a set of key principles that can guide the design 
of lean supply chains. We divide our design principles into three major categories. The first 
two sets of principles relate to internal production processes. These are the processes that 
actually create the goods and services within a firm. The third category applies lean concepts 
to the entire supply chain. These principles include
	1.	 Lean Layouts
	 	
a.  Group technology
	 	
b.  Quality at the source
	 	
c.  JIT production
	2.	 Lean Production Schedules
	 	
a.  Uniform plant loading
	 	
b.  Kanban production control system

358	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
	 	
c.  Determination of number of Kanbans needed
	 	
d.  Minimized setup times
	3.	 Lean Supply Chains
	 	
a.  Specialized plants
	 	
b.  Collaboration with suppliers
	 	
c.  Building a lean supply chain
Lean Concepts
Lean requires the plant layout to be designed to ensure balanced workflow with a minimum 
of work-in-process inventory. Each workstation is part of a production line, whether or not a 
physical line actually exists. Capacity is balanced using the same logic for an assembly line, 
and operations are linked through a pull system. In addition, the system designer must visual­
ize how all aspects of the internal and external logistics system tie to the layout.
Preventive maintenance is emphasized to ensure that flows are not interrupted by down­
time or malfunctioning equipment. Preventive maintenance involves periodic inspection and 
repair designed to keep a machine reliable. Operators perform much of the maintenance 
because they are most familiar with their machines and because machines are easier to repair, 
since lean operations favor several simple machines rather than one large complex one.
G r o u p  T e c h n o l o g y   Group technology is a philosophy in which similar parts 
are grouped into families, and the processes required to make the parts are arranged in a 
manufacturing cell. Instead of transferring jobs from one specialized department to another, 
group technology considers all operations required to make a part and groups those machines 
together. Exhibit 14.5 illustrates the difference between the clusters of different machines 
grouped into cells versus departmental layouts. The group technology cells eliminate 
movement and queue (waiting) time between operations, reduce inventory, and reduce the 
number of employees required. Workers, however, must be flexible to run several machines 
and processes. Due to their advanced skill level, these workers have increased job security.
Q u a l i t y  a t  t h e  S o u r c e   Quality at the source means do it right the first time, and 
when something goes wrong, stop the process or assembly line immediately. Factory workers 
become their own inspectors, personally responsible for the quality of their output. Workers 
concentrate on one part of the job at a time so quality problems are uncovered. If the pace is 
too fast, if the worker finds a quality problem, or if a safety issue is discovered, the worker is 
Grinder
Lathe
Heat
treat
1
A
2
B
Saw
Grinder
Lathe
Lathe
Press
Press
Saw
Heat
treat
5
6
4
2
3
1
Saw
Saw
Saw
Grinder
Grinder
Press
Press
Press
Lathe
Lathe
Lathe
Lathe
Group Technology Manufacturing Cells. . .
. . .Instead of Specialized Workcenters
Group Technology versus Departmental Specialty
exhibit 14.5
Group technology
A philosophy in which 
similar parts are grouped 
into families, and the 
processes required 
to make the parts are 
arranged in a specialized 
workcell.
Quality at the source
The philosophy of making 
workers personally 
responsible for the quality 
of their output. Workers 
are expected to make the 
part correctly the first time 
and to stop the process 
immediately if there is a 
problem.
Preventive 
maintenance
Periodic inspection and 
repair designed to keep 
equipment reliable.

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
359
obligated to push a button to stop the line and turn on a visual signal. People from other areas 
respond to the alarm and the problem. Workers are empowered to do their own maintenance 
and housekeeping until the problem is fixed.
J I T  Pr od u c t i o n  JIT (just-in-time) means producing what is needed when needed and 
no more. Anything over the minimum amount necessary is viewed as waste because effort and 
material expended for something not needed now cannot be utilized now. This is in contrast to 
relying on extra material just in case something goes wrong.
JIT is typically applied to repetitive manufacturing, which is when the same or similar 
items are made one after another. JIT does not require large volumes and can be applied to 
any repetitive segments of a business regardless of where they appear. Under JIT, the ideal lot 
size or production batch is one. Although workstations may be geographically dispersed, it is 
important to minimize transit time and keep transfer quantities small—typically one-tenth of 
a day’s production. Vendors even ship several times a day to their customers to keep lot sizes 
small and inventory low. The goal is to drive all inventory queues to zero, thus minimizing 
inventory investment and shortening lead times.
When inventory levels are low, quality problems become very visible. Exhibit 14.6 illus­
trates this idea. If the water in a pond represents inventory, the rocks represent problems that 
could occur in a firm. A high level of water hides the problems (rocks). Management assumes 
everything is fine, but as the water level drops in an economic downturn, problems are pre­
sented. If you deliberately force the water level down (particularly in good economic times), 
you can expose and correct problems before they cause worse problems. JIT manufacturing 
exposes problems otherwise hidden by excess inventories and staff.
Lean Production Schedules
As noted earlier, lean production requires a stable schedule over a lengthy time horizon. This 
is accomplished by level scheduling, freeze windows, and underutilization of capacity. A 
level schedule is one that requires material to be pulled into final assembly in a pattern uni­
form enough to allow the various elements of production to respond to pull signals. It does 
not necessarily mean that the usage of every part on an assembly line is identified hour by 
hour for days on end; it does mean that a given production system equipped with flexible set­
ups and a fixed amount of material in the pipelines can respond to the dynamic needs of the 
assembly line.
The term freeze window refers to that period of time during which the schedule is fixed 
and no further changes are possible. An added benefit of the stable schedule is seen in how 
Order
entry
backlog
Machine
downtime
Paperwork
backlog
Engineering
design
redundancies
INVENTORY
PRODUCTIVITY
PROBLEMS
Vendor
delinquencies
Scrap
Change
orders
Work-in-
process
queues
(“banks”)  
Inspection
backlog
Decision
backlogs
Inventory Hides Problems
exhibit 14.6
Level schedule
A schedule that pulls 
material into final assembly 
at a constant rate.
Freeze window
The period of time during 
which the schedule is fixed 
and no further changes are 
possible.

360	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
parts and components are accounted for in a pull system. Here, the concept of backflush 
is used where the parts that go into each unit of the product are periodically removed from 
inventory and accounted for based on the number of units produced. For example, if 1,000 
road bicycles are made, 1,000 of the appropriate handlebars, 2,000 tires, one seat, and so on 
are automatically removed from on-hand inventory. This eliminates much of the shop-floor 
data collection activity, which is required if each part must be tracked and accounted for dur­
ing production.
Underutilization and overutilization of capacity are controversial features of lean pro­
duction. Conventional approaches use safety stocks and early deliveries as a hedge against 
production problems like poor quality, machine failures, and unanticipated bottlenecks in tra­
ditional manufacturing. Under lean production, excess labor, machines, and overtime provide 
the hedge. The excess capacity in labor and equipment that results is much cheaper than car­
rying excess inventory. When demand is greater than expected, overtime must be used. Often, 
part-time labor is used when additional capacity is needed. During idle periods, personnel can 
be put to work on other activities such as special projects, work group activities, and worksta­
tion housekeeping.
U n i f o r m  P l a n t  L o a d i n g  Smoothing the production flow to dampen the reaction 
waves that normally occur in response to schedule variations is called uniform plant loading. 
When a change is made in a final assembly, the changes are magnified throughout the line and 
the supply chain. The only way to eliminate the problem is to make adjustments as small as 
possible by setting a firm monthly production plan for which the output rate is frozen.
Toyota found it could do this by building the same mix of products every day in small 
quantities. Thus, it always has a total mix available to respond to variations in demand. A 
Toyota example is shown in Exhibit 14.7. Monthly car style quantities are reduced to daily 
quantities (assuming a 20-day month) in order to compute a model cycle time (defined here 
as the time between two identical units being completed on the line). The cycle time figure is 
used to adjust resources to produce the precise quantity needed. The speed of equipment or of 
the production line is adjusted so only the needed quantity is produced each day. JIT strives to 
produce on schedule, on cost, and on quality.
K a n b a n  P r o d u c t i o n  C o n t r o l  S y s t e m s  A kanban control system uses a 
signaling device to regulate JIT flows. Kanban means “sign” or “instruction card” in 
Japanese. In a paperless control system, containers can be used instead of cards. The cards or 
containers make up the kanban pull system. The authority to produce or supply additional 
parts comes from downstream operations. Consider Exhibit 14.8, where we show an assembly 
line that is supplied with parts by a machine center. The machine center makes two parts, A 
and B. These two parts are stored in containers that are located next to the assembly line and 
next to the machine center. Each container next to the assembly line has a withdrawal kanban, 
and each container next to the machine center has a production kanban. This is often referred 
to as a two-card kanban system.
When the assembly line takes the first part A from a full container, a worker takes the with­
drawal kanban from the container, and takes the card to the machine center storage area. In the 
machine center area, the worker finds a container of part A, removes the production kanban, 
Model
Monthly 
Quantity
Daily 
Quantity
Model Cycle 
Time (Minutes)
Sedan
5,000
250
2
Hardtop
2,500
125
4
Wagon
2,500
125
4
Sequence: Sedan, hardtop, sedan, wagon, sedan, hardtop, sedan, wagon, and so on (one minute apart)
Toyota Example of Mixed-Model Production Cycle in a Japanese 
Assembly Plant
exhibit 14.7
Backflush
Calculating how many 
of each part were used 
in production and using 
these calculations to adjust 
actual on-hand inventory 
balances. This eliminates 
the need to actually 
track each part used in 
production.
Uniform plant loading
Smoothing the production 
flow to dampen schedule 
variation.
Kanban
A signaling device used to 
control production.
Kanban pull system
An inventory or production 
control system that uses 
a signaling device to 
regulate flows.

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
361
and replaces it with the withdrawal kanban. Placement of this card on the container authorizes 
the movement of the container to the assembly line. The freed production kanban is placed 
on a rack by the machine center, which authorizes the production of another lot of material. 
A similar process is followed for part B. The cards on the rack visually show upcoming work 
for the machine center. Cards are not the only way to signal the need for production of a part; 
other visual methods are possible, as shown in Exhibit 14.9.
The following are some other possible approaches:
	
Kanban squares.    Some companies use marked spaces on the floor or on a table 
to identify where material should be stored. When the square is empty, the supplying 
operations are authorized to produce; when the square is full, no parts are needed.
	
Container system.    Sometimes the container itself can be used as a signal device. In 
this case, an empty container on the factory floor visually signals the need to fill it. The 
amount of inventory is adjusted by simply adding or removing containers.
	
Colored golf balls.    At a Kawasaki engine plant, when a part used in a subassembly 
is down to its queue limit, the assembler rolls a colored golf ball down a pipe to the 
replenishment machine center. This tells the operator which part to make next. Many 
variations have been developed on this approach.
The kanban pull approach can be used not only within a manufacturing facility but also 
between manufacturing facilities (pulling engines and transmissions into an automobile 
assembly operation, for example) and between manufacturers and external suppliers.
Machine
center
Assembly
line
Withdrawal
kanban
Production
kanban
Storage
parts
A & B
Storage
parts
A & B
Material flow
Card (signal) flow
Flow of Two Kanbans
exhibit 14.8
Part numbers
mark location of
C 584 B 162 A 593
Signal marker hanging on
post for part C584 shows
that production should start
for that part. The post is
located so that workers in
normal locations can easily
see it.
Signal marker on
stack of boxes
A 593
B 162
C 584
Diagram of Outbound Stockpoint with Warning Signal Marker
exhibit 14.9

362	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
D e t e r m i n i n g  t h e  N u m b e r  o f  K a n b a n s  N e e d e d   Setting up a kanban 
control system requires determination of the number of kanban cards (or containers) needed. 
In a two-card system, we are finding the number of sets of withdrawal and production cards. 
The kanban cards represent the number of containers of material that flow back and forth 
between the supplier and the user areas. Each container represents the minimum production 
lot size to be supplied. The number of containers, therefore, directly controls the amount of 
work-in-process inventory in the system.
Accurately estimating the lead time needed to produce a container of parts is the key to 
determining the number of containers. This lead time is a function of the processing time for 
the container, any waiting time during the production process, and the time required to trans­
port the material to the user. Enough kanbans are needed to cover the expected demand during 
this lead time plus some additional amount for safety stock. The number of kanban card sets is
k = ​ Expected demand during lead time + Safety stock 
 
 
 
________________________________________ 
 
 
Size of the container 
​
= ​ DL(1 + S) 
_________ 
C 
​
where
k = Number of kanban card sets
D = Average number of units demanded per period (lead time and demand must be 
­expressed in the same time units)
L = Lead time to replenish an order (expressed in the same units as demand)
S = Safety stock expressed as a percentage of demand during the lead time (this can be 
based on a service level and variance as shown in Chapter 20).
C = Container size
Observe that a kanban system does not produce zero inventory; rather, it controls the 
amount of material that can be in process at a time—the number of containers of each item. 
The kanban system can be easily adjusted to fit the current way the system is operating because 
card sets can be easily added or removed from the system. If the workers find that they are 
not able to consistently replenish the item on time, an additional container of material, with 
the accompanying kanban cards, can be added. If it is found that excess containers of material 
accumulate, card sets can be easily removed, thus reducing the amount of inventory.
​[14.1 ]​
EXAMPLE 14.1: Determining the Number of Kanban Card Sets
Meritor, a company that makes muffler assemblies for the automotive industry, is committed 
to the use of kanban to pull material through its manufacturing cells. Meritor has designed 
each cell to fabricate a specific family of muffler products. Fabricating a muffler assembly 
involves cutting and bending pieces of pipe that are welded to a muffler and a catalytic con­
verter. The mufflers and catalytic converters are pulled into the cell based on current demand. 
The catalytic converters are made in a specialized cell.
	
Catalytic converters are made in batches of 10 units and are moved in special hand carts to 
the fabrication cells. The catalytic converter cell is designed so that different types of catalytic 
converters can be made with virtually no setup loss. The cell can respond to an order for a 
batch of catalytic converters in approximately four hours. Because the catalytic converter cell 
is right next to the muffler assembly fabrication cell, transportation time is virtually zero.
	
The muffler assembly fabrication cell averages approximately eight assemblies per hour. 
Each assembly uses the same catalytic converter. Due to some variability in the process, man­
agement has decided to have safety stock equivalent to 10 percent of the needed inventory.
	
How many kanban sets are needed to manage the replenishment of the catalytic converters?

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
363
M i n i m i z ed  S e t u p  T i m e s   The reductions in setup and changeover times are 
necessary to achieve a smooth flow. Exhibit 14.10 shows the relationship between lot size and 
setup costs. Under a traditional approach, setup cost is treated as a constant, and the optimal 
order quantity is shown as six. Under the kanban approach, setup cost is significantly reduced 
and the corresponding optimal order quantity is reduced. In the exhibit, the order quantity has 
been reduced from six to two under lean methods by employing setup-time-saving procedures. 
This organization will ultimately strive for a lot size of one.
A simple idea used to achieve such setup time reductions involves dividing the setup 
time into internal and external activities. Internal activities must be done while a machine is 
stopped. External activities can be done while the machine is running. The setup process is 
then changed so that external activities are done while the machine is running in anticipation 
of the next setup. Other time-saving devices such as duplicate tool holders also are used to 
speed setups.
Lean Supply Chains
Building a lean supply chain involves taking a systems approach to integrating the partners. 
Supply must be coordinated with the need of the production facilities, and production must be 
tied directly to the demand of the customers for products. The importance of speed and steady 
SOLUTION
In this case, the lead time for replenishment of the converters (L) is four hours. The demand 
(D) for the catalytic converters is eight per hour. Safety stock (S) is 10 percent of the expected 
demand, and the container size (C) is 10 units.
​k = ​ 8 × 4​(​1 + .1​)​ 
_________ 
10 
​ = ​ 35.2 
____ 
10  ​ = 3.52 or 4 sets​
In this case, we would need four kanban card sets, and we would have four containers of con­
verters in the system. In all cases, when we calculate k, we will round the number up because 
we always need to work with full containers of parts. When the first unit of a batch of 10 cata­
lytic converters is used in the muffler fabrication cell, a “signal” card is sent to the catalytic 
converter cell to trigger the production of another batch.
Definitions: Holding cost includes the costs of storing inventory and the cost of money tied up in inventory. Setup cost 
includes the wage costs attributable to workers making the setup, and various administrative and supplies costs. (These 
are defined in total in Chapter 20, “Inventory Management.”)
10
Setup
cost
Holding
cost
Total
cost
8
6
Quantity
4
2
0
Cost
Traditional
10
Setup
cost
Holding
cost
Total
cost
8
6
Quantity
4
2
0
Cost
Kanban
Relationship between Lot Size and Setup Cost
exhibit 14.10

364	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
consistent flow that is responsive to actual customer demand cannot be overemphasized. Con­
cepts that relate to lean network design are discussed next.
S p e c i a l i z e d  P l a n t s   Small specialized plants rather than large vertically integrated 
manufacturing facilities are important. Large operations and their inherent bureaucracies 
are difficult to manage and are not in line with the lean philosophy. Plants designed for 
one purpose can be constructed and operated more economically. These plants need to 
be linked together so they can be synchronized to one another and to the actual need 
of the market. Speed and quick response to changes are keys to the success of a lean 
supply chain.
C o l l a b o r a t i o n  w i t h  S u p p l i e r s  Just as customers and employees are key 
components of lean systems, suppliers are also important to the process. If a firm shares its 
projected usage requirements with its vendors, they have a long-term picture of the demands 
that will be placed on their production and distribution systems. Some vendors are linked 
online with a customer to share production scheduling and input needs data. This permits 
them to develop level production systems. Confidence in the supplier or vendor’s delivery 
commitment allows reductions of buffer inventories. Maintaining stock at a lean level requires 
frequent deliveries during the day. Some suppliers even deliver directly to a location on the 
production line and not to a receiving dock. When vendors adopt quality practices, incoming 
receiving inspections of their products can be bypassed.
B u i l d i n g  a  L e a n  S u p p l y  C h a i n
A supply chain is the sum total of organizations involved—from raw materials firms through 
tiers of suppliers to original equipment manufacturers, onward to the ultimate distribution and 
delivery of the finished product to the customer. Womack and Jones, in their seminal work 
Lean Thinking, provide the following guidelines for implementing a lean supply chain:
∙	 Value must be defined jointly for each product family, along with a target cost based on 
the customer’s perception of value.
∙	 All firms along the value stream must make an adequate return on their investments 
related to the value stream.
∙	 The firms must work together to identify and eliminate muda (waste).
∙	 When cost targets are met, the firms along the stream will immediately conduct new 
analyses to identify remaining muda and set new targets.
∙	 Every participating firm has the right to examine every activity in every firm relevant 
to the value stream as part of the joint search for waste.
In summary, to be lean, everyone’s got to be on the same page!
LEAN SERVICES
Many lean techniques have been successfully applied by service firms. Just as in manufactur­
ing, the suitability of each technique and the corresponding work steps depend on the charac­
teristics of the firm’s markets, production and equipment technology, skill sets, and corporate 
culture. Service firms are no different in this respect. Here are 10 of the more successful 
techniques applied to service companies:
	  1.	 Organize Problem-Solving Groups Honeywell is extending its use of quality teams 
from manufacturing into its service operations. Other corporations as diverse as 
First Bank/Dallas, Standard Meat Company, and Miller Brewing Company are using 
similar approaches to improve service. British Airways used quality teams as a fun­
damental part of its strategy to implement new service practices.
	  2.	 Upgrade Housekeeping Good housekeeping means more than winning the clean 
broom award. It means that only the necessary items are kept in a work area, that 
Apply lean concepts to 
service processes.
LO 14–4

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
365
there is a place for everything, and that everything is clean and in a constant state of 
readiness. The employees clean their own areas.
	 	
  Service organizations such as McDonald’s, Disneyland, and Speedi-Lube have 
recognized the critical nature of housekeeping. Their dedication to housekeeping has 
meant that service processes work better, the attitude of continuous improvement is 
easier to develop, and customers perceive that they are receiving better service.
	  3.	 Upgrade Quality The only cost-effective way to improve quality is to develop reli­
able process capabilities. Process quality is quality at the source—it guarantees first-
time production of consistent and uniform products and services.
	 	
  McDonald’s is famous for building quality into its service delivery process. It lit­
erally “industrialized” the service delivery system so that part-time, casual workers 
could provide the same eating experience anywhere in the world. Quality doesn’t 
mean producing the best; it means consistently producing products and services that 
give the customers their money’s worth.
	  4.	 Clarify Process Flows Clarification of flows, based on JIT themes, can dramatically 
improve the process performance. The following are three examples.
	 	
  First, Federal Express Corporation changed air flight patterns from origin-to-­
destination to origin-to-hub, where the freight is transferred to an outbound plane 
heading for the destination. This revolutionized the air transport industry. Second, 
the order-entry department of a manufacturing firm converted from functional sub­
departments to customer-centered work groups and reduced the order processing lead 
time from eight to two days. Finally, Supermaids sends in a team of house cleaners, 
each with a specific responsibility, to clean a part of each house quickly with parallel 
processes. Changes in process flows can literally revolutionize service industries.
	  5.	 Revise Equipment and Process Technologies Revising technologies involves evalu­
ation of the equipment and processes for their ability to meet the process require­
ments, to process consistently within tolerance, and to fit the scale and capacity of 
the work group.
	 	
  Speedi-Lube converted the standard service station concept to a specialized lubri­
cation and inspection center by changing the service bays from drive-in to drive-
through and by eliminating the hoists and instead building pits under the cars where 
employees have full access to the lubrication areas on the vehicle.
	 	
  A hospital reduced operating room setup time so it had the flexibility to perform a 
wider range of operations without reducing the operating room availability.
	  6.	 Level the Facility Load Service firms synchro­
nize production with demand. They have developed 
unique approaches to leveling demand so they can 
avoid making customers wait for service. McDonald’s 
offers a special breakfast menu in the morning. Retail 
stores use take-a-number systems. The post office 
charges more for next-day delivery. These are all 
examples of the service approach for creating uniform 
facility loads.
	  7.	 Eliminate Unnecessary Activities A step that does 
not add value is a candidate for elimination. A step 
that does add value may be a candidate for reengi­
neering to improve the process consistency or to 
reduce the time to perform the tasks.
	 	
  A hospital discovered that significant time was 
spent during an operation waiting for an instrument 
that was not available when the operation began. It 
developed a checklist of instruments required for 
each category of operation. Speedi-Lube eliminated 
steps, but also added steps that did not improve the 
lubrication process but did make customers feel more 
assured about the work being performed.
Prior to an operation, nurses check the sterile 
instruments and other equipment that will be used. A pre-
operative checklist is used to ensure that the doctors 
will have what they need during surgery, thus avoiding 
delays and increasing patient safety.
© Dana Neely Photography/The Image Bank/Getty Images

366	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
	  8.	 Reorganize Physical Configuration Work area configurations frequently require 
reorganization during a lean implementation. Often, manufacturers accomplish this 
by setting up manufacturing cells to produce items in small lots, synchronous to 
demand. These cells amount to microfactories inside the plant.
	 	
  Most service firms are far behind manufacturers in this area. However, a few inter­
esting examples do come out of the service sector. Some hospitals—instead of routing 
patients all over the building for tests, exams, X-rays, and injections—are reorganizing 
their services into work groups based on the type of problem. Teams that treat only 
trauma are common, but other work groups have been formed to treat less immediate 
conditions like hernias. These amount to microclinics within the hospital facility.
	  9.	 Introduce Demand-Pull Scheduling Due to the nature of service production and 
consumption, demand-pull (customer-driven) scheduling is necessary for operating 
a service business. Moreover, many service firms are separating their operations into 
“back room” and “customer contact” facilities. This approach creates new problems 
in coordinating schedules between the facilities. The original Wendy’s restaurants 
were set up so cooks could see cars enter the parking lot. They put a pre-established 
number of hamburger patties on the grill for each car. This pull system was designed 
to have a fresh patty on the grill before the customer even placed an order.
	10.	 Develop Supplier Networks The term supplier networks in the lean context refers to 
the cooperative association of suppliers and customers working over the long term for 
mutual benefit. Service firms have not emphasized supplier networks for materials 
because the service costs are often predominantly labor. Notable exceptions include 
service organizations like McDonald’s, one of the biggest food products purchasers 
in the world, which has been developing lean practices. Manpower and other employ­
ment agencies have established lean-type relationships with a temporary employment 
service and a trade school to develop a reliable source of trained assemblers.
Concept Connections
LO 14–1   Explain what lean production is.
Summary
	∙	 Lean production involves improving processes by 
eliminating waste and excess inventory.
	∙	 The just-in-time philosophy, pioneered by Toyota, is 
the basis for the concept.
	∙	 The concept includes the entire supply chain with the 
goal of creating value for the customer by eliminating 
all non–value-adding activities.
Key Terms
Lean production  Integrated activities designed to 
achieve high-volume, high-quality production using 
minimal inventories of raw materials, work-in-process, 
and finished goods.
Customer value  In the context of lean production, 
something for which the customer is willing to pay.
Waste  Anything that does not add value from the cus­
tomer’s perspective.
LO 14–2   Illustrate how lean concepts can be applied to supply chain processes.
Summary
	∙	 Lean concepts can be applied to virtually all the pro­
cesses in the supply chain.
	∙	 Key areas include production layout, the scheduling of 
production, and the design of the supply chain.
	∙	 Flow throughout the supply chain can be managed 
using just-in-time systems that pull material based on 
need.
	∙	 The kanban card is an example of this type of system.

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
367
LO 14–3   Analyze supply chain processes using value stream mapping.
Summary
	∙	 Value stream mapping is a flowcharting tool used to 
visualize flows through a process.
	∙	 Features of the tool are the identification of value add­
ing and non–value-adding activities, together with a 
time line for each activity and the process as a whole.
	∙	 The tool can be applied to production, logistics, and 
distribution processes.
	∙	 The goal in using the tool is to identify ways to “lean” 
a process by eliminating waste and creating value for 
the customer.
	∙	 A Kaizen event is a short-term project designed to 
quickly improve a process.
Key Terms
Value stream mapping  A graphical way to analyze 
where value is or is not being added as material flows 
through a process.
Kaizen  Japanese philosophy that focuses on continuous 
improvement.
Preventive maintenance  Periodic inspection and repair 
designed to keep equipment reliable.
Group technology  A philosophy in which similar parts 
are grouped into families, and the processes required to 
make the parts are arranged in a specialized workcell.
Quality at the source  The philosophy of making workers 
personally responsible for the quality of their output. Work­
ers are expected to make the part correctly the first time 
and to stop the process immediately if there is a problem.
Level schedule  A schedule that pulls material into final 
assembly at a constant rate.
Freeze window  The period of time during which the 
schedule is fixed and no further changes are possible.
Backflush  Calculating how many of each part were 
used in production and using these calculations 
to adjust actual on-hand inventory balances. This 
eliminates the need to actually track each part used in 
production.
Uniform plant loading  Smoothing the production flow 
to dampen schedule variation.
Kanban  A signaling device used to control production.
Kanban pull system  An inventory or production control 
system that uses a signaling device to regulate flows.
k = ​ DL(1 + S) 
_________ 
C 
​
[14.1]
LO 14–4   Apply lean concepts to service processes.
Summary
	∙	 Lean concepts can be successfully applied by service 
firms.
	∙	 Just as with production processes, waste elimination 
and customer value creation are also goals of service 
processes.
	∙	 Often, services operate in an environment with more 
uncertainty, making them more difficult to control.
Key Terms
Value stream  These are the value-adding and non–
value-adding activities required to design, order, and 
provide a product from concept to launch, order to deliv­
ery, and raw materials to customers.
Waste reduction  The optimization of value-adding 
activities and elimination of non–value-adding activities 
that are part of the value stream.

368	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
A local hospital wants to set up a kanban system to manage its supply of blood with the 
regional blood bank. The regional blood bank delivers blood to the hospital each day with 
a one-day order lead time (an order placed by 6 P.M. today will be delivered tomorrow after­
noon). Internally, the hospital purchasing group places orders for blood each day at 5 P.M. 
Blood is measured by the pint and is shipped in containers that contain six pints. For a par­
ticular blood type, the hospital uses an average of 12 pints per day. Due to the critical nature of 
a blood shortage, the hospital wants to carry a safety stock of two days’ expected supply. How 
many kanban card sets should the hospital prepare?
Solution
This problem is typical of how a real application might look. Using the data given, the vari­
ables for this problem are as follows:
	
D = 12 pints per day (average demand)
L = 1 day (lead time)
S = 200 percent (safety stock, as a fraction this is 2.0)
C = 6 pints (container size)
​k = ​ DL​(​1 + S​)​ 
_______ 
C 
​ = ​ 12​(​1 + 2​)​ 
______ 
6 
​ = 6​
This indicates that we need to prepare six kanban card sets. Each time a new container of 
blood (containing six pints) is opened, the card will be sent to purchasing and another six 
pints of blood will be ordered. When the blood is received, the card will be attached to the 
new container and moved to the blood storage area.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Value Stream Mapping Example: Bolt Manufacturing
A simple example will illustrate the use of value stream mapping. Exhibit 14.11 depicts a 
bolt manufacturing operation that ships 7,500 bolts per week. The current state map pro­
vides cycle time and setup time information for each of the 15 processes used, and it pro­
vides ­inventory levels at each location. The map also depicts information flow between 
the steel supplier, the bolt customer, and management via production scheduling. The total 
value-added time, denoted as processing time, is obtained by summing all of the individual 
value-added ­contributions at each processing step on the time line. For the example, it equals 
28.88 seconds. At each inventory location, lead time is calculated by dividing inventory level 
by daily production demand, which is 1,500 bolts. Summing all of the lead time produces an 
overall production lead time of 66.1 days, which is the entire time it takes an individual bolt 
to make its way through the plant.
There are several possibilities to optimize the current production scenario. Exhibit 14.12 
provides a few of these, shown as Kaizen bursts, including eliminating several processing 
steps, modifying some of the existing processes, and reducing travel distances between pro­
cesses. Exhibit 14.13, the future state map, illustrates the incorporation of these modifica­
tions. As shown, the changes reduce production lead time to 50.89 days, which is a 23 percent 
reduction. The production scenario could be enhanced even more if pull systems were incor­
porated at various locations.
LO 14–2
LO 14–3

	
369
exhibit 14.11
Weekly
Weekly Order
Weekly Order
2x weekly
Customer
7,500 pieces
345 ft
I
500 ft coils
5 days 
I
Production
Control
Daily
100% Sort
1
CT = 5 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Yearly = 360,000
Monthly = 30,000
Weekly = 7,500
Daily = 1,500
Lot Size = 3,500
Production Lead Time
66.1 days
Processing Time
28.88 sec
5 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
5 days
3 days
3 days
2 days
5 days
0.97 day
4,500 pieces
90 ft
I
Salt Spray
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 10 hours
4,500 pieces
0 ft
I
Doc Final
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Chemical & Physical
Certification
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
3,000 pieces
345 ft
I
7,500 pieces
I
1,066 pieces
I
Label & Ship
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
1,243 pieces
351 ft
I
Reroll & Box
1
CT = 0.857 sec
Setup = 2 hours
0.857 sec
0.02 sec
0.857 sec
0.02 sec
0.01 sec
0.83 day
0.83 day
3 days
4 days
0.71 day
1,243 pieces
351 ft
I
Phosphorous & Oil
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
249 ft
I
Roll Thread
1
CT = 0.857 sec
Setup = 2 hours
Metrology Lab
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
6,000 pieces
210 ft
I
Receiving
1
CT = 0.01 sec
Setup = 0 hours
38,400 pieces
480 ft
I
Blanking
1
CT = 0.75 sec
Setup = 6 hours
0.75 sec
8.57 sec
10 sec
0.02 sec
2.7 sec
25.6 days
2.24 days
1.92 days
3 days
5 days
3,360 pieces
30 ft
I
Necking
1
CT = 8.57 sec
Setup = 1.5 hours
2,880 pieces
366 ft
I
Share Head
1
CT = 10 sec
Setup = 1.5 hours
Pickle & Dubois
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
180 ft
I
Carburize & Induction
1
CT = 2.7 sec
Setup = 0 hours
492 ft
I
Production
Supervisor
Steel
Supplier
1x weekly
1,450 pieces
165 ft
Current State Map for Bolt Manufacturing Example

370
Weekly
Weekly Order
Weekly Order
2x weekly
Customer
7,500 pieces
345 ft
I
500 ft coils
5 days 
I
Production
Control
Daily
100% Sort
1
CT = 5 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Yearly = 360,000
Monthly = 30,000
Weekly = 7,500
Daily = 1,500
Lot Size = 3,500
Production Lead Time
66.1 days
Processing Time
28.88 sec
5 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
5 days
3 days
3 days
2 days
5 days
0.97 day
4,500 pieces
90 ft
I
Salt Spray
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 10 hours
4,500 pieces
0 ft
I
Doc Final
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Chemical & Physical
Certification
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
3,000 pieces
345 ft
I
7,500 pieces
I
1,066 pieces
I
Label & Ship
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
1,243 pieces
351 ft
I
Reroll & Box
1
CT = 0.857 sec
Setup = 2 hours
0.857 sec
0.02 sec
0.857 sec
0.02 sec
0.01 sec
0.83 day
0.83 day
3 days
4 days
0.71 day
1,243 pieces
351 ft
I
Phosphorous & Oil
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
249 ft
I
Roll Thread
1
CT = 0.857 sec
Setup = 2 hours
Metrology Lab
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
6,000 pieces
210 ft
I
Receiving
1
CT = 0.01 sec
Setup = 0 hours
38,400 pieces
480 ft
I
Blanking
1
CT = 0.75 sec
Setup = 6 hours
0.75 sec
8.57 sec
10 sec
0.02 sec
2.7 sec
25.6 days
2.24 days
1.92 days
3 days
5 days
3,360 pieces
30 ft
I
Necking
1
CT = 8.57 sec
Setup = 1.5 hours
2,880 pieces
366 ft
I
Share Head
1
CT = 10 sec
Setup = 1.5 hours
Pickle & Dubois
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
180 ft
I
Carburize & Induction
1
CT = 2.7 sec
Setup = 0 hours
492 ft
I
Production
Supervisor
Steel
Supplier
1x weekly
1,450 pieces
165 ft
Modify Hardening
Eliminate Receiving
Eliminate Reroll
Eliminate Sorting
Eliminate Salt Spray
Combine Necking & Shaving w/ CNC
exhibit 14.12
Potential Process Changes for Bolt Manufacturing Example

	
371
Weekly
Weekly Order
Weekly Order
2x weekly
Customer
500 ft coils
5 days 
I
Production
Control
Daily
Yearly = 360,000
Monthly = 30,000
Weekly = 7,500
Daily = 1,500
Lot Size = 3,500
Production Lead Time
50.89 days
Processing Time
12.73 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.02 sec
0.83 day
3 days
2 days
5 days
4,500 pieces
0 ft
I
Doc Final
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Chemical & Physical
Certification
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
3,000 pieces
345 ft
I
7,500 pieces
I
1,066 pieces
I
Label & Ship
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
1,243 pieces
I
0.02 sec
0.857 sec
0.02 sec
0.83 day
3 days
0.71 day
1,243 pieces
351 ft
I
Phosphorous & Oil
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
249 ft
I
Roll Thread
1
CT = 0.857 sec
Setup = 2 hours
Metrology Lab
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
38,400 pieces
480 ft
I
Blanking
1
CT = 0.75 sec
Setup = 6 hours
0.75 sec
10 sec
0.02 sec
1 sec
25.6 days
1.92 days
3 days
5 days
2,880 pieces
200 ft
I
I
CNC
1
CT = 10 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Pickle & Dubois
1
1
CT = 0.02 sec
Setup = 0 hours
4,500 pieces
180 ft
Carburize &
Induction
CT = 1 sec
Setup = 0 hours
Production
Supervisor
Steel
Supplier
1x weekly
100 ft
200 ft
exhibit 14.13
Future State Map for Bolt Manufacturing Example

372	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Is it possible to achieve zero inventories? Why or why not?
	  2.	 One way to help achieve lean production systems is to employ flexible automated manu­
facturing equipment and automated material handling systems. A natural result of such 
a move is that fewer people are required in the process, an issue addressed regularly in 
negotiations with labor unions. Do you think there is a conflict between such a move and 
the principle of Respect for People in the Toyota Production System?
	  3.	 Can a supply chain become too lean? Explain your answer—using examples if possible.
	  4.	 Why must lean have a stable schedule?
	  5.	 What objections might a marketing manager have to uniform plant loading?
	  6.	 What are the implications for cost accounting of lean production?
	  7.	 What are the roles of suppliers and customers in a lean system?
	  8.	 Explain how cards are used in a kanban system.
	  9.	 In which ways, if any, are the following systems analogous to kanban: returning empty 
bottles to the supermarket and picking up filled ones; running a hot dog stand at lunch­
time; withdrawing money from a checking account; raking leaves into bags?
	10.	 Why is lean hard to implement in practice?
	11.	 Explain the relationship between quality and productivity under the lean philosophy.
	12.	 Stopping waste is a vital part of lean. Using value stream mapping, identify some sources 
of waste in your home or dorm and discuss how they may be eliminated.
	13.	 How would you show a pull system in VSM symbols between the blanking and CNC 
stages of the bolt manufacturing Solved Problem 2?
	14.	 What is value stream mapping?
	15.	 What is the purpose of value stream mapping? How can it be achieved?
	16.	 Will lean work in service environments? Why or why not?
	17.	 Discuss ways to use lean to improve one of the following: a pizza restaurant, a hospital, 
or an auto dealership.
LO 14–1
LO 14–2
LO 14–3
LO 14–4
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What phrase refers to the idea that all steps in supply chain processes that deliver goods 
and services to the customer should create value?
	  2.	 What term refers to the optimization of value-adding activities and the elimination of 
non–value-adding activities that are part of a value stream?
	  3.	 List at least four of the seven prominent types of waste that should be eliminated from the 
supply chain.
	  4.	 What lean concept relates to eliminating non–value-added steps and waste in product 
storage processes?
	  5.	 What term refers to a schedule that pulls material into final assembly at a constant rate?
	  6.	 The periodic inspection and repair of equipment designed to keep the equipment reliable, 
thus eliminating unplanned downtime due to malfunctions is called _____.
	  7.	 What term refers to the concept of doing things right the first time and, when problems 
occur, stopping the process to fix the source of the problem?
	  8.	 In some JIT systems, marked spaces on a table or the floor identify where material should 
be stored. Supplying operations are signaled to produce more when the space is empty. 
What are these spaces called?
	  9.	 Under a kanban approach to lean manufacturing, order quantities should be as small as 
possible. For a part that is manufactured in-house, what part of its manufacturing process 
needs to be reduced to reduce the optimal order quantity for an item?
	10.	 A supplier of instrument gauge clusters uses a kanban system to control material flow. 
The gauge cluster housings are transported five at a time. A fabrication center produces 
approximately 10 gauges per hour. It takes approximately two hours for the housing to 
LO 14–1
LO 14–2

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
373
be replenished. Due to variations in processing times, management has decided to keep 
20 percent of the needed inventory as safety stock. How many kanban card sets are 
needed? (Answer in Appendix D)
	11.	 Transmissions are delivered to the fabrication line four at a time. It takes one hour for 
transmissions to be delivered. Approximately four vehicles are produced each hour, and 
management has decided that 50 percent of expected demand should be maintained as 
safety stock. How many kanban card sets are needed?
	12.	 A bottling plant fills 2,400 bottles every two hours. The lead time is 40 minutes and a 
container accommodates 120 bottles. The safety stock is 10 percent of expected demand. 
How many kanban cards are needed?
	13.	 Refer to Example 14.1 as the basis for this problem. Meritor hires a team of consultants.
	 	 	 The consultants suggest a partial robotic automation, as well as an increase in safety stock 
to 12.5 percent. Meritor implements these suggestions. The result is an increase in effi­
ciency in both the fabrication of muffler assembly and the making of catalytic converters. 
The muffler assembly fabrication cell now averages 16 assemblies per hour and the lead 
time has been decreased to two hours’ response time for a batch of 10 catalytic convert­
ers. How many kanban cards are now needed?
	14.	 Meritor is so pleased with the outcome from previous suggestions that the consultants 
are invited back for more work. The consultants now suggest a more complete robotic 
automation of the making of muffler assemblies and also a reduction in container size to 
eight per container. Meritor implements these suggestions and the result is that the muf­
fler assembly fabrication cell now averages approximately 32 assemblies per hour, and 
the catalytic converter assembly cell can now respond to an order for a batch of catalytic 
converters in one hour. The safety stock remains at 12.5 percent. How many kanban cards 
are needed? (Answer in Appendix D)
	15.	 In value stream mapping, what does an arrow in the shape of a lightning bolt mean?
	16.	 What does an inverted triangle represent in a value stream map?
	17.	 In a data box on a value stream map, what do the abbreviations CT and C/O mean?
	18.	 What is used to indicate suggested changes in a process that may lead to improvements in 
a value stream?
	19.	 Compared to manufacturing systems, what is it about the environment of service opera­
tions that make them much harder to control?
	20.	 The chapter presents multiple techniques that service firms can use to make their pro­
cesses leaner. Which technique is demonstrated by a restaurant that offers special dis­
counts midweek to attract more demand during a traditionally slow period?
LO 14–3
LO 14–4
Quality Parts Company supplies gizmos for a computer 
manufacturer located a few miles away. The company 
produces two different models of gizmos in production 
runs ranging from 100 to 300 units.
The production flow of models X and Y is shown in 
Exhibit 14.14. Model Z requires milling as its first step, 
but otherwise follows the same flow pattern as X and Y. 
Skids can hold up to 20 gizmos at a time. Approximate 
times per unit by operation number and equipment setup 
times are shown in Exhibit 14.15.
Demand for gizmos from the computer company ranges 
between 125 and 175 per month, equally divided among 
X, Y, and Z. Subassembly builds up inventory early in the 
month to make certain that a buffer stock is always avail­
able. Raw materials and purchased parts for subassem­
blies each constitute 40 percent of the manufacturing cost 
of a gizmo. Both categories of parts are multiple-sourced 
from about 80 vendors and are delivered at random times. 
(Gizmos have 40 different part numbers.)
Scrap rates are about 10 percent at each operation, 
inventory turns twice yearly, employees are paid on a 
day rate, employee turnover is 25 percent per year, and 
net profit from operations is steady at 5 percent per year. 
Maintenance is performed as needed.
The manager of Quality Parts Company has been con­
templating installing an automated ordering system to 
help control inventories and to “keep the skids filled.” 
(She feels that two days of work in front of a worksta­
tion motivates the worker to produce at top speed.) She 
is also planning to add three inspectors to clean up the 
quality problem. Further, she is thinking about setting up 
a rework line to speed repairs. Although she is pleased 
Case: Quality Parts Company

374	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Machining Dept.
Machine no. 1
Mill
Machine no. 2
Lathe
1
Machine no. 3
Drill
2
Machine no. 4
Drill
3
4
5
7
6
8
Skid
Skid
Skid
Skid
Skid
Skid
Offices
Operator
Part-time worker
Scale: 1/4" = 1 ft.
Skid
Skid
Shipping
Oven
Skid
Skid
Paint
booth
Receiving
Tool crib
Table
Table
Assembly Dept.
Assembly bench
Packing bench
To
assembly
Subassembly
area for
purchased parts
going into
final assembly
From
receiving
Finishing Dept.
8
1
9
10
20
11
12
14
6
7
8
19
3
15
13
16
17
2
5
4
18
2
1
3
4
5
6
9
7
13
12
11
10
Gizmo Production Flow
exhibit 14.14
Operation Number and Name
Operation Time (Minutes)
Setup Time (Minutes)
Milling for Model Z
20
60
1 Lathe
50
30
2 Mod. 14 drill
15
  5
3 Mod. 14 drill
40
  5
4 Assembly step 1
50
  Assembly step 2
45
  Assembly step 3
50
5 Inspection
30
6 Paint
30
7 Oven
50
20
8 Packing
  5
Operations and Setup Time
exhibit 14.15

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
375
with the high utilization of most of her equipment and 
labor, she is concerned about the idle time of the milling 
machine. Finally, she has asked the industrial engineer­
ing department to look into high-rise shelving to store 
parts coming off machine 4.
Questions
	1.	 Which of the changes being considered by the 
manager of Quality Parts Company are counter to 
the lean philosophy?
	2.	 Make recommendations for lean improvements 
in such areas as scheduling, layout, kanban, task 
groupings, and inventory. Use quantitative data as 
much as possible; state necessary assumptions.
	3.	 Sketch the operation of a pull system for running 
Quality Parts Company’s current system.
	4.	 Outline a plan for introducing lean at Quality Parts 
Company.
Value stream mapping involves first developing a 
baseline map of the current situation of a company’s 
external and/or internal operations, and then apply­
ing lean concepts, developing a future state map that 
shows improved operations. Exhibit 14.16, for example, 
shows the current state with a production lead time of 
4.5 days. This system is a batch/push system (indicated 
by striped arrows), resulting in long delays and inven­
tory buildups. Exhibit 14.17 shows the future state 
map with a production lead time of 0.25 day. This was 
accomplished by moving to a continuous-flow pull 
system and attacking the seven wastes. Value stream 
mapping uses a number of special icons and a display 
format of boxes and flows.
Questions
	1.	 Eliminating the queue of work dramatically quick­
ens the time it takes a part to flow through the 
system. What are the disadvantages of removing 
those queues?
	2.	 How do you think the machine operators would 
react to the change?
	3.	 What would you do to ensure that the operators 
were kept busy?
Case: Value Stream Mapping
Daily
Daily
3 days
.5 min
1 day
.5 day
1.2 min
2.2 min
Process
time = 3.9 min.
Production
lead = 4.5 days
Suppliers
Customer
Production
control
(ERP)
I
I
Machine 1
1
Machine 2
1
Assembly
10
I
Map of the Current State
exhibit 14.16
Source: Jared Lovelle, “Mapping the Value Stream,” IIE Solutions 33, no. 2 (February 2001), p. 32.

376	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Map of the Future State
exhibit 14.17
Source: Jared Lovelle, “Mapping the Value Stream,” IIE Solutions 33, no. 2 (February 2001), p. 32.
Daily
.25 day
.5 min
One-piece
flow
1.2 min
2.2 min
Process
time = 3.9 min.
Production
lead = .25 day
Suppliers
Customer
Production
control
(ERP)
Machine 1
1
Machine 2
Assembly
FIFO
10
One-piece
flow
Combine
machines 1 and
2 into a single
machine cell
Daily
A fishing boat manufacturer, Pro Fishing Boats, is having 
many problems with critical globally sourced parts. Pro 
Fishing has two manufacturing facilities in the United 
States. The firm’s reliance on efficient global supply 
chain operations is increasing as the manufacturer is 
sourcing more and more parts overseas, including criti­
cal components. Recent problems with a number of these 
critical parts have caused line shutdowns. In response, 
Pro Fishing has mandated a six-week inventory on all 
globally sourced parts. Management has asked you to 
evaluate whether this is the right decision.
First, you must understand Pro Fishing’s supply 
chain. Currently, there is very little visibility (knowledge 
of the current status) of inventory in the supply chain, 
and communication with the supply base is minimal. In 
fact, the boat manufacturer does not have any visibility 
past the Tier I suppliers. Adding to the complexity of this 
problem, each part of the supply chain is handled by dif­
ferent departments within the company.
In order to understand the supply chain, Pro Fishing 
has asked you to map its supply chain. To do so, it has 
identified a critical component to follow in the supply 
chain. After having the opportunity to interview supply 
chain participants, including suppliers, you have col­
lected the following information.
The component is manufactured overseas in China 
by the Tier I supplier, Manufacturing Inc. The Manufac­
turing Inc. production schedule is based on orders sent 
via fax from the Pro Fishing warehouse. It operates on a 
90-60-30–day forecast, along with a weekly order. Upon 
completion of the component, Manufacturing Inc. sends 
the component via truck to the Shanghai Port, where it is 
loaded onto a ship heading to the United States. Loading 
at the port takes 1 week, and truck transport takes 3 days. 
Manufacturing Inc. holds a 9-week finished goods buf­
fer inventory. Manufacturing time for each component is 
only about 3 days. The ship bound to the United States 
takes about 14 days to travel overseas. Upon arrival in 
the United States, the component is unloaded at the 
Los Angeles port. This takes about 5 days and customs 
inspects the shipment in Los Angeles. The goods travel 
by train to Chicago, which takes about 7 days. Goods are 
held in Chicago for about half a week. From there, the 
component is trucked to a Pro Fishing warehouse where 
the 6-week inventory buffer has been mandated. Ship­
ment to the Pro Fishing warehouse takes 2 days. From 
the warehouse, the components are trucked to plants in 
the United States triggered by electronic orders from 
each of the Pro Fishing plants.
In talking to Manufacturing Inc., Pro Fishing has 
learned that the component is made up of two main raw 
materials: one from China and the other from the United 
States. Due to the risk of running out of these raw materi­
als, Manufacturing Inc. maintains a 4-week buffer of the 
China-based raw materials and a 12-week buffer of the 
U.S.-based raw materials. These Tier II supplier orders 
Case: Pro Fishing Boats—A Value Stream Mapping Exercise

	
Lean Supply Chains	
Chapter 14	
377
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 Anything that does not add value from the custom­
er’s perspective.
	  2.	 An integrated set of activities designed to achieve 
production using minimal inventories of raw materi­
als, work-in-process, and finished goods.
	  3.	 The Toyota Production System is founded on these 
two philosophies.
	  4.	 The set of value- and non–value-adding activities 
required to design, order, and provide a product from 
concept to launch, order to delivery, and raw materi­
als to customers.
	  5.	 The Japanese philosophy that focuses on continuous 
improvement.
	  6.	 A philosophy in which similar parts are brought 
together in families for production purposes.
	  7.	 Means producing only what is needed when needed 
and no more.
	  8.	 A period of time during which the production sched­
ule cannot be changed.
	  9.	 Producing a mix of products that matches demand as 
closely as possible.
	10.	 A production control system that uses a signaling 
device to regulate the flow of material.
	11.		 If the lead time for an item is exactly five days, the 
demand is a constant four units per day, and the shipment 
container contains two units, how many kanban card sets 
would be needed? (Assume 0 percent safety stock.)
	12.	 A firm wants to justify smaller lot sizes economi­
cally. Management knows that it cannot change the 
cost to carry one unit in inventory because this is 
largely based on the value of the item. To justify a 
smaller lot size, what must it do?
are by formal purchase order only. It is interesting to note 
that Manufacturing Inc. uses these suppliers due to Pro 
Fishing’s strict supplier qualification requirements.
Questions
	1.	 Create a value stream map (VSM) of this supply 
chain. What other information is needed?
	2.	 Where is there risk for supply chain disruptions or 
stoppages to the flow of materials?
	3.	 Where do opportunities reside in improving supply 
chain operations and how has VSM helped reveal 
these?
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Waste  2. Lean production  3. Elimination of waste and respect for people  4. Value stream  5. Kaizen  6. Group
 technology  7. JIT (just-in-time) production  8. Freeze window  9. Uniform plant loading  10. Kanban  11. 10 card sets  12. Reduce setup cost

378
NEW WIDE LANE IN THE PANAMA CANAL
Much of the U.S. imports from Asia arrive by ship on the West Coast, and then get 
transferred to rail lines for transit to the rest of the country. On July 26, 2016, Panama 
rocked the world of logistics. That’s when it opened a fat new lane of its canal for big 
ships that can carry three times as much as vessels sailing the old channel. Larger 
vessels should make it cheaper to send cargo through the canal to ports in the East 
and on the Gulf Coast of the United States. Several logistics experts are calling the 
expansion a game changer and a threat to the western ports and railroads.
It takes about 18 days total to make the ship and 
train journey from Asia to the West Coast, and then 
across the country to East Coast businesses. When 
conditions are good, the all-water route through the 
Panama Canal takes about 22 days, roughly the same 
as via the Suez Canal—a competing route from Asia 
to the East Coast. At times, the sea voyages can take 
substantially longer, depending on ship speed and 
route congestion. 
The ship-to-rail route costs 10 percent to 25 percent 
more than the pure all-water route, but it is faster and usu­
ally more reliable. The economies of the expanded canal 
makes the pure all-water route even more attractive from 
a cost view. Shippers like alternatives and now there are 
actually three alternatives for moving goods from Asia to 
the eastern U.S., the enlarged Panama Canal, the Suez 
Canal, and the mixed-mode ship and train journey.
Logistics, 
Distribution, and 
Transportation
15
© EvrenKalinbacak/Getty Images RF
Learning Objectives
	LO15–1	 Explain what logistics is.
	LO15–2	 Contrast logistics and warehouse design alternatives.
	LO15–3	 Analyze logistics-driven location decisions.

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
379
A major issue in designing a great supply chain for manufactured goods is determining the 
way those items are moved from the manufacturing plant to the customer. For consumer prod­
ucts, this often involves moving product from the manufacturing plant to a warehouse and 
then to a retail store. You probably do not think about this often, but consider all those items 
with “Made in China” on the label. That sweatshirt probably has made a trip longer than you 
may ever make. If you live in Chicago in the United States and the sweatshirt is made in the 
Fujian region of China, that sweatshirt traveled over 6,600 miles, or 10,600 kilometers, nearly 
halfway around the world, to get to the retail store where you bought it. To keep the price of 
the sweatshirt down, that trip must be made as efficiently as possible. There is no telling how 
that sweatshirt made the trip. It might have been flown in an airplane or might have traveled 
in a combination of vehicles, possibly going by truck part of the way and by boat or plane the 
rest. Logistics is about this movement of goods through the supply chain.
APICS, the supply chain and operations professional organization, defines logistics as “the 
art and science of obtaining, producing, and distributing material and product in the proper 
place and in proper quantities.” This is a fairly broad definition, and this chapter will focus 
on how to analyze where we locate warehouses and plants and how to evaluate the movement 
of materials to and from those locations. The term international logistics refers to managing 
these functions when the movement is on a global scale. Clearly, if the China-made sweatshirt 
is sold in the United States or Europe, this involves international logistics.
There are companies that specialize in logistics, such as United Parcel Service (UPS), 
FedEx, and DHL. These global companies are in the business of moving everything from 
flowers to industrial equipment. Today, a manufacturing company most often will contract 
with one of those companies to handle many of its logistics functions. In this case, those 
transportation companies often are called a third-party logistics company. The most basic 
function would be simply moving the goods from one place to another. The logistics company 
also may provide additional services such as warehouse management, inventory control, and 
other customer service functions.
Logistics is big business, accounting for 8 to 9 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product, 
and growing. Today’s modern, efficient warehouse and distribution centers are the heart of 
logistics. These centers are carefully managed and efficiently operated to ensure the secure 
storage and quick flow of goods, services, and related information from the point of origin to 
the point of consumption.
LOGISTICS
logistics
The art and science of 
obtaining, producing, and 
distributing material and 
product in the proper 
place and in the proper 
quantities.
International logistics
All functions concerned 
with the movement of 
materials and finished 
goods on a global scale.
Third-party logistics 
company
A company that manages 
all or part of another 
company’s product 
delivery operations.
Each business day, 
FedEx Express moves 
more than 3.5 million 
packages through 
10 air express hubs 
around the globe.
© Lawrence K. Ho/Los 
Angeles Times/Getty Images
Explain what logistics is.
LO 15–1

380	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
The problem of deciding how best to transport goods from plants to customers is a complex 
one that affects the cost of a product. Major trade-offs related to the cost of transporting the 
product, speed of delivery, and flexibility to react to changes are involved. Information sys­
tems play a major role in coordinating activities and include activities such as allocating 
resources, managing inventory levels, scheduling, and order tracking. A full discussion of 
these systems is beyond the scope of this book, but we cover basic inventory control in other 
chapters.
Transportation Modes 
A key decision area is deciding how material will be transported. The Logistics-System 
Design Matrix shown in Exhibit 15.1 depicts the basic alternatives. There are six widely rec­
ognized modes of transportation: highway (trucks), water (ships), air (aircraft), rail (trains), 
pipelines, and hand delivery. Each mode is uniquely suited to handle certain types of prod­
ucts, as described next.
∙	 Highway (truck)    Actually, few products are moved without some highway transpor­
tation. The highway offers great flexibility for moving goods to virtually any location 
not separated by water. Size of the product, weight, and liquid or bulk can all be accom­
modated with this mode.
∙	 Water (ship)    Very high capacity and very low cost, but transit times are slow, and 
large areas of the world are not directly accessible to water carriers. This mode is espe­
cially useful for bulk items such as oil, coal, and chemical products.
∙	 Air    Fast but expensive. Small, light, expensive items are most appropriate for this 
mode of transportation.
∙	 Rail (trains)    This is a fairly low-cost alternative, but transit times can be long and 
may be subject to variability. The suitability of rail can vary depending on the rail infra­
structure. The European infrastructure is highly developed, making this an attractive 
alternative compared to trucks, while in the United States, the railroad infrastructure 
has declined over the last 50 years, making it less attractive.
DECISIONS RELATED TO LOGISTICS
Contrast logistics and 
warehouse design 
alternatives.
LO 15–2
Slow
Speed of delivery
Fast
Low
High
Cost
High
Low
Volume
Highway
Air
Hand
delivery
Pipeline
Rail
Water
Logistics-System Design Matrix: Framework Describing Logistics 
Processes
exhibit 15.1

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
381
The problem of facility location is faced by both new and existing businesses, and its solution 
is critical to a company’s eventual success. An important element in designing a company’s 
supply chain is the location of its facilities. For instance, 3M has moved a significant part of 
its corporate activity, including R&D, to the more temperate climate of Austin, Texas. Toys 
“R” Us has opened locations in Japan as part of its global strategy. Disney chose Shanghai for 
its Chinese theme park, and Boeing assembles the 787 Dreamliner in South Carolina. Manu­
facturing and service companies’ location decisions are guided by a variety of criteria defined 
by competitive imperatives. Criteria that influence manufacturing plant and warehouse loca­
tion planning are discussed next.
Proximity to Customers: For example, Japan’s NTN Driveshafts built a major plant in 
Columbus, Indiana, to be closer to major automobile manufacturing plants in the United 
States, whose buyers want their goods delivered yesterday. Such proximity also helps 
ensure that customer needs are incorporated into products being developed and built.
Business Climate: A favorable business climate can include the presence of similar-sized 
businesses, the presence of companies in the same industry and, in the case of international 
locations, the presence of other foreign companies. Probusiness government legislation 
∙	 Pipelines    This is highly specialized and limited to liquids, gases, and solids in slurry 
forms. No packaging is needed and the costs per mile are low. The initial cost to build a 
pipeline is very high.
∙	 Hand Delivery    This is the last step in many supply chains. Getting the product in the 
customer’s hand is often a slow and costly activity due to the high labor content.
Few companies use a single mode of transportation. Multimodal solutions are the norm, 
and finding the correct multimode strategies can be a significant problem. The problem of 
coordination and scheduling the carriers requires comprehensive information systems capable 
of tracking goods through the system. Standardized containers often are used so that a product 
can be transferred efficiently from a truck to an airplane or ship.
Warehouse Design
Special consolidation warehouses are used when shipments from various sources are pulled 
together and combined into larger shipments with a common destination. This improves the 
efficiency of the entire system. Cross-docking is an approach used in these consolidation 
warehouses, where, rather than making larger shipments, large shipments are broken down 
into small shipments for local delivery in an area. This often can be done in a coordinated 
manner so the goods are never stored in inventory.
Retailers receive shipments from many suppliers in their regional warehouses and imme­
diately sort those shipments for delivery to individual stores by using cross-docking systems 
coordinated by computerized control systems. This results in a minimal amount of inventory 
being carried in the warehouses.
Hub-and-spoke systems combine the idea of consolidation and that of cross-docking. 
Here, the warehouse is referred to as a “hub” and its sole purpose is sorting goods. Incoming 
goods are sorted immediately to consolidation areas, where each area is designated for ship­
ment to a specific location. Hubs are located in strategic locations near the geographic center 
of the region they are to serve to minimize the distance a good must travel.
Designing a system is an interesting and complex task. The following section focuses on 
the plant and warehouse location problem as representative of the types of logistics decisions 
that need to be made. Logistics is a broad topic, and its elements evolve as the value-added 
services provided by major logistics vendors expand. Having the proper network design is 
fundamental to efficiency in the industry.
LOCATING LOGISTICS FACILITIES
Cross-docking
An approach used in 
consolidation warehouses 
where, rather than making 
larger shipments, large 
shipments are broken 
down into small shipments 
for local delivery in an area.
Hub-and-spoke 
systems
Systems that combine the 
idea of consolidation and 
that of cross-docking.
Analyze logistics-driven 
location decisions.
LO 15–3

382	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Free trade zone
A closed facility (under the 
supervision of government 
customs officials) into 
which foreign goods can 
be brought without being 
subject to the payment of 
normal import duties.
Trading blocs
A group of countries 
that agree on a set of 
special arrangements 
governing the trading of 
goods between member 
countries. Companies may 
locate in places affected 
by the agreement to take 
advantage of new market 
opportunities.
and local government intervention to facilitate businesses locating in an area via subsidies, 
tax abatements, and other support are also factors.
Total Costs: The objective is to select a site with the lowest total cost. This includes 
regional costs, inbound distribution costs, and outbound distribution costs. Land, construc­
tion, labor, taxes, and energy costs make up the regional costs. In addition, there are hidden 
costs that are difficult to measure. These involve (1) excessive moving of preproduction 
material between locations before final delivery to the customers and (2) loss of customer 
responsiveness arising from locating away from the main customer base.
Infrastructure: Adequate road, rail, air, and sea transportation is vital. Energy and tele­
communications requirements also must be met. In addition, the local government’s will­
ingness to invest in upgrading infrastructure to the levels required may be an incentive to 
select a specific location.
Quality of Labor: The educational and skill levels of the labor pool must match the com­
pany’s needs. Even more important are their willingness and ability to learn.
Suppliers: A high-quality and competitive supplier base makes a given location suitable. 
The proximity of important suppliers’ plants also supports lean production methods.
Other Facilities: The location of other plants or distribution centers of the same company 
may influence a new facility’s location in the network. Issues of product mix and capacity 
are strongly interconnected to the location decision in this context.
Free Trade Zones: A foreign trade zone or a free trade zone is typically a closed facil­
ity (under the supervision of the customs department) into which foreign goods can be 
brought without being subject to the normal customs requirements. There are about 260 
such free trade zones in the United States today. Such specialized locations also exist in 
other countries. Manufacturers in free trade zones can utilize imported components used in 
the production of the final product and delay payment of customs duties until the product 
is shipped into the host country.
Political Risk: The fast-changing geopolitical scenes in numerous nations present exciting 
and challenging opportunities. But the extended phase of transformation that many coun­
tries are undergoing makes the decision to locate in those areas extremely difficult. Politi­
cal risks in both the country of location and the host country influence location decisions.
Government Barriers: Barriers to enter and locate in many countries are being removed 
today through legislation. Yet many nonlegislative and cultural barriers should be consid­
ered in location planning.
Trading Blocs: The Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) is one of the new 
trading blocs in our hemisphere. Such agreements influence location decisions, both 
within and outside trading bloc countries. Firms typically locate, or relocate, within a bloc 
to take advantage of new market opportunities or lower total costs afforded by the trading 
agreement. Other companies (those outside the trading bloc countries) decide on locations 
within the bloc so as not to be disqualified from competing in the new market. Examples 
include the location of various Japanese auto manufacturing plants in Europe before 1992, 
as well as recent moves by many communications and financial services companies into 
Mexico in a post-NAFTA environment.
Environmental Regulation: The environmental regulations that impact a certain industry 
in a given location should be included in the location decision. Besides measurable cost 
implications, these regulations influence the relationship with the local community.
Host Community: The host community’s interest in having the plant in its midst is a nec­
essary part of the evaluation process. Local educational facilities and the broader issue of 
quality of life are also important.
Competitive Advantage: An important decision for multinational companies is the nation 
in which to locate the home base for each distinct business. A company can have differ­
ent home bases for distinct businesses or segments. Competitive advantage is created at a 
home base where strategy is set, the core product and process technology are created, and 

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
383
787 Dreamliner Assembled in South 
Carolina from Components Sourced from 
around the World
Boeing has always assembled its large jets in Seattle, 
Washington, but that recently changed. Boeing rolled out 
the first jetliner made in the American South on April 27, 
2012, amid fireworks and the cheers of thousands of work­
ers. By 2016, the plant was producing 12 of the revolution­
ary aircraft per month and that is expected to increase to 14 
per month by 2020. 
OSCM AT WORK
Other than the new assembly location, the 787 uses 
global subcontractors who deliver completed sub-assem­
blies to the South Carolina plant. Wings, for example, are 
manufactured in Japan, horizontal stabilizers in Italy and 
South Korea, passenger doors in France, and cargo and 
access doors in Sweden. In order to move all these parts, 
Boeing modified four used 747-400 into 747 Dreamlifters, 
gigantic planes capable of carrying completed wings and 
large fuselage sections.
This radically different approach to building planes is 
designed to save cost and speed production.
Boeing workers gather around a 747 Dreamlifter at the company’s assembly plant in North Charleston, South Carolina.
© Stephen Morton/Bloomberg via Getty Images
a critical mass of production takes place. So a company should move its home base to a 
country that stimulates innovation and provides the best environment for global competi­
tiveness. This concept can also be applied to domestic companies seeking to gain sustain­
able competitive advantage. It partly explains the southeastern states’ recent emergence as 
the preferred corporate destination within the United States (that is, their business climate 
fosters innovation and low-cost production).
Plant Location Methods
As we will see, there are many techniques available for identifying potential sites for plants or 
other types of facilities. The process required to narrow the decision down to a particular area 
can vary significantly depending on the type of business and the competitive pressures that 
must be considered. As we have discussed, there are often many different criteria that need to 
be considered when selecting from the set of feasible sites.

384	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
In this section, we sample three different types of techniques that have proven to be very 
useful to many companies. The first is the factor-rating system that allows us to consider 
many different types of criteria using simple point-rating scales. Next, we consider the trans­
portation method of linear programming, a powerful technique for estimating the cost of 
using a network of plants and warehouses. Following this, we consider the centroid method, 
a technique often used by communications companies (cell phone providers) to locate their 
transmission towers. Finally, later in the chapter we consider how service firms such as 
McDonald’s and State Farm Insurance use statistical techniques to find desirable locations 
for their facilities.
Keep in mind that each of the techniques described here would be used within the con­
text of a more comprehensive strategy for locating a facility. Typically, the strategy would 
employ some type of search where major regions are first considered; it is narrowed down 
to areas, then to potential sites, and finally a choice is made between a few alternatives. 
Think of these techniques as simple tools that are used in different ways to zero in on a 
site. The factor-rating system is useful when nonquantitative factors are important. The 
linear programming and centroid methods are quantitative and may be tied to cost and 
service-related criteria. The statistical techniques are good when there is significant vari­
ability in criteria measures. The techniques are often used in combination to solve a real 
problem.
Fa c t o r - R a t i n g  S y s t e m s  Factor-rating systems are perhaps the most widely used 
of the general location techniques because they provide a mechanism to combine diverse 
factors in an easy-to-understand format.
By way of example, a refinery was assigned the following range of point values to major 
factors affecting a set of possible sites.
Range
Fuels in region
Power availability and reliability
Labor climate
Living conditions
Transportation
Water supply
Climate
Supplies
Tax policies and laws
0 to 330
0 to 200
0 to 100
0 to 100
0 to 50  
0 to 10  
0 to 50  
0 to 60  
0 to 20  
Each site was then rated against each factor, and a point value was selected from its 
assigned range. The sums of assigned points for each site were then compared. The site with 
the most points was selected.
A major problem with simple point-rating schemes is that they do not account for the 
wide range of costs that may occur within each factor. For example, there may be only a few 
hundred dollars’ difference between the best and worst locations on one factor and several 
thousands of dollars’ difference between the best and the worst on another. The first factor 
may have the most points available to it but provide little help in making the location decision; 
the second may have few points available but potentially show a real difference in the value of 
locations. To deal with this problem, it has been suggested that points possible for each factor 
be derived using a weighting scale based on standard deviations of costs rather than simply 
total cost amounts. In this way, relative costs can be considered.
T r a n s p o r t a t i o n  M e t h o d  o f  L i n e a r  P r o g r a m m i n g   The transportation 
method is a special linear programming method. (Note that linear programming is developed 
in detail in Appendix A.) It gets its name from its application to problems involving 
transporting products from several sources to several destinations. The two common objectives 
of such problems are to either (1) minimize the cost of shipping n units to m destinations or 
(2) maximize the profit of shipping n units to m destinations.
Factor-rating systems
An approach for selecting 
a facility location by 
combining a diverse set 
of factors. Point scales 
are developed for each 
criterion. Each potential site 
is then evaluated on each 
criterion and the points are 
combined to calculate a 
rating for the site.
Transportation method
A special linear 
programming method 
that is useful for solving 
problems involving 
transporting products from 
several sources to several 
destinations.

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
385
EXAMPLE 15.1: U.S. Pharmaceutical Company
Suppose the U.S. Pharmaceutical Company has four factories supplying the warehouses of 
four major customers and its management wants to determine the minimum-cost shipping 
schedule for its monthly output to these customers. Factory supply, warehouse demands, and 
shipping costs per case for these drugs are shown in Exhibit 15.2A.
The transportation matrix for this example appears in Exhibit 15.2B, where supply avail­
ability at each factory is shown in the far right column and the warehouse demands are shown 
in the bottom row. The shipping costs are shown in the small boxes within the cells. For 
example, the cost to ship one unit from the Indianapolis factory to the customer warehouse in 
Columbus is $25. The actual flows would be shown in the cells intersecting the factory rows 
and warehouse columns.
SOLUTION
This problem can be solved by using Microsoft Excel’s Solver function. If you are not famil­
iar with the Solver, you should study Appendix A, “Linear Programming Using the Excel 
Solver.” Exhibit 15.3 shows how the problem can be set up in the spreadsheet. Cells B6 
through E6 contain the requirement for each customer warehouse. Cells F2 through F5 con­
tain the amount that can be supplied from each plant. Cells B2 through E5 are the cost of 
shipping one unit for each potential plant and warehouse combination.
Cells for the solution of the problem are B9 through E12. These cells can initially be left 
blank when setting up the spreadsheet. Column cells F9 through F12 are the sum of each row, 
indicating how much is actually being shipped from each factory in the candidate solution. 
Similarly, row cells B13 through E13 are sums of the amount being shipped to each customer 
in the candidate solution. The Excel Sum function can be used to calculate these values.
Shipping Costs per Case (in Dollars)
Factory
Supply
Warehouse
Demand
From
To 
Columbus
To 
St. Louis
To 
Denver
To 
Los Angeles
Indianapolis
15
Columbus
10
Indianapolis
$25  
$35  
$36  
$60  
Phoenix
  6
St. Louis
12
Phoenix
55
30
25
25
New York
14
Denver
15
New York
40
50
80
90
Atlanta
11
Los Angeles
  9
Atlanta
30
40
66
75
A. Data for U.S. Pharmaceutical Transportation Problem
exhibit 15.2
B. Transportation Matrix for U.S. Pharmaceutical Problem
To
From
46
46
Phoenix
Indianapolis
New York
Atlanta
Destination
requirements
10
25
55
40
30
35
30
50
40
36
25
80
66
60
25
90
75
12
15
9
Columbus
St. Louis
Denver
Los Angeles
Factory supply
15
6
14
11

386	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
The cost of the candidate solution is calculated in cells B16 through E19. Multiplying the 
amount shipped in the candidate solution by the cost per unit of shipping over that particular 
route makes this calculation. For example, multiplying B2 by B9 in cell B16 gives the cost of 
shipping between Indianapolis and Columbus for the candidate solution. The total cost shown 
in cell F20 is the sum of all these individual costs.
To solve the problem, the Excel Solver application needs to be accessed. The Solver is 
found by selecting Data and then Solver from the Excel menu. A screen similar to what is 
shown here should appear. If you cannot find Solver at that location, the required add-in might 
not have been activated when Excel was initially installed on your computer.
Solver parameters now need to be set. First, set the target cell. 
This is the cell where the total cost associated with the solution is 
calculated. In our sample problem, this is cell F20, which sums the 
values in cells B16 through E19. Next, we need to indicate that 
we are minimizing this cell. Selecting the “Min” button does this. 
The location of our solution is indicated in the “By Changing Vari­
able Cells.” These cells are B9 through E12 in our example.
Next, we need to indicate the constraints for our problem. For 
our transportation problem, we must be sure customer demand 
is met and we do not exceed the capacity of our manufacturing 
plants. To ensure that demand is met, click on “Add” and highlight 
the range of cells where we have calculated the total amount being 
shipped to each customer. This range is B13 to E13 in our exam­
ple. Next select “=” indicating that we want the amount shipped 
to equal demand. Finally, on the right side enter the range of cells 
where the actual customer demand is stated in our spreadsheet. 
This range is B6 to E6 in our example.
The second set of constraints that ensures that the capacity of 
our manufacturing plants is not exceeded is entered similarly. The 
range of cells that indicate how much is being shipped from each 
Excel Screen Showing the U.S. Pharmaceutical Problem
exhibit 15.3
Excel screen shots from Microsoft Excel. © 2010 Microsoft 
Corporation

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
387
Centroid Method
The centroid method is a technique for locating single facilities that considers the existing 
facilities, the distances between them, and the volumes of goods to be shipped. The tech­
nique is often used to locate intermediate or distribution warehouses. In its simplest form, this 
method assumes that inbound and outbound transportation costs are equal, and it does not 
include special shipping costs for less than full loads.
Another major application of the centroid method today is the location of communication 
towers in urban areas. Examples include radio, TV, and cell phone towers. In this application, 
the goal is to find sites that are near clusters of customers, thus ensuring clear radio signals. 
The centroid method finds a simple mathematical point. Once it is found, the problem should 
consider qualitative factors such as geography, roads, and utilities to find an exact location.
The centroid method begins by placing the existing locations on a coordinate grid system. 
Coordinates are usually based on longitude and latitude measures due to the rapid adoption of 
GPS systems for mapping locations. To keep it simple for our examples, we use arbitrary X, Y 
coordinates. Exhibit 15.4 shows an example of a grid layout.
The centroid is found by calculating the X and Y coordinates that result in the minimal 
transportation cost. We use the formulas
	
Cx = ​ ∑dixVi 
_____ 
∑Vi
  ​    Cy = ​ 
∑diyVi 
_____ 
∑Vi
  ​	
​​[​15.1​]​
where
Cx = X coordinate of the centroid
Cy = Y coordinate of the centroid
dix = X coordinate of the ith location
diy = Y coordinate of the ith location
Vi = Volume of goods moved to or from the ith location
factory is F9 to F12. These values need to be less than or equal to (< =) the capacity of each 
factory, which is in cells F2 to F5.
Two options need to be set for solving transportation problems. First, set the solving 
method to “Simplex LP.” This tells the Solver that there are no nonlinear calculations in our 
spreadsheet. This is important because the Solver can use a very efficient algorithm to cal­
culate the optimal solution to this problem if this condition exists. Next, check the “Make 
Unconstrained Variables Non-Negative” box. This tells Solver that the values in our solution 
need to be greater than or equal to zero. In transportation problems, shipping negative quanti­
ties does not make any sense. Click “Solve” to actually solve the problem. Solver will notify 
you that it found a solution. Indicate that you want that solution saved. Finally, click OK to go 
back to the main spreadsheet. The solution should be in cells B9 to E12.
The transportation method can be used to solve many different types of problems if it is 
applied innovatively. For example, it can be used to test the cost impact of different candidate 
locations on the entire production–distribution network. To do this, we might add a new row 
that contains the unit shipping cost from a factory in a new location, say, Dallas, to the exist­
ing set of customer warehouses, along with the total amount it could supply. We could then 
solve this particular matrix for minimum total cost. Next we would replace the factory located 
in Dallas in the same row of the matrix with a factory at a different location, Houston, and 
again solve for minimum total cost. Assuming the factories in Dallas and Houston would be 
identical in other important respects, the location resulting in the lower total cost for the net­
work would be selected.
For additional information about using the Solver, see Appendix A, “Linear Programming 
Using the Excel Solver.”
Centroid method
A technique for locating 
single facilities that 
considers the existing 
facilities, the distances 
between them, and the 
volumes of goods to be 
shipped.

388	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
500
400
300
200
100
0
100
200
300
X
Y
400
500
Plant
Distributor
* Centroid (308, 217)
Thousand Oaks (25, 450)
Glendale (350, 400)
Anaheim (400, 150)
Long Beach (325, 75)
La Habra (450, 350)
Grid Map for Centroid Example
exhibit 15.4
Locations
Gallons of 
Gasoline 
per Month 
(000,000)
Long Beach 
1,500 
Anaheim 
   250 
La Habra 
   450 
Glendale 
   350 
Thousand Oaks 
   450 
EXAMPLE 15.2: HiOctane Refining Company
HiOctane Refining Company needs to locate an intermediate holding facility between its 
refining plant in Long Beach and its major distributors. Exhibit 15.4 shows the coordinate 
map and the amount of gasoline shipped to or from the plant and distributors.
In this example, for the Long Beach location (the first location), dix = 325, diy = 75, and 
Vi = 1,500.
SOLUTION
Using the information in Exhibit 15.4, we can calculate the coordinates of the centroid:
​ 
​C​ x​
​ 
= ​ ​(​325 × 1,500​)​ + ​(​400 × 250​)​ + ​(​450 × 450​)​ + ​(​350 × 350​)​ + ​(​25 × 450​)​ 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________ 
 
 
 
1,500 + 250 + 450 + 350 + 450 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= ​ 923,750 
______ 
3,000  ​ = 307.9
​ 
 
​C​ y​
​ 
= ​ ​(​75 × 1,500​)​ + ​(​150 × 250​)​ + ​(​350 × 450​)​ + ​(​400 × 350​)​ + ​(​450 × 450​)​ 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________ 
 
 
 
1,500 + 250 + 450 + 350 + 450 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= ​ 650,000 
______ 
3,000  ​ = 216.7
 
​
This gives management the X and Y coordinates of approximately 308 and 217, respec­
tively, and provides an initial starting point to search for a new site. By examining the location 
of the calculated centroid on the grid map, we can see that it might be more cost-efficient to 
ship directly between the Long Beach plant and the Anaheim distributor than to ship via a 
warehouse near the centroid. Before a location decision is made, management would probably 
recalculate the centroid, changing the data to reflect this (that is, decrease the gallons shipped 
from Long Beach by the amount Anaheim needs and remove Anaheim from the formula).
Locating Service Facilities
Because of the variety of service firms and the relatively low cost of establishing a service 
facility compared to one for manufacturing, new service facilities are far more common than 
new factories and warehouses. Indeed, there are few communities in which rapid population 

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
389
growth has not been paralleled by concurrent rapid growth in retail outlets, restaurants, 
municipal services, and entertainment facilities.
Services typically have multiple sites to maintain close contact with customers. The loca­
tion decision is closely tied to the market selection decision. If the target market is college-age 
groups, locations in retirement communities—despite desirability in terms of cost, resource 
availability, and so forth—are not viable alternatives. Market needs also affect the number of 
sites to be built and the size and characteristics of the sites. Whereas manufacturing location 
decisions are often made by minimizing costs, many service location decision techniques 
maximize the profit potential of various sites. Next, we present a multiple regression model 
that can be used to help select good sites.
EXAMPLE 15.3: Screening Hotel Location Sites
Selecting good sites is crucial to a hotel chain’s success. Of the four major marketing consid­
erations (price, product, promotion, and location), location and product have been shown to 
be most important for multisite firms. As a result, hotel chain owners who can pick good sites 
quickly have a distinct competitive advantage.
Exhibit 15.5 shows the initial list of variables included in a study to help a hotel chain 
screen potential locations for its new hotels. Data were collected on 57 existing sites. Anal­
ysis of the data identified the variables that correlated with operating profit in two years. 
(See Exhibit 15.6.)
SOLUTION
An introduction into how regression models are constructed is included in Chapter 18. The 
details of how variables are selected for inclusion in the model are beyond the scope of this 
book. Basically the variables that are the most strongly correlated (as shown in Exhibit 15.6) 
are used in a linear mathematical model to maximize the fit between the profitability and 
characteristics of each potential site. The correlations are a relative measure of the amount of 
statistical variation explained by each variable. Variables with values closer to 1 or  –1 explain 
more variation than those closer to zero.
The analysis done by the hotel chain indicated that the best variables to include in the 
model were the following:
	∙	 State population per inn (STATE)
∙	 Room rate for the inn (PRICE)
∙	 Square root of the income of the area (INCOME)
	∙	 College enrollment within four miles (COLLEGE)
The final form for this model is as follows:
​
Profitability
​ 
=
​ 
39.05
​ 
−
​ 
5.41 × State  population per inn (1,000)
​ 
 
 
 
 
​​ 
​​  + 5.86​  ×​  Room rate for the inn​ 
 
 
 
​​ 
​​  −  3.91​  ×​  Square root of the income of the area (1,000)​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
​
​ 
+ 1.75
​ 
×
​ 
College enrollment within 4 miles
 
​
The model shows that profitability is negatively affected by the state population per inn, 
positively affected by room rate, negatively affected by area income (the inns do better in 
lower-income areas), and positively affected by colleges nearby.
The hotel chain implemented the model on a spreadsheet and routinely uses the spread­
sheet to screen potential real estate acquisitions. The founder and president of the hotel 
chain has accepted the model’s validity and no longer feels obligated to personally select 
the sites.
This example shows that a specific model can be obtained from the requirements of service 
organizations and used to identify the most important features in site selection.

390	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Independent Variables Collected for the Initial Model-Building Stage
Category
Name
Description
Competitive
INNRATE
PRICE
RATE
RMS 1
RMSTOTAL
ROOMSINN
Inn price
Room rate for the inn
Average competitive room rate
Hotel rooms within 1 mile
Hotel rooms within 3 miles
Inn rooms
Demand generators
CIVILIAN
COLLEGE
HOSP1
HOSPTOTL
HVYIND
LGTIND
MALLS
MILBLKD
MILITARY
MILTOT
OFC1
OFCTOTAL
OFCCBD
PASSENGR
RETAIL
TOURISTS
TRAFFIC
VAN
Civilian personnel on base
College enrollment within 4 miles
Hospital beds within 1 mile
Hospital beds within 4 miles
Heavy industrial employment
Light industrial acreage
Shopping mall square footage
Military base blocked
Military personnel
MILITARY+CIVLIAN
Office space within 1 mile
Office space within 4 miles
Office space in Central Business District
Airport passengers enplaned
Scale ranking of retail activity
Annual tourists
Traffic count
Airport van
Demographic
EMPLYPCT
INCOME
POPULACE
Unemployment percentage
Average family income
Residential population
Market awareness
AGE
NEAREST
STATE
URBAN
Years inn has been open
Distance to nearest inn
State population per inn
Urban population per inn
Physical
ACCESS
ARTERY
DISTCBD
SIGNVIS
Accessibility
Major traffic artery
Distance to downtown
Sign visibility
exhibit 15.5
Variable
Year 1
Year 2
ACCESS
AGE
COLLEGE
DISTCBD
EMPLYPCT
INCOME
MILTOT
NEAREST
OFCCBD
POPULACE
PRICE
RATE
SIGNVIS
STATE
TRAFFIC
URBAN
.20
.29
−.22   
−.51   
.30
.30
.38
.25
−.32   
.32
−.22   
.49
.25
−.22   
−.22   
−.23   
.22
.35
.58
.27
−.33   
−.26   
A Summary of the Variables that Correlated with Operating Margin
exhibit 15.6

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
391
Concept Connections
LO 15–1   Explain what logistics is.
	∙	 Logistics covers the entire scope of obtaining, pro­
ducing, and distributing material and product to the 
proper place and in the correct quantities.
	∙	 The focus here is on the movement of material and the 
location of warehouses and manufacturing plants with 
consideration of the cost of material movement.
Summary
	∙	 Third-party logistics companies, such as FedEx and 
DHL, provide services to many companies.
Key Terms
Logistics  Management functions that support the com­
plete cycle of material flow: from the purchase and 
internal control of production materials; to the planning 
and control of work-in-process; to the purchasing, ship­
ping, and distribution of the finished product.
International logistics  All functions concerned with the 
movement of materials and finished goods on a global scale.
Third-party logistics company  A company that man­
ages all or part of another company’s product delivery 
operations.
LO 15–2   Contrast logistics and warehouse design alternatives.
Summary
	∙	 Decision related to how material will be transported 
and where plants and warehouses are located have an 
impact on the cost of the product.
	∙	 Trade-offs relate to the cost of transporting the prod­
uct, delivery speed, and the ability to efficiently react 
to changes in plans.
	∙	 Transportation alternatives, called “modes” of trans­
portation, include water, rail, highways, air, pipelines, 
and hand delivery. Often, multiple modes are used as a 
product moves through the supply chain.
	∙	 Warehouses and distribution centers are used to con­
solidate shipments from various sources to improve 
the efficiency of the supply chain.
	∙	 Finding the optimal logistics-system design—consisting 
of manufacturing plants, distribution centers and 
warehouses, and, ultimately, delivery to the final cus­
tomer—is a complex task.
Key Terms
Cross-docking  An approach used in consolidation ware­
houses where, rather than making larger shipments, large 
shipments are broken down into small shipments for 
local delivery in an area.
Hub-and-spoke systems  Systems that combine the idea 
of consolidation and that of cross-docking.
LO 15–3   Analyze logistics-driven location decisions.
	∙	 There are a variety of criteria that go beyond cost for 
determining the location of the facilities that form a 
company’s supply chain.
	∙	 The factor-rating system is an analytical tool that 
allows consideration of many different types of crite­
ria using point-rating scales for each criterion.
	∙	 Linear programming, in particular the transporta­
tion method, is useful when transportation cost is the 
major criterion in the decision.
Summary
	∙	 A third technique is the centroid method, which is use­
ful for finding desirable geographic coordinates for a 
facility such as a cellphone tower.
	∙	 Locating service type businesses is often very depen­
dent on how close the contact needs to be to custom­
ers. For example, an automatic teller machine for a 
bank needs to be in close proximity to existing and 
potential customers.

392	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Key Terms
Free trade zone  A closed facility (under the supervi­
sion of government customs officials) into which foreign 
goods can be brought without being subject to the pay­
ment of normal import duties.
Trading blocs  A group of countries that agree on a set 
of special arrangements governing the trading of goods 
between member countries. Companies may locate in 
places affected by the agreement to take advantage of 
new market opportunities.
Factor-rating system  An approach for selecting a facil­
ity location by combining a diverse set of factors. Point 
scales are developed for each criterion. Each potential 
site is then evaluated on each criterion and the points are 
combined to calculate a rating for the site.
Transportation method  A special linear programming 
method that is useful for solving problems involving 
transporting products from several sources to several 
destinations.
Centroid method  A technique for locating single facili­
ties that considers the existing facilities, the distances 
between them, and the volumes of goods to be shipped.
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Green Energy Technologies (GET) is planning to locate a new solar panel manufacturing 
plant in the southeastern United States to meet strongly growing demand in that market. It 
is considering three cities for this new plant: Montgomery, Alabama; Atlanta, Georgia; and 
Charleston, North Carolina. It has developed a list of important factors to consider in making 
its decision. After making site visits to each of the three cities, the facility location team has 
rated each of the cities as shown in the following table.
Solved Problems
LO 15–1
City Ratings
Factor
Max Points
Montgomery
Atlanta
Charleston
Availability of labor
Availability of technical skills
Transportation infrastructure
Warehousing availability/costs
Proximity to customers
Proximity to suppliers
Taxation structure
Quality of life
Climate
60
50
40
40
35
25
15
10
  5
55
37
34
30
22
25
12
  7
  3
52
46
37
33
27
22
10
  8
  3
48
41
32
28
25
20
14
  9
  4
Based on this factor-rating system and the points assigned by the facility location team, which 
location appears to be the best choice?
Solution
The difficulty in applying a factor-rating system lies in the design of the system and the evalu­
ation of each potential site on every factor. Once this is accomplished, evaluating the results is 
a simple matter of adding up the total points for each candidate location. Based on the ratings 
shown, the point totals are as follows.
Montgomery
225
Atlanta
238
Charleston
221
Based on the results of the rating system, Atlanta would appear to be the best choice.
Key Formulas
Centroid
 ​[​15.1​]​	 	
Cx = ​ ∑dixVi 
_____ 
∑Vi
  ​    Cy = ​ 
∑diyVi 
_____ 
∑Vi
  ​	

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
393
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Industrial Packaging Solutions (IPS) is a manufacturer of corrugated fiberboard shipping 
boxes used by companies across the United States. It sells to wholesalers, who in turn sell to 
resellers or end-user customers. Final products are consolidated on standard shipping pallets 
of uniform dimensions and weight. Because of this, the cost to ship a pallet to a single destina­
tion is the same regardless of the type of box loaded on the pallet. The standard unit for sales 
and operations planning at IPS is a pallet load.
After recently opening a new factory to satisfy growing demand for its products, IPS is 
concerned about allocating demand from its customers to the facilities in its production net­
work. It wants to do so in a way that minimizes the total cost of shipping final products to the 
wholesalers.
It currently has three factories that service a network of eight major wholesalers. Rel­
evant data for the next year are shown in the following tables.
Factory Location
Production
Capacity
(pallets × 1,000)
Wholesaler Location
Demand
(pallets × 1,000)
Denver, CO
Chicago, IL
Baltimore, MD
25
50
35
Spokane, WA
Los Angeles, CA
Kansas City, MO
Minneapolis, MN
Indianapolis, IN
Atlanta, GA
New York, NY
Orlando, FL
 8.5
19.6
 9.3
 8.8
11.8
13.6
17.2
 8.4
Based on contracts with its transportation suppliers, IPS is confident that the following trans­
portation rates will be valid over the next year. Rates provided are to transport one pallet of 
product. There is no quantity discount given for volume shipments.
Destination City and Transportation Rates
Factory Location
Spokane
L.A.
K.C.
Minn.
Indy
Atlanta
N.Y.
Orlando
Denver, CO
Chicago, IL
Baltimore, MD
$42
  65
  75
$49
  69
  77
$45
  49
  68
$54
  38
  62
$56
  32
  43
$65
  45
  44
$70
  50
  35
$72
  55
  38
Use the transportation method of linear programming to develop a low-cost transportation 
plan for IPS for the upcoming year.
Solution
The first step is to consolidate the capacity, demand, and cost data in a single table. This table 
is shown as follows. Note that the capacity and demand numbers have been converted to single 
pallets to match the transportation cost units. You could instead convert the transportation cost 
data into 1,000 pallet units. Either way is fine, as long as you have consistent units for all data.
Destination City and Transportation Rates
Factory Location
Spokane
L.A.
K.C.
Minn.
Indy
Atlanta
N.Y.
Orlando Capacity
Denver, CO
$42
$49
$45
$54
$56
$465
$70
$72
25,000
Chicago, IL
$65
$69
$49
$38
$32
$45
$50
$55
50,000
Baltimore, MD
$75
$77
$68
$62
$43
$44
$35
$38
35,000
Demand:
8,500
19,600
9,300
8,800
11,800
13,600
17,200
8,400
The next step is to insert this table in Excel, along with a copy of the table to indicate the can­
didate solution and a smaller table to calculate the costs based on the candidate solution. The 
following screen capture from Excel shows how this would be set up.
The blank cells in the candidate solution table represent the amount to ship from each 
factory to each destination—they will be set up as changing cells in Solver. The Demand Met 
LO 15–2

394	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
row in that table sums up each column in the table, telling us how much demand is being 
met in each city by our solution. For example, the formula in cell B14 is SUM(B11:B13). 
Similarly, the Capacity Used column sums up each row in the table, telling us how much 
product is shipped from each plant in our solution. For example, the formula in cell J11 is 
SUM(Bl1:I11). The cells in the Cost Calculations table each multiply the relevant cells from 
the candidate solution and the cost data tables, telling us how much our candidate solution 
costs for each factory–customer combination. For example, the formula in B18 is B11*B4. 
The Total cell simply sums up all the costs in the table.
Next, we need to set up Solver to let it solve the problem for us. This is fairly easy given 
the structure of the tables. We need to tell Solver the following things:
∙		 We want to minimize the total cost.
∙		 It can change the values of the empty cells in the Candidate Solution table.
∙		 The amount shipped to each customer must match the amount demanded.
∙		 The amount shipped from each factory must not exceed the capacity of that factory.
After starting Solver, we would set up the parameters as shown. Be sure to set the options to 
“Assume Linear Model” and “Assume Non-Negative.” (The latter could also be accomplished 
by adding a constraint that all changing cells be greater than or equal to zero.)

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
395
After running Solver, we get the following solution:
If IPS follows the plan presented by Solver, it will spend a little over $4 million to ship its 
products to its customers next year. The recommended plan should not be too surprising—
Denver primarily satisfies the West Cost demand, Chicago serves the middle of the country, 
and Baltimore serves the East. This makes sense given the reality that transportation costs 
increase as distance traveled increases. Further, we can see that both Denver and Baltimore 
will max out their capacity in this plan, with Chicago using only about 75 percent of capacity.
LO 15–3
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
Cool Air, a manufacturer of automotive air conditioners, currently produces its XB-300 line 
at three different locations: plant A, plant B, and plant C. Recently, management decided to 
build all compressors, a major product component, in a separate dedicated facility, plant D.
Using the centroid method and the information displayed in Exhibit 15.7, determine a 
location for plant D. Assume a linear relationship between volumes shipped and shipping 
costs (no premium charges).
Plant
Compressors 
Required per Year
A
6,000
B
8,200
C
7,000
Plant Location Matrix
Exhibit 15.7
400
300
200
100
100
200
X
Y
300
400
Plant B (100, 300)
Plant C (275, 380)
Plant D (172, 263)
Plant A (150, 75)

396	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Solution
Discussion Questions
	1.	 What motivations typically cause firms to initiate a facilities location or relocation project?
	2.	 List five major reasons why a new electronic components manufacturing firm should move 
into your city or town.
	3.	 Recent figures show that almost 60 percent of the volume of freight movements in the 
United States ship by truck. Railroads are far more fuel efficient on a ton-mile basis—CSX 
advertises it can move a ton of freight 468 miles on a gallon of fuel. Why is it that rail does 
not have a greater share of the freight market in the United States?
	4.	 What is required to make cross-docking a viable solution for a logistics provider?
	5.	 What are the pros and cons of relocating a small or mid-sized manufacturing firm (that 
makes mature products) from the United States to China?
	6.	 How do facility location decisions differ for service facilities and manufacturing plants?
	7.	 If you could locate your new software development company anywhere in the world, which 
place would you choose, and why?
LO15-1
LO15-2
LO15-3
Objective Questions
	1.	 Some manufacturing firms contract with an outside company to manage the firm’s logis­
tics functions. What is the general term for a firm that provides such services?
	2.	 Logistics accounts for about what percent of the U.S. gross domestic product?
	3.	 What mode of transportation is involved in the movement of the greatest number of 
products?
	4.	 What mode of transportation is limited to specialized products such as liquids and gases?
	5.	 A manufacturer has decided to locate a new factory in the northwestern United States to 
serve the growing demand in that market. It has narrowed the potential sites down to two 
finalists: city A and city B. It has developed a list of important factors to consider in select­
ing a site, and rated each as shown in the following table.
Factor
City A
City B
Utility rates
100
115
Availability of skilled labor
  78
  75
Tax rates
  40
  35
Transportation
  46
  38
Proximity to suppliers
  35
  34
Quality of life
  19
  16
	
Based on these data, which city appears to be the better choice?
LO15-1
LO15-2
LO15-3
​
​d​ 1x​ = 150  ​d​ 1y​ = 75    ​V​ 1​ = 6,000
​ 
 
 
​d​ 2x​ = 100  ​d​ 2y​ = 300  ​V​ 2​ = 8,200
​ 
 
 
​d​ 3x​ = 275  ​d​ 3y​ = 380  ​V​ 3​ = 7,000
​ 
 
 
​C​ x​ = ​ 
∑ ​d​ ix​V​ i​ 
______ 
∑ ​V​ i​  ​ = ​ ​(​150 × 6,000​)​ + ​(​100 × 8,200​)​ + ​(​275 × 7,000​)​ 
 
 
 
_______________________________ 
 
 
6,000 + 8,200 + 7,000 
​ = 171.9​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​C​ y​ = ​ 
∑ ​d​ iy​V​ i​ 
______ 
∑ ​V​ i​  ​ = ​ ​(​75 × 6,000​)​ + ​(​300 × 8,200​)​ + ​(​380 × 7,000​)​ 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
 
 
21,200 
​ = 262.7
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
Plant D[​C​ x​, ​C​ y​ ] = D[172,263 ]
 
​	

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
397
	6.	 Logistics Consultants Inc. (LCI) provides various logistics analysis services to other 
firms, including facility location decisions. It has just completed a project for a major cus­
tomer, but on the eve of its presentation it discovered a computer malfunction had partially 
deleted some of its data. One file that was impacted contains the final factor rating results. 
Following are the partial results it was able to recover. As you’ll notice, some ratings are 
missing.
Ratings
Factor
Max Points
City X
City Y
Availability of labor
Availability of utilities
Transportation infrastructure
Warehousing availability/costs
Proximity to customers
Business climate
Taxation structure
Quality of life
150
130
  80
  75
  65
  40
  30
  25
130
122
  73
  70
  59
  30
  15
  22
123
110
  63
  24
  17
	 	 If you were the project manager for LCI, what would you do given that you are missing 
some crucial data?
	7.	 Bindley Corporation has a one-year contract to supply motors for all washing machines 
produced by Rinso Ltd. Rinso manufactures the washers at four locations around the coun­
try: New York, Fort Worth, San Diego, and Minneapolis. Plans call for the following num­
bers of washing machines to be produced at each location.
New York
Fort Worth
San Diego
Minneapolis
50,000
70,000
60,000
80,000
	 	 Bindley has three plants that can produce the motors. The plants and production capacities 
are
Boulder
Macon
Gary
100,000
100,000
150,000
	 	 Due to varying production and transportation costs, the profit Bindley earns on each 1,000 
units depends on where they were produced and where they were shipped. The following 
table gives the accounting department estimates of the dollar profit per unit. (Shipment 
will be made in lots of 1,000.)
Shipped to
Produced at
New York
Fort Worth
San Diego
Minneapolis
Boulder
Macon
Gary
 7
20
 8
11
17
18
 8
12
13
13
10
16
	 	    Given profit maximization as a criterion, Bindley would like to determine how many 
motors should be produced at each plant and how many motors should be shipped from 
each plant to each destination.
	
a.	 Develop a transportation grid for this problem.
	
b.	 Find the optimal solution using Microsoft Excel.
	8.	 Rent’R Cars is a multisite car rental company in the city. It is trying out a new “return the 
car to the location most convenient for you” policy to improve customer service. But this 
means that the company has to constantly move cars around the city to maintain required 

398	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
	       a.	 Find the solution that minimizes moving costs using Microsoft Excel.
	       b		 What would you have to do to the costs to assure that A always sends a car to D as part 
of the optimal solution?
  9.	 Sycamore Plastics (SP) is a manufacturer of polyethylene plastic pellets used as a raw mate­
rial by manufacturers of plastic goods around the U.S. SP currently operates four manufac­
turing centers in Philadelphia, PA; Atlanta, GA; St. Louis, MO; and Salt Lake City, UT. The 
plants have different capacities and production costs, as indicated in the following table.
Plant
Maximum Capacity 
(× 100,000 lbs.)
Prod. Costs 
(per 1,000 lbs.)
Philadelphia
Atlanta
St. Louis
Salt Lake City
 7.5
 9.0
12.0
10.3
$325.00
$275.00
$305.00
$250.00
	 	 	    SP currently has six contract customers located in New York City; Birmingham, AL; 
Terre Haute, IN; Dallas, TX; Spokane, WA; and San Diego, CA. Transportation costs 
between the plants and various customers, as well as contracted demand from each cus­
tomer, are shown in the following table.  (Answers in Appendix D)
Transport Costs per 1,000 lbs.
From/To
NYC
Birmingham
Terre Haute
Dallas
Spokane
San Diego
Philadelphia
Atlanta
St. Louis
Salt Lake City
$45
$55
$57
$72
$52
$42
$60
$71
$56
$58
$50
$67
$62
$59
$54
$57
$78
$80
$65
$52
$85
$82
$70
$60
Total Demand 
  (× 1,000 lbs.)
525
415
925
600
325
400
	       a.	 Create a solver model and find the optimal solution to help SP develop a distribution 
plan that will minimize costs to supply the customers’ demand.
	       b		 Comment briefly on your solution. Beyond the obvious, does your proposed solution 
have any other implications for SP?
	10.	 A small manufacturing facility is being planned that will feed parts to three heavy manu­
facturing facilities. The locations of the current plants with their coordinates and volume 
requirements are given in the following table.
Plant Location
Coordinates (x, y)
Volume (Parts per Year)
Peoria
Decatur
Joliet
300, 320
375, 470
470, 180
4,000
6,000
3,000
	 	   Use the centroid method to determine a location for this new facility. (Answer in Appen­
dix D)
	 	 	 levels of vehicle availability. The supply and demand for economy cars, and the total cost 
of moving these vehicles between sites, are shown as follows.
To
From
165
165
B
A
C
Demand
50
$9
9
5
$8
8
3
$6
8
3
$5
0
10
60
25
30
D
E
F
G
Supply
50
40
75

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
399
	11.	 DM Office Products (DMOP) is a wholesale supplier of office products with one facil­
ity in Pennsylvania. It has decided to build a new distribution warehouse in the state of 
New York to help serve the growing demand in that market. It has four major customers 
located in Buffalo, Syracuse, Albany, and New York City. Though New York City is 
the largest market, it also has the greatest competition, and DMOP is not a major player 
there. When DMOP ships an order to a customer, it uses its own small fleet of two trucks 
to deliver, so the cost of delivery is essentially the same for a full or partially full truck. 
The expected number of annual shipments to each city and their coordinates on an x, y 
grid is shown in the following table.
City
x-coordinates
y-coordinates
Number of shipments
Buffalo
Syracuse
Albany
New York
  325
1,420
2,300
2,275
850
900
630
 25
 78
 82
122
 62
	 	 	 Use the centroid method to recommend a location for the new warehouse for DMOP. 
Round your coordinates to one decimal place.
	12.	 Santa Cruz Bottling is a manufacturer of organic soft drinks on the coast of central 
California. Its products are enjoying a growing reputation and increased demand through­
out the American Southwest. Because of the high cost of transporting soft drinks, it is 
considering a new plant to serve the states of New Mexico and Arizona. A key concern in 
its search for a new location is the resultant transportation costs to serve its key markets. 
Following is a list of cities where its main wholesale customers are located, along with 
estimated annual demand in cases of product for each.
City
x-coordinate
y-coordinate
Number of cases
Phoenix
Tucson
Albuquerque
Santa Fe
250
350
800
850
250
125
450
520
25,000
20,000
28,000
17,000
	       a.	 Use the centroid method to recommend a location for the new bottling plant. Round 
your coordinates to one decimal place.
	       b.	 Do you have any concerns about the result? How would you deal with them?
W. W. Grainger, Inc., is a leading supplier of mainte­
nance, repair, and operating (MRO) products to busi­
nesses and institutions in the United States, Canada, and 
Mexico, with an expanding presence in Japan, India, 
China, and Panama. The company works with more than 
3,000 suppliers and runs an extensive Website (www
.grainger.com) where Grainger offers nearly 900,000 
products. The products range from industrial adhesives 
used in manufacturing, to hand tools, janitorial supplies, 
lighting equipment, and power tools. When something 
is needed by one of its 1.8 million customers, it is often 
needed quickly, so quick service and product availability 
are key drivers to Grainger’s success.
Your assignment  involves studying U.S. distribution 
in Grainger’s supply chain. Grainger works with over 250 
suppliers in the China and Taiwan region. These suppliers 
produce products to Grainger’s specifications and ship to the 
United States using ocean freight carriers from four major 
ports in China and Taiwan. From these ports, product is 
shipped to U.S. entry ports in either Seattle, Washington, or 
Los Angeles, California. After passing through customs, the 
20- and 40-foot containers are shipped by rail to Grainger’s 
central distribution center in Kansas City, Kansas. The con­
tainers are unloaded and quality is checked in Kansas City. 
From there, individual items are sent to regional warehouses 
in nine U.S. locations, a Canadian site, and Mexico. 
Grainger: Reengineering the China/U.S. Supply Chain
Analytics Exercise: Distribution Center Location

400	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
little would need to be shipped back to the Los Angeles 
warehouse after the new system has been operating for 
six months.
Grainger management feels that it may be possible 
to make this change, but it is not sure if it would actually 
save any money and whether it would be a good strategic 
change.
Specific questions to address in your 
analysis:
	1.	 Relative to the U.S. distribution network, calcu­
late the cost associated with running the existing 
system. Assume that 40 percent of the volume 
arrives in Seattle and 60 percent in Los Angeles 
and that the port processing fee for federal process­
ing at both locations is $5.00 per CBM. Assume 
that everything is transferred to the Kansas City 
distribution center by rail, where it is unloaded 
and quality-checked. Assume that all volume is 
then transferred by truck to the nine existing ware­
houses in the United States.
	2.	 Consider the idea of upgrading the Los Angeles 
warehouse to include a distribution center capable 
of processing all the volume coming into the United 
States. Assume that containers coming into Seattle 
Although a high percentage of demand was from 
warehouses either south or east of Kansas City, the ques­
tion has surfaced concerning the 18 percent that will be 
shipped to Kansas City and then shipped back to the Los 
Angeles warehouse. This double-transportation could 
potentially be eliminated if a new distribution center were 
built in Los Angeles. The idea might be to ship material 
arriving at the Seattle port by rail to a new Los Angeles 
distribution center, which would be located at the current 
location of the Los Angeles warehouse.
It is estimated that the Los Angeles facility could 
be upgraded at a one-time cost of $1,500,000 and then 
operated for $350,000 per year. In the new Los Angeles 
distribution center, containers would be unloaded and 
processed through a quality assurance check, just as is 
now done in Kansas City. The variable cost for doing this 
would be $5.00 per CBM processed, which includes the 
cost to move the containers from the Los Angeles port to 
the distribution center.
After the material is processed in Los Angeles, the 
amount needed to replenish the Los Angeles warehouse 
(approximately 18 percent) would be kept and the rest 
sent by rail to Kansas City. It would then be directly 
stocked in the Kansas City distribution center and used 
to replenish the warehouses. Grainger expects that very 
Grainger: U.S. Distribution
In the United States, approximately 40 percent of the 
containers enter in Seattle, Washington, and 60 per­
cent at the Los Angeles, California, port. Containers 
on arrival at the port cities are inspected by federal 
agents and then loaded onto rail cars for movement 
to the Kansas City distribution center. Variable costs 
for processing at the port are $5.00 per cubic meter 
(CBM) in both Los Angeles and Seattle. The rate for 
shipping the containers to Kansas City is $0.0018 per 
CBM per mile.
In Kansas City, the containers are unloaded and 
processed through a quality assurance check. This costs 
$3.00 per CMB processed. A very small percentage of 
the material is actually sent back to the supplier, but 
errors in quantity and package size are often found that 
require accounting adjustments.
Items are stored in the Kansas City distribution cen­
ter, which serves nine warehouses in the United States. 
Items are also sent to warehouses in Canada and Mex­
ico, but for the purposes of this study we focus on the 
United States. The nine warehouses each place orders at 
the distribution center that contains all the items to be 
replenished. Kansas City picks each item on the order, 
consolidates the items onto pallets, and ships the items on 
53-foot trucks destined to each warehouse. Truck freight 
costs $0.0220 per CBM per mile. The demand forecasts 
for the items purchased from China/Taiwan for next year 
in cubic meters, as well as the shipping distances, are 
given in the following table.
Distances
Warehouse
Demand (CBM)
Miles from 
Kansas City
Miles from 
Los Angeles
Miles from 
Seattle 
Average
% of Demand
Kansas City
Cleveland
New Jersey
Jacksonville
Chicago
Greenville
Memphis
Dallas
Los Angeles
Total
20,900
17,100
24,700
15,200
22,800
15,200
17,100
22,800
34,200
190,000
11%
 9%
13%
 8%
12%
 8%
 9%
12%
18%
    0
  800
1,200
1,150
  520
  940
  510
  500
1,620
1,620
2,350
2,780
2,420
2,020
2,320
1,790
1,430
    0
1,870
2,410
2,890
2,990
2,060
2,950
2,330
2,130
1,140

	
Logistics, Distribution, and Transportation	
Chapter 15	
401
would be inspected by federal officials (this needs 
to be done at all port locations) and then immedi­
ately shipped by rail in their original containers to 
Los Angeles. All volume would be unloaded and 
quality-checked in Los Angeles (the quality check 
cost $5.00 per CBM when done in Los Angeles). 
Eighteen percent of the volume would then be 
kept in Los Angeles for distribution through that 
warehouse and the rest transshipped by rail to the 
Kansas City warehouse. Assume the cost to trans­
ship by rail is $0.0018 per CBM per mile. The 
material sent to Kansas City would not need to go 
through the “unload and quality check process,” 
and would be stored directly in the Kansas City 
distribution center. Assume that the remaining 
volume would be transferred by truck to the eight 
remaining warehouses in the United States at a 
cost of $0.0220 per CBM per mile.
	3.	 What should be done based on your analytics 
analysis of the U.S. distribution system? Should 
the new Los Angeles distribution center be added? 
Is there any obvious change that Grainger might 
make to have this option be more attractive?
	4.	 Is this strategically something that Grainger should 
do? What has the company not considered that 
may be important?
Many thanks to Gary Scalzitti of Grainger for help with developing this case.
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined. Answers 
are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 This is the art and science of obtaining, producing, 
and distributing material and product in the proper 
place and in the proper quantities.
	2.	 A company that is hired to handle logistics functions.
	3.	 A mode of transportation that is the most flexible rela­
tive to cost, volume, and speed of delivery.
	4.	 When large shipments are broken down directly into 
smaller shipments for local delivery.
	5.	 Sorting goods is the main purpose of this type of 
warehouse.
	6.	 A place where foreign goods can be brought into the 
United States without being subject to normal customs 
requirements.
  7.	 The main cost criterion employed when a transporta­
tion model is used for analyzing a logistics network.
  8.	 The Microsoft Excel function used to solve the trans­
portation model.
  9.	 For the transportation model to be able to find a fea­
sible solution, this must always be greater than or 
equal to total demand.
	10.	 The “changing cells” in a transportation model rep­
resent this.
	11.	 This is a method that locates facilities relative to an 
X, Y grid.
	12.	 A technique that is useful for screening potential 
locations for services.
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Logistics  2. Third-party logistics company  3. Highway  4. Cross-docking 5. Hub 6. Free trade zone 7. Cost of shipping  
8. Solver 9. Total capacity 10. Allocation of demand to a plant or warehouse  11. Centroid method 12. Regression analysis

402
THE FACTORYLESS GOODS PRODUCERS
Consider a company like Apple Inc. and its iPhone and iPad. Apple handles every part 
of making its products except the actual fabrication. Currently, Apple outsources the 
production of many of its products to Taiwan’s Hon Hai Precision Industry. Hon Hai, 
which is better known as Foxconn, draws 40 to 50 percent of its revenue from assem­
bling Apple products.
As many industries have become 
global suppliers, this type of global out­
sourcing has become common for cloth­
ing, most retail household products, 
furniture, and computers. These facto­
ryless goods producers do most of the 
functions of manufacturing, and in many 
cases, design the product and oversee 
distribution.
Much of the attraction for this arrange­
ment is the traditionally low labor costs 
in Chinese factories. Because labor cost 
has recently surged in China, outsourc­
ing specialists such as Foxconn have 
diversified their operations to other 
low-wage countries, including Vietnam, 
Indonesia, Turkey, Brazil, Mexico, and 
Hungary.
Learning Objectives
	LO 16–1	 Explain what strategic sourcing is.
	LO 16–2	 Explain why companies outsource processes.
	LO 16–3	 Analyze the total cost of ownership.
	LO 16–4	 Evaluate sourcing performance.
Global Sourcing 
and Procurement
16
© Mick Ryan/Getty Images RF

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
403
Strategic sourcing is the development and management of supplier relationships to acquire 
goods and services in a way that aids in achieving the immediate needs of the business. In the 
past, the term sourcing was just another term for purchasing, a corporate function that finan­
cially was important but strategically was not the center of attention. Today, as a result of glo­
balization and inexpensive communications technology, the basis for competition is changing. 
A firm is no longer constrained by the capabilities it owns; what matters is its ability to make 
the most of available capabilities, whether they are owned by the firm or not. Outsourcing 
is so sophisticated that even core functions such as engineering, research and development, 
manufacturing, information technology, and marketing can be moved outside the firm.
Sourcing activities can vary greatly and depend on the item being purchased. Exhibit 16.1 
maps different processes for sourcing or purchasing an item. The term sourcing implies a 
more complex process suitable for products that are strategically important. Purchasing pro­
cesses that span from a simple “spot” or one-time purchase to a long-term strategic alliance 
are depicted on the diagram. The diagram positions a purchasing process according to the 
specificity of the item, contract duration, and intensity of transaction costs.
Specificity refers to how common the item is and, in a relative sense, how many substitutes 
might be available. For example, blank DVD disks are commonly available from many dif­
ferent vendors and would have low specificity. A custom-made envelope that is padded and 
specially shaped to contain a specific item that is to be shipped would be an example of a 
high-specificity item.
Commonly available products can be purchased using a relatively simple process. For low-
volume and inexpensive items purchased during the regular routine of work, a firm may order 
from an online catalog. Often, these online catalogs are customized for a customer. Special 
user identifications can be set up to authorize a customer’s employees to purchase certain 
groups of items, with limits on how much they can spend. Other items require a more com­
plex process.
A request for proposal (RFP) is commonly used for purchasing items that are more com­
plex or expensive and where there may be a number of potential vendors. A detailed informa­
tion packet describing what is to be purchased is prepared and distributed to potential vendors. 
The vendor then responds with a detailed proposal of how the company intends to meet the 
terms of the RFP. A request for bid or reverse auction is similar in terms of the information 
packet needed. A major difference is how the bid price is negotiated. In the RFP, the bid is 
included in the proposal, whereas in a request for bid or reverse auction, vendors actually bid 
on the item in real time and often using Internet software.
STRATEGIC SOURCING
Explain what strategic 
sourcing is.
LO 16–1
Sourcing
A process suitable for 
procuring products that are 
strategically important to 
the firm.  
Strategic sourcing
The development and 
management of supplier 
relationships to acquire 
goods and services in a 
way that aids in achieving 
the needs of a business.
Specificity
Refers to how commonly 
available the material is 
and whether substitutes 
can be used.  
Request for proposal
A solicitation that asks for 
a detailed proposal from 
a vendor interested in 
supplying an item.  
Request for
proposal
Spot
purchase
Short
Long
Contract
duration
Low
High
Specificity
Strategic
alliance
High
Low
Transaction costs
Request for bid
and
reverse auctions
Electronic
catalog
Vendor
managed
inventory
The Sourcing/Purchasing Design Matrix
exhibit 16.1

404	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Vendor-managed inventory is when a customer actu­
ally allows the supplier to manage the inventory policy 
of an item or group of items for them. In this case, the 
supplier is given the freedom to replenish the item as they 
see fit. Typically, there are some constraints related to the 
maximum that the customer is willing to carry, the required 
service levels, and other billing transaction processes. 
Selecting the proper process depends on minimizing the 
balance between the supplier’s delivered costs of the item 
over a period of time, say a year, and the customer’s costs 
of managing the inventory. This is discussed later in the 
chapter in the context of the “total cost of ownership” for 
a purchased item.
The Bullwhip Effect
In many cases, there are adversarial relations between sup­
ply chain partners, as well as dysfunctional industry prac­
tices such as a reliance on price promotions. Consider the 
common food industry practice of offering price promo­
tions every January on a product. Retailers respond to the 
price cut by stocking up, in some cases buying a year’s 
supply—a practice the industry calls forward buying. 
Nobody wins in the deal. Retailers have to pay to carry the 
year’s supply, and the shipment bulge adds cost through­
out the supplier’s system. For example, the supplier plants 
must go on overtime starting in October to meet the bulge. 
Even the vendors that supply the manufacturing plants are affected because they must quickly 
react to the large surge in raw material requirements.
The impact of these types of practices has been studied at companies such as Procter & 
Gamble. Exhibit 16.2 shows typical order patterns faced by each node in a supply chain that 
consists of a manufacturer, a distributor, a wholesaler, and a retailer. In this case, the demand 
is for disposable baby diapers. The retailer’s orders to the wholesaler display greater vari­
ability than the end-consumer sales; the wholesaler’s orders to the manufacturer show even 
more oscillations; and, finally, the manufacturer’s orders to its suppliers are the most volatile. 
This phenomenon of variability magnification as we move from the customer to the producer 
in the supply chain is often referred to as the bullwhip effect. The effect indicates a lack of 
synchronization among supply chain members. Even a slight change in consumer sales ripples 
backward in the form of magnified oscillations upstream, resembling the result of a flick of 
a bullwhip handle. Because the supply patterns do not match the demand patterns, inven­
tory accumulates at various stages, and shortages and delays occur at others. This bullwhip 
effect has been observed by many firms in numerous industries, including Campbell Soup and 
Procter & Gamble in consumer products; Hewlett-Packard, IBM, and Motorola in electronics; 
General Motors in automobiles; and Eli Lilly in pharmaceuticals.
Campbell Soup pioneered a program called continuous replenishment that typifies what 
many manufacturers are doing to smooth the flow of materials through their supply chain. 
Here is how the program works. Campbell establishes electronic data interchange (EDI) 
links with retailers and offers an “everyday low price” that eliminates discounts. Every 
morning, retailers electronically inform the company of their demand for all ­Campbell prod­
ucts and of the level of inventories in their distribution centers. Campbell uses that informa­
tion to forecast future demand and to determine which products require replenishment based 
on upper and lower inventory limits previously established with each supplier. Trucks leave 
the Campbell shipping plant that afternoon and arrive at the retailers’ distribution centers 
with the required replenishments the same day. Using this system, Campbell can cut the 
retailers’ inventories, which under the old system averaged four weeks of supply, to about 
two weeks of supply.
Instead of sending purchase orders, customers 
electronically send daily demand information to the 
supplier. The supplier generates replenishment orders for 
the customer based on this demand information.
© Charlie Westerman/Getty Images
Vendor-managed 
inventory
When a customer allows 
the supplier to manage the 
inventory policy of an item 
or group of items.
Forward buying
A term that refers to when 
a customer, responding to 
a promotion, buys far in 
advance of when an item 
will be used.  
Bullwhip effect
The variability in demand 
is magnified as we move 
from the customer to the 
producer in the supply 
chain.
Continuous 
replenishment
A program for 
automatically supplying 
groups of items to a 
customer on a regular 
basis.  

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
405
This solves some problems for Campbell Soup, but what are the advantages for the retailer? 
Most retailers figure that the cost to carry the inventory of a given product for a year equals at 
least 25 percent of what they paid for the product. A two-week inventory reduction represents 
a cost savings equal to nearly 1 percent of sales. The average retailer’s profits equal about 
2 percent of sales, so this saving is enough to increase profits by 50 percent. Because the 
retailer makes more money on Campbell products delivered through continuous replenish­
ment, it has an incentive to carry a broader line of them and to give them more shelf space. 
Campbell Soup found that after it introduced the program, sales of its products grew twice as 
fast through participating retailers as they did through other retailers.
Supply Chain Uncertainty Framework
The supply chain uncertainty framework (Exhibit 16.3) is designed to help managers under­
stand the nature of demand for their products and then devise the supply chain that can 
best satisfy that demand. Many aspects of a product’s demand are important—for example, 
product life cycle, demand predictability, product variety, and market standards for lead 
times and service. Products can be categorized as either primarily functional or primarily 
innovative. Because each category requires a distinctly different kind of supply chain, the 
root cause of supply chain problems is a mismatch between the type of product and type of 
supply chain.
Functional products include the staples that people buy in a wide range of retail outlets, 
such as grocery stores and gas stations. Because such products satisfy basic needs, which do 
not change much over time, they have stable, predictable demand and long life cycles. But 
their stability invites competition, which often leads to low profit margins. Specific criteria 
for identifying functional products include the following: product life cycle of more than two 
years, contribution margin of 5 to 20 percent, only 10 to 20 product variations, an average 
Functional products
Staples that people buy 
in a wide range of retail 
outlets, such as grocery 
stores and gas stations.
20
15
10
5
0
Order Quantity
Time
Consumer Sales
20
15
10
5
0
Order Quantity
Time
Retailer’s Orders to Wholesaler
20
15
10
5
0
Order Quantity
Time
Wholesaler’s Orders to Manufacturer
20
15
10
5
0
Order Quantity
Time
Manufacturer’s Orders to Supplier
Increasing Variability of Orders Up the Supply Chain
exhibit 16.2

406	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
forecast error at time of production of only 10 percent, and a lead time for make-to-order 
products of from six months to one year.
To avoid low margins, many companies introduce innovations in fashion or technology to 
give customers an additional reason to buy their products. Fashionable clothes and personal 
computers are good examples. Although innovation can enable a company to achieve higher 
profit margins, the very newness of the innovative products makes demand for them unpre­
dictable. These innovative products typically have a life cycle of just a few months. Imitators 
quickly erode the competitive advantage that innovative products enjoy, and companies are 
forced to introduce a steady stream of newer innovations. The short life cycles and the great 
variety typical of these products further increase unpredictability. Exhibit 16.3 summarizes 
the differences between functional and innovative products.
We expand on this idea by focusing on the “supply” side of the supply chain. While the 
Supply Chain uncertainty framework captures important demand characteristics, there are 
uncertainties revolving around the supply side that are equally important drivers for the right 
supply chain strategy.
A stable supply process is where the manufacturing process and the underlying technology 
are mature and the supply base is well established. In contrast, an evolving supply process is 
where the manufacturing process and the underlying technology are still under early develop­
ment and are rapidly changing. As a result, the supply base may be limited in both size and 
experience. In a stable supply process, manufacturing complexity tends to be low or manage­
able. Stable manufacturing processes tend to be highly automated, and long-term supply con­
tracts are prevalent. In an evolving supply process, the manufacturing process requires a lot of 
fine-tuning and is often subject to breakdowns and uncertain yields. The supply base may not 
be reliable, because the suppliers themselves are going through process innovations. Exhibit 
16.3 summarizes some of the differences between stable and evolving supply processes.
While functional products tend to have a more mature and stable supply process, that is not 
always the case. For example, the annual demand for electricity and other utility products in a 
locality tends to be stable and predictable, but the supply of hydroelectric power, which relies 
on rainfall in a region, can be erratic year by year. Some food products also have a very stable 
demand, but the supply (both quantity and quality) of the products depends on yearly weather 
conditions. Similarly, there are also innovative products with a stable supply process. Fashion 
apparel products have a short selling season and their demand is highly unpredictable. How­
ever, the supply process is very stable, with a reliable supply base and a mature manufacturing 
process technology. Exhibit 16.4 gives some examples of products that have different demand 
and supply uncertainties.
In most cases, it is more challenging to operate a supply chain that is in the right column 
of Exhibit 16.4 than in the left column, and similarly it is more challenging to operate a sup­
ply chain that is in the lower row of Exhibit 16.4 than in the upper row. Before setting up a 
supply chain strategy, it is necessary to understand the sources of the underlying uncertain­
ties and explore ways to reduce these uncertainties. If it is possible to move the uncertainty 
Innovative products
Products such as 
fashionable clothes and 
personal computers that 
typically have a life cycle of 
just a few months.
Stable supply process
A process where the 
underlying technology is 
stable.  
Evolving supply 
process
A process where the 
underlying technology 
changes rapidly.  
 
Product (Demand) 
Characteristics
 
Manufacturing (Supply) Process 
Characteristics
 
Functional
Innovative
 
Stable
Evolving
Demand
Predictable
Unpredictable
Breakdowns
Few
Higher
Product Life
Long
Short
Process Yield
High
Lower
Inventory Value
Low
High
Quality Problems
Few
More
Product Variety
Low
High
Supply Sources
Many
Few
Volume
High
Low
Process Changes
Few
Many
Stock-out Cost
Low
High
Lead Time
Dependable
Difficult to predict
Product and Process Uncertainty Characteristics
exhibit 16.3
Based on research conducted by Marshall Fisher (Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania).

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
407
characteristics of the product from the right column to the left or from the lower row to the 
upper, then the supply chain performance will improve.
Using the supply and demand characteristics discussed so far, four types of supply chain 
strategies, as shown in Exhibit 16.4, are possible. Information technologies play an important 
role in shaping such strategies.
∙ 	 Efficient supply chains    These are supply chains that utilize strategies aimed at creat­
ing the highest levels of cost efficiency. For such efficiencies to be achieved, non–value-
added activities should be eliminated, scale economies should be pursued, optimization 
techniques should be deployed to get the best capacity utilization in production and 
distribution, and information linkages should be established to ensure the most efficient, 
accurate, and cost-effective transmission of information across the supply chain.
∙ 	 Risk-hedging supply chains    These are supply chains that utilize strategies aimed at 
pooling and sharing resources in a supply chain so that the risks in supply disruption 
can be shared. A single entity in a supply chain can be vulnerable to supply disruptions, 
but if there is more than one supply source or if alternative supply resources are avail­
able, then the risk of disruption is reduced. A company may, for example, increase the 
safety stock of its key component to hedge against the risk of supply disruption, and 
by sharing the safety stock with other locations that also need this key component, the 
cost of maintaining this safety stock can be shared. This type of strategy is common in 
retailing, where different retail stores or dealerships share inventory. Information tech­
nology is important for the success of these strategies because real-time information on 
inventory and demand allows the most cost-effective management and transshipment of 
goods between partners sharing the inventory.
∙ 	 Responsive supply chains    These are supply chains that utilize strategies aimed at 
being responsive and flexible to the changing and diverse needs of the customers. To be 
responsive, companies use build-to-order and mass customization processes as a means 
to meet the specific requirements of customers.
∙ 	 Agile supply chains    These are supply chains that utilize strategies aimed at being 
responsive and flexible to customer needs, while the risks of supply shortages or dis­
ruptions are hedged by pooling inventory and other capacity resources. These supply 
chains essentially have strategies in place that combine the strengths of “hedged” and 
“responsive” supply chains. They are agile because they have the ability to be respon­
sive to the changing, diverse, and unpredictable demands of customers on the front end, 
while minimizing the back-end risks of supply disruptions.
Demand and supply uncertainty is a good framework for understanding supply chain strategy. 
Innovative products with unpredictable demand and an evolving supply process face a major 
challenge. Because of shorter and shorter product life cycles, the pressure for dynamically 
adjusting and adopting a company’s supply chain strategy is great. In the following section, 
we explore the concepts of outsourcing, green sourcing, and total cost of ownership. These 
are important tools for coping with demand and supply uncertainty.
Product (Demand) Characteristics
Functional
Innovative
Manufacturing (Supply) Process 
Characteristics
Stable
Efficient Supply Chain
Grocery, basic apparel, food, oil and gas
Responsive Supply Chain
Fashion apparel, low-end computers, 
seasonal products
Evolving
Risk-Hedging Supply Chain
Hydroelectric power, food dependent on 
weather
Agile Supply Chain
Cellphones, high-end computers, 
semiconductors
Supply Chain Uncertainty Framework
exhibit 16.4
Based on research conducted by Hau Lee (Stanford University).

408	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Outsourcing is the act of moving some of a firm’s internal activities and decision responsi­
bility to outside providers. The terms of the agreement are established in a contract. Outsourc­
ing goes beyond the more common purchasing and consulting contracts because not only are 
the activities transferred, but also resources that make the activities occur, including people, 
facilities, equipment, technology, and other assets, are transferred. The responsibilities for 
making decisions over certain elements of the activities are transferred as well. Taking com­
plete responsibility for this is a specialty of contract manufacturers such as Flextronics.
The reasons why a company decides to outsource can vary greatly. Exhibit 16.5 lists exam­
ples of reasons to outsource and the accompanying benefits. Outsourcing allows a firm to focus 
on activities that represent its core competencies. Thus, the company can create a competitive 
advantage while reducing cost. An entire function may be outsourced, or some elements of an 
activity may be outsourced, with the rest kept in-house. For example, some of the elements of 
information technology may be strategic, some may be critical, and some may be performed 
less expensively by a third party. Identifying a function as a potential outsourcing target, and 
then breaking that function into its components, allows decision makers to determine which 
activities are strategic or critical and should remain in-house and which can be outsourced like 
commodities. As an example, outsourcing the logistics function will be discussed.
Logistics Outsourcing
There has been dramatic growth in outsourcing in the logistics area. Logistics is a term that 
refers to the management functions that support the complete cycle of material flow: from the 
purchase and internal control of production materials; to the planning and control of work-in-
process; to the purchasing, shipping, and distribution of the finished product. The emphasis 
on lean inventory means there is less room for error in deliveries. Trucking companies such 
as Ryder have started adding the logistics aspect to their businesses—changing from merely 
moving goods from point A to point B, to managing all or part of all shipments over a longer 
period, typically three years, and replacing the shipper’s employees with their own. Logistics 
companies now have complex computer tracking technology that reduces the risk in transpor­
tation and allows the logistics company to add more value to the firm than it could if the func­
tion were performed in-house. Third-party logistics providers track freight using electronic 
data interchange technology and a satellite system to tell customers exactly where its driv­
ers are and when deliveries will be made. Such technology is critical in some environments 
where the delivery window may be only 30 minutes long.
Explain why companies 
outsource processes.
LO 16–2
Logistics
Management functions 
that support the complete 
cycle of material flow: from 
the purchase and internal 
control of production 
materials; to the planning 
and control of work-in-
process; to the purchasing, 
shipping, and distribution 
of the finished product.
OUTSOURCING
Financially Driven Reasons
Improve return on assets by reducing inventory and selling unnecessary assets.
Generate cash by selling low-return entities.
Gain access to new markets, particularly in developing countries.
Reduce costs through a lower cost structure.
Turn fixed costs into variable costs.
Improvement-Driven Reasons
Improve quality and productivity.
Shorten cycle time.
Obtain expertise, skills, and technologies that are not otherwise available.
Improve risk management.
Improve credibility and image by associating with superior providers.
Organizationally Driven Reasons
Improve effectiveness by focusing on what the firm does best.
Increase flexibility to meet changing demand for products and services.
Increase product and service value by improving response to customer needs.
Reasons to Outsource and the Resulting Benefits
exhibit 16.5
Outsourcing
Moving some of a firm’s 
internal activities and 
decision responsibility to 
outside providers.

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
409
FedEx has one of the most advanced systems available for tracking items being sent 
through its services. The system is available to all customers over the Internet. It tells the 
exact status of each item currently being carried by the company. Information on the exact 
time a package is picked up, when it is transferred between hubs in the company’s network, 
and when it is delivered is available on the system. You can access this system at the FedEx 
website (www.fedex.com). Select your country on the initial screen and then select “Track 
Shipments” in the Track box in the lower part of the page. Of course, you will need the actual 
tracking number for an item currently in the system to get information. FedEx has integrated 
its tracking system with many of its customers’ in-house information systems.
Another example of innovative outsourcing in logistics involves Hewlett-Packard. 
­Hewlett-Packard turned over its inbound raw materials warehousing in Vancouver, British 
Columbia, to Roadway Logistics. Roadway’s 140 employees operate the warehouse 24 hours 
a day, seven days a week, coordinating the delivery of parts to the warehouse and manag­
ing storage. Hewlett-Packard’s 250 employees were transferred to other company activities. 
Hewlett-Packard reports savings of 10 percent in warehousing operating costs.
One of the drawbacks to outsourcing is the layoffs that often result. Even in cases where the 
outsourcing partner hires former employees, they are often hired back at lower wages with fewer 
benefits. Outsourcing is perceived by many unions as an effort to circumvent union contracts.
Framework for Supplier Relationships
In theory, outsourcing is a no-brainer. Companies can unload noncore activities, shed balance 
sheet assets, and boost their return on capital by using third-party service providers. But in 
reality, things are more complicated. It is often difficult to determine what is core and noncore 
today, because situations change so quickly today.  
Exhibit 16.6 is a useful framework to help managers make appropriate choices for the 
structure of supplier relationships. The decision goes beyond the notion that “core competen­
cies” should be maintained under the direct control of management of the firm and that other 
activities should be outsourced. In this framework, a continuum that ranges from vertical 
integration to arm’s-length relationships forms the basis for the decision.
An activity can be evaluated using the following characteristics: required coordination, 
strategic control, and intellectual property. Required coordination refers to how difficult it 
is to ensure that the activity will integrate well with the overall process. Uncertain activities 
that require much back-and-forth exchange of information should not be outsourced, whereas 
activities that are well understood and highly standardized can easily move to business part­
ners who specialize in the activity. Strategic control refers to the degree of loss that would be 
incurred if the relationship with the partner were severed. There could be many types of losses 
that would be important to consider, including specialized facilities, knowledge of major cus­
tomer relationships, and investment in research and development. A final consideration is the 
potential loss of intellectual property through the partnership.
Intel is an excellent example of a company that recognized the importance of this type of 
decision framework in the mid-1980s. During the early 1980s, Intel found itself being squeezed 
Companies usually 
outsource standard 
activities when they are 
not part of the “core 
competency” of the 
firm.
KEY IDEA
Do not outsource
Outsource
Coordination characteristics
Coordination and interfaces are not well defined. 
The information and coordination is specific to 
each job.  
Technology is immature and there is a need for 
“expert” knowledge obtained by experience.
Standardized interfaces, required informa­
tion is highly codified and standardized 
(prices, quantities, delivery schedules, etc.).
Investment is strategic assets 
characteristics
Significant investments in highly specialized assets are 
needed. The investments cannot be easily recovered 
if the relationship terminates. Long-term investments 
in specialized R&D, and lengthy learning curves.
Assets are commonly available from a large 
number of potential customers or suppliers.
Intellectual property 
characteristics
Weak intellectual property protection. Easy-to-
imitate technology when access is given.
Strong intellectual property protection 
Difficult-to-imitate technology
A Framework for Structuring Supplier Relationships
exhibit 16.6

410	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
out of the market for memory chips (the type it had invented) by Japanese competitors such 
as Hitachi, Fujitsu, and NEC. These companies had developed stronger capabilities to develop 
and rapidly scale up complex semiconductor manufacturing processes. It was clear by 1985 
that a major Intel competency was its ability to design complex integrated circuits—something 
it did much better than manufacturing or developing processes for more standardized chips. As 
a result, faced with growing financial losses, Intel was forced to exit the memory chip market.
Learning a lesson from the memory market, Intel shifted its focus to the market for micro­
processors, which it had invented in the late 1960s. To keep from repeating the mistake with 
memory chips, Intel felt it was essential to develop strong capabilities in process develop­
ment and manufacturing. A pure “core competency” strategy would have suggested that Intel 
focus on the design of microprocessors and use outside partners to manufacture them. Given 
the close connection between semiconductor product development and process development, 
Capability Sourcing at 7-Eleven
The term capability sourcing was coined to refer to the way 
companies focus on the things they do best and outsource 
other functions to key partners. The idea is that owning 
capabilities may not be as important as having control of 
those capabilities. This allows many additional capabilities 
to be outsourced. Companies are under intense pressure to 
improve revenue and margins because of increased compe­
tition. An area where this has been particularly intense is the 
convenience store industry, where 7-Eleven is a major player.
Before 1991, 7-Eleven was one of the most vertically 
integrated convenience store chains. When it is vertically 
integrated, a firm controls most of the activities in its supply 
chain. In the case of 7-Eleven, the firm owned its own dis­
tribution network, which delivered gasoline to each store, 
made its own candy and ice, and required the managers 
to handle store maintenance, credit card processing, store 
payroll, and even the in-store information technology (IT) 
system. For a while, 7-Eleven even owned the cows that 
produced the milk sold in the stores. But it was difficult for 
7-Eleven to manage costs in this diverse set of functions.
OSCM AT WORK
At that time, 7-Eleven had a Japanese branch that was 
very successful but was based on a totally different inte­
gration model. Rather than using a company-owned and 
vertically integrated model, the Japanese stores had part­
nerships with suppliers that carried out many of the day-
to-day functions. Those suppliers specialized in each area, 
enhancing quality and improving service while reducing 
cost. The Japanese model involved outsourcing everything 
possible without jeopardizing the business by giving com­
petitors critical information. A simple rule said that if a part­
ner could provide a capability more effectively than 7-Eleven 
could itself, that capability should be outsourced. In the 
United States, the company eventually outsourced activities 
such as human resources, finance, information technology, 
logistics, distribution, product development, and packaging. 
7-Eleven still maintains control of all vital information and 
handles all merchandising, pricing, positioning, promotion 
of gasoline, and ready-to-eat food.
The following chart shows how 7-Eleven has structured 
key partnerships.
Activity
Outsourcing Strategy
Gasoline
Outsourced distribution to Citgo. Maintains control over pricing and promotion. These are activities that 
can differentiate its stores.
Snack foods
Frito-Lay distributes its products directly to the stores. 7-Eleven makes critical decisions about order 
quantities and shelf placement. 7-Eleven mines extensive data on local customer purchase patterns to 
make these decisions at each store.
Prepared foods
Joint venture with E. A. Sween: Combined Distribution Centers (CDCs), a direct-store delivery operation 
that supplies 7-Eleven stores with sandwiches and other fresh goods two times a day
Specialty products
Many are developed specially for 7-Eleven customers. For example, 7-Eleven worked with Hershey to 
develop an edible straw used with the popular Twizzler treat. Worked with Anheuser-Busch on special 
NASCAR and Major League Baseball promotions.
Data analysis
7-Eleven relies on an outside vendor, IRI, to maintain and format purchasing data while keeping the data 
proprietary. Only 7-Eleven can see the actual mix of products its customers purchase at each location.
New capabilities
American Express supplies automated teller machines.
Western Union handles money wire transfers.
CashWorks furnishes check-cashing capabilities.
Electronic Data Systems (EDS) maintains network functions.

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
411
however, relying on outside parties for manufacturing would likely have created costs in terms 
of longer development lead times. Over the late-1980s, Intel invested heavily in building 
world-class capabilities in process development and manufacturing. These capabilities are 
one of the chief reasons it has been able to maintain approximately 90 percent of the personal 
computer microprocessor market, despite the ability of competitors like AMD to “clone” Intel 
designs relatively quickly. Expanding its capabilities beyond its original core capability of 
product design has been a critical ingredient in Intel’s sustained success.
Good advice is to keep control of—or acquire—activities that are true competitive dif­
ferentiators or have the potential to yield a competitive advantage, and to outsource the rest. 
It is important to make a distinction between “core” and “strategic” activities. Core activities 
are key to the business, but do not confer a competitive advantage, such as a bank’s informa­
tion technology operations. Strategic activities are a key source of competitive advantage. 
Because the competitive environment can change rapidly, companies need to monitor the situ­
ation constantly, and adjust accordingly. As an example, Coca-Cola, which decided to stay out 
of the bottling business in the early 1900s, partnered instead with independent bottlers and 
quickly built market share. The company reversed itself in the 1980s when bottling became a 
key competitive element in the industry.
Green Sourcing
Being environmentally responsible has become a business imperative, and many firms are 
looking to their supply chains to deliver “green” results. A significant area of focus relates to 
how a firm works with suppliers where the opportunity to save money and benefit the envi­
ronment might not be a strict trade-off proposition. Financial results can often be improved 
through both cost reductions and boosting revenues.
Green sourcing is not just about finding new environmentally friendly technologies or 
increasing the use of recyclable materials. It can also help drive cost reductions in a variety of 
ways, including product content substitution, waste reduction, and lower usage.
A comprehensive green sourcing effort should assess how a company uses items that are pur­
chased internally, in its own operations, or in its products and services. As costs of commodity 
items like steel, electricity, and fossil fuels continue to increase, properly designed green sourc­
ing efforts should find ways to significantly reduce and possibly eliminate the need for these 
types of commodities. As an example, consider retrofitting internal lighting in a large office 
building to a modern energy-efficient technology. Electricity cost savings of 10 to 12 percent 
per square foot can easily translate into millions of dollars in associated electricity cost savings.
Another important cost area in green sourcing is waste reduction opportunities. This 
includes everything from energy and water to packaging and transportation. A great example 
of this is the redesigned milk jug introduced recently by leading grocery retailers. Using the 
new jug, with more rectangular dimensions and a square base, cuts the associated water con­
sumption of the jugs by 60 to 70 percent compared to earlier jug designs because the new 
design does not require the use of milk crates. Milk crates 
typically become filthy during use due to spillage and other 
natural factors; thus, they are usually hosed down before 
reuse, consuming thousands of gallons of water. The new 
design also reduces fuel costs. Since crates are no longer 
used, they also do not have to be transported back to the 
dairy plant or farm distribution point for future shipments. 
Furthermore, the new jugs have the unexpected benefit 
of fitting better in modern home refrigerator doors and 
allow retailers to fit more of them in their in-store coolers. 
Breakthrough results like the new milk jug can result from 
comprehensive partnerships between users and their sup­
pliers working to find innovative solutions.
Many companies have found that working with suppli­
ers can result in opportunities that improve revenue. The 
opportunity to turn waste products into sources of revenue 
© Kevin Clifford/AP Images

412	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
might be significant. For example, a leading beverage manufacturer operates a recycling sub­
sidiary that sources used aluminum cans from a large number of suppliers. The subsidiary 
actually processes more aluminum cans than are used in the company’s own products, conse­
quently developing a strong secondary revenue stream for the company.
In other cases, green sourcing can help establish entirely new lines of business to serve 
environmentally conscious customers. In the cleaning products aisle of a supermarket, shop­
pers will find numerous options of “green” cleaning products from a variety of consumer 
products companies. These products typically use natural ingredients in lieu of chemicals, and 
many are in concentrated amounts to reduce overall packaging costs.
Logistics suppliers could find business opportunities coming directly to them as a result of the 
green trend. A large automobile manufacturer completed a project to “green” its logistics/distri­
bution network. The automaker analyzed the shipping carriers, locations, and overall efficiency 
of its distribution network for both parts and finished automobiles. By increasing the use of rail 
transportation for parts, consolidating shipments in fewer ports, and partnering with its logistics 
providers to increase fuel efficiency for both marine and road transportation, the company reduced 
its overall distribution-related carbon dioxide emissions by several thousand tons per year.
The following is an outline of a six-step process (see Exhibit 16.7) designed to transform a 
traditional process to a green sourcing process.
	1.	 Assess the opportunity.    For a given category of expense, all relevant costs need to 
be taken into account. The five most common areas include electricity and other energy 
costs; disposal and recycling; packaging; commodity substitution (alternative materials 
to replace materials such as steel or plastic); and water (or other related resources). These 
costs are identified and incorporated into an analysis of total cost (sometimes referred 
to as “spend” cost analysis) at this step. From this analysis, it is possible to prioritize the 
different costs based on the highest potential savings and criticality to the organization. 
Fly ash is generally stored at coal power 
plants or placed in landfills as shown here. 
About 43 percent is recycled, reducing the 
harmful impact on the environment from 
landfills.
© Carolyn Kaster/AP Images
This is important in directing effort to where it will likely have the most 
impact on the firm’s financial position and cost reduction goals.
	2.	 Engage internal supply chain sourcing agents.    Internal sourc­
ing agents are those within the firm that purchase items and have 
direct knowledge of business requirements, product specifications, 
and other internal perspectives inherent in the supply chain. These 
individuals and groups need to be “on-board” and be partners in the 
improvement process to help set realistic green goals. The goal of 
generating no waste, for example, becomes a cross-functional sup­
ply chain effort that relies heavily on finding and developing the 
right suppliers. These internal managers need to identify the most 
significant opportunities. They can develop a robust baseline model 
of what should be possible for reducing current and ongoing costs. 
In the case of procuring new equipment, for example, the baseline 
model would include not just the initial price of the equipment as in 
traditional sourcing, but also energy, disposal, recycling, and main­
tenance costs.
	3.	 Assess the supply base.    A sustainable sourcing process requires 
engaging new and existing vendors. As in traditional sourcing, the 
firm needs to understand vendor capabilities, constraints, and prod­
uct offering. The green process needs to be augmented with formal 
requirements that relate to green opportunities, including possible 
commodity substitutions and new manufacturing processes. These 
requirements need to be incorporated in vendor bid documents or the 
request for proposals (RFPs).
	 	
  A good example is concrete that uses fly ash, a by-product from 
coal-fired power plants. Fly ash can be substituted for Portland 
cement in ready-mix concrete or in concrete blocks to produce a 
stronger and lighter product with reduced water consumption. Fly 

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
413
ash substitution helped a company reduce its exposure to volatile and rapidly increas­
ing prices for cement. At the same time, the reduced weight of the block lowered 
transportation costs to the company’s new facilities. The company was also able to 
establish a specification incorporating fly ash for all new construction sites to follow. 
Finally, the substitution also helped the power plant by providing a new market for 
the fly ash, which previously had to be discarded.
	4.	 Develop the sourcing strategy.    The main goal with this step is to develop quantita­
tive and qualitative criteria that will be used to evaluate the sourcing process. These 
are needed to properly analyze associated costs and benefits. These criteria need to 
be clearly articulated in bid documents and RFPs when working with potential sup­
pliers so that their proposals will address relevant goals related to sustainability.
	5.	 Implement the sourcing strategy.    The evaluation criteria developed in step 4 
should help in the selection of vendors and products for each business requirement. 
The evaluation process should consider initial cost and the total cost of owner­
ship for the items in the bid. So, for example, energy-efficient equipment that is 
proposed with a higher initial cost may, over its productive life, actually result in a 
lower total cost due to energy savings and a related lower carbon footprint. Relevant 
green opportunities such as energy efficiency and waste reduction need to be mod­
eled and then incorporated into the sourcing analysis to make it as comprehensive 
as possible and to facilitate an effective vendor selection process that supports the 
firm’s needs.
	6.	 Institutionalize the sourcing strategy.    Once the vendor is selected and contracts 
finalized, the procurement process begins. Here, the sourcing and procurement 
department needs to define a set of metrics against which the supplier will be mea­
sured for the contract’s duration. These metrics should be based on performance, 
delivery, compliance with pricing guidelines, and similar factors. It is vital that met­
rics that relate to the company’s sustainability goals are considered as well. Periodic 
audits may also need to be incorporated in the process to directly observe practices 
that relate to these metrics to ensure honest reporting of data.
	 	
  A key aspect of green sourcing, compared to a traditional process, is the expanded 
view of the sourcing decision. This expanded view requires the incorporation of new 
criteria for evaluating alternatives. Further, it requires a wider range of internal inte­
gration such as designers, engineers, and marketers. Finally, visualizing and captur­
ing the green sourcing savings often involve greater complexity and longer payback 
periods compared to a traditional process.
4. Develop the
    sourcing strategy
— Develop
     quantitative criteria
5. Implement
    sourcing strategy
— Select vendors and
     products based on
     criteria
6. Institutionalize the
    sourcing strategy
— Metrics and audits
     to monitor
     performance
1. Assess the
    opportunity
— Evaluate and
     prioritize costs
2. Engage
    sourcing agents
— Cross-functional
     ownership of the
     process
3. Assess the
    supply base
— Engage vendors
     in the process
Six-Step Process for Green Sourcing
exhibit 16.7

414	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
The total cost of ownership (TCO) is an estimate of the cost of an item that includes all the costs 
related to its procurement and use, including any related costs in disposing of the item after it is 
no longer useful. The concept can be applied to a company’s internal costs or it can be viewed 
more broadly to consider costs throughout the supply chain. To fully appreciate the cost of pur­
chasing an item from a particular vendor, an approach that captures the costs of the activities 
associated with purchasing and actually using the item should be considered. Depending on the 
complexity of the purchasing process, activities such as prebid conferences, visits by potential 
suppliers, and even visits to potential suppliers can significantly impact the total cost of the item.
A TCO analysis is highly dependent on the actual situation; in general, though, the costs out­
lined in Exhibit 16.8 should be considered. The costs can be categorized into three broad areas: 
acquisition costs, ownership costs, and post-ownership costs. Acquisition costs are the initial costs 
associated with the purchase of materials, products, and services. They are not long-term costs 
of ownership but represent an immediate cash outflow. Acquisition costs include the prepurchase 
costs associated with preparing documents to distribute to potential suppliers, identifying sup­
pliers and evaluating suppliers, and other costs associated with actually procuring the item. The 
actual purchase prices, including taxes, tarriffs, and transportation costs, are also included.
Ownership costs are incurred after the initial purchase and are associated with the ongoing use 
of the product or material. Examples of costs that are quantifiable include energy usage, scheduled 
maintenance, repair, and financing (leasing situation). There can also be qualitative costs such as 
aesthetic factors (e.g., the item is pleasing to the eye), and ergonomic factors (e.g., productivity 
improvement or reducing fatigue). These ownership costs can often exceed the initial purchase 
price and have an impact on cash flow, profitability, and even employee morale and productivity.
TOTAL COST OF OWNERSHIP
Analyze the total cost of 
ownership.
LO 16–3
Acquisition costs
· Purchase planning costs
· Quality costs
· Taxes
· Purchase price
· Financing costs
Ownership costs
· Energy costs
· Maintenance and repair
· Financing
· Supply chain/supply
   network costs
Post-ownership costs
· Disposal
· Environmental costs
· Warranty costs
· Product liability costs
· Customer dissatisfaction costs 
Total cost of ownership
Total Cost of Ownership
exhibit 16.8
Total cost of ownership
Estimate of the cost of 
an item that includes all 
the costs related to the 
procurement and use 
of the item, including 
disposing of the item after 
its useful life.

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
415
Major costs associated with post-ownership include salvage value and disposal costs. For 
many purchases, there are established markets that provide data to help estimate reasonable 
future values, such as the Kelley Blue Book for used automobiles. Other areas that can be 
included are the long-term environmental impact (particularly when the firm has sustain­
ability goals), warranty and product liabilities, and the negative marketing impact of low cus­
tomer satisfaction with the item.
Overemphasis on acquisition cost or purchase price frequently results in a failure to address 
other significant ownership and post-ownership costs. TCO is a philosophy for understanding 
all relevant costs of doing business with a particular supplier for a good or service. It is not only 
relevant for a business that wants to reduce its cost of doing business but also for a firm that 
aims to design products or services that provide the lowest total cost of ownership to custom­
ers. For example, some automobile manufacturers have extended the tune-up interval on many 
models to 100,000 miles, thereby reducing vehicle operating cost for car owners. Viewing TCO 
in this way can lead to an increased value of the product to existing and potential customers.
These costs can be estimated as cash inflows (the sale of used equipment, etc.) or outflows 
(such as purchase prices, demolition of an obsolete facility, etc.). The following example 
shows how this analysis can be organized using a spreadsheet. Keep in mind that the costs 
considered need to be adapted to the decision being made. Costs that do not vary based on the 
decision need not be considered, but relevant costs that vary depending on the decision should 
be included in the analysis.
TCO actually draws on many areas for a thorough analysis. These include finance (net 
present value), accounting (product pricing and costing), operations management (reliability, 
quality, need, and inventory planning), marketing (demand), and information technology (sys­
tems integration). It is probably best to approach this using a cross-functional team represent­
ing the key functional areas.
EXAMPLE 16.1: Total Cost of Ownership Analysis
Consider the analysis of the purchase of a copy machine that might be used in a copy center. 
The machine has an initial cost of $120,000 and is expected to generate income of $40,000 per 
year. Supplies are expected to be $7,000 per year and the machine needs to be overhauled dur­
ing year 3 at a cost of $9,000. It has a salvage value of $7,500 when we plan to sell it at year 6.
SOLUTION
Laying these costs out over time can lead to the use of net present value analysis to evaluate 
the decision. Consider Exhibit 16.9, where the present values of each yearly stream are dis­
counted to now. (See Appendix E for a present value table.) As we can see, the present value 
in this analysis shows that the present value cost of the copier is $12,955.
Discount factor = 20%.
Note: These calculations were done using the full precision of a spreadsheet.
Year
Now
1
2
3
4
5
6
Initial Investment
−$120,000
Manufacturer required overhaul
−$9,000
Cash inflows from using the machine
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
$ 40,000
Supplies needed to use the machine
−$7,000
−$7,000
−$7,000
−$7,000
−$7,000
−$7,000
Salvage value
$ 7,500
Total of annual streams
−$120,000
$ 33,000
$ 33,000
$ 24,000
$ 33,000
$ 33,000
$ 40,500
Discount factor from Appendix C 1/(1 + .2)Year
1.000
0.833
0.694
0.579
0.482
0.402
0.335
Present value − yearly
−$120,000
$ 27,500
$ 22,917
$ 13,889
$ 15,914
$ 13,262
$ 13,563
Present value
−$12,955
Analysis of the Purchase of an Office Copier
exhibit 16.9

416	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
It is important that any analysis is adapted to the particular scenario. Such factors as 
exchange rates, the risk of doing business in a particular region of the world, transportation, 
and other items are often important. Depending on the alternatives, there are a host of factors, 
often going beyond cost, that need to be considered. Adapting this type of cost analysis and 
combining it with a more qualitative risk analysis are useful in actual company situations.
MEASURING SOURCING PERFORMANCE
One view of sourcing is centered on the inventories that are positioned in the system. 
Exhibit 16.10 shows how hamburger meat and potatoes are stored in various locations in 
a typical fast-food restaurant chain. Here we see the steps that the beef and potatoes move 
through on their way to the local retail store and then to the customer. Inventory is carried at 
each step, and this inventory has a particular cost to the company. Inventory serves as a buffer, 
thus allowing each stage to operate independently of the others. For example, the distribution 
center inventory allows the system that supplies the retail stores to operate independently of 
the meat and potato packing operations. Because the inventory at each stage ties up money, it 
is important that the operations at each stage are synchronized to minimize the size of these 
buffer inventories. The efficiency of the supply chain can be measured based on the size of the 
inventory investment in the supply chain. The inventory investment is measured relative to the 
total cost of the goods that are provided through the supply chain.
Two common measures to evaluate supply chain efficiency are inventory turnover and 
weeks of supply. These essentially measure the same thing. Weeks of supply is the inverse of 
inventory turnover times 52. Inventory turnover is calculated as follows:
Inventory turnover = ​ 
Cost of goods sold 
 
 
_____________________________ 
 
 
 Average aggregate inventory value ​
The cost of goods sold is the annual cost for a company to produce the goods or services 
provided to customers; it is sometimes referred to as the cost of revenue. This does not include 
the selling and administrative expenses of the company. The average aggregate inventory 
value is the average total value of all items held in inventory for the firm valued at cost. It 
includes the raw material, work-in-process, finished goods, and distribution inventory consid­
ered owned by the company.
​[​16.1​]​
Potato
farm
Cattle
farm
Distribution
center
Retail
store
Customer
Slaughter
house
Meat
packing
Potato processing and packing
Potatoes—
25  /lb.
Cows—
50  /lb.
Beef
carcasses—
55  /lb.
Beef loins—
60  /lb.
Frozen beef
patties—
65  /lb.
Hamburgers—
$8.00/lb.
French fries—
$3.75/lb.
Potatoes—
30  /lb.
Bags of frozen
French fries—
35  /lb.
Beef patties—$1.00/lb.
Frozen french
fries—40  /lb.
Inventory in the Supply Chain—Fast-Food Restaurant
exhibit 16.10
Inventory turnover
A measure of supply chain 
efficiency.
Cost of goods sold
The annual cost for a 
company to produce the 
goods or services provided 
to customers.
Average aggregate 
inventory value
The average total value of 
all items held in inventory 
for the firm, valued at cost.
Evaluate sourcing 
performance
LO 16–4

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
417
Good inventory turnover values vary by industry and the type of products being handled. 
At one extreme, a grocery store chain may turn inventory over 100 times per year. Values of 
six to seven are typical for manufacturing firms.
In many situations, particularly when distribution inventory is dominant, weeks of supply 
is the preferred measure. This is a measure of how many weeks’ worth of inventory is in the 
system at a particular point in time. The calculation is as follows:
Weeks of supply = ​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​ Average aggregate inventory value 
 
 
____________________________ 
 
 
 Cost of goods sold 
​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​ × 52 weeks
When company financial reports cite inventory turnover and weeks of supply, we can 
assume that the measures are being calculated firmwide. We show an example of this type 
of calculation in the example that follows using Dell Computer data. These calculations, 
though, can be done for individual entities within the organization. For example, we might 
be interested in the production raw materials inventory turnover or the weeks of supply 
associated with the warehousing operation of a firm. In these cases, the cost would be that 
associated with the total amount of inventory that runs through the specific inventory. In 
some very-low-inventory operations, days or even hours are a better unit of time for measur­
ing supply.
A firm considers inventory an investment because the intent is for it to be used in the 
future. Inventory ties up funds that could be used for other purposes, and a firm may have 
to borrow money to finance the inventory investment. The objective is to have the proper 
amount of inventory and to have it in the correct locations in the supply chain. Determining 
the correct amount of inventory to have in each position requires a thorough analysis of the 
supply chain coupled with the competitive priorities that define the market for the company’s 
products.
​[​16.2​]​
EXAMPLE 16.2: Inventory Turnover Calculation
Dell Computer reported the following information in a recent annual report (all dollar amounts 
are expressed in millions):
The cost of revenue corresponds to what we call cost of goods sold. One might think that U.S. 
companies, at least, would use a common accounting terminology, but this is not true. The 
inventory turnover calculation is
​Inventory turnover = ​  40,190 
_______ 
228 + 231 ​ = 87.56 turns per year​
This is amazing performance for a high-tech company, but it explains much of why the com­
pany is such a financial success.
	
The corresponding weeks of supply calculation is
​Weeks of supply = ​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​ ​ 228 + 231 
_ 
40, 190  ​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​ × 52 = .59 week​
Net revenue
$49,205
Cost of revenue
$40,190
Production materials on hand
     $228
Work-in-process and finished goods on hand
      $231
Days of supply in inventory
             4 days
Weeks of supply
Preferred measure of 
supply chain efficiency 
that is mathematically 
the inverse of inventory 
turnover times 52.

418	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Concept Connections
LO 16–1   Explain what strategic sourcing is.
Summary
	∙ 	 Sourcing is a term that captures the strategic nature 
of purchasing in today’s global and Internet-connected 
marketplace.
	∙ 	 The sourcing/purchasing design matrix captures the 
scope of the topic that ranges from one-time spot pur­
chases, to a complex strategic alliance arrangement 
with another firm.
	∙ 	 A phenomenon known as the bullwhip effect has been 
observed in many industries. This is when changes 
in demand are magnified as they move from the cus­
tomer to the manufacturer. The phenomenon is caused 
by long lead times and the fact that there are often 
multiple stages in a supply chain.
	∙ 	 Supply chains can be categorized based on demand 
and supply uncertainty characteristics. Four types of 
supply chains are identified: (1) efficient, (2) risk-
hedging, (3) responsive, and (4) agile.
Key Terms
Strategic sourcing  The development and management 
of supplier relationships to acquire goods and services in 
a way that aids in achieving the needs of a business.
Sourcing  A process suitable for procuring products that 
are strategically important to the firm.
Specificity  Refers to how commonly available the mate­
rial is and whether substitutes can be used.
Request for proposal (RFP)  A solicitation that asks for a 
detailed proposal from a vendor interested in supplying 
an item.
Vendor managed inventory  When a customer allows 
the supplier to manage the inventory policy of an item or 
group of items.
Forward buying  A term that refers to when a customer, 
responding to a promotion, buys far in advance of when 
an item will be used.
Bullwhip effect  The variability in demand is magnified 
as we move from the customer to the producer in the 
supply chain.
Continuous replenishment  A program for automatically 
supplying groups of items to a customer on a regular 
basis.
Functional products  Staples that people buy in a wide 
range of retail outlets, such as grocery stores and gas 
stations.
Innovative products  Products such as fashionable 
clothes and personal computers that typically have a life 
cycle of just a few months.
Stable supply process  A process where the underlying 
technology is stable.
Evolving supply process  A process where the underly­
ing technology changes rapidly.
LO 16–2   Explain why companies outsource processes.
	∙ 	 Outsourcing is when a firm contracts with an outside 
provider for activities essential to the firm’s success.
	∙ 	 The transportation of a firm’s products (referred to as 
logistics) is often outsourced.
	∙ 	 Whether an activity is outsourced or not often depends 
on criteria related to (1) coordination requirements, 
(2) strategic control, and (3) intellectual property 
issues.
	∙ 	 Green sourcing has become an imperative for many 
firms and it may create new markets for a firm’s 
products.
Summary
Key Terms
Outsourcing  Moving some of a firm’s internal activities 
and decision responsibility to outside providers.
Logistics  Management functions that support the com­
plete cycle of material flow: from the purchase and 
internal control of production materials; to the planning 
and control of work-in-process; to the purchasing, ship­
ping, and distribution of the finished product.

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
419
LO 16–3   Analyze the total cost of ownership.
	∙	 This is an approach to understanding the total cost of 
an item.
	∙ 	 Costs can generally be categorized into three areas: 
(1) acquisition costs, (2) ownership costs, and (3) 
post-ownership costs.
Summary
Total cost of ownership  Estimate of the cost of an item 
that includes all the costs related to the procurement and 
use of the item, including disposing of the item after its 
useful life.
Key Terms
LO 16–4   Evaluate sourcing performance.
	∙ 	 Inventory turn and weeks of supply are the most com­
mon measures to evaluate supply chain efficiency. 
These measures can vary greatly depending on the 
industry.
Summary
Key Terms
Inventory turnover  A measure of supply chain 
efficiency.
Cost of goods sold  The annual cost for a company to 
produce the goods or services provided to customers.
Average aggregate inventory value  The average total value 
of all items held in inventory for the firm, valued at cost.
Weeks of supply  Preferred measure of supply chain 
efficiency that is mathematically the inverse of inventory 
turnover times 52.
Inventory turnover = ​ 
Cost of goods sold 
 
 
_____________________________ 
 
 
 Average aggregate inventory value ​
Weeks of supply = ​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​ Average aggregate inventory value 
 
 
____________________________ 
 
 
 Cost of goods sold 
​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​ × 52 weeks
​[​16.1​]​
​[​16.2​]​
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What recent changes have caused supply chain management to gain importance?
	  2.	 Describe the differences between functional and innovative products.
	  3.	 What are characteristics of efficient, responsive, risk-hedging, and agile supply chains? 
Can a supply chain be both efficient and responsive? Risk-hedging and agile? Why or 
why not?
	  4.	 With so much productive capacity and room for expansion in the United States, why 
would a company based in the United States choose to purchase items from a foreign 
firm? Discuss the pros and cons.
	  5.	 As a supplier, which factors about a buyer (your potential customer) would you consider 
to be important in setting up a long-term relationship?
	  6.	 Describe how outsourcing works. Why would a firm want to outsource?
	  7.	 Have you ever purchased a product based on purchase price alone and were surprised 
by the eventual total cost of ownership (TCO), either in money or in time? Describe the 
situation.
	  8.	 Why might managers resist buying a more expensive piece of equipment, known to have 
a lower TCO, than a less expensive item?
LO 16–1
LO 16–2
LO 16–3

420	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
	  9.	 Why is it desirable to increase a company’s inventory turnover ratio?
	10.	 Research and compare the inventory turnover ratios of three large retailers: Walmart, Tar­
get, and Nordstrom. Use the same financial Website for all three, and compare numbers 
from the same time frame. What do these ratios tell you? Are you surprised by what you 
found?
LO 16–4
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What term refers to the development and management of supplier relationships in order 
to acquire goods and services in a way that helps achieve the immediate needs of a 
business?
	  2.	 Sometimes a company may need to purchase goods or services that are unique, very com­
plex, and/or extremely expensive. These would not be routine purchases, but there may 
be a number of vendors that could supply what is needed. What process would be used to 
transmit the company’s needs to the available vendors, asking for a detailed response to 
the needs?
	  3.	 Sony Electronics produces a wide variety of electronic products for the consumer market­
place, such as laptop computers, PlayStation game consoles, and tablet computers. What 
type of products would these be considered in the Supply Chain Uncertainty Framework?
	  4.	 One product that Staples sells a lot of is copy paper. According to the Supply Chain 
Uncertainty Framework, what supply chain strategy is appropriate for this product?
	  5.	 What is the term used for the act of moving some of a company’s internal activities and 
decision-making processes to outside providers?
	  6.	 What is the term used for a company moving management of the complete cycle of mate­
rial flow to an outside provider?
	  7.	 Many bottled water manufacturers have recently worked with their suppliers to switch 
over to bottles using much less plastic than before, reducing the amount of plastic that 
needs to be transported, recycled, and/or disposed of. What sourcing practice is this an 
example of?
	  8.	 What term is used to refer to those activities that are the key source of competitive 
advantage?
	  9.	 What three main categories of costs are considered in figuring the total cost of ownership?
	10.	 Which category of lifetime product costs are sometimes overemphasized, leading to a 
failure to fully recognize the total cost of ownership?
	11.	 One of your Taiwanese suppliers has bid on a new line of molded plastic parts that is 
currently being assembled at your plant. The supplier has bid $0.10 per part, given a 
forecast you provided of 200,000 parts in year 1; 300,000 in year 2; and 500,000 in year 
3. Shipping and handling of parts from the supplier’s factory is estimated at $0.01 per 
unit. Additional inventory handling charges should amount to $0.005 per unit. Finally, 
administrative costs are estimated at $20 per month.
	
	   Although your plant is able to continue producing the part, the plant would need to 
invest in another molding machine, which would cost $10,000. Direct materials can be 
purchased for $0.05 per unit. Direct labor is estimated at $0.03 per unit plus a 50 percent 
surcharge for benefits; indirect labor is estimated at $0.011 per unit plus 50 percent ben­
efits. Up-front engineering and design costs will amount to $30,000. Finally, manage­
ment has insisted that overhead be allocated if the parts are made in-house at a rate of 
100 percent of direct labor cost. The firm uses a cost of capital of 15 percent per year.
	
	   What should you do, continue to produce in-house or accept the bid from your Taiwan­
ese supplier? (Answer in Appendix D)
	12.	 Your company assembles five different models of a motor scooter that is sold in specialty 
stores in the United States. The company uses the same engine for all five models. You 
have been given the assignment of choosing a supplier for these engines for the coming 
year. Due to the size of your warehouse and other administrative restrictions, you must 
order the engines in lot sizes of 1,000 each. Because of the unique characteristics of the 
LO 16–1
LO 16–2
LO 16–3

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
421
engine, special tooling is needed during the manufacturing process for which you agree 
to reimburse the supplier. Your assistant has obtained quotes from two reliable engine 
suppliers and you need to decide which to use. The following data have been collected.
Truckload (40,000 lb. each load):
$0.80 per ton-mile
Less-than-truckload:
$1.20 per ton-mile
Note: Per ton-mile = 2,000 lb. per mile
Requirements (annual forecast)
12,000 units
Weight per engine
22 pounds
Order processing cost
$125 per order
Inventory carry cost
20 percent of the average value of inventory per year
Note: Assume that half of the lot size is in inventory, on average (1,000/2 = 500 units).
Order Quantity
Supplier 1 
Unit Price
Supplier 2 
Unit Price
1 to 1,499 units/order
$510.00
$505.00
1,500 to 2,999 units/order
  500.00
$505.00
3,000+ units/order
  490.00
  488.00
Tooling costs
$22,000
$20,000
Distance
  125 miles
  100 miles
Net revenue
$375,000
Cost of goods sold
322,000
Value of production materials on-hand
42,500
Value of work-in-process inventory
37,000
Value of finished goods on-hand
12,500
Two qualified suppliers have submitted the following quotations.
Your assistant has obtained the following freight rates from your carrier.
	
a.  Perform a total cost of ownership analysis and select a supplier.
	
b.  Would it make economic sense to order in truckload quantities? Would your supplier 
selection change if you ordered truckload quantities?
	13.	 Which supply chain efficiency measure is more appropriate when the majority of inven­
tory is held in distribution channels?
	14.	 What do you call the average total value of all items held in inventory for a firm, at cost?
	15.	 The owner of a large machine shop has just finished its financial analysis from the prior 
fiscal year. Following is an excerpt from the final report:
LO 16–4
	
a.  Compute the inventory turnover ratio (ITR).
	
b.  Compute the weeks of supply (WS).
	16.	 The McDonald’s fast-food restaurant on campus sells an average of 4,000 quarter-pound 
hamburgers each week. Hamburger patties are resupplied twice a week, and on average 
the store has 350 pounds of hamburger in stock. Assume that the hamburger patties cost 
$1.00 a pound. What is the inventory turnover for the hamburger patties? On average, 
how many days of supply are on-hand? (Answer in Appendix D)
	17.	 U.S. Airfilter has hired you as a supply chain consultant. The company makes air fil­
ters for residential heating and air-conditioning systems. These filters are made in a sin­
gle plant located in Louisville, Kentucky, in the United States. They are distributed to 

422	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Quarter 1 
(January 
through March)
Quarter 2 
(April 
through June)
Quarter 3 
(July through 
September)
Quarter 4 
(October through 
December)
Sales (total quarter): 
  United States
  Canada
  Europe
300
75
30
350
60
33
405
75
20
375
70
15
Cost of goods sold 
  (total quarter)
280
295
340
350
Raw materials at 
  the Louisville 
plant (end-of-quarter)
  50
  40
  55
  60
Work-in-process 
  and finished 
goods at the 
Louisville plant 
(end-of-quarter)
100
105
120
150
Distribution center 
Inventory (end-of-quarter):
  United States
  Canada
  Europe
25
10
5
27
11
4
23
15
5
30
16
5
All amounts in millions of U.S. dollars.
retailers through wholesale centers in 100 locations in the United States, Canada, and 
Europe. You have collected the following data relating to the value of inventory in the 
U.S. Airfilter supply chain. 
	
a.  What is the average inventory turnover for the firm?
	
b.  If you were given the assignment to increase inventory turnover, what would you 
focus on? Why?
	
c.  The company reported that it used $500M worth of raw material during the year. On 
average, how many weeks of supply of raw material are on-hand at the factory?
W. W. Grainger, Inc., is a leading supplier of mainte­
nance, repair, and operating (MRO) products to busi­
nesses and institutions in the United States, Canada, and 
Mexico, with an expanding presence in Japan, India, 
China, and Panama. The company works with more 
than 3,000 suppliers and runs an extensive Website 
(www.grainger.com), where it offers nearly 900,000 
products. The products range from industrial adhesives 
used in manufacturing, to hand tools, janitorial supplies, 
lighting equipment, and power tools. When something 
is needed by one of its 1.8 million customers, it is often 
needed quickly, so quick service and product availability 
are key drivers to Grainger’s success.
Your assignment involves studying a specific part of 
Grainger’s supply chain. Grainger works with over 250 
suppliers in the China and Taiwan region. These sup­
pliers produce products to Grainger’s specifications and 
ship to the United States using ocean freight carriers 
from four major ports in China and Taiwan. From these 
ports, product is shipped to U.S. entry ports in either 
Seattle, Washington, or Los Angeles, California. After 
passing through customs, the 20- and 40-foot containers 
are shipped by rail to Grainger’s central distribution cen­
ter in Kansas City, Kansas. The containers are unloaded 
and quality is checked in Kansas City. From there, indi­
vidual items are sent to regional warehouses in nine U.S. 
locations, a Canadian site, and Mexico.
The Current China/Taiwan Logistics 
Arrangement
The contracts that Grainger has with Chinese and Tai­
wanese suppliers currently specify that the supplier owns 
the product and is responsible for all costs incurred until 
the product is delivered to the shipping port. These are 
commonly referred to as free on board (FOB) shipping 
port contracts. Grainger works with a freight forward­
ing company that coordinates all shipments from the 
Asian suppliers.
Analytics Exercise: Global Sourcing Decisions—Grainger: Reengineering the 
China/U.S. Supply Chain

	
Global Sourcing and Procurement	
Chapter 16	
423
Currently, suppliers have the option of either ship­
ping product on pallets to consolidation centers at the 
port locations or packing the product in 20- and 40-foot 
containers that are loaded directly on the ships bound 
for the United States. In many cases, the volume from a 
supplier is relatively small and will not sufficiently fill 
a container. The consolidation centers are where indi­
vidual pallets are loaded into the containers that protect 
the product while being shipped across the Pacific Ocean 
and then to Grainger’s Kansas City distribution center. 
The freight forwarding company coordinates the efficient 
shipping of the 20- and 40-foot containers. These are 
the same containers that are loaded onto rail cars in the 
United States.
Currently, about 190,000 cubic meters of material 
are shipped annually from China and Taiwan. This is 
expected to grow about 15 percent per year over the next 
five years. About 89 percent of all the volume shipped 
from China and Taiwan are sent directly from the suppli­
ers in 20- and 40-foot containers that are packed by the 
supplier at the supplier site. Approximately 21 percent 
are packed in the 20-foot containers and 79 percent in 
40-foot containers. The 20-foot containers can hold 34 
cubic meters (CBM) of material, and the 40-foot contain­
ers, 67 CBM. The cost to ship a 20-foot container is $480, 
and for a 40-foot container, $600; this is from any port 
location in China or Taiwan and to either Los Angeles 
or Seattle. Grainger estimates that these supplier-filled 
containers average 85 percent full when they are shipped.
The remaining 11 percent shipped from China and 
Taiwan go through consolidation centers that are located 
at each port. These consolidation centers are run by the 
freight forwarding company and cost about $75,000 per 
year each to operate. At the volumes that are currently 
running through these centers, the variable cost is $4.90 
per CBM. The variable cost of running a consolidation 
center could be reduced to about $1.40 per CBM using 
technology if the volume could be increased to at least 
50,000 CBM per year. Now there is much variability in 
the volume run at each center and it only averages about 
5,000 CBM per site.
Material at the consolidation centers is accumulated 
on an ongoing basis, and as containers are filled they are 
sent to the port. Volume is sufficient enough that at least 
one 40-foot container is shipped from each consolidation 
center each week. Grainger has found that the consolida­
tion centers can load all material into 40-foot containers 
and utilize 96 percent of the capacity of the container.
Grainger ships from four major port locations. 
Approximately 10 percent of the volume is shipped from 
the north China port of Qingdao, while 42 percent is 
shipped from the central China port of Shanghai/Ningbo. 
Another 10 percent is shipped from Kaohsiung in ­Taiwan. 
The final 38 percent is shipped from the southern Yan­
tian/Hong Kong port. Consolidation centers are currently 
run in each location.
Grainger management feels that it may be possible to 
make this part of its supply chain more efficient.
Specific questions to address in your 
analysis:
	1.	 Evaluate the current China/Taiwan logistics costs. 
Assume a current total volume of 190,000 CBM 
and that 89 percent is shipped direct from the sup­
plier plants in containers. Use the data from the 
case and assume that the supplier-loaded contain­
ers are 85 percent full. Assume that consolidation 
centers are run at each of the four port locations. 
The consolidation centers use only 40-foot con­
tainers and fill them to 96 percent capacity. 
Assume that it costs $480 to ship a 20-foot con­
tainer and $600 to ship a 40-foot container. What 
is the total cost to get the containers to the United 
States? Do not include U.S. port costs in this part 
of the analysis.
	2.	 Evaluate an alternative that involves consolidat­
ing all 20-foot container volumes and using only 
a single consolidation center in Shanghai/Ningbo. 
Assume that all the existing 20-foot container 
­volumes and the existing consolidation center vol­
umes are sent to this single consolidation center by 
suppliers. This new consolidation center volume 
would be packed into 40-foot containers, filled to 
96 percent, and shipped to the United States. The 
existing 40-foot volume would still be shipped 
direct from the suppliers at 85 percent capacity 
utilization.
	3.	 What should be done based on your analytics anal­
ysis? What have you not considered that may make 
your analysis invalid or that may strategically limit 
success? What do you think Grainger management 
should do?
Many thanks to Gary Scalzitti of Grainger for help with developing this case.
© Debbie Noda/Modesto Bee/ZUMAPRESS/Alamy

424	
Section 3	
Supply Chain Processes
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined. Answers 
are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 Refers to how common an item is or how many sub­
stitutes might be available.
	  2.	 When a customer allows the supplier to manage 
inventory policy for an item or group of items.
	  3.	 A phenomenon characterized by increased variation 
in ordering as we move from the customer to the 
manufacturer in the supply chain.
	  4.	 Products that satisfy basic needs and do not change 
much over time.
	  5.	 Products with short life cycles and typically high 
profit margins.
	  6.	 A supply chain that must deal with high levels of 
both supply and demand uncertainty.
	  7.	 In order to cope with high levels of supply uncer­
tainty, a firm would use this strategy to reduce risk.
	  8.	 Used to describe functions related to the flow of 
material in a supply chain.
	  9.	 When a firm works with suppliers to look for oppor­
tunities to save money and benefit the environment.
	10.	 Refers to an estimate of the cost of an item that 
includes all costs related to the procurement and use 
of an item, including the costs of disposing after its 
useful life.
Answers To Practice Exam  1. Specificity  2. Vendor-managed inventory  3. Bullwhip effect  4. Functional products  5. Innovative products
 6. Agile supply chain  7. Multiple sources of supply (pooling)  8. Logistics  9. Green sourcing  10. Total cost of ownership

	
425
SECTION 
FOUR
	17.	Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
	18.	Forecasting
	19.	Sales and Operations Planning
	20.	Inventory Management
	21.	Material Requirements Planning
	22.	Workcenter Scheduling
	23.	Theory of Constraints
Supply and Demand 
Planning and 
Control
Information Technology Plays an 
Important Role in Operations and 
Supply Chain Management Success
Running a business requires a great planning sys­
tem. What do we expect to sell in the future? How 
many people should we hire to handle the Christmas 
rush? How much inventory do we need? What 
should we make today? This section discusses vari­
ous approaches used to answer these questions. 
The use of comprehensive software packages is 
common practice, but it is important to understand 
the basic planning concepts that underlie them so 
that the right software can be purchased and con­
figured correctly. Moreover, given this basic under­
standing, a spreadsheet can be created for simple 
production planning situations.

426
17
Enterprise 
Resource 
Planning Systems
Learning Objectives
	LO17–1	 Understand what an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system is.
	LO17–2	 Explain how ERP integrates business units through information sharing.
	LO17–3	 Illustrate how supply chain planning and control fits within ERP.
	LO17–4	 Evaluate supply chain performance using data from the ERP system.
ERP IN THE CLOUD!
Imagine having your PC, your cell phone, and your iPad all being in sync—all the 
time. Imagine being able to access all of your personal data, your bank accounts, 
your investments, or the location of your partner at any given moment. Imagine hav­
ing the ability to organize and retrieve data from any online source. Imagine being 
able to share that data—photos, movies, contracts, e-mail, documents, and so forth—
with your friends, family, and co-workers in an instant. Imagine being able to do this 
without being tethered to an Ethernet cable. Everything is wireless and security is 
ensured. This is what personal cloud computing promises to deliver.
Now move this into the business realm. Companies can make all of their data avail­
able through simple apps. Every employee, no matter where they are located, can 
set up an instant office with a simple and secure wireless 
connection. New applications are instantly deployed glob­
ally to all employees when they are ready. All employees 
are looking at the same data, using the same application 
software, and reacting to the same real-time information. 
The savings on cabling, on server utilization, training, and 
support are dramatic. But the real benefits come from opti­
mization and more consistent decisions, sharing customer 
information, and transparency from knowing the exact cur­
rent status of the firm. Welcome to the world of ERP and 
working in “the cloud.”
Cloud computing
A term that refers to 
delivering hosted ERP 
services over the Internet. 
This can significantly 
reduce the cost of ERP.
© Ronda Churchill/Bloomberg via Getty Images

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
427
This chapter discusses the integrated enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems that 
are now commonly used by large companies to support supply and demand planning and 
control, the topic of this section of the book. Major software vendors such as JDA Software, 
Microsoft, Oracle, and SAP (see Exhibit 17.1) offer state-of-the-art systems designed to pro­
vide real-time data to support better routine decision making, improve the efficiency of trans­
action processing, foster cross-functional integration, and provide improved insights into how 
a business should be run.
In most companies, ERP provides the information backbone needed to manage day-to-
day execution. These systems support the standard planning and control functions covered 
in this section of the book. In particular, standard applications include forecasting covered 
in Chapter 18, sales and operations planning in Chapter 19, inventory control in Chapter 
20, material requirements planning in Chapter 21, and workcenter scheduling in Chapter 22. 
The standard offering from the major vendors are often extended through more specialized 
industry-specific applications, or through custom modules built with spreadsheets or other 
general-purpose software.
WHAT IS ERP?
The term enterprise resource planning (ERP) can mean different things, depending on one’s 
viewpoint. From the view of managers in a company, the emphasis is on the word plan­
ning; ERP represents a comprehensive software approach to support decisions concurrent 
with planning and controlling the business. On the other hand, for the information technology 
community, ERP is a term describing a software system that integrates application programs 
in finance, manufacturing, logistics, sales and marketing, human resources, and other func­
tions in a firm. This integration is accomplished through a database shared by all the func­
tions and data-processing applications. ERP systems typically are very efficient at handling 
the many transactions that document the activities of a company. For our purposes, we begin 
by describing our view of what ERP should accomplish for management, with an emphasis 
on planning. Following this, we describe how the ERP software programs are designed and 
then provide points to consider in choosing an ERP system. Our special interest is in how the 
software supports supply chain planning and control decisions.
ERP systems allow for integrated planning across the functional areas in a firm. Perhaps 
more importantly, ERP also supports integrated execution across functional areas. Today, the 
focus is moving to coordinated planning and execution across companies. In many cases, this 
work is supported by ERP systems.
Consistent Numbers
ERP requires a company to have consistent definitions across functional areas. Consider the 
problem of measuring demand. How is demand measured? Is it when manufacturing com­
pletes an order? When items are picked from finished goods? When they physically leave the 
Enterprise resource 
planning (ERP)
A computer system that 
integrates application 
programs in accounting, 
sales, manufacturing, and 
the other functions in a 
firm. This integration is 
accomplished through a 
database shared by all the 
application programs.
Understand what an 
enterprise resource 
planning (ERP) system is.
LO 17-1
Company
Special Features
Website
JDA Software
Recent growth through purchase of software companies includ­
ing i2 and Manugistics. Specializes in supply chain applications.
www.jda.com
Microsoft
Windows integration and the Office suite (Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint). The ERP product is Microsoft Dynamics that 
features customer relationship management.
www.microsoft.com
Oracle
Major database vendor (hardware and software).
www.oracle.com
SAP
Largest ERP vendor. Comprehensive scope of products across 
many industries.
www.sap.com
Major ERP Vendors
exhibit 17.1

428	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
premises? When they are invoiced? When they arrive at the customer sites? What is needed 
is a set of agreed-on definitions that are used by all functional units when they are processing 
their transactions. Consistent reporting of such measures as demand, stockouts, raw materi­
als inventory, and finished goods inventory, for example, can then be accomplished. This is a 
basic building block for ERP systems.
Companies implementing ERP strive to derive benefits through much greater efficiency 
gained by an integrated supply chain planning and control process. In addition, better respon­
siveness to the needs of customers is obtained through the real-time information provided by 
the system. To better understand how this works, we next describe features of ERP software.
Software Imperatives
There are four aspects of ERP software that determine the quality of an ERP system:
	1.	 The software should be multifunctional in scope with the ability to track financial 
results in monetary terms, procurement activity in units of material, sales in terms 
of product units and services, and manufacturing or conversion processes in units of 
resources or people. That is, excellent ERP software produces results closely related 
to the needs of people for their day-to-day work.
	2.	 The software should be integrated. When a transaction or piece of data representing 
an activity of the business is entered by one of the functions, data regarding the other 
related functions are updated as well. This eliminates the need for reposting data to 
the system. Integration also ensures a common vision—we all sing from the same 
sheet of music.
	3.	 The software needs to be modular in structure so it can be combined into a single 
expansive system, narrowly focused on a single function, or connected with software 
from another source/application.
	4.	 The software must facilitate basic planning and control activities, including forecast­
ing, production planning, and inventory management.
An ERP system is most appropriate for a company seeking the benefits of data and process 
integration supported by its information system. Benefit is gained from the elimination of 
redundant processes, increased accuracy in information, superior processes, and improved 
speed in responding to customer requirements.
An ERP software system can be built with software modules from different vendors, or it 
can be purchased from a single vendor. A multivendor approach can provide the opportunity 
to purchase “best in class” of each module. But this is usually at the expense of increased cost 
and greater resources that may be needed to implement and integrate the functional modules. 
On the other hand, a single-vendor approach may be easier to implement, but the features and 
functionality may not be the best available.
Routine Decision Making
It is important to make a distinction between the transaction processing capability and the 
decision support capability of an ERP system. Transaction processing relates to the posting 
and tracking of the activities that document the business. When an item is purchased from 
a vendor, for example, a specific sequence of activities occurs. The solicitation of the offer, 
acceptance of the offer, delivery of goods, storage in inventory, and payment for the purchase 
are all activities that occur as a result of the purchase. The efficient handling of the transac­
tions as goods move through each step of the process is the primary goal of an ERP system.
A second objective of an ERP system is decision support. Decision support relates to how 
well the system helps the user make intelligent judgments about how to run the business. A 
key point here is that people, not software, make the decisions. The system supports better 
decision making. In the case of purchasing an item, for example, the amount to purchase, 
the selection of the vendor, and how it should be delivered will need to be decided. These 
decisions are made by professionals, while ERP systems are oriented toward transaction pro­
cessing. However, over time, they evolve using decision logic based on parameters set in the 
Transaction processing
This is the posting and 
tracking of the detailed 
activities of a business.
Decision support
This is the ability of the 
system to help a user make 
intelligent judgments about 
how to run the business.

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
429
system. For example, for items stored in inventory, the specific reorder points, order quanti­
ties, vendors, transportation vendors, and storage locations can be established when the items 
are initially entered in the system. At a later point, the decision logic can be revisited to 
improve the results. A major industry has been built around the development of bolt-on soft­
ware packages designed to provide more intelligent decision support to ERP systems.
Explain how ERP integrates 
business units through 
information sharing.
LO 17-2
HOW ERP CONNECTS THE FUNCTIONAL UNITS
A typical ERP system is made up of functionally oriented and tightly integrated modules. All 
the modules of the system use a common database that is updated in real time. Each module 
has the same user interface, similar to that of the familiar Microsoft Office products, thus 
making the use of the different modules much easier for users trained on the system. ERP sys­
tems from various vendors are organized in different ways, but typically modules are focused 
on at least the following four major areas: finance, manufacturing and logistics, sales and 
marketing, and human resources.
ERP systems have evolved in much the same way as car models at auto­
mobile manufacturers. Automakers introduce new models every year or two 
and make many minor refinements. Major (platform) changes are made much 
less frequently, perhaps every five to eight years. The same is true of ERP 
software. ERP vendors are constantly looking for ways to improve the func­
tionality of their software, so new features are often added. Many of these 
minor changes are designed to improve the usability of the software through 
a better screen interface or added features that correspond to the “hot” idea 
of the time. Major software revisions that involve changes to the structure of 
the database, and changes to the network and computer hardware technolo­
gies, though, are made only every three to five years. The basic ERP platform 
cannot be easily changed because of the large number of existing users and 
support providers. But these changes do occur.
Exhibit 17.2 depicts the scope of ERP applications. The diagram is meant 
to show how a comprehensive information system uses ERP as its core or 
© Jag_cz/Shutterstock.com
Human resource
management
Finance
Sales and marketing
Manufacturing and logistics
Manufacturing
planning and control
Sales and operations
planning
Material and capacity
planning
Material and vendor
management
Enterprise planning
models
Enterprise
performance
Data
warehousing
Report generation
Transaction
processing
Enterprise
Resource Planning
The Scope of ERP Applications
exhibit 17.2

430	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
backbone. Many other software-based functions may be integrated with the ERP system but 
are not necessarily included in the ERP system. The use of more specialized software such 
as decision support systems can often bring significant competitive advantages to a firm. The 
following brief descriptions of typical module functionality give an indication of how com­
prehensive the applications can be.
Finance
As a company grows through acquisition, and as business units make more of their own deci­
sions, many companies find themselves with incompatible and sometimes conflicting finan­
cial data. An ERP system provides a common platform for financial data capture, a common 
set of numbers, and processes, facilitating rapid reconciliation of the general ledger. The real 
value of an ERP system is in the automatic capture of basic accounting transactions from the 
source of the transactions. The actual order from a customer, for example, is used not only 
by manufacturing to trigger production requirements, but also becomes the information for 
updating accounts payable when the order is actually shipped.
Manufacturing and Logistics
This set of applications is the largest and most complex of the module categories. The system 
components discussed in this section of the book are concentrated in this area. Typical com­
ponents include:
∙	 Sales and operations planning coordinates the various planning efforts, including 
marketing planning, financial planning, operations planning, and human resource 
planning.
∙	 Materials management covers tasks within the supply chain, including purchasing, 
vendor evaluation, and invoice management. It also includes inventory and warehouse 
management functions to support the efficient control of materials.
∙	 Plant maintenance supports the activities associated with planning and performing 
repairs and preventative maintenance.
∙	 Quality management software implements procedures for quality control and 
assurance.
∙	 Production planning and control supports both discrete and process manufacturing. 
Repetitive and configure-to-order approaches are typically provided. Most ERP sys­
tems address all phases of manufacturing, including capacity leveling, material require­
ments planning, just-in-time (JIT), product costing, bill of materials processing, and 
database maintenance. Orders can be generated from sales orders or from links to an 
Internet site.
∙	 Project management systems facilitate the setup, management, and evaluation of 
large, complex projects.
Sales and Marketing
This group of system components supports activities such as customer management; sales 
order management; forecasting, order management, credit checking configuration man­
agement; distribution, export controls, shipping, transportation management; and billing, 
invoices, and rebate processing. These modules, like the others, are increasingly implemented 
globally, allowing firms to manage the sales process worldwide. For example, if an order is 
received in Hong Kong, but the products are not available locally, they may be internally pro­
cured from warehouses in other parts of the world and shipped to arrive together at the Hong 
Kong customer’s site.
Human Resources
This set of applications supports the capabilities needed to manage, schedule, pay, hire, and 
train the people who make an organization run. Typical functions include payroll, benefits 

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
431
administration, hiring procedures, personnel development planning, workforce planning, 
schedule and shift planning, time management, and travel expense accounting.
Customized Software
In addition to the standard application modules, many companies utilize special add-on mod­
ules that link to the standard modules, thus tailoring applications to specific needs. These 
modules may be tailored to specific industries such as chemical/petrochemical, oil and gas, 
hospital, or banking. They may also provide special decision support functions such as opti­
mal scheduling of critical resources.
Even though the scope of applications included in standard ERP packages is very large, 
additional software will usually be required because of the unique characteristics of each 
company. A company generates its own unique mix of products and services that are designed 
to provide a significant competitive advantage to the firm. This unique mix of products and 
services will need to be supported by unique software capabilities, some of which may be 
purchased from vendors and some that will need to be custom-designed. Customized software 
applications are also widely used to coordinate the activities of a firm with its supply chain 
customers and suppliers.
Data Integration
The software modules, as described earlier, form the core of an ERP system. This core is 
designed to process the business transactions to support the essential activities of an enter­
prise in an efficient manner. Working from a single database, transactions document each of 
the activities that compose the processes used by the enterprise to conduct business. A major 
value of the integrated database is that information is not reentered at each step of a process, 
thus reducing errors and work.
Transactions are processed in real time, meaning that as soon as the transaction is entered 
into the system, the effect on items such as inventory status, order status, and accounts receiv­
able is known to all users of the system. There is no delay in the processing of a transaction in 
a real-time system. A customer could, for example, call into an order desk to learn the exact 
status of an order—or determine the status independently through an Internet connection. From 
a decision analysis viewpoint, the amount of detail available in the system is extremely rich. If, 
for example, one wishes to analyze the typical lead time for a make-to-order product, the analyst 
could process an information request that selects all of the orders for the product over the past 
three months, calculate the time between order date and delivery date for each order, and finally 
average the time for the whole set of orders. Analyses, such as this lead time, can be valuable for 
evaluating improvements designed to make the process more responsive, for example.
To facilitate queries not built into the standard ERP system software, a separate data 
warehouse is commonly employed. A data warehouse is a special program (often running on a 
totally separate computer) that is designed to automatically archive and process data for uses that 
are outside the basic ERP system applications. For example, the data warehouse could, on an ongo­
ing basis, perform the calculations needed for the average lead time question. The data warehouse 
software and database is set up so that users may access and analyze data without placing a burden 
on the operational ERP system. This is a powerful mechanism to support higher-level decision 
support applications. See the nearby OSCM at Work box titled “Open Information Warehouse.”
A good example of a company making use of a data warehouse is Walmart. Walmart is 
now able to put two full years of retail store sales data online. The data are used by both 
internal Walmart buyers and outside suppliers—sales and current inventory data on prod­
ucts sold at Walmart and Sam’s Club stores. Vendors, who are restricted to viewing products 
they supply, use a Web-based extranet site to collaborate with Walmart’s buyers in managing 
inventory and making replenishment decisions. A vendor’s store-by-store sales results for a 
given day are available to vendors by 4 A.M. the following day. The database is more than 130 
terabytes in size. Each terabyte is the equivalent of 250 million pages of text. At an average of 
500 pages per book, a terabyte is a half-million books. For Walmart as a whole, that is about 
20 major university libraries.
Real time
As soon as a transaction 
is entered, the effect is 
known by all users of the 
system.
Data warehouse
A special program that is 
designed to automatically 
capture and process data 
for uses that are outside 
the basic ERP system 
applications.

432	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
ERP is concerned with all aspects of a supply chain, including managing materials, schedul­
ing machines and people, and coordinating suppliers and key customers. The coordination 
required for success runs across all functional units in the firm. Consider the following simple 
example to illustrate the degree of coordination required.
Simplified Example
Ajax Food Services Company has one plant that makes sandwiches. These are sold in vending 
machines, cafeterias, and small stores. One of the sandwiches is peanut butter and jelly (PBJ). 
It is made from bread, butter, peanut butter, and grape jelly. When complete, it 
is wrapped in a standard plastic package used for all Ajax sandwiches. One loaf 
of bread makes 10 sandwiches, a package of butter makes 50 sandwiches, and 
containers of peanut butter and jelly each make 20 sandwiches.
Consider the information needed by Ajax for planning and control. First, 
Ajax needs to know what demand to expect for its PBJ sandwich in the future. 
This might be forecast by analyzing detailed sales data from each location 
where the sandwiches are sold. Because sales are all handled by sales repre­
sentatives who travel between the various sites, data based on the actual orders 
and sales reports provided by the reps can be used to make this forecast. The 
same data are used by human resources to calculate commissions owed to the 
reps for payroll purposes. Marketing uses the same data to analyze each current 
location and evaluate the attractiveness of new locations.
Freshness is very important to Ajax, so daily demand forecasts are devel­
oped to plan sandwich making. Consider, for example, that Ajax sees that it 
Open Information Warehouse
Any modern database will let you easily formulate an SQL 
query like “What sales did my company have in Italy in 2016?” 
A report generated in response to such a query could look 
like this:
Region
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Total
Umbria
1,000
1,200
  800
2,000
5,000
Toscana
2,000
2,600
1,600
2,800
9,000
Calabria
  400
  300
  150
  450
1,300
Total
3,400
4,100
2,550
5,250
15,300  
But things get more complex if, for instance, we then 
want to use this answer as the basis for drilling down to look 
at the sales for different quarters and sales representatives in 
the various regions. Drilling down means descending through 
an existing hierarchy to bring out more and more detail.
In the following example, we drill down through the 
sales hierarchy (sales representatives in Toscana). Signore 
Corleone’s sales do not appear to have been affected by 
the holiday season in the third quarter.
OSCM AT WORK
Sales
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Total
S. Paolo
500
600
300
500
1,900
S. Vialli
700
600
200
700
2,200
S. Ferrari
600
700
400
700
2,400
S. Corleone
200
700
700
900
2,500
Total
2,000  
2,600  
1,600  
2,800  
9,000
At this point, you can switch to another dimension—for 
instance, from sales representative to product sold. This is 
often referred to as slice and dice.
Product
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Total
X-11
2,000
2,500
1,500
3,550
9,550
Z-12
1,400
1,600
1,050
1,700
5,750
Total
3,400
4,100
2,550
5,250
15,300  
From the standpoint of a data analyst, it can now be 
useful to check sales of particular products in each region. 
Current software allows the end user to do this easily using 
the data warehouse approach implemented within the 
system.
HOW SUPPLY CHAIN PLANNING AND CONTROL FITS 
WITHIN ERP
Illustrate how supply chain 
planning and control fits 
within ERP.
LO 17-3
© DJC/Alamy

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
433
needs to make 300 PBJ sandwiches to be delivered to the sales sites this Friday. Ajax will 
actually assemble the sandwiches on Thursday. According to the usage data given earlier, this 
requires 30 loaves of bread, 6 packages of butter, and 15 containers of peanut butter and jelly. 
Freshness is largely dictated by the age of the bread, so it is important that Ajax works closely 
with the local baker because the baker delivers bread each morning on the basis of the day’s 
assembly schedule. Similarly, the delivery schedules for the butter, peanut butter, and jelly 
need to be coordinated with the vendors of these items.
Ajax uses college students who work on a part-time basis to assemble the sandwiches. 
A student can make 60 sandwiches per hour and sandwiches must be ready for loading into 
the delivery trucks by 4:00 P.M. on the day prior to delivery. Our 300 sandwiches require five 
hours of work, so any one student doing this work needs to start at or before 11:00 A.M. on 
Thursday to make the sandwiches on time.
An ERP system is designed to provide the information and decision support needed to 
coordinate this type of activity. Of course, with our simplified example, the coordination is 
trivial, but consider if our company were making hundreds of different types of sandwiches 
in 1,000 cities around the world, and these sandwiches were sold at hundreds of sites in each 
of these cities. This is exactly the scale of operations that can be handled by a modern ERP 
system.
Precisely how all of these calculations are made is, of course, the main focus of this sec­
tion of the book. All of the details for how material requirements are calculated, capacity is 
planned, and demand forecasts are made, for example, are explained in great detail.
SAP Supply Chain Management
In this section, we see how SAP, a major ERP vendor, has approached the details of supply 
chain planning and control. Here, we are using SAP to show how one vendor organizes the 
functions. Other major vendors like JDA Software, Oracle, and Microsoft each have a unique 
approach to packaging supply chain software.
SAP divides its supply chain software into four main functions: supply chain planning, 
supply chain execution, supply chain collaboration, and supply chain coordination. Current 
information about products is on vendors’ Websites, and readers are encouraged to download 
the white papers that describe a vendor’s current thinking. These publications are informative 
and indicate where a vendor will move in the future. Moreover, comparing/contrasting this 
information can be very educational—and help in making key choices as to which business 
processes can be supported by standard (plain vanilla) software.
The supply chain design module provides a centralized overview of the entire sup­
ply chain and key performance indicators, which helps identify weak links and potential 
improvements. It supports strategic planning by enabling the testing of various scenarios 
to determine how changes in the market or customer demand can be addressed by the sup­
ply chain. Here, for our simplified example of Ajax food services, we could evaluate the 
relative profitability of particular market channels and locations such as vending machines 
versus shops in train stations.
Collaborative demand and supply planning helps match demand to supply. Demand-
planning tools take into account historical demand data, causal factors, marketing events, 
market intelligence, and sales objectives and enable the supply chain network to work on 
a single forecast. Supply planning tools create an overall supply plan that covers materials 
management, production, distribution and transportation requirements, and constraints. Here, 
Ajax would be able to anticipate the demands for each kind of sandwich in each location and 
plan replenishments accordingly.
SAP Supply Chain Execution
Materials management shares inventory and procurement order information to ensure that the 
materials required for manufacturing are available in the right place and at the right time. This 
set of applications supports plan-driven procurement, inventory management, and invoicing, 
with a feedback loop between demand and supply to increase responsiveness. In this set of 
applications, Ajax would plan for all the sandwich components to be delivered to the right 

434	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
places at the right times. Inventories might be maintained on some items such as peanut but­
ter, while others such as bread might be planned on a just-in-time basis.
Collaborative manufacturing shares information with partners to coordinate production 
and enable everyone to work together to increase both visibility and responsiveness. These 
applications support all types of production processes: engineer-to-order, assemble-to-order, 
make-to-order, and make-to-stock. They create a continuous information flow across engi­
neering, planning, and execution and can optimize production schedules across the supply 
chain, taking into account material and capacity constraints. Here, Ajax might do joint plan­
ning with key suppliers and perhaps organize the planning of special promotions.
Collaborative fulfillment supports partnerships that can intelligently commit to delivery 
dates in real time and fulfill orders from all channels on time. This set of applications includes 
a global available-to-promise (ATP) feature that locates finished products, components, and 
machine capacities in a matter of seconds. It also manages the flow of products through sales 
channels, matching supply to market demand, reassigning supply and demand to meet shifts 
in customer demand, and managing transportation and warehousing. Clearly, all these logis­
tics activities are critical to Ajax in order to deliver fresh sandwiches in the right amounts.
SAP Supply Chain Collaboration
The inventory collaboration hub uses the Internet to gain visibility to suppliers and manage 
the replenishment process. Suppliers can see the status of their parts at all plants, receive 
automatic alerts when inventory levels get low, and respond quickly via the Web. The hub can 
also be integrated with back-end transaction and planning systems to update them in real time. 
Here, Ajax could provide real-time inventory views to its suppliers—not only of material sup­
pliers, but also of downstream inventories (i.e., sandwiches).
Collaborative replenishment planning is particularly useful in the consumer products 
and retail industries. These applications allow manufacturers to collaborate with their stra­
tegic retail customers to increase revenue, improve service, and lower inventory levels and 
costs. They enable an exception-based collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment 
(CPFR) process that allows the firm to add retail partners without a proportional increase in 
staff. This set of applications would be particularly useful to Ajax as it grows its global busi­
ness and adds new channels of distribution.
Vendor managed inventory (VMI) is a set of processes to enable vendor-driven replenish­
ment that can be implemented over the Web. Now, Ajax vendors would no longer receive 
“orders.” They would replenish Ajax inventories as they like—but be paid for their materials 
only when items are consumed by Ajax.
Enterprise portal gives users personalized access to a range of information, applications, 
and services supported by the system. It uses role-based technology to deliver information to 
users according to their individual responsibilities within the supply chain network. It can also 
use Web-based tools to integrate third-party systems in the firm’s supply chain network. Here, 
for example, marketing people at Ajax might like to examine the detailed sales data (and per­
haps customer questionnaires) in relation to a new product introduction.
Mobile supply chain management is a set of applications so that people can plan, execute, 
and monitor activity using mobile and remote devices. Mobile data entry using personal data 
assistant devices and automated data capture using wireless “smart tags,” for example, are 
supported. Here, Ajax can have marketing and even delivery personnel report on actual store 
conditions—not just sales but also category management. For example, how well does the 
actual assortment of sandwiches match the standard?
SAP Supply Chain Coordination
Supply chain event management monitors the execution of supply chain events, such as the 
issue of a pallet or the departure of a truck, and flags any problems that come up. This set 
of applications is particularly useful for product tracking/traceability. For Ajax, if there is a 
customer complaint about a sandwich, it is critical to quickly determine if this is an isolated 
instance or whether there might be a large group of bad quality sandwiches—and how to 
find them.

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
435
Supply chain performance management allows the firm to define, select, and monitor key 
performance indicators, such as costs and assets, and use them to gain an integrated, compre­
hensive view of performance across the supply chain. It provides constant surveillance of key 
performance measures and generates an alert if there is a deviation from plan. It can be used 
with mySAP Business Intelligence and SAP’s data warehousing and data analysis software. 
Here, Ajax needs to not only assess profit contribution by sandwich type and location, it also 
needs to determine which are the best supplier and customer partners.
PERFORMANCE METRICS TO EVALUATE INTEGRATED 
SYSTEM EFFECTIVENESS
As indicated, one significant advantage that a firm gains from using an integrated ERP system 
is the ability to obtain current data on how the firm is performing. An ERP system can pro­
vide the data needed for a comprehensive set of performance measures to evaluate strategic 
alignment of the various functions with the firm’s strategy. An example of the comprehen­
siveness of the measures is tracking the time from spending cash on purchases until the cash 
is received in sales.
The balance sheet and the income and expense statements contain financial measures, such 
as net profit, that traditionally have been used to evaluate the success of the firm. A limitation 
of traditional financial metrics is that they primarily tell the story of past events. They are less 
helpful as a guide to decision makers in creating future value through investments in customer 
infrastructure, suppliers, employees, manufacturing processes, and other innovations.
Our goal is a more holistic approach to management of the firm. Exhibit 17.3 depicts three 
major functional areas that make up the internal supply chain of a manufacturing enterprise: 
purchasing, manufacturing, and sales and distribution. Tight cooperation is required between 
these three functions for effective manufacturing planning and control. Considered indepen­
dently, purchasing is mainly concerned with minimizing materials cost, manufacturing with 
minimum production costs, sales with selling the greatest amount, and distribution with mini­
mum distribution and warehousing costs. Let us consider how each independently operating 
function might seek to optimize its operation.
The “Functional Silo” Approach
The purchasing function is responsible for buying all of the material required to support 
manufacturing operations. When operating independently, this function wishes to know what 
materials and quantities are going to be needed over the long term. The purchasing group then 
solicits bids for the best price for each material. The main criterion is simply the cost of the 
material, and the purchasing function is evaluated on this criterion: What is latest actual cost 
versus standard cost? Of course, quality is always going to be important to the group, so typi­
cally some type of quality specification will need to be guaranteed by the supplier. But quality 
is more of a constraint than a goal; suppliers must achieve some minimal level of specifica­
tion. Consideration of delivery schedules, quantities, and responsiveness are also important, 
Evaluate supply chain 
performance using data 
from the ERP system.
LO 17-4
·  Raw materials inventory
·  Work-in-process
·  Finished goods inventory
·  Purchase cost of material
·  Accounts payable
Procurement
cycle
Manufacturing
cycle
Sales and distribution
cycle
·  Distribution inventory
·  Accounts receivable
Manufacturing Operating Cycle
exhibit 17.3

436	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
but again these considerations are often secondary at best in how the purchasing function is 
evaluated in a traditional firm.
For manufacturing, making the product at the lowest possible cost is the classic metric. To 
do this requires minimum equipment downtime, with high equipment and labor utilization. 
Stopping to set up equipment is not the desire of this group. This group is focused on high-
volume output, with minimum changeovers. Quality is again “important”—but as in purchas­
ing, it is more of a minimum hurdle.
Long production runs lead to lower unit costs, but they also generate larger inventories. For 
sales, larger inventories appear at first to be desirable, since these should support customer 
service. Alas, it is not so; a one-year supply of product A is of no help when we are out of 
product B.
Distribution can be equally narrow-minded and suboptimal. In the classic case, its job is 
moving the product from the manufacturing site to the customer at the lowest possible cost. 
Depending on the product, it may need to be stored in one or more distribution centers and 
be moved via one or more different modes of transportation (truck, rail, etc.). Evaluation of 
activities tends to focus on the specific activity involved. For example, many firms focus on 
the lowest price quotation for moving a product from one stage of the distribution chain to 
another, rather than on the total costs of moving materials into and out of the overall firm. 
And even here this cost focus needs to be integrated with other objectives such as lower inven­
tories, faster response times, and customer service.
Consider the implications if all three areas are allowed to work independently. To take 
advantage of discounts, purchasing will buy the largest quantities possible. This results in 
large amounts of raw material inventory. The manufacturing group desires to maximize pro­
duction volumes in order to spread the significant fixed costs of production over as many 
units as possible. These large lot sizes result in high amounts of work-in-process inventory, 
with large quantities of goods pushed into finished goods whether they are needed or not. 
Large lot sizes also mean that the time between batches increases; therefore, response times 
to unexpected demand increase. Finally, distribution will try to fully load every truck that 
is used to move material to minimize transportation cost. Of course, this may result in large 
amounts of inventory in distribution centers (perhaps the wrong ones) and might not match 
well with what customers really need. Given the opportunity, the sales group might even 
sell product that cannot possibly be delivered on time. After all, they are evaluated on sales, 
not deliveries. A more coordinated approach is facilitated by the use of an ERP system. 
The following is an example of a consistent set of metrics useful for managing supply chain 
functions effectively.
Integrated Supply Chain Metrics
The APICS Supply Chain Council has developed many metrics to measure the performance 
of the overall supply chain. It has used these standardized measures to develop benchmarks 
for comparisons between companies. Exhibit 17.4 contains a list of some of these measures 
with average and best-in-class benchmarks. The average and best-in-class measures are for 
typical large industrial products. The APICS Supply Chain Council has developed sets of 
measures similar to these for many different categories of companies.
A particularly useful approach to measuring performance not only captures the integrated 
impact that the three classic functions have on the entire business supply chain, it also inte­
grates the finance function. Such a metric, which measures the relative efficiency of a supply 
chain, is cash-to-cash cycle time. Cash-to-cash cycle time integrates the purchasing, manu­
facturing, and sales/distribution cycles depicted in Exhibit 17.3. But it also relates well to the 
financial maxim: Cash is king! Calculating the measure requires the use of data related to 
purchasing, accounting, manufacturing, and sales.
Actually, cash-to-cash cycle time is a measure of cash flow. Cash flow indicates where 
cash comes from (its source), where cash is spent (its use), and the net change in cash for the 
year. Understanding how cash flows through a business is critical to managing the business 
effectively. Accountants use the term operating cycle to describe the length of time it takes a 
business to convert cash outflows for raw materials, labor, and so forth into cash inflows. This 
Cash-to-cash cycle 
time
The average number 
of days that it takes a 
business to convert cash 
spent for raw material and 
other resources into cash 
inflows from sales.

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
437
cycle time determines, to a large extent, the amount of capital needed to start and operate a 
business. Conceptually, cash-to-cash cycle time is calculated as follows:
Cash-to-cash cycle time = Inventory days of supply + Days of sales outstanding
– Average payment period for material
​​[​17.1​]​
The overall result is the number of days between paying for raw materials and getting paid 
for the product. Going through the details of calculating cash-to-cash cycle time demonstrates 
the power of integrated information. These calculations are straightforward in an ERP system. 
The calculation can be divided into three parts: the accounts receivable cycle, the inventory 
cycle, and the accounts payable cycle.
Exhibit 17.5 shows the data that are used for calculating cash-to-cash cycle time. The 
data are controlled by different functions within the company. The current accounts payable 
amount, an account that is dependent on the credit terms that purchasing negotiates with sup­
pliers, captures the current money the firm owes its suppliers. As will be seen in the calcula­
tion, this is a form of credit to the company.
The inventory account gives the value of the entire inventory within the company. This includes 
raw materials, work-in-process, finished goods, and distribution inventory. The value of inventory 
depends on the quantities stored and also the cost of the inventory to the firm. All three major 
functional areas affect the inventory account. Purchasing has a major influence on raw materials. 
Manufacturing largely determines work-in-process and finished goods. Sales/distribution influ­
ences the location of finished goods—as well as the amounts, through their forecasts and orders.
Just as inventory is affected by all three functions, the cost of sales is dependent on costs 
that are incurred throughout the firm. For the purposes of the cash-to-cash cycle time calcula­
tion, this is expressed as a percentage of total sales. This percentage depends on such items as 
material cost, labor cost, and all other direct costs associated with the procurement of materi­
als, manufacturing process, and distribution of the product.
Measure
Description
Best in Class
Average or 
Median
Delivery performance
What percentage of orders is shipped 
according to schedule?
93%
69%
Fill rate by line item
Orders often contain multiple line 
items. This is the percentage of the 
actual line items filled.
97%
88%
Perfect order fulfillment
This measures how many complete 
orders were filled and shipped on 
time.
92.4%
65.7%
Order fulfillment lead time
The time from when an order is 
placed to when it is received by the 
customer.
135 days
225 days
Warranty cost of % of 
revenue
This is the actual warranty expense 
divided by revenue.
1.2%
2.4%
Inventory days of supply
How long an item spends in inventory 
before being used.
55 days
84 days
Cash-to-cash cycle time
Considering accounts payable, 
accounts receivable, and inventory, 
this is the amount of time it takes to 
turn cash used to purchase materi­
als into cash from a customer.
35.6 days
99.4 days
Asset turns
This is a measure of how many times 
the same assets can be used to 
generate revenue and profit.
4.7 turns
1.7 turns
Supply Chain Metrics
exhibit 17.4

438	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Sales are simply the total sales revenue over a given period of time. Finally, accounts 
receivable is the amount owed the firm by its customers. The accounts receivable amount will 
depend on the firm’s credit policy and its ability to deliver product in a timely manner. Exhibit 
17.5 shows how the three major functional areas influence the cash-to-cash cycle calculation.
Calculating the Cash-to-Cash Cycle Time
As noted, the first task in determining the cash-to-cash cycle time is to calculate accounts 
receivable cycle time. This measures the length of time it takes a business to convert a sale 
into cash. In other words, how long does it take a business to collect the money owed for 
goods already sold? One way is to calculate the number of days of sales invested in accounts 
receivable:
	
​​​S​ d​  =  ​ S 
__ 
d ​​	
​[​17.2​]​
where
Sd = average daily sales
 S = sales over d days
	
​​​AR​ d​  =  ​ AR 
___ 
​S​ d​ ​​	
​​[ 17.3 ]​
where
ARd = average days of accounts receivable
 AR = accounts receivable
The next part of the calculation is the inventory cycle time. This is the number of days of 
inventory measured relative to the cost of sales:
	
​​​C​ d​  =  ​S​ d​ CS​	
​​[ 17.4 ]​
where
 Cd = average daily cost of sales
CS = cost of sales (percent)
Accounts
payable
Inventory
Cost of sales
Sales
Cash-to-cash
cycle time
Manufacturing
Purchasing
Sales and distribution
Accounts
receivable
ERP
Database
Integrated ERP Data for Cash-to-Cash Cycle Time Calculation
exhibit 17.5

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
439
	
​​​I​ d​  =  ​ I 
__ 
​C​ d​ ​​	
​[ 17.5 ]​
where
Id = average days of inventory
I = current value of inventory (total)
Next, the accounts payable cycle time measures the level of accounts payable relative to 
the cost of sales:
	
​​​AP​ d​  =  ​ AP 
___ 
​C​ d​ ​​	
​​[ 17.6 ]​
where
APd = average days of accounts payable
AP = accounts payable
Finally, the cash-to-cash cycle time is calculated from the three cycle times.
	
​​Cash-to-cash cycle time = ​AR​ d​ + ​I​ d​ − ​AP​ d​​	
​[ 17.7 ]​
The cash-to-cash cycle time is an interesting measure for evaluating the relative supply 
chain effectiveness of a firm. Some firms are actually able to run a negative value for the 
measure. This implies the ability to invest in the business as needed—with no requirement for 
additional funds! Metrics, such as cash-to-cash cycle time, can be efficiently reported using 
ERP data. These metrics can even be reported in real time if needed.
EXAMPLE 17.1: Cash-to-Cash Cycle Time Calculation
Accounting has supplied the following information from our ERP system:
Data:
Sales over last 30 days = $1,020,000
Accounts receivable at the end of the month = $200,000
Inventory value at the end of the month = $400,000
Cost of sales = 60 percent of total sales
Accounts payable at the end of the month = $160,000
Calculate our current cash-to-cash cycle time.
SOLUTION
​
​S​ d​      =  ​ S 
__ 
d ​       =  ​ 1, 020, 000 
________ 
30 
​  =  34, 000
​ 
 
 
​AR​ d​  =  ​ AR 
___ 
​S​ d​ ​    =  ​ 200, 000 
______ 
34, 000 ​      =  5.88 days
​ 
 
 
 
​C​ d​       =  ​S​ d​ CS = 34,000(0.6) = 20,400
​ 
 
 
​I​ d​       =  ​ I 
__ 
​C​ d​ ​     =  ​ 400, 000 
______ 
20, 400 ​      =  19.6 days
​ 
 
 
 
​AP​ d​    =  ​ AP 
___ 
​C​ d​ ​    =  ​ 160, 000 
______ 
20, 400 ​      =  7.84 days
​ 
 
 
 
​Cash-to-cash cycle time = AR​ d​ + ​I​ d​ − ​AP​ d​  =  5.88 + 19.6 − 7.84  =  17.64 days
​

440	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
LO 17-1   Understand what an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system is.
Summary
	∙	 ERP is a comprehensive software system that inte­
grates data from all functional areas of a business. 
This integration is accomplished through a database 
that is shared by all the applications. 
	∙	 Benefits gained are better processes, information 
accuracy, and responsiveness through the real-time 
information provided by the system. 
	∙	 The system is designed to efficiently handle the 
transactions that document the activities of the firm, 
and also enables the users to make better business 
decisions.
Concept Connections
Key Terms
Cloud computing  A term that refers to delivering hosted 
ERP services over the Internet. This can significantly 
reduce the cost of ERP.
Enterprise resource planning (ERP)  A computer system 
that integrates application programs in accounting, sales, 
manufacturing, and the other functions in a firm. This 
integration is accomplished through a database shared 
by all the application programs.
Transaction processing  This is the posting and tracking 
of the detailed activities of a business.
Decision support  This is the ability of the system to 
help a user make intelligent judgments about how to run 
the business.
LO 17-2   Explain how ERP integrates business units through information sharing.
	∙	 Typical ERP systems have application modules in 
finance, manufacturing and logistics, sales and mar­
keting, and human resources.
	∙	 The software modules connect to a common database 
that is updated in real time. Data is shared across the 
modules in such a way that a transaction entered in 
one area is propagated to the others. 
	∙	 In addition to the standard modules, many companies 
use specialized modules that tailor the system to their 
specific needs.
Summary
Key Terms
Real time  As soon as a transaction is entered, the effect 
is known by all users of the system.
Data warehouse  A special program that is designed to 
automatically capture and process data for uses that are 
outside the basic ERP system applications.
LO 17-3   Illustrate how supply chain planning and control fits within ERP.
Summary
	∙	 Applications for supply chain activities such as man­
aging materials, scheduling machines and people, 
coordinating suppliers, and processing customer 
orders are all included within an ERP system. 
	∙	 The activities commonly supported are: design of the 
supply chain system, future planning to meet supply 
and demand objectives, execution of activities to meet 
these activities, collaboration between suppliers and 
customers, and coordination to track activities against 
plans.

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
441
LO 17-4   Evaluate supply chain performance using data from the ERP system.
	∙	 Performance measures that span functional areas are 
most useful to ensure that each area is not optimizing 
their own processes at the expense of the other areas. 
For example, manufacturing might minimize cost by 
focusing on high-volume production, with minimum 
changeovers. This may result in producing too much 
of one item and not enough of another, thus not allow­
ing sales to fill customer orders. 
	∙	 The APICS Supply Chain Council is a good source for 
data relating to the metrics commonly used in different 
industries. Cash-to-cash cycle time is a useful supply 
chain metric because it captures how quickly a dollar 
spent on raw material is converted into income from 
the firm’s customers. It is calculated from accounting 
data captured by the ERP system.
Summary
Key Terms
Cash-to-cash cycle time  The average number of days 
that it takes a business to convert cash spent for raw 
material and other resources into cash inflows from 
sales.
Key Formulas
​[​17.1​]​	
Cash-to-cash cycle time = Inventory days of supply ​+​ Days of sales outstanding
​−​Average payment period for material
​[​17.2​]​	
​​​S​ d​  =  ​ S 
__ 
d ​​	 	
​[ 17.4 ]​	 ​​​C​ d​  =  ​S​ d​ CS​	
​​[ 17.6 ]​	 ​​​AP​ d​  =  ​ AP 
___ 
​C​ d​ ​​	
​[ 17.3 ]​	 ​​​AR​ d​  =  ​ AR 
___ 
​S​ d​ ​​	
​​[ 17.5 ]​	 ​​​I​ d​  =  ​ I 
__ 
​C​ d​ ​​	 	
​[ 17.7 ]​	 ​​Cash-to-cash cycle time = ​AR​ d​ + ​I​ d​ − ​AP​ d​​
LO17-4
Midwest Baking Products manufactures a variety of dry goods used in industrial and con­
sumer baking. As the company has grown, it has found it increasingly difficult to keep accu­
rate tabs on inventory and cash flows. Six months ago, it completed an ERP implementation 
project, and the ERP system is running smoothly now. The information systems department is 
training various functional areas about how to retrieve reports from the system, and the result 
of one report shows the following data from the prior month (May).
Gross sales
$1,440,000
Cost of goods sold
720,000
Accounts receivable (end-of-month)
250,000
Accounts payable (end-of-month)
150,000
Net assets
3,754,000
Inventory value (end-of-month)
470,000
Use this report to calculate the cash-to-cash cycle time. Round interim calculations to 
two decimal places if needed.
Solution
We calculate the cash-to-cash cycle time by using formulas 17.2 through 17.7, in order. Equa­
tion 17.7 will give us the cash-to-cash cycle time.
Average Daily Sales
​S​ d​  =  ​ S 
__ 
d ​  =  ​ 1, 440, 000 
________ 
31 
​  =  46, 451.61​
[Unlike Example 17.1, we use 31 in the denominator of the given equation because May has 
31 days.]
Solved Problems

442	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Average Days Accounts Receivable
​A ​R​ d​  =  ​ AR 
___ 
​S​ d​ ​  =  ​ 250, 000 
________ 
46, 451.61 ​  =  5.38​
Inventory Cycle Time
Equation 17.4 is used here, and it asks for the cost of sales as a percent of total sales. We 
instead have the cost of goods sold (same as cost of sales) in dollars. We first need to convert 
this to a percentage to use Equation 17.4.
​CS = ​  COGS 
________ 
Total Sales ​ = ​  720, 000 
________ 
1, 440, 000 ​ = 0.50​
Now we can apply Equation 17.4:
​C​ d​  =  ​S​ d​ ∗ CS  =  46, 451.61 * 0.50  =  23, 225.81​
Average Days of Inventory
​I​ d​  =  ​ I 
__ 
​C​ d​ ​  =  ​ 470, 000 
________ 
23, 225.81 ​  =  20.24​
Accounts Payable Cycle Time
​A​P​ d​  =  ​ AP 
___ 
​C​ d​ ​  =  ​ 150, 000 
________ 
23, 225.81 ​  =  6.46​
Cash-to-Cash Cycle Time
​A​R​ d​ + ​I​ d​ + A​P​ d​ = 5.38 + 20.24 − 6.46 = 19.16 days​
The cash-to-cash cycle time based on this recent report is 19.16 days.
Discussion Questions
	1.	 Describe the benefits of using an ERP system.
	2.	 Are the ERP systems discussed in the chapter appropriate for use in all firms? Explain.
	3.	 Describe how an ERP system fits into the overall information system structure in a firm.
	4.	 ERP systems provide a wealth of information that can be used and analyzed in a wide vari­
ety of ways. What is an inherent risk with so much information?
	5.	 Visit the vendors’ Websites to read up on both SAP and Microsoft Dynamics ERP systems. 
Provide a list of four ways in which the two differ in their approach to implementing ERP.
	6.	 Briefly describe how supply chain planning and control is managed in an ERP system.
	7.	 Explain how an ERP system can improve the evaluation and analysis of performance 
metrics.
	8.	 Why is the cash-to-cash cycle time such an important supply chain performance measure?
LO17-4
LO17-1
LO17-2
LO17-3
Objective Questions
	1.	 What company is the largest ERP vendor?
	2.	 What term relates to the posting and tracking of activities that document a business?
	3.	 Is it true that, for an ERP system to be effective, it must be completely purchased from a 
single vendor?
	4.	 ERP systems from different vendors vary quite a bit, but typically they will focus on at 
least which four major areas?
	5.	 Which common ERP module category is typically the largest and most complex? (Answer 
in Appendix D)
	6.	 What is the term for a computer program often used to facilitate database queries that are 
not part of a standard ERP system?
LO17-1
LO17-2

	
Enterprise Resource Planning Systems	
Chapter 17	
443
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 A computer system that links all areas of a company 
using an integrated set of application programs and a 
common database.
	2.	 The application programs are designed in accordance 
with industry norms or _____.
	3.	 True/False: Implementing an ERP system is a simple 
exercise that involves loading software on a computer.
	4.	 A term used for delivering ERP services on demand 
over the Internet.
	5.	 The name of Microsoft’s ERP offering.
	6.	 Part of an ERP system that manages the activities 
within a certain functional area.
	7.	 A set of processes to enable vendor-driven replenish­ment.
	8.	 A metric that measures the percentage of orders 
shipped according to schedule.
	  7.	 What are the four main functions within SAP’s supply chain software?
	  8.	 What term refers to the sharing of information with partners to coordinate production, 
enabling everyone to work together to increase visibility and responsiveness?
	  9.	 What part of SAP gives users personalized access to a range of information, applications, 
and services supported by the system?
	10.	 What supply chain metric measures how many complete orders were filled and shipped 
on time?
	11.	 During the past month a firm shows the following metrics:
Average days of accounts receivable
6.75 days
Average daily cost of sales
$  35,000
Current total value of inventory
$300,000
Current value of accounts payable
$200,000
	 	    Compute the cash-to-cash cycle time. Round to two decimal places in all of your calcula­
tions. (Answer in Appendix D)
LO17-4
LO17-3
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Enterprise resource planning (ERP) system 2. Best practices 3. False 4. Cloud computing 5. Microsoft Dynamics 
6. Module 7. Vendor-managed inventory 8. Delivery performance

444
FROM BEAN TO CUP: STARBUCKS GLOBAL 
SUPPLY CHAIN CHALLENGE
Starbucks Corporation is the largest coffeehouse company in the world, with over 
17,000 stores in more than 50 countries. The company serves some 50 million cus­
tomers each week.
Forecasting demand for a Starbucks is an amazing challenge. The product line 
goes well beyond drip-brewed coffee sold on demand in the stores. It includes 
espresso-based hot drinks, other hot and cold drinks, coffee beans, salads, hot and 
cold sandwiches and panini, pastries, snacks, and items 
such as mugs and tumblers. Many of the company’s prod­
ucts are seasonal or specific to the locality of the store. 
Starbucks-branded ice cream and coffee are also offered 
at grocery stores around the world.
The creation of a single, global logistics system was 
important for Starbucks because of its far-flung supply 
chain. The company generally brings coffee beans from 
Latin America, Africa, and Asia to the United States and 
Europe in ocean containers. From the port of entry, the 
“green” (unroasted) beans are trucked to storage sites, 
either at a roasting plant or nearby. After the beans are 
roasted and packaged, the finished product is trucked 
to regional distribution centers, which range from 
200,000 to 300,000 square feet in size. Coffee, how­
ever, is only one of the many products held at these distribution centers. They also 
handle other items required by Starbucks retail outlets, everything from furniture 
to cappuccino mix.
Learning Objectives
	LO 18–1	 Understand how forecasting is essential to supply chain planning.
	LO 18–2	 Evaluate demand using quantitative forecasting models.
	LO 18–3	 Apply qualitative techniques to forecast demand.
	LO 18–4	 Apply collaborative techniques to forecast demand.
Forecasting
18
Starbucks Coffee in Bur 
Juman Center Shopping 
Mall, Dubai, United Arab 
Emirates.
 © Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis;

	
445
Tactical forecasts
Short-term forecasts 
used for making day-to-
day decisions related to 
meeting demand.
In the Analytics Exercise at the end of the chapter, we consider the challenging 
demand forecasting problem that Starbucks must solve to be able to successfully run 
this complex supply chain.
Forecasts are vital to every business organization and for every significant management deci­
sion. Forecasting is the basis of corporate planning and control. In the functional areas of 
finance and accounting, forecasts provide the basis for budgetary planning and cost control. 
Marketing relies on sales forecasting to plan new products, compensate sales personnel, and 
make other key decisions. Production and operations personnel use forecasts to make peri­
odic decisions involving supplier selection, process selection, capacity planning, and facility 
layout, as well as for continual decisions about purchasing, production planning, scheduling, 
and inventory.
In considering what forecasting approach to use, it is important to consider the purpose of 
the forecast. Some forecasts are for very high-level demand analysis. What do we expect the 
demand to be for a group of products over the next year, for example? Some forecasts are used 
to help set the strategy of how, in an aggregate sense, we will meet demand. We will call these 
strategic forecasts. Relative to the material in the book, strategic forecasts are most appropri­
ate when making decisions related to overall strategy (Chapter 2), capacity (Chapter 5), man­
ufacturing process design (Chapter 7), service process design (Chapter 9), location and 
distribution design (Chapter 15), sourcing (Chapter 16), and in sales and operations planning 
(Chapter 19). These all involve medium and long-term decisions that relate to how demand 
will be met strategically.
Forecasts are also needed to determine how a firm operates processes on a day-to-day 
basis. For example, when should the inventory for an item be replenished, or how much pro­
duction should we schedule for an item next week? These are tactical forecasts where the 
goal is to estimate demand in the relatively short term, a few weeks or months. These fore­
casts are important to ensure that in the short term we are able to meet customer lead time 
expectations and other criteria related to the availability of our products and services.
In Chapter 7, the concept of decoupling points is discussed. These are points within the 
supply chain where inventory is positioned to allow processes or entities in the supply chain to 
operate independently. For example, if a product is stocked at a retailer, the customer pulls the 
item from the shelf and the manufacturer never sees a customer order. Inventory acts as a buf­
fer to separate the customer from the manufacturing process. Selection of decoupling points 
is a strategic decision that determines customer lead times and can greatly impact inventory 
investment. The closer this point is to the customer, the quicker the customer can be served. 
Typically, a trade-off is involved where quicker response to customer demand comes at the 
expense of greater inventory investment because finished goods inventory is more expensive 
than raw material inventory.
Forecasting is needed at these decoupling points to set appropriate inventory levels for 
these buffers. The actual setting of these levels is the topic of Chapter 20, “Inventory Manage­
ment,” but an essential input into those decisions is a forecast of expected demand and the 
expected error associated with that demand. If, for example, we are able to forecast demand 
very accurately, then inventory levels can be set precisely to expected customer demand. On 
the other hand, if predicting short-term demand is difficult, then extra inventory to cover this 
uncertainty will be needed.
The same is true relative to service settings where inventory is not used to buffer demand. 
Here, capacity availability relative to expected demand is the issue. If we can predict demand 
in a service setting very accurately, then tactically all we need to do is ensure that we have the 
Strategic forecasts
Medium and long-term 
forecasts that are used 
for decisions related to 
strategy and aggregate 
demand.
FORECASTING IN OPERATIONS AND SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT
Understand how 
forecasting is essential to 
supply chain planning.
LO 18–1

446	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
appropriate capacity in the short term. When demand is not predictable, then excess capacity 
may be needed if servicing customers quickly is important.
Bear in mind that a perfect forecast is virtually impossible. Too many factors in the 
business environment cannot be predicted with certainty. Therefore, rather than search for 
the perfect forecast, it is far more important to establish the practice of continual review of 
forecasts and to learn to live with inaccurate forecasts. This is not to say that we should not 
try to improve the forecasting model or methodology or even to try to influence demand 
in a way that reduces demand uncertainty. When forecasting, a good strategy is to use two 
or three methods and look at them from a common-sense view. Will expected changes in 
the general economy affect the forecast? Are there changes in our customers’ behaviors 
that will impact demand that are not being captured by our current approaches? In this 
chapter, we look at qualitative techniques that use managerial judgment and also at quan­
titative techniques that rely on mathematical models. It is our view that combining these 
techniques is essential to a good forecasting process that is appropriate to the decisions 
being made.
Forecasting is critical in 
determining how much 
inventory to keep to 
meet customer needs.
 © John McBride & Company 
Inc./The Image Bank/Getty 
Images
Evaluate demand using 
quantitative forecasting 
models.
LO 18–2
QUANTITATIVE FORECASTING MODELS
Forecasting can be classified into four basic types: qualitative, time series analysis, causal 
relationships, and simulation. 
Qualitative techniques are covered later in the chapter. Time series analysis, the primary 
focus of this chapter, is based on the idea that data relating to past demand can be used to 
predict future demand. Past data may include several components, such as trend, seasonal, or 
cyclical influences, and are described in the following section. Causal forecasting, which we 
discuss using the linear regression technique, assumes that demand is related to some underly­
ing factor or factors in the environment. Simulation models allow the forecaster to run through 
a range of assumptions about the condition of the forecast. In this chapter, we focus on quali­
tative and time series techniques because these are most often used in supply chain planning 
and control.
Time series analysis
A forecast in which past 
demand data is used to 
predict future demand.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
447
Components of Demand
In most cases, demand for products or services can be broken down into six components: aver­
age demand for the period, a trend, seasonal element, cyclical elements, random variation, 
and autocorrelation. Exhibit 18.1 illustrates a demand over a four-year period, showing the 
average, trend, and seasonal components and randomness around the smoothed demand curve.
Cyclical factors are more difficult to determine because the time span may be unknown or 
the cause of the cycle may not be considered. Cyclical influence on demand may come from 
such occurrences as political elections, war, economic conditions, or sociological pressures.
Random variations are caused by chance events. Statistically, when all the known causes 
for demand (average, trend, seasonal, cyclical, and autocorrelative) are subtracted from total 
demand, what remains is the unexplained portion of demand. If we cannot identify the cause 
of this remainder, it is assumed to be purely random chance.
Autocorrelation denotes the persistence of occurrence. More specifically, the value 
expected at any point is highly correlated with its own past values. In waiting line theory, the 
length of a waiting line is highly autocorrelated. That is, if a line is relatively long at one time, 
then shortly after that time we would expect the line still to be long.
When demand is random, it may vary widely from one week to another. Where high auto­
correlation exists, the rate of change in demand is not expected to change very much from one 
week to the next.
Trend lines are the usual starting point in developing a forecast. These trend lines are then 
adjusted for seasonal effects, cyclical elements, and any other expected events that may influence 
the final forecast. Exhibit 18.2 shows four of the most common types of trends. A linear trend is 
obviously a straight continuous relationship. An S-curve is typical of a product growth and matu­
rity cycle. The most important point in the S-curve is where the trend changes from slow growth 
to fast growth or from fast to slow. An asymptotic trend starts with the highest demand growth 
at the beginning but then tapers off. Such a curve could happen when a firm enters an existing 
market with the objective of saturating and capturing a large share of the market. An exponential 
curve is common in products with explosive growth. The exponential trend suggests that sales 
will grow at an ever-increasing rate—an assumption that may not be safe to make.
A widely used forecasting method plots data and then searches for the curve pattern (such 
as linear, S-curve, asymptotic, or exponential) that fits best. The attractiveness of this method 
is that because the mathematics for the curve are known, solving for values for future time 
periods is easy.
Sometimes our data do not seem to fit any standard curve. This may be due to several 
causes essentially beating the data from several directions at the same time. For these cases, a 
simplistic but often effective forecast can be obtained by simply plotting data.
Remember that we are 
illustrating long-term 
patterns, so these 
should be considered 
when making long-term 
forecasts. When making 
short-term forecasts, 
these patterns are often 
not so strong.
KEY IDEA
Seasonal
Trend
Average
Number
of units
demanded
1
2
3
4
Year
Historical Product Demand Consisting of a Growth Trend and 
Seasonal Demand
exhibit 18.1

448	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Time Series Analysis
Time series forecasting models try to predict the future based on past data. For example, sales 
figures collected for the past six weeks can be used to forecast sales for the seventh week. Quar­
terly sales figures collected for the past several years can be used to forecast future quarters. Even 
though both examples contain sales, different forecasting time series models would likely be used.
Exhibit 18.3 shows the time series models discussed in the chapter and some of their char­
acteristics. Terms such as short, medium, and long are relative to the context in which they 
are used. However, in business forecasting short term usually refers to under three months; 
medium term, three months to two years; and long term, greater than two years. We would 
generally use short-term forecasts for tactical decisions such as replenishing inventory or 
scheduling employees in the near term, and medium-term forecasts for planning a strategy for 
meeting demand over the next six months to a year and a half. In general, the short-term mod­
els compensate for random variation and adjust for short-term changes (such as consumers’ 
responses to a new product). They are especially good for measuring the current variability 
in demand, which is useful for setting safety stock levels or estimating peak loads in a service 
setting. Medium-term forecasts are useful for capturing seasonal effects, and long-term mod­
els detect general trends and are especially useful in identifying major turning points.
Which forecasting model a firm should choose depends on:
	1.	 Time horizon to forecast
	2.	 Data availability
6
5
4
3
2
1
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Sales
(000)
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
12
11
10
9
8
7
Quarters
Linear Trend
10
0
– 0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Sales
(000)
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
20
Time periods
S-Curve Trend
6
5
4
3
2
1
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
Sales
(000)
2.4
2.6
2.8
3.0
12
11
10
9
8
7
Quarters
Asymptotic Trend
6
5
4
3
2
1
12
11
10
9
8
7
Periods
Sales          Trend
Actual          Fitted line
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Sales
(000)
70
Exponential Trend
Common Types of Trends
exhibit 18.2

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
449
Forecasting Method
Amount of Historical Data
Data Pattern
Forecast Horizon
Simple moving average
6 to 12 months; weekly data are 
often used
Stationary only (i.e., no trend or 
seasonality)
Short
Weighted moving average and 
simple exponential smoothing
5 to 10 observations needed to start
Stationary only
Short
Exponential smoothing with trend
5 to 10 observations needed to start
Stationary and trend
Short
Linear regression
10 to 20 observations
Stationary, trend, and seasonality
Short to medium
Trend and seasonal models
2 to 3 observations per season
Stationary, trend, and seasonality
Short to medium
	3.	 Accuracy required
	4.	 Size of forecasting budget
	5.	 Availability of qualified personnel
In selecting a forecasting model, there are other issues such as the firm’s degree of flexibility. 
(The greater the ability to react quickly to changes, the less accurate the forecast needs to be.) 
Another item is the consequence of a bad forecast. If a large capital investment decision is to 
be based on a forecast, it should be a good forecast.
S i m p l e M o v i n g  A v e r a g e  When demand for a product is neither growing nor 
declining rapidly, and if it does not have seasonal characteristics, a moving average can be 
useful in removing the random fluctuations for forecasting. The idea here is to simply 
calculate the average demand over the most recent periods. Each time a new forecast is 
made, the oldest period is discarded in the average and the newest period included. Thus, if 
we want to forecast June with a five-month moving average, we can take the average of 
January, February, March, April, and May. When June passes, the forecast for July would be 
the average of February, March, April, May, and June. An example using weekly demand is 
shown in Exhibit 18.4. Here, 3-week and 9-week moving average forecasts are calculated. 
Notice how the forecast is shown in the period following the data used. The 3-week moving 
average for week 4 uses actual demand from weeks 1, 2, and 3.
Selecting the period length should be dependent on how the forecast is going to be used. 
For example, in the case of a medium-term forecast of demand for planning a budget, monthly 
time periods might be more appropriate, whereas if the forecast were being used for a short-
term decision related to replenishing inventory, a weekly forecast might be more appropriate. 
Although it is important to select the best period for the moving average, the number of peri­
ods to use in the forecast can also have a major impact on the accuracy of the forecast. As the 
moving average period becomes shorter, and fewer periods are used, and there is more oscilla­
tion, there is a closer following of the trend. Conversely, a longer time span gives a smoother 
response, but lags the trend.
The formula for a simple moving average is
​​F​ t​ = ​ 
​A​ t−1​ + ​A​ t−2​ + ​A​ t−3​ + . . . + ​A​ t−n​ 
 
 
__________________ 
 
n 
​​
where
​ 
​F​ t​
​ 
= Forecast for the coming period
​ 
 
 
n​ = Number of periods to be averaged​ 
 
 
 
​A​ t−1​​ = Actual occurrence in the past period​ 
 
 
 
 
​A​ t−2​,   ​A​ t−3​,  and  ​A​ t−n​
​ 
= Actual occurrences two periods ago, three periods ago, and so on, 
up to n periods ago 
​
Moving Average
A forecast based on 
average past demand.
​[18.1]​
A Guide to Selecting an Appropriate Forecasting Method
exhibit 18.3

450	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Week
Demand
3 Week
9 Week
  1
   800
  2
1,400
  3
1,000
  4
1,500
1,067
  5
1,500
1,300
  6
1,300
1,333
  7
1,800
1,433
  8
1,700
1,533
  9
1,300
1,600
10
1,700
1,600
1,367
11
1,700
1,567
1,467
12
1,500
1,567
1,500
13
2,300
1,633
1,556
14
2,300
1,833
1,644
15
2,000
2,033
1,733
16
1,700
2,200
1,811
17
1,800
2,000
1,800
18
2,200
1,833
1,811
19
1,900
1,900
1,911
20
2,400
1,967
1,933
21
2,400
2,167
2,011
22
2,600
2,233
2,111
23
2,000
2,467
2,144
24
2,500
2,333
2,111
25
2,600
2,367
2,167
26
2,200
2,367
2,267
27
2,200
2,433
2,311
28
2,500
2,333
2,311
29
2,400
2,300
2,378
30
2,100
2,367
2,378
24
20
16
12
8
4
400
800
1,200
1,600
2,000
2,400
2,800
28
32
Actual
3 week
9 week
Forecast Demand Based on a Three- and a Nine-Week Simple Moving 
Average
exhibit 18.4

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
451
A plot of the data in Exhibit 18.4 shows the effects of using different numbers of periods in 
the moving average. We see that the growth trend levels off at about the 23rd week. The three-
week moving average responds better in following this change than the nine-week average, 
although overall, the nine-week average is smoother.
The main disadvantage in calculating a moving average is that all individual elements must 
be carried as data because a new forecast period involves adding new data and dropping the 
earliest data. For a three- or six-period moving average, this is not too severe. But plotting a 
60-day moving average for the usage of each of 100,000 items in inventory would involve a 
significant amount of data.
W e igh t ed  M o v i n g  A v e r a g e  Whereas the simple moving average assigns equal 
importance to each component of the moving average database, a weighted moving average 
allows any weights to be placed on each element, provided, of course, that the sum of all 
weights equals 1. For example, a department store may find that, in a four-month period, the 
best forecast is derived by using 40 percent of the actual sales for the most recent month, 
30 percent of two months ago, 20 percent of three months ago, and 10 percent of four months 
ago. If actual sales experience was
Weighted moving 
average
A forecast made with 
past data where more 
recent data is given more 
significance than older 
data.
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
Month 4
Month 5
100
90
105
95
?
the forecast for month 5 would be
​
​F​ 5​
​ 
​= 0.40​(​95​)​ + 0.30​(​105​)​ + 0.20​(​90​)​ + 0.10​(​100​)​
​ 
 
 
 
​​  = 38 + 31.5 + 18 + 10​ 
 
​
​ 
= 97.5
 
​
The formula for a weighted moving average is
​​F​ t​ = ​w​ 1​ ​A​ t−1​ + ​w​ 2​ ​A​ t−2​ + . . . +​ w​ n​ ​A​ t−n​​
where
​
​w​ 1​
​ 
= Weight to be given to the actual occurrence for the period t − 1
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​w​ 2​​ = Weight to be given to the actual occurrence for the period t − 2​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​w​ n​​ = Weight to be given to the actual occurrence for the period t − n​ 
 
 
 
 
 
n
​ 
= Total number of prior periods in the forecast
 
​
Although many periods may be ignored (that is, their weights are zero) and the weighting 
scheme may be in any order (for example, more distant data may have greater weights than 
more recent data), the sum of all the weights must equal 1.
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​w​ i​ = 1​
Suppose sales for month 5 actually turned out to be 110. Then, the forecast for month 6 
would be
​
​F​ 6​
​ 
​= 0.40​(​110​)​ + 0.30​(​95​)​ + 0.20​(​105​)​ + 0.10​(​90​)​
​ 
 
 
 
​​  = 44 + 28.5 + 21 + 9​ 
 
​
​ 
= 102.5
 
​
Experience and trial and error are the simplest ways to choose weights. As a general rule, the 
most recent past is the most important indicator of what to expect in the future, and, there­
fore, it should get higher weighting. The past month’s revenue or plant capacity, for example, 
would be a better estimate for the coming month than the revenue or plant capacity of several 
months ago.
However, if the data are seasonal, for example, weights should be established accordingly. 
Bathing suit sales in July of last year should be weighted more heavily than bathing suit sales 
in December (in the Northern Hemisphere).
​[18.2]​

452	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The weighted moving average has a definite advantage over the simple moving average in 
being able to vary the effects of past data. However, it is more inconvenient and costly to use 
than the exponential smoothing method, which we examine next.
E x p o n e n t i a l  S m o o t h i n g  In the previous methods of forecasting (simple and 
weighted moving averages), the major drawback is the need to continually carry a large 
amount of historical data. (This is also true for regression analysis techniques, which we soon 
will cover.) As each new piece of data is added in these methods, the oldest observation is 
dropped and the new forecast is calculated. In many applications (perhaps in most), the most 
recent occurrences are more indicative of the future than those in the more distant past. If this 
premise is valid—that the importance of data diminishes as the past becomes more distant—
then exponential smoothing may be the most logical and easiest method to use.
Exponential smoothing is the most used of all forecasting techniques. It is an integral part 
of virtually all computerized forecasting programs, and it is widely used in ordering inventory 
in retail firms, wholesale companies, and service agencies.
Exponential smoothing techniques have become well accepted for six major reasons:
	1.	 Exponential models are surprisingly accurate.
	2.	 Formulating an exponential model is relatively easy.
	3.	 The user can understand how the model works.
	4.	 Little computation is required to use the model.
	5.	 Computer storage requirements are small because of the limited use of historical 
data.
	6.	 Tests for accuracy as to how well the model is performing are easy to compute.
In the exponential smoothing method, only three pieces of data are needed to forecast the 
future: the most recent forecast, the actual demand that occurred for that forecast period, and 
a smoothing constant alpha (α). This smoothing constant determines the level of smoothing 
and the speed of reaction to differences between forecasts and actual occurrences. The value 
for the constant is determined both by the nature of the product and by the manager’s sense of 
what constitutes a good response rate. For example, if a firm produced a standard item with 
relatively stable demand, the reaction rate to differences between actual and forecast demand 
would tend to be small, perhaps just 5 or 10 percentage points. However, if the firm were 
experiencing growth, it would be desirable to have a higher reaction rate, perhaps 15 to 30 
percentage points, to give greater importance to recent growth experience. The more rapid the 
growth, the higher the reaction rate should be. Sometimes users of the simple moving average 
switch to exponential smoothing but like to keep the forecasts about the same as the simple 
moving average. In this case, α is approximated by 2 ÷ (n + 1), where n is the number of time 
periods in the corresponding simple moving average.
The equation for a single exponential smoothing forecast is simply
​​F​ t​ = ​F​ t−1​ + α(​A​ t−1​ − ​F​ t−1​ )​
where
​ 
​F​ t​
​ 
= The exponentially smoothed forecast for period t
​ 
 
 
 
 
​F​ t−1​​ = The exponentially smoothed forecast made for the prior period​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​A​ t−1​​ = The actual demand in the prior period​ 
 
 
 
α
​ 
= The desired response rate, or smoothing constant
 
​
This equation states that the new forecast is equal to the old forecast plus a portion of the error 
(the difference between the previous forecast and what actually occurred).
To demonstrate the method, assume that the long-run demand for the product under study 
is relatively stable and a smoothing constant (α) of 0.05 is considered appropriate. If the expo­
nential smoothing method were used as a continuing policy, a forecast would have been made 
Exponential smoothing
A time series forecasting 
technique using 
weights that decrease 
exponentially (1 – α) for 
each past period.
Smoothing constant 
alpha (α)
The parameter in the 
exponential smoothing 
equation that controls 
the speed of reaction 
to differences between 
forecasts and actual 
demand.
​[18.3]​

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
453
for last month. Assume that last month’s forecast (Ft–1) was 1,050 units. If 1,000 actually were 
demanded, rather than 1,050, the forecast for this month would be 
​
​F​ t​
​ 
​= ​F​ t−1​ + α​(​ ​A​ t−1​ − ​F​ t−1​)​
​ 
 
​​ ​= 1, 050 + 0.05​(​1, 000 − 1, 050​)​​ 
 
 
​
​ 
​= 1, 050 + 0.05​(​ − 50​)​
​ 
 
​
​ 
= 1, 047.5 units
 
​
Because the smoothing coefficient is small, the reaction of the new forecast to an error of 
50 units is to decrease the next month’s forecast by only 2½ units.
When exponential smoothing is first used for an item, an initial forecast may be obtained 
by using a simple estimate, like the first period’s demand, or by using an average of preceding 
periods, such as the average of the first two or three periods.
Single exponential smoothing has the shortcoming of lagging changes in demand. 
Exhibit 18.5 presents actual data plotted as a smooth curve to show the lagging effects of 
the exponential forecasts. The forecast lags during an increase or decrease, but overshoots 
when a change in direction occurs. Note that the higher the value of alpha, the more closely 
the forecast follows the actual. To more closely track actual demand, a trend factor may be 
added. Adjusting the value of alpha also helps. This is termed adaptive forecasting. Both 
trend effects and adaptive forecasting are briefly explained in the following sections.
E x p onen t i a l  S m o o t h i n g  w i t h  T r e n d  Remember that an upward or downward 
trend in data collected over a sequence of time periods causes the exponential forecast to 
always lag behind (be above or below) the actual occurrence. Exponentially smoothed 
forecasts can be corrected somewhat by adding in a trend adjustment. To correct the trend, we 
need two smoothing constants. Besides the smoothing constant α, the trend equation also uses 
a smoothing constant delta (δ). Both alpha and delta reduce the impact of the error that 
occurs between the actual and the forecast. If both alpha and delta are not included, the trend 
overreacts to errors.
Smoothing constant 
delta (δ)
An additional parameter 
used in an exponential 
smoothing equation that 
includes an adjustment for 
trend.
N
J
J
A
A
S
A
N
J
F
O
M
D
J
M
J
A
M
O
M
D
J
F
S
J
0
100
200
300
400
500
F
Actual
Ft = Ft – 1 + α(At – 1 – Ft – 1)
α = 0.1, 0.3, and 0.5
α = .5
α = .3
α = .1
Exponential Forecasts versus Actual Demand for Units of a Product 
over Time Showing the Forecast Lag
exhibit 18.5

454	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
To get the trend equation going, the first time it is used the trend value must be entered 
manually. This initial trend value can be an educated guess or a computation based on 
observed past data.
The equations to compute the forecast including trend (FIT) are​ ​
Ft = FITt–1 + α(At–1 – FITt–1)
Tt = Tt–1 + δ(Ft – FITt–1)
FITt = Ft + Tt
where
​ 
​F​ t​
​ 
= The exponentially smoothed forecast that does not include trend for period t
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​T​ t​
​ 
= The exponentially smoothed trend for period t
​ 
 
 
 
 
​FIT​ t​
​ 
= The forecast including trend for period t
​ 
 
 
 
​FIT​ t−1​​ = The forecast including trend made for the prior period​ 
 
 
 
 
​A​ t−1​
​ 
= The actual demand for the prior period
​ 
 
 
 
α
​ 
= Smoothing constant (alpha)
​ 
 
 
δ
​ 
= Smoothing constant (delta)
 
​
To make an exponential forecast that includes trend, step through the equations one at a time.
Step 1: Using Equation 18.4, make a forecast that is not adjusted for trend. This uses the 
previous forecast and previous actual demand.
Step 2: Using Equation 18.5, update the estimate of trend using the previous trend esti­
mate, the unadjusted forecast just made, and the previous forecast.
Step 3: Make a new forecast that includes trend by using the results from steps 1 and 2.
EXAMPLE 18.1: Forecast Including Trend
Assume a previous forecast, including a trend of 110 units, a previous trend estimate of 
10 units, an alpha of .20, and a delta of .30. If actual demand turned out to be 115 rather than 
the forecast 110, calculate the forecast for the next period.
SOLUTION
The actual At–1 is given as 115. Therefore,
​ 
​F​ t​
​ 
​= ​FIT​ t−1​ + α​(​ ​A​ t−1​ − ​FIT​ t−1​)​
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
​= 110 + .2​(​115 − 110​)​ = 111.0​
​ 
 
 
​T​ t​​ ​= ​T​ t−1​ + δ​(​ ​F​ t​ − ​FIT​ t−1​)​​ 
 
​
​ 
​= 10 + .3​(​111 − 110​)​ = 10.3​
​ 
 
 
​FIT​ t​
​ 
= ​F​ t​ + ​T​ t​ = 111.0 + 10.3 = 121.3
​
	
If, instead of 121.3, the actual turned out to be 120, the sequence would be repeated and the 
forecast for the next period would be
​ 
​F​ t+1​
​ 
​= 121.3 + .2​(​120 − 121.3​)​ = 121.04​
​ 
 
 
 
​T​ t+1​​ ​= 10.3 + .3​(​121.04 − 121.3​)​ = 10.22​​ 
 
 
 
​FIT​ t+1​
​ 
= 121.04 + 10.22 = 131.26
 
​
Exponential smoothing requires that the smoothing constants be given a value between 0 
and 1. Typically, fairly small values are used for alpha and delta in the range of .1 to .3. The 
values depend on how much random variation there is in demand and how steady the trend 
factor is. Later in the chapter, error measures are discussed that can be helpful in picking 
appropriate values for these parameters.
​[18.4]​
​[18.5]​
​[18.6]​

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
455
Linear Regression Analysis  Regression can be defined as a functional relationship 
between two or more correlated variables. It is used to predict one variable given the others. 
The relationship is usually developed from observed data. The data should be plotted first to 
see if they appear linear or if at least parts of the data are linear. Linear regression refers to 
the special class of regression where the relationship between variables forms a straight line.
The linear regression line is of the form Y = a + bt, where Y is the value of the dependent vari­
able that we are solving for, a is the Y intercept, b is the slope, and t is an index for the time period.
Linear regression is useful for long-term forecasting of major occurrences and aggregate 
planning. For example, linear regression would be very useful to forecast demands for product 
families. Even though demand for individual products within a family may vary widely during 
a time period, demand for the total product family is surprisingly smooth.
The major restriction in using linear regression forecasting is, as the name implies, that past 
data and future projections are assumed to fall in about a straight line. Although this does limit its 
application sometimes, if we use a shorter period of time, linear regression analysis can still be 
used. For example, there may be short segments of the longer period that are approximately linear.
Linear regression is used both for time series forecasting and for causal relationship fore­
casting. When the dependent variable (usually the vertical axis on a graph) changes as a result 
of time (plotted as the horizontal axis), it is time series analysis. If one variable changes 
because of the change in another variable, this is a causal relationship (such as the number of 
deaths from lung cancer increasing with the number of people who smoke).
We use the following example to demonstrate linear least squares regression analysis.
EXAMPLE 18.2: Least Squares Method
A firm’s sales for a product line during the 12 quarters of the past three years were as follows:
Quarter
Sales
1
  600
2
1,550
3
1,500
4
1,500
5
2,400
6
3,100
Quarter
Sales
7
2,600
8
2,900
9
3,800
10
4,500
11
4,000
12
4,900
The firm wants to forecast each quarter of the fourth year—that is, quarters 13, 14, 15, and 16.
SOLUTION
The least squares equation for linear regression is
​Y = a + bt​
where
​
Y
​ 
= Dependent variable computed by the equation
​ 
 
 
 
y
​ 
= The actual dependent variable data point (used as follows)
​ 
 
 
 
 
a​ = Y intercept​ 
 
b
​ 
= Slope of the line
​ 
 
t
​ 
= Time period
 
​
	
The least squares method tries to fit the line to the data that minimizes the sum of the 
squares of the vertical distance between each data point and its corresponding point on the 
line. If a straight line is drawn through the general area of the points, the difference between 
the point and the line is y – Y. Exhibit 18.6 shows these differences. The sum of the squares of 
the differences between the plotted data points and the line points is
​(​y​ 1​ − ​Y​ 1​ )​ 2​ + ​(​y​ 2​ − ​Y​ 2​ )​ 2​ + . . . +​(​y​ 12​ − ​Y​ 12​ )​ 2​
The best line to use is the one that minimizes this total.
	
As before, the straight line equation is
Y = a + bt
​[18.7]​
Linear regression 
forecasting
A forecasting technique 
that fits a straight line to 
past demand data.

456	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
In the least squares method, the equations for a and b are
b = ​ 
∑ t ​y​  ​  − n​ t ¯ ​ · ​ ¯ y ​​  ​ 
___________ 
∑ ​t​ 2​  − n ​ t ¯ ​ 2​  ​
​a = ​ ¯ y ​ − b​ t ¯ ​​
where
​ 
a
​ 
= Y intercept
​ 
 
b
​ 
= Slope of the line
​ 
 
​ ¯ y ​
​ 
= Average of all ys
​ 
 
​ ¯ t ​​ = Average of all ts​ 
 
t​ = t value at each data point​ 
 
 
y
​ 
= y value at each data point
​ 
 
 
n
​ 
= Number of data points
​ 
 
 
Y
​ 
= Value of the dependent variable computed with the regression equation
​
Exhibit 18.7 shows these computations carried out for the 12 data points in the problem. Note 
that the final equation for Y shows an intercept of 441.67 and a slope of 359.6. The slope 
shows that for every unit change in t, Y changes by 359.6. Note that these calculations can be 
done with the INTERCEPT and SLOPE functions in Microsoft Excel.
	
Strictly based on the equation, forecasts for periods 13 through 16 would be
​
​Y​ 13​
​
​ = 441.67 + 359.6​(​13​)​
​
 = 5,116.5
​ 
 
 
​Y​ 14​
​ 
​= 441.67 + 359.6​(​14​)​
​
 = 5,476.1
​ 
 
 
​Y​ 15​​ ​= 441.67 + 359.6​(​15​)​​ = 5,835.7​ 
 
 
​Y​ 16​
​ 
​= 441.67 + 359.6​(​16​)​
​
 = 6,195.3
​
	
The standard error of estimate, or how well the line fits the data, is
​​S​ yt​ = ​√ 
__________
 
​ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​(​y​ i​ − ​Y​ i​ )​ 2​ 
__________ 
n − 2 
​ ​​
​[18.8]​
​[18.9]​
​[18.10]​
Least Squares Regression Line
exhibit 18.6
3
5
7
Quarters
9
11
1
Y1
Y2
y2
y3
Y3
Y4
y4
y5
Y5
Y6
y6
y7
Y7
Y8
Y9
y9
y10
Y10
Y11
y11
y12
Y12
y8
0
500
1,000
1,500
4,000
4,500
$5,000
Sales
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
2
4
6
8
10
12
y1

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
457
	
The standard error of estimate is computed from the second and last columns of Exhibit 18.7:
​​S​ yt​​ = ​√ 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​ ​(​600 − 801.3​)​ 2​ + ​(​1, 550 − 1, 160.9​)​ 2​ + ​(​1, 500 − 1, 520.5​)​ 2​ + . . . + ​(​4, 900 − 4, 757.1​)​ 2​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
10 
​ ​​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= 363.9
 
​
In addition to the INTERCEPT and SLOPE functions, Microsoft Excel has a very powerful 
regression tool designed to perform these calculations. (Note that it can also be used for mov­
ing average and exponential smoothing calculations.) To use the tool, a table is needed that 
contains data relevant to the problem (see Exhibit 18.8). The tool is part of the Data Analysis 
(1) 
t
(2) 
y
(3) 
t × y
(4) 
t2
(5) 
y2
(6) 
y
1
  600
   600
   1
   360,000
  801.3
2
1,550
  3,100
   4
  2,402,500
1,160.9
3
1,500
  4,500
   9
  2,250,000
1,520.5
4
1,500
  6,000
  16
  2,250,000
1,880.1
5
2,400
12,000
  25
 5,760,000
2,239.7
6
3,100
18,600
  36
  9,610,000
2,599.4
7
2,600
18,200
  49
  6,760,000
2,959.0
8
2,900
23,200
  64
  8,410,000
3,318.6
9
3,800
34,200
  81
14,440,000
3,678.2
10
4,500
45,000
100
20,250,000
4,037.8
11
4,000
44,000
121
16,000,000
4,397.4
12
  4,900
  58,800
144
  24,010,000
4,757.1
78
33,350 
268,200  
650
112,502,500 
​ ¯ t​ = 6.5  b = 359.6154​
​ ¯ y​ = 2, 779.17  a = 441.6667​
​Therefore, Y = 441.67 + 359.6t​
​S​ yt​ = 363.9​
Least Squares Regression Analysis
exhibit 18.7
Excel Regression Tool
exhibit 18.8

458	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
ToolPak that is accessed from the Data menu (you may need to add this to your Data options 
by using the Add-In option under File → Options → Add-Ins).
	
To use the tool, first input the data in two columns in your spreadsheet, then access the 
Regression option from the → Data menu. Next, specify the Y Range, which is B2:B13, and 
the time periods in the X Range, which is A2:A13 in our example. Finally, an Output Range 
is specified. This is where you would like the results of the regression analysis placed in your 
spreadsheet. In the example, A16 is entered. There is some information provided that goes 
beyond what we have covered, but what you are looking for is the Intercept and X Variable 
coefficients that correspond to the intercept and slope values in the linear equation. These are 
in cells B32 and B33 in Exhibit 18.8.
D e c o m p o s i t i o n  o f  a  T i m e  S e r i e s   A time series can be defined as chronologically 
ordered data that may contain one or more components of demand: trend, seasonal, cyclical, 
autocorrelation, and random. Decomposition of a time series means identifying and separating 
the time series data into these components. In practice, it is relatively easy to identify the 
trend (even without mathematical analysis, it is usually easy to plot and see the direction of 
movement) and the seasonal component (by comparing the same period year to year). It is 
considerably more difficult to identify the cycles (these may be many months or years long), the 
autocorrelation, and the random components. (The forecaster usually calls random anything left 
over that cannot be identified as another component.)
When demand contains both seasonal and trend effects at the same time, the question is 
how they relate to each other. In this description, we examine two types of seasonal variation: 
additive and multiplicative.
Additive seasonal variation simply assumes that the seasonal amount is a constant no mat­
ter what the trend or average amount is.
Forecast including trend and seasonal = Trend + Seasonal
Exhibit 18.9A shows an example of increasing trend with constant seasonal amounts.
In multiplicative seasonal variation, the trend is multiplied by the seasonal factors.
Forecast including trend and seasonal = Trend × Seasonal factor
Exhibit 18.9B shows the seasonal variation increasing as the trend increases because its 
size depends on the trend.
The multiplicative seasonal variation is the usual experience. Essentially, this says that the 
larger the basic amount projected, the larger the variation around this that we can expect.
A seasonal factor is the amount of correction needed in a time series to adjust for the sea­
son of the year.
January
Amount
A. Additive Seasonal
July
January
July
January
July
January
July
January
January
Amount
B. Multiplicative Seasonal
July
January
July
January
July
January
July
January
Additive and Multiplicative Seasonal Variation Superimposed on Changing Trend
exhibit 18.9
Decomposition
The process of identifying 
and separating time series 
data into fundamental 
components such as trend 
and seasonality.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
459
We usually associate seasonal with a period of the year characterized by some particular activ­
ity. We use the word cyclical to indicate other than annual recurrent periods of repetitive activity.
The following examples show how seasonal indexes are determined and used to forecast 
(1) a simple calculation based on past seasonal data and (2) the trend and seasonal index from 
a hand-fit regression line. We follow this with a more formal procedure for the decomposition 
of data and forecasting using least squares regression.
EXAMPLE 18.3: Simple Proportion
Assume that in past years, a firm sold an average of 1,000 units of a particular product line 
each year. On the average, 200 units were sold in the spring, 350 in the summer, 300 in the 
fall, and 150 in the winter. The seasonal factor (or index) is the ratio of the amount sold during 
each season divided by the average for all seasons.
SOLUTION
In this example, the yearly amount divided equally over all seasons is 1,000 ÷ 4 = 250. The 
seasonal factors therefore are
Companies such as 
Toro manufacture 
lawnmowers and snow 
blowers to match 
seasonal demand. Using 
the same equipment 
and assembly lines 
provides better capacity 
utilization, workforce 
stability, productivity, 
and revenue.
Courtesy of The Toro 
Company
Past 
Sales
Average Sales 
for Each Season 
(1,000/4)
Seasonal 
Factor
Spring
200
250
200/250 = 0.8
Summer
350
250
350/250 = 1.4
Fall
300
250
300/250 = 1.2
Winter
   150
250
150/250 = 0.6
   Total
1,000
Expected 
Demand for 
Next Year
Average 
Sales for 
Each Season 
(1,100/4)
Seasonal 
Factor
Next Year’s 
Seasonal 
Forecast
Spring
275
×
0.8
= 
220
Summer
275
×
1.4
= 
385
Fall
275
×
1.2
= 
330
Winter
_____
275
×
0.6
= 
165
   Total
1,100
Using these factors, if we expected demand for next year to be 1,100 units, we would forecast 
the demand to occur as

460	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The seasonal factor may be periodically updated as new data are available. The following 
example shows the seasonal factor and multiplicative seasonal variation.
EXAMPLE 18.4: Computing Trend and Seasonal Factor from a Linear Regression 
Line Obtained with Excel
Forecast the demand for each quarter of the next year using trend and seasonal factors. 
Demand for the past two years is in the following table:
2011
Quarter
Actual
amount
From trend
equation
FITt = 176.1 + 52.3t
Ratio of
actual ÷ trend
Seasonal factor
(average of same
quarters in both years)
I
II
III
IV
2012
I
II
III
IV
300
200
220
530
520
420
400
700
228.3
280.6
332.9
385.1
—
437.4
489.6
541.9
594.2
1.31
0.71
0.66
1.38
—
1.19
0.86
0.74
1.18
I    1.25
II    0.79
III  0.70
IV 1.28
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
I
II
III
IV
I
II
III
IV
2011
2012
Quarter
Amount
1
300
2
200
3
220
4
530
Quarter
Amount
5
520
6
420
7
400
8
700
SOLUTION
First, we plot as in Exhibit 18.10 and then calculate the slope and intercept using Excel. For 
Excel, the quarters are numbered 1 through 8. The “known ys” are the amounts (300, 200, 
220, etc.), and the “known xs” are the quarter numbers (1, 2, 3, etc.). We obtain a slope = 52.3 
(rounded), and intercept = 176.1 (rounded). The equation for the line is
Forecast Including Trend (FIT) = 176.1 + 52.3t
Computing a Seasonal Factor from the Actual Data and Trend Line
exhibit 18.10

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
461
	
Next, we can derive a seasonal index by comparing the actual data with the trend line, as in 
Exhibit 18.10. The seasonal factor was developed by averaging the same quarters in each year.
	
We can compute the 2013 forecast including trend and seasonal factors (FITS) as follows:
​ 
​FITS​ t​
​ 
= FIT × Seasonal
​ 
 
 
I—2013 ​FITS​ 9​
​ 
​= ​[​176.1 + 52.3​(​9​)​]​1.25 = 808​
​ 
 
 
 
II—2013 ​FITS​ 10​​ ​= ​[​176.1 + 52.3​(​10​)​]​0.79 = 552​​ 
 
 
 
III—2013 ​FITS​ 11​
​ 
​= ​[​176.1 + 52.3​(​11​)​]​0.70 = 526​
​ 
 
 
 
IV—2013 ​FITS​ 12​
​ 
​= ​[​176.1 + 52.3​(​12​)​]​1.28 = 1, 029​
​
Note, these numbers were calculated using Excel, so your numbers may differ slightly due to 
rounding.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Period 
(t)
Quarter
Actual 
Demand 
(y)
Average of the Same 
Quarters of Each Year
Seasonal 
Factor
Deseasonalized 
Demand (yd) 
Col. (3) ÷ Col. (5)
t2 
(Col. 1)2
t × yd 
Col. (1) × 
Col. (6)
1
I
600
(600 + 2,400 + 3,800)∕3
    = 2,266.7
0.82
735.7
1
735.7
2
II
1,550
(1,550 + 3,100 + 4,500)∕3
    = 3,050
1.10
1,412.4
4
2,824.7
3
III
1,500
(1,500 + 2,600 + 4,000)∕3
    = 2,700
0.97
1,544.0
9
4,631.9
4
IV
1,500
(1,500 + 2,900 + 4,900)∕3
    = 3,100
1.12
1,344.8
16
5,379.0
5
I
2,400
0.82
2,942.6
25
14,713.2
6
II
3,100
1.10
2,824.7
36
16,948.4
7
III
2,600
0.97
2,676.2
49
18,733.6
8
IV
2,900
1.12
2,599.9
64
20,798.9
9
I
3,800
0.82
4,659.2
81
41,932.7
10
II
4,500
1.10
4,100.4
100
41,004.1
11
III
4,000
0.97
4,117.3
121
45,290.1
12
IV
   4,900
  1.12
  4,392.9
144
   52,714.5
78
33,350*
12.03
33,350.1*
650
265,706.9
​​t ¯ ​ = ​ 78 
___ 
12 ​ = 6.5b = ​ 
∑ t ​y​ d​​  − n​t ¯ ​ ​y​ d​​ 
_________ 
∑ ​t​ 2​  − n ​ ¯ t​​ 2​  ​ = ​ 265, 706.9 − 12​(​​6.5​)​​2, 779.2 
 
 
__________________________ 
 
650 − 12 ​(​​6.5​)​​​ 2​ 
​ = 342.2​
​​ ¯ y​ d​ = 33, 350 / 12 = 2, 779.2a = ​ ¯ y​ d​ − b​t ¯ ​ = 2, 779.2 − 342.2​(​​6.5​)​​ = 554.9​
​Therefore,Y = a + bt = 554.9 + 342.2t​
Deseasonalized Demand
exhibit 18.11
*Column 3 and column 6 totals should be equal at 33,350. Differences are due to rounding. Column 5 was rounded to two decimal places.
D e com p os i t i o n  U s i n g  L e a s t  S q u a r e s  R e g r e s s i o n  This procedure is 
different from the previous one and in some cases may give better results. The approach 
described in Example 18.3 started by fitting a regression line, and given the line, the seasonal 
indexes are calculated. With this approach, we start by calculating seasonal indexes. Then, 
using data that have been “deseasonalized,” we estimate a trend line using linear regression. 
More formally, the process is:
	1.	 Decompose the time series into its components.
	 a.   Find seasonal component.
	 b.   Deseasonalize the demand.
	 c.   Find trend component.

462	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	2.	 Forecast future values of each component.
	 a.   Project trend component into the future.
	 b.   Multiply trend component by seasonal component.
Exhibit 18.11 shows the decomposition of a time series using least squares regression and 
the same basic data we used in our first regression example. Each data point corresponds to 
using a single three-month quarter of the three-year (12-quarter) period. Our objective is to 
forecast demand for the four quarters of the fourth year.
Step 1. Determine the seasonal factor (or index).    Exhibit 18.11 summarizes the calcu­
lations needed. Column 4 develops an average for the same quarters in the three-year period. 
For example, the first quarters of the three years are added together and divided by three. 
A seasonal factor is then derived by dividing that average by the general average for all 
12 quarters ​​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​ 33, 350 
______ 
12  ​, or 2,779​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​. For example, this first quarter seasonal factor is ​ 2, 266.7 
_______ 
2, 779  ​ = 
0.82​. These are entered in column 5. Note that the seasonal factors are identical for similar 
quarters in each year.
Step 2. Deseasonalize the original data.    To remove the seasonal effect on the data, we 
divide the original data by the seasonal factor. This step is called the deseasonalization of 
demand and is shown in column 6 of Exhibit 18.11.
Step 3. Develop a least squares regression line for the deseasonalized data.    The pur­
pose here is to develop an equation for the trend line Y, which we then modify with the 
seasonal factor. The procedure is the same as we used before: 
Y = a + bt
where
 yd = Deseasonalized demand (see Exhibit 18.11)
 t
= Quarter
Y
= Demand computed using the regression equation Y = a + bt
a
= Y intercept
b
= Slope of the line
The least squares calculations using columns 1, 7, and 8 of Exhibit 18.11 are shown in the 
lower section of the exhibit. The final deseasonalized equation for our data is Y = 554.9 + 
342.2t. This straight line is shown in Exhibit 18.12.
0
500
1,500
2,500
Sales
3,500
4,500
5,000
1
Quarters
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Original data
Deseasonalized data
Deseasonalized equation
Y = 554.9 + 342.2 x
9
10 11 12
Straight Line Graph of Deseasonalized Equation
exhibit 18.12

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
463
Our forecast is now complete.
When a straight line is fitted through data points and then used for forecasting, errors can 
come from two sources. First, there are the usual errors similar to the standard deviation of 
any set of data. Second, there are errors that arise because the line is wrong. Exhibit 18.13 
shows this error range. Instead of developing the statistics here, we will briefly show why the 
range broadens. First, visualize that one line is drawn that has some error such that it slants 
too steeply upward. Standard errors are then calculated for this line. Now visualize another 
line that slants too steeply downward. It also has a standard error. The total error range, for 
this analysis, consists of errors resulting from both lines, as well as all other possible lines. 
We included this exhibit to show how the error range widens as we go further into the future.
Forecast Errors
In using the term forecast error, we are referring to the difference between what actually 
occurred and what was forecast. In statistics, these errors are called residuals. As long as 
the forecast value is within the confidence limits, as we discuss later under the heading, 
“­Measurement of Error,” this is not really an error because it is what we expected. But com­
mon usage refers to the difference as an error.
Demand for a product is generated through the interaction of a number of factors too com­
plex to describe accurately in a model. Therefore, all forecasts certainly contain some error. 
In discussing forecast errors, it is convenient to distinguish between sources of error and the 
measurement of error.
Sources of Error  Errors can come from a variety of sources. One common source that many 
forecasters are unaware of is projecting past trends into the future. For example, when we talk 
Period
Quarter
Y from 
Regression Line
Seasonal Factor
Forecast 
(Y × Seasonal Factor)
13
1
5,003.5
0.82
4,102.87
14
2
5,345.7
1.10
5,880.27
15
3
5,687.9
0.97
5,517.26
16
4
6,030.1
1.12
6,753.71
Demand
Time
Present
Future
Past
Prediction
interval
Trend component
Prediction
interval
Prediction Intervals for Linear Trend
exhibit 18.13
Forecast error
The difference between 
actual demand and what 
was forecast.
Step 4. Project the regression line through the period to be forecast.    Our purpose is 
to forecast periods 13 through 16. We start by solving the equation for Y at each of these 
periods (shown in step 5, column 3).
Step 5. Create the final forecast by adjusting the regression line by the seasonal factor.  
Recall that the Y equation has been deseasonalized. We now reverse the procedure by mul­
tiplying the quarterly data we derived by the seasonal factor for that quarter:

464	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
about statistical errors in regression analysis, we are referring to the deviations of observations 
from our regression line. It is common to attach a confidence band (that is, statistical control 
limits) to the regression line to reduce the unexplained error. But when we then use this 
regression line as a forecasting device by projecting it into the future, the error may not be 
correctly defined by the projected confidence band. This is because the confidence interval is 
based on past data; it may not hold for projected data points and therefore cannot be used with 
the same confidence. In fact, experience has shown that the actual errors tend to be greater 
than those predicted from forecast models.
Errors can be classified as bias or random. Bias errors occur when a consistent mistake is 
made. Sources of bias include the failure to include the right variables; the use of the wrong 
relationships among variables; employing the wrong trend line; a mistaken shift in the sea­
sonal demand from where it normally occurs; and the existence of some undetected secular 
trend. ­Random errors can be defined as those that cannot be explained by the forecast model 
being used.
M e a s u r e m e n t  o f  E r r o r   Several common terms used to describe the degree of 
error are standard error, mean squared error (or variance), and mean absolute deviation. In 
addition, tracking signals may be used to indicate any positive or negative bias in the forecast.
Standard error is discussed in the section on linear regression in this chapter. Because the 
standard error is the square root of a function, it is often more convenient to use the function 
itself. This is called the mean squared error, or variance.
The mean absolute deviation (MAD) was in vogue in the past but subsequently was 
ignored in favor of standard deviation and standard error measures. In recent years, MAD has 
made a comeback because of its simplicity and usefulness in obtaining tracking signals. 
MAD is the average error in the forecasts, using absolute values. It is valuable because MAD, 
like the standard deviation, measures the dispersion of some observed value from some 
expected value.
MAD is computed using the differences between the actual demand and the forecast 
demand without regard to sign. It equals the sum of the absolute deviations divided by the 
number of data points or, stated in equation form,
​MAD =  ​ 
​∑ 
t=1
​ 
n
 ​|​ ​A​ t​ − ​F​ t​|​ 
________ 
n 
​​
where
​ 
t
​ 
=
​ 
Period number
​ 
 
​A​ t ​
​ 
=
​ 
Actual demand for the period t
​ 
 
 
​F​ t ​​ =​ Forecast demand for the period t​ 
 
 
n 
​ 
=
​ 
Total number of periods
​ 
 
 
∥
​ 
=
​ 
A symbol used to indicate the absolute value disregarding positive and negative signs
​
When the errors that occur in the forecast are normally distributed (the usual case), the 
mean absolute deviation relates to the standard deviation of the error terms as
​1 standard deviation ≈ ​√ 
__
 
​ π 
__ 2 ​ ​ × MAD, or approximately 1.25 MAD​
Conversely,
1 MAD is approximately 0.8 standard deviation
The standard deviation is the larger measure. If the MAD of a set of points was found to be 
60 units, then the standard deviation would be approximately 75 units. In the usual statistical 
manner, if control limits were set at plus or minus 3 standard deviations (or ±3.75 MADs), 
then 99.7 percent of the points would fall within these limits.
Mean absolute 
deviation (MAD)
The average of the 
absolute value of the 
actual forecast error.
​[18.11]​

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
465
An additional measure of error that is often useful is the mean absolute percent error 
(MAPE). This measure gauges the error relative to the demand as a percentage. For example, 
if the error is 10 units and actual demand is 20 units, the error is 50 percent
​⎛ ⎝​ 10 
___ 
20 ​ = .50​⎞ ⎠​. In the case of an average demand of 1,000 units, the MAPE would be only 1 percent 
​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​  10 
_____ 
1,000 ​ = .01​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​. MAPE is the average of the percent error. MAPE is calculated as follows:
​MAPE ​ = ​ 100 
___ 
n  ​ ​∑ t=1 ​ 
n  ​
⎡
 
⎢ ⎣​ 
​|​A​ t​ – ​F​ t​  |​ 
_____ 
​A​ t​ 
​
⎤
 
⎥ ⎦​
This is a useful measure because it is an estimate of how much error to expect with a fore­
cast. The real value of the MAPE is that it allows you to compare forecasts between ­products 
that have very different average demand. If you used the MAD, the product with the higher 
demand would have the higher MAD even if it was a better forecast.
A tracking signal is a measurement that indicates whether the forecast average is keeping 
pace with any genuine upward or downward changes in demand. When a forecast is consis­
tently low or high, it is referred to as a biased forecast. Exhibit 18.14 shows a normal distribu­
tion with a mean of 0 and a MAD equal to 1. Thus, if we compute the tracking signal and find 
it equal to minus 2, we can see that the forecast model is providing forecasts that are quite a 
bit above the mean of the actual occurrences.
A tracking signal (TS) can be calculated using the arithmetic sum of forecast deviations 
divided by the mean absolute deviation:
​TS =  ​ RSFE 
_____ 
MAD ​​
where​
RSFE = The running sum of forecast errors, considering the nature of the error. (For 
­example, negative errors cancel positive errors and vice versa.)
MAD = The average of all the forecast errors (disregarding whether the deviations are
positive or negative). It is the average of the absolute deviations.
Exhibit 18.15 illustrates the procedure for computing MAD and the tracking signal for a six-
month period where the forecast had been set at a constant 1,000 and the actual demands that 
occurred are as shown. In this example, the forecast, on the average, was off by 66.7 units and 
the tracking signal was equal to 3.3 mean absolute deviations.
Mean absolute percent 
error (MAPE)
The average error 
measured as a percentage 
of average demand.
​[18.12]​
Tracking signal
A measure of whether the 
forecast is keeping pace 
with any genuine upward 
or downward changes in 
demand. This is used to 
detect forecast bias.
​[18.13]​
3
4
1
2
1
Mean = 0
3
4
2
−1 MAD
1 MAD
−4 MAD
4 MAD
−3 MAD
3 MAD
−2 MAD
2 MAD
A Normal Distribution with Mean = 0 and MAD = 1
exhibit 18.14

466	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Month
Demand 
Forecast
Actual
Deviation
RSFE
Abs. Dev.
Sum of 
Abs. Dev.
MAD 
(% Error)*
​TS = ​ RSFE† 
_____ 
MAD ​
1
1,000
950
−50
−50
50
50
50 (5.26%) 
−1
2
1,000
1,070
+70
+20
70
120
60 (5.61%) 
.33
3
1,000
1,100
+100
+120
100
220
73.3 (6.67%)
1.64
4
1,000
960
−40
180
40
260
65 (6.77%) 
1.2
5
1,000
1,090
+90
+170
90
350
70 (6.42%) 
2.4
6
1,000
1,050
+50
+220
50
400
66.7 (6.35%)
3.3
*Overall, MAD = 400 ÷ 6 = 66.7. MAPE = (5.26 + 5.61 + 6.67 + 6.77 + 6.42 + 6.35)/6 = 6.18%
†Overall, ​TS = ​ RSFE 
_____ 
MAD ​ = ​ 220 
____ 
66.7 ​ = 3.3 MADs​.
Computing the Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD), the Running 
Sum of Forecast Errors (RSFE), and the Tracking Signal (TS) from 
Forecast and Actual Data
exhibit 18.15
Tracking
signal
Actual
exceeds
forecast
Actual is
less than
forecast
1
2
3
4
Month
5
6
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3
We can get a better feel for what the MAD and tracking signal mean by plotting the points 
on a graph. Though this is not completely legitimate from a sample-size standpoint, we plot­
ted each month in Exhibit 18.15 to show the drift of the tracking signal. Note that it drifted 
from minus 1 MAD to plus 3.3 MADs. This happened because actual demand was greater 
than the forecast in four of the six periods. If the actual demand does not fall below the fore­
cast to offset the continual positive RSFE, the tracking signal would continue to rise and we 
would conclude that assuming a demand of 1,000 is a bad forecast.
Causal Relationship Forecasting
Causal relationship forecasting involves using independent variables other than time to pre­
dict future demand. To be of value for the purpose of forecasting, any independent variable 
must be a leading indicator. For example, we can expect that an extended period of rain will 
increase sales of umbrellas and raincoats. The rain causes the sale of rain gear. This is a causal 
relationship, where one occurrence causes another. If the causing element is known far enough 
in advance, it can be used as a basis for forecasting.
Often, leading indicators are not causal relationships, but in some indirect way they 
may suggest that some other things might happen. Other noncausal relationships just seem 
to exist as a coincidence. The following shows one example of a forecast using a causal 
relationship.
Causal relationship 
forecasting
Forecasting using 
independent variables 
other than time to predict 
future demand.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
467
EXAMPLE 18.5: Forecasting Using a Causal Relationship
The Carpet City Store in Carpenteria has kept records of its sales (in square yards) each year, 
along with the number of permits for new houses in its area.
Number of Housing Starts
Year
Permits
Sales 
(in Sq. Yds.)
1
18
13,000
2
15
12,000
3
12
11,000
4
10
10,000
5
20
14,000
6
28
16,000
7
35
19,000
8
30
17,000
9
20
13,000
Carpet City’s operations manager believes forecasting sales is possible if housing starts are 
known for that year. First, the data are plotted in Exhibit 18.16, with
x = Number of housing start permits
y = Sales of carpeting
	
Because the points appear to be in a straight line, the manager decides to use the linear 
relationship Y = a + bx.
SOLUTION
An easy way to solve this problem is to use the SLOPE and INTERCEPT functions in Excel. 
Given the data in the table, the SLOPE is equal to 344.2211 and the INTERCEPT is equal to 
6698.492.
2,000
6,000
10,000
Sales
(square
yards of
carpet)
14,000
18,000
20,000
Y
Y
4
Number of housing start permits
X
X
4,000
8,000
12,000
16,000
0
8
12
16
6
2
10
14
18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
Causal Relationship: Sales to Housing Starts
exhibit 18.16

468	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	
The manager interprets the slope as the average number of square yards of carpet sold for 
each new house built in the area. The forecasting equation is therefore
Y = 6698.492 + 344.2211x
Now suppose that there are 25 permits for houses to be built next year. The sales forecast 
would therefore be
6,698.492 + 344.2211(25) = 15,304.02 square yards
In this problem, the lag between filing the permit with the appropriate agency and the new 
home owner coming to Carpet City to buy carpet makes a causal relationship feasible for 
forecasting.
M u l t i p l e  Re g r e s s i o n  A n a l y s i s   Another forecasting method is multiple 
regression analysis, in which a number of variables are considered, together with the effects 
of each on the item of interest. For example, in the home furnishings field, the effects of the 
number of marriages, housing starts, disposable income, and the trend can be expressed in a 
multiple regression equation as
S = A + Bm(M) + Bh(H) + Bi(I) + Bt(T)
where
​ 
S
​ 
= Gross sales for year
​ 
 
A
​ 
= Base sales, a starting point from which other factors have influence
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
M​ = Marriages during the year​ 
 
 
H​ = Housing starts during the year​ 
 
 
I
​ 
= Annual disposable personal income
​ 
 
 
 
T
​ 
= Time trend (first year = 1, second = 2, third = 3, and so forth)
 
​
Bm, Bh, Bi, and Bt represent the influence on expected sales of the numbers of marriages and 
housing starts, income, and trend.
Forecasting by multiple regression is appropriate when a number of factors influence a 
variable of interest—in this case, sales. Its difficulty lies with collecting all the additional data 
that is required to produce the forecast, especially data that comes from outside the firm. For­
tunately, standard computer programs for multiple regression analysis are available, relieving 
the need for tedious manual calculation.
Microsoft Excel supports the time series analysis techniques described in this section. 
These functions are available under the Data Analysis tools for exponential smoothing, mov­
ing averages, and regression.
QUALITATIVE TECHNIQUES IN FORECASTING
Qualitative forecasting techniques generally take advantage of the knowledge of experts and 
require much judgment. These techniques typically involve processes that are well defined 
to those participating in the forecasting exercise. For example, in the case of forecasting the 
demand for new fashion merchandise in a retail store, the firm can include a combination of 
input from typical customers expressing preferences and from store managers who understand 
product mix and store volumes, where they view the merchandise and run through a series of 
exercises designed to bring the group to a consensus estimate. The point is that these are no 
wild guesses as to the expected demand—rather, it involves a well-thought-out and structured 
decision-making approach.
Apply qualitative 
techniques to forecast 
demand.
LO 18–3

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
469
These techniques are most useful when the product is new or there is little experience 
with selling into a new region. Here such information as knowledge of similar products, the 
habits of customers in the area, and how the product will be advertised and introduced may be 
important to estimate demand successfully. In some cases, it may even be useful to consider 
industry data and the experience of competing firms in making estimates of expected demand.
The following are samples of qualitative forecasting techniques.
Market Research
Firms often hire outside companies that specialize in market research to conduct this type 
of forecasting. You may have been involved in market surveys through a marketing class. 
Certainly, you have not escaped telephone calls asking you about product preferences, your 
income, habits, and so on.
Market research is used mostly for product research in the sense of looking for new product 
ideas, likes and dislikes about existing products, which competitive products within a particu­
lar class are preferred, and so on. Again, the data collection methods are primarily surveys 
and interviews.
Panel Consensus
In a panel consensus, the idea that two heads are better than one is extrapolated to the idea 
that a panel of people from a variety of positions can develop a more reliable forecast than a 
narrower group. Panel forecasts are developed through open meetings with a free exchange 
of ideas from all levels of management and individuals. The difficulty with this open style is 
that lower-level employees are intimidated by higher levels of management. For example, a 
salesperson in a particular product line may have a good estimate of future product demand 
but may not speak up to refute a much different estimate given by the vice president of mar­
keting. The Delphi technique (which we discuss shortly) was developed to try to correct this 
impairment to free exchange.
When decisions in forecasting are at a broader, higher level (as when introducing a new 
product line or concerning strategic product decisions such as new marketing areas), the term 
executive judgment is generally used. The term is self-explanatory: a higher level of manage­
ment is involved.
Historical Analogy
In trying to forecast demand for a new product, an ideal situation would be one where an 
existing product or generic product could be used as a model. There are many ways to classify 
such analogies—for example, complementary products, substitutable or competitive prod­
ucts, and products as a function of income. Again, you have surely gotten a deluge of mail 
advertising products in a category similar to a product purchased via catalog, the Internet, or 
mail order. If you buy a DVD through the mail, you will receive more mail about new DVDs 
and DVD players. A causal relationship would be that demand for compact discs is caused by 
demand for DVD players. An analogy would be forecasting the demand for digital videodisc 
players by analyzing the historical demand for VCRs. The products are in the same general 
category of electronics and may be bought by consumers at similar rates. A simpler example 
would be toasters and coffeepots. A firm that already produces toasters and wants to produce 
coffeepots could use the toaster history as a likely growth model.
Delphi Method
As we mentioned under panel consensus, a statement or opinion of a higher-level person will 
likely be weighted more than that of a lower-level person. The worst case is where lower-level 
people feel threatened and do not contribute their true beliefs. To prevent this problem, the 
Delphi method conceals the identity of the individuals participating in the study. Everyone 
has the same weight. Procedurally, a moderator creates a questionnaire and distributes it to 
participants. Their responses are summed and given back to the entire group along with a new 
set of questions.

470	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The step-by-step procedure for the Delphi method is:
	1.	 Choose the experts to participate. There should be a variety of knowledgeable people 
in different areas.
	2.	 Through a questionnaire (or e-mail), obtain forecasts (and any premises or qualifica­
tions for the forecasts) from all participants.
	3.	 Summarize the results, and redistribute them to the participants along with appropri­
ate new questions.
	4.	 Summarize again, refining forecasts and conditions, and again develop new 
questions.
	5.	 Repeat step 4 if necessary. Distribute the final results to all participants.
The Delphi technique can usually achieve satisfactory results in three rounds. The time 
required is a function of the number of participants, how much work is involved for them to 
develop their forecasts, and their speed in responding.
WEB-BASED FORECASTING: COLLABORATIVE PLANNING, 
FORECASTING, AND REPLENISHMENT (CPFR)
Collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) is a Web-based tool used 
to coordinate demand forecasting, production and purchase planning, and inventory replen­
ishment between supply chain trading partners. CPFR is being used as a means of integrating 
all members of an n-tier supply chain, including manufacturers, distributors, and retailers. As 
depicted in Exhibit 18.17, the ideal point of collaboration utilizing CPFR is the retail-level 
demand forecast, which is successively used to synchronize forecasts, production, and replen­
ishment plans upstream through the supply chain.
Although the methodology is applicable to any industry, CPFR applications to date have 
largely focused on the food, apparel, and general merchandise industries. The potential bene­
fits of sharing information for enhanced planning visibility in any supply chain are enormous. 
Various estimates for cost savings attributable to improved supply chain coordination have 
been proposed, including $30 billion annually in the food industry alone.
CPFR’s objective is to exchange selected internal information on a shared Web server in 
order to provide for reliable, longer-term future views of demand in the supply chain. CPFR 
uses a cyclic and iterative approach to derive consensus supply chain forecasts. It consists of 
the following five steps:
Step 1. Creation of a front-end partnership agreement.    This agreement specifies (1) 
objectives (e.g., inventory reductions, lost sales elimination, lower product obsolescence) to 
be gained through collaboration, (2) resource requirements (e.g., hardware, software, per­
formance metrics) necessary for the collaboration, and (3) expectations of confidentiality 
Note: Solid arrows represent material flows; dashed arrows represent information flows.
Production Planning
and Purchase Information
Replenishment
Information
Forecast
Information
“Tier n”
Vendor
Tier 3
Vendor
Tier 2
Vendor
Tier 1
Vendor
Distribution
Center
Fabrication and
Final Assembly
Retailer
n-Tier Supply Chain with Retail Activities
exhibit 18.17
Apply collaborative 
techniques to forecast 
demand.
LO 18–4
Collaborative planning, 
forecasting, and 
replenishment (CPFR)
An Internet tool to 
coordinate forecasting, 
production, and purchasing 
in a firm’s supply chain.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
471
concerning the prerequisite trust necessary to share sensitive company information, which 
represents a major implementation obstacle.
Step 2. Joint business planning.    Typically, partners create partnership strategies, design 
a joint calendar identifying the sequence and frequency of planning activities to follow 
that affect product flows, and specify exception criteria for handling planning variances 
between the trading partners’ demand forecasts.
Step 3. Development of demand forecasts.    Forecast development may follow preexist­
ing company procedures. Retailers should play a critical role because shared point-of-sale 
(POS) data permit the development of more accurate and timely expectations (compared 
with extrapolated warehouse withdrawals or aggregate store orders) for both retailers and 
vendors. Given the frequency of forecast generation and the potential for vast numbers of 
items requiring forecast preparation, a simple forecast procedure such as a moving average 
is commonly used within CPFR. Simple techniques are easily used in conjunction with 
expert knowledge of promotional or pricing events to modify forecast values accordingly.
Step 4. Sharing forecasts.    Retailer (order forecasts) and vendor (sales forecasts) then 
electronically post their latest forecasts for a list of products on a shared server. The server 
examines pairs of corresponding forecasts and issues an exception notice for any fore­
cast pair where the difference exceeds a preestablished safety margin (e.g., 5 percent). If 
the safety margin is exceeded, planners from both firms may collaborate electronically to 
derive a consensus forecast.
Step 5. Inventory replenishment.    Once the corresponding forecasts are in agreement, 
the order forecast becomes an actual order, which commences the replenishment process. 
Each of these steps is then repeated iteratively in a continuous cycle, at varying times, by 
individual products, and the calendar of events is established between trading partners. For 
example, partners may review the front-end partnership agreement annually, evaluate the 
joint business plans quarterly, develop forecasts weekly to monthly, and replenish daily.
The early exchange of information between trading partners provides for reliable, longer-
term future views of demand in the supply chain. The forward visibility based upon informa­
tion sharing leads to a variety of benefits within supply chain partnerships.
As with most new corporate initiatives, there is skepticism and resistance to change. One of 
the largest hurdles hindering collaboration is the lack of trust over complete information shar­
ing between supply chain partners. The conflicting objective between the profit-­maximizing 
vendor and the cost-minimizing customer gives rise to adversarial supply chain relationships. 
Sharing sensitive operating data may enable one trading partner to take advantage of the 
other. Similarly, there is the potential loss of control as a barrier to implementation. Some 
companies are rightfully concerned about the idea of placing strategic data such as financial 
reports, manufacturing schedules, and inventory values online. Companies open themselves 
up to security breaches. However, front-end partnership agreements, nondisclosure agree­
ments, and limited information access may help overcome these fears.
Concept Connections
LO 18–1   Understand how forecasting is essential to supply chain planning.
Summary
Forecasts are essential to every business organization. It 
is important to consider the purpose of the forecast before 
selecting the technique.
	∙	 Strategic forecasts are typically longer term and usually 
involve forecasting demand for a group of products.
	∙	 Tactical forecasts would cover only a short period of 
time, at most a few weeks in the future, and would 
typically be for individual items.
Forecasts are used in many different problems stud­
ied in this book.

472	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Key Terms
Strategic forecasts  Medium and long-term forecasts 
that are used for decisions related to strategy and aggre­
gate demand.
Tactical forecasts  Short-term forecasts used for making 
day-to-day decisions related to meeting demand.
LO 18–2   Evaluate demand using quantitative forecasting models.
In this chapter, the focus is on time series analysis tech­
niques. With a time series analysis, past demand data are 
used to predict future demand.
	∙	 Demand can be broken down or “decomposed” into 
basic elements, such as trend, seasonality, and random 
variation (there are other elements, but these are the 
ones considered in this chapter).
	∙	 Four different time series models are evaluated: sim­
ple moving average, weighted moving average, expo­
nential smoothing, and linear regression.
	∙	 Trend and seasonal components are analyzed for these 
problems.
	∙	 Causal relationship forecasting is different from time 
series (but commonly used) because it uses data other 
than past demand in making the forecast.
	∙	 The quality of a forecast is measured based on its 
error. Various measures exist, including the average 
error, percentage of error, and bias. Bias occurs when 
a forecast is consistently higher or lower than actual 
demand.
Summary
Key Terms
Time series analysis  A forecast in which past demand 
data is used to predict future demand.
Moving average  A forecast based on average past demand.
Weighted moving average  A forecast made with past 
data where more recent data is given more significance 
than older data.
Exponential smoothing  A time series forecasting tech­
nique using weights that decrease exponentially (1 – α) 
for each past period.
Smoothing constant alpha (α)  The parameter in the expo­
nential smoothing equation that controls the speed of reac­
tion to differences between forecasts and actual demand.
Smoothing constant delta (δ)  An additional parameter 
used in an exponential smoothing equation that includes 
an adjustment for trend.
Linear regression forecasting  A forecasting technique 
that fits a straight line to past demand data.
Decomposition  The process of identifying and separat­
ing time series data into fundamental components such 
as trend and seasonality.
Forecast error  The difference between actual demand 
and what was forecast.
Mean absolute deviation (MAD)  The average of the 
absolute value of the actual forecast error.
Mean absolute percent error (MAPE)  The average error 
measured as a percentage of average demand.
Tracking signal  A measure of whether the forecast is 
keeping pace with any genuine upward or downward 
changes in demand. This is used to detect forecast bias.
Causal relationship forecasting  Forecasting using 
independent variables other than time to predict future 
demand.
Key Formulas
​​F​ t​ = ​ 
​A​ t−1​ + ​A​ t−2​ + ​A​ t−3​ + . . . +​A​ t−n​ 
 
 
__________________ 
 
n 
​​
​​F​ t​ = ​w​ 1​ ​A​ t−1​ + ​w​ 2​ ​A​ t−2​ + . . . +​w​ n​ ​A​ t−n​​
​​F​ t​ = ​F​ t−1​ + α(​A​ t−1​ − ​F​ t−1​ )​
Ft = FITt–1 + α(At–1 – FITt–1)
Tt = Tt–1 + δ(Ft – FITt–1)
​[18.1]​
​[18.2]​
​[18.3]​
​[18.4]​
​[18.5]​
FITt = Ft + Tt
​Y = a + bt​
b = ​ 
∑ t ​y​  ​  − n​ ¯ t ​ ​·​ ¯ y ​​  ​ 
__________ 
∑ ​t​ 2​  − n ​ ¯ t ​ 2​  ​
​a = ​ ¯ y ​ − b​ ¯ t ​​
​[18.6]​
​[18.7]​
​[18.8]​
​[18.9]​

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
473
​LO 18–3   Apply qualitative techniques to forecast demand.
	∙	 Qualitative techniques depend more on judgment or 
the opinions of experts and can be useful when past 
demand data are not available.
	∙	 These techniques typically involve a structured pro­
cess so that experience can be acquired and accuracy 
assessed.
Summary
LO 18–4   Apply collaborative techniques to forecast demand.
	∙	 Collaboration between supply chain partners, such as 
the manufacturer and the retailer selling a product, can 
be useful.
	∙	 Typically, Web-based technology is used to derive 
a forecast that is a consensus of all the participants. 
There are often great benefits to all participants due 
to the sharing of information and future planning vis­
ibility offered through the system.
Summary
Key Terms
Collaborative Planning, Forecasting, and Replenish­
ment (CPFR)  An Internet tool to coordinate forecasting, 
production, and purchasing in a firm’s supply chain.
​​S​ yt​ = ​√ 
__________
 
​ 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
n
 ​ ​(​y​ i​ − ​Y​ i​ )​ 2​ 
__________ 
n − 2 
​ ​​
​MAD =  ​ 
​∑ 
t=1
​ 
n
 ​|​ ​A​ t​ − ​F​ t​|​ 
________ 
n 
​​
​[18.10]​
​[18.11]​
​MAPE ​ = ​ 100 
___ 
n  ​ ​∑ t=1​ 
n  ​
⎡
 
⎢ ⎣​ 
​|​A​ t​ – ​F​ t​ |​ 
_____ 
​A​ t​ 
​
⎤
 
⎥ ⎦​
​TS =  ​ RSFE 
_____ 
MAD ​​
​[18.12]​
​[18.13]​
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Sunrise Baking Company markets doughnuts through a chain of food stores. It has been expe­
riencing overproduction and underproduction because of forecasting errors. The following 
data are its demand in dozens of doughnuts for the past four weeks. Doughnuts are made 
for the following day; for example, Sunday’s doughnut production is for Monday’s sales, 
­Monday’s production is for Tuesday’s sales, and so forth. The bakery is closed Saturday, so 
Friday’s production must satisfy demand for both Saturday and Sunday.
LO 18–2
4 Weeks Ago
3 Weeks Ago
2 Weeks Ago
Last Week
Monday
2,200
2,400
2,300
2,400
Tuesday
2,000
2,100
2,200
2,200
Wednesday
2,300
2,400
2,300
2,500
Thursday
1,800
1,900
1,800
2,000
Friday
1,900
1,800
2,100
2,000
Saturday
(closed on Saturday)
Sunday
2,800
2,700
3,000
2,900

474	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Make a forecast for this week based on the following:
	
a.  Daily, using a simple four-week moving average.
	
b.  Daily, using a weighted moving average with weights of 0.40, 0.30, 0.20, and 0.10 
(most recent to oldest week).
	
c.  Sunrise is also planning its purchases of ingredients for bread production. If bread 
demand had been forecast for last week at 22,000 loaves and only 21,000 loaves were 
actually demanded, what would Sunrise’s forecast be for this week using exponential 
smoothing with α = 0.10?
	
d.  Suppose, with the forecast made in c, this week’s demand actually turns out to be 
22,500. What would the new forecast be for the next week?
Solution
	
a.   Simple moving average, four-week.
​
Monday ​ 2,400 + 2,300 + 2,400 + 2,200 
 
 
____________________ 
 
4 
​
​ 
=
​ 
​ 9,300 
_____ 
4  ​ = 2,325 doz.
​ 
 
 
 
 
Tuesday
​ 
=
​ 
​ 8,500 
_____ 
4  ​ = 2,125 doz.
​ 
 
 
 
 
Wednesday
​ 
=
​ 
​ 9,500 
_____ 
4  ​ = 2,375 doz.
​ 
 
 
 
 
Thursday
​ 
=
​ 
​ 7,500 
_____ 
4  ​ = 1,875 doz.
​ 
 
 
 
 
Friday
​ 
=
​ 
​ 7,800 
_____ 
4  ​ = 1,950 doz.
​ 
 
 
 
 
Saturday and Sunday
​ 
=
​ 
​ 11,400 
_____ 
4 
​ = 2,850 doz.
​
	
b.  Weighted average with weights of .40, .30, .20, and .10.
(.10)
(.20)
(.30)
 (.40)
Monday
220
+
480
+
690
+
   960
=
2,350
Tuesday
200
+
420
+
660
+
   880
=
2,160
Wednesday
230
+
480
+
690
+
1,000
=
2,400
Thursday
180
+
380
+
540
+
   800
=
1,900
Friday
190
+
360
+
630
+
   800
=
1,980
Saturday and 
Sunday
280
+
540
+
900
+
1,160
=
2,880
	
c.  Exponentially smoothed forecast for bread demand
​
​F​ t​
​ 
=
​ 
​F​ t−1​ + α(​A​ t−1​ − ​F​ t−1​ )
​ 
 
​​ =​ 22,000 + 0.10(21,000 − 22,000 )​ 
 
 
​
​ 
=
​ 
22,000 − 100 = 21,900 loaves
  ​
	
d.  Exponentially smoothed forecast
​​F​ t+1​​ =​ 21,900 + .10(22,500 – 21,900 )​ 
 
 
​​  =​ 21,900 + .10(600 ) = 21,960 loaves​
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Given the following information, make a forecast for May using exponential smoothing with 
trend and linear regression. 
Month
January
February
March
April
Demand
700
760
780
790

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
475
For exponential smoothing with trend, assume that the previous forecast (for April) including 
trend (FIT) was 800 units, and the previous trend component (T) was 50 units. Also, alpha
(α) = .3 and delta(δ) = .1.
For linear regression, use the January-through-April demand data to fit the regression 
line. Use the Excel regression functions SLOPE and INTERCEPT to calculate these values.
Solution
Exponential smoothing with trend
Use the following three steps to update the forecast for each period:
1	
Forecast without Trend Ft = FITt−1 + α(At−1− FITt−1)
2	
Update Trend estimate Tt =Tt−1 + δ(Ft − FITt−1)
3	
New Forecast including Trend FITt =Ft +Tt
​
​Given      FIT​ April​
​ 
=
​ 
800
​ 
 
and  ​T​ April​​ 
=​ 50  ​
​
Then     ​F​ May​
​ 
=
​ 
800 + .3(790 − 800 ) = 797
​ 
 
 
​T​ May​​ =​ 50 + .1(797 − 800 ) = 49.7​ 
 
 
​FIT​ May​
​ 
=
​ 
797 + 49.7 = 846.7
 
​
Linear regression
1	
Set up the problem and calculate the slope and intercept as shown here.
2	
Forecast using linear regression
Ft = a + bt
where a is the “Slope” and b is the “Intercept,” and t for May is 5 (the index for month 5).
​Then     ​  ​F​ May​ = 685 + 29​(​5​)​ = 830​
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
The following are quarterly data for the past two years. From these data, prepare a forecast for 
the upcoming year using decomposition.
Period
Actual
1
300
2
540
3
885
4
580
Period
Actual
5
416
6
760
7
1,191
8
760

476	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Solution
(Note that the values you obtain may be slightly different due to rounding. The values given 
here were obtained using an Excel spreadsheet.)
(1)
Period
x
(2)
Actual
y
(3)
Period
average
(4)
Seasonal
factor
(5)
Deseasonalized
demand yd
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
300
540
885
580
416
760
1,191
760
358
650
1,038
670
0.527
0.957
1.529
0.987
0.527
0.957
1.529
0.987
568.99
564.09
578.92
587.79
789.01
793.91
779.08
770.21
Total
5,432
2,716
8.0
Average
679
 679
1
Column 3 is seasonal average. For example, the first-quarter average is
​ 300 + 416 
_______ 
2 
​ = 358​
Column 4 is the quarter average (column 3) divided by the overall average (679). Column 5 is 
the actual data divided by the seasonal index. To determine t2 and ty, we can construct a table 
as follows:
Period t
Deseasonalized 
Demand (yd)
t2
tyd
1
568.99
1
 569.0
2
564.09
4
1,128.2
3
578.92
9
1,736.7
4
587.79
16 
2,351.2
5
789.01
25 
3,945.0
6
793.91
36 
4,763.4
7
779.08
49 
5,453.6
8
770.21
64 
6,161.7
Sums
36
5,432
204 
26,108.8 
Average
4.5
679
Now we calculate regression results for deseasonalized data.
​ 
b
​ 
=
​ 
​ ​(​26108.8​)​ − ​(​8​)​(​4.5​)​(​679​)​ 
 
_________________ 
 
​(​204​)​ − ​(​8​)​(​4.5​)​ 2​ 
​ = 39.64
​ 
 
 
a​ =​ ​ ¯ y ​​ d​ − b​ ¯ t ​​ 
a
​ 
=
​ 
679 − 39.64​(​4.5​)​ = 500.6
 
​
Therefore, the deseasonalized regression results are
​Y = 500.6 + 39.64t​

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
477
Actual 
Demand
Forecast 
Demand
Actual 
Deviation
Cumulative 
Deviation (RSFE)
Tracking 
Signal
Absolute Deviation 
(% Deviation)
October
700
660
 40
  40
1.00
40 (5.71%)
November
760
840
−80
−40
0.67
80 (10.53%)
December
780
750
 30
−10
0.20
30 (3.85%)
January
790
835
−45
−55
1.13
45 (5.70%)
February
850
910
−60
−115
2.25
60 (7.06%)
March
950
890
 60
−55
1.05
60 (6.32%)
Average demand = 805 
Total dev. = 315
Period
Trend Forecast
Seasonal Factor
Final Forecast
  9
857.4
×
0.527
=
   452.0
10
897.0
×
0.957
=
   858.7
11
936.7
×
1.529
=
1,431.9
12
976.3
×
0.987
=
   963.4
Actual
Forecast
October
700
660
November
760
840
December
780
750
January
790
835
February
850
910
March
950
890
SOLVED PROBLEM 4
A specific forecasting model was used to forecast demand for a product. The forecasts and the 
corresponding demand that subsequently occurred are shown as follows. Use the MAD, track­
ing signal technique, and MAPE to evaluate the accuracy of the forecasting model.
Solution
Evaluate the forecasting model using the MAD, the tracking signal, and MAPE.
​ 
MAD
​ 
=
​ 
​ 315 
___ 
6  ​ = 52.5
​ 
 
 
Tracking signal​ =​ ​ − 55 
____ 
52.5 ​ = − 1.05​ 
 
MAPE
​ 
=
​ 
​ 5 . 71 + 10 . 53 + 3 . 85 + 5 . 70 + 7 . 06 + 6 . 32 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
 
6 
​ = 6.53%
​
0
– 1.05
There is not enough evidence to reject the forecasting model, so we accept its recommendations.

478	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Last Year
This Year
January
300
275
February
400
375
March
425
350
April
450
425
May
400
400
June
460
350
Last Year
This Year
July
400
350
August
300
275
September
375
350
October
500
November
550
December
500
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Why is forecasting necessary in OSCM?
	  2.	 It is a common saying that the only thing certain about a forecast is that it will be wrong. 
What is meant by this?
	  3.	 From the choice of the simple moving average, weighted moving average, exponential 
smoothing, and linear regression analysis, which forecasting technique would you con­
sider the most accurate? Why?
	  4.	 All forecasting methods using exponential smoothing, adaptive smoothing, and exponen­
tial smoothing including trend require starting values to get the equations going. How 
would you select the starting value for, say, Ft−1?
	  5.	 How is a seasonal index computed from a regression line analysis?
	  6.	 Discuss the basic differences between the mean absolute deviation and mean absolute 
percent error.
	  7.	 What implications do forecast errors have for the search for ultrasophisticated statistical 
forecasting models?
	  8.	 Causal relationships are potentially useful for which component of a time series?
	  9.	 Let’s say you work for a company that makes prepared breakfast cereals like corn flakes. 
Your company is planning to introduce a new hot breakfast product made from whole 
grains that would require some minimal preparation by the consumer. This would be 
a completely new product for the company. How would you propose forecasting initial 
demand for this product?
	10.	 How has the development of the Internet affected the way companies forecast in support 
of their supply chain planning process?
	11.	 What sorts of risks do you see in reliance on the Internet in the use of collaborative plan­
ning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR)?
LO 18–1
LO 18–2
LO 18–3
LO 18–4
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What is the term for forecasts used for making day-to-day decisions about meeting demand?
	  2.	 What category of forecasting techniques uses managerial judgment in lieu of numerical data?
	  3.	 Given the following history, use a three-quarter moving average to forecast the demand 
for the third quarter of this year. Note, the 1st quarter is Jan, Feb, and Mar; 2nd quarter 
Apr, May, Jun; 3rd quarter Jul, Aug, Sep; and 4th quarter Oct, Nov, Dec.
LO 18–1
LO 18–2
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Last year
100
125
135
175
185
200
150
140
130
200
225
250
This year
125
135
135
190
200
190
	  4.	 Here are the data for the past 21 months for actual sales of a particular product:
Develop a forecast for the fourth quarter using a three-quarter, weighted moving average. 
Weight the most recent quarter 0.5, the second most recent 0.25, and the third 0.25. Do the 
problem using quarters, as opposed to forecasting separate months. (Answer in Appendix D)

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
479
	  5.	 The following table contains the number of complaints received in a department store for 
the first six months of operation.
Month
Complaints
January
36
February
45
March
81
Month
Complaints
April
 90
May
108
June
144
If a three-month moving average is used to smooth this series, what would have been the 
forecast for May?
	  6.	 The following tabulations are actual sales of units for six months and a starting forecast 
in January. (Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  Calculate forecasts for the remaining five months using simple exponential smoothing 
with α = 0.2.
	
b.  Calculate MAD for the forecasts.
Month
Actual 
Demand
1
31
2
34
3
33
4
35
5
37
Month
Actual 
Demand
6
36
7
38
8
40
9
40
10  
41
	
a.  Calculate the single exponential smoothing forecast for these data using an α of 0.30 
and an initial forecast (F1) of 31.
	
b.  Calculate the exponential smoothing with trend forecast for these data using an α 
of 0.30, a δ of 0.30, an initial trend forecast (T1) of 1, and an initial exponentially 
smoothed forecast (F1) of 30.
	
c.  Calculate the mean absolute deviation (MAD) for each forecast. Which is best?
	  8.	 Actual demand for a product for the past three months was
Three months ago
400 units
Two months ago
350 units
Last month
325 units
	
a.  Using a simple three-month moving average, make a forecast for this month.
	
b.  If 300 units were actually demanded this month, what would your forecast be for next 
month?
	
c.  Using simple exponential smoothing, what would your forecast be for this month if the 
exponentially smoothed forecast for three months ago was 450 units and the smooth­
ing constant was 0.20?
	  9.	 Assume an initial starting Ft of 300 units, a trend (Tt) of eight units, an alpha of 0.30, and a 
delta of 0.40. If actual demand turned out to be 288, calculate the forecast for the next period.
Actual
Forecast
January
100
80
February
  94
March
106
April
  80
May
  68
June
  94
	  7.	 The following table contains the demand from the last 10 months.

480	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	10.	 The number of cases of merlot wine sold by the Connor Owen winery in an eight-year 
period is as follows.
Year
Cases of 
Merlot Wine
1
270
2
356
3
398
4
456
Year
Cases of 
Merlot Wine
5
358
6
500
7
410
8
376
  Using an exponential smoothing model with an alpha value of 0.20, estimate the 
smoothed value calculated as of the end of year 8. Use the average demand for years 1 
through 3 as your initial forecast, and then smooth the forecast forward to year 8.
	11.	 Not all the items in your office supply store are evenly distributed as far as demand is 
concerned, so you decide to forecast demand to help plan your stock. Past data for legal-
sized yellow tablets for the month of August are
Actual
June
140
July
180
August
170
Week 1
300
Week 2
400
Week 3
600
Week 4
700
	
a.  Using a three-week moving average, what would you forecast the next week to be?
	
b.  Using exponential smoothing with α = 0.20, if the exponential forecast for week 3 was 
estimated as the average of the first two weeks [(300 + 400)/2 = 350], what would you 
forecast week 5 to be?
	12.	 Assume that your stock of sales merchandise is maintained based on the forecast demand. 
If the distributor’s sales personnel call on the first day of each month, compute your fore­
cast sales by each of the three methods requested here.
	
a.  Using a simple three-month moving average, what is the forecast for September?
	
b.  Using a weighted moving average, what is the forecast for September with weights of 
0.20, 0.30, and 0.50 for June, July, and August, respectively?
	
c.  Using single exponential smoothing and assuming that the forecast for June had been 
130, forecast sales for September with a smoothing constant alpha of 0.30.
	13.	 Historical demand for a product is as follows.
Demand
April
60
May
55
June
75
Demand
July
60
August
80
September
75
	
a.  Using a simple four-month moving average, calculate a forecast for October.
	
b.  Using single exponential smoothing with α = 0.2 and a September forecast = 65, cal­
culate a forecast for October.
	
c.  Using simple linear regression, calculate the trend line for the historical data. Let’s say 
the X axis is April = 1, May = 2, and so on, while the Y axis is demand.
	
d.  Calculate a forecast for October using your regression formula.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
481
	14.	 Demand for stereo headphones and MP3 players for joggers has caused Nina Industries 
to grow almost 50 percent over the past year. The number of joggers continues to expand, 
so Nina expects demand for headsets to also expand, because, as yet, no safety laws have 
been passed to prevent joggers from wearing them. Demand for the players for last year 
was as follows.
Month
Demand 
(units)
January
4,200
February
4,300
March
4,000
April
4,400
May
5,000
June
4,700
Month
Demand 
(units)
July
5,300
August
4,900
September
5,400
October
5,700
November
6,300
December
6,000
	
a.  Using linear regression analysis, what would you estimate demand to be for each month 
next year? Using a spreadsheet, follow the general format in Exhibits 18.7 and 18.8. 
Compare your results to those obtained by using the forecast spreadsheet function.
	
b.  To be reasonably confident of meeting demand, Nina decides to use three standard 
errors of estimate for safety. How many additional units should be held to meet this 
level of confidence?
	15.	 Historical demand for a product is
Demand
January
12
February
11
March
15
April
12
May
16
June
15
	
a.  Using a weighted moving average with weights of 0.60, 0.30, and 0.10, find the July 
forecast.
	
b.  Using a simple three-month moving average, find the July forecast.
	
c.  Using single exponential smoothing with α = 0.2 and a June forecast = 13, find the 
July forecast. Make whatever assumptions you wish.
	
d.  Using simple linear regression analysis, calculate the regression equation for the pre­
ceding demand data.
	
e.  Using the regression equation in d, calculate the forecast for July.
	16.	 The tracking signals computed using past demand history for three different products are 
as follows. Each product used the same forecasting technique.
TS 1
TS 2
TS 3
  1
−2.70
1.54
0.10
  2
−2.32
−0.64 
0.43
  3
−1.70
2.05
1.08
  4
−1.10
2.58
1.74
  5
−0.87
−0.95  
1.94
  6
−0.05
−1.23  
2.24
  7
  0.10
0.75
2.96
  8
  0.40
−1.59  
3.02
  9
  1.50
  0.47 
3.54
10
  2.20
2.74
3.75
Discuss the tracking signals for each and what the implications are.

482	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	17.	 Here are the actual tabulated demands for an item for a nine-month period (January 
through September). Your supervisor wants to test two forecasting methods to see which 
method was better over this period.
Month
Actual
January
110
February
130
March
150
April
170
May
160
Month
Actual
June
180
July
140
August
130
September
140
	
a.  Forecast April through September using a three-month moving average.
	
b.  Use simple exponential smoothing with an alpha of 0.3 to estimate April through 
­September, using the average of January through March as the initial forecast for April.
	
c.  Use MAD to decide which method produced the better forecast over the six-month 
period.
	18.	 A particular forecasting model was used to forecast a six-month period. Here are the 
forecasts and actual demands that resulted:
Forecast
Actual
April
250
200
May
325
250
June
400
325
July
350
300
August
375
325
September
450
400
  Find the tracking signal and state whether you think the model being used is giving 
acceptable answers.
	19.	 Harlen Industries has a simple forecasting model: Take the actual demand for the same 
month last year and divide that by the number of fractional weeks in that month. This gives 
the average weekly demand for that month. This weekly average is used as the weekly 
forecast for the same month this year. This technique was used to forecast eight weeks for 
this year, which are shown as follows, along with the actual demand that occurred.
  The following eight weeks show the forecast (based on last year) and the demand that 
actually occurred:
Week
Forecast 
Demand
Actual 
Demand
1
140
137
2
140
133
3
140
150
4
140
160
5
140
180
6
150
170
7
150
185
8
150
205
	
a.  Compute the MAD of forecast errors.
	
b.  Using the RSFE, compute the tracking signal.
	
c.  Based on your answers to parts (a) and (b), comment on Harlen’s method of forecasting.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
483
Month
Actual 
Demand
1
62
2
65
3
67
4
68
5
71
6
73
Month
Actual 
Demand
7
76
8
78
9
78
10
80
11
84
12
85
	20.	 In this problem, you are to test the validity of your forecasting model. Here are the fore­
casts for a model you have been using and the actual demands that occurred:
Week
Forecast
Actual
1
 800
 900
2
 850
1,000  
3
 950
1,050  
4
 950
 900
5
1,000  
 900
6
 975
1,100  
Use the method stated in the text to compute MAD and the tracking signal. Then, decide 
whether the forecasting model you have been using is giving reasonable results.
	21.	 The following table shows predicted product demand using your particular forecasting 
method along with the actual demand that occurred. (Answers in Appendix D)
Forecast
Actual
1,500
1,550
1,400
1,500
1,700
1,600
1,750
1,650
1,800
1,700
	
a.  Compute the tracking signal using the mean absolute deviation and running sum of 
forecast errors.
	
b.  Discuss whether your forecasting method is giving good predictions.
	22.	 Your manager is trying to determine what forecasting method to use. Based upon the fol­
lowing historical data, calculate the following forecast and specify what procedure you 
would utilize.
	
a.  Calculate the simple three-month moving average forecast for periods 4 to 12.
	
b.  Calculate the weighted three-month moving average using weights of 0.50, 0.30, and 
0.20 for periods 4 to 12.
	
c.  Calculate the single exponential smoothing forecast for periods 2 to 12 using an initial 
forecast (F1) of 61 and an α of 0.30.
	
d.  Calculate the exponential smoothing with trend component forecast for periods 2 to 12 
using an initial trend forecast (T1) of 1.8, an initial exponential smoothing forecast (F1) 
of 60, an α of 0.30, and a δ of 0.30.
	
e.  Calculate the mean absolute deviation (MAD) for the forecasts made by each tech­
nique in periods 4 to 12. Which forecasting method do you prefer?

484	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	23.	 After using your forecasting model for six months, you decide to test it using MAD and a 
tracking signal. Here are the forecast and actual demands for the six-month period:
Period
Forecast
Actual
May
450
500
June
500
550
July
550
400
August
600
500
September
650
675
October
700
600
	
a.  Find the tracking signal.
	
b.  Decide whether your forecasting routine is acceptable.
	24.	 Zeus Computer Chips, Inc. used to have major contracts to produce the Centrino-type 
chips. The market has been declining during the past three years because of the quad-core 
chips, which it cannot produce, so Zeus has the unpleasant task of forecasting next year. 
The task is unpleasant because the firm has not been able to find replacement chips for its 
product lines. Here is the demand over the past 12 quarters:
Two 
Years Ago
Last 
Year
This 
Year
I
II
III
IV
4,800
3,500
4,300
3,000
I
II
III
IV
3,500
2,700
3,500
2,400
I
II
III
IV
3,200
2,100
2,700
1,700
Use the decomposition technique to forecast the demand for the next four quarters.
	25.	 The sales data for two years are as follows. Data are aggregated with two months of sales 
in each “period.”
Months
Sales
Months
Sales
January–February
March–April
May–June
July–August
September–October
November–December
109
104
150
170
120
100
January–February
March–April
May–June
July–August
September–October
November–December
115
112
159
182
126
106
	
a.  Plot the data.
	
b.  Fit a simple linear regression model to the sales data.
	
c.  In addition to the regression model, determine multiplicative seasonal index factors. A 
full cycle is assumed to be a full year.
	
d.  Using the results from parts (b) and (c), prepare a forecast for the next year.
	26.	 The following table shows the past two years of quarterly sales information. Assume that 
there are both trend and seasonal factors and that the seasonal cycle is one year. Use time 
series decomposition to forecast quarterly sales for the next year.
Quarter
Last Year
Sales
Quarter
This Year
Sales
I
II
III
IV
215
240
205
190
I
II
III
IV
160
195
150
140

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
485
Year
Season
Actual 
Demand
2 years ago
Spring
205
Summer
140
Fall
375
Winter
575
Last year
Spring
475
Summer
275
Fall
685
Winter
965
	27.	 Tucson Machinery, Inc. manufactures numerically controlled machines, which sell for an 
average price of $0.5 million each. Sales for these NCMs for the past two years were as 
follows.
Quarter
Quantity (Units)
Quarter
Quantity (Units)
Last Year
I
II
III
IV
12
18
26
16
This Year
I
II
III
IV
16
24
28
18
	
a.  Find a line using regression in Excel.
	
b.  Find the trend and seasonal factors.
	
c.  Forecast sales for next year.
	28.	 Use regression analysis on deseasonalized demand to forecast next summer’s demand, 
given the following historical demand data.
Earnings per Share
Quarter
Company A
Company B
3 years ago
I
$1.67
$0.17
II
2.35
0.24
III
1.11
0.26
IV
1.15
0.34
2 years ago
I
1.56
0.25
II
2.04
0.37
III
1.14
0.36
IV
0.38
0.44
Last year
I
0.29
0.33
II
−0.18 (loss)
0.40
III
−0.97 (loss)
0.41
IV
0.20
0.47
This year
I
−1.54 (loss)
0.30
II
0.38
0.47
	29.	 The following are earnings per share for two companies by quarter from the first quarter 
three years ago through the second quarter of this year. Forecast earnings per share for 
the rest of this year and next year. Use exponential smoothing to forecast the third period 
of this year, and the time series decomposition method to forecast the last two quarters of 
this year and all four quarters of next year. (It is much easier to solve this problem on a 
computer spreadsheet so you can see what is happening.)

486	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	
a.  For the exponential smoothing method, choose the first quarter of three years ago as 
the beginning forecast. Make two forecasts: one with α = 0.10 and one with α = 0.30.
	
b.  Using the MAD method of testing the forecasting model’s performance, plus actual 
data from three years ago through the second quarter of this year, how well did the 
model perform?
	
c.  Using the decomposition of a time series method of forecasting, forecast earnings per 
share for the last two quarters of this year and all four quarters of next year. Is there a 
seasonal factor in the earnings?
	
d.  Using your forecasts, comment on each company.
	30.	 Mark Price, the new productions manager for Speakers and Company, needs to find out 
which variable most affects the demand for their line of stereo speakers. He is uncertain 
whether the unit price of the product or the effects of increased marketing are the main 
drivers in sales and wants to use regression analysis to figure out which factor drives 
more demand for its particular market. Pertinent information was collected by an exten­
sive marketing project that lasted over the past 12 years (year 1 is data from 12 years ago) 
and was reduced to the data that follow.
Year
Sales/Unit 
(thousands)
Price/Unit
Advertising 
($000)
1
   400
280
   600
2
   700
215
   835
3
   900
211
1,100
4
1,300
210
1,400
5
1,150
215
1,200
6
1,200
200
1,300
7
   900
225
   900
8
1,100
207
1,100
9
   980
220
   700
10  
1,234
211
   900
11  
   925
227
   700
12  
   800
245
   690
	
a.  Perform a regression analysis based on these data using Excel. Answer the following 
questions based on your results.
	
b.  Which variable, price or advertising, has a larger effect on sales and how do you 
know?
	
c.  Predict average yearly speaker sales for Speakers and Company based on the regres­
sion results if the price was $300 per unit and the amount spent on advertising (in 
thousands) was $900.
	31.	 Sales by quarter for last year and the first three quarters of this year were as follows.
Quarter
I
II
III
IV
Last year
$23,000  
$27,000  
$18,000  
$9,000
This year
19,000
24,000
15,000
  Using a procedure that you develop that captures the change in demand from last year 
to this year and also the seasonality in demand, forecast expected sales for the fourth 
quarter of this year.
	32.	 The following are sales revenues for a large utility company for years 1 through 11. Fore­
cast revenue for years 12 through 15. Because we are forecasting four years into the 
future, you will need to use linear regression as your forecasting method.

	
Forecasting	
Chapter 18	
487
As we discussed at the beginning of the chapter, Star­
bucks has a large, global supply chain that must efficiently 
supply over 17,000 stores. Although the stores might 
appear to be very similar, they are actually very different. 
Depending on the location of the store, its size, and the 
profile of the customers served, Starbucks management 
configures the store offerings to take maximum advan­
tage of the space available and customer preferences.
Starbucks’ actual distribution system is much more 
complex, but for the purpose of our exercise let’s focus 
on a single item that is currently distributed through five 
distribution centers in the United States. Our item is a 
logo-branded coffeemaker that is sold at some of the larger 
retail stores. The coffeemaker has been a steady seller over 
the years due to its reliability and rugged construction. 
Starbucks does not consider this a seasonal product, but 
there is some variability in demand. Demand for the prod­
uct over the past 13 weeks is shown in the following table.
The demand at the distribution centers (DCs) varies 
between about 40 units, on average, per week in Atlanta 
and 48 units in Dallas. The current quarter’s data are 
pretty close to the demand shown in the table.
Management would like you to experiment with 
some forecasting models to determine what should be 
used in a new system to be implemented. The new sys­
tem is programmed to use one of two forecasting models: 
simple moving average or exponential smoothing.
Analytics Exercise: Forecasting Supply Chain Demand—Starbucks 
Corporation (LO 18–2)
Week 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Average 
Atlanta 
33
45
37
38
55
30
18
58
47
37
23
55
40
40
Boston 
26
35
41
40
46
48
55
18
62
44
30
45
50
42
Chicago 
44
34
22
55
48
72
62
28
27
95
35
45
47
47
Dallas 
27
42
35
40
51
64
70
65
55
43
38
47
42
48
LA
32
43
54
40
46
74
40
35
45
38
48
56
50
46
  Total 
162  
199  
189  
213  
246  
288  
245  
204  
236  
257  
174  
248  
229  
222  
Year
Revenue 
(millions)
1
$4,865.9  
2
5,067.4
3
5,515.6
4
5,728.8
5
5,497.7
6
5,197.7
7
5,094.4  
8
5,108.8
9
5,550.6
10
5,738.9
11
5,860.0
	33.	 What forecasting technique makes use of written surveys or telephone interviews?
	34.	 Which qualitative forecasting technique was developed to ensure that the input from 
every participant in the process is weighted equally?
	35.	 When forecasting demand for new products, sometimes firms will use demand data from 
similar existing products to help forecast demand for the new product. What technique is 
this an example of?
	36.	 Often, firms will work with their partners across the supply chain to develop forecasts 
and execute production and distribution between the partners. What technique does this 
describe?
	37.	 How many steps are there in collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment 
(CPFR)?
	38.	 What is the first step in CPFR?
LO 18–3
LO 18–4

488	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Questions
	1.	 Consider using a simple moving average model. 
Experiment with models using five weeks’ and three 
weeks’ past data. The past data in each region are 
given as follows (week −1 is the week before week 
1 in the table, −2 is two weeks before week 1, etc.). 
Evaluate the forecasts that would have been made 
over the 13 weeks using the overall (at the end of the 
13 weeks) mean absolute deviation, mean absolute 
percent error, and tracking signal as criteria.
	2.	 Next, consider using a simple exponential smooth­
ing model. In your analysis, test two alpha values, 
0.2 and 0.4. Use the same criteria for evaluating 
the model as in part 1. When using an alpha value 
of 0.2, assume that the forecast for week 1 is the 
past three-week average (the average demand for 
periods −3, −2, and −1). For the model using an 
alpha of 0.4, assume that the forecast for week 1 is 
the past five-week average.
	3.	 Starbucks is considering simplifying the supply 
chain for their coffeemaker. Instead of stocking 
the coffeemaker in all five distribution centers, 
they are considering only supplying it from a 
single location. Evaluate this option by analyz­
ing how accurate the forecast would be based on 
the demand aggregated across all regions. Use the 
model that you think is best from your analysis of 
parts 1 and 2. Evaluate your new forecast using 
mean absolute deviation, mean absolute percent 
error, and the tracking signal.
	4.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
aggregating demand from a forecasting view? Are 
there other things that should be considered when 
going from multiple DCs to a DC?
Week 
−5 
−4 
−3 
−2 
−1 
Atlanta 
45 
38
30
58
37
Boston
62
18
48
40
35
Chicago
62
22
72
44
48
Dallas
42
35
40
64
43
LA
43
40
54
46
35
Total
254 
153 
244 
252 
198  
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 This is a type of forecast used to make long-term 
decisions, such as where to locate a warehouse or 
how many employees to have in a plant next year.
	  2.	 This is the type of demand that is most appropriate 
for using forecasting models.
	  3.	 This is a term used for actually influencing the sale 
of a product or service.
	  4.	 These are the six major components of demand.
	  5.	 This type of analysis is most appropriate when the 
past is a good predictor of the future.
	  6.	 This is identifying and separating time series data 
into components of demand.
	  7.	 If the demand in the current week was 102 units and 
we had forecast it to be 125, what would be next 
week’s forecast using an exponential smoothing 
model with an alpha of 0.3?
	  8.	 Assume you are using exponential smoothing with 
an adjustment for trend. Demand is increasing at a 
very steady rate of about five units per week. Would 
you expect your alpha and delta parameters to be 
closer to one or zero?
	  9.	 Your forecast is, on average, incorrect by about 10 
percent. The average demand is 130 units. What is 
the MAD?
	10.	 If the tracking signal for your forecast was consis­
tently positive, you could then say this about your 
forecasting technique.
	11.	 What would you suggest to improve the forecast 
described in question 10?
	12.	 You know that sales are greatly influenced by the 
amount your firm advertises in the local paper. What 
forecasting technique would you suggest trying?
	13.	 What forecasting tool is most appropriate when closely 
working with customers dependent on your products?
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Strategic forecast  2. Independent demand  3. Demand management  4. Average demand for the period, trend,
 seasonal elements, cyclical elements, random variation, and autocorrelation  5. Time series analysis  6. Decomposition  7. 118 units  8. Zero  9. 13  
10. Biased, consistently too low  11. Add a trend component  12. Causal relationship forecasting (using regression)  13. Collaborative planning, 
forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR)

	
489
Sales and 
Operations 
Planning
Learning Objectives
	LO19–1	
Understand what sales and operations planning is and how it 
coordinates manufacturing, logistics, service, and marketing plans.
	LO19–2	
Construct and evaluate aggregate plans that employ different 
strategies for meeting demand.
	LO19–3	
Explain yield management and why it is an important strategy.
19
© Lane Oatey/Getty Images RF
Consider the dilemma of the executive staff at Southwest Manufacturing Com­
pany at their monthly planning meeting. Things are tough and it seems that 
everyone is complaining.
∙	 The president has been reviewing reports from marketing. “We keep run­
ning out of product. How can we sell stuff if we don’t have it when the cus­
tomer wants it? And the response time on customer questions is terrible. It is 
often days between when the question comes in and when we get around to 
responding. This cannot continue.”
∙	 The supply chain executive responds, “Our forecast from marketing was ter­
rible last month. They sold 30 percent more than they had forecast. How do 
you expect us to keep this stuff in stock?” 
∙	 Marketing chimes in with, “We had a great month, what are you complaining 
about?  We told you mid-month that things were going well.” The plant man­
ager replies, “There is no way that we can react that 
quickly. What are you expecting from us? Our sched­
ules are fixed six weeks into the future. You want us 
to be efficient, don’t you?” 
∙	 The president asks, “Should we just bump everything 
up 30 percent for next month? I sure don’t want to 
run out again.” 
∙	
Marketing responds, “Only if you are willing to keep run­
ning that 2-for-1 deal that we were running last month. 
Our customers pass that discount on to their customers 
and that keeps sales going. I am not sure that we are 
making much money when we discount like that.” 
∙	 This wakes up the finance guy, “Oh, so now I under­
stand why we have such a big negative revenue vari­
ance. We can’t give the stuff away anymore.”

490
This struggle between those selling the product, those supplying the product, and 
those keeping track of the money goes on month after month. The problem is one of 
matching supply with demand at a price that makes the firm profitable. It is a difficult 
balancing act and one that plays out at most companies. 
Today, many companies are using a business process called sales and operations 
planning (S&OP) to help avoid such problems. This chapter defines S&OP and dis­
cusses how to make it work.
In this chapter, we focus on the aggregate operations plan, which translates annual and 
quarterly business plans into broad labor and output plans for the intermediate term (3 to 18 
months). The objective of the aggregate operations plan is to minimize the cost of resources 
required to meet demand over that period.
Sales and operations planning is a process that helps firms provide better customer ser­
vice, lower inventory, shorten customer lead times, stabilize production rates, and give top 
management a handle on the business. The process is designed to coordinate the key business 
activities related to marketing and sales with the operations and supply chain activities that 
are required to meet demand over time. Depending on the situation, business activities may 
include the timing of newspaper advertisements, volume discounting of discontinued items, 
and major direct sales promotions, for example. The process is designed to help a company 
get demand and supply in balance and keep them in balance over time. The process requires 
teamwork among marketing and sales, distribution and logistics, operations, finance, and 
product development.
The sales and operations planning process consists of a series of meetings, finishing with 
a high-level meeting where key intermediate-term decisions are made. The end goal is an 
agreement between various departments on the best course of action to achieve the optimal 
balance between supply and demand. The idea is to put the operational plan in line with the 
business plan.
This balance must occur at an aggregate level and also at the detailed individual prod­
uct level. By aggregate we mean at the level of major groups of products. Over time, we 
need to ensure that we have enough total capacity. Because demand is often quite dynamic, 
it is important that we monitor our expected needs 3 to 18 months or further into the future. 
When planning this far into the future, it is difficult to know exactly how many of a particular 
product we will need, but we should be able to know how a larger group of similar products 
should sell. The term aggregate refers to this group of products. Given that we have enough 
aggregate capacity, our individual product schedulers, working within aggregate capacity 
constraints, can handle the daily and weekly launching of individual product orders to meet 
short-term demand.
An Overview of Sales and Operations Planning Activities
Exhibit 19.1 positions sales and operations planning relative to other major operations plan­
ning activities. The term sales and operations planning was coined by companies to refer to 
the process that helps firms keep demand and supply in balance. In operations management, 
this process traditionally was called aggregate planning. The new terminology is meant to 
capture the importance of cross-functional work. Typically, this activity requires an integrated 
effort with cooperation from sales, distribution and logistics, operations, finance, and product 
development.
WHAT IS SALES AND OPERATIONS PLANNING?
Aggregate operations 
plan
A plan for labor and 
production for the 
intermediate term with the 
objective to minimize the 
cost of resources needed 
to meet demand.
Understand what sales 
and operations planning 
is and how it coordinates 
manufacturing, logistics, 
service, and marketing 
plans.
LO 19–1
Sales and operations 
planning
The process that 
companies use to keep 
demand and supply in 
balance by coordinating 
manufacturing, distribution, 
marketing, and financial 
plans.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
491
Long-range planning
One year or more.
Intermediate-range 
planning
Involves a time period of 
usually 3 to 18 months.
Short-range planning
From a day to six months.
Supply network
planning
Forecasting and
demand management
Manufacturing
Logistics
Services
Master scheduling
Material requirements
planning
Order scheduling
Sales and operations
(aggregate) planning
Sales plan
Aggregate
operations
plan
Vehicle capacity
planning
Vehicle loading
Vehicle dispatching
Weekly workforce
scheduling
Daily workforce
scheduling
Warehouse receipt
planning
Strategic capacity
planning
Process planning
Long
range
Medium
range
Short
range
Overview of Major Operations and Supply Planning Activities
exhibit 19.1
Within sales and operations planning, marketing devel­
ops a sales plan that extends through the next 3 to 18 
months. This sales plan typically is stated in units of aggre­
gate product groups and often is tied into sales incentive 
programs and other marketing activities. The operations 
side develops an operations plan as an output of the pro­
cess, which is discussed in depth in this chapter. By focus­
ing on aggregate product and sales volumes, the marketing 
and operations functions are able to develop plans for the 
way demand will be met. This is a particularly difficult task 
when there are significant changes in demand over time as 
a result of market trends or other factors.
Aggregation on the supply side is done by product fami­
lies, and on the demand side it is done by groups of custom­
ers. Individual product production schedules and matching 
customer orders can be handled more readily as a result of 
the sales and operations planning process. Typically, sales 
and operations planning occurs on a monthly cycle. Sales and operations planning links a 
company’s strategic plans and business plan to its detailed operations and supply processes. 
These detailed processes include manufacturing, logistics, and service activities, as shown in 
Exhibit 19.1.
In Exhibit 19.1, the time dimension is shown as long, intermediate, and short range. 
Long-range planning generally is done annually, focusing on a horizon greater than one 
year. Intermediate-range planning usually covers a period from 3 to 18 months, with time 
increments that are weekly, monthly, or sometimes quarterly. Short-range planning covers a 
period from one day to six months, with daily or weekly time increments.
Long-range planning activities are done in two major areas. The first is the design of the 
manufacturing and service processes that produce the products of the firm, and the second is 
Product family of similar earphones produced by the same 
company.
© Future Publishing/Getty Images

492	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
the design of the logistics activities that deliver products to the customer. Process planning 
deals with determining the specific technologies and procedures required to produce a prod­
uct or service. Strategic capacity planning deals with determining the long-term capabilities 
(such as size and scope) of the production systems. Similarly, from a logistics point of view, 
supply network planning determines how the product will be distributed to the customer on 
the outbound side, with decisions relating to the location of warehouses and the types of 
transportation systems to be used. On the inbound side, supply network planning involves 
decisions relating to outsourcing production, the selection of parts and component suppliers, 
and related decisions.
Intermediate-term activities include forecasting and demand management, as well as sales 
and operations planning. The determination of expected demand is the focus of forecasting 
and demand management. From these data, detailed sales and operations plans for meeting 
these requirements are made. The sales plans are inputs to sales force activities, which are the 
focus of marketing books. The operations plan provides input into the manufacturing, logis­
tics, and service planning activities of the firm. Master scheduling and material requirements 
planning are designed to generate detailed schedules that indicate when parts are needed for 
manufacturing activities. Coordinated with these plans are the logistics plans needed to move 
the parts and finished products through the supply chain.
Short-term details are focused mostly on scheduling production and shipment orders. 
These orders need to be coordinated with the actual vehicles that transport material through 
the supply chain. On the service side, short-term scheduling of employees is needed to ensure 
that adequate customer service is provided and fair worker schedules are maintained.
The Aggregate Operations Plan
The aggregate operations plan is concerned with setting production rates by product group or 
other broad categories for the intermediate term (3 to 18 months). Note again from Exhibit 19.1 
that the aggregate plan precedes the master schedule. The main purpose of the aggregate plan 
is to specify the optimal combination of production rate, workforce level, and inventory on 
hand. Production rate refers to the number of units completed per unit of time (such as per 
hour or per day). Workforce level is the number of workers needed for production (produc­
tion = production rate × workforce level). Inventory on hand is unused inventory carried 
over from the previous period.
Here is a formal statement of the aggregate planning problem: Given the demand forecast 
Ft for each period t in the planning horizon that extends over T periods, determine the produc­
tion level Pt, inventory level It, and workforce level Wt for periods t = 1, 2, . . . , T that mini­
mize the relevant costs over the planning horizon.
The form of the aggregate plan varies from company to company. In some firms, it is a 
formalized report containing planning objectives and the planning premises on which it is 
based. In other companies, particularly smaller ones, the owner may make simple calculations 
of workforce needs that reflect a general staffing strategy.
The process by which the plan itself is derived also varies. One common approach is to 
derive it from the corporate annual plan, as shown in Exhibit 19.1. A typical corporate plan 
contains a section on manufacturing that specifies how many units in each major product line 
need to be produced over the next 12 months to meet the sales forecast. The planner takes 
this information and attempts to determine how best to meet these requirements with avail­
able resources. Alternatively, some organizations combine output requirements into equiva­
lent units and use this as the basis for the aggregate plan. For example, a division of General 
Motors may be asked to produce a certain number of cars of all types at a particular facility. 
The production planner would then take the average labor hours required for all models as a 
basis for the overall aggregate plan. Refinements to this plan, specifically model types to be 
produced, would be reflected in shorter-term production plans.
Another approach is to develop the aggregate plan by simulating various master produc­
tion schedules and calculating corresponding capacity requirements to see if adequate labor 
and equipment exist at each workcenter. If capacity is inadequate, additional requirements for 
Production rate
Number of units completed 
per unit of time.
Workforce level
Number of workers 
needed in a period.
Inventory on hand
Inventory carried from the 
previous period.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
493
overtime, subcontracting, extra workers, and so forth are specified for each product line and 
combined into a rough-cut plan. This plan is then modified by cut-and-try or mathematical 
methods to derive a final and (one hopes) lower-cost plan.
T h e Pr od u c t i o n  Pl a n n i n g  E n vi r o n m e n t  Exhibit 19.2 illustrates the internal 
and external factors that constitute the production planning environment. In general, the 
external environment is outside the production planner’s direct control, but in some firms, 
demand for the product can be managed. Through close cooperation between marketing and 
operations, promotional activities and price cutting can be used to build demand during slow 
periods. Conversely, when demand is strong, promotional activities can be curtailed and 
prices raised to maximize the revenues from those products or services that the firm has the 
capacity to provide. The current practices in managing demand will be discussed later in the 
section titled “Yield Management.”
Complementary products may work for firms facing cyclical demand fluctuations. For 
instance, lawnmower manufacturers will have strong demand for spring and summer, but 
weak demand during fall and winter. Demands on the production system can be smoothed 
out by producing a complementary product with high demand during fall and winter, and low 
demand during spring and summer (for instance, snowmobiles, snowblowers, or leafblowers). 
With services, cycles are more often measured in hours than months. Restaurants with strong 
demand during lunch and dinner will often add a breakfast menu to increase demand during 
the morning hours.
But even so, there are limits to how much demand can be controlled. Ultimately, the pro­
duction planner must live with the sales projections and orders promised by the marketing 
function, leaving the internal factors as variables that can be manipulated in deriving a pro­
duction plan. A new approach to facilitate managing these internal factors is termed accurate 
response. This entails refined measurement of historical demand patterns blended with expert 
judgment to determine when to begin production of particular items. The key element of the 
approach is clearly identifying those products for which demand is relatively predictable from 
those for which demand is relatively unpredictable.
The internal factors themselves differ in their controllability. Current physical capacity 
(plant and equipment) is usually nearly fixed in the short run; union agreements often con­
strain what can be done in changing the workforce; physical capacity cannot always be 
increased; and top management may limit the amount of money that can be tied up in 
External
capacity (such as
subcontractors)
Competitors’
behavior
Current
physical
capacity
Raw material
availability
Planning for
production
Current
workforce
Inventory
levels
External
to firm
Internal to
firm
Economic
conditions
Market
demand
Activities
required for
production
Required Inputs to the Production Planning System
exhibit 19.2

494	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
inventories. Still, there is always some flexibility in managing these factors, and production 
planners can implement one or a combination of the production planning strategies dis­
cussed here.
P r o d u c t i o n  P l a n n i n g  S t r a t e g i e s  There are essentially three production 
planning strategies. These strategies involve trade-offs among the workforce size, work hours, 
inventory, and backlogs.
	1.	 Chase strategy. Match the production rate to the order rate by hiring and laying off 
employees as the order rate varies. The success of this strategy depends on having 
a pool of easily trained applicants to draw on as order volumes increase. There are 
obvious motivational impacts. When order backlogs are low, employees may feel 
compelled to slow down out of fear of being laid off as soon as existing orders are 
completed.
	2.	 Stable workforce—variable work hours. Vary the output by varying the number of 
hours worked through flexible work schedules or overtime. By varying the number 
of work hours, you can match production quantities to orders. This strategy provides 
workforce continuity and avoids many of the emotional and tangible costs of hiring 
and firing associated with the chase strategy.
	3.	 Level strategy. Maintain a stable workforce working at a constant output rate. Short­
ages and surpluses are absorbed by fluctuating inventory levels, order backlogs, 
and lost sales. Employees benefit from stable work hours at the costs of potentially 
decreased customer service levels and increased inventory costs. Another concern is 
the possibility of inventoried products becoming obsolete.
When just one of these variables is used to absorb demand fluctuations, it is termed a pure 
strategy; two or more used in combination constitute a mixed strategy. As you might sus­
pect, mixed strategies are more widely applied in industry.
S u b c o n t r a c t i n g  In addition to these strategies, managers also may choose to 
subcontract some portion of production. This strategy is similar to the chase strategy, but 
hiring and laying off are translated into subcontracting and not subcontracting. Some level of 
Production planning 
strategies
Plans for meeting demand 
that involve trade-offs in 
the number of workers 
employed, work hours, 
inventory, and shortages.
Water skis and snow 
skis are examples 
of complementary 
products.
© Pixtal/AGE fotostock RF
© Ingram Publishing/SuperStock RF
© Pixtal/AGE fotostock RF
Pure strategy
A simple strategy that uses 
just one option, such as 
hiring and firing workers, 
for meeting demand.
Mixed strategy
A more complex strategy 
that combines options for 
meeting demand.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
495
subcontracting can be desirable to accommodate demand fluctuations. However, unless the 
relationship with the supplier is particularly strong, a manufacturer can lose some control over 
schedule and quality.
R e lev an t  C o s t s   Four costs are relevant to the aggregate production plan. These relate to 
the production cost itself, as well as the cost to hold inventory and to have unfilled orders. More 
specifically, these are
	1.	 Basic production costs    These are the fixed and variable costs incurred in produc­
ing a given product type in a given time period. Included are direct and indirect labor 
costs and regular as well as overtime compensation.
	2.	 Costs associated with changes in the production rate    Typical costs in this cat­
egory are those involved in hiring, training, and laying off personnel. Hiring tempo­
rary help is a way of avoiding these costs.
	3.	 Inventory holding costs    A major component is the cost of capital tied up in inven­
tory. Other components are storing, insurance, taxes, spoilage, and obsolescence.
	4.	 Backordering costs    Usually, these are very hard to measure and include costs 
of expediting, loss of customer goodwill, and loss of sales revenues resulting from 
backordering.
B u d get s  To receive funding, operations managers are generally required to submit 
annual, and sometimes quarterly, budget requests. The aggregate plan is key to the success 
of the budgeting process. Recall that the goal of the aggregate plan is to minimize the total 
production-related costs over the planning horizon by determining the optimal combination 
of workforce levels and inventory levels. Thus, the aggregate plan provides justification for 
the requested budget amount. Accurate medium-range planning increases the likelihood of (1) 
receiving the requested budget and (2) operating within the limits of the budget.
It’s All in the Planning
You’re sitting anxiously in the suddenly assembled general 
manager’s staff meeting. Voices are nervously subdued. 
The rumor mill is in high gear about another initiative-of-
the-month about to be loosed among the leery survivors of 
the last purge. The meeting begins. Amid the tricolor visu­
als and 3D spreadsheets, the same old message is skepti­
cally received by managers scrambling for politically correct 
responses in an endless game of shoot the messenger.
This is a familiar scene in corporations around the 
world. But interestingly, firms such as Advanced Optical 
Components, a division of Finisar, formerly VCSEL, have 
learned how to manage the process of successfully match­
ing supply and demand. Advanced Optical Components has 
developed a new semiconductor laser used in computing, 
networking, and sensing applications. Forecasting and man­
aging production capacity is a unique challenge for compa­
nies with a stream of new and innovative products coming 
to market. Using a monthly sales and operations planning 
process, Advanced Optical Components has been able to 
OSCM AT WORK
improve its short- and long-term forecasting accuracy from 
60 percent to consistently hitting 95 percent or better. The 
specific steps within its plan focus the executive team on 
(1) the demand opportunities for current and new products 
and (2) the constraints on the organization’s ability to pro­
duce product to meet this demand. The plan, developed in 
a monthly sales and operations planning executive meeting, 
ensures that demand is synchronized with supply, so cus­
tomers get the product they want, when they want it, while 
inventory and costs are kept to a minimum.
Advanced Optical Components managers indicated 
that a critical step was getting the general manager to 
champion the process. The second step was achieving 
a complete understanding of required behavior from the 
team, including committing to a balanced and synchronized 
demand/supply plan, being accountable for meeting the 
performance standards, having open and honest communi­
cation, not promising what cannot be delivered, and making 
the decisions needed to address the identified opportuni­
ties and constraints.

496	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
In the next section, we provide an example of medium-range planning in a manufacturing 
setting. This example illustrates the trade-offs associated with different production planning 
strategies.
AGGREGATE PLANNING TECHNIQUES
Companies commonly use simple cut-and-try charting and graphic methods to develop aggre­
gate plans. A cut-and-try approach involves costing out various production planning alterna­
tives and selecting the one that is best. Elaborate spreadsheets are developed to facilitate the 
decision process. Sophisticated approaches involving linear programming and simulation are 
often incorporated into these spreadsheets. In the following, we demonstrate a spreadsheet 
approach to evaluate four strategies for meeting demand for the JC Company. Later, we dis­
cuss more sophisticated approaches using linear programming (see Appendix A).
A Cut-and-Try Example: The JC Company
A firm with pronounced seasonal variation normally plans production for a full year to cap­
ture the extremes in demand during the busiest and slowest months. But we can illustrate the 
general principles involved with a shorter horizon. Suppose we wish to set up a production 
plan for the JC Company’s Chinese manufacturing plant for the next six months. We are given 
the following information.
Construct and evaluate 
aggregate plans that 
employ different strategies 
for meeting demand.
LO 19–2
Demand and Working Days
January
February
March
April
May
June
Totals
Demand forecast
1,800
1,500
1,100
900
1,100
1,600
8,000
Number of working days
     22
     19
     21
   21
     22
     20
   125
Costs
Materials
$100.00/unit
Inventory holding cost
    $1.50/unit/month
Marginal cost of stock out
    $5.00/unit/month
Marginal cost of subcontracting
  $20.00/unit ($120 subcontracting cost 
less $100 material savings)
Hiring and training cost
$200.00/worker
Layoff cost
$250.00/worker
Labor hours required
            5/unit
Straight-time cost (first eight hours each day)
    $4.00/hour
Overtime cost (time and a half)
    $6.00/hour
Inventory
Beginning inventory
400 units
Safety stock
25% of month demand
In solving this problem, we can exclude the material costs. We could have included 
this $100 cost in all our calculations, but if we assume that a $100 cost is common to each 
demanded unit, then we need only concern ourselves with the marginal costs. Because the 
subcontracting cost is $120, our marginal cost that does not include materials is $20.
Note that many costs are expressed in a different form than typically found in the 
accounting records of a firm. Therefore, do not expect to obtain all these costs directly 
from such records, but obtain them indirectly from management personnel, who can help 
interpret the data.
Inventory at the beginning of the first period is 400 units. Because the demand forecast is 
imperfect, the JC Company has determined that a safety stock (buffer inventory) should be 
established to reduce the likelihood of stock outs. For this example, assume the safety stock 
should be one-quarter of the demand forecast. (Chapter 20 covers this topic in depth.)

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
497
Before investigating alternative production plans, it is often useful to convert demand fore­
casts into production requirements, which take into account the safety stock estimates. In 
Exhibit 19.3, note that these requirements implicitly assume that the safety stock is never actu­
ally used, so that the ending inventory each month equals the safety stock for that month. For 
example, the January safety stock of 450 (25 percent of January demand of 1,800) becomes 
the inventory at the end of January. The production requirement for January is demand plus 
safety stock minus beginning inventory (1,800 + 450 – 400 = 1,850).
Now we must formulate alternative production plans for the JC Company. Using a spread­
sheet, we investigate four different plans with the objective of finding the one with the lowest 
total cost.
Plan 1.    Produce to exact monthly production requirements using a regular eight-hour 
day by varying workforce size.
Plan 2.    Produce to meet expected average demand over the next six months by maintain­
ing a constant workforce. This constant number of workers is calculated by finding the 
average number of workers required each day over the horizon. Take the total production 
requirements and multiply by the time required for each unit. Then divide by the total time 
that one person works over the horizon [(8,000 units × 5 hours per unit) ÷ (125 days × 8 
hours per day) = 40 workers]. Inventory is allowed to accumulate, with shortages filled 
from next month’s production by backordering. Negative beginning inventory balances 
indicate that demand is backordered. In some cases, sales may be lost if demand is not met. 
The lost sales can be shown with a negative ending inventory balance followed by a zero 
beginning inventory balance in the next period. Notice that in this plan we use our safety 
stock in January, February, March, and June to meet expected demand.
Plan 3.    Produce to meet the minimum expected demand (April) using a constant work­
force on regular time. Subcontract to meet additional output requirements. The number of 
workers is calculated by locating the minimum monthly production requirement and deter­
mining how many workers would be needed for that month [(850 units × 5 hours per unit) 
÷ (21 days × 8 hours per day) = 25 workers] and subcontracting any monthly difference 
between requirements and production.
Plan 4.    Produce to meet expected demand for all but the first two months using a con­
stant workforce on regular time. Use overtime to meet additional output requirements. The 
number of workers is more difficult to compute for this plan, but the goal is to finish June 
with an ending inventory as close as possible to the June safety stock. By trial and error it 
can be shown that a constant workforce of 38 workers is the closest approximation.
The next step is to calculate the cost of each plan. This requires the series of simple calcula­
tions shown in Exhibit 19.4. Note that the headings in each row are different for each plan 
because each is a different problem requiring its own data and calculations.
The final step is to tabulate and graph each plan and compare their costs. From 
Exhibit 19.5 we can see that using subcontractors resulted in the lowest cost (Plan 3). 
Exhibit 19.6 shows the effects of the four plans. This is a cumulative graph illustrating the 
expected results on the total production requirement.
In practice, there are 
often many different 
types of special 
requirements. These 
can be due to union 
contracts, or other 
factors relating to 
worker availability, for 
example.
KEY IDEA
January
February
March
April
May
June
Beginning inventory
400  
450  
375  
275  
225  
275  
Demand forecast
1,800  
1,500  
1,100  
900   1,100   1,600  
Safety stock (.25 × Demand forecast)
450  
375  
275  
225  
275  
400  
Production requirement (Demand forecast + Safety 
stock − Beginning inventory)
1,850  
1,425  
1,000  
850   1,150   1,725  
Ending inventory (Beginning inventory + Production 
requirement − Demand forecast)
450  
375  
275  
225  
275  
400  
Aggregate Production Planning Requirements
exhibit 19.3

498	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Production Plan 2: Constant Workforce; Vary Inventory and Stock out
  January
February
March
  April
  May
  June
  Total
Beginning inventory
400    
8     
−276   
−32    
412    
720    
Working days per month
22    
19     
21   
21    
22    
20    
Production hours available (Working days 
per month × 8 hr/day × 40 workers)*
7,040    
6,080     
6,720   
6,720    
7,040    
6,400    
Actual production (Production hours 
available/5 hr/unit)
1,408    
1,216     
1,344   
1,344    
1,408    
1,280    
Demand forecast (from Exhibit 19.3)
1,800    
1,500     
1,100   
900    
1,100    
1,600    
Ending inventory (Beginning inventory + 
Actual production − Demand forecast)
8    
−276     
−32   
412    
720    
400    
Shortage cost (Units short × $5)
$0    
$1,380     
$160   
$0    
$0    
$0    
$1,540  
Safety stock (from Exhibit 19.3)
450    
375     
275   
225    
275    
400    
Units excess (Ending inventory − Safety 
stock) only if positive amount
0    
0     
0   
187    
445    
0    
Inventory cost (Units excess × $1.50)
$0    
$0     
$0   
$281    
$668    
$0    
$948  
Straight-time cost (Production hours 
available × $4)
$28,160    
$24,320     
$26,880   
$26,880     $28,160     $25,600     $160,000  
Total cost  
$162,488  
Production Plan 1: Exact Production; Vary Workforce
January
February
March
April
May
June
Total
Production requirement (from Exhibit 19.3)
1,850    
1,425    
1,000    
850    
1,150   
1,725  
Production hours required (Production 
requirement × 5 hr/unit)
9,250    
7,125    
5,000    
4,250    
5,750   
8,625  
Working days per month
22    
19    
21    
21    
22   
20  
Hours per month per worker (Working 
days × 8 hr/day)
176    
152    
168    
168    
176   
160  
Workers required (Production hours 
required/Hours per month per worker)
53    
47    
30    
26    
33   
54  
New workers hired (assuming open­
ing workforce equal to first month’s 
requirement of 53 workers)
0    
0    
0    
0    
7   
21  
Hiring cost (New workers hired × $200)
$0    
$0    
$0    
$0    
$1,400   
$4,200  
$5,600  
Workers laid off
0    
6    
17    
4    
0   
0  
Layoff cost (Workers laid off × $250)
$0    
$1,500    
$4,250    
$1,000    
$0   
$0  
$6,750  
Straight-time cost (Production hours 
required × $4)
$37,000    
$28,500    
$20,000    
$17,000    
$23,000   
$34,500  
$160,000  
Total cost  
$172,350  
Costs of Four Production Plans
exhibit 19.4
*(Sum of production requirement in Exhibit 19.3 × 5 hr/unit)/(Sum of production hours available × 8 hr/day) = (8,000 × 5)/(125 × 8) = 40.
Note that we have made one other assumption in this example: The plan can start with any 
number of workers with no hiring or layoff cost. This usually is the case because an aggregate 
plan draws on existing personnel, and we can start the plan that way. However, in an actual 
application, the availability of existing personnel transferable from other areas of the firm may 
change the assumptions.
Plan 1 is the “S” curve when we chase demand by varying workforce. Plan 2 has the high­
est average production rate (the line representing cumulative demand has the greatest slope). 
Using subcontracting in Plan 3 results in it having the lowest production rate. Limits on the 
amount of overtime available results in Plan 4 being similar to Plan 2.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
499
Productio Plan 4: Constant Workforce Overtime
January
February
March
April
May
June
Total
Beginning inventory
400    
0     
0     
177    
554    
792    
Working days per month
22    
19     
21     
21    
22    
20    
Production hours available (Working days × 
8 hr/day × 38 workers)*
6,688    
5,776     
6,384     
6,384    
6,688    
6,080    
Regular shift production (Production hours 
available/5 hr/unit)
1,338    
1,155     
1,277     
1,277    
1,338    
1,216    
Demand forecast (from Exhibit 19.3)
1,800    
1,500     
1,100     
900    
1,100    
1,600    
Units available before overtime (Beginning 
inventory + Regular shift production − 
Demand forecast). This number has been 
rounded to the nearest integer.
−62    
−345     
177     
554    
792    
408    
Units overtime
62    
375     
0     
0    
0    
0    
Overtime cost (Units overtime × 5 hr/unit × 
$6/hr.)
$1,860    
$10,350     
$0     
$0    
$0    
$0    
$12,210  
Safety stock (from Exhibit 19.3)
450    
375     
275     
225    
275    
400    
Units excess (Units available before 
overtime − Safety stock) only if positive 
amount
0    
0     
0     
329    
517    
8    
Inventory cost (Units excessive × $1.50)
$0    
$0     
$0     
$494    
$776    
$12    
$1,281  
Straight-time cost (Production hours avail­
able × $4)
$26,752    
$23,104      $25,536      $25,536     $26,752     $24,320     $152,000  
Total cost  
$165,491  
Production Plan 3: Constant Low Workforce; Subcontract
 January
February
   March
    April
May
   June
Total
Production requirement (from Exhibit 19.3)
1,850  
1,425  
1,000  
850    
1,150  
1,725  
Working days per month
22  
19  
21 
21    
22  
20  
Production hours available (Working 
days × 8 hr/day × 25 workers)*
4,400  
3,800  
4,200  
4,200    
4,400  
4,000  
Actual production (Production hours 
available/5 hr per unit)
880  
760  
840  
840    
880  
800  
Units subcontracted (Production 
requirement − Actual production)
970  
665  
160  
10    
270  
925  
Subcontracting cost (Units subcontracted 
× $20)
$19,400  
$13,300  
$3,200  
$200    
$5,400  
$18,500  
$60,000  
Straight-time cost (Production hours 
available × $4)
$17,600  
$15,200  
$16,800  
$16,800     $17,600  
$16,000  
$100,000  
Total cost  
$160,000  
Costs of Four Production Plans (concluded)
exhibit 19.4
*Minimum production requirement. In this example, April is minimum of 850 units. Number of workers required for April is 
(850 × 5)/(21 × 8) = 25.
*Workers determined by trial and error. See text for explanation.
Each of these four plans focused on one particular cost, and the first three were simple pure 
strategies. Obviously, there are many other feasible plans, some of which would use a com­
bination of workforce changes, overtime, and subcontracting. The problems at the end of this 
chapter include examples of such mixed strategies. In practice, the final plan chosen would 
come from searching a variety of alternatives and future projections beyond the six-month 
planning horizon we have used.

500	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
5
Cumulative 
number 
of units
Cumulative
production
requirement
(also coincides
with Plan 1)
Shortage (Plan 2)
1,000
1,400
1,800
2,000
2,400
3,000
3,800
Plan 1
Excess inventory (Plan 2)
Plan 2
Plan 4
Subcontracting (Plan 3)
Plan 3
Overtime
(Plan 4)
4,000
5,000
4,400
5,200
6,000
6,400
5,600
7,000
7,600
8,000
15
25
35
45
55
75
Cumulative number of production days
65
85
95
105
125
115
Four Plans for Satisfying a Production Requirement over the Number 
of Production Days Available
exhibit 19.6
Comparison of Four Plans
exhibit 19.5
Costs
Plan 1: Exact 
Production; Vary 
Workforce
Plan 2: Constant 
Workforce; Vary 
Inventory and 
Stock out
Plan 3: Constant 
Low Workforce; 
Subcontract
Plan 4: Constant 
Workforce; 
Overtime
Hiring
$     5,600 
$            0
$            0      
$            0
Layoff
       6,750
            0
      0
            0
Excess inventory
             0
         948
      0
            1,281      
Shortage
             0
      1,540
      0
            0
Subcontract
             0
             0
60,000   
            0
Overtime
             0
             0
      0
    12,210 
Straight time
  160,000
   160,000
  100,000      
  152,000 
 $172,350
 $162,488
$160,000      
 $165,491

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
501
Keep in mind that the cut-and-try approach does not guarantee finding the minimum-cost 
solution. However, spreadsheet programs, such as Microsoft Excel, can perform cut-and-try 
cost estimates in seconds and have elevated this kind of “what if” analysis to a fine art. More 
sophisticated programs can generate much better solutions without the user having to inter­
cede, as in the cut-and-try method.
Aggregate Planning Applied to Services: Tucson Parks 
and Recreation Department
Charting and graphic techniques are also useful for aggregate planning in service applica­
tions. The following example shows how a city’s parks and recreation department could use 
the alternatives of full-time employees, part-time employees, and subcontracting to meet its 
commitment to provide a service to the city.
Tucson Parks and Recreation Department has an operation and maintenance budget of 
$9,760,000. The department is responsible for developing and maintaining open space, all 
public recreational programs, adult sports leagues, golf courses, tennis courts, pools, and so 
forth. There are 336 full-time-equivalent employees (FTEs). Of these, 216 are full-time per­
manent personnel who provide the administration and year-round maintenance to all areas. 
The remaining 120 FTE positions are staffed with part-timers; about three-quarters of them 
are used during the summer, and the remaining quarter in the fall, winter, and spring seasons. 
The three-fourths (or 90 FTE positions) show up as approximately 800 part-time summer 
jobs: lifeguards, baseball umpires, and instructors in summer programs for children. Eight 
hundred part-time jobs came from 90 FTEs because many last only for a month or two, while 
the FTE positions are a year long.
Currently, the only parks and recreation work subcontracted amounts to less than $100,000. 
This is for the golf and tennis pros and for grounds maintenance at the libraries and veterans’ 
cemetery.
Because of the nature of city employment, the probable bad public image, and civil service 
rules, the option to hire and fire full-time help daily or weekly to meet seasonal demand is 
out of the question. However, temporary part-time help is authorized and traditional. Also, 
it is virtually impossible to have regular (full-time) staff for all the summer jobs. During 
the summer months, the approximately 800 part-time employees are staffing many programs 
that occur simultaneously, prohibiting level scheduling over a normal 40-hour week. A wider 
variety of skills are required (such as umpires, coaches, lifeguards, and teachers of ceramics, 
guitar, karate, belly dancing, and yoga) than can be expected from full-time employees.
Three options are open to the department in its aggregate planning:
	1.	 The present method, which is to maintain a medium-level full-time staff and schedule 
work during off-seasons (such as rebuilding baseball fields during the winter months) 
and to use part-time help during peak demands.
	2.	 Maintain a lower level of staff over the year and subcontract all additional work pres­
ently done by full-time staff (still using part-time help).
	3.	 Maintain an administrative staff only and subcontract all work, including part-time 
help. (This would entail contracts to landscaping firms and pool maintenance compa­
nies as well as to newly created private firms to employ and supply part-time help.)
The common unit of measure of work across all areas is full-time-equivalent jobs or 
employees. For example, assume in the same week that 30 lifeguards worked 20 hours each, 
40 instructors worked 15 hours each, and 35 baseball umpires worked 10 hours each. This is 
equivalent to (30 × 20) + (40 × 15) + (35 × 10) = 1,550 ÷ 40 = 38.75 FTE positions for that 
week. Although a considerable amount of workload can be shifted to off-season, most of the 
work must be done when required.
Full-time employees consist of three groups: (1) the skeleton group of key department 
personnel coordinating with the city, setting policy, determining budgets, measuring perfor­
mance, and so forth; (2) the administrative group of supervisory and office personnel who 
are responsible for or whose jobs are directly linked to the direct-labor workers; and (3) the 
With services, inventory 
is typically not an issue. 
Sometimes a few extra 
employees are added 
as a buffer to cover 
employee vacations 
and other needs.
KEY IDEA

502	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
direct-labor workforce of 116 full-time positions. These workers physically maintain the 
department’s areas of responsibility, such as cleaning up, mowing golf greens and ballfields, 
trimming trees, and watering grass.
Cost information needed to determine the best alternative strategy is
Full-time direct-labor employees
   Average wage rate
$8.90 per hour
   Fringe benefits
17% of wage rate
   Administrative costs
20% of wage rate
Part-time employees
   Average wage rate
$8.06 per hour
   Fringe benefits
11% of wage rate
   Administrative costs
25% of wage rate
Subcontracting all full-time jobs
$3.2 million
Subcontracting all part-time jobs
$3.7 million
June and July are the peak demand seasons in Tucson. Exhibit 19.7 shows the high require­
ments for June and July personnel. The part-time help reaches 576 FTE positions (although, 
in actual numbers, this is approximately 800 different employees). After a low fall and winter 
staffing level, the demand shown as “full-time direct” reaches 130 in March (when grounds 
are reseeded and fertilized) and then increases to a high of 325 in July. The present method 
levels this uneven demand over the year to an average of 116 full-time year-round employees 
by early scheduling of work. Note that the actual requirement is 115 (28,897/252 = 114.67), 
but an extra employee has been added as a safety measure. As previously mentioned, no 
attempt is made to hire and lay off full-time workers to meet this uneven demand.
Exhibit 19.8 shows the cost calculations for all three alternatives and compares the total 
costs for each alternative. From this analysis, it appears that the department is already using 
the lowest-cost alternative (Alternative 1).
Actual Demand Requirement for Full-Time Direct Employees and Full-Time-Equivalent (FTE) 
Part-Time Employees
exhibit 19.7
Feb.
Full-time-
equivalent
employees
required
200
Full-time
FTE part-time
100
300
400
500
600
Apr.
June
Aug.
Oct.
Dec.
Jan.
Mar.
May
July
Sept.
Nov.
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Total
Days
22  
20  
21  
22  
21  
20  
21  
21  
21  
23  
18  
22  
252  
Full-time employees
     66  
     28      130        90      195  
   290  
   325        92  
   45        32        29        60              
Full-time days*
1,452  
560   2,730   1,980   4,095  
5,800  
6,825   1,932  
945  
736  
522   1,320   28,897  
Full-time-equivalent 
part-time employees
     41  
     75        72        68        72        302        576        72  
     0        68        84        27                  
FTE days
902   1,500   1,512   1,496   1,512  
6,040   12,096   1,512  
0   1,564   1,512  
594   30,240  
*Full-time days are derived by multiplying the number of days in each month by the number of workers.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
503
Why is it that the guy sitting next to you on the plane paid half the price you paid for your 
ticket? Why was a hotel room you booked more expensive when you booked it six months in 
advance than when you checked in without a reservation (or vice versa)? The answers lie in 
the practice known as yield management. Yield management can be defined as the process 
of allocating the right type of capacity to the right type of customer at the right price and 
time to maximize revenue or yield. Yield management can be a powerful approach to making 
demand more predictable, which is important to aggregate planning.
Alternative 1: Maintain 116 full-time regular direct workers. Schedule work during off-seasons to level workload 
throughout the year. Continue to use 120 full-time-equivalent (FTE) part-time employees to meet high demand periods.
Costs
Days per Year 
(Exhibit 19.7)
Hours 
(Employees × Days 
× 8 Hours)
Wages 
(Full-Time, $8.90; 
Part-Time, $8.06)
Fringe Benefits 
(Full-Time, 17%; 
Part-Time, 11%)
Administrative Cost 
(Full-Time, 20%; 
Part-Time, 25%)
116 full-time regular 
  employees
252
233,856
$2,081,318
$353,824
$416,264
120 part-time 
  employees
252
241,920
$1,949,875
$214,486
$487,469
      Total cost = $5,503,236
$4,031,193
$568,310
$903,733
Alternative 2: Maintain 50 full-time regular direct workers and the present 120 FTE part-time employees. Subcontract jobs, releasing 66 
full-time regular employees. Subcontract cost, $2,200,000.
Cost
Days per Year 
(Exhibit 19.7)
Hours 
(Employees × 
Days × 8 Hours)
Wages 
(Full-Time, $8.90; 
Part-Time, $8.06)
Fringe Benefits 
(Full-Time, 17%; 
Part-Time, 11%)
Administrative Cost 
(Full-Time, 20%; 
Part-Time, 25%)
Subcontract 
Cost
50 full-time 
  employees
252
100,800
$    897,120
$152,510
$179,424
120 FTE part-time 
  employees
252
241,920
$1,949,875
$214,486
$487,469
Subcontracting 
  cost
                    
                
                
$2,200,000
      Total cost = $6,080,884
$2,846,995
$366,996
$666,893
$2,200,000
Alternative 3: Subcontract all jobs previously performed by 116 full-time regular employees. Subcontract cost $3,200,000. Subcontract 
all jobs previously performed by 120 FTE part-time employees. Subcontract cost $3,700,000.
Cost
Subcontract 
Cost
0 full-time employees
0 part-time employees
Subcontract full-time jobs
$3,200,000
Subcontract part-time jobs
$3,700,000
      Total cost
$6,900,000
Three Possible Plans for the Parks and Recreation Department
exhibit 19.8
YIELD MANAGEMENT
Explain yield management 
and why it is an important 
strategy.
LO 19–3
Yield management
Given limited capacity, the 
process of allocating it 
to customers at the right 
price and time to maximize 
profit.

504	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Yield management has existed as long as there 
has been limited capacity for serving customers. 
However, its widespread scientific application 
began with American Airlines’ computerized 
reservation system (SABRE), introduced in 
the mid-1980s. The system allowed the airline 
to change ticket prices on any routes instanta­
neously as a function of forecast demand. People 
Express, a no-frills, low-cost competitor airline, 
was one of the most famous victims of Ameri­
can’s yield management system. Basically, the 
system enabled hour-by-hour updating on com­
peting routes so that American could match or 
better prices wherever People Express was fly­
ing. The president of People Express realized 
that the game was lost when his mother flew on 
American to People’s hub for a lower price than 
People could offer!
From an operational perspective, yield management is most effective when
	1.	 Demand can be segmented by customer.
	2.	 Fixed costs are high and variable costs are low.
	3.	 Inventory is perishable.
	4.	 Product can be sold in advance.
	5.	 Demand is highly variable.
Hotels illustrate these five characteristics well. They offer one set of rates during the week 
for the business traveler and another set during the weekend for the vacationer. The variable 
costs associated with a room (such as cleaning) are low in comparison to the cost of adding 
rooms to the property. Available rooms cannot be transferred from night to night, and blocks 
of rooms can be sold to conventions or tours. Finally, potential guests may cut short their stay 
or not show up at all.
Most organizations (such as airlines, rental car agencies, cruise lines, and hotels) man­
age yield by establishing decision rules for opening or closing rate classes as a function of 
expected demand and available supply. The methodologies for doing this can be quite sophis­
ticated. A common approach is to forecast demand over the planning horizon and then use 
marginal analysis to determine the rates that will be charged if demand is forecast as being 
above or below set control limits around the forecast mean.
Operating Yield Management Systems
A number of interesting issues arise in managing yield. One is that pricing structures must 
appear logical to the customer and justify the different prices. Such justification, commonly 
called rate fences, may have either a physical basis (such as a room with a view) or a non­
physical basis (like unrestricted access to the Internet). Pricing also should relate to address­
ing specific capacity problems. If capacity is sufficient for peak demand, price reductions to 
stimulate off-peak demand should be the focus. If capacity is insufficient, offering deals to 
customers who arrive during non-peak periods (or creating alternative service locations) may 
enhance revenue generation.
A second issue is handling variability in arrival or starting times, duration, and time 
between customers. This entails employing maximally accurate forecasting methods (the 
greater the accuracy in forecasting demand, the more likely yield management will succeed); 
coordinated policies on overbooking, deposits, and no-show or cancellation penalties; and 
well-designed service processes that are reliable and consistent.
A third issue relates to managing the service process. Some strategies include schedul­
ing additional personnel to meet peak demand, increasing customer self-service, creating 
Many Hotel Chains Use Priceline to Sell Excess Capacity at a Discount.
© NetPhotos/Alamy

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
505
adjustable capacity, utilizing idle capacity for complementary services, and cross-training 
employees to create reserves for peak periods.
The fourth and perhaps most critical issue is training workers and managers to work in 
an environment where overbooking and price changes are standard occurrences that directly 
impact the customer. Companies have developed creative ways of mollifying overbooked cus­
tomers. A golf course company offers $100 putters to players who have been overbooked at 
a popular tee time. Airlines, of course, frequently give overbooked passengers free tickets for 
other flights.
Concept Connections
LO 19–1   Understand what sales and operations planning is and how it coordinates 
manufacturing, logistics, service, and marketing plans.
Summary
	∙	 The output of the sales and operation planning process 
is the aggregate plan.
	∙	 The aggregate plan is a high-level operational plan 
that can be executed by the operations and supply 
chain functions.
	∙	 The process brings together marketing and sales, dis­
tribution and logistics, operations, finance, and prod­
uct development to agree on the best plan to match 
supply with demand.
	∙	 The input into the process is the sales plan developed 
by marketing.
	∙	 Typically, aggregation is done by product families and 
by groups of customers, and the plan is completed 
using these aggregate supply and demand quantities.
	∙	 Outputs of the plan are planned production rates, 
aggregate labor requirements, and expected finished 
good levels.
	∙	 Cost minimization is typically a major driver when 
finding a plan.
Key Terms
Aggregate operations plan  A plan for labor and pro­
duction for the intermediate term with the objective to 
minimize the cost of resources needed to meet demand.
Sales and operations planning  The process that com­
panies use to keep demand and supply in balance by 
coordinating manufacturing, distribution, marketing, and 
financial plans.
Long-range planning  One year or more.
Intermediate-range planning  Involves a time period of 
usually 3 to 18 months.
Short-range planning  From a day to six months.
Production rate  Number of units completed per unit of time.
Workforce level  Number of workers needed in a period.
Inventory on hand  Inventory carried from the previous 
period.
Production planning strategies  Plans for meeting 
demand that involve trade-offs in the number of workers 
employed, work hours, inventory, and shortages.
Pure strategy  A simple strategy that uses just one option, 
such as hiring and firing workers, for meeting demand.
Mixed strategy  A more complex strategy that combines 
options for meeting demand.
LO 19–2   Construct and evaluate aggregate plans that employ different strategies for meeting 
demand.
Summary
	∙	 Companies 
commonly 
use 
simple 
cut-and-try 
(trial-and-error) techniques for analyzing aggregate 
planning problems. Sophisticated mathematical pro­
gramming techniques can also be used.
	∙	 Strategies vary greatly depending on the situation faced 
by the company. Plans are typically evaluated based on 
cost, but it is important to consider the feasibility of the 
plan (that overtime is not excessive, for example).

506	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
LO 19–3   Explain yield management and why it is an important strategy.
Summary
	∙	 Yield management occurs when a firm adjusts the 
price of its product or service in order to influence 
demand. Usually, it is done to make future demand 
more predictable, which is important to successful 
sales and operations planning.
	∙	 This practice is commonly used in the airline, hotel, 
casino, and auto retail industries, for example.
	∙	 Policies that involve overbooking, requiring deposits, 
and no-show or cancellation penalties are coordinated 
with the different pricing scheme.
Key Term
Yield management  Given limited capacity, the process 
of allocating it to customers at the right price and time to 
maximize profit.
Solved Problem
Jason Enterprises (JE) produces video telephones for the home market. Quality is not quite 
as good as it could be at this point, but the selling price is low and Jason can study market 
response while spending more time on R&D.
At this stage, however, JE needs to develop an aggregate production plan for the six 
months from January through June. You have been commissioned to create the plan. The fol­
lowing information should help.
Demand and Working Days
January
February
March
April
May
June
Totals
Demand forecast
500
600
650
800
900
800
4,250
Number of working days
  22
  19
  21
  21
  22
  20
  125
LO19–2
                                                                                     Costs        
Materials
$100.00/unit
Inventory holding cost
  $10.00/unit/month
Marginal cost of stock out
  $20.00/unit/month
Marginal cost of subcontracting 
$100.00/unit ($200 subcontracting cost  
                          less $100 material savings)
Hiring and training cost
  $50.00/worker
Layoff cost
$100.00/worker
Labor hours required
          4/unit
Straight-time cost (first eight hours each day)
 $12.50/hour
Overtime cost (time and a half)
 $18.75/hour
                                                                                    Inventory   
Beginning inventory
200 units                                          
Safety stock required
0% of month demand                   
What is the cost of each of the following production strategies?
	a.	 Produce exactly to meet demand; vary workforce (assuming opening workforce equal to 
first month’s requirements).
	b.	 Constant workforce; vary inventory and allow shortages only (assuming a workforce of 
10).
	c.	 Constant workforce of 10; use subcontracting.

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
507
Solution
Production Plan 1: Exact Production; Vary Workforce
January
February
    March
    April
  May
  June
Total
Production requirement
300  
600    
650
800
900
800
Production hours required 
(Production requirement × 
4 hr/unit)
1,200  
2,400    
2,600
3,200
3,600
3,200
Working days per month
22  
19    
21
21
22
20
Hours per month per 
worker (Working days × 
8 hr/day)
176  
152    
168
168
176
160
Workers required 
(Production hours 
required/Hours per 
month per worker)
7  
16    
15
19
20
20
New workers hired 
(assuming opening 
workforce equal to first 
month’s requirement of 
7 workers)
0  
9    
0
4
1
0
Hiring cost (New workers 
hired × $50)
$0  
$450    
$0
$200
$50
$0
$700
Workers laid off
0  
0    
1
0
0
0
Layoff cost (Workers 
laid off × $100)
$0  
$0    
$100
$0
$0
$0
$100
Straight-time cost 
(Production hours 
required × $12.50)
$15,000   $30,000
$32,500
$40,000
$45,000
$40,000
$202,500
Total cost $203,300
Aggregate Production Planning Requirements
January
February
March
April
May
June
Total
Beginning inventory
200
    0
    0
    0
    0
    0
Demand forecast
500
600
650
800
900
800
Safety stock (0.0 × 
Demand forecast)
    0
    0
    0
    0
    0
    0
Production requirement 
(Demand forecast + 
Safety stock – Beginning 
inventory)
300
600
650
800
900
800
Ending inventory (Beginning 
inventory + Production 
requirement – Demand 
forecast)
    0
    0
    0
    0
    0
    0
Production Plan 2: Constant Workforce; Vary Inventory and Stock Out
 January
February
March
April
  May
  June
Total
Beginning inventory
200
140   
–80
–310
–690
–1150  
Working days per month
22
19   
21
21
22
20  
Production hours avail­
able (Working days per 
month × 8 hr/day × 10 
workers)*
1,760
1,520   
1,680
1,680
1,760
1,600
*Assume a constant workforce of 10.
(continued)

508	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Production Plan 2: Constant Workforce; Vary Inventory and Stock Out
 January
February
March
April
  May
  June
Total
Actual production 
(Production hours 
available/4 hr/unit)
440
380   
420
420
440
400  
Demand forecast
500
600   
650
800
900
800  
Ending inventory 
(Beginning inventory 
+ Actual production – 
Demand forecast)
140
–80   
–310
–690
–1,150
–1,550  
Shortage cost (Units 
short × $20)
$0
$1,600   
$6,200
$13,800
$23,000
$31,000  
$75,600
Safety stock
0
0   
0
0
0
0  
Units excess (Ending 
inventory – Safety 
stock; only if positive 
amount)
140
0   
0
0
0
0  
Inventory cost (Units 
excess × $10)
$1,400
$0   
$0
$0
$0
$0  
$1,400
Straight-time cost 
(Production hours 
available × $12.50)
$22,000
$19,000    $21,000
$21,000
$22,000
$20,000   $125,000
Total cost $202,000
Production Plan 3: Constant Workforce; Subcontract
January
February
March
April
May
June
Total
Production requirement
300
460†
650
800
900
800
Working days per month
22
19
21
21
22
20
Production hours available 
(Working days × 8 hr/day × 
10 workers)*
1,760
1,520
1,680
1,680
1,760
1,600
Actual production 
(Production hours 
available/4 hrs per unit)
440
380
420
420
440
400
Units subcontracted 
(Production requirements – 
Actual production)
0
80
230
380
460
400
Subcontracting cost (Units 
subcontracted × $100)
$0
$8,000
$23,000
$38,000
$46,000
$40,000
$155,000
Straight-time cost 
(Production hours 
available × $12.50)
$22,000
$19,000
$21,000
$21,000
$22,000
$20,000
$125,000
Total cost $280,000
*Assume a constant workforce of 10.
†600 – 140 units of beginning inventory in February.
Summary
Plan Description
Hiring
Layoff
Subcontract
Straight 
Time
Shortage
Excess 
Inventory
Total 
Cost
1. Exact production; 
vary workforce
$700
$100
$202,500
$203,300
2. Constant workforce; 
vary inventory and 
shortages
$125,000
$75,600
$1,400
$202,000
3. Constant workforce; 
subcontract
$155,000
$125,000
$280,000

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
509
Objective Questions
	1.	 Major operations and supply planning activities can be grouped into categories based on 
the relevant time range of the activity. Into what time range category does sales and opera­
tions planning fit?
	2.	 What category of planning covers a period from a day to six months, with daily or weekly 
time increments?
	3.	 In the agriculture industry, migrant workers are commonly employed to pick crops ready 
for harvest. They are hired as needed and are laid off once the crops are picked. The reali­
ties of the industry make this approach necessary. Which production planning strategy best 
describes this approach?
	4.	 What is the term for a more complex production strategy that combines approaches from 
more than one basic strategy?
	5.	 List at least three of the four costs relevant to the aggregate production plan.
	6.	 Which of the four costs relevant to aggregate production planning is the most difficult to 
accurately measure?
	7.	 Develop a production plan and calculate the annual cost for a firm whose demand forecast is 
fall, 10,000; winter, 8,000; spring, 7,000; summer, 12,000. Inventory at the beginning of fall is 
500 units. At the beginning of fall, you currently have 30 workers, but you plan to hire tempo­
rary workers at the beginning of summer and lay them off at the end of summer. In addition, 
you have negotiated with the union an option to use the regular workforce on overtime during 
winter or spring if overtime is necessary to prevent stock outs at the end of those quarters. 
Overtime is not available during the fall. Relevant costs are hiring, $100 for each temp; layoff, 
$200 for each worker laid off; inventory holding, $5 per unit-quarter; backorder, $10 per unit; 
straight time, $5 per hour; overtime, $8 per hour. Assume that the productivity is 0.5 unit per 
worker hour, with eight hours per day and 60 days per season. (Answer in Appendix D)
	8.	 Plan production for a four-month period: February through May. For February and March, 
you should produce to exact demand forecast. For April and May, you should use overtime 
and inventory with a stable workforce; stable means that the number of workers needed for 
March will be held constant through May. However, government constraints put a maxi­
mum of 5,000 hours of overtime labor per month in April and May (zero overtime in 
February and March). If demand exceeds supply, then backorders occur. There are 100 
workers on January 31. You are given the following demand forecast: February, 80,000; 
March, 64,000; April, 100,000; May, 40,000. Productivity is four units per worker hour, 
eight hours per day, 20 days per month. Assume zero inventory on February 1. Costs are: 
hiring, $50 per new worker; layoff, $70 per worker laid off; inventory holding, $10 per 
unit-month; straight-time labor, $10 per hour; overtime, $15 per hour; backorder, $20 per 
unit. Find the total cost of this plan.
LO19–1
LO19–2
Discussion Questions
	1.	 What are the basic controllable variables of a production planning problem? What are the 
four major costs?
	2.	 Distinguish between pure and mixed strategies in production planning.
	3.	 What are the major differences between aggregate planning in manufacturing and aggre­
gate planning in services?
	4.	 How does forecast accuracy relate, in general, to the practical application of the aggregate 
planning models discussed in the chapter?
	5.	 In what way does the time horizon chosen for an aggregate plan determine whether it is the 
best plan for the firm? 
	6.	 Define yield management. How does it differ from the pure strategies in production 
planning?
	7.	 How would you apply yield management concepts to a barbershop? A soft drink vending 
machine?
LO19–1
LO19–2
LO19–3

510	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	  9.	Plan production for the next year. The demand forecast is: spring, 20,000; summer, 10,000; 
fall, 15,000; winter, 18,000. At the beginning of spring you have 70 workers and 1,000 
units in inventory. The union contract specifies that you may lay off workers only once a 
year, at the beginning of summer. Also, you may hire new workers only at the end of sum­
mer to begin regular work in the fall. The number of workers laid off at the beginning of 
summer and the number hired at the start of fall should result in planned production levels 
for summer and fall that equal the demand forecasts for summer and fall, respectively. If 
demand exceeds supply, use overtime in spring only, which means that backorders could 
occur in winter. You are given these costs: hiring, $100 per new worker; layoff, $200 per 
worker laid off; holding, $20 per unit-quarter; backorder cost, $8 per unit; straight-time 
labor, $10 per hour; overtime, $15 per hour. Productivity is 0.5 unit per worker hour, eight 
hours per day, 50 days per quarter. Find the total cost.
	10.	DAT, Inc., needs to develop an aggregate plan for its product line. Relevant data are
Production time
1 hour per unit
Beginning inventory
500 units
Average labor 
cost
$10 per hour
Safety stock
One-half month
Workweek
5 days, 8 hours 
each day
Shortage cost
$20 per unit per 
month
Days per month
Assume 20 workdays 
per month
Carrying cost
$5 per unit per 
month
The forecast for next year is
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
2,500
3,000
4,000
3,500
3,500
3,000
3,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
3,000
3,000
	 	 	    Management prefers to keep a constant workforce and production level, absorbing 
variations in demand through inventory excesses and shortages. Demand not met is car­
ried over to the following month.
	 	 	    Develop an aggregate plan that will meet the demand and other conditions of the problem. 
Do not try to find the optimum; just find a good solution and state the procedure you might 
use to test for a better solution. Make any necessary assumptions. (Answer in Appendix D)
	11.	Old Pueblo Engineering Contractors creates six-month “rolling” schedules, which are 
recomputed monthly. For competitive reasons (it would need to divulge proprietary design 
criteria, methods, and so on), Old Pueblo does not subcontract. Therefore, its only options 
to meet customer requirements are (1) work on regular time; (2) work on overtime, which 
is limited to 30 percent of regular time; (3) do customers’ work early, which would cost 
an additional $5 per hour per month; and (4) perform customers’ work late, which would 
cost an additional $10 per hour per month penalty, as provided by their contract.
	 	 	    Old Pueblo has 25 engineers on its staff at an hourly rate of $30. The overtime rate is 
$45. Customers’ hourly requirements for the six months from January to June are
January
February
March
April
May
June
5,000
4,000
6,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
Develop an aggregate plan using a spreadsheet. Assume 20 working days in each month.
	12.	Alan Industries is expanding its product line to include three new products: A, B, and C. 
These are to be produced on the same production equipment, and the objective is to meet 
the demands for the three products using overtime where necessary. The demand forecast 
for the next four months, in hours required to make each product, is
Product
April
May
June
July
A
800
600
800
1,200
B
600
700
900
1,100
C
700
500
700
   850

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
511
	 	 	 Because the products deteriorate rapidly, there is a high loss in quality and, consequently, 
a high carrying cost when a product is made and carried in inventory to meet future 
demand. Each hour’s production carried into future months costs $3 per production hour 
for A, $4 for Model B, and $5 for Model C.
	 	 	    Production can take place either during regular working hours or during overtime. 
Regular time is paid at $4 when working on A, $5 for B, and $6 for C. The overtime pre­
mium is 50 percent of the regular time cost per hour.
   The number of production hours available for regular time and overtime is
April
May
June
July
Regular time
Overtime
1,500
700
1,300
650
1,800
900
2,000
1,000
	 	 	   Set up the problem in a spreadsheet and an optimal solution using the Excel Solver. 
Appendix A describes how to use the Excel Solver.
	13.	Shoney Video Concepts produces a line of video streaming servers that are linked to com­
puters for storing movies. These devices have very fast access and large storage capacity.
	 	 	    Shoney is trying to determine a production plan for the next 12 months. The main 
criterion for this plan is that the employment level is to be held constant over the period. 
Shoney is continuing in its R&D efforts to develop new applications and prefers not to 
cause any adverse feelings with the local workforce. For the same reason, all employees 
should put in full workweeks, even if that is not the lowest-cost alternative. The forecast 
for servers for the next 12 months is
Month
Forecast Demand
Month
Forecast Demand
January
February
March
April
May
June
600
800
900
600
400
300
July
August
September
October
November
December
200
200
300
700
800
900
	 	 	   Manufacturing cost is $200 per server, equally divided between materials and labor. 
Inventory storage cost is $5 per month. A shortage of servers results in lost sales and is 
estimated to cost an overall $20 per unit short.
	 	 	    The inventory on hand at the beginning of the planning period is 200 units. Ten labor 
hours are required per DVD player. The workday is eight hours.
	 	 	    Develop an aggregate production schedule for the year using a constant workforce. For 
simplicity, assume 22 working days each month except July, when the plant closes down 
for three weeks’ vacation (leaving seven working days). Assume that total production 
capacity is greater than or equal to total demand.
	14.	Develop a production schedule to produce the exact production requirements by varying 
the workforce size for the following problem. Use the example in the chapter as a guide 
(Plan 1).
	 	 	    The monthly forecasts for Product X for January, February, and March are 1,000, 
1,500, and 1,200, respectively. Safety stock policy recommends that half of the forecast 
for that month be defined as safety stock. There are 22 working days in January, 19 in 
February, and 21 in March. Beginning inventory is 500 units.
	 	 	    Manufacturing cost is $200 per unit, storage cost is $3 per unit per month, standard 
pay rate is $6 per hour, overtime rate is $9 per hour, cost of stock out is $10 per unit per 
month, marginal cost of subcontracting is $10 per unit, hiring and training cost is $200 
per worker, layoff cost is $300 per worker, and worker productivity is 0.1 unit per hour. 
Assume that you start off with 50 workers and that they work 8 hours per day.
	15.	Helter Industries, a company that produces a line of women’s bathing suits, hires tem­
poraries to help produce its summer product demand. For the current four-month rolling 
schedule, there are three temps on staff and 12 full-time employees. The temps can be 
hired when needed and can be used as needed, whereas the full-time employees must 

512	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
be paid whether they are needed or not. Each full-time employee can produce 205 suits, 
while each temporary employee can produce 165 suits per month.
   Demand for bathing suits for the next four months is as follows:
May
June
July
August
3,200
2,800
3,100
3,000
	 	 	    Beginning inventory in May is 403 bathing suits. Bathing suits cost $40 to produce and 
carrying cost is 24 percent per year.
	 	 	    Develop an aggregate plan that uses the 12 full-time employees each month and a 
minimum number of temporary employees. Assume that all employees will produce at 
their full potential each month. Calculate the inventory carrying cost associated with your 
plan using planned end of month levels.
	16.	The widespread scientific application of yield management began within what industry?
	17.	Under what type of demand is yield management most effective?
	18.	In a yield managment system, pricing differences must appear logical and justified to the 
customer. What is the basis for this justification commonly called?
	19.	The essence of yield management is the ability to manage what?
LO19–3
Forecast Demand by Quarter (1,000 Case Units)
3,000
0
500
1st
(1–13)
2nd
(14–26)
3rd
(27–39)
4th
(40–52)
1st
(Next Year)
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
You are the operations manager for a manufacturing plant 
that produces pudding food products. One of your impor­
tant responsibilities is to prepare an aggregate plan for the 
plant. This plan is an important input into the annual bud­
get process. The plan provides information on production 
rates, manufacturing labor requirements, and projected 
finished goods inventory levels for the next year.
You make those little boxes of pudding mix on pack­
aging lines in your plant. A packaging line has a number 
of machines that are linked by conveyors. At the start of 
the line, the pudding is mixed; it is then placed in small 
packets. These packets are inserted into the small pudding 
boxes, which are collected and placed in cases that hold 48 
boxes of pudding. Finally, 160 cases are collected and put 
on a pallet. The pallets are staged in a shipping area from 
which they are sent to four distribution centers. Over the 
years, the technology of the packaging lines has improved 
so that all the different flavors can be made in relatively 
small batches with no setup time to switch between flavors. 
The plant has 15 of these lines, but currently only 10 are 
being used. Six employees are required to run each line.
The demand for this product fluctuates from month 
to month. In addition, there is a seasonal component, with 
peak sales before Thanksgiving, Christmas, and Easter 
each year. To complicate matters, at the end of the first 
quarter of each year the marketing group runs a promo­
tion in which special deals are made for large purchases. 
Business is going well, and the company has been experi­
encing a general increase in sales.
The plant sends product to four large distribution 
warehouses strategically located in the United States. 
Trucks move product daily. The amounts shipped are 
based on maintaining target inventory levels at the ware­
houses. These targets are calculated based on anticipated 
weeks of supply at each warehouse. Current targets are 
set at two weeks of supply.
In the past, the company has had a policy of produc­
ing very close to what it expects sales to be because of 
limited capacity for storing finished goods. Production 
capacity has been adequate to support this policy.
A sales forecast for next year has been prepared by 
the marketing department. The forecast is based on quar­
terly sales quotas, which are used to set up an incentive 
program for the salespeople. Sales are mainly to the large 
U.S. retail grocers. The pudding is shipped to the grocers 
from the distribution warehouses based on orders taken 
by the salespeople.
Your immediate task is to prepare 
an aggregate plan for the coming year. 
The technical and economic factors 
that must be considered in this plan are 
shown next.
The Situation
Analytics Exercise: Developing an Aggregate Plan—Bradford Manufacturing

	
Sales and Operations Planning	
Chapter 19	
513
Technical and Economic Information
	1.	 The plant runs 5 days each week, and currently is 
running 10 lines with no overtime. Each line requires 
six people to run. For planning purposes, the lines 
are run for 7.5 hours each normal shift. Employees, 
though, are paid for eight hours’ work. It is possible 
to run up to two hours of overtime each day, but it 
must be scheduled for a week at a time, and all the 
lines must run overtime when it is scheduled. Work­
ers are paid $20.00/hour during a regular shift and 
$30.00/hour on overtime. The standard production 
rate for each line is 450 cases/hour.
	2.	 The marketing forecast for demand is as follows: 
Q1—2,000; Q2—2,200; Q3—2,500; Q4—2,650; 
and Q1 (next year)—2,200. These numbers are 
in 1,000-case units. Each number represents a 
13-week forecast.
	3.	 Management has instructed manufacturing to 
maintain a two-week safety stock supply of pud­
ding inventory in the warehouses. The two-week 
supply should be based on future expected sales. 
The following are ending inventory target levels to 
comply with the safety stock requirement for each 
quarter: Q1—338; Q2—385; Q3—408; Q4—338.
	4.	 Inventory carrying cost is estimated by accounting 
to be $1.00 per case per year. This means that if a 
case of pudding is held in inventory for an entire year, 
the cost to just carry that case in inventory is $1.00. 
If a case is carried for only one week, the cost is 
$1.00/52, or $0.01923. The cost is proportional to the 
time carried in inventory. There are 200,000 cases in 
inventory at the beginning of Q1 (this is 200 cases in 
the 1,000-case units that the forecast is given in).
	5.	 If a stock out occurs, the item is backordered and 
shipped at a later date. The cost when a backorder 
occurs is $2.40 per case due to the loss of goodwill 
and the high cost of emergency shipping.
	6.	 The human resource group estimates that it costs 
$5,000 to hire and train a new production employee. 
It costs $3,000 to lay off a production worker.
	7.	 Make the following assumptions in your cost 
calculations:
	∙	 Inventory costs are based on inventory in excess 
of the safety stock requirement.
	∙	 Backorder costs are incurred on the negative 
deviation from the planned safety stock require­
ment, even though planned inventory may be 
positive.
	∙	 Overtime must be used over an entire quarter 
and should be based on hours per day over that 
time.
Questions
	1.	 Prepare an aggregate plan for the 
coming year, assuming that the sales 
forecast is perfect. Use the work­
sheet “Bradford Manufacturing” 
that is in the “19 Sales and Opera­
tions Planning” spreadsheet. In the 
worksheet, an area has been designated for your 
aggregate plan solution. Supply the number of 
packaging lines to run and the number of overtime 
hours for each quarter. You will need to set up the 
cost calculations in the spreadsheet.
	 	 	
You may want to try using the Excel Solver to 
find a low-cost solution. Remember that your final 
solution needs an integer number of lines and an 
integer number of overtime hours for each quar­
ter. (Solutions that require 8.9134 lines and 1.256 
hours of overtime are not feasible.)
	 	 	
It is important that your spreadsheet calcula­
tions are set up so that any values in the number of 
lines and overtime hours rows evaluates correctly. 
Your spreadsheet will be evaluated based on this.
	2.	 Find a solution to the problem that goes beyond 
just minimizing cost. Prepare a short write-up that 
describes the process you went through to find 
your solution and that justifies why you think it is a 
good solution.
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	1.	 Term used to refer to the process a firm uses to bal­
ance supply and demand.
	2.	 When doing aggregate planning, these are the three 
general operations–related variables that can be 
adjusted.
	3.	 A strategy where the production rate is set to match 
expected demand.
	4.	 When overtime is used to meet demand and avoid the 
costs associated with hiring and firing.
	5.	 A strategy that uses inventory and backorders as part 
of the strategy to meet demand.
	6.	 Sometimes a firm may choose to have all or part of the 
work done by an outside vendor. This is the term used 
for the approach.
	7.	 If expected demand during the next four quarters 
is 150, 125, 100, and 75 thousand units, and each 

514	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
  9.  In a service setting, what general operations–related 
variable is not available compared to a production 
setting?
	10.  The practice of allocating capacity and manipulating 
demand to make it more predictable.
worker can produce 1,000 units per quarter, how many 
workers should be used if a level strategy is being 
employed?
	8.	 Given the data from question 7, how many workers 
would be needed for a chase strategy?
Answers to Practice Exam 1. Sales and operations planning  2. Production rate, workforce level, inventory   3. Chase  4. Stable workforce – Variable 
work hours  5. Level strategy 6. Subcontracting  7. 113  8. 150, 125, 100, 75  9. Inventory  10. Yield management

	
515
Learning Objectives
	LO 20–1	 Explain how inventory is used and understand what it costs.
	LO 20–2	 Analyze how different inventory control systems work.
	LO 20–3	 Analyze inventory using the Pareto principle.
WILL WAREHOUSES BE NEEDED IN THE 
FUTURE?
Logistics visionaries have talked for years about eliminating—or at least drastically 
reducing—the role of inventory in modern supply chains. The most efficient, slack-
free supply chains, after all, wouldn’t require any inventory buffer because supply and 
demand would be in perfect sync. This vision certainly has its appeal: The death of 
inventory would mean dramatically reduced logistics costs and simplified fulfillment.
There’s no need to write a eulogy for inventory just yet. Most 
companies haven’t honed their networks and technologies well 
enough to eliminate the need for at least minimal inventory. Logis­
tics managers have to perform a daily, delicate act balancing:
•	 Transportation costs against fulfillment speed
•	 Inventory costs against the cost of stock outs
•	 Customer satisfaction against the cost to serve
•	 New capabilities against profitability
What’s more, two accelerating business trends are making it 
even harder to synchronize supply chains.
First, global sourcing is forcing supply chains to stretch farther 
across borders. The goods people consume are increasingly made 
in some other part of the world, particularly in Asia. This accelera­
tion in global sourcing changes the logistics equation. When goods 
cross borders, considerations such as fulfillment speed (these are 
the activities performed once an order is received) and inventory 
costs get more complicated. Second, powerful retailers and other 
end customers with clout are starting to push value-added supply 
chain responsibilities further up the supply chain. More customers 
are asking manufacturers or third-party logistics providers to label 
Inventory 
Management
20
© Daniel Acker/Bloomberg via Getty Images

516
and prepare individual items so the products are ready to go directly to store shelves. 
With added responsibilities, of course, come added costs. Upstream suppliers are 
always looking for ways to squeeze more costs out of other areas of the supply chain, 
such as transportation and distribution.
A growing number of companies are overcoming these barriers by taking a more 
direct approach to global fulfillment. This direct-to-store approach—also known as 
distribution center bypass or direct distribution—keeps inventory moving from manu­
facturer to end customer by eliminating stops at warehouses along the way. Because 
companies can shrink the fulfillment cycle and eliminate inventory costs, direct-to-
store can offer a good balance between fulfillment speed and logistics costs.
Internet-enabled electronic links between supply chain partners have allowed bet­
ter coordination and collaboration among the various supply chain segments. Mean­
while, at the front of the supply chain, increasingly sophisticated point-of-sale systems 
can capture product demand patterns. This information can then be fed up the supply 
chain to manufacturers and components suppliers. More accurate sales-forecasting 
tools take some of the guesswork out of production and reduce the need for large 
inventory safety stocks. Tracking and tracing tools are also available to follow orders 
across borders and through the hands of different supply partners.
In short, companies no longer need as much inventory gathering dust in ware­
houses because they can better synchronize production and distribution with 
demand. Direct-to-store lets them keep inventory in motion—across borders and 
around the world.
You should visualize inventory as stacks of money sitting on forklifts, on shelves, and in 
trucks and planes while in transit. That’s what inventory is—money. For many businesses, 
inventory is the largest asset on the balance sheet at any given time, even though it is often not 
very liquid. It is a good idea to try to get your inventory down as far as possible.
The economic benefit from inventory reduction is evident from the following statistics: 
The average cost of inventory in the United States is 30 to 35 percent of its value. For exam­
ple, if a firm carries an inventory of $20 million, it costs the firm more than $6 million per 
year. These costs are due mainly to obsolescence, insurance, and opportunity costs. If the 
amount of inventory could be reduced to $10 million, for instance, the firm would save over 
$3 million, which goes directly to the bottom line; that is, the savings from reduced inventory 
results in increased profit.
UNDERSTANDING INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
This chapter and Chapter 21 present techniques designed to manage inventory in different 
supply chain settings. In this chapter, the focus is on settings where the desire is to maintain 
a stock of inventory that can be delivered to our customers on demand. Recall in ­Chapter 7 
the concept of the  customer order decoupling point, which is a point where inventory is 
positioned to allow processes or entities in the supply chain to operate independently. For 
­example, if a product is stocked at a retailer, the customer pulls the item from the shelf and the 
manufacturer never sees a customer order. In this case, inventory acts as a buffer to separate 
the customer from the manufacturing process. Selection of decoupling points is a strategic 
decision that determines customer lead times and can greatly impact inventory investment. 
The closer this point is to the customer, the quicker the customer can be served.
Explain how inventory is 
used and understand what 
it costs.
LO 20–1

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
517
The techniques described in this chapter are suited for managing the inventory at these decou­
pling points. Typically, there is a trade-off where quicker response to customer demand comes 
at the expense of greater inventory investment. This is because finished goods inventory is more 
expensive than raw material inventory. In practice, the idea of a single decoupling point in a 
supply chain is unrealistic. There may actually be multiple points where buffering takes place.
Good examples of where the models described in this chapter are used include retail stores, 
grocery stores, wholesale distributors, hospital suppliers, and suppliers of repair parts needed 
to fix or maintain equipment quickly. Situations in which it is necessary to have the item “in-
stock” are ideal candidates for the models described in this chapter. A distinction that needs to 
be made with the models included in this chapter is whether this is a one-time purchase—for 
example, for a seasonal item or for use at a special event—or whether the item will be stocked 
on an ongoing basis.
Exhibit 20.1 depicts different types of supply chain inventories that would exist in a make-
to-stock environment, typical of items directed at the consumer. In the upper echelons of the 
supply chain, which are supply points closer to the customer, stock usually is kept so that an 
item can be delivered quickly when a customer need occurs. Of course, there are many excep­
tions, but in general this is the case. The raw materials and manufacturing plant inventory 
held in the lower echelon potentially can be managed in a special way to take advantage of 
the planning and synchronization that are needed to efficiently operate this part of the sup­
ply chain. In this case, the models in this chapter are most appropriate for the upper echelon 
inventories (retail and warehouse), and the lower echelon should use the material require­
ments planning (MRP) technique that will be described in Chapter 21. The applicability of 
these models could be different for other environments, such as when we produce directly to 
customer order as in the case of an aircraft manufacturer.
The techniques described here are most appropriate when demand is difficult to predict 
with great precision. In these models, we characterize demand by using a probability distribu­
tion and maintain stock so that the risk associated with stockout is managed. For these appli­
cations, the following three models are discussed:
	1.	 The single-period model. This is used when we are making a one-time purchase of 
an item. An example might be purchasing T-shirts to sell at a one-time sporting event.
	2.	 Fixed–order quantity model. This is used when we want to maintain an item “in-
stock,” and when we resupply the item, a certain number of units must be ordered 
each time. Inventory for the item is monitored until it gets down to a level where the 
risk of stocking out is great enough that we are compelled to order.
A decoupling point 
is where inventory is 
carried and allows the 
“upstream” part of the 
supply chain to operate 
relatively independent 
of the “downstream” 
part.
KEY IDEA
Supply Chain Inventory
Retail Store
Inventory
Single-Period, Fixed–Order
Quantity, Fixed–Time Period
(Chapter 20 models)
Material Requirements
Planning
(Chapter 21 model)
Warehouse
Inventory
Manufacturing
Plant Inventory
Raw Materials
Best Model for Managing
Inventory
Supply Chain Inventories—Make-to-Stock Environment
exhibit 20.1

518	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	3.	 Fixed–time period model. This is similar to the fixed–order quantity model, and 
is used when the item should be in-stock and ready to use. In this case, rather than 
monitoring the inventory level and ordering when the level gets down to a critical 
quantity, the item is ordered at certain intervals of time, for example, every Friday 
morning. This is often convenient when a group of items is ordered together. An 
example is the delivery of different types of bread to a grocery store. The bakery 
supplier may have 10 or more products stocked in a store, and rather than delivering 
each product individually at different times, it is much more efficient to deliver all 10 
together at the same time and on the same schedule.
In this chapter, we want to show not only the mathematics associated with great inventory 
control but also the “art” of managing inventory. Ensuring accuracy in inventory records is 
essential to running an efficient inventory control process. Techniques such as ABC analysis 
and cycle counting are essential to the actual management of the system because they focus 
attention on the high-value items and ensure the quality of the transactions that affect the 
tracking of inventory levels.
Inventory is the stock of any item or resource used in an organization. An inventory sys­
tem is the set of policies and controls that monitor levels of inventory and determine what lev­
els should be maintained, when stock should be replenished, and how large orders should be.
By convention, manufacturing inventory generally refers to items that contribute to or 
become part of a firm’s product output. Manufacturing inventory is typically classified into 
raw materials, finished products, component parts, supplies, and work-in-process. In distribu­
tion, inventory is classified as in-transit, meaning that it is being moved in the system, and 
warehouse, which is inventory in a warehouse or distribution center. Retail sites carry inven­
tory for immediate sale to customers. In services, inventory generally refers to the tangible 
goods to be sold and the supplies necessary to administer the service.
The basic purpose of inventory analysis, whether in manufacturing, distribution, retail, or 
services, is to specify (1) when items should be ordered and (2) how large the order should 
be. Many firms are tending to enter into longer-term relationships with vendors to supply 
their needs for perhaps the entire year. This changes the “when” and “how many to order” to 
“when” and “how many to deliver.”
Purposes of Inventory
All firms (including JIT operations) keep a supply of inventory for the following reasons:
	1.	 To maintain independence of operations. A supply of materials at a work center 
allows that center flexibility in operations. For example, because there are costs for 
making each new production setup, this inventory allows management to reduce the 
number of setups.
	 	
	   Independence of workstations is desirable on assembly lines as well. The time 
it takes to do identical operations will naturally vary from one unit to the next. There­
fore, it is desirable to have a cushion of several parts within the workstation so that 
shorter performance times can compensate for longer performance times. This way, 
the average output can be fairly stable.
	2.	 To meet variation in product demand. If the demand for the product is known pre­
cisely, it may be possible (though not necessarily economical) to produce the product 
to exactly meet the demand. Usually, however, demand is not completely known, and 
a safety or buffer stock must be maintained to absorb variation.
	3.	 To allow flexibility in production scheduling. A stock of inventory relieves the 
pressure on the production system to get the goods out. This causes longer lead 
times, which permit production planning for smoother flow and lower-cost operation 
through larger lot-size production. High setup costs, for example, favor producing a 
larger number of units once the setup has been made.
	4.	 To provide a safeguard for variation in raw material delivery time. When mate­
rial is ordered from a vendor, delays can occur for a variety of reasons: a normal 
Inventory (Goldratt’s 
definition)
All the money that the 
system has invested 
in purchasing things it 
intends to sell (Goldratt’s 
definition).
Every individual item 
in inventory should 
be there for a specific 
purpose. Also, when 
you see an item in 
inventory, put a dollar 
sign on it. Inventory 
is like piles of money 
sitting in a warehouse.
KEY IDEA

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
519
variation in shipping time, a shortage of material at the vendor’s plant causing back­
logs, an unexpected strike at the vendor’s plant or at one of the shipping companies, a 
lost order, or a shipment of incorrect or defective material.
	5.	 To take advantage of economic purchase order size. There are costs to place 
an order: labor, phone calls, typing, postage, and so on. Therefore, the larger each 
order is, the fewer the orders that need be written. Also, shipping costs favor larger 
orders—the larger the shipment, the lower the per-unit cost.
	6.	 Many other domain-specific reasons. Depending on the situation, inventory may 
need to be carried. For example, in-transit inventory is material being moved from 
the suppliers to customers and depends on the order quantity and the transit lead 
time. Another example is inventory that is bought in anticipation of price changes 
such as fuel for jet planes or semiconductors for computers. There are many other 
examples.
For each of the preceding reasons (especially for items 3, 4, and 5), be aware that inventory 
is costly and large amounts are generally undesirable. Long cycle times are caused by large 
amounts of inventory, which are undesirable as well.
Inventory Costs
In making any decision that affects inventory size, the following costs must be considered:
	1.	 Holding (or carrying) costs. This broad category includes the costs for storage 
facilities, handling, insurance, pilferage, breakage, obsolescence, depreciation, taxes, 
and the opportunity cost of capital. Obviously, high holding costs tend to favor low 
inventory levels and frequent replenishment.
	2.	 Setup (or production change) costs. To make each different product involves 
obtaining the necessary materials, arranging specific equipment setups, filling out the 
required papers, appropriately charging time and materials, and moving out the previ­
ous stock of material.
	 	
	   If there were no costs or loss of time in changing from one product to another, 
many small lots would be produced. This would reduce inventory levels, with a 
resulting savings in cost. One challenge today is to try to reduce these setup costs to 
permit smaller lot sizes. (This is the goal of a JIT system.)
Elevated view of a large 
distribution warehouse
© Alistair Berg/Getty Images RF

520	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	3.	 Ordering costs. These costs refer to the managerial and clerical costs to prepare the 
purchase or production order. Ordering costs include all the details, such as counting 
items and calculating order quantities. The costs associated with maintaining the sys­
tem needed to track orders are also included in ordering costs.
	4.	 Shortage costs. When the stock of an item is depleted, an order for that item must 
either wait until the stock is replenished or be canceled. When the demand is not met 
and the order is canceled, this is referred to as a stock out. A backorder is when the 
order is held and filled at a later date when the inventory for the item is replenished. 
There is a trade-off between carrying stock to satisfy demand and the costs resulting 
from stock outs and backorders. This balance is sometimes difficult to obtain because 
it may not be possible to estimate lost profits, the effects of lost customers, or late­
ness penalties. Frequently, the assumed shortage cost is little more than a guess, 
although it is usually possible to specify a range of such costs.
Establishing the correct quantity to order from vendors or the size of lots submitted to 
the firm’s productive facilities involves a search for the minimum total cost resulting from 
the combined effects of four individual costs: holding costs, setup costs, ordering costs, and 
shortage costs. Of course, the timing of these orders is a critical factor that may impact inven­
tory cost.
Independent versus Dependent Demand
In inventory management, it is important to understand the trade-offs involved in using differ­
ent types of inventory control logic. Exhibit 20.2 is a framework that shows how characteris­
tics of demand, transaction cost, and the risk of obsolete inventory map into different types of 
systems. The systems in the upper left of the exhibit are described in this chapter, and those in 
the lower right in Chapter 21.
Transaction cost is dependent on the level of integration and automation incorporated 
in the system. Manual systems such as simple two-bin logic depend on human posting of 
the transactions to replenish inventory, which is relatively expensive compared to using a 
computer to automatically detect when an item needs to be ordered. Integration relates to 
how connected systems are. For example, it is common for orders for material to be auto­
matically transferred to suppliers electronically and for these orders to be automatically 
captured by the supplier inventory control system. This type of integration greatly reduces 
transaction cost.
Reorder point/equal
order period
Manual
two-bin
High
Transaction costs
Low
Independent
Dependent
Demand
High
Low
Obsolete
inventory
(risk)
Material
requirements
planning
Rate-based
synchronous
planning
Inventory-Control-System Design Matrix: Framework Describing 
Inventory Control Logic
exhibit 20.2

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
521
The risk of obsolescence is also an important consideration. If an item is used infrequently 
or only for a very specific purpose, there is considerable risk in using inventory control logic 
that does not track the specific source of demand for the item. Further, items that are sensitive 
to technical obsolescence, such as computer memory chips and processors, need to be man­
aged carefully based on actual need to reduce the risk of getting stuck with inventory that is 
outdated.
An important characteristic of demand relates to whether demand is derived from an end 
item or is related to the item itself. We use the terms independent demand and ­dependent 
demand to describe this characteristic. Briefly, the distinction between independent and 
dependent demand is this: In independent demand, the demands for various items are unre­
lated to each other. For example, a workstation may produce many parts that are unrelated 
but that meet some external demand requirement. In dependent demand, the need for any one 
item is a direct result of the need for some other item, usually a higher-level item of which 
it is part.
In concept, dependent demand is a relatively straightforward computational problem. 
Required quantities of a dependent-demand item are simply computed, based on the number 
needed in each higher-level item in which it is used. For example, if an automobile company 
plans on producing 500 cars per day, then obviously it will need 2,000 wheels and tires (plus 
spares). The number of wheels and tires needed is dependent on the production levels and 
is not derived separately. The demand for cars, on the other hand, is independent—it comes 
from many sources external to the automobile firm and is not a part of other products; it is 
unrelated to the demand for other products.
To determine the quantities of independent items that must be produced, firms usually turn 
to their sales and market research departments. They use a variety of techniques, including 
customer surveys, forecasting techniques, and economic and sociological trends, as we dis­
cussed in Chapter 18 on forecasting. Because independent demand is uncertain, extra units 
must be carried in inventory. This chapter presents models to determine how many units need 
to be ordered, and how many extra units should be carried to reduce the risk of stocking out.
Independent demand
The demands for these 
items are unrelated to 
each other, or to activities 
that can be predicted with 
certainty. 
Dependent demand
The need for an item is a 
direct result of the need for 
some other item, usually 
an item of which it is a part. 
Also, when the demand for 
the item can be predicted 
with accuracy due to 
a schedule or specific 
activitity.
Analyze how different 
inventory control systems 
work.
LO 20–2
INVENTORY CONTROL SYSTEMS
An inventory system provides the organizational structure and the operating policies for 
maintaining and controlling goods to be stocked. The system is responsible for ordering and 
receipt of goods: timing the order placement and keeping track of what has been ordered, how 
much, and from whom. The system also must follow up to answer such questions as: Has the 
supplier received the order? Has it been shipped? Are the dates correct? Are the procedures 
established for reordering or returning undesirable merchandise?
This section divides systems into single-period systems and multiple-period systems. The 
classification is based on whether the decision is just a one-time purchasing decision where 
the purchase is designed to cover a fixed period of time and the item will not be reordered, or 
the decision involves an item that will be purchased periodically where inventory should be 
kept in stock to be used on demand. We begin with a look at the one-time purchasing decision 
and the single-period inventory model.
A Single-Period Inventory Model
Certainly, an easy example to think about is the classic single-period (newsperson) problem. 
For example, consider the problem that the newsperson has in deciding how many newspapers 
to put in the sales stand outside a hotel lobby each morning. If the person does not put enough 
papers in the stand, some customers will not be able to purchase a paper and the newsperson 
will lose the profit associated with these sales. On the other hand, if too many papers are 
placed in the stand, the newsperson will have paid for papers that were not sold during the day, 
lowering profit for the day.
Single-period problem
Answers the question of 
how much to order when 
an item is purchased only 
one time and it is expected 
that it will be used and 
then not reordered.

522	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Actually, this is a very common type 
of problem. Consider the person selling 
T-shirts promoting a championship bas­
ketball or football game. This is especially 
difficult, because the person must wait 
to learn what teams will be playing. The 
shirts can then be printed with the proper 
team logos. Of course, the person must 
estimate how many people will actually 
want the shirts. The shirts sold prior to the 
game can probably be sold at a premium 
price, whereas those sold after the game 
will need to be steeply discounted.
A simple way to think about this is 
to consider how much risk we are will­
ing to take for running out of inventory. 
Let’s consider that the newsperson sell­
ing papers in the sales stand had collected 
data over a few months and had found 
that, on average, each Monday 90 papers 
were sold with a standard deviation of 10 
papers (assume that during this time the 
papers were purposefully overstocked in 
order not to run out, so they would know 
what “real” demand was). With these data, 
our newsperson could simply state a service rate that is felt to be acceptable. For example, 
the newsperson might want to be 80 percent sure of not running out of papers each Monday.
Recall from your study of statistics, assuming that the probability distribution associated 
with the sales of the paper is normal, that if we stocked exactly 90 papers each Monday morn­
ing, the risk of stocking out would be 50 percent, because 50 percent of the time we expect 
demand to be less than 90 papers and 50 percent of the time we expect demand to be greater 
than 90. To be 80 percent sure of not stocking out, we need to carry a few more papers. From 
the cumulative standard normal distribution table given in Appendix G, we see that we need 
approximately 0.85 standard deviation of extra papers to be 80 percent sure of not stocking 
out. A quick way to find the exact number of standard deviations needed for a given probabil­
ity of stocking out is with the NORMSINV(probability) function in Microsoft Excel (NORM­
SINV(0.8) = 0.84162). Given our result from Excel, which is more accurate than what we can 
get from the tables, the number of extra papers would be 0.84162 × 10 = 8.416, or 9 papers 
(There is no way to stock 0.4 paper!).
To make this more useful, it would be good to actually consider the potential profit and 
loss associated with stocking either too many or too few papers on the stand. Let’s say that 
our newspaper person pays $0.20 for each paper and sells the papers for $0.50. In this case, 
the marginal cost associated with underestimating demand is $0.30, the lost profit. Similarly, 
the marginal cost of overestimating demand is $0.20, the cost of buying too many papers. The 
optimal stocking level, using marginal analysis, occurs at the point where the expected ben­
efits derived from carrying the next unit are less than the expected costs for that unit. Keep in 
mind that the specific benefits and costs depend on the problem.
In symbolic terms, define
​
​C​ o​ = Cost per unit of demand overestimated
​ 
 
 
 
​C​ u​ = Cost per unit of demand underestimated​
By introducing probabilities, the expected marginal cost equation becomes
​P​(​C​ o​)​ ≤ ​(​1 − P​)​C​ u​
Salesperson Alberto Tilghman, left, displays Philadelphia Phillies 
merchandise at a Modell’s sporting goods store in Philadelphia.
© Matt Rourke/AP Images

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
523
where P is the probability that the unit will not be sold and 1 – P is the probability of it being 
sold because one or the other must occur. (The unit is sold or is not sold.)1
Then, solving for P, we obtain
​P ≤ ​ 
​C​ u​ 
_____ 
​C​ o​ + ​C​ u​ ​
This equation states that we should continue to increase the size of the order so long as the 
probability of selling what we order is equal to or less than the ratio Cu/(Co + Cu).
Returning to our newspaper problem, our cost of overestimating demand (Co) is $0.20 
per paper and the cost of underestimating demand (Cu) is $0.30. The probability therefore 
is 0.3/(0.2 + 0.3) = 0.6. Now we need to find the point on our demand distribution that cor­
responds to the cumulative probability of 0.6. Using the NORMSINV function to get the 
number of standard deviations (commonly referred to as the Z-score) of extra newspapers 
to carry, we get 0.253, which means we should stock 0.253(10) = 2.53 or 3 extra papers. 
The total number of papers for the stand each Monday morning, therefore, should be 
93 papers.
Single-period inventory models are useful for a wide variety of service and manufacturing 
applications. Consider the following:
	1.	 Overbooking of airline flights. It is common for customers to cancel flight reserva­
tions for a variety of reasons. Here, the cost of underestimating the number of cancel­
lations is the revenue lost due to an empty seat on a flight. The cost of overestimating 
cancellations is the awards, such as free flights or cash payments, that are given to 
customers unable to board the flight.
	2.	 Ordering of fashion items. A problem for a retailer selling fashion items is that 
often only a single order can be placed for the entire season. This is often caused by 
long lead times and the limited life of the merchandise. The cost of underestimating 
demand is the lost profit due to sales not made. The cost of overestimating demand is 
the cost that results when it is discounted.
	3.	 Any type of one-time order. For example, ordering T-shirts for a sporting event or 
printing maps that become obsolete after a certain period of time.
EXAMPLE 20.1: Hotel Reservations
A hotel near the university always fills up on the evening before football games. History has 
shown that when the hotel is fully booked, the number of last-minute cancellations has a mean 
of 5 and a standard deviation of 3. The average room rate is $80. When the hotel is over­
booked, the policy is to find a room in a nearby hotel and to pay for the room for the customer. 
This usually costs the hotel approximately $200 because rooms booked on such late notice are 
expensive. How many rooms should the hotel overbook?
SOLUTION
The cost of underestimating the number of cancellations is $80 and the cost of overestimating 
cancellations is $200.
​P ≤ ​ 
​C​ u​ 
_____ 
​C​ o​ + ​C​ u​ ​ = ​ 
$80 
__________ 
$200 + $80 ​ = 0.2857​
Using NORMSINV(.2857) from Excel gives a Z-score of –0.56599. The negative value indi­
cates that we should overbook by a value less than the average of 5. The actual value should 
be –0.56599(3) = –1.69797, or 2 reservations less than 5. The hotel should overbook three 
reservations on the evening prior to a football game.
[20.1]

524	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Another common method for analyzing this type of problem is with a discrete probability dis­
tribution found using actual data and marginal analysis. For our hotel, consider that we have 
collected data and our distribution of no-shows is as follows.
Number of 
No-Shows
Probability
Cumulative 
Probability
0
0.05
0.05
1
0.08
0.13
2
0.10
0.23
3
0.15
0.38
4
0.20
0.58
5
0.15
0.73
6
0.11
0.84
7
0.06
0.90
8
0.05
0.95
9
0.04
0.99
10
0.01
1.00
	
Using these data, we can create a table showing the impact of overbooking. Total expected 
cost of each overbooking option is then calculated by multiplying each possible outcome by 
its probability and summing the weighted costs. The best overbooking strategy is the one with 
minimum cost.
Number of Reservations Overbooked
No-
Shows
Probability
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
  0
0.05
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
2,000
  1
0.08
80
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
1,800
  2
0.1
160
80
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
  3
0.15
240
160
80
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
  4
0.2
320
240
160
80
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
  5
0.15
400
320
240
160
80
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
  6
0.11
480
400
320
240
160
80
0
200
400
600
800
  7
0.06
560
480
400
320
240
160
80
0
200
400
600
  8
0.05
640
560
480
400
320
240
160
80
0
200
400
  9
0.04
720
640
560
480
400
320
240
160
80
0
200
10
0.01
800
720
640
560
480
400
320
240
160
80
0
Expected cost
337.6
271.6
228
212.4
238.8
321.2
445.6
600.8
772.8
958.8
1,156
From the table, the minimum total cost is when three extra reservations are taken. This 
approach, using discrete probability, is useful when valid historic data are available.
Multiperiod Inventory Systems
There are two general types of multiperiod inventory systems: fixed–order quantity models 
(also called the economic order quantity, EOQ, and Q-model) and fixed–time period models 
(also referred to variously as the periodic system, periodic review system, fixed–order inter­
val system, and P-model). Multiperiod inventory systems are designed to ensure that an item 
will be available on an ongoing basis throughout the year. Usually, the item will be ordered 
multiple times throughout the year where the logic in the system dictates the actual quantity 
ordered and the timing of the order.
The basic distinction is that fixed–order quantity models are “event triggered” and fixed–
time period models are “time triggered.” That is, a fixed–order quantity model initiates an 
order when the event of reaching a specified reorder level occurs. This event may take place 
at any time, depending on the demand for the items considered. In contrast, the fixed–time 
Fixed–order quantity 
model (Q-model)
An inventory control 
model where the amount 
requisitioned is fixed 
and the actual ordering 
is triggered by inventory 
dropping to a specified 
level of inventory.
Fixed–time period 
model (P-model)
An inventory control model 
that specifies inventory 
is ordered at the end of 
a predetermined time 
period. The interval of time 
between orders is fixed 
and the order quantity 
varies.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
525
period model is limited to placing orders at the end of a predetermined time period; only the 
passage of time triggers the model.
To use the fixed–order quantity model (which places an order when the remaining inven­
tory drops to a predetermined order point, R), the inventory remaining must be continually 
monitored. Thus, the fixed–order quantity model is a perpetual system, which requires that 
every time a withdrawal from inventory or an addition to inventory is made, records must be 
updated to reflect whether the reorder point has been reached. In a fixed–time period model, 
counting takes place only at the review period. (We will discuss some variations of systems 
that combine features of both.)
Some additional differences tend to influence the choice of systems (also see Exhibit 20.3):
∙	 The fixed–time period model has a larger average inventory because it must also pro­
tect against stockout during the review period, T; the fixed–order quantity model has no 
review period.
∙	 The fixed–order quantity model favors more expensive items because average inven­
tory is lower.
∙	 The fixed–order quantity model is more appropriate for important items such as critical 
repair parts because there is closer monitoring and therefore quicker response to poten­
tial stockout.
∙	 The fixed–order quantity model requires more time to maintain because every addition 
or withdrawal is logged.
Exhibit 20.4 shows what occurs when each of the two models is put into use and becomes 
an operating system. As we can see, the fixed–order quantity system focuses on order quanti­
ties and reorder points. Procedurally, each time a unit is taken out of stock, the withdrawal is 
logged and the amount remaining in inventory is immediately compared to the reorder point. 
If it has dropped to this point, an order for Q items is placed. If it has not, the system remains 
in an idle state until the next withdrawal.
In the fixed–time period system, a decision to place an order is made after the stock has 
been counted or reviewed. Whether an order is actually placed depends on the inventory posi­
tion at that time.
Fixed–Order Quantity Models
Fixed–order quantity models attempt to determine the specific point, R, at which an order will 
be placed and the size of that order, Q. The order point, R, is always a specified number of 
units. An order of size Q is placed when the inventory available (currently in stock and on 
Q-Model
P-Model
Feature
Fixed–Order Quantity Model
Fixed–Time Period Model
Order quantity
Q—constant (the same amount 
ordered each time)
q—variable (varies each time 
order is placed)
When to place order
R—when the inventory position 
drops to the reorder level
T—when the review period 
arrives
Recordkeeping
Each time a withdrawal or addi­
tion is made
Counted only at review period
Size of inventory
Less than fixed–time period 
model
Larger than fixed–order quantity 
model
Time to maintain
Higher due to perpetual 
recordkeeping
Efficient, because multiple items 
can be ordered at the same time
Type of items
Higher-priced, critical, or impor­
tant items
Typically used with lower-cost 
items
Fixed–Order Quantity and Fixed–Time Period Differences
exhibit 20.3

526	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Fixed–Order 
Quantity System
Fixed–Time Period 
Reordering System
Is position ≤ 
Reorder point?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Issue an order for 
exactly Q units
Demand occurs
Unit withdrawn 
from inventory or 
backordered
Compute inventory position 
Position = On-hand + 
On-order – Backorder
Compute order quantity to 
bring inventory up to 
required level
Issue an order for the 
number of units needed
Idle state
Waiting for demand
Demand occurs
Units withdrawn from 
inventory or backordered
Idle state
Waiting for demand
Compute inventory position
Position = On-hand + 
On-order – Backorder
P-Model
Q-Model
Has review 
time
arrived?
Comparison of Fixed–Order Quantity and Fixed–Time Period 
Reordering Inventory Systems
exhibit 20.4
order) reaches the point R. Inventory position is defined as the on-hand plus on-order minus 
backordered quantities. The solution to a fixed–order quantity model may stipulate something 
like this: When the inventory position drops to 36, place an order for 57 more units.
The simplest models in this category occur when all aspects of the situation are known 
with certainty. If the annual demand for a product is 1,000 units, it is precisely 1,000—not 
1,000 plus or minus 10 percent. The same is true for setup costs and holding costs. Although 
the assumption of complete certainty is rarely valid, it provides a good basis for our coverage 
of inventory models.
Exhibit 20.5 and the discussion about deriving the optimal order quantity are based on the 
following characteristics of the model. These assumptions are unrealistic, but they represent a 
starting point and allow us to use a simple example.
∙	 Demand for the product is constant and uniform throughout the period.
∙	 Lead time (time from ordering to receipt) is constant.
∙	 Price per unit of product is constant.
∙	 Inventory holding cost is based on average inventory.
∙	 Ordering or setup costs are constant.
∙	 All demands for the product will be satisfied. (No backorders are allowed.)
The “sawtooth effect” relating Q and R in Exhibit 20.5 shows that when the inventory posi­
tion drops to point R, a reorder is placed. This order is received at the end of time period L, 
which does not vary in this model.
Inventory position
The amount on hand 
plus on-order minus 
backordered quantities. In 
the case where inventory 
has been allocated for 
special purposes, the 
inventory position is 
reduced by these allocated 
amounts.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
527
In constructing any inventory model, the first step is to develop a functional relationship 
between the variables of interest and the measure of effectiveness. In this case, because we are 
concerned with cost, the following equation becomes:
​     Total​ 
annual cost​ = ​     Annual​ 
purchase cost ​+ ​     Annual​ 
ordering cost​ + ​   Annual​ 
holding cost​
or
​TC = DC + ​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S + ​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ H​
where
TC = Total annual cost
D = Demand (annual)
C = Cost per unit
Q = Quantity to be ordered (the optimal amount is termed the economic order quantity—
EOQ—or Qopt)
S = Setup cost or cost of placing an order
R = Reorder point
L = Lead time
H = Annual holding and storage cost per unit of average inventory (often, holding cost is 
taken as a percentage of the cost of the item, such as H = iC, where i is the percent 
carrying cost)
On the right side of the equation, DC is the annual purchase cost for the units, (D/Q)S is the 
annual ordering cost (the actual number of orders placed, D/Q, times the cost of each order, 
S), and (Q/2)H is the annual holding cost (the average inventory, Q/2, times the cost per unit 
for holding and storage, H). These cost relationships are graphed in Exhibit 20.6.
The second step in model development is to find that optimal order quantity Qopt at which 
total cost is a minimum. In Exhibit 20.6, the total cost is minimal at the point where the slope 
of the curve is zero. Using calculus, we take the derivative of total cost with respect to Q and 
set this equal to zero. For the basic model considered here, the calculations are
​
   TC = DC + ​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S + ​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ H
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
​ dTC 
____ 
dQ ​ = 0 + ​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​ ​ − DS 
_ 
​Q​ 2​  ​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​ + ​ H 
__ 
2 ​ = 0
​ 
​
​
​​Q​ opt​ = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​​
[20.2]
Optimal order quantity 
(Qopt)
This order size minimizes 
total annual cost.
[20.3]
Inventory
on
hand
L
Time
L
L
Q-Model
Q
Q
Q
Q
R
Basic Fixed–Order Quantity Model
exhibit 20.5

528	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Because this simple model assumes constant demand and lead time, neither safety stock nor 
stockout cost is necessary, and the reorder point, R, is simply
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L​
where
​ ¯ 
d ​ = Average daily demand (constant)
 L = Lead time in days (constant)
EXAMPLE 20.2: Economic Order Quantity and Reorder Point
Find the economic order quantity and the reorder point, given
​ 
Annual demand ​(​D​)​
​ 
=
​ 
1, 000 units
​ 
 
 
 
Average daily demand ​(​ ¯ 
d ​)​
​ 
=
​ 
1, 000 ∕365
​ 
 
 
Ordering cost ​(​S​)​​ =​ $5 per order​ 
 
 
Holding cost ​(​H​)​​ =​ $1.25 per unit per year​ 
 
 
 
Lead time ​(​L​)​
​ 
=
​ 
5 days
​ 
 
 
Cost per unit ​(​C​)​
​ 
=
​ 
$12.50
 
​
What quantity should be ordered?
SOLUTION
The optimal order quantity is
​Q​ opt​ = ​ ​√ 
____ 
2DS ​ 
____ 
H 
​ = ​√ 
________ 
​ 2(1, 000 ) 5 
________ 
1.25 
​ ​ = ​√ 
_____ 
8, 000 ​ = 89.4 units​
The reorder point is
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L = ​ 1, 000 
_____ 
365  ​(5 ) = 13.7 units​
	
Rounding to the nearest unit, the inventory policy is as follows: When the inventory 
­position drops to 14, place an order for 89 more.
	
The total annual cost will be
​
TC
​ 
= DC + ​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S + ​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ H
​ 
 
​​ 
​= 1, 000​⎛ 
⎜ ⎝​12.50​⎞ 
⎟ ⎠​ + ​ 1, 000 
_ 
89  ​(​5​)​ + ​ 89 
_ 
2 ​(​1.25​)​​ 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= $12, 611.80
 
​
Reorder point (R)
An order is placed when 
inventory drops to this 
level.
[20.4]
TC (total cost)
DC (annual cost of items)
H (holding cost)
 Q
Cost
Qopt
Order quantity size (Q)
S (ordering cost)
D
2
Q
Annual Product Costs, Based on Size of the Order
exhibit 20.6

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
529
Note that the total ordering cost (1,000/89) × 5 = $56.18 and the total carrying cost (89/2) × 
1.25 = $55.625 are very close but not exactly the same due to rounding Q to 89.
	
Note that, in this example, the purchase cost of the units was not required to determine 
the order quantity and the reorder point because the cost was constant and unrelated to 
order size.
E s t ab l i s h i n g  S a f e t y  S t o c k  L e ve l s   The previous model assumed that demand 
was constant and known. In the majority of cases, though, demand is not constant but varies 
from day to day. Safety stock must therefore be maintained to provide some level of protection 
against stock outs. Safety stock can be defined as the amount of inventory carried in addition 
to the expected demand. In a normal distribution, this would be the mean. For example, if our 
average monthly demand is 100 units and we expect next month to be the same, if we carry 
120 units, then we have 20 units of safety stock.
Safety stock can be determined based on many different criteria. A common approach is 
for a company to simply state that a certain number of weeks of supply needs to be kept in 
safety stock. It is better, though, to use an approach that captures the variability in demand.
For example, an objective may be something like “set the safety stock level so that there 
will only be a 5 percent chance of stocking out if demand exceeds 300 units.” We call this 
approach to setting safety stock the probability approach.
T h e Pr ob a b i l i t y  A p p r o a ch  Using the probability criterion to determine safety 
stock is pretty simple. With the models described in this chapter, we assume that the demand 
over a period of time is normally distributed with a mean and a standard deviation. Again, 
remember that this approach considers only the probability of running out of stock, not how 
many units we are short. To determine the probability of stocking out over the time period, we 
can simply plot a normal distribution for the expected demand and note where the amount we 
have on hand lies on the curve.
Let’s take a few simple examples to illustrate this. Say we expect demand to be 100 units 
over the next month, and we know that the standard deviation is 20 units. If we go into the 
month with just 100 units, we know that our probability of stocking out is 50 percent. Half 
of the months we would expect demand to be greater than 100 units; half of the months we 
would expect it to be less than 100 units. Taking this further, if we ordered a month’s worth 
of inventory of 100 units at a time and received it at the beginning of the month, over the long 
run we would expect to run out of inventory in six months of the year.
If running out this often was not acceptable, we would want to carry extra inventory to 
reduce this risk of stocking out. One idea might be to carry an extra 20 units of inventory 
for the item. In this case, we would still order a month’s worth of inventory at a time, but we 
would schedule delivery to arrive when we still have 20 units remaining in inventory. This 
would give us that little cushion of safety stock to reduce the probability of stocking out. If 
the standard deviation associated with our demand was 20 units, we would then be carrying 
one standard deviation worth of safety stock. Looking at the cumulative standard normal dis­
tribution (Appendix G), and moving one standard deviation to the right of the mean, gives a 
probability of 0.8413. So approximately 84 percent of the time we would not expect to stock 
out, and 16 percent of the time we would. Now, if we order every month, we would expect to 
stock out approximately two months per year (0.16 × 12 = 1.92). For those using Excel, given 
a z value, the probability can be obtained with the NORMSDIST function.
It is common for companies using this approach to set the probability of not stocking out 
at 95 percent. This means we would carry about 1.64 standard deviations of safety stock, 
or 33 units (1.64 × 20 = 32.8) for our example. Once again, keep in mind that this does not 
mean that we would order 33 units extra each month. Rather, it means that we would still 
order a month’s worth each time, but we would schedule the receipt so that we could expect 
to have 33 units in inventory when the order arrives. In this case, we would expect to stock 
out approximately 0.6 month per year, or that stockouts would occur in 1 of every 20 months.
Safety stock
The amount of inventory 
carried in addition to the 
expected demand.

530	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
F i x e d – O r d e r  Q u a n t i t y  M o d e l  w i t h  S a f e t y  S t o c k  A fixed–order quantity 
system perpetually monitors the inventory level and places a new order when stock reaches 
some level, R. The danger of stockout in this model occurs only during the lead time, between 
the time an order is placed and the time it is received. As shown in Exhibit 20.7, an order is 
placed when the inventory position drops to the reorder point, R. During this lead time, L, a 
range of demands is possible. This range is determined either from an analysis of past demand 
data or from an estimate (if past data are not available).
The amount of safety stock depends on the service level desired, as previously discussed. 
The quantity to be ordered, Q, is calculated in the usual way considering the demand, short­
age cost, ordering cost, holding cost, and so forth. A fixed–order quantity model can be used 
to compute Q, such as the simple Qopt model previously discussed. The reorder point is then 
set to cover the expected demand during the lead time plus a safety stock determined by the 
desired service level. Thus, the key difference between a fixed–order quantity model where 
demand is known and one where demand is uncertain is in computing the reorder point. The 
order quantity is the same in both cases. The uncertainty element is taken into account in the 
safety stock.
The reorder point is
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L + z ​σ​ L​​
​where
R = Reorder point in units
​ ¯ 
d ​​ = Average daily demand
L = Lead time in days (time between placing an order and receiving the items)
z = Number of standard deviations for a specified service probability
σL = Standard deviation of usage during lead time
The term zσL is the amount of safety stock. Note that if safety stock is positive, the effect 
is to place a reorder sooner. That is, R without safety stock is simply the average demand dur­
ing the lead time. If lead time usage was expected to be 20, for example, and safety stock was 
computed to be 5 units, then the order would be placed sooner, when 25 units remained. The 
greater the safety stock, the sooner the order is placed.
C o m p u t i n g  d ,  σ L,  a n d  z   Demand during the replenishment lead time is really an 
estimate or forecast of expected use of inventory from the time an order is placed to when it 
is received. It may be a single number (for example, if the lead time is a month, the demand 
may be taken as the previous year’s demand divided by 12), or it may be a summation of 
expected demands over the lead time (such as the sum of daily demands over a 30-day lead 
time). For the daily demand situation, d can be a forecast demand using any of the models 
[20.5]
Number 
of units 
on hand
R
0
Q
L
Range of demand
Safety stock
Stockout
Time
Q-Model
Fixed–Order Quantity Model
exhibit 20.7

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
531
in Chapter 18 on forecasting. For example, if a 30-day period was used to calculate d, then a 
simple average would be
​
​ ¯ 
d ​ = ​ 
​∑ i=1​ 
n  ​ ​d​ i​ 
______ 
n 
​
​ 
​=​ ​ 
​∑ i=1​ 
30 ​ ​d​ i​ 
______ 
30  ​
​
where n is the number of days.
The standard deviation of the daily demand is
​
​σ​ d​ = ​ 
​√ 
___________ 
 
​∑ i=1​ 
n  ​(​ ​d​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
d ​)​ 2​ ​ 
 
__________ 
n 
​
​ 
 
​=​ ​ 
​√ 
___________ 
 
​∑ i=1​ 
30 ​(​ ​d​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
d ​)​ 2​ ​ 
 
__________ 
30 
​
​
Because σd refers to one day, if lead time extends over several days, we can use the statisti­
cal premise that the standard deviation of a series of independent occurrences is equal to the 
square root of the sum of the variances. That is, in general,
​​σ​ L​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​σ​ 1​ 
2​ + ​σ​ 2​ 
2​ + . . . +​σ​ L​ 
2 ​ ​​
​For example, suppose we computed the standard deviation of demand to be 10 units per day. 
If our lead time to get an order is five days, the standard deviation for the five-day period, 
assuming each day can be considered independent, is
​σ​ 5​ = ​√ 
___________________________ 
 
 
​(​10​)​ 2​ + ​(​10​)​ 2​ + ​(​10​)​ 2​ + ​(​10​)​ 2​ + ​(​10​)​ 2​ ​ = 22.36​
Next we need to find z, the number of standard deviations of safety stock.
Suppose we wanted our probability of not stocking out during the lead time to be 0.95. The 
z value associated with a 95 percent probability of not stocking out is 1.64 (see Appendix G or 
use the Excel NORMSINV function). Given this, safety stock is calculated as follows:
​
SS
​ 
= z ​σ​ L​
​ 
​ ​
​ 
 
​​ = 1.64 × 22.36​  ​​ 
 
​
​ 
= 36.67
​ 
​
 ​
We now compare two examples. The difference between them is that in the first, the varia­
tion in demand is stated in terms of standard deviation over the entire lead time, while in the 
second, it is stated in terms of standard deviation per day.
EXAMPLE 20.3: Reorder Point
Consider an economic order quantity case where annual demand D = 1,000 units, economic 
order quantity Q = 200 units, the desired probability of not stocking out P = .95, the standard 
deviation of demand during lead time σL = 25 units, and lead time L = 15 days. Determine the 
reorder point. Assume that demand is over a 250-workday year.
SOLUTION
In our example,
 ​ ¯ 
d ​ = ​ 1, 000 
_____ 
250  ​ = 4​, and lead time is 15 days. We use the equation
​R​  = ​ ¯ 
d ​L + z ​σ​ L​​ 
 
​
​ 
​= 4​(​15​)​ + z​(​25​)​
​
[20.6]
[20.7]
[20.8]
[20.9]

532	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
In this case, z is 1.64.
	
Completing the solution for R, we have
R = 4(15) + 1.64(25) = 60 + 41 = 101 units
This says that when the stock on hand gets down to 101 units, order 200 more.
EXAMPLE 20.4: Order Quantity and Reorder Point
Daily demand for a certain product is normally distributed, with a mean of 60 and a standard 
deviation of 7. The source of supply is reliable and maintains a constant lead time of six days. 
The cost of placing the order is $10 and annual holding costs are $0.50 per unit. There are 
no stock-out costs, and unfilled orders are filled as soon as the order arrives. Assume sales 
occur over the entire 365 days of the year. Find the order quantity and reorder point to satisfy a 
95 percent probability of not stocking out during the lead time.
SOLUTION
In this problem we need to calculate the order quantity Q as well as the reorder point R.
​
​ ¯ 
d ​ = 60
​ 
S = $10
​ 
 
​σ​ d​ = 7​ 
H = $0.50​ 
 
​D = 60​(​365​)​
​ 
L = 6
 
​
The optimal order quantity is
​Q​ opt​ = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​ = ​√ 
__________
 
 
​ 2​(​60​)​365​(​10​)​ 
 
__________ 
0.50 
​ ​ = ​√ 
_______ 
876, 000 ​ = 936 units​
	
To compute the reorder point, we need to calculate the amount of product used during the 
lead time and add this to the safety stock.
	
The standard deviation of demand during the lead time of six days is calculated from the 
variance of the individual days. Because each day’s demand is independent,2
​σ​ L​ = ​√ 
____
 
​∑ 
i=1
​ 
L
 ​ ​σ​ d​ 
2​ ​ = ​√ 
_____ 
6 ​(​7​)​ 2​ ​ = 17.15​
Once again, z is 1.64.
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L + z ​σ​ L​ = 60​(​6​)​ + 1.64​(​17.15​)​ = 388 units​
	
To summarize the policy derived in this example, an order for 936 units is placed whenever 
the number of units remaining in inventory drops to 388.
Fixed–Time Period Models
In a fixed–time period system, inventory is counted only at particular times, such as every 
week or every month. Counting inventory and placing orders periodically are desirable in 
situations such as when vendors make routine visits to customers and take orders for their 
complete line of products, or when buyers want to combine orders to save transportation 
costs. Other firms operate on a fixed time period to facilitate planning their inventory count; 
for example, Distributor X calls every two weeks and employees know that all Distributor X’s 
product must be counted.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
533
Fixed–time period models generate order quantities that vary from period to period, 
depending on the usage rates. These generally require a higher level of safety stock than a 
fixed–order quantity system. The fixed–order quantity system assumes continual tracking of 
inventory on hand, with an order immediately placed when the reorder point is reached. In 
contrast, the standard fixed–time period models assume that inventory is counted only at the 
time specified for review. It is possible that some large demand will draw the stock down to 
zero right after an order is placed. This condition could go unnoticed until the next review 
period. Then, the new order, when placed, still takes time to arrive. Thus, it is possible to be 
out of stock throughout the entire review period, T, and order lead time, L. Safety stock, there­
fore, must protect against stock outs during the review period itself, as well as during the lead 
time from order placement to order receipt.
F ix e d – T i m e  P e r i o d  M o d e l  w i t h  S a f e t y  S t o c k  In a fixed–time period 
system, reorders are placed at the time of review (T), and the safety stock that must be 
reordered is
​Safety stock = z ​σ​ T+L​​
​Exhibit 20.8 shows a fixed–time period system with a review cycle of T and a constant 
lead time of L. In this case, demand is randomly distributed about a mean d. The quantity to 
order, q, is
​
​  Order​ 
quantity​
​ 
= ​ 
Average demand
​ 
over the​ 
 
vulnerable period 
​
​ 
+ ​Safety​ 
stock ​ 
​ 
−  ​
Inventory currently
​ 
 
on hand (plus on​ 
 
order, if any)
 
​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
q
​ 
​=       ​ ¯ 
d ​(​T + L​)​
​ 
+   z ​σ​ T + L​
​ 
−                I
​ 
 
​
where
q = Quantity to be ordered
T = The number of days between reviews
L = Lead time in days (time between placing an order and receiving it)
​ ¯ 
d ​ = Forecast average daily demand
z = Number of standard deviations for a specified service probability
σT + L = Standard deviation of demand over the review and lead time
I = Current inventory level (includes items on order)
[20.10]
[20.11]
Note: The demand, lead time, review period, and so forth can be any time units such as days, weeks, or 
years so long as they are consistent throughout the equation.
Inventory 
on hand 
(in units)
Safety 
stock
Place 
order
Place 
order
Place 
order
P-Model
Stockout
Time
L
L
T
T
T
L
Fixed–Time Period Inventory Model
exhibit 20.8

534	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
In this model, demand ( ​ ¯ ​d​) can be forecast and revised each review period if desired, or the 
yearly average may be used if appropriate. We assume that demand is normally distributed.
The value of z is dependent on the probability of stocking out and can be found using 
Appendix G or by using the Excel NORMSINV function.
EXAMPLE 20.5: Quantity to Order
Daily demand for a product is 10 units, with a standard deviation of 3 units. The review period 
is 30 days, and the lead time is 14 days. Management has set a policy of satisfying 98 percent 
of demand from items in stock. At the beginning of this review period, there are 150 units in 
inventory.
	
How many units should be ordered?
SOLUTION
The quantity to order is
​q​  = ​ ¯ 
d ​(​T + L​)​ + z ​σ​ T+L​ − I​ 
 
​​ 
= 10(30 + 14 ) + z ​σ​ T+L​ − 150​
	
Before we can complete the solution, we need to find σT1L and z. To find σT1L, we use the 
notion, as before, that the standard deviation of a sequence of independent random variables 
equals the square root of the sum of the variances. Therefore, the standard deviation during 
the period T + L is the square root of the sum of the variances for each day:
​​σ​ T+L​ = ​√ 
_____
 
​ ∑ 
i=1
​ 
T+L
​ ​σ​ d​ 
2​ ​​
​Because each day is independent and σd is constant,
​σ​ T+L​ = ​√ 
________ 
​(​T + L​)​σ​ d​ 
2​ ​ = ​√ 
___________ 
 
​(​30 + 14​)​(​3​)​ 2​ ​ = 19.90​
The z value for P = 0.98 is 2.05.
	
The quantity to order, then, is
​q = ​ ¯ 
d ​(​T + L​)​ + z ​σ​ T+L​ − I = 10​(​30 + 14​)​ + 2.05​(​19.90​)​ − 150 = 331 units​
To ensure a 98 percent probability of not stocking out, order 331 units at this review period.
Inventory Turn Calculation
It is important for managers to realize that how they run items using inventory control logic 
relates directly to the financial performance of the firm. A key measure that relates to com­
pany performance is inventory turn. Recall that inventory turn is calculated as follows:
​Inventory turn = ​ 
Cost of goods sold 
 
____________________ 
 
Average inventory value ​
So what is the relationship between how we manage an item and the inventory turn for that 
item? Here, let us simplify things and consider just the inventory turn for an individual 
item or a group of items. First, if we look at the numerator, the cost of goods sold for an 
individual item relates directly to the expected yearly demand (D) for the item. Given a 
cost per unit (C) for the item, the cost of goods sold is just D times C. Recall this is the 
same as what was used in our total cost equation when calculating. Next, consider average 
inventory value. Recall from EOQ that the average inventory is Q/2, which is true if we 
assume that demand is constant. When we bring uncertainty into the equation, safety stock 
is needed to manage the risk created by demand variability. The fixed–order quantity model 
[20.12]
Inventory turn
A measure of the expected 
number of times inventory 
is replaced over a year.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
535
and fixed–time period model both have equations for calculating the safety stock required 
for a given probability of stocking out. In both models, we assume that, when going through 
an order cycle, half the time we need to use the safety stock and half the time we do not. So, 
on average, we expect the safety stock (SS) to be on hand. Given this, the average inventory 
is equal to the following:
​Average inventory value = ​(​Q / 2 + SS​)​C​
​The inventory turn for an individual item then is
​ Inventory turn =  ​ 
DC 
_________ 
 
​(​Q ∕ 2 + SS​)​C ​ = ​ 
D 
______ 
Q ∕ 2 + SS ​​
​EXAMPLE 20.6: Average Inventory Calculation—Fixed–Order Quantity Model 
Suppose the following item is being managed using a fixed–order quantity model with safety stock.
Annual demand (D) = 1,000 units 
Order quantity (Q) = 300 units 
Safety stock (SS) = 40 units
	
What are the average inventory level and inventory turn for the item?
SOLUTION
​ 
Average inventory = Q / 2 + SS = 300 / 2 + 40 = 190 units
​ 
 
 
 
 
Inventory turn = ​ 
D 
______ 
Q / 2 + SS ​ = ​ 1, 000 
_____ 
190  ​ = 5.263 turns per year
​
EXAMPLE 20.7: Average Inventory Calculation—Fixed–Time Period Model 
Consider the following item that is being managed using a fixed–time period model with 
safety stock.
Weekly demand (d) = 50 units 
Review cycle (T) = 3 weeks 
Safety stock (SS) = 30 units
What are the average inventory level and inventory turn for the item?
SOLUTION
Here we need to determine how many units we expect to order each cycle. If we assume that 
demand is fairly steady, then we would expect to order the number of units that we expect 
demand to be during the review cycle. This expected demand is equal to dT if we assume 
there is no trend or seasonality in the demand pattern.
​
​Average inventory = dT∕ 2 + SS = 50​(​3​)​ ∕ 2 + 30 = 105 units​
​ 
 
 
 
 
Inventory turn = ​ 
52d 
_______ 
dT ∕ 2 + SS ​ = ​ 52​(​50​)​ 
_____ 
105  ​ = 24.8 turns per year
 ​
Here we assume the firm operates 52 weeks in the year.
Price-Break Model
The price-break model deals with the fact that, generally, the selling price of an item var­
ies with the order size. This is a discrete or step change rather than a per-unit change. For 
[20.13]
[20.14]
Price-break model
This model is useful for 
finding the order quantity 
of an item when the price 
of the item varies with the 
order size.

536	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
example, wood screws may cost $0.02 each for 1 to 99 screws, $1.60 per 100, and $13.50 
per 1,000. To determine the optimal quantity of any item to order, we simply solve for 
the economic order quantity for each price and at the point of price change. But not all of 
the economic order quantities determined by the formula are feasible. In the wood screw 
example, the Qopt formula might tell us that the optimal decision at the price of 1.6 cents 
is to order 75 screws. This would be impossible, however, because 75 screws would cost 
2 cents each.
In general, to find the lowest-cost order quantity, we need to calculate the economic 
order quantity for each possible price and check to see whether the quantity is feasible. It 
is ­possible that the economic order quantity that is calculated is either higher or lower than 
the range to which the price corresponds. Any feasible quantity is a potential candidate 
for order quantity. We also need to calculate the cost at each of the price-break quantities, 
because we know that price is feasible at these points and the total cost may be lowest at 
one of these values.
The calculations can be simplified a little if holding cost is based on a percentage of unit 
price (they will be in all the examples and problems given in this book). In this case, we only 
need to look at a subset of the price-break quantities. The following two-step procedure can 
be used:
	Step 1.    Sort the prices from lowest to highest and then, beginning with the lowest price, 
calculate the economic order quantity for each price level until a feasible economic order 
quantity is found. By feasible, we mean that the quantity is in the correct corresponding 
range for that price.
	Step 2.    If the first feasible economic order quantity is for the lowest price, this quantity 
is best and you are finished. Otherwise, calculate the total cost for the first feasible eco­
nomic order quantity (you did these from lowest to highest price) and also calculate the 
total cost at each price break lower than the price associated with the first feasible eco­
nomic order quantity. This is the lowest order quantity at which you can take advantage of 
the price break. The optimal Q is the one with the lowest cost.
Looking at Exhibit 20.9, we see that order quantities are solved from right to left, or from 
the lowest unit price to the highest, until a valid Q is obtained. Then, the order quantity at each 
price break above this Q is used to find which order quantity has the least cost—the computed 
Q or the Q at one of the price breaks.
Units
@ C = $4.50
@ C = $5.00
@ C = $3.90
1,100
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
Ordering
cost and
holding
cost
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
716
632
666
900
1,000
1,100
1,200
1,300
Curves for Three Separate Order Quantity Models in a Three-Price-Break Situation (red line 
depicts feasible range of purchases)
exhibit 20.9

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
537
Q = 632 
Where
c = $5
Q = 667 
Where
c = $4.50
Q = 716 
Where 
c = $3.90
Price 
Break 
1,000
Holding cost 
​⎛ ⎝​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ iC⎞ ⎠​
​ 667 
___ 
2  ​ (0.20)4.50 
  = $300.15​
 
​ 1, 000 
_____ 
2 
​ (0.20)3.90 
  = $390​
Ordering cost 
​⎛ ⎝​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S⎞ ⎠​
Not feasible
​ 10, 000​(​20​)​ 
________ 
667 
​  
  = $299.85​
Not feasible
​ 10, 000​(​20​)​ 
________ 
1, 000 
​   
  = $200​
Holding and ordering cost
$600.00  
$590
Item cost (DC)
     
10,000(4.50) 
10,000(3.90)
Total cost
     
$45,600 
$39,590
Relevant Costs in a Three-Price-Break Model
exhibit 20.10
EXAMPLE 20.8: Price Break
Consider the following case, where
D = 10,000 units (annual demand)
S = $20 to place each order
 i = 20 percent of cost (annual carrying cost, storage, interest, obsolescence, etc.)
C = Cost per unit (according to the order size; orders of 0 to 499 units, $5.00 per unit; 500 
to 999, $4.50 per unit; 1,000 and up, $3.90 per unit)
What quantity should be ordered?
SOLUTION
The appropriate equations from the basic fixed–order quantity case are
​TC = DC + ​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S + ​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ iC​
and
​Q = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
iC  ​ ​​
​Solving for the economic order size, we obtain
@ C = $3.90,
Q = 716
Not feasible
@ C = $4.50,
Q = 667
Feasible, cost = $45,600
Check Q = 1,000,
Cost = $39,590
Optimal solution
	
In Exhibit 20.9, which displays the cost relationship and order quantity range, note that 
most of the order quantity–cost relationships lie outside the feasible range and that only a 
single, continuous range results. This should be readily apparent because, for example, the 
first order quantity specifies buying 632 units at $5.00 per unit. However, if 632 units are 
ordered, the price is $4.50, not $5.00. The same holds true for the third order quantity, which 
specifies an order of 716 units at $3.90 each. This $3.90 price is not available on orders of less 
than 1,000 units.
	
Exhibit 20.10 itemizes the total costs at the economic order quantities and at the price 
breaks. The optimal order quantity is shown to be 1,000 units.
[20.15]

538	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
One practical consideration in price-break problems is that the price reduction from vol­
ume purchases frequently makes it seemingly economical to order amounts larger than the 
Qopt. Thus, when applying the model, we must be particularly careful to obtain a valid esti­
mate of product obsolescence and warehousing costs.
INVENTORY PLANNING AND ACCURACY
Maintaining inventory through counting, placing orders, receiving stock, and so on takes per­
sonnel time and costs money. When there are limits on these resources, the logical move is to 
try to use the available resources to control inventory in the best way. In other words, focus on 
the most important items in inventory.
In the nineteenth century, Villefredo Pareto, in a study of the distribution of wealth in 
Milan, found that 20 percent of the people controlled 80 percent of the wealth. This logic of 
the few having the greatest importance and the many having little importance has been broad­
ened to include many situations and is termed the Pareto principle.3 This is true in our every­
day lives (most of our decisions are relatively unimportant, but a few shape our future) and is 
certainly true in inventory systems (where a few items account for the bulk of our investment).
Any inventory system must specify when an order is to be placed for an item and how 
many units to order. Most inventory control situations involve so many items that it is not 
practical to model and give thorough treatment to each item. To get around this problem, the 
ABC inventory classification scheme divides inventory items into three groupings: high dol­
lar volume (A), moderate dollar volume (B), and low dollar volume (C). Dollar volume is a 
measure of importance; an item low in cost but high in volume can be more important than a 
high-cost item with low volume.
ABC Classification
If the annual usage of items in inventory is listed according to dollar volume, generally, the 
list shows that a small number of items account for a large dollar volume and that a large num­
ber of items account for a small dollar volume. Exhibit 20.11A illustrates the relationship.
The ABC approach divides this list into three groupings by value: A items constitute 
roughly the top 15 percent of the items, B items the next 35 percent, and C items the last 
50 percent. From observation, it appears that the list in Exhibit 20.11A can be meaningfully 
grouped with A including 20 percent (2 of the 10), B including 30 percent, and C including 50 
percent. These points show clear delineations between sections. The result of this segmenta­
tion is shown in Exhibit 20.11B and plotted in Exhibit 20.11C.
Segmentation may not always occur so neatly. The objective, though, is to try to separate 
the important from the unimportant. Where the lines actually break depends on the particular 
inventory under question and on how much personnel time is available. (With more time, a 
firm could define larger A or B categories.)
The purpose of classifying items into groups is to establish the appropriate degree of con­
trol over each item. On a periodic basis, for example, class A items may be more clearly con­
trolled with weekly ordering, B items may be ordered biweekly, and C items may be ordered 
monthly or bimonthly. Note that the unit cost of items is not related to their classification. 
An A item may have a high dollar volume through a combination of either low cost and high 
usage or high cost and low usage. Similarly, C items may have a low dollar volume because of 
either low demand or low cost. In an automobile service station, gasoline would be an A item 
with daily or weekly replenishment; tires, batteries, oil, grease, and transmission fluid may 
be B items and ordered every two to four weeks; and C items would consist of valve stems, 
windshield wiper blades, radiator caps, hoses, fan belts, oil and gas additives, car wax, and so 
forth. C items may be ordered every two or three months or even be allowed to run out before 
reordering because the penalty for stockout is not serious.
Sometimes an item may be critical to a system if its absence creates a sizable loss. In this 
case, regardless of the item’s classification, sufficiently large stocks should be kept on hand to 
prevent runout. One way to ensure closer control is to designate this item an A or a B, forcing 
it into the category even if its dollar volume does not warrant such inclusion.
Analyze inventory using 
the Pareto principle.
LO 20–3
ABC inventory 
classification
Divides inventory into 
dollar volume categories 
that map into strategies 
appropriate for the 
category.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
539
Item Number
Annual Dollar Usage
Percentage of Total Value
22
$  95,000
40.69%
68
75,000
32.13
27
25,000
10.71
03
15,000
6.43
82
13,000
5.57
54
7,500
3.21
36
1,500
0.64
19
800
0.34
23
425
0.18
41
          225
    0.10
$233,450
100.00%
B. ABC Grouping of Inventory Items
Classification
Item Number
Annual Dollar Usage
Percentage of Total
A
22, 68
$170,000
72.8%
B
27, 03, 82
53,000
22.7
C
54, 36, 19, 23, 41
    10,450
    4.5
$233,450
100.0%
C. ABC Inventory Classification (inventory value for each group versus the group’s portion 
of the total list)
Percentage 
of total 
inventory 
value
A items
B items
C items
Percentage of total list of different stock items
20
40
60
80
100
100
80
60
40
20
0
A. Annual Usage of Inventory by Value
exhibit 20.11
Inventory Accuracy and Cycle Counting
Inventory records usually differ from the actual physical count; inventory accuracy refers to how 
well the two agree. Companies such as Walmart understand the importance of inventory accuracy 
and expend considerable effort ensuring it. The question is, “How much error is acceptable?” If 
the record shows a balance of 683 of part X, and an actual count shows 652, is this within reason? 
Suppose the actual count shows 750, an excess of 67 over the record. Is this any better?
Every production system must have agreement, within some specified range, between what 
the record says is in inventory and what actually is in inventory. There are many reasons why 
records and inventory may not agree. For example, an open stockroom area allows items to 
be removed for both legitimate and unauthorized purposes. The legitimate removal may have 
been done in a hurry and simply not recorded. Sometimes parts are misplaced, turning up 
months later. Parts are often stored in several locations, but records may be lost or the location 
recorded incorrectly. Sometimes stock replenishment orders are recorded as received, when 
in fact they never were. Occasionally, a group of parts is recorded as removed from inventory, 
but the customer order is canceled and the parts are replaced in inventory without canceling 
the record. To keep the production system flowing smoothly without parts shortages and effi­
ciently without excess balances, records must be accurate.

540	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
How can a firm keep accurate, up-to-date records? Using bar codes and RFID tags is impor­
tant to minimizing errors caused by inputting wrong numbers in the system. It is also impor­
tant to keep the storeroom locked. If only storeroom personnel have access, and one of their 
measures of performance for personnel evaluation and merit increases is record accuracy, there 
is a strong motivation to comply. Every location of inventory storage, whether in a locked 
storeroom or on the production floor, should have a recordkeeping mechanism. A second way 
is to convey the importance of accurate records to all personnel and depend on them to assist in 
this effort. (It all boils down to this: Put a fence that goes all the way to the ceiling around the 
storage area so that workers cannot climb over to get parts; put a lock on the gate and give one 
person the key. Nobody can pull parts without having the transaction authorized and recorded.)
Another way to ensure accuracy is to count inventory frequently and match this against 
records. A widely used method is called cycle counting.
Cycle counting a physical inventory-taking technique in which inventory is counted fre­
quently rather than once or twice a year. The key to effective cycle counting and, therefore, to 
accurate records lies in deciding which items are to be counted, when, and by whom.
Virtually all inventory systems these days are computerized. The computer can be pro­
grammed to produce a cycle count notice in the following cases:
	1.	 When the record shows a low or zero balance on hand. (It is easier to count fewer items.)
	2.	 When the record shows a positive balance but a backorder was written (indicating a 
discrepancy).
	3.	 After some specified level of activity.
	4.	 To signal a review based on the importance of the item (as in the ABC system) such 
as in the following table:
Annual Dollar Usage
Review Period
$10,000 or more
30 days or less
$3,000–$10,000
45 days or less
$250–$3,000
90 days or less
Less than $250
180 days or less
Cycle counting
A physical inventory-
taking technique in which 
inventory is counted on a 
frequent basis rather than 
once or twice a year.
A sales clerk at Tokyo’s 
Mitsukoshi department 
store reads an RFID tag 
on jeans to check stock. 
Mitsukoshi and Japan’s 
electronic giant Fujitsu 
partnered to use RFID to 
improve stock control 
and customer service.
© AFP/Getty Images

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
541
The easiest time for stock to be counted is when there is no activity in the stockroom or on 
the production floor. This means on the weekends or during the second or third shift, when 
the facility is less busy. If this is not possible, more careful logging and separation of items 
are required to count inventory while production is going on and transactions are occurring.
The counting cycle depends on the available personnel. Some firms schedule regular stock­
room personnel to do the counting during lulls in the regular working day. Other companies 
hire private firms that come in and count inventory. Still other firms use full-time cycle coun­
ters who do nothing but count inventory and resolve differences with the records. Although 
this last method sounds expensive, many firms believe that it is actually less costly than the 
usual hectic annual inventory count generally performed during the two- or three-week annual 
vacation shutdown.
The question of how much error is tolerable between physical inventory and records has 
been much debated. Some firms strive for 100 percent accuracy, whereas others accept a 
1, 2, or 3 percent error. The accuracy level often recommended by experts is ±0.2 percent 
for A items, ±1 percent for B items, and ±5 percent for C items. Regardless of the specific 
accuracy decided on, the important point is that the level be dependable so that safety stocks 
may be provided as a cushion. Accuracy is important for a smooth production process so that 
customer orders can be processed as scheduled and not held up because of unavailable parts.
Concept Connections
LO 20–1   Explain how inventory is used and understand what it costs.
Summary
	∙	 Inventory is expensive mainly due to storage, obsoles­
cence, insurance, and the value of the money invested.
	∙	 This chapter explains models for controlling inven­
tory that are appropriate when it is difficult to pre­
dict exactly what demand will be for an item in the 
future and it is desired to have the item available from 
“stock.”
	∙	 The basic decisions that need to be made are: (1) when 
should an item be ordered, and (2) how large should 
the order be.
	∙	 The main costs relevant to these models are: (1) the 
cost of the item itself, (2) the cost to hold an item in 
inventory, (3) setup costs, (4) ordering costs, and (5) 
costs incurred when an item runs short.
Key Terms
Inventory  The stock of any item or resource used in an 
organization.
Independent demand  The demands for these items are 
unrelated to each other, or to activities that can be pre­
dicted with certainty. 
Dependent demand  The need for an item is a direct 
result of the need for some other item, usually an item 
of which it is a part. Also, when the demand for the item 
can be predicted with accuracy due to a schedule or spe­
cific activitity.
LO 20–2   Analyze how different inventory control systems work.
Summary
	∙	 An inventory system provides a specific operating 
policy for managing items to be in stock. Other than 
defining the timing and sizing of orders, the system 
needs to track the exact status of these orders (Have 
the orders been received by the supplier? Have they 
been shipped? On which date is each expected? And 
so on.).
	∙	 Single-period model—When an item is purchased 
only one time and it is expected that it will be used 
and then not reordered, the single-period model is 
appropriate.
	∙	 Multiple-period models—When the item will be reor­
dered and the intent is to maintain the item in stock, 
multiple-period models are appropriate.

542	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	∙	 There are two basic types of multiple-period models, 
with the key distinction being what triggers the timing 
of the order placement.
	∙	 With the fixed–order quantity model, an order is 
placed when inventory drops to a low level called the 
reorder point.
	∙	 With the fixed–time period model, orders are placed 
at fixed intervals of time, say, every two weeks. The 
order quantity varies for each order.
	∙	 Safety stock is extra inventory that is carried for pro­
tection in case the demand for an item is greater than 
expected. Statistics are used to determine an appropri­
ate amount of safety stock to carry based on the prob­
ability of stocking out.
	∙	 Inventory turn measures the expected number of times 
that average inventory is replaced over a year. It can be 
calculated in aggregate using average inventory levels 
or on an individual item basis.
Key Terms
Single-period problem  Answers the question of how 
much to order when an item is purchased only one 
time and it is expected that it will be used and then not 
reordered.
Fixed–order quantity model (Q-model)  An inventory 
control model where the amount requisitioned is fixed 
and the actual ordering is triggered by inventory drop­
ping to a specified level of inventory.
Fixed–time period model (P-model)  An inventory con­
trol model that specifies inventory is ordered at the end 
of a predetermined time period. The interval of time 
between orders is fixed and the order quantity varies.
Inventory position  The amount on hand plus on-
order minus backordered quantities. In the case where 
inventory has been allocated for special purposes, 
the inventory position is reduced by these allocated 
amounts.
Optimal order quantity (Qopt)  This order size minimizes 
total annual cost.
Reorder point (R)  An order is placed when inventory 
drops to this level.
Safety stock  The amount of inventory carried in addi­
tion to the expected demand.
Inventory turn  The cost of goods sold divided by the total 
average value of inventory. A measure of the expected 
number of times that inventory is replaced each year.
Price-break model  This model is useful for finding the 
order quantity of an item when the price of the item var­
ies with the order size.
​P ≤ ​ 
​C​ u​ 
_____ 
​C​ o​ + ​C​ u​ ​
Inventory position = On-hand + On-order – 
Backorder
​TC = DC + ​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S + ​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ H​
​​Q​ opt​ = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​​
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L​
​R = ​ ¯ 
d ​L + z ​σ​ L​​
[20.1]
[20.2]
[20.3]
[20.4]
[20.5]
[20.6]
​ ¯ 
d ​ = ​ 
​∑ i=1​ 
n  ​ ​d​ i​ 
______ 
n 
​
​ ​ ¯ 
d ​ = ​ 
​√ 
___________ 
 
​∑ i=1​ 
n  ​(​ ​d​ i​ − ​ ¯ 
d ​)​ 2​ ​ 
 
__________ 
n 
​ ​
​​σ​ L​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​σ​ 1​ 
2​ + ​σ​ 2​ 
2​ + . . . +​σ​ L​ 
2 ​ ​​
Safety stock = z​σ​T + L 
[20.7]
[20.8]
[20.9]
[20.10]
Key Formulas
​
​  Order​ 
quantity​
​ 
= ​ 
Average demand
​ 
over the​ 
 
vulnerable period 
​
​ 
+ ​Safety​ 
stock ​ 
​ 
−  ​
Inventory currently
​ 
 
on hand (plus on​ 
 
order, if any)
 
​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
q
​ 
​=       ​ ¯ 
d ​(​T + L​)​
​ 
+   z ​σ​  ​
​ 
−                I
​ 
 
​
[20.11]

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
543
​​σ​ T+L​ = ​√ 
_____
 
​ ∑ 
i=1
​ 
T+L
​ ​σ​ d​ 
2​ ​​
​Average inventory value= ​(​Q ∕ 2 + SS​)​C​
[20.12]
[20.13]
​ Inventory turn=  ​ 
DC 
_________ 
 
​(​Q ∕ 2 + SS​)​C ​ = ​ 
D 
______ 
Q ∕ 2 + SS ​​
​Q = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
iC  ​ ​​
[20.14]
[20.15]
LO 20–3   Analyze inventory using the Pareto principle.
Summary
	∙	 Most inventory control systems are so large that it is 
not practical to model and give a thorough treatment 
to each item. In these cases, it is useful to categorize 
items according to their yearly dollar value.
	∙	 A simple A, B, C categorization where A items are 
the high annual dollar value items, B items are the 
medium dollar value items, and C items are the low 
dollar value items is useful. This categorization can 
be used as a measure of the relative importance of 
an item.
	∙	 Typically, A items are roughly the top 15 percent of 
the items and represent 80 percent of the yearly dollar 
value. B items would be the next 35 percent and make 
up around 15 percent of the yearly dollar value. The 
C items would be the last 50 percent of the item, and 
have only 5 percent of the yearly dollar value.
	∙	 Cycle counting is a useful method for scheduling the 
audit of each item carried in inventory. Companies 
audit their inventory at least yearly to ensure accuracy 
of the records.
Key Terms
ABC inventory classification  Divides inventory into dol­
lar volume categories that map into strategies appropri­
ate for the category.
Cycle counting  A physical inventory-taking technique 
in which inventory is counted on a frequent basis rather 
than once or twice a year.
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1 
A product is priced to sell at $100 per unit, and its cost is constant at $70 per unit. Each unsold 
unit has a salvage value of $20. Demand is expected to range between 35 and 40 units for the 
period; 35 definitely can be sold and no units over 40 will be sold. The demand probabilities and 
the associated cumulative probability distribution (P) for this situation are shown as follows.
Number 
of Units 
Demanded
Probability 
of This 
­Demand
Cumulative 
Probability
35
36
37
38
39
40
0.10
0.15
0.25
0.25
0.15
0.10
0.10
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.90
1.00
How many units should be ordered?
Solution
The cost of underestimating demand is the loss of profit, or Cu = $100 − $70 = $30 per unit. 
The cost of overestimating demand is the loss incurred when the unit must be sold at salvage 
value, Co = $70 − $20 = $50.
The optimal probability of not being sold is
​P ≤ ​ 
​C​ u​ 
_____ 
​C​ o​ + ​C​ u​ ​ = ​ 
30 
_____ 
50 + 30 ​ = .375​
LO 20–2

544	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
From the distribution data given, this corresponds to the 37th unit.
The following is a full marginal analysis for the problem. Note that the minimum cost 
occurs when 37 units are purchased.
Number of Units Purchased
Units Demanded
Probability
35
36
37
38
39
40
35
0.1
0
50
100
150
200
250
36
0.15
30
0
50
100
150
200
37
0.25
60
30
0
50
100
150
38
0.25
90
60
30
0
50
100
39
0.15
120
90
60
30
0
50
40
0.1
150
120
90
60
30
0
Total cost
75
53
43
53
83
125
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Items purchased from a vendor cost $20 each, and the forecast for next year’s demand is 1,000 
units. If it costs $5 every time an order is placed for more units, and the storage cost is $4 per 
unit per year, answer the following questions.
	
a.  What quantity should be ordered each time?
	
b.  What is the total ordering cost for a year?
	
c.  What is the total storage cost for a year?
Solution
	
a.  The quantity to be ordered each time is
​Q = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​ = ​√ 
________ 
​ 2​(​1,000​)​5 
_______ 
4 
​ ​ = 50 units​
	
b.  The total ordering cost for a year is
​​ D 
__ 
Q ​ S = ​ 1,000 
_____ 
50  ​(​$5​)​ = $100​
	
c.  The storage cost for a year is
​​ Q 
__ 
2 ​ H = ​ 50 
__ 
2 ​(​$4​)​ = $100​
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
Daily demand for a product is 120 units, with a standard deviation of 30 units. The review 
period is 14 days and the lead time is 7 days. At the time of review, 130 units are in stock. If 
only a 1 percent risk of stocking out is acceptable, how many units should be ordered?
Solution
​
​σ​ T+L​
​ 
=
​ 
​√ 
___________ 
 
(14 + 7 ) ​(30 )​ 2​ ​ = ​√ 
______ 
18,900 ​ = 137.5
​ 
 
 
 
z
​ 
=
​ 
2.33
​ 
q​ =​ ​ ¯ 
d ​(T + L ) + z ​σ​ T+L​ − I​ 
 
​
​ 
=
​ 
120(14 + 7 ) + 2.33(137.5 ) − 130
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
=
​ 
2,710 units
 
​
SOLVED PROBLEM 4
A company currently has 200 units of a product on-hand that it orders every two weeks when 
the salesperson visits the premises. Demand for the product averages 20 units per day with a 

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
545
standard deviation of 5 units. Lead time for the product to arrive is seven days. Management 
has a goal of a 95 percent probability of not stocking out for this product.
The salesperson is due to come in late this afternoon when 180 units are left in stock 
(assuming that 20 are sold today). How many units should be ordered?
Solution
​
Give I = 180, T = 14, L = 7, d
​ 
=
​ 
20
​ 
​σ​ T+L​
​ 
=
​ 
​√ 
______ 
21 ​(​5​)​ 2​ ​ = 23
​ 
 
z
​ 
=
​ 
1.64
​ 
q
​ 
=
​ 
​ ¯ 
d ​​(​T + L​)​ + z ​σ​ T+L​ − I
​ 
 
​
​ 
=
​ 
20​(​14 + 7​)​ + 1.64​(​23​)​ − 180
​ 
 
 
q
​ 
=
​ 
278 units
 
​
SOLVED PROBLEM 5
Sheet Metal Industries Inc. (SMI) is a Tier 1 supplier to various industries that use compo­
nents made from sheet metal in their final products. Manufacturers of desktop computers and 
electronic devices are its primary customers. SMI orders a relatively small number of differ­
ent raw sheet metal products in very large quantities. The purchasing department is trying 
to establish an ordering policy that will minimize total costs while meeting the needs of the 
firm. One of the highest volume items it purchases comes in precut sheets direct from the steel 
processor. Forecasts based on historical data indicate that SMI will need to purchase 200,000 
sheets of this product on an annual basis. The steel producer has a minimum order quantity of 
1,000 sheets, and offers a sliding price scale based on the quantity in each order, as follows.
Order Quantity
Unit Price
1,000–9,999
$2.35
10,000–29,999
$2.20
30,000 +
$2.15
The purchasing department estimates that it costs $300 to process each order, and SMI 
has an inventory carrying cost equal to 15 percent of the value of inventory.
Based on this information, use the price-break model to determine an optimal order 
quantity.
Solution
The first step is to take the information in the problem and assign it to the proper notation in 
the model.
D = 200,000 units (annual demand)
S = $300 to place and process each order
I = 15 percent of the item cost
C = cost per unit, based on the order quantity Q, as shown in the table
	
Next, solve the economic order size at each price point starting with the lowest unit price. 
Stop when you reach a feasible Q.
​Q​ $2.15​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​ 2 * 200,000 * 300 
 
____________ 
 
.15 * 2.15 
​ ​ = 19,290 (infeasible)​
The EOQ at $2.15 is not feasible for that price point. The best quantity to order at that 
price point is therefore the minimum feasible quantity of 30,000.

546	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
​Q​ $2.20​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​ 2 * 200,000 * 300 
 
____________ 
 
.15 * 2.20 
​ ​ = 19,069 ​(​feasible​)​
The EOQ at $2.20 is feasible, therefore the best quantity to order at that price point is 
the EOQ of 19,069. Because we found a feasible EOQ at this price point, we do not need to 
consider any higher price points. The two ordering policies to consider are: Order 30,000 
sheets each time at $2.15 apiece, or order 19,069 sheets each time at $2.20 each. The question 
is whether the purchase price savings at the $2.15 price point will offset the higher holding 
costs that would result from the higher ordering quantity. To answer this question, compute 
the total cost of each option.
​
TC ​ Q=30,000​ = 200,000 * $2.15 + ​ 200,000 
______ 
30,000 ​ ($300 ) + ​ 30,000 
_____ 
2 
​ (.15 )($2.15 ) ≈ $436,837
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T ​C​ Q=19,069​ = 200,000 * $2.20 + ​ 200,000 
______ 
19,069 ​ ($300 ) + ​ 19,069 
_____ 
2 
​ (.15 )($2.20 ) ≈ $446,293
​
The lowest total annual cost comes when ordering 30,000 units at $2.15, so that would be 
the best ordering policy. Are you surprised that the 5-cent difference in unit price would make 
such a difference in total cost? When dealing in large volumes, even tiny price changes can 
have a significant impact on the big picture.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Distinguish between dependent and independent demand in a McDonald’s restaurant, in 
an integrated manufacturer of personal copiers, and in a pharmaceutical supply house.
	  2.	 Distinguish between in-process inventory, safety stock inventory, and seasonal inventory.
	  3.	 Discuss the nature of the costs that affect inventory size. For example:
	
a.  How does shrinkage (stolen stock) contribute to the cost of carrying inventory? How 
can this cost be reduced?
	
b.  How does obsolescence contribute to the cost of carrying inventory? How can this 
cost be reduced?
	  4.	 Under which conditions would a plant manager elect to use a fixed–order quantity model 
as opposed to a fixed–time period model? What are the disadvantages of using a fixed–
time period ordering system?
	  5.	 What two basic questions must be answered by an inventory control decision rule?
	  6.	 Discuss the assumptions that are inherent in production setup cost, ordering cost, and car­
rying costs. How valid are they?
	  7.	 “The nice thing about inventory models is that you can pull one off the shelf and apply it 
so long as your cost estimates are accurate.” Comment.
	  8.	 Which type of inventory system would you use in the following situations?
	
a.  Supplying your kitchen with fresh food
	
b.  Obtaining a daily newspaper
	
c.  Buying gas for your car
To which of these items do you impute the highest stock-out cost?
	  9.	 What is the purpose of classifying items into groups, as the ABC classification does?
	10.	 When cycle counting inventory, why do experts recommend a lower acceptable error 
tolerance for A items than B or C items?
LO20–1
LO20–2
LO20–3
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What is the term used to refer to inventory while in distribution—that is, being moved 
within the supply chain?
	  2.	 Almost certainly you have seen vending machines being serviced on your campus and 
elsewhere. On a predetermined schedule, the vending company checks each machine and 
fills it with various products. This is an example of which category of inventory model?
LO20–1

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
547
	  3.	 To support the manufacture of desktop computers for its customers, Dell needs to order 
all the parts that go into the computer, such as hard drives, motherboards, and memory 
modules. Obviously, the demand for these items is driven by the production schedule for 
the computers. What is the term used to describe demand for these parts?
	  4.	 The local supermarket buys lettuce each day to ensure really fresh produce. Each 
morning, any lettuce that is left from the previous day is sold to a dealer that resells it 
to farmers who use it to feed their animals. This week, the supermarket can buy fresh 
lettuce for $4.00 a box. The lettuce is sold for $10.00 a box and the dealer that sells 
old lettuce is willing to pay $1.50 a box. Past history says that tomorrow’s demand 
for lettuce averages 250 boxes with a standard deviation of 34 boxes. How many 
boxes of lettuce should the supermarket purchase tomorrow? (Answer available in 
Appendix D)
	  5.	 Next week, Super Discount Airlines has a flight from New York to Los Angeles that 
will be booked to capacity. The airline knows from past history that an average of 25 
customers (with a standard deviation of 15) cancel their reservation or do not show 
for the flight. Revenue from a ticket on the flight is $125. If the flight is overbooked, 
the airline has a policy of getting the customer on the next available flight and giving 
the person a free round-trip ticket on a future flight. The cost of this free round-trip 
ticket averages $250. Super Discount considers the cost of flying the plane from New 
York to Los Angeles a sunk cost. By how many seats should Super Discount overbook 
the flight?
	  6.	 Solve the newsperson problem. What is the optimal order quantity?
Probability
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.1
Value
1
2
3
4
5
6
Purchase cost c = 15
Selling price p = 25
Salvage value v = 10
	  7.	 Wholemark is an Internet order business that sells one popular New Year’s greet­
ing card once a year. The cost of the paper on which the card is printed is $0.05 per 
card, and the cost of printing is $0.15 per card. The company receives $2.15 per card 
sold. Because the cards have the current year printed on them, unsold cards have no 
­salvage value. Its customers are from the four areas: Los Angeles, Santa Monica, 
Hollywood, and Pasadena. Based on past data, the number of customers from each of 
the four regions is normally distributed with a mean of 2,000 and a standard devia­
tion of 500. (Assume these four are independent.) What is the optimal production 
quantity for the card?
	  8.	 Lakeside Bakery bakes fresh pies every morning. The daily demand for its apple pies is a 
random variable with (discrete) distribution, based on past experience, given by
Demand
  5
10
15
20
25
30
Probability
10%
20%
25%
25%
15%
5%
Each apple pie costs the bakery $6.75 to make and is sold for $17.99. Unsold apple pies 
at the end of the day are purchased by a nearby soup kitchen for 99 cents each. Assume 
no goodwill cost.
	
a.  If the company decided to bake 15 apple pies each day, what would be its expected 
profit?
	
b.  Based on the demand distribution given, how many apple pies should the company 
bake each day to maximize its expected profit?
	  9.	 Sally’s Silk Screening produces specialty T-shirts that are primarily sold at special 
events. She is trying to decide how many to produce for an upcoming event. During the 
event, Sally can sell T-shirts for $20 apiece. However, when the event ends, any unsold 
LO20–2

548	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
T-shirts are sold for $4 each. It costs Sally $8 to make a specialty T-shirt. Sally’s estimate 
of demand is the following:
Demand
Probability
300
.05
400
.10
500
.40
600
.30
700
.10
800
.05
	
a.  What is the service rate (or optimal fractile)?
	
b.  How many T-shirts should she produce for the upcoming event?
	10.	 You are a newsvendor selling the San Pedro Times every morning. Before you get to 
work, you go to the printer and buy the day’s paper for $0.25 a copy. You sell a copy of 
the San Pedro Times for $1.00. Daily demand is distributed normally with mean = 250 
and standard deviation = 50. At the end of each morning, any leftover copies are worth­
less and they go to a recycle bin.
	
a.  How many copies of the San Pedro Times should you buy each morning?
	
b.  Based on part (a), what is the probability that you will run out of stock?
	11.	 Famous Albert prides himself on being the Cookie King of the West. Small, freshly 
baked cookies are the specialty of his shop. Famous Albert has asked for help to deter­
mine the number of cookies he should make each day. From an analysis of past demand, 
he estimates demand for cookies as the following:
Demand
Probability of Demand
1,800 dozen
0.05
2,000
0.10
2,200
0.20
2,400
0.30
2,600
0.20
2,800
0.10
3,000
0.05
  Each dozen sells for $0.69 and costs $0.49, which includes handling and transporta­
tion. Cookies that are not sold at the end of the day are reduced to $0.29 and sold the 
following day as day-old merchandise.
	
a.  Construct a table showing the profits or losses for each possible quantity.
	
b.  What is the optimal number of cookies to make?
	
c.  Solve this problem by using marginal analysis.
	12.	 Ray’s Satellite Emporium wishes to determine the best order size for its best-selling sat­
ellite dish (Model TS111). Ray has estimated the annual demand for this model at 1,000 
units. His cost to carry one unit is $100 per year per unit, and he has estimated that each 
order costs $25 to place. Using the EOQ model, how many should Ray order each time?
	13.	 Dunstreet’s Department Store would like to develop an inventory ordering policy with 
a 95 percent probability of not stocking out. To illustrate your recommended procedure, 
use as an example the ordering policy for white percale sheets.
  Demand for white percale sheets is 5,000 per year. The store is open 365 days per year. 
Every two weeks (14 days) inventory is counted and a new order is placed. It takes 10 
days for the sheets to be delivered. Standard deviation of demand for the sheets is 5 per 
day. There are currently 150 sheets on-hand.
  How many sheets should you order?

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
549
	14.	 Charlie’s Pizza orders all of its pepperoni, olives, anchovies, and mozzarella cheese to be 
shipped directly from Italy. An American distributor stops by every four weeks to take 
orders. Because the orders are shipped directly from Italy, they take three weeks to arrive.
  Charlie’s Pizza uses an average of 150 pounds of pepperoni each week, with a standard 
deviation of 30 pounds. Charlie’s prides itself on offering only the best-quality ingre­
dients and a high level of service, so it wants to ensure a 98 percent probability of not 
stocking out on pepperoni.
  Assume that the sales representative just walked in the door and there are currently 
500 pounds of pepperoni in the walk-in cooler. How many pounds of pepperoni would 
you order? (Answer in Appendix D)
	15.	 Given the following information, formulate an inventory management system. The item 
is demanded 50 weeks a year.
Parameter
Value
Item cost
$10.00
Order cost
$250.00/order
Annual holding cost
33% of item cost
Annual demand
25,750 units
Average weekly demand
515/week
Standard deviation of weekly demand
25 units
Lead time
1 week
Service probability
95%
	
a.  State the order quantity and reorder point.
	
b.  Determine the annual holding and order costs.
	
c.  If a price break of $50 per order was offered for purchase quantities of over 2,000, 
would you take advantage of it? How much would you save annually?
	16.	 Lieutenant Commander Data is planning to make his monthly (every 30 days) trek to 
Gamma Hydra City to pick up a supply of isolinear chips. The trip will take Data about 
two days. Before he leaves, he calls in the order to the GHC Supply Store. He uses chips 
at an average rate of 5 per day (seven days per week) with a standard deviation of demand 
of 1 per day. He needs a 98 percent service probability. If he currently has 35 chips in 
inventory, how many should he order? What is the most he will ever have to order?
	17.	 Jill’s Job Shop buys two parts (Tegdiws and Widgets) for use in its production system 
from two different suppliers. The parts are needed throughout the entire 52-week year. 
Tegdiws are used at a relatively constant rate and are ordered whenever the remaining 
quantity drops to the reorder level. Widgets are ordered from a supplier who stops by 
every three weeks. Data for both products are as follows:  (Answers in Appendix D)
Item
Tegdiw
Widget
Annual demand
10,000
5,000
Holding cost (% of item cost)
20%
20%
Setup or order cost
$150.00
$25.00
Lead time
4 weeks
1 week
Safety stock
55 units
5 units
Item cost
$10.00
$2.00
	
a.  What is the inventory control system for Tegdiws? That is, what is the reorder quantity 
and what is the reorder point?
	
b.  What is the inventory control system for Widgets?
	18.	 Demand for an item is 1,000 units per year. Each order placed costs $10; the annual cost 
to carry items in inventory is $2 each. In what quantities should the item be ordered?

550	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	19.	 The annual demand for a product is 15,600 units. The weekly demand is 300 units with 
a standard deviation of 90 units. The cost to place an order is $31.20, and the time from 
ordering to receipt is four weeks. The annual inventory carrying cost is $0.10 per unit. 
Find the reorder point necessary to provide a 98 percent service probability.
  Suppose the production manager is asked to reduce the safety stock of this item by 
50 percent. If she does so, what will the new service probability be?
	20.	 Daily demand for a product is 100 units, with a standard deviation of 25 units. The review 
period is 10 days and the lead time is 6 days. At the time of review, there are 50 units in 
stock. If 98 percent service probability is desired, how many units should be ordered?
	21.	 Item X is a standard item stocked in a company’s inventory of component parts. Each 
year, the firm, on a random basis, uses about 2,000 of item X, which costs $25 each. Stor­
age costs, which include insurance and cost of capital, amount to $5 per unit of average 
inventory. Every time an order is placed for more of item X, it costs $10.
	
a.  Whenever item X is ordered, what should the order size be?
	
b.  What is the annual cost for ordering item X?
	
c.  What is the annual cost for storing item X?
	22.	 Annual demand for a product is 13,000 units; weekly demand is 250 units with a standard 
deviation of 40 units. The cost of placing an order is $100, and the time from ordering to 
receipt is four weeks. The annual inventory carrying cost is $0.65 per unit. To provide a 
98 percent service probability, what must the reorder point be?
  Suppose the production manager is told to reduce the safety stock of this item by 
100 units. If this is done, what will the new service probability be?
	23.	 Gentle Ben’s Bar and Restaurant uses 5,000 quart bottles of an imported wine each year. 
The effervescent wine costs $3 per bottle and is served only in whole bottles because it 
loses its bubbles quickly. Ben figures that it costs $10 each time an order is placed, and 
holding costs are 20 percent of the purchase price. It takes three weeks for an order to 
arrive. Weekly demand is 100 bottles (closed two weeks per year) with a standard devia­
tion of 30 bottles.
  Ben would like to use an inventory system that minimizes inventory cost and will pro­
vide a 95 percent service probability.
	
a.  What is the economic quantity for Ben to order?
	
b.  At what inventory level should he place an order?
	24.	 Retailers Warehouse (RW) is an independent supplier of household items to department 
stores. RW attempts to stock enough items for a 98 percent service probability.
  A stainless steel knife set is one item it stocks. Demand (2,400 sets per year) is rela­
tively stable over the entire year. Whenever new stock is ordered, a buyer must ensure 
that numbers are correct for stock on-hand and then phone in a new order. The total cost 
involved to place an order is about $5. RW figures that holding inventory in stock and 
paying for interest on borrowed capital, insurance, and so on, add up to about $4 hold­
ing cost per unit per year.
  Analysis of the past data shows that the standard deviation of demand from retailers 
is about four units per day for a 365-day year. Lead time to get the order is seven days.
	
a.  What is the economic order quantity?
	
b.  What is the reorder point?
	25.	 Daily demand for a product is 60 units with a standard deviation of 10 units. The review 
period is 10 days, and lead time is 2 days. At the time of review, there are 100 units in 
stock. If 98 percent service probability is desired, how many units should be ordered?
	26.	 University Drug Pharmaceuticals orders its antibiotics every two weeks (14 days) when 
a salesperson visits from one of the pharmaceutical companies. Tetracycline is one of its 
most prescribed antibiotics, with an average daily demand of 2,000 capsules. The stan­
dard deviation of daily demand was derived from examining prescriptions filled over the 
past three months and was found to be 800 capsules. It takes five days for the order to 
arrive. University Drug would like to satisfy 99 percent of the prescriptions. The sales­
person just arrived, and there are currently 25,000 capsules in stock.
How many capsules should be ordered?

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
551
	27.	 Sarah’s Muffler Shop has one standard muffler that fits a large variety of cars. Sarah 
wishes to establish a reorder point system to manage inventory of this standard muffler. 
Use the following information to determine the best order size and the reorder point.
Annual demand
3,500 mufflers
Ordering cost
$50 per order
Standard deviation of 
daily demand
6 mufflers per working 
day
Service probability
90%
Item cost
$30 per muffler
Lead time
2 working days
Annual holding cost
25% of item value
Working days
300 per year
	28.	 After graduation, you decide to go into a partnership in an office supply store that has 
existed for a number of years. Walking through the store and stockrooms, you find a great 
discrepancy in service levels. Some spaces and bins for items are completely empty; oth­
ers have supplies that are covered with dust and have obviously been there a long time. 
You decide to take on the project of establishing consistent levels of inventory to meet 
customer demands. Most of your supplies are purchased from just a few distributors that 
call on your store once every two weeks.
  You choose, as your first item for study, computer printer paper. You examine the 
sales records and purchase orders and find that demand for the past 12 months was 5,000 
boxes. Using your calculator, you sample some days’ demands and estimate that the stan­
dard deviation of daily demand is 10 boxes. You also search out these figures:
Cost per box of paper: $11
Desired service probability: 98 percent
Store is open every day.
Salesperson visits every two weeks.
Delivery time following visit is three days.
Using your procedure, how many boxes of paper would be ordered if, on the day the 
salesperson calls, 60 boxes are on-hand?
	29.	 A distributor of large appliances needs to determine the order quantities and reorder 
points for the various products it carries. The following data refer to a specific refrigera­
tor in its product line.
Cost to place an order
$100/order
Holding cost
20 percent of product cost per year
Cost of refrigerator
$500/unit
Annual demand
500 units
Standard deviation of demand during lead time
10 units
Lead time
7 days
Consider an even daily demand and a 365-day year.
	
a.  What is the economic order quantity?
	
b.  If the distributor wants a 97 percent service probability, what reorder point, R, should 
be used?
	30.	 It is your responsibility, as the new head of the automotive section of Nichols Department 
Store, to ensure that reorder quantities for the various items have been correctly estab­
lished. You decide to test one item and choose Michelin tires, XW size 185 × 14 BSW. A 
perpetual inventory system has been used, so you examine this, as well as other records, 
and come up with the following data.
Cost per tire
$35 each
Holding cost
20 percent of tire cost per year
Demand
1,000 per year
Ordering cost
$20 per order
Standard deviation of daily demand
3 tires
Delivery lead time
4 days

552	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Because customers generally do not wait for tires but go elsewhere, you decide on a ser­
vice probability of 98 percent. Assume the demand occurs 365 days per year.
	
a.  Determine the order quantity.
	
b.  Determine the reorder point.
	31.	 UA Hamburger Hamlet (UAHH) places a daily order for its high-volume items (ham­
burger patties, buns, milk, and so on). UAHH counts its current inventory on-hand once 
per day and phones in its order for delivery 24 hours later. Determine the number of ham­
burgers UAHH should order for the following conditions:
Average daily demand
600
Standard deviation of demand
100
Desired service probability
99%
Hamburger inventory
800
	32.	 A local service station is open 7 days per week, 365 days per year. Sales of 10W40 grade 
premium oil average 20 cans per day. Inventory holding costs are $0.50 per can per year. 
Ordering costs are $10 per order. Lead time is two weeks. Backorders are not practical—
the motorist drives away.
	
a.  Based on these data, choose the appropriate inventory model and calculate the eco­
nomic order quantity and reorder point. Describe in a sentence how the plan would 
work. Hint: Assume demand is deterministic.
	
b.  The boss is concerned about this model because demand really varies. The standard 
deviation of demand was determined from a data sample to be 6.15 cans per day. The 
manager wants a 99.5 percent service probability. Determine a new inventory plan 
based on this information and the data in part (a). Use Qopt from part (a).
	33.	 Dave’s Auto Supply custom mixes paint for its customers. The shop performs a weekly 
inventory count of the main colors used for mixing paint. Determine the amount of white 
paint that should be ordered using the following information:
Average weekly demand
20 gallons
Standard deviation of demand
5 gallons/week
Desired service probability
98%
Current inventory
25 gallons
Lead time
1 week
	34.	 SY Manufacturers (SYM) is producing T-shirts in three colors: red, blue, and white. The 
monthly demand for each color is 3,000 units. Each shirt requires 0.5 pound of raw cotton 
that is imported from Luft-Geshfet-Textile (LGT) Company in Brazil. The purchasing 
price per pound is $2.50 (paid only when the cotton arrives at SYM’s facilities) and trans­
portation cost by sea is $0.20 per pound. The traveling time from LGT’s facility in Brazil 
to the SYM facility in the United States is two weeks. The cost of placing a cotton order, 
by SYM, is $100 and the annual interest rate that SYM is facing is 20 percent.
	
a.  What is the optimal order quantity of cotton?
	
b.  How frequently should the company order cotton?
	
c.  Assuming that the first order is needed on April 1, when should SYM place the order?
	
d.  How many orders will SYM place during the next year?
	
e.  What is the resulting annual holding cost?
	
 f.  What is the resulting annual ordering cost?
	
g.  If the annual interest cost is only 5 percent, how will it affect the annual number of 
orders, the optimal batch size, and the average inventory? (You are not expected to 
provide a numerical answer to this question. Just describe the direction of the change 
and explain your answer.)
	35.	 Demand for a book at Amazon.com is 250 units per week. The product is supplied to the 
retailer from a factory. The factory pays $10 per unit, while the total cost of a shipment 
from the factory to the retailer when the shipment size is Q is given by
Shipment cost = $50 + 2Q

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
553
Assume the annual inventory carrying cost is 20 percent.
	
a.  What is the cost per shipment and annual holding cost per book?
	
b.  What is the optimal shipment size?
	
c.  What is the average throughput time?
	36.	 Palin’s Muffler Shop has one standard muffler that fits a large variety of cars. The shop 
wishes to establish a periodic review system to manage inventory of this standard muf­
fler. Use the information in the following table to determine the optimal inventory target 
level (or order-up-to level).
Annual demand
3,000 mufflers
Ordering cost
$50 per order
Standard deviation of 
daily demand
6 mufflers per working 
day
Service probability
90%
Item cost
$30 per muffler
Lead time
2 working days
Annual holding cost
25% of item value
Working days
300 per year
Review period
15 working days
	
a.  What is the optimal target level (order-up-to level)?
	
b.  If the service probability requirement is 95 percent, the optimal target level [your 
answer in part (a)] will (select one):
   I.	 Increase.
  II.	 Decrease.
III.	 Stay the same.
	37.	 Daily demand for a certain product is normally distributed, with a mean of 100 and a 
standard deviation of 15. The supplier is reliable and maintains a constant lead time of 
5 days. The cost of placing an order is $10 and the cost of holding inventory is $0.50 per 
unit per year. There are no stock-out costs, and unfilled orders are filled as soon as the 
order arrives. Assume sales occur over 360 days of the year.
  Your goal here is to find the order quantity and reorder point to satisfy a 90 percent 
probability of not stocking out during the lead time.
	
a.  What type of system is the company using?
	
b.  Find the order quantity.
	
c.  Find the reorder point.
	38.	 A particular raw material is available to a company at three different prices, depending on 
the size of the order:
Less than 100 pounds
$20 per pound
100 pounds to 1,000 pounds
$19 per pound
More than 1,000 pounds
$18 per pound
The cost to place an order is $40. Annual demand is 3,000 units. The holding (or carry­
ing) cost is 25 percent of the material price.
What is the economic order quantity to buy each time?
	39.	 CU, Incorporated (CUI), produces copper contacts that it uses in switches and relays. 
CUI needs to determine the order quantity, Q, to meet the annual demand at the lowest 
cost. The price of copper depends on the quantity ordered. Here are price-break and other 
data for the problem:
Price of copper
$0.82 per pound up to 2,499 pounds
$0.81 per pound for orders between 2,500 and 5,000 pounds
$0.80 per pound for orders greater than 5,000 pounds
Annual demand
50,000 pounds per year
Holding cost
20 percent per unit per year of the price of the copper
Ordering cost
$30.00
Which quantity should be ordered?
	40.	 In the past, Taylor Industries has used a fixed–time period inventory system that involved 
taking a complete inventory count of all items each month. However, increasing labor 
LO 20–3

554	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
costs are forcing Taylor Industries to examine alternative ways to reduce the amount of 
labor involved in inventory stockrooms, yet without increasing other costs, such as short­
age costs. Here is a random sample of 20 of Taylor’s items.
Item Number
Annual Usage
Item Number
Annual Usage
1
$1,500
11
$13,000
2
12,000
12
600
3
2,200
13
42,000
4
50,000
14
9,900
5
9,600
15
1,200
6
750
16
10,200
7
2,000
17
4,000
8
11,000
18
61,000
9
800
19
3,500
10  
15,000
20
2,900
	
a.  What would you recommend Taylor do to cut back its labor cost? (Illustrate using an 
ABC plan.)
	
b.  Item 15 is critical to continued operations. How would you recommend it be classified?
	41.	 Alpha Products, Inc., is having a problem trying to control inventory. There is insuf­
ficient time to devote to all its items equally. The following is a sample of some items 
stocked, along with the annual usage of each item expressed in dollar volume.
Item
Annual Dollar Usage
Item
Annual Dollar Usage
a
$  7,000
k
$80,000
b
1,000
l
400
c
14,000
m
1,100
d
2,000
n
30,000
e
24,000
o
1,900
f
68,000
p
800
g
17,000
q
90,000
h
900
r
12,000
i
1,700
s
3,000
j
2,300
t
32,000
	
a.  Can you suggest a system for allocating control time?
	
b.  Specify where each item from the list would be placed.
	42.	 DAT, Inc., produces digital audiotapes to be used in the consumer audio division. DAT 
lacks sufficient personnel in its inventory supply section to closely control each item 
stocked, so it has asked you to determine an ABC classification. Here is a sample from 
the inventory records:
Item
Average Monthly 
Demand
Price per Unit
Item
Average Monthly 
Demand
Price per Unit
1
700
$  6.00
6
 100
$10.00
2
200
4.00
7
3,000
2.00
3
2,000
12.00
8
2,500
1.00
4
1,100
20.00
9
 500
10.00
5
4,000
21.00
10
1,000
2.00
Develop an ABC classification for these 10 items.

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
555
Analytics Exercise: Inventory Management at Big10Sweaters.com
Big10Sweaters.com is a new company started last year 
by two recent college graduates. The idea behind the 
company was simple. It will sell premium logo sweat­
ers for Big Ten colleges with one major, unique feature. 
This unique feature is a special large monogram that has 
the customer’s name, major, and year of graduation. The 
sweater is the perfect gift for graduating students and 
alumni, particularly avid football fans who want to show 
support during the football season. The company is off to 
a great start and had a successful first year while selling 
to only a few schools. This year it plans to expand to a 
few more schools and target the entire Big Ten Confer­
ence within three years.
You have been hired by Big10Sweaters.com and 
need to make a good impression by making good sup­
ply chain decisions. This is your big opportunity with a 
startup. There are only two people in the firm and you 
were hired with the prospect of possibly becoming a prin­
cipal in the future. You majored in supply chain (opera­
tions) management in school and had a great internship 
at a big retailer that was getting into Internet sales. The 
experience was great, but now you are on your own and 
have none of the great support that the big company 
had. You need to find and analyze your own data and 
make some big decisions. Of course, Rhonda and Steve, 
the partners who started the company, are knowledgeable 
about this venture and they are going to help along the 
way.
Rhonda had the idea to start the company two years 
ago and talked her friend from business school, Steve, 
into joining her. Rhonda is into Web marketing, has a 
degree in computer science, and has been working on 
completing an online MBA. She is as much an artist as a 
techie. She can really make the Website sing.
Steve majored in accounting and likes to pump the 
numbers. He has done a great job of keeping the books 
and selling the company to some small venture capital 
people in the area. Last year, he was successful in get­
ting them to invest $2,000,000 in the company (a onetime 
investment). There were some significant strings attached 
to this investment in that it stipulated that only $100,000 
per year could go toward paying the salary of the two 
principals. The rest had to be spent on the ­Website, 
advertising, and inventory. In addition, the venture capital 
company gets 25 percent of the company profits, before 
taxes, during the first four years of operation, assuming 
the company makes a profit.
Your first job is to focus on the firm’s inventory. The 
company is centered on selling the premium sweaters to 
college football fans through a Website. Your analysis is 
important since a significant portion of the company’s 
assets is the inventory that it carries.
The business is cyclic, and sales are concentrated 
during the period leading up to the college football 
season, which runs between late August and the end of 
each year. For the upcoming season, the firm wants to 
sell sweaters to only a few of the largest schools in the 
Midwest region of the United States. In particular, it is 
targeting the Ohio State University (OSU), University of 
Michigan (UM), Michigan State University (MSU), Pur­
due University (PU), and Indiana University (IU). These 
five schools have major football programs and a loyal fan 
base.
The firm has considered the idea of making the 
sweaters in its own factory, but for now it purchases them 
from a supplier in China. The prices are great, but ser­
vice is a problem because the supplier has a 20-week 
lead time for each order and the minimum order size is 
5,000 sweaters. The order can consist of a mix of the dif­
ferent logos, such as 2,000 for OSU, 1,500 for UM, 750 
for MSU, 500 for PU, and 250 for IU. Within each logo 
sublot, sizes are allocated based on percentages, and the 
supplier suggests 20 percent X-large, 50 percent large, 
20 percent medium, and 10 percent small based on its 
historical data.
Once an order is received, a local subcontractor 
applies the monograms and ships the sweaters to the cus­
tomer. The subcontractor stores the inventory of sweat­
ers for the company in a small warehouse area located at 
their site.
This is the company’s second year of operation. 
Last year, it sold sweaters for only three of the schools, 
OSU, MU, and PU. It ordered the minimum 5,000 
sweaters and sold all of them, but the experience was 
painful because the company had too many MU sweat­
ers and not enough for OSU fans. Last year, it ordered 
2,300 OSU, 1,800 MU, and 900 PU sweaters. Of the 
5,000 sweaters, 342 had to be sold at a steep discount on 
eBay after the season. The company was hoping not to 
do this again.
For the next year, you have collected some data rel­
evant to the decision. Exhibit 20.12 shows cost informa­
tion for the product when purchased from the supplier 
in China. Here we see that the cost for each sweater, 
delivered to the warehouse of our monogramming sub­
contractor, is $60.88. This price is valid for any quantity 
we order above 5,000 sweaters. This order can be a mix 
of sweaters for each of the five schools we are targeting. 
The supplier needs 20 weeks to process the order, so the 

556	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Item
Cost
  Material
$32.00
  Labor
 10.50
  Overhead
  1.25
  Transportation within China
  1.00
  Supplier profit
  8.95
  Agent’s fee
  2.68
  Freight (ocean carrier)
  1.50
  Duty, insurance, etc.
  3.00
Total China supplier cost
$60.88
  Monogram material
  5.00
  Labor
  8.00
Total subcontractor cost
$13.00
Total (per sweater)
$73.88
Cost Information for Big10Sweaters.com
exhibit 20.12
Average 
Football Game 
Attendance
Last Year’s 
Actual Sales 
(full price)
Rhonda’s 
Forecast for 
Next Year
Steve’s 
Forecast for 
Next Year
Market 
Research 
Forecast for 
Next Year
Average 
Forecast
Standard 
Deviation
Ohio State
Michigan
Purdue
Michigan State
Indiana
Penn State
Wisconsin
Iowa 
Illinois
Minnesota
Northwestern
Nebraska
Total
105,261
108,933
50,457
74,741
41,833
107,008
80,109
70,214
59,545
50,805
24,190
85,071
2,300
1,468
890
—
—
4,658*
2,500
1,800
1,000
1,750
600
7,650
2,200
1,500
900
1,500
500
6,600
2,800
2,000
1,100
1,600
450
7,950
2,500
1,767
1,000
1,617
517
7,400
300
252
100
126
76
430**
Forecast Data for Big10Sweaters.com
exhibit 20.13
*342 sweaters were sold through eBay for $50 each (the customer pays shipping on all orders).
**Calculated assuming the demand at each school is independent​​√ 
_____ 
​ Σ​ 
i=1​ 
N ​ ​σ​ i​ 2​ ​​
order needs to be placed around April 1 for the upcoming 
football season.
Our monogramming subcontractor gets $13 for each 
sweater. Shipping cost is paid by the customer when the 
order is placed.
In addition to the cost data, you also have some 
demand information, as shown in Exhibit 20.13. The exact 
sales numbers for last year are given. Sweaters sold at full 
retail price were sold for $120 each. Sweaters left over at 
the end of the season were sold through eBay for $50 each 
and these sweaters were not monogrammed by our sub­
contractor. Keep in mind that the retail sales numbers do 
not accurately reflect actual demand because they stocked 
out of the OSU sweaters toward the end of the season.
As for advertising the sweaters for next season, 
Rhonda is committed to using the same approach used 

	
Inventory Management	
Chapter 20	
557
last year. The firm placed ads in the football program sold 
at each game. These worked very well for reaching those 
attending the games, but she realized there may be ways 
to advertise that may open sales to more alumni. She has 
hired a market research firm to help identify other adver­
tising outlets but has decided to wait at least another year 
to try something different.
Forecasting demand is a major problem for the com­
pany. You have asked Rhonda and Steve to predict what 
they think sales might be next year. You have also asked the 
market research firm to apply their forecasting tools. Data 
on these forecasts are given in Exhibit 20.13. To generate 
some statistics, you have averaged the forecasts and calcu­
lated the standard deviation for each school and in total.
Based on advice from the market research firm, you 
have decided to use the aggregate demand forecast and 
standard deviation for the aggregate demand. The aggre­
gate demand was calculated by adding the average fore­
cast for each item. The aggregate standard deviation was 
calculated by squaring the standard deviation for each 
item (this is the variance), summing the variance for each 
item, and then taking the square root of this sum. This 
assumes that the demand for each school is independent, 
meaning that the demand for Ohio State is totally unre­
lated to the demand at Michigan and the other schools.
You will allocate your aggregate order to the indi­
vidual schools based on their expected percentage of total 
demand. You discussed your analysis with Rhonda and 
Steve and they are OK with your analysis. They would 
like to see what the order quantities would be if each 
school was considered individually.
You have a spreadsheet set up with all the data from 
the exhibits called Big10Sweater.xls and you are ready to 
do some calculations.
Questions
	1.	 You are curious as to how much Rhonda and Steve 
made in their business last year. You do not have all 
the data, but you know that most of their expenses 
relate to buying the sweaters and having them mono­
grammed. You know they paid themselves $50,000 
each and you know the rent, utilities, insurance, and a 
benefit package for the business was about $20,000. 
About how much do you think they made “before 
taxes” last year? If they must make their payment to 
the venture capital firm, and then pay 50 percent in 
taxes, what was their increase in cash last year?
	2.	 What was your reasoning behind using the aggre­
gate demand forecast when determining the size of 
your order rather than the individual school fore­
casts? Should you rethink this or is there a sound 
basis for doing it this way?
	3.	 How many sweaters should you order this year? 
Break down your order by individual school. Doc­
ument your calculations in your spreadsheet. Cal­
culate this based on the aggregate forecast and also 
the forecast by individual school.
	4.	 What do you think they could make this year? They 
are paying you $40,000 and you expect your ben­
efit package addition would be about $1,000 per 
year. Assume that they order based on the aggre­
gate forecast.
	5.	 How should the business be developed in the 
future? Be specific and consider changes related to 
your supplier, the monogramming subcontractor, 
target customers, and products.
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 The model most appropriate for making a one-time 
purchase of an item.
	  2.	 The model most appropriate when inventory is 
replenished only in fixed intervals of time—for 
example, on the first Monday of each month.
	  3.	 The model most appropriate when a fixed amount 
must be purchased each time an order is placed.
	  4.	 Based on an EOQ-type ordering criterion, what cost 
must be taken to zero if the desire is to have an order 
quantity of a single unit?
	  5.	 Term used to describe demand that can be accurately 
calculated to meet the need of a production schedule, 
for example.
	  6.	 Term used to describe demand that is uncertain and 
needs to be forecast.
	  7.	 We are ordering T-shirts for the spring party and are 
selling them for twice what we paid for them. We 
expect to sell 100 shirts and the standard deviation 
associated with our forecast is 10 shirts. How many 
shirts should we order?
	  8.	 We have an item that we stock in our store that has 
fairly steady demand. Our supplier insists that we 
buy 1,200 units at a time. The lead time is very short 
on the item because the supplier is only a few blocks 
away and we can pick up another 1,200 units when 
we run out. How many units do you expect to have in 
inventory, on average?

558	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	  9.	 For the item described in question 8, if we expect to 
sell approximately 15,600 units next year, how many 
trips will we need to make to the supplier over the 
year?
	10.	 If we decide to carry 10 units of safety stock for the 
item described in questions 8 and 9, and we imple­
mented this by going to our supplier when we had 
10 units left, how much inventory would you expect 
to have, on average, now?
	11.	 We are being evaluated based on the percentage of 
total demand met in a year (not the probability of 
stocking out as used in the chapter). Consider an 
item that we are managing using a fixed–order quan­
tity model with safety stock. We decide to double the 
order quantity but leave the reorder point the same. 
Would you expect the percent of total demand met 
next year to go up or down? Why?
	12.	 Consider an item for which we have 120 units cur­
rently in inventory. The average demand for the item 
is 60 units per week. The lead time for the item is 
exactly 2 weeks and we carry 16 units for safety 
stock. What is the probability of running out of the 
item if we order right now?
	13.	 If we take advantage of a quantity discount, would 
you expect your average inventory to go up or down? 
Assume that the probability of stocking out criterion 
stays the same.
	14.	 This is an inventory auditing technique where inven­
tory levels are checked more frequently than one 
time a year.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Single-period model  2. Fixed–time period model  3. Fixed–order quantity model  4. Setup or ordering cost  5. Depen­
dent demand  6. Independent demand  7. 100 shirts  8. 600 units  9. 13 trips  10. 610 units  11. Go up (we are taking fewer chances of running out)  
12. 50 percent  13. Will probably go up if the probability of stocking out stays the same  14. Cycle counting​​
Footnotes
	1.	 P is actually a cumulative probability because the sale of the nth unit depends not only on exactly n being demanded but also on 
the demand for any number greater than n.
	2.	 As previously discussed, the standard deviation of a sum of independent variables equals the square root of the sum of the 
variances. 
	3.	 The Pareto principle is also widely applied in quality problems through the use of Pareto charts. (See Chapter 12.)

	
559
Learning Objectives
	LO 21–1	 Explain what material requirements planning (MRP) is.
	LO 21–2	 Understand how the MRP system is structured.
	LO 21–3	 Analyze an MRP problem.
	LO 21–4	 Evaluate and compare MRP lot-sizing techniques.
INSIDE THE IPAD
So what does it cost for Apple Computer to build an iPad?
A good estimate can be made by taking one apart and evaluating the 
cost of each component. There are many analysts who look at this each 
time a new model iPad is introduced. Looking at many of these reports, 
an estimate of the major costs for an iPad 3 with 64GB of memory is the 
following:
Memory $80 
Touchscreen and display $130 
Processor $23 
Cameras $12 
Wi-Fi and sensors $15 
Battery and power management $42 
Other items $50 
Box and charger $6 
Manufacturing cost $10
So, for a total cost of about $368, Apple can build an iPad that it sells 
for about $700. Of course, this does not include the cost to transport the 
iPad and other support costs, but a profit of $332 is not bad.
Material 
Requirements 
Planning
21
© Aleksey Boldin/123RF

560	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Our emphasis in this chapter is on material requirements planning (MRP), which is the key 
piece of logic that ties the production functions together from a material planning and control 
view. MRP has been installed almost universally in manufacturing firms, even those consid­
ered small companies. The reason is that MRP is a logical, easily understandable approach 
to the problem of determining the number of parts, components, and materials needed to 
produce each end item. MRP also provides the schedule specifying when each of these items 
should be ordered or produced.
MRP is based on dependent demand. Dependent demand is caused by the demand for 
a higher-level item. Tires, wheels, and engines are dependent demand items based on the 
demand for automobiles, for example.
Determining the number of dependent demand items needed is essentially a straightfor­
ward multiplication process. If one Part A takes five parts of B to make it, then five parts of 
A require 25 parts of B. The basic difference in independent demand, covered in Chapter 20, 
and dependent demand covered in this chapter, is as follows: If Part A is sold outside the firm, 
the amount of Part A that we sell is uncertain. We need to create a forecast using past data 
or do something like a market analysis. Part A is an independent item. However, Part B is a 
dependent part and its use depends on Part A. The number of B needed is simply the number 
of A times five. As a result of this type of multiplication, the requirements of other dependent 
demand items tend to become more and more lumpy as we go farther down into the prod­
uct creation sequence. Lumpiness means that the requirements tend to bunch or lump rather 
than having an even dispersal. This is also caused by the way manufacturing is done. When 
manufacturing occurs in lots (or batches), items needed to produce the lot are withdrawn from 
inventory in quantities (perhaps all at once) rather than one at a time.
Where MRP Can Be Used
MRP is most valuable in industries where a number of products are made in batches using 
the same productive equipment. The list in Exhibit 21.1 includes examples of different indus­
try types and the expected benefit from MRP. As you can see in the exhibit, MRP is most 
valuable to companies involved in assembly operations and least valuable to those in make-
to-order fabrication. One more point to note: MRP does not work well in companies that pro­
duce a low number of units annually. Especially for companies producing complex, expensive 
products requiring advanced research and design, experience has shown that lead times tend 
to be too long and too uncertain, and the product configuration too complex. Such companies 
need the control features that network scheduling techniques offer. These project management 
methods are covered in Chapter 4.
Material requirements 
planning (MRP)
The logic for determining 
the number of parts, 
components, and materials 
needed to produce a 
product.
UNDERSTANDING MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING
An employee performs 
the final quality 
control check for the 
make-to-stock company 
making automobile tires. 
© vario images GmbH & 
Co.KG/Alamy
Explain what material 
requirements planning 
(MRP) is.
LO 21–1

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
561
Master Production Scheduling
Generally, the master production schedule deals with end items (typically finished goods 
items sold to customers) and is a major input to the MRP process. If the end item is quite 
large or quite expensive, however, the master schedule may schedule major subassemblies or 
components instead.
All production systems have limited capacity and limited resources. This presents a chal­
lenging job for the master scheduler. Although the aggregate plan provides the general range 
of operation, the master scheduler must specify exactly what is to be produced. These deci­
sions are made while responding to pressures from various functional areas such as the sales 
department (meet the customer’s promised due date), finance (minimize inventory), manage­
ment (maximize productivity and customer service, minimize resource needs), and manufac­
turing (have level schedules and minimize setup time).
To determine an acceptable, feasible schedule to be released to the shop, trial master pro­
duction schedules are run through the MRP program, which is described in the next section. 
The resulting planned order releases (the detailed production schedules) are checked to make 
sure that resources are available and that the completion times are reasonable. What appears 
to be a feasible master schedule may turn out to require excessive resources once the required 
materials, parts, and components from lower levels are determined. If this does happen (the 
usual case), the master production schedule is then modified with these limitations and 
the MRP program is run again. To ensure good master scheduling, the master scheduler (the 
human being) must
∙	 Include all demands from product sales, warehouse replenishment, spares, and inter­
plant requirements.
∙	 Never lose sight of the aggregate plan.
∙	 Be involved with customer order promising.
∙	 Be visible to all levels of management.
∙	 Objectively trade off manufacturing, marketing, and engineering conflicts.
∙	 Identify and communicate all problems.
The upper portion of Exhibit 21.2 shows an aggregate plan for the total number of mat­
tresses planned per month, without regard for mattress type. The lower portion shows a mas­
ter production schedule specifying the exact type of mattress and the quantity planned for 
Industry Type
Examples
Expected 
Benefits
Assemble-to-stock
Combines multiple component parts into a finished product, 
which is then stocked in inventory to satisfy customer demand. 
Examples: watches, tools, appliances.
High
Make-to-stock
Items are manufactured by machine rather than assembled 
from parts. These are standard stock items carried in anticipa­
tion of customer demand. Examples: piston rings, electrical 
switches.
Medium
Assemble-to-order
A final assembly is made from standard options that the cus­
tomer chooses. Examples: trucks, generators, motors.
High
Make-to-order
Items are manufactured by machine to customer order. These 
are generally industrial orders. Examples: bearings, gears, 
fasteners.
Low
Engineer-to-order
Items are fabricated or assembled completely to customer 
specification. Examples: turbine generators, heavy machine 
tools.
High
Process
Includes industries such as foundries, rubber and plastics, 
specialty paper, chemicals, paint, drug, food processors.
Medium
Industry Applications and Expected Benefits of MRP
exhibit 21.1

562	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
production by week. In month 1, for example, a total of 900 mattresses are scheduled: 600 
model 327s, 200 model 538s, and 100 model 749s. The next level down (not shown) would be 
the MRP program that develops detailed schedules showing when cotton batting, springs, and 
hardwood are needed to make the mattresses.
To again summarize the planning sequence, the aggregate operations plan, discussed in 
Chapter 19, specifies product groups. It does not specify exact items. The next level down in 
the planning process is the master production schedule. The master production schedule 
(MPS) is the time-phased plan specifying how many of each end item the firm plans to build 
and when. For example, the aggregate plan for a furniture company may specify the total vol­
ume of mattresses it plans to produce over the next month or next quarter. The MPS goes the 
next step down and identifies the exact size of the mattresses and their qualities and styles. All 
of the mattresses sold by the company would be specified by the MPS. The MPS also states 
period by period (usually weekly) how many and when each of these mattress types is needed.
Still further down the disaggregation process is the MRP program, which calculates and 
schedules all raw materials, parts, and supplies needed to make the mattress specified by the 
MPS.
T i m e  Fe n c e s  The question of flexibility within a master production schedule depends 
on several factors: production lead time, commitment of parts and components to a specific 
end item, relationship between the customer and vendor, amount of excess capacity, and the 
reluctance or willingness of management to make changes.
The purpose of time fences is to maintain a reasonably controlled flow through the produc­
tion system. Unless some operating rules are established and adhered to, the system could be 
chaotic and filled with overdue orders and constant expediting.
Exhibit 21.3 shows an example of a master production schedule time fence. Management 
defines time fences as periods of time having some specified level of opportunity for the cus­
tomer to make changes. (The customer may be the firm’s own marketing department, which 
may be considering product promotions, broadening variety, or the like.) Note in the exhibit 
that for the next eight weeks, this particular master schedule is frozen. Each firm has its own 
time fences and operating rules. Under these rules, frozen could be defined as anything from 
absolutely no changes in one company to only the most minor of changes in another. Slushy 
may allow changes in specific products within a product group so long as parts are available. 
Liquid may allow almost any variations in products, with the provisions that capacity remains 
about the same and that there are no long lead time items involved.
Some firms use a feature known as available to promise for items that are master sched­
uled. This feature identifies the difference between the number of units currently included in 
the master schedule and firm customer orders. For example, assume the master schedule indi­
cates that 100 units of Model 538 mattress are going to be made during week seven. If firm 
Master production 
schedule (MPS)
A time-phased plan 
specifying how many of 
each end item the firm 
plans to build and when.
Available to promise
A feature of MRP systems 
that identifies the 
difference between the 
number of units currently 
included in the master 
schedule and the actual 
(firm) customer orders.
Aggregate Production 
Plan for Mattresses
Master Production 
Schedule for Mattress 
Models
Month
Mattress production
1
 
2
900
950
Model 327 
Model 538 
Model 749
200
100
100 
100
400
150
200 
200
100 
100
200
1
2
3
4
5
Week
6
7
8
The Aggregate Plan and the Master Production Schedule for 
Mattresses
exhibit 21.2

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
563
customer orders now only indicate that 65 of those mattresses have actually been sold, the 
sales group has another 35 mattresses “available to promise” for delivery during that week. 
This can be a powerful tool for coordinating sales and production activities.
Understand how the MRP 
system is structured.
LO 21–2
Weeks
Slushy
Capacity
Frozen
Liquid
Forecast and available 
capacity
8
15
26
8
Firm customer orders
Master Production Schedule Time Fences
exhibit 21.3
MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS PLANNING 
SYSTEM STRUCTURE
The material requirements planning portion of manufacturing activities most closely interacts 
with the master schedule, bill-of-materials file, inventory records file, and output reports as 
shown in Exhibit 21.4.
Each facet of Exhibit 21.4 is detailed in the following sections, but essentially the MRP 
system works as follows: The master production schedule states the number of items to be 
produced during specific time periods. A bill-of-materials file identifies the specific materials 
used to make each item and the correct quantities of each. The inventory records file contains 
data such as the number of units on hand and on order. These three sources—master produc­
tion schedule, bill-of-materials file, and inventory records file—become the data sources for 
the material requirements program, which expands the production schedule into a detailed 
order scheduling plan for the entire production sequence.
Demand for Products
Product demand for end items comes primarily from two main sources. The first is known 
customers who have placed specific orders, such as those generated by sales personnel, or 
from interdepartment transactions. These orders usually carry promised delivery dates. There 
is no forecasting involved in these orders—simply add them up. The second source is the 
aggregate production plan (described in Chapter 19). The aggregate plan reflects the firm’s 
strategy for meeting demand in the future. The strategy is implemented through the detailed 
master production schedule.
In addition to the demand for end products, customers also order specific parts and com­
ponents either as spares or for service and repair. These demands are not usually part of the 
master production schedule; instead, they are fed directly into the material requirements plan­
ning program at the appropriate levels. That is, they are added in as a gross requirement for 
that part or component.
Bill-of-Materials
The bill-of-materials (BOM) file contains the complete product description, listing the mate­
rials, parts, and components; the quantity of each item; and also the sequence in which the 
product is created. This BOM file is one of the three main inputs to the MRP program. (The 
other two are the master schedule and the inventory records file.)
Bill-of-Materials (BOM)
The complete product 
description, listing the 
materials, parts, and 
components; the quantity 
of each item; and also the 
sequence in which the 
product is created.

564	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The BOM file is often called the product structure file or product tree because it shows 
how a product is put together. It contains the information to identify each item and the quan­
tity used per unit of the item of which it is a part. To illustrate this, consider Product A shown 
in Exhibit 21.5A. Product A is made of two units of Part B and three units of Part C. Part B is 
made of one unit of Part D and four units of Part E. Part C is made of two units of Part F, five 
units of Part G, and four units of Part H.
Bill-of-materials files often list parts using an indented structure. This clearly identifies 
each item and the manner in which it is assembled because each indentation signifies the 
components of the item. A comparison of the indented parts in Exhibit 21.5B with the item 
structure in Exhibit 21.5A shows the ease of relating the two displays. From a computer stand­
point, however, storing items in indented parts lists is very inefficient. To compute the amount 
of each item needed at the lower levels, each item would need to be expanded (“exploded”) 
and summed. A more efficient procedure is to store parts data in simple single-level lists. That 
is, each item and component is listed showing only its parent and the number of units needed 
per unit of its parent. This avoids duplication because it includes each assembly only once. 
Exhibit 21.5B shows both the indented parts list and the single-level parts list for Product A.
A modular bill-of-materials is the term for a buildable item that can be produced and 
stocked as a subassembly. It is also a standard item with no options within the module. Many 
end items that are large and expensive are better scheduled and controlled as modules (or 
subassemblies). It is particularly advantageous to schedule subassembly modules when the 
Production 
activity 
reports
Bill-of- 
materials 
file
Master 
production 
schedule 
(MPS)
Inventory 
records 
file
Aggregate 
production 
plan
Material 
planning 
(MRP 
computer 
program)
Engineering 
design 
changes
Firm orders 
from 
customers
Forecasts 
of demand 
from  
customers
Inventory 
transactions
Secondary reports
Exceptions reports
Planning reports
Reports for performance control
Planned order releases for 
inventory and production 
control
Primary reports
Overall View of the Inputs to a Standard Material Requirements 
Planning Program and the Reports Generated by the Program
exhibit 21.4

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
565
same subassemblies appear in different end items. For example, a manufacturer of cranes can 
combine booms, transmissions, and engines in a variety of ways to meet a customer’s needs. 
Using a modular bill-of-materials simplifies the scheduling and control and also makes it 
easier to forecast the use of different modules. Another benefit in using modular bills is that 
if the same item is used in a number of products, then the total inventory investment can be 
minimized.
A super bill-of-materials includes items with fractional options. (A super bill can specify, 
for example, 0.3 of a part. What that means is that 30 percent of the units produced contain 
that part and 70 percent do not.) Modular and super bills-of-materials are often referred to as 
planning bills-of-materials because they simplify the planning process.
L o w - L ev el  C o d i n g  If all identical parts occur at the same level for each end product, 
the total number of parts and materials needed for a product can be computed easily. Consider 
Product L shown in Exhibit 21.6A. Notice that Item N, for example, occurs both as an input 
to L and as an input to M. Item N, therefore, needs to be lowered to level 2 (Exhibit 21.6B) to 
bring all Ns to the same level. If all identical items are placed at the same level, it becomes a 
simple matter for the computer to scan across each level and summarize the number of units 
of each item required.
Inventory Records
The inventory records file can be quite lengthy. Exhibit 21.7 shows the variety of informa­
tion contained in the inventory records. The MRP program accesses the status segment of the 
record according to specific time periods (called time buckets in MRP slang). These records 
are accessed as needed during the program run.
As we will see, the MRP program performs its analysis from the top of the product struc­
ture downward, calculating requirements level by level. There are times, however, when it is 
desirable to identify the parent item that caused the material requirement. For example, we 
F(2)
C(3)
D(1)
E(4)
B(2)
A
G(5)
H(4)
B. Parts List in an Indented Format and in a Single-Level List
A. Bill-of-Materials (Product Structure Tree) for Product A
exhibit 21.5
Indented Parts List
Single-Level Parts List
A
A
B(2)
B(2)
C(3)
D(1)
B
E(4)
D(1)
C(3)
E(4)
F(2)
C
G(5)
F(2)
H(4)
G(5)
H(4)

566	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Level
0
L
1
M
N
M
3
R
S
Q
R
S
S
Q
R
S
R
Q
R
2
P
N
Q
R
P
N
N
4
S
S
L
A. BOM for Product L
B. Low-Level Coded BOM
Product L Hierarchy in (A) Expanded to the Lowest Level of Each Item in (B)
exhibit 21.6
Part no.
Description
Lead time
Std. cost
Safety stock
Item master
data segment
Order quantity
Setup
Cycle
Last year's usage
Class
Scrap allowance
Cutting data
Pointers
Etc.
Control
balance
Period
Totals
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Gross
requirements
Inventory
status
segment
Scheduled
receipts
Projected
available balance
Planned order
releases
SUBSIDIARY
DATA 
Order details
Pending action
Counters 
Keeping track
Allocated
The Inventory Status Record for an Item in Inventory
exhibit 21.7
may want to know what subassemblies are generating the requirement for a part that we order 
from a supplier. The MRP program allows the creation of a peg record file either separately 
or as part of the inventory record file. Pegging requirements allows us to retrace a material 
requirement upward in the product structure through each level, identifying each parent item 
that created the demand.
I n v e n t o r y  T r a n s a c t i o n s  F i l e  The inventory status file is kept up-to-date by 
posting inventory transactions as they occur. These changes occur because of stock receipts 
and disbursements, scrap losses, wrong parts, canceled orders, and so forth.
MRP Computer Program
The material requirements planning program operates using information from the inventory 
records, the master schedule, and the bill-of-materials. The process of calculating the exact 
requirements for each item managed by the system is often referred to as the “explosion” pro­
cess. Working from the top level downward in the bill-of-materials, requirements from parent 
MRP programs are 
integrated into ERP 
systems offered by 
companies such as SAP 
and Oracle.
KEY IDEA

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
567
items are used to calculate the requirements for component items. Consideration is taken of 
current on-hand balances and orders that are scheduled for receipt in the future.
The following is a general description of the MRP explosion process:
	1.	 The requirements for level 0 items, typically referred to as end items, are retrieved 
from the master schedule. These requirements are referred to as gross requirements 
by the MRP program. Typically, the gross requirements are scheduled in weekly time 
buckets.
	2.	 Next, the program uses the current on-hand balance together with the schedule 
of orders that will be received in the future to calculate the net requirements. Net 
requirements are the amounts needed week by week in the future over and above 
what is currently on hand or committed to through an order already released and 
scheduled.
	3.	 Using net requirements, the program calculates when orders should be received to 
meet these requirements. This can be a simple process of just scheduling orders to 
arrive according to the exact net requirements or a more complicated process where 
requirements are combined for multiple periods. This schedule of when orders should 
arrive is referred to as planned-order receipts.
	4.	 Because there is typically a lead time associated with each order, the next step is 
to find a schedule for when orders are actually released. Offsetting the planned-
order receipts by the required lead time does this. This schedule is referred to as the 
planned-order release.
	5.	 After these four steps have been completed for all the level zero items, the program 
moves to level 1 items.
	6.	 The gross requirements for each level 1 item are calculated from the planned-order 
release schedule for the parents of each level 1 item. Any additional independent 
demand also needs to be included in the gross requirements.
	7.	 After the gross requirements have been determined, net requirements, planned-order 
receipts, and planned-order releases are calculated as described in steps 2 to 4.
	8.	 This process is then repeated for each level in the bill-of-materials.
The process of doing these calculations is much simpler than the description, as you will 
see in the example that follows. Typically, the explosion calculations are performed each week 
or whenever changes have been made to the master schedule. Some MRP programs have the 
option of generating immediate schedules, called net change schedules. Net change systems 
are “activity” driven and requirements and schedules are updated whenever a transaction is 
processed that has an impact on the item. Net change enables the system to reflect in real time 
the exact status of each item managed by the system.
AN EXAMPLE USING MRP
Ampere, Inc., produces a line of electric meters installed in residential buildings by electric 
utility companies to measure power consumption. Meters used on single-family homes are 
of two basic types for different voltage and amperage ranges. In addition to complete meters, 
some subassemblies are sold separately for repair or for changeovers to a different voltage or 
power load. The problem for the MRP system is to determine a production schedule to iden­
tify each item, the period when it is needed, and the appropriate quantities. The schedule is 
then checked for feasibility, and the schedule is modified if necessary.
Forecasting Demand
Demand for the meters and components originates from two sources: regular customers that 
place firm orders in advance based on the needs of their projects and other, typically smaller, 
customers that buy these items as needed. The smaller customer requirements were forecast 
Analyze an MRP problem.
LO 21–3
Net change systems
MRP systems that calculate 
the impact of a change 
in the MRP data (the 
inventory status, BOM, 
or master schedule) 
immediately.

568	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
using one of the usual techniques described in Chapter 18 and past demand data. Exhibit 21.8 
shows the requirements for meters A and B and subassembly D for a three-month period 
(Months 3 through 5). There are some “other parts” used to make the meters. In order to keep 
our example manageable, we are not including them in this example.
Developing a Master Production Schedule
For the meter and component requirements specified in Exhibit 21.8, assume that the 
­quantities to satisfy the known and random demands must be available during the first week 
of the month. This assumption is reasonable because management (in our example) prefers 
to produce meters in a single batch each month rather than a number of batches throughout 
the month.
Exhibit 21.9 shows the trial master schedule that we use under these conditions, with 
demand for Months 3, 4, and 5 listed in the first week of each month, or as Weeks 9, 13, and 
17. For brevity, we will work with demand through Week 9. The schedule we develop should 
be examined for resource availability, capacity availability, and so on, and then revised and 
run again. We will stop with our example at the end of this one schedule, however.
Bill-of-Materials (Product Structure)
The product structure for meters A and B is shown in Exhibit 21.10A in the typical way using 
low-level coding, in which each item is placed at the lowest level at which it appears in the 
structure hierarchy. Meters A and B consist of a common subassembly C and some parts that 
include part D. To keep things simple, we will focus on only one of the parts, part D, which 
is a transformer.
From the product structure, notice that part D (the transformer) is used in subassembly C 
(which is used in both meters A and B). In the case of meter A, an additional part D (trans­
former) is needed. The “2” in parentheses next to D when used to make a C indicates that two 
Ds are required for every C that is made. The product structure, as well as the indented parts 
list in Exhibit 21.10B, indicates how the meters are actually made. First, subassembly C is 
made, and potentially these are carried in inventory. In a final assembly process, meters A and 
B are put together, and in the case of meter A an additional part D is used.
Meter A
Meter B
Subassembly D
Month
Known
Forecast
Known
Forecast
Known
Forecast
3   
1,000
250
410
60
200
70
4  
   600
250
300
60
180
70
5  
   300
250
500
60
250
70
Future Requirements for Meters A and B and Subassembly D 
Stemming from Specific Customer Orders and from Forecasts
exhibit 21.8
Week
Meter A
Meter B
Subassembly D
1,250 
470 
270
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17
850 
360 
250
550 
560 
320
9
A Master Schedule to Satisfy Demand Requirements as Specified in 
Exhibit 21.8
exhibit 21.9

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
569
Exhibit 12.10B shows the subassemblies and parts that make up the meters and shows the 
numbers of units required per unit of parent in parentheses.
Inventory Records
The inventory records data would be similar to those shown in Exhibit 21.7. As shown ear­
lier in the chapter, additional data such as vendor identity, cost, and lead time also would be 
included in these data. For this example, the pertinent data include the on-hand inventory at 
the start of the program run, safety stock requirements, and the current status of orders that 
have already been released (see Exhibit 21.11). Safety stock is a minimum amount of inven­
tory that we always want to keep on hand for an item. For example, for subassembly C, we 
never want the inventory to get below 5 units. We also see that we have an order for 10 units of 
meter B that is scheduled for receipt at the beginning of Week 5. Another order for 100 units 
of part D (the transformer) is scheduled to arrive at the beginning of Week 4.
Performing the MRP Calculations
Conditions are now set to perform the MRP calculations: End-item requirements have been 
presented in the master production schedule, while the status of inventory and the order lead 
times are available, and we also have the pertinent product structure data. The MRP calcula­
tions (often referred to as an explosion) are done level by level, in conjunction with the inven­
tory data and data from the master schedule.
B. Indented Parts List for Meter A and Meter B, with the Required Number of Items 
per Unit of Parent Listed in Parentheses
Meter A
Meter B
Level 2
Level 1
Level 0
A
B
C(1)
C(1)
D(2)
D(1)
D(2)
A. Product Structure for Meters A and B
exhibit 21.10
Meter A
A
D(1)
C(1)
D(2)
Meter B
B
C(1)
D(2)
Item
On-Hand Inventory
Lead Time (Weeks)
Safety Stock
On Order
A
50
2
0
B
60
2
0
10 (Week 5)
C
40
1
5
D
200
1
20
100 (Week 4)
Number of Units On Hand and Lead Time Data that Would Appear on 
the Inventory Record File
exhibit 21.11

570	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Exhibit 21.12 shows the details of these calculations. The following analysis explains the 
logic in detail. We will limit our analysis to the problem of meeting the gross requirements for 
1,250 units of meter A, 470 units of meter B, and 270 units of transformer D, all in Week 9.
An MRP record is kept for each item managed by the system. The record contains gross 
requirements, scheduled receipts, projected available balance, net requirements, planned 
order receipts, and planned order releases data. Gross requirements are the total amount 
required for a particular item. These requirements can be from external customer demand and 
also from demand calculated due to manufacturing requirements. Scheduled receipts repre­
sent orders that have already been released and that are scheduled to arrive as of the begin­
ning of the period. Once the paperwork on an order has been released, what was a “planned” 
order prior to that event now becomes a scheduled receipt. Projected available balance is the 
amount of inventory expected as of the end of a period. This can be calculated as follows:
​
Projected
​ 
available​ 
balancet
  ​ = ​
Projected
​ 
available​ 
balancet−1
​ − ​Gross​ 
requirementst
​ + ​Scheduled​ 
receiptst
  ​ + ​
Planned
​ 
order​ 
receiptst
​
One thing that needs to be considered is the initial projected available balance. In the case 
where safety stock is needed, the on-hand balance needs to be reduced by the safety stock. So 
projected available balance in period zero is on hand minus the safety stock.
A net requirement is the amount needed when the projected available balance plus the 
scheduled receipts in a period are not sufficient to cover the gross requirement. The planned 
order receipt is the amount of an order that is required to meet a net requirement in the period. 
Finally, the planned order release is the planned order receipt offset by the lead time.
A
LT = 2 weeks
On hand = 50
Safety stock = 0
Order qty = lot-for-lot
Item
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order receipts
Planned order releases
50
4
5
6
Week
7
8
9
50
50
50
1,200
50
0
1,250
1,200
1,200
B
LT = 2 weeks
On hand = 60
Safety stock = 0
Order qty = lot-for-lot
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order receipts
Planned order releases
60
70
10
70
70
400
70
0
470
400
400
C
LT = 1 week
On hand = 40
Safety stock = 5
Order qty = 2,000
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order receipts
Planned order releases
35
35
35
435
2,000
435
435
1,200
400+
1,565
2,000
D
LT = 1 week
On hand = 200
Safety stock = 20
Order qty = 5,000
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order receipts
Planned order releases
280
100
280
1,280
80
5,000
5,000
80
4,810
270
4,000
1,200
190
3,720
5,000
5,000
Material Requirements Planning Schedule for Meters A and B, and Subassemblies C and D
exhibit 21.12

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
571
EXAMPLE 21.1: MRP Explosion Calculations
Juno Lighting makes special lights that are popular in new homes. Juno expects demand for 
two popular lights to be the following over the next eight weeks.
VH1-234
VH2-100
Light Socket
On hand
85
358
425
Q
200 (the production lot size)
400 (the production lot size)
500 (purchase quantity)
Lead time
1 week
1 week
3 weeks
Safety stock
0 units
0 units
20 units
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
VH1-234
34
37
41
45
48
48
48
48
VH2-100
104
134
144
155
134
140
141
145
A key component in both lights is a socket that the bulb is screwed into in the base fixture. 
Each light has one of these sockets. Given the following information, plan the production of 
the lights and purchases of the socket.
SOLUTION
Week
Item
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
VH1-234
Gross requirement
34
37
41
45
48
48
48
48
Q = 200
Scheduled receipts
LT = 1
Projected available 
balance
51
14
173
128
80
32
184
136
OH = 85
Net requirements
27
16
SS = 0
Planned order receipts
200
200
Planned order releases
200
200
VH2-100
Gross requirement
104
134
144
155
134
140
141
145
Q = 400
Scheduled receipts
LT = 1
Projected available 
balance
254
120
376
221
87
347
206
61
OH = 358
Net requirements
24
53
SS = 0
Planned order receipts
400
400
Planned order releases
400
400
Socket
Gross requirement
600
400
200
Q = 500
Scheduled receipts
500
LT = 3
Projected available 
balance
905
305
305
305
405
205
205
205
OH = 425
Net requirements
95
SS = 20
Planned order receipts
500
Planned order releases
500
The best way to proceed is to work period by period by focusing on the projected available bal­
ance calculation. Whenever the available balance goes below zero, a net requirement is gener­
ated. When this happens, plan an order receipt to meet the requirement. For example, for VH1 
we start with 85 units in inventory and need 34 to meet Week 1 production requirements. This 
brings our available balance at the end of Week 1 to 51 units. Another 37 units are used during 
Week 2, dropping inventory to 14. In Week 3, our projected balance drops to 0 and we have a 
net requirement of 27 units that needs to be covered with an order scheduled to be received in 
Week 3. Because the lead time is one week, this order needs to be released in Week 2. Week 4 
projected available balance is 128, calculated by taking the 200 units received in Week 3 and 
subtracting the Week 3 net requirement of 27 units and the 45 units needed for Week 4.
	
Because sockets are used in both VH1 and VH2, the gross requirements come from the 
planned order releases for these items: 600 are needed in Week 2 (200 for VH1s and 400 for 
VH2s), 400 in Week 5, and 200 in Week 6. Projected available balance is beginning inventory 
of 425 plus the scheduled receipts of 500 units minus the 20 units of safety stock.

572	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Beginning with meter A, the projected available balance is 50 units and there are no net 
requirements until Week 9. In Week 9, an additional 1,200 units are needed to cover the 
demand of 1,250 generated from the order scheduled through the master schedule. The order 
quantity is designated “lot-for-lot,” which means that we can order the exact quantity needed 
to meet net requirements. An order, therefore, is planned for receipt of 1,200 units for the 
beginning of Week 9. Because the lead time is two weeks, this order must be released at the 
beginning of Week 7.
Meter B is similar to A, although an order for 10 units is scheduled for receipt in period 
5. We project that 70 units will be available at the end of Week 5. There is a net require­
ment for 400 additional units to meet the gross requirement of 470 units in Week 9. This 
requirement is met with an order for 400 units that must be released at the beginning of 
Week 7.
Item C is the subassembly used in both meters A and B. We only need additional Cs 
when either A or B is being made. Our analysis of A indicates that an order for 1,200 will 
be released in Week 7. An order for 400 Bs also will be released in Week 7, so total demand 
for C is 1,600 units in Week 7. The projected available balance is the 40 units on hand minus 
the safety stock of 5 units that we have specified, or 35 units. In Week 7, the net requirement 
is 1,565 units. The order policy for C indicates an order quantity of 2,000 units, so an order 
receipt for 2,000 is planned for Week 7. This order needs to be released in Week 6 due to the 
one-week lead time. Assuming this order is actually processed in the future, the projected 
available balance is 435 units in Weeks 7, 8, and 9.
Item D, the transformer, has demand from three different sources. The demand in Week 
6 is due to the requirement to put Ds into subassembly C. In this case, two Ds are needed 
for every C, or 4,000 units (the product structure indicates this two-to-one relationship). In 
the seventh week, 1,200 Ds are needed for the order for 1,200 As that are scheduled to be 
released in Week 7. Another 270 units are needed in Week 9 to meet the independent demand 
scheduled through the master schedule. Projected available balance at the end of Week 4 is 
280 units (200 on hand plus the scheduled receipt of 100 units minus the safety stock of 20 
units) and 280 units in Week 5. There is a net requirement for an additional 3,720 units in 
Week 6, so we plan to receive an order for 5,000 units (the order quantity). This results in 
a projected balance of 1,280 in Week 6 and 80 in Week 7 because 1,200 are used to meet 
demand. Eighty units are projected to be available in Week 8. Due to the demand for 270 in 
Week 9, a net requirement of 190 units in Week 9 results in planning the receipt of an addi­
tional 5,000-unit order in Week 9.
LOT SIZING IN MRP SYSTEMS
The determination of lot sizes in an MRP system is a complicated and difficult problem. Lot 
sizes are the part quantities issued in the planned order receipt and planned order release sec­
tions of an MRP schedule. For parts produced in-house, lot sizes are the production quantities 
of batch sizes. For purchased parts, these are the quantities ordered from the supplier. Lot 
sizes generally meet part requirements for one or more periods.
Most lot-sizing techniques deal with how to balance the setup or order costs and holding 
costs associated with meeting the net requirements generated by the MRP planning process. 
Many MRP systems have options for computing lot sizes based on some of the more com­
monly used techniques. The use of lot-sizing techniques increases the complexity of run­
ning MRP schedules in a plant. In an attempt to save setup costs, the inventory generated 
with the larger lot sizes needs to be stored, making the logistics in the plant much more 
complicated.
Next we explain four lot-sizing techniques using a common example. The lot-sizing tech­
niques presented are lot-for-lot (L4L), economic order quantity (EOQ), least total cost (LTC), 
and least unit cost (LUC).
Evaluate and compare 
MRP lot-sizing techniques.
LO 21–4

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
573
Consider the following MRP lot-sizing problem; the net requirements are shown for eight 
scheduling weeks:
Cost per item
$10.00
Order or setup cost
$47.00
Inventory carrying cost/week
0.5%
Weekly net requirements:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
50
60
70
60
95
75
60
55
Lot-for-Lot
Lot-for-lot (L4L) is the most common technique. It
∙	 Sets planned orders to exactly match the net requirements.
∙	 Produces exactly what is needed each week with no inventory carried over into future 
periods.
∙	 Minimizes carrying cost.
∙	 Does not take into account setup costs or capacity limitations.
Exhibit 21.13 shows the lot-for-lot calculations. The net requirements are given in column 2. 
Because the logic of lot-for-lot says the production quantity (column 3) will exactly match the 
required quantity (column 2), there will be no inventory left at the end (column 4). Without any 
inventory to carry over into the next week, there is zero holding cost (column 5). However, lot-
for-lot requires a setup cost each week (column 6). Incidentally, there is a setup cost each week 
because this is a workcenter where a variety of items are worked on each week. This is not a 
case where the workcenter is committed to one product and sits idle when it is not working on 
that product (in which case only one setup would result). Lot-for-lot causes high setup costs.
Economic Order Quantity
In Chapter 20, we discussed the EOQ model that explicitly balances setup and holding costs. 
In an EOQ model, either fairly constant demand must exist or safety stock must be kept to 
provide for demand variability. The EOQ model uses an estimate of total annual demand, the 
setup or order cost, and the annual holding cost. EOQ was not designed for a system with 
discrete time periods such as MRP. The lot-sizing techniques used for MRP assume that part 
requirements are satisfied at the start of the period. Holding costs are then charged only to the 
ending inventory for the period, not to the average inventory as in the case of the EOQ model. 
EOQ assumes that parts are used continuously during the period. The lot sizes generated by 
EOQ do not always cover the entire number of periods. For example, the EOQ might provide 
(1) 
Week
(2) 
Net Requirements
(3) 
Production Quantity
(4) 
Ending Inventory
(5) 
Holding Cost
(6) 
Setup Cost
(7) 
Total Cost
1
50
50
0
$0.00
$47.00
$  47.00  
2
60
60
0
0.00
47.00
  94.00
3
70
70
0
0.00
47.00
141.00
4
60
60
0
0.00
47.00
188.00
5
95
95
0
0.00
47.00
235.00
6
75
75
0
0.00
47.00
282.00
7
60
60
0
0.00
47.00
329.00
8
55
55
0
0.00
47.00
376.00
Lot-for-Lot Run Size for an MRP Schedule
exhibit 21.13

574	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
the requirements for 4.6 periods. Using the same data as in the lot-for-lot example, the eco­
nomic order quantity is calculated as follows:
​
Annual demand based on the 8 weeks = D = ​ 525 
___ 
8  ​ × 52 = 3, 412.5 units
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual holding cost = H = 0.5 %  × $10 × 52 weeks = $2.60 per unit
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​Setup cost = S = $47​(​given​)​​ 
 
 
EOQ= ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​ = ​√ 
____________ 
 
​ 2​(​3, 412.5​)​(​$47​)​ 
 
____________ 
$2.60 
​ ​ = 351 units
 
​
Exhibit 21.14 shows the MRP schedule using an EOQ of 351 units. The EOQ lot size in Week 
1 is enough to meet requirements for Weeks 1 through 5 and a portion of Week 6. Then, in 
Week 6 another EOQ lot is planned to meet the requirements for Weeks 6 through 8. Notice 
that the EOQ plan leaves some inventory at the end of Week 8 to carry forward into Week 9.
Least Total Cost
The least total cost method (LTC) is a dynamic lot-sizing technique that calculates the order 
quantity by comparing the carrying cost and the setup (or ordering) costs for various lot sizes 
and then selects the lot in which these are most nearly equal.
The top half of Exhibit 21.15 shows the least cost lot size results. The procedure to compute 
least total cost lot sizes is to compare order costs and holding costs for various numbers of 
weeks. For example, costs are compared for producing in Week 1 to cover the requirements for 
Week 1; producing in Week 1 for Weeks 1 and 2; producing in Week 1 to cover Weeks 1, 2, and 
3; and so on. The correct selection is the lot size where the ordering costs and holding costs are 
approximately equal. In Exhibit 21.15, the best lot size is 335 because a $38 carrying cost and a 
$47 ordering cost are closer than $56.75 and $47 ($9 versus $9.75). This lot size covers require­
ments for Weeks 1 through 5. Unlike EOQ, the lot size covers only whole numbers of periods.
Based on the Week 1 decision to place an order to cover five weeks, we are now located 
in Week 6, and our problem is to determine how many weeks into the future we can provide 
for from here. Exhibit 21.15 shows that holding and ordering costs are closest in the quan­
tity that covers requirements for Weeks 6 through 8. Notice that the holding and ordering 
costs here are far apart. This is because our example extends only to Week 8. If the planning 
horizon were longer, the lot size planned for Week 6 would likely cover more weeks into the 
future beyond Week 8. This brings up one of the limitations of both LTC and LUC (discussed 
below). Both techniques are influenced by the length of the planning horizon. The bottom half 
of Exhibit 21.15 shows the final run size and total cost.
Least Unit Cost
The least unit cost method is a dynamic lot-sizing technique that adds ordering and inventory 
carrying cost for each trial lot size and divides by the number of units in each lot size, picking 
the lot size with the lowest unit cost. The top half of Exhibit 21.16 calculates the unit cost for 
Week
Net Requirements
Production Quantity
Ending Inventory
Holding Cost
Setup Cost
Total Cost
1
50
351
301
$15.05
$47.00
$62.05
2
60
0
241
12.05
0.00
74.10
3
70
0
171
8.55
0.00
82.65
4
60
0
111
5.55
0.00
88.20
5
95
0
16
0.80
0.00
89.00
6
75
351
292
14.60
47.00
150.60
7
60
0
232
11.60
0.00
162.20
8
55
0
177
 8.85
0.00
171.05
Economic Order Quantity Run Size for an MRP Schedule
exhibit 21.14

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
575
Weeks
Quantity Ordered
Carrying Cost
Order Cost
Total Cost 
1
50
$ 0.00
$47.00
 $ 47.00
1–2
110
3.00
 47.00
50.00
1–3
180
10.00
 47.00
57.00
1–4
240
19.00
 47.00
66.00
1st order
1–5
335
38.00
 47.00
85.00 ←Least total cost
1–6
410
56.75
 47.00
103.75
1–7
470
74.75
 47.00
121.75
1–8
525
94.00
 47.00
141.00
6
 75
 0.00
 47.00
47.00
6–7
135
 3.00
 47.00
50.00
2nd order
6–8
190
 8.50
 47.00
55.50 ←Least total cost
Week
Net Requirements
Production Quantity
Ending Inventory
Holding Cost
Setup Cost
Total Cost
1
50
335
285
$14.25
$47.00
$ 61.25
2
60
0
225
11.25
0.00
72.50
3
70
0
155
7.75
0.00
80.25
4
60
0
95
4.75
0.00
85.00
5
95
0
0
0.00
0.00
85.00
6
75
190
115
5.75
47.00
137.75
7
60
0
55
2.75
0.00
140.50
8
55
0
0
0.00
0.00
140.50
Least Total Cost Run Size for an MRP Schedule
exhibit 21.15
Weeks
Quantity Ordered
Carrying Cost
Order Cost
Total Cost
Unit Cost
1
50
$ 0.00
$47.00
$  47.00  
$0.9400
1–2
110
 3.00
 47.00
50.00
 0.4545
1–3
180
10.00
 47.00
57.00
 0.3167
1–4
240
19.00
 47.00
66.00
 0.2750
1–5
335
38.00
 47.00
85.00
 0.2537
1st order
1–6
410
56.75
 47.00
103.75 
 0.2530 ←Least unit cost
1–7
470
74.75
 47.00
121.75 
 0.2590
1–8
525
94.00
 47.00
141.00 
 0.2686
?
60
 0.00
 47.00
47.00
 0.7833
2nd order
7–8
115
 2.75
 47.00
49.75
 0.4326 ←Least unit cost
Week
Net Requirements
Production Quantity
Ending Inventory
Holding Cost
Setup Cost
Total Cost
1
50
410
360
$18.00
$47.00
$ 65.00
2
60
0
300
15.00
0.00
80.00
3
70
0
230
11.50
0.00
91.50
4
60
0
170
8.50
0.00
100.00
5
95
0
75
3.75
0.00
103.75
6
75
0
0
0
0
103.75
7
60
115
55
2.75
47.00
153.50
8
55
0
0
0
0
$153.50
Least Total Cost Run Size for an MRP Schedule
exhibit 21.16

576	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
ordering lots to meet the needs of Weeks 1 through 8. Note that the minimum occurred when 
the quantity 410, ordered in Week 1, was sufficient to cover Weeks 1 through 6. The lot size 
planned for Week 7 covers through the end of the planning horizon.
The least unit cost run size and total cost are shown in the bottom half of Exhibit 21.16.
Choosing the Best Lot Size
Using the lot-for-lot method, the total cost for the eight weeks is $376; the EOQ total cost is 
$171.05; the least total cost method is $140.50; and the least unit cost is $153.50. The lowest 
cost was obtained using the least total cost method of $140.50. If there were more than eight 
weeks, the lowest cost could differ.
The advantage of the least unit cost method is that it is a more complete analysis and 
would take into account ordering or setup costs that might change as the order size increases. 
If the ordering or setup costs remain constant, the lowest total cost method is more attrac­
tive because it is simpler and easier to compute, yet it would be just as accurate under that 
restriction.
Concept Connections
LO 21–1   Explain what material requirements planning (MRP) is.
Summary
	∙	 An enterprise resource planning (ERP) system 
­integrates application programs in accounting, sales, 
manufacturing, and the other functions in a firm. 
MRP  is typically an application within the ERP 
system.
	∙	 MRP is the logic that calculates the number of parts, 
components, and other materials needed to produce a 
product.
	∙	 MRP determines detailed schedules that show exactly 
what is needed over time.
	∙	 MRP is most useful in industries where standard prod­
ucts are made in batches from common components 
and parts.
	∙	 The master production schedule (MPS) is a plan that 
specifies what will be made by a production system in 
the future.
	∙	 The items scheduled in the MPS are referred to as 
“end items” and represent the products that drive the 
requirements for the MRP system.
	∙	 The MPS is a plan for meeting all the demands for the 
end items, including customer demand, the demand for 
replacements, and any other demands that might exist.
	∙	 Often, “time fences” are used in the MPS to make 
the schedules calculated by the MRP system stable 
and ensure their feasibility. When the MPS is based 
on forecast demand, rather than actual demand, a fea­
ture known as “available to promise” is often used 
that identifies the difference between the number of 
units included in the MPS and current actual customer 
orders (these may be different because the forecast may 
be different than actual customer demand). This can be 
useful for coordinating sales and production activities.
Key Terms
Enterprise resource planning (ERP)  A computer system 
that integrates application programs in accounting, sales, 
manufacturing, and the other functions in a firm. This 
integration is accomplished through a database shared 
by all the application programs.
Material requirements planning (MRP)  The logic for 
determining the number of parts, components, and mate­
rials needed to produce a product.
Master production schedule (MPS)  A time-phased plan 
specifying how many of each end item the firm plans to 
build and when.
Available to promise  A feature of MRP systems that 
identifies the difference between the number of units 
currently included in the master schedule and the actual 
(firm) customer orders.

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
577
Key Terms
Bill-of-Materials (BOM)  The complete product descrip­
tion, listing the materials, parts, and components; the 
quantity of each item; and also the sequence in which 
the product is created.
Net change systems  MRP systems that calculate the 
impact of a change in the MRP data (the inventory sta­
tus, BOM, or master schedule) immediately.
LO 21–2   Understand how the MRP system is structured.
	∙	 The MRP system uses three sources of information:
	 1.  Demand comes from the master schedule.
	 2.  The bill-of-materials identifies exactly what is 
needed to make each end item.
	 3.  The current inventory status of the items managed by 
the system (units currently on-hand, expected receipts 
in the future, and how long it takes to replenish an 
item).
	∙	 Using the three sources of information, the MRP sys­
tem produces schedules for each item it manages.
	∙	 The MRP system can be updated in real time or peri­
odically, depending on the application.
Summary
LO 21–3   Analyze an MRP problem.
	∙	 The logic used by MRP is often referred to as explo­
sion calculations because the requirements shown in 
the MPS are “exploded” into detailed schedules for 
each item managed by the system.
	∙	 The basic logic is that the projected available balance in 
this period is calculated by taking the balance from the 
last period, subtracting the gross requirements from this 
period, and adding in scheduled and planned receipts.
Summary
LO 21–4   Evaluate and compare MRP lot-sizing techniques.
	∙	 Lot sizes are the production (or purchasing) quantities 
used by the MRP system.
	∙	 Lot-for-lot is the simplest case and is when the system 
schedules exactly what is needed in each period.
	∙	 When setup cost is significant or other constraints 
force different quantities, lot-for-lot might not be the 
best method to use.
	∙	 Lot-size techniques are used to balance the fixed and vari­
able costs that vary according to the production lot size.
Summary
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Product X is made of two units of Y and three of Z. Y is made of one unit of A and two units 
of B. Z is made of two units of A and four units of C.
Lead time for X is one week; Y, two weeks; Z, three weeks; A, two weeks; B, one week; 
and C, three weeks.
a.  Draw the bill-of-materials (product structure tree).
b.  If 100 units of X are needed in week 10, develop a planning schedule showing when each 
item should be ordered and in what quantity. Assume we have no inventory in any of the 
items to start.
LO 21–3

578	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Solution
	
a.  
	
b.  The orders are circled.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Product M is made of two units of N and three of P. N is made of two units of R and four units 
of S. R is made of one unit of S and three units of T. P is made of two units of T and four 
units of U.
	a.  Show the bill-of-materials (product structure tree).
	b.  If 100 Ms are required, how many units of each component are needed?
	c.  Show both a single-level parts list and an indented parts list.
Solution
	
a.  
A (1)
B (2)
A (2)
C (4)
Y (2)
Z (3)
X
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9
X 
Y 
Z 
A 
B 
C
LT = 1
LT = 2
LT = 3
LT = 2
LT = 1
LT = 3
300 
600 
400 
1,200
200
100 
200 
300
100
1,200
600
200
10
200 
400
R (2)
S (4)
T (2)
U (4)
N (2)
P (3)
M
S (1)
T (3)
	
b.  M = 100
N   = 200
P     = 300
R     = 400
S  = 800 + 400 = 1,200
T  = 600 + 1,200 = 1,800
U = 1,200

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
579
	
c.  
Single-Level 
Parts List
Indented Parts List
M
N (2)
N(2)
P (3)
R(2)
N
S (1)
R (2)
T (3)
S (4)
S (4)
R
P (3)
S (1)
T (2)
T (3)
U (4)
P
T (2)
U (4)
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
Given the product structure diagram, and the data given, complete the MRP records for parts 
A, B, and C.
C
C
A
B (2)
Week
Item
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
Gross requirements
  5
15
18
8
12
22
LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
On-hand = 21
Projected available balance
Safety stock = 0
Net requirements
Order quantity = 20
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
B
Gross requirements
LT = 2 weeks
Scheduled receipts
32
On-hand = 20
Projected available balance
Safety stock = 0
Net requirements
Order quantity = 40
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
C
Gross requirements
LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
On-hand = 70
Projected available balance
Safety Stock = 10
Net requirements
Order quantity = lot-for-lot
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases

580	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Solution
Week
Item
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
Gross requirements
5
15
18
8
12
22
LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
On-hand = 21
Projected available balance
16
1
3
15
3
1
Safety stock = 0
Net requirements
17
5
19
Order quantity = 20
Planned-order receipts
20
20
20
Planned-order releases
20
20
20
B
Gross requirements
40
40
40
LT = 2 weeks
Scheduled receipts
32
On-hand = 20
Projected available balance
52
12
12
12
12
12
Safety stock = 0
Net requirements
28
28
Order quantity = 40
Planned-order receipts
40
40
Planned-order releases
40
40
C
Gross requirements
40
20
60
20
LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
On-hand = 70
Projected available balance
20
0
0
0
0
0
Safety Stock = 10
Net requirements
60
20
Order quantity = lot-for-lot
Planned-order receipts
60
20
Planned-order releases
60
20
Notes:
	  1.	 For item A, start by calculating the projected available balance through week 2. In week 
3, there is a net requirement for 17 units, so we plan to receive an order for 20 units. Pro­
jected available balance for week 3 is three units and a net requirement for five in week 4, 
so we plan another order to be received in week 4. Projected available balance for week 4 
is 15 units, with three in week 5 and a net requirement for 19 in week 6. We need to plan 
one more order for receipt in week 6.
	  2.	 The gross requirements for B are based on two times the planned order releases for A. We 
need to account for the scheduled receipt in week 1 of 32 units, resulting in a projected 
available balance of 52 at the end of week 1.
	  3.	 The gross requirements for C are based on the planned order releases for items A and B 
because C is used in both items. The projected available balance is calculated by subtract­
ing out the safety stock because this inventory is kept in reserve. In week 1, for example, 
projected available balance is 70 units on-hand − 40 units gross requirements − 10 units 
safety stock = 20 units.
SOLVED PROBLEM 4
Consider the following data relevant to an MRP lot-sizing problem:
Item cost per unit
$25
Setup cost
$100
Inventory carrying cost per year
20.8%
Weekly Net Requirements
  1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
105
80
130
50
0
200
125
100
Use the four lot-sizing rules in the chapter to propose an MRP schedule under each rule. 
Assume there is no beginning inventory.
Solution
Lot-for-Lot
The lot-for-lot rule is very commonly used because it is so simple and intuitive. The planned-
order quantities are equal to the net requirements each week.
LO 21–4

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
581
Week
Requirements 
Net
Production 
Quantity
Ending 
Inventory
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
1
105
105
0
$0.00
$100.00
$100.00
2
80
80
0
0.00
100.00
200.00
3
130
130
0
0.00
100.00
300.00
4
50
50
0
0.00
100.00
400.00
5
0
0
0
0.00
0.00
400.00
6
200
200
0
0.00
100.00
500.00
7
125
125
0
0.00
100.00
600.00
8
100
100
0
0.00
100.00
700.00
Economic Order Quantity
We need D, S, and H in the EOQ formula. We will estimate annual demand based on average 
weekly demand over these 8 weeks.
​D = Annual demand = ​ 105 + 80 + 130 + 50 + 0 + 200 + 125 + 100 
 
 
 
____________________________________ 
 
8 
​  × 52 = 5, 135​
​H = Annual holding cost = .208 × $25.00 = $5.20​
​S = Setup cost = $100     (given )​
​EOQ = ​√ 
____
 
​ 2DS 
____ 
H  ​ ​ = ​√ 
____________
 
 
​ 2(5135 )(100 ) 
 
____________ 
5.20 
​ ​ = 444​
In computing holding costs per week, divide H by 52. Weekly holding cost is $0.10 per unit. 
We can now develop an order schedule based on EOQ lot sizing.
Week
Net 
Requirements
Production 
Quantity
Ending 
Inventory
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
1
105
444
339
$33.90
$100.00
$133.90
2
80
0
259
25.90
0.00
159.80
3
130
0
129
12.90
0.00
172.70
4
50
0
79
7.90
0.00
180.60
5
0
0
79
7.90
0.00
188.50
6
200
444
323
32.30
100.00
320.80
7
125
0
198
19.80
0.00
340.60
8
100
0
98
9.80
0.00
350.40
Least Total Cost (LTC)
Similar to the example in Exhibit 21.15, we can create the following table comparing costs for 
ordering 1 through 8 weeks’ demand in the first order.
Weeks
Net 
Requirements
Production 
Quantity
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
1
105
105
$   0.00
$100.00
$100.00
1−2
80
185
8.00
100.00
108.00
1−3
130
315
34.00
100.00
134.00
1−4
50
365
49.00
100.00
149.00
1−5
0
365
49.00
100.00
149.00
1−6
200
565
149.00
100.00
249.00
1−7
125
690
224.00
100.00
324.00
1−8
100
790
294.00
100.00
394.00
7
125
125
0.00
100.00
100.00
7−8
100
225
10.00
100.00
110.00

582	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
For the first order, the difference between holding and setup costs is least when ordering for 
weeks 1 through 6, so the first order should be for 565 units, enough for weeks 1 through 6. For 
the second order, we need to consider only weeks 7 and 8. The difference between holding and 
setup costs is least when placing a second order to cover demand during weeks 7 through 8, 
so the second order should be for 225 units. Note that as we move through time and net require­
ments for weeks 9 and beyond become known, we would revisit the second order based on those 
new requirements. It is likely that the best second order will end up being for more than just 
weeks 7 and 8. For now, we can develop an order schedule based on the data we have available.
Week
Net 
Requirements
Production 
Quantity
Ending 
Inventory
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
1
105
565
460
$46.00
$100.00
$146.00
2
 80
  0
380
 38.00
   0.00
 184.00
3
130
  0
250
 25.00
   0.00
 209.00
4
 50
  0
200
 20.00
   0.00
 229.00
5
  0
  0
200
 20.00
   0.00
 249.00
6
200
  0
  0
  0.00
   0.00
 249.00
7
125
225
100
 10.00
 100.00
 359.00
8
100
  0
  0
  0.00
   0.00
 359.00
Least Unit Cost (LUC)
The LUC method uses calculations from the LTC method, dividing each option’s total cost by 
the order quantity to determine a unit cost. Most of the following table is copied from the LTC 
method, with one additional column to calculate the unit costs.
Week
Net 
Requirements
Production 
Quantity
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
Unit 
Cost
1
105
105
$  0.00
$100.00
$100.00
$0.9524
1−2
80
185
8.00
100.00
108.00
0.5838
1−3
130
315
34.00
100.00
134.00
0.4254
1−4
50
365
49.00
100.00
149.00
0.4082
1−5
0
365
49.00
100.00
149.00
0.4082
1−6
200
565
149.00
100.00
249.00
0.4407
1−7
125
690
224.00
100.00
324.00
0.4696
1−8
100
790
294.00
100.00
394.00
0.4987
6
200
200
0.00
100.00
100.00
0.5000
6−7
125
325
12.50
100.00
112.50
0.3462
6−8
100
425
32.50
100.00
132.50
0.3118
For the first order, the least unit cost results from ordering enough to cover weeks 1 
through 5, so our first order would be for 365 units. (This example can be a bit tricky—we 
have to use a little common sense.) Ordering for weeks 1 through 4 has the same low unit cost 
because there is no demand for week 5. We will say we are ordering for weeks 1 through 5 
so that we don’t place an unnecessary order in week 5 to cover demand for weeks 5 through 
8. For the second order, the lowest unit cost comes from ordering for weeks 6 through 8, so 
we would plan for an order of 425 units. As with the LTC example, our second order might 
change as we learn net requirements for weeks 9 and beyond. Based on these orders, we can 
now develop an order schedule based on LUC.
Week
Net 
Requirements
Production 
Quantity
Ending 
Inventory
Holding 
Cost
Setup 
Cost
Total 
Cost
1
105
365
260
$26.00
$100.00
$126.00
2
 80
0
180
 18.00
 0.00
 144.00
3
130
0
 50
5.00
 0.00
 149.00

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
583
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What do we mean when we say that MRP is based on dependent demand?
	  2.	 Discuss the importance of the master production schedule in an MRP system.
	  3.	 Explain the need for time fences in the master production schedule.
	  4.	 “MRP just prepares shopping lists. It does not do the shopping or cook the dinner.” 
Comment.
	  5.	 What are the sources of demand in an MRP system? Are these dependent or independent, 
and how are they used as inputs to the system?
	  6.	 State the types of data that would be carried in the bill-of-materials file and the inventory 
record file.
	  7.	 Discuss the meaning of MRP terms such as planned order release and scheduled order 
receipt.
	  8.	 Why is the MRP process referred to as an “explosion”?
	  9.	 Many practitioners currently update MRP weekly or biweekly. Would it be more valuable 
if it were updated daily? Discuss.
	10.	 Should safety stock be necessary in an MRP system with dependent demand? If so, why? 
If not, why do firms carry it anyway?
	11.	 Contrast the significance of the term lead time in the traditional EOQ context and in an 
MRP system.
	12.	 Planning orders using a lot-for-lot (L4L) technique is commonly done because it is simple 
and intuitive. It also helps minimize holding costs because you are only ordering what is 
needed when it is needed. So far, it sounds like a good idea. Are there any disadvantages 
to this approach?
	13.	 What is meant when we say that the least total cost (LTC) and least unit cost (LUC) meth­
ods are dynamic lot-sizing techniques?
LO 21–1
LO 21–2
LO 21–3
LO 21–4
4
 50
0
0
0.00
 0.00
 149.00
5
0
0
0
0.00
 0.00
 149.00
6
200
425
225
 22.50
 100.00
 271.50
7
125
0
100
 10.00
 0.00
 281.50
8
100
0
0
0.00
 0.00
 281.50
Best Lot Size Method
Based on the data we have available, the total costs for each lot-sizing method are lot-for-lot, 
$700.00; EOQ, $350.40; LTC, $359.00; and LUC, $281.50. The relatively high setup cost in 
this example makes lot-for-lot an unwise choice. LUC has the lowest total cost by a signifi­
cant margin. It works so well here because it minimizes holding costs across the planning 
horizon.
Objective Questions
	  1.	 Match the industry type to the expected benefits from an MRP system as High, Medium, 
or Low.
Industry Type
Expected Benefit 
(High, Medium, or Low)
Assemble-to-stock
Assemble-to-order
Make-to-stock
Make-to-order
Engineer-to-order
Process
LO 21–1

584	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	  2.	 MRP is based on what type of demand?
	  3.	 Which scheduling process drives requirements in the MRP process?
	  4.	 What term is used to identify the difference between the number of units of an item listed 
on the master schedule and the number of firm customer orders?
	  5.	 What are the three primary data sources used by the MRP system?
	  6.	 What is another common name for the bill-of-materials?
	  7.	 What is the process used to ensure that all of the needs for a particular item are calculated 
at the same time in the MRP process?
	  8.	 What is the MRP term for the time periods used in planning?
Note: For these problems, to simplify data handling to include the receipt of orders that have 
actually been placed in previous periods, the following six-level scheme can be used. (A 
number of different techniques are used in practice, but the important issue is to keep track 
of what is on-hand, what is expected to arrive, what is needed, and what size orders should 
be placed.) One way to calculate the numbers is as follows:
Week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned-order receipt
Planned-order release
	  9.	 Semans is a manufacturer that produces bracket assemblies. Demand for bracket assem­
blies (X) is 130 units. The following is the BOM in indented form:
Item
Description
Usage
X 
Bracket assembly
1
   A
Wall board
4
  B
Hanger subassembly
2
     D
Hanger casting
3
     E
Ceramic knob
1
   C
Rivet head screw
3
     F
Metal tong
4
     G
Plastic cap
2
The following is a table indicating current inventory levels:
Item
X
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Inventory
25
16
60
20
180
160
1,000
100
	
a.  Using Excel, create the MRP using the information provided.
	
b.  What are the net requirements of each item in the MPS?
	10.	 In the following MRP planning schedule for item J, indicate the correct net requirements, 
planned-order receipts, and planned-order releases to meet the gross requirements. Lead 
time is one week.
Week Number
Item J
0
1
2
3
4
5
Gross requirements
75
50
70
On-hand
40
Net requirements
Planned-order receipt
Planned-order release
LO 21–2
LO 21–3

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
585
	11.	 Assume that product Z is made of two units of A and four units of B. A is made of three 
units of C and four of D. D is made of two units of E.
  Lead times for the purchase or fabrication of each unit to final assembly are: Z takes 
two weeks; A, B, C, and D take one week each; and E takes three weeks.
  Fifty units are required in period 10. (Assume that there is currently no inventory on-
hand of any of these items.) 
	
a.  Show the bill-of-materials (product structure tree). (Answer in Appendix D)
	
b.  Develop an MRP planning schedule showing gross and net requirements and order 
release and order receipt dates.
	12.	 One unit of A is made of three units of B, one unit of C, and two units of D. B is com­
posed of two units of E and one unit of D. C is made of one unit of B and two units of E. 
E is made of one unit of F.
  Items B, C, E, and F have one-week lead times; A and D have lead times of two weeks.
  Assume that lot-for-lot (L4L) lot sizing is used for items A, B, and F; lots of size 50, 
50, and 200 are used for Items C, D, and E, respectively. Items C, E, and F have on-hand 
(beginning) inventories of 10, 50, and 150, respectively; all other items have zero begin­
ning inventory. We are scheduled to receive 10 units of A in week 2, 50 units of E in week 
1, and also 50 units of F in week 1. There are no other scheduled receipts. If 30 units of 
A are required in week 8, use the low-level-coded bill-of-materials to find the necessary 
planned-order releases for all components.
	13.	 One unit of A is made of two units of B, three units of C, and two units of D. B is com­
posed of one unit of E and two units of F. C is made of two units of F and one unit of D. 
E is made of two units of D. Items A, C, D, and F have one-week lead times; B and E 
have lead times of two weeks. Lot-for-lot (L4L) lot sizing is used for items A, B, C, and 
D; lots of size 50 and 180 are used for items E and F, respectively. Item C has an on-hand 
(beginning) inventory of 15; D has an on-hand inventory of 50; all other items have zero 
beginning inventories. We are scheduled to receive 20 units of item E in week 2; there are 
no other scheduled receipts.
  Construct simple and low-level-coded bill-of-materials (product structure tree) and 
indented and summarized parts lists.
  If 20 units of A are required in week 8, use the low-level-coded bill-of-materials to find 
the necessary planned-order releases for all components.
	14.	 One unit of A is made of one unit of B and one unit of C. B is made of four units of C and 
one unit each of E and F. C is made of two units of D and one unit of E. E is made of three 
units of F. Item C has a lead time of one week; items A, B, E, and F have two-week lead 
times; and item D has a lead time of three weeks. Lot-for-lot (L4L) lot sizing is used for 
items A, D, and E; lots of size 50, 100, and 50 are used for items B, C, and F, respectively. 
Items A, C, D, and E have on-hand (beginning) inventories of 20, 50, 100, and 10, respec­
tively; all other items have zero beginning inventory. We are scheduled to receive 10 units 
of A in week 1, 100 units of C in week 1, and 100 units of D in week 3; there are no other 
scheduled receipts. If 50 units of A are required in week 10, use the low-level-coded bill-
of-materials (product structure tree) to find the necessary planned-order releases for all 
components.
	15.	 One unit of A is made of two units of B and one unit of C. B is made of three units of D 
and one unit of F. C is composed of three units of B, one unit of D, and four units of E. D 
is made of one unit of E. Item C has a lead time of one week; items A, B, E, and F have 
two-week lead times; and item D has a lead time of three weeks. Lot-for-lot (L4L) lot siz­
ing is used for items C, E, and F; lots of size 20, 40, and 160 are used for items A, B, and 
D, respectively. Items A, B, D, and E have on-hand (beginning) inventories of 5, 10, 100, 
and 100, respectively; all other items have zero beginning inventories. We are scheduled 
to receive 10 units of A in week 3, 20 units of B in week 7, 40 units of F in week 5, and 
60 units of E in week 2; there are no other scheduled receipts. If 20 units of A are required 
in week 10, use the low-level-coded bill-of-materials (product structure tree) to find the 
necessary planned order releases for all components.

586	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	16.	 One unit of A is composed of two units of B and three units of C. Each B is composed of 
one unit of F. C is made of one unit of D, one unit of E, and two units of F. Items A, B, C, 
and D have 20, 50, 60, and 25 units of on-hand inventory, respectively. Items A, B, and 
C use lot-for-lot (L4L) as their lot-sizing technique, while D, E, and F require multiples 
of 50, 100, and 100, respectively, to be purchased. B has scheduled receipts of 30 units in 
period 1. No other scheduled receipts exist. Lead times are one period for items A, B, and 
D, and two periods for items C, E, and F. Gross requirements for A are 20 units in period 
1, 20 units in period 2, 60 units in period 6, and 50 units in period 8. Find the planned 
order releases for all items.
	17.	 Each unit of A is composed of one unit of B, two units of C, and one unit of D. C is com­
posed of two units of D and three units of E. Items A, C, D, and E have on-hand inven­
tories of 20, 10, 20, and 10 units, respectively. Item B has a scheduled receipt of 10 units 
in period 1, and C has a scheduled receipt of 50 units in period 1. Lot-for-lot (L4L) lot 
sizing is used for items A and B. Item C requires a minimum lot size of 50 units. D and 
E are required to be purchased in multiples of 100 and 50, respectively. Lead times are 
one period for items A, B, and C, and two periods for items D and E. The gross require­
ments for A are 30 in period 2, 30 in period 5, and 40 in period 8. Find the planned-order 
releases for all items.
	18.	 Product A is an end item and is made from two units of B and four of C. B is made of 
three units of D and two of E. C is made of two units of F and two of E.
  A has a lead time of one week. B, C, and E have lead times of two weeks, and D and F 
have lead times of three weeks.
	
a.  Show the bill-of-materials (product structure tree).
	
b.  If 100 units of A are required in week 10, develop the MRP planning schedule, speci­
fying when items are to be ordered and received. There are currently no units of inven­
tory on-hand.
	19.	 Audio Products, Inc., produces two AM/FM/CD players for cars. The radio/CD units are 
identical, but the mounting hardware and finish trim differ. The standard model fits inter­
mediate and full-sized cars, and the sports model fits small sports cars.
  Audio Products handles the production in the following way. The chassis (radio/CD 
unit) is assembled in Mexico and has a manufacturing lead time of two weeks. The 
mounting hardware is purchased from a sheet steel company and has a three-week lead 
time. The finish trim is purchased as prepackaged units consisting of knobs and various 
trim pieces from a Taiwan electronics company with offices in Los Angeles. Trim pack­
ages have a two-week lead time. Final assembly time may be disregarded because adding 
the trim package and mounting are performed by the customer.
  Audio Products supplies wholesalers and retailers, which place specific orders for both 
models up to eight weeks in advance. These orders, together with enough additional units 
to satisfy the small number of individual sales, are summarized in the following demand 
schedule.
Week
Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Standard model
300
400
Sports model
200
100
  There are currently 50 radio/CD units on-hand but no trim packages or mounting 
hardware.
  Prepare a material requirements plan to meet the demand schedule exactly. Specify the 
gross and net requirements, on-hand amounts, and the planned order release and receipt 
periods for the radio/CD chassis, the standard trim and sports car model trim, and the 
standard mounting hardware and the sports car mounting hardware.

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
587
	20.	 The MRP gross requirements for item A are shown here for the next 10 weeks. Lead time 
for A is three weeks and setup cost is $10. There is a carrying cost of $0.01 per unit per 
week. Beginning inventory is 90 units.
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gross 
requirements
30
50
10
20
70
80
20
60
200
50
Use the least total cost or the least unit cost lot-sizing method to determine when and for 
what quantity the first order should be released.
	21.	 The MRP gross requirements for item X are shown here for the next 10 weeks. Lead time 
for A is two weeks, and setup cost is $9. There is a carrying cost of $0.02 per unit per 
week. Beginning inventory is 70 units.
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Gross 
requirements
20
10
15
45
10
30
100
20
40
150
Use the least total cost or the least unit cost lot-sizing method to determine when and for 
what quantity the first order should be released. (Answer in Appendix D)
	22.	 Product A consists of two units of subassembly B, three units of C, and one unit of D. B 
is composed of four units of E and three units of F. C is made of two units of H and three 
units of D. H is made of five units of E and two units of G.
	
a.  Construct a simple bill-of-materials (product structure tree).
	
b.  Construct a product structure tree using low-level coding.
	
c.  Construct an indented parts list.
	
d.  To produce 100 units of A, determine the number of units of B, C, D, E, F, G, and H 
required.
LO 21–4
Recently, Phil Harris, the production control manager at 
Brunswick, read an article on time-phased requirements 
planning. He was curious about how this technique might 
work in scheduling Brunswick’s engine assembly opera­
tions and decided to prepare an example to illustrate the 
use of time-phased requirements planning.
Phil’s first step was to prepare a master schedule 
for one of the engine types produced by Brunswick: the 
Model 1000 engine. This schedule indicates the num­
ber of units of the Model 1000 engine to be assembled 
each week during the last 12 weeks and is shown on the 
next page. Next, Phil decided to simplify his require­
ments planning example by considering only two of the 
many components needed to complete the assembly of 
the Model 1000 engine. These two components, the gear 
box and the input shaft, are shown in the product struc­
ture diagram shown below. Phil noted that the gear box 
is assembled by the Subassembly Department and subse­
quently is sent to the main engine assembly line. The input 
shaft is one of several component parts manufactured by 
Brunswick needed to produce a gear box subassembly. 
Thus, levels 0, 1, and 2 are included in the product struc­
ture diagram to indicate the three manufacturing stages 
involved in producing an engine: the Engine Assem­
bly Department, the Subassembly Department, and the 
Machine Shop.
The manufacturing lead times required to produce 
the gear box and input shaft components are also indi­
cated in the bill-of-materials diagram. Note that two 
weeks are required to produce a batch of gear boxes and 
that all the gear boxes must be delivered to the assembly 
line parts stockroom before Monday morning of the week 
in which they are to be used. Likewise, it takes three 
weeks to produce a lot of input shafts, and all the shafts 
needed for the production of gear boxes in a given week 
must be delivered to the Subassembly Department stock­
room before Monday morning of that week.
In preparing the MRP example, Phil planned to use 
the worksheets shown on the next page and to make the 
following assumptions:
	1.	 Seventeen gear boxes are on-hand at the beginning 
of week 1, and five gear boxes are currently on 
order to be delivered at the start of week 2.
	2.	 Forty input shafts are on-hand at the start of week 
1, and 22 are scheduled for delivery at the begin­
ning of week 2.
Analytics Exercise: An MRP Explosion—Brunswick Motors

588	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Week
Quantity
1
2
3
4
5
Engine assembly master schedule
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order release
1
2
3
4
5
Gear box requirements
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected available balance
Net requirements
Planned order release
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Input shaft requirements
Week
1
2
3
4
5
Model 1000 master schedule
Model 1000 product structure
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Demand
15
5
7
10
15
20
10
8
2
16
Gear box
Lead time = 2 weeks
Used: 1 per engine
Crankcase
Input shaft
Lead time = 3 weeks
Used: 2 per gear box
Engine assembly
Assignment
	1.	 Initially, assume that Phil wants to minimize his 
inventory requirements. Assume that each order 
will be only for what is required for a single 
period. Using the following forms, calculate the 
net requirements and planned order releases for the 
gear boxes and input shafts. Assume that lot sizing 
is done using lot-for-lot.
	2.	 Phil would like to consider the costs that his 
accountants are currently using for inventory 
carrying and setup for the gear boxes and input 
shafts. These costs are as follows:
Part
Cost
Gear Box
Setup = $90/order
Inventory carrying cost = $2/unit/week
Input Shaft
Setup = $45/order
Inventory carrying cost = $1/unit/week
	 	   Given the cost structure, evaluate the cost of the 
schedule from (1). Assume inventory is valued at 
the end of each week.
	3.	 Find a better schedule by reducing the number of 
orders and carrying some inventory. What are the 
cost savings with this new schedule?

	
Material Requirements Planning	
Chapter 21	
589
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 Term used for a computer system that integrates appli­
cation programs for the different functions in a firm.
	  2.	 Logic used to calculate the needed parts, components, 
and other materials needed to produce an end item.
	  3.	 This drives the MRP calculations and is a detailed 
plan for how we expect to meet demand.
	  4.	 Period of time during which a customer has a speci­
fied level of opportunity to make changes.
	  5.	 This identifies the specific materials used to make 
each item and the correct quantities of each.
	  6.	 If an item is used in two places in a bill-of-materials, 
say level 3 and level 4, what low-level code would be 
assigned to the item?
	  7.	 One unit of part C is used in item A and in item 
B. Currently, we have 10 As, 20 Bs, and 100 Cs in 
inventory. We want to ship 60 As and 70 Bs. How 
many additional Cs do we need to purchase?
	  8.	 These are orders that have already been released and 
are to arrive in the future.
	  9.	 This is the total amount required for a particular item.
	10.	 This is the amount needed after considering what we 
currently have in inventory and what we expect to 
arrive in the future.
	11.	 The planned-order receipt and planned-order release 
are offset by this amount of time.
	12.	 These are the part quantities issued in the planned-
order release section of an MRP report.
	13.	 The term for ordering exactly what is needed each 
period without regard to economic considerations.
	14.	 None of the techniques for determining order quan­
tity consider this important noneconomic factor that 
could make the order quantity infeasible.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Enterprise resource planning (ERP)  2. Material requirements planning (MRP)  3. Master production schedule  
4. Time fence  5. Bill-of-materials  6. Level 4  7. Zero  8. Scheduled receipts  9. Gross requirements  10. Net requirements  11. Lead time  12. Lot 
sizes  13. Lot-for-lot ordering  14. Capacity

590
Patients in a hospital 
waiting room. 
© Heath Korvola/Getty 
Images RF
22
Workcenter 
Scheduling
Learning Objectives
	LO22–1	
Explain workcenter scheduling.
	LO22–2	
Analyze scheduling problems using priority rules and more specialized techniques.
	LO22–3	
Apply scheduling techniques to the manufacturing shop floor.
	LO22–4	
Analyze employee schedules in the service sector.
HOSPITALS CUT ER WAITS—NEW “FAST 
TRACK” UNITS, HIGH-TECH IDS SPEED VISITS
A few years ago, Oakwood Hospital and Medical Center in Dearborn, Michigan, prom­
ised that anybody taken to the emergency department would be seen by a doctor 
within 30 minutes—or they would get a written apology and two free movie passes. It 
sounded like a cheap marketing ploy. Some employees cringed.
The 30-minute guarantee has been a huge success. 
All four of Oakwood Healthcare System’s hospitals rolled 
it out, and patient satisfaction levels soared. Less than 1 
percent of the patients asked for free tickets.
Recently, the center announced a zero-wait program 
in the four hospital emergency departments and at Oak­
wood’s health care center. Success with this precedent-
setting service is not yet known, but processes were 
redesigned and some tricky scheduling of staff is being 
employed.
A growing number of hospitals are putting patients 
with relatively minor ailments—who previously would 
be left to languish in the waiting room—into “fast track” 
units to get them in and out of emergency beds quickly. 
Others are using sophisticated computer systems to give 
administrators a complete up-to-the-minute status report on every patient in every 
emergency bed. In some areas, medical identification cards are being used that can 

	
591
Keep in mind that workflow equals cash flow, and scheduling lies at the heart of the process. 
A schedule is a timetable for performing activities, utilizing resources, or allocating facilities. 
In this chapter, we discuss short-run scheduling and control of orders with an emphasis on 
workcenters. We also introduce some basic approaches to short-term scheduling of workers 
in services.
Operations scheduling is at the heart of what is currently referred to as Manufacturing 
Execution Systems (MES). An MES is an information system that schedules, dispatches, 
tracks, monitors, and controls production on the factory floor. Such systems also provide 
real-time linkages to MRP systems, product and process planning, and systems that extend 
beyond the factory, including supply chain management, ERP, sales, and service manage­
ment. A number of software specialty houses develop and implement MESs as part of a suite 
of software tools.
Similar to an MES, a Service Execution System (SES) is an information system that links, 
schedules, dispatches, tracks, monitors, and controls the customer’s encounters with the ser­
vice organization and its employees. Obviously, the extent to which each of these elements 
is brought into play is determined by the extent of the customer’s physical involvement with 
the service organization, the number of stages in the service, and whether the service is stan­
dardized (e.g., a scheduled airline flight) or customized (e.g., a hospital visit). The common 
features of any large system are a central database that contains all the relevant information 
on resource availability and customers, and a management control function that integrates and 
oversees the process.
The Nature and Importance of Workcenters
A workcenter is an area in a business in which productive resources are organized and work 
is completed. The workcenter may be a single machine, a group of machines, or an area where 
a particular type of work is done. These workcenters can be organized according to function 
in a workcenter configuration or by-product in a flow, assembly line, or group technology cell 
(GT cell) configuration. Recall from the discussion in Chapter 8 that many firms have moved 
from the workcenter configuration to GT cells.
In the case of the workcenter, jobs need to be routed between functionally organized work­
centers to complete the work. When a job arrives at a workcenter—for example, the drilling 
department in a factory that makes custom-printed circuit boards—it enters a queue to wait 
for a drilling machine that can drill the required holes. Scheduling, in this case, involves deter­
mining the order for running the jobs, and also assigning a machine that can be used to make 
the holes.
A characteristic that distinguishes one scheduling system from another is how capac­
ity is considered in determining the schedule. Scheduling systems can use either infinite 
or finite loading. Infinite loading occurs when work is assigned to a workcenter simply 
based on what is needed over time. No consideration is given directly to whether there 
is sufficient capacity at the resources required to complete the work, nor is the actual 
sequence of the work as done by each resource in the workcenter considered. Often, a 
simple check is made of key resources to see if they are overloaded in an aggregate sense. 
This is done by calculating the amount of work required over a period (usually a week) 
Workcenter
Often referred to as a job 
shop, a process structure 
suited for low-volume 
production of a great 
variety of nonstandard 
products.  Workcenters 
sometimes are referred to 
as departments and are 
focused on a particular 
type of operation.
Infinite loading
Work is assigned to a 
workcenter based on 
what is needed over time. 
Capacity is not considered.
WORKCENTER SCHEDULING
be swiped into a computer to speed up patient registrations and produce instant vital 
information to emergency doctors and nurses. Other changes needed to slash wait­
ing times require reengineering billing, records, and laboratory operations; upgrad­
ing technical staff; and replacing the emergency physician group with a new crew 
willing to work longer hours.
Explain workcenter 
scheduling.
LO 22–1
Manufacturing 
Execution System 
(MES)
An information system that 
schedules, dispatches, 
tracks, monitors, and 
controls production on the 
factory floor.

592	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
using setup and run time standards for each order. When using an infinite loading system, 
lead time is estimated by taking a multiple of the expected operation time (setup and run 
time) plus an expected queuing delay caused by material movement and waiting for the 
order to be worked on.
A finite loading approach actually schedules in detail each resource using the setup and 
run time required for each order. In essence, the system determines exactly what will be done 
by each resource at every moment during the working day. If an operation is delayed due to 
a part(s) shortage, the order will sit in the queue and wait until the part is available from a 
preceding operation. Theoretically, all schedules are feasible when finite loading is used.
Another characteristic that distinguishes scheduling systems is whether the schedule is 
generated forward or backward in time. For this forward–backward dimension, the most com­
mon is forward scheduling. Forward scheduling refers to the situation in which the system 
takes an order and then schedules each operation that must be completed forward in time. A 
system that forward schedules can tell the earliest date that an order can be completed. Con­
versely, backward scheduling starts from some date in the future (possibly a due date) and 
schedules the required operations in reverse sequence. This tells the latest time when an order 
can be started so that it is completed by a specific date.
A material requirements planning (MRP) system is an example of an infinite loading, 
backward scheduling system for materials. With simple MRP, each order has a due date some­
time in the future. In this case, the system calculates parts needs by backward scheduling 
the time that the operations will be run to complete the orders. The time required to make 
each part (or batch of parts) is estimated based on historical data. The scheduling systems 
addressed in this chapter are intended for the processes required to actually make those parts 
and subassemblies.
Thus far, the term resources has been used in a generic sense. In practice, we need to 
decide what we are going to actually schedule. Commonly, processes are referred to as either 
machine limited or labor limited. In a machine-limited process, equipment is the critical 
resource that is scheduled. Similarly, in a labor-limited process, people are the key resource 
that is scheduled. Most actual processes are either labor limited or machine limited but, luck­
ily, not both.
Finite loading
Each resource is scheduled 
in detail using the setup 
and run time required for 
each order. The system 
determines exactly what 
will be done by each 
resource at every moment 
during the working day.
Forward scheduling
Schedules from now 
into the future to tell the 
earliest that an order can 
be completed.
Backward scheduling
Starts from some date in 
the future (typically the 
due date) and schedules 
the required operations in 
reverse sequence. Tells the 
latest time when an order 
can be started so that it is 
completed by a specific 
date.
Machine-limited 
process
Equipment is the critical 
resource that is scheduled.
Labor-limited process
People are the key 
resource that is scheduled.
At kaiten sushi 
restaurants, sushi is 
circulated to customers 
on a conveyor belt. In 
order to monitor the 
quality of the product, 
some Kaiten Sushi 
restaurants use RFID 
tagging.
© sozaijiten/Datacraft/Getty 
Images RF

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
593
Exhibit 22.1 describes the scheduling approaches typically used for different manufac­
turing processes. Whether capacity is considered depends on the actual process. Available 
computer technology allows generation of very detailed schedules such as scheduling each 
job on each machine and assigning a specific worker to the machine at a specific point in time. 
Systems that capture the exact state of each job and each resource are also available. Using 
RFID or bar-coding technology, these systems can efficiently capture all of this detailed 
information.
Typical Scheduling and Control Functions
The following functions must be performed in scheduling and controlling an operation:
	1.	 Allocating jobs, equipment, and personnel to workcenters or other specified loca­
tions. Essentially, this is short-run capacity planning.
	2.	 Determining the sequence of order performance (that is, establishing job priorities).
	3.	 Initiating performance of the scheduled work. This is commonly termed the 
dispatching of jobs.
	4.	 Shop-floor control (or production activity control) involving:
       a.  Reviewing the status and controlling the progress of jobs as they are being worked on.
       b.  Expediting late and critical jobs.
A simple workcenter scheduling process is shown in Exhibit 22.2. At the start of the day, 
the scheduler (in this case, a production control person assigned to this department) selects 
and sequences available jobs to be run at individual workstations. The scheduler’s decisions 
would be based on the operations and routing requirements of each job, the status of existing 
jobs at each workcenter, the queue of work before each workcenter, job priorities, material 
availability, anticipated job orders to be released later in the day, and workcenter resource 
capabilities (labor and/or machines).
To help organize the schedule, the scheduler would draw on job status information from the 
previous day, external information provided by central production control, process engineer­
ing, and so on. The scheduler also would confer with the supervisor of the department about 
the feasibility of the schedule, especially workforce considerations and potential bottlenecks. 
Dispatching
The activity of initiating 
scheduled work.
Type
Product
Characteristics
Typical Scheduling Approach
Continuous 
process
Chemicals, steel, wire and 
cables, liquids (beer, soda), 
canned goods
Full automation, low labor content 
in product costs, facilities dedi­
cated to one product
Finite forward scheduling of the process; 
machine limited
High-volume 
manufacturing
Automobiles, telephones, fasten­
ers, textiles, motors, household 
fixtures
Automated equipment, partially 
automated handling, moving 
assembly lines, most equipment 
in line
Finite forward scheduling of the line (a 
production rate is typical); machine limited; 
parts are pulled to the line using just-in-time 
(kanban) system
Mid-volume 
manufacturing
Industrial parts, high-end 
consumer products
GT cells, focused minifactories
Infinite forward scheduling typical: priority con­
trol; typically labor limited, but often machine 
limited; often responding to just-in-time orders 
from customers or MRP due dates
Low-volume 
workcenters
Custom or prototype equipment, 
specialized instruments, low-
volume industrial products
Machining centers organized by 
manufacturing function (not in 
line), high labor content in product 
cost, general-purpose machinery 
with significant changeover time, 
little automation of material han­
dling, large variety of product
Infinite, forward scheduling of jobs: usually 
labor limited, but certain functions may be 
machine limited (a heat-treating process or 
a precision machining center, for example); 
priorities determined by MRP due dates
Types of Manufacturing Processes and Scheduling Approaches
exhibit 22.1

594	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The details of the schedule are communicated to workers via dispatch lists shown on com­
puter terminals, in hard-copy printouts, or by posting a list of what should be worked on in 
central areas. Visible schedule boards are highly effective ways to communicate the priority 
and current status of work.
Objectives of Workcenter Scheduling
The objectives of workcenter scheduling are to (1) meet due dates, (2) minimize lead time, 
(3) minimize setup time or cost, (4) minimize work-in-process inventory, and (5) maximize 
machine or labor utilization. It is unlikely, and often undesirable, to simultaneously satisfy all 
of these objectives. For example, keeping all equipment and/or employees busy may result in 
having to keep too much inventory. Or, as another example, it is possible to meet 99 out of 100 
of your due dates but still have a major schedule failure if the one due date that was missed 
was for a critical job or key customer. The important point, as is the case with other produc­
tion activities, is to maintain a systems perspective to assure that workcenter objectives are in 
sync with the operations strategy of the organization.
Job Sequencing
The process of determining the job order on some machine or in some workcenter is known 
as sequencing or priority sequencing. Priority rules are the rules used in obtaining a job 
sequence. These can be very simple, requiring only that jobs be sequenced according to 
one piece of data, such as processing time, due date, or order of arrival. Other rules, though 
equally simple, may require several pieces of information, typically to derive an index number 
such as the least slack rule and the critical ratio rule (both defined later). Still others, such as 
Johnson’s rule (also discussed later), apply to job scheduling on a sequence of machines and 
require a computational procedure to specify the order of performance. Eight of the more 
common priority rules are shown in Exhibit 22.3.
The following standard measures of schedule performance are used to evaluate priority rules:
	1.	 Meeting due dates of customers or downstream operations.
	2.	 Minimizing the flow time (the time a job spends in the process).
	3.	 Minimizing work-in-process inventory.
	4.	 Minimizing the idle time of machines or workers.
Sequencing
The process of determining 
which job to start first on a 
machine or workcenter.
Priority rules
The logic used to 
determine the sequence of 
jobs in a queue.
Production
control
Supervisor
Station 3
Station 4
Station 2
Station 1
Orders
New
orders
Orders
Orders
Orders
Typical Scheduling Process
exhibit 22.2

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
595
Analyze scheduling 
problems using priority 
rules and more specialized 
techniques.
LO 22–2
EXAMPLE 22.1: n Jobs on One Machine
Mike Morales is the supervisor of Legal Copy-Express, which provides copy services for 
downtown Los Angeles law firms. Five customers submitted their orders at the beginning of 
the week. Specific scheduling data are as follows:
Job (in Order 
of Arrival)
Processing 
Time (Days)
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
A
3
5
B
4
6
C
2
7
D
6
9
E
1
2
All orders require the use of the only color copy machine available; Morales must decide on 
the processing sequence for the five orders. The evaluation criterion is minimum flow time. 
Suppose that Morales decides to use the FCFS rule in an attempt to make Legal Copy-Express 
appear fair to its customers.
1 FCFS (first come, first served). Orders are run in the order they arrive in the department.
2 SOT (shortest operating time). Run the job with the shortest completion time first, next-shortest sec­
ond, and so on. This is sometimes also referred to as SPT (shortest processing time). This rule is often 
combined with a lateness rule to prevent jobs with longer times from being delayed too long.
3 EDD (earliest due date first). Run the job with the earliest due date first.
4 STR (slack time remaining). This is calculated as the time remaining before the due date minus the 
processing time remaining. Orders with the shortest slack time remaining (STR) are run first.
STR = Time remaining before due date — Remaining processing time
5 STR/OP (slack time remaining per operation). Orders with the shortest slack time per number of 
operations are run first.
STR/OP = STR/Number of remaining operations
6 CR (critical ratio). This is calculated as the difference between the due date and the current date 
divided by the number of work days remaining. Orders with the smallest CR are run first.
7 LCFS (last come, first served). This rule occurs frequently by default. As orders arrive, they are placed 
on the top of the stack; the operator usually picks up the order on top to run first.
8 Random order or whim. The supervisors or the operators usually select whichever job they feel like 
running.
Priority Rules for Job Sequencing
exhibit 22.3
PRIORITY RULES AND TECHNIQUES
Scheduling n Jobs on One Machine
Let’s look at some of the eight priority rules compared in a static scheduling situation involv­
ing four jobs on one machine. (In scheduling terminology, this class of problems is referred 
to as an “n job—one-machine problem” or simply “n/1.”) The theoretical difficulty of sched­
uling problems increases as more machines are considered rather than as more jobs must be 
processed; therefore, the only restriction on n is that it be a specified, finite number. Consider 
the following example.

596	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
SOLUTION
FCFS RULE: The FCFS rule results in the following flow times:
FCFS Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (Days)
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
Flow 
Time (Days)
A
3
5
0 + 3 =   3
B
4
6
3 + 4 =   7
C
2
7
7 + 2 =   9
D
6
9
9 + 6 = 15
E
1
2
15 + 1 = 16
Total flow time = 3 + 7 + 9 + 15 + 16 = 50 days
​Average flow time = ​ 50 
___ 
5 ​ = 10 days​
Comparing the due date of each job with its flow time, we observe that only Job A will be on 
time. Jobs B, C, D, and E will be late by 1, 2, 6, and 14 days, respectively. On average, a job 
will be late by (0 + 1 + 2 + 6 + 14)∕5 = 4.6 days.
SOLUTION
SOT RULE: Let’s now consider the SOT rule. Here, Morales gives the highest priority to the 
order that has the shortest processing time. The resulting flow times are
SOT Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (Days)
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
Flow Time 
(Days)
E
1
2
0 + 1 =     1
C
2
7
1 + 2 =     3
A
3
5
3 + 3 =     6
B
4
6
6 + 4 = 10
D
6
9
10 + 6 = 16
Total flow time = 1 + 3 + 6 + 10 + 16 = 36 days
​Average flow time = ​ 36 
___ 
5 ​ = 7.2 days​
SOT results in a lower average flow time than the FCFS rule. In addition, Jobs E and C will 
be ready before the due date, and Job A is late by only one day. On average, a job will be late 
by (0 + 0 + 1 + 4 + 7)∕5 = 2.4 days.
SOLUTION
EDD RULE: If Morales decides to use the EDD rule, the resulting schedule is
EDD Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (Days)
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
Flow Time 
(Days)
E
1
2
0 + 1 =    1
A
3
5
1 + 3 =    4
B
4
6
4 + 4 =    8
C
2
7
8 + 2 = 10
D
6
9
10 + 6 = 16
Total flow time 1 + 4 + 8 + 10 + 16 = 39 days
Average flow time = 7.8 days

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
597
In this case, Jobs B, C, and D will be late. On average, a job will be late by (0 + 0 + 2 + 3 + 
7)∕5 = 2.4 days.
SOLUTION
LCFS, RANDOM, and STR RULES: Here are the resulting flow times of the LCFS, random, 
and STR rules:
Job Sequence
Processing 
Time (Days)
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
Flow Time 
(Days)
LCFS Schedule
E
1
2
0 + 1 =    1
D
6
9
1 + 6 =    7
C
2
7
7 + 2 =    9
B
4
6
9 + 4 = 13
A
3
5
13 + 3 = 16  
Total flow time = 46 days
Average flow time = 9.2 days
Average lateness = 4.0 days
Random Schedule
D
6
9
0 + 6 =   6
C
2
7
6 + 2 =   8
A
3
5
8 + 3 = 11
E
1
2
11 + 1 = 12  
B
4
6
12 + 4 = 16  
Total flow time = 53 days
Average flow time = 10.6 days
Average lateness = 5.4 days
STR Schedule
Slack
E
1
2
0 + 1 =    1
2 − 1 = 1
A
3
5
1 + 3 =    4
5 − 3 = 2
B
4
6
4 + 4 =    8
6 − 4 = 2
D
6
9
8 + 6 = 14
9 − 6 = 3
C
2
7
14 + 2 = 16
7 − 2 = 5
Total flow time = 43 days
Average flow time = 8.6 days
Average lateness = 3.2 days
C o m p ar i s o n  o f  P r i o r i t y  Ru l e s
Here are some of the results summarized for the rules that Morales examined:
Rule
Total Flow 
Time (Days)
Average Flow 
Time (Days)
Average Lateness 
(Days)
FCFS
50
10
4.6
SOT
36
 7.2
2.4
EDD
39
 7.8
2.4
LCFS
46
 9.2
4.0
Random
53
 10.6
5.4
STR
43
 8.6
3.2
Here, SOT is better than the other rules in terms of average flow time. Moreover, it can be 
shown mathematically that the SOT rule yields an optimal solution in the n/1 case for average 

598	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
flow time and performs well relative to average lateness as well. In fact, so powerful is this 
simple rule that it has been termed the most important concept in the entire aspect of sequenc­
ing. It does have its shortcomings, however. The main one is that longer jobs may never 
be started if short jobs keep arriving at the scheduler’s desk. To avoid this, companies may 
invoke what is termed a truncated SOT rule whereby jobs waiting for a specified time period 
are automatically moved to the front of the line.
Scheduling n Jobs on Two Machines
The next step up in complexity is the n/2 flow-shop case, where two or more jobs must be 
processed on two machines in a common sequence. As in the n/1 case, there is an approach 
that leads to an optimal solution according to certain criteria. The objective of this approach, 
termed Johnson’s rule or Johnson’s method (after its developer), is to minimize the flow time 
from the beginning of the first job until the finish of the last. Johnson’s rule consists of the 
following steps:
	1.	 List the operation time for each job on both machines.
	2.	 Select the shortest operation time.
	3.	 If the shortest time is on the first machine, do the job first; if it is on the second 
machine, do the job last. In the case of a tie, do the job on the first machine.
	4.	 Repeat Steps 2 and 3 for each remaining job until the schedule is complete.
EXAMPLE 22.2: n Jobs on Two Machines
We can illustrate this procedure by scheduling four jobs through two machines.
SOLUTION
Step 1: List operation times.
Job
Operation Time 
on Machine 1
Operation Time 
on Machine 2
A
3
2
B
6
8
C
5
6
D
7
4
	
Steps 2 and 3: Select the shortest operation time and assign. Job A is shortest on Machine 
2 and is assigned first and performed last. (Once assigned, Job A is no longer available to be 
scheduled.)
	
Step 4: Repeat Steps 2 and 3 until completion of the schedule. Select the shortest opera­
tion time among the remaining jobs. Job D is second-shortest on Machine 2, so it is per­
formed second to last. (Remember, Job A is last.) Now Jobs A and D are not available for 
scheduling. Job C is the shortest on Machine 1 among the remaining jobs. Job C is per­
formed first. Now only Job B is left with the shortest operation time on Machine 1. Thus, 
according to Step 3, it is performed first among the remaining, or second overall. (Job C was 
already scheduled first.)
	
In summary, the solution sequence is C → B → D → A and the flow time is 25 days, which 
is a minimum. Also minimized are total idle time and mean idle time. The final schedule 
appears in Exhibit 22.4.
	
These steps result in scheduling the jobs having the shortest time in the beginning and end 
of the schedule. As a result, the concurrent operating time for the two machines is maximized, 
thus minimizing the total operating time required to complete the jobs.
Johnson’s rule
A sequencing rule used 
for scheduling any number 
of jobs on two machines. 
The rule is designed to 
minimize the time required 
to complete all the jobs.

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
599
Machine 1
Job C
Job B
Job D
Job A
Idle but available
for other work
Machine 2
Idle
Job C
Job B
Job D
Job A
0
5
11
Cumulative time in days
19
23
25
Optimal Schedule of Jobs Using Johnson’s Rule
exhibit 22.4
Johnson’s method has been extended to yield an optimal solution for the n/3 case. When 
flow-shop scheduling problems larger than n/3 arise (and they generally do), analytical solu­
tion procedures leading to optimality are not available. The reason for this is that, even though 
the jobs may arrive in static fashion at the first machine, the scheduling problem becomes 
dynamic, and waiting lines start to form in front of machines downstream. At this point, 
it becomes a multistage queuing problem, which is generally solved using simulation tech­
niques such as those discussed in Chapter 10.
Scheduling a Set Number of Jobs on the Same Number 
of Machines
Some workcenters have enough of the right kinds of machines to start all jobs at the same 
time. Here, the problem is not which job to do first, but rather which particular assignment of 
individual jobs to individual machines will result in the best overall schedule. In such cases, 
we can use the assignment method.
The assignment method is a special case of the transportation method of linear program­
ming. It can be applied to situations where there are n supply sources and n demand uses 
(such as five jobs on five machines) and the objective is to minimize or maximize some 
measure of effectiveness. This technique is convenient in applications involving the allocation 
of jobs to workcenters, people to jobs, and so on. The assignment method is appropriate in 
solving problems that have the following characteristics:
	1.	 There are n “things” to be distributed to n “destinations.”
	2.	 Each thing must be assigned to one and only one destination.
	3.	 Only one criterion can be used (minimum cost, maximum profit, or minimum com­
pletion time, for example).
EXAMPLE 22.3: Assignment Method
Suppose that a scheduler has five jobs that can be performed on any of five machines (n = 5). 
The cost of completing each job–machine combination is shown in Exhibit 22.5. The scheduler 
would like to devise a minimum-cost assignment. (There are 5!, or 120, possible assignments.)
SOLUTION
This problem may be solved by the assignment method, which consists of four steps (note that 
this also can be solved using the Excel Solver):
	1.	 Subtract the smallest number in each row from itself and all other numbers in that row. 
(There will then be at least one zero in each row.)
	2.	 Subtract the smallest number in each column from all other numbers in that column. 
(There will then be at least one zero in each column.)
Assignment method
A special case of the 
transportation method of 
linear programming that is 
used to allocate a specific 
number of jobs to the same 
number of machines.

600	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	3.	 Determine if the minimum number of lines required to cover each zero is equal to 
n. If so, an optimal solution has been found, because job machine assignments must 
be made at the zero entries, and this test proves that this is possible. If the minimum 
number of lines required is less than n, go to Step 4.
	4.	 Draw the least possible number of lines through all the zeros. (These may be the same lines 
used in Step 3.) Subtract the smallest number not covered by lines from itself and all other 
uncovered numbers, and add it to the number at each intersection of lines. Repeat Step 3.
	
For the example problem, the steps listed in Exhibit 22.6 would be followed.
Machine
Job
A
B
C
D
E
I
$5
$6
$4
$8
$3
II
6
4
9
8
5
III
4
3
2
5
4
IV
7
2
4
5
3
V
3
6
4
5
5
Assignment Matrix Showing Machine Processing Costs for Each Job
exhibit 22.5
Step 1: Row reduction—the smallest number 
is subtracted from each row.
I 
2 
3 
1 
5 
0
II 
2 
0 
5 
4 
1
III 
2 
1 
0 
3 
2
IV 
5 
0 
2 
3 
1
V 
0 
3 
1 
2 
2
Step 2: Column reduction—the smallest 
number is subtracted from each column.
I 
2 
3 
1 
3 
0
II 
2 
0 
5 
2 
1
III 
2 
1 
0 
1 
2
IV 
5 
0 
2 
1 
1
V 
0 
3 
1 
0 
2
Step 3: Apply line test—the number of lines to 
cover all zeros is 4; because 5 are required, 
go to step 4.
I 
2 
3 
1 
3 
0
II 
2 
0 
5 
2 
1
III 
2 
1 
0 
1 
2
IV 
5 
0 
2 
1 
1
V 
0 
3 
1 
0 
2
Step 4: Subtract smallest uncovered number and 
add to intersection of lines. Using lines drawn 
in Step 3, smallest uncovered number is 1.
I 
1 
3 
0 
2 
0
II 
1 
0 
4 
1 
1
III 
2 
2 
0 
1 
3
IV 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1
V 
0 
4 
1 
0 
3
Optimal assignments and their costs.
Job I to Machine E 
$ 3
Job II to Machine B 
4
Job III to Machine C 
2
Job IV to Machine D 
5
Job V to Machine A 
3
 Total cost 
$17
Optimal solution—by “line test.”
I 
1 
3 
0 
2 
0
II 
1 
0 
4 
1 
1
III 
2 
2 
0 
1 
3
IV 
4 
0 
1 
0 
1
V 
0 
4 
1 
0 
3
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Machine
Job
A
B
C
D
E
Job
A
B
C
D
E
Job
A
B
C
D
E
Job
A
B
C
D
E
Job
A
B
C
D
E
Procedure to Solve an Assignment Matrix
exhibit 22.6

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
601
	
Note that even though there are two zeros in three rows and three columns, the solution 
shown in Exhibit 22.6 is the only one possible for this problem because Job III must be 
assigned to Machine C to meet the “assign to zero” requirement. Other problems may have 
more than one optimal solution, depending, of course, on the costs involved.
The nonmathematical rationale of the assignment method is one of minimizing opportunity 
costs. For example, if we decided to assign Job I to Machine A instead of to Machine E, we would 
be sacrificing the opportunity to save $2 ($5 – $3). The assignment algorithm in effect performs 
such comparisons for the entire set of alternative assignments by means of row and column reduc­
tion, as described in Steps 1 and 2. It makes similar comparisons in Step 4. Obviously, if assign­
ments are made to zero cells, no opportunity cost, with respect to the entire matrix, occurs.
Scheduling n Jobs on m Machines
Complex workcenters are characterized by multiple machine centers processing a variety of 
different jobs arriving at the machine centers intermittently throughout the day. If there are n 
jobs to be processed on m machines and all jobs are processed on all machines, then there are 
(n!)m alternative schedules for this job set. Because of the large number of schedules that exist 
for even small workcenters, computer simulation (see Chapter 10) is the only practical way to 
determine the relative merits of different priority rules in such situations.
W h i c h  Pr i o r i t y  R u l e  S h o u l d  Be  U s e d ?  We believe that the needs of most 
manufacturers are reasonably satisfied by a relatively simple priority scheme that embodies 
the following principles:
	1.	 It should be dynamic; that is, computed frequently during a job to reflect changing 
conditions.
	2.	 It should be based in one way or another on slack (the difference between the work 
remaining to be done on a job and the time remaining to do it).
Current approaches used by companies combine simulation with human schedulers to create 
schedules.
SHOP-FLOOR CONTROL
Scheduling job priorities is just one aspect of shop-floor control (now often called­ ­production 
activity control). The APICS Dictionary defines a shop-floor control system as
A system for utilizing data from the shop floor as well as data processing 
files to maintain and communicate status information on shop orders and 
workcenters.
The major functions of shop-floor control are
∙	 Assigning the priority of each shop order.
∙	 Maintaining work-in-process quantity information.
∙	 Conveying shop-order status information to the office.
∙	 Providing actual output data for capacity control purposes.
∙	 Providing quantity by location by shop order for WIP inventory and accounting purposes.
∙	 Measuring efficiency, utilization, and productivity of manpower and machines.
Gantt Charts
Smaller job shops and individual departments of large ones employ the venerable Gantt chart 
to help plan and track jobs. As described in Chapter 4, the Gantt chart is a type of bar chart 
that plots tasks against time. Gantt charts are used for project planning and to coordinate a 
Apply scheduling 
techniques to the 
manufacturing shop floor.
LO 22–3
Shop-floor (production 
activity) control
A system for utilizing data 
from the shop floor to 
maintain and communicate 
status information on shop 
orders and workcenters.

602	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
number of scheduled activities. The example in Exhibit 22.7 indicates that Job A is behind 
schedule by about four hours, Job B is ahead of schedule, and Job C has been completed, after 
a delayed start for equipment maintenance. Note that whether the job is ahead of schedule or 
behind schedule is based on where it stands compared to where we are now. In Exhibit 22.7, 
we are at the end of Wednesday, and Job A should have been completed. Job B has already 
had some of Thursday’s work completed.
Tools of Shop-Floor Control
The basic tools of shop-floor control are
	1.	 The daily dispatch list, which tells the supervisor which jobs are to be run, their pri­
ority, and how long each will take. (See Exhibit 22.8A.)
	2.	 Various status and exception reports, including
	 a.	The anticipated delay report, made out by the shop planner once or twice a week 
and reviewed by the chief shop planner to see if there are any serious delays that 
could affect the master schedule. (See Exhibit 22.8B.)
	 b.	Scrap reports.
	 c.	Rework reports.
	 d.	Performance summary reports giving the number and percentage of orders com­
pleted on schedule, the lateness of unfilled orders, the volume of output, and so on.
	 e.	Shortage list.
	3.	 An input/output control report, which is used by the supervisor to monitor the work­
load–capacity relationship for each workstation. (See Exhibit 22.8C.)
I n p u t / O u t p u t  C o n t r o l   Input/output (I/O) control is a major feature of a 
manufacturing planning and control system. Its major precept is that the planned work input 
to a workcenter should never exceed the planned work output. When the input exceeds the 
output, backlogs build up at the workcenter, which in turn increases the lead time estimates 
for jobs upstream. Moreover, when jobs pile up at the workcenter, congestion occurs, 
processing becomes inefficient, and the flow of work to downstream workcenters becomes 
sporadic. (The water flow analogy to shop capacity control in Exhibit 22.9 illustrates the 
general phenomenon.) Exhibit 22.8C shows an I/O report for a downstream workcenter. 
Looking first at the lower or output half of the report, we see that output is far below plan. 
It would seem that a serious capacity problem exists for this workcenter. However, a look 
at the input part of the plan makes it apparent that the serious capacity problem exists at an 
upstream workcenter feeding this workcenter. The control process would entail finding the 
cause of upstream problems and adjusting capacity and inputs accordingly. The basic solution 
is simple: Either increase capacity at the bottleneck station or reduce the input to it. (Input 
reduction at bottleneck workcenters, incidentally, is usually the first step recommended by 
production control consultants when job shops get into trouble.)
D a t a  I n t e g r i t y  Shop-floor control systems in most modern plants are now computerized, 
with job status information entered directly into a computer as the job enters and leaves a 
Job
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
A
B
C
Maintenance
Start of an activity
End of an activity
Schedule allowed activity time
Actual work progress
Point in time where chart is reviewed
Time set aside for nonproduction 
activities; e.g., repairs, routine 
maintenance, material outages
Gantt Chart Symbols
Gantt Chart
exhibit 22.7
Input/output (I/O) 
control
Work being released 
into a workcenter should 
never exceed the planned 
work output. When the 
input exceeds the output, 
backlogs build up at the 
workcenter that increase 
the lead time.

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
603
A. Dispatch List
Workcenter 1501—Day 205
Start date
Job #
Description
Run time
201 
203 
205 
205 
207 
208
15131 
15143 
15145 
15712 
15340 
15312
Shaft 
Stud 
Spindle 
Spindle 
Metering rod
Shaft
11.4
20.6
4.3
8.6
6.5
4.6
B. Anticipated Delay Report
Dept. 24 April 8
Part #
Sched. date
New 
date
Cause of delay
Action
17125 
13044 
17653
4/10 
4/11
4/11
4/15 
5/1 
4/14
Fixture broke
Out for plating—
plater on strike
New part holes
don’t align
Toolroom will return
on 4/15
New lot started
Engineering laying out
new jig
C. Input/Output Control Report
Workcenter 0162
Week ending
Planned input
Actual input
Cumulative deviation
Planned output
Actual output
Cumulative deviation
505 
210 
110
–100
210
140
–70
512 
210 
150 
–160 
210 
120 
–160
519 
210 
140 
–230 
210 
160 
–210
526 
210 
130 
–310 
210 
120 
–300
Some Basic Tools of Shop-Floor Control
exhibit 22.8
workcenter. Many plants have gone heavily into bar coding and optical scanners to speed 
up the reporting process and to cut down on data entry errors. As you might guess, the key 
problems in shop-floor control are data inaccuracy and lack of timeliness. When these occur, 
data fed back to the overall planning system are wrong, and incorrect production decisions are 
made. Typical results are excess inventory, stockout problems, or both; missed due dates; and 
inaccuracies in job costing.
Of course, maintaining data integrity requires that a sound data-gathering system be in 
place. More importantly, however, it requires adherence to the system by everybody inter­
acting with it. Most firms recognize this, but maintaining what is variously referred to as 
shop discipline, data integrity, or data responsibility is not always easy. And despite periodic 
drives to publicize the importance of careful shop-floor reporting by creating data integrity 
task forces, inaccuracies can still creep into the system in many ways: A line worker drops a 
part under the workbench and pulls a replacement from stock without recording either trans­
action. An inventory clerk makes an error in a cycle count. A manufacturing engineer fails 
to note a change in the routing of a part. A department supervisor decides to work jobs in a 
different order than specified in the dispatch list.

604	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Output
completed orders
Capacity
Work in process
(load)
Manufacturing
lead time
Open unreleased
orders
New
orders
Production
control
Input rate
Shop Capacity Control Load Flow
exhibit 22.9
Principles of Workcenter Scheduling
Much of our discussion of workcenter scheduling systems can be summarized in the follow­
ing principles:
	1.	 There is a direct equivalence between workflow and cash flow.
	2.	 The effectiveness of any shop should be measured by speed of flow through the shop.
	3.	 Schedule jobs as a string, with process steps back to back.
An assembly line supervisor taking notes as he observes employees. 
© Corbis Super RF/Alamy RF
	  4.	 Once started, a job should not be 
interrupted.
	  5.	 Speed of flow is most efficiently 
achieved by focusing on bottleneck 
workcenters and jobs.
	  6.	 Reschedule every day.
	  7.	 Obtain feedback each day on jobs 
that are not completed at each 
workcenter.
	  8.	 Match workcenter input information 
to what the worker can actually do.
	  9.	 When seeking improvement in 
output, look for incompatibility 
between engineering design and 
­process execution.
	10.	 Certainty of standards, routings, 
and so forth, is not possible in 
a shop, but always work toward 
achieving it.

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
605
PERSONNEL SCHEDULING IN SERVICES
The scheduling problem in most service organizations revolves around setting weekly, daily, 
and hourly personnel schedules. In this section, we present a simple analytical approach for 
developing such schedules.
Scheduling Daily Work Times
We now show how bank clearinghouses and back-office operations of large bank branches 
establish daily work times. Basically, management wants to derive a staffing plan that 
(1) requires the fewest workers to accomplish the daily workload and (2) minimizes the vari­
ance between actual and planned output.
In structuring the problem, bank management defines inputs (checks, statements, invest­
ment documents, and so forth) as products, which are routed through different processes or 
functions (receiving, sorting, encoding, and so forth).
To solve the problem, a daily demand forecast is made by product for each function. This is 
converted to labor hours required per function, which in turn is converted to workers required 
Employee Scheduling Software Applied to 
Security
ScheduleSource Inc. of Broomfield, Colorado, offers an 
integrated suite of tools for workforce management named 
TeamWork. At the heart of TeamWork is a customizable and 
automated employee scheduling system. The benefits of 
TeamWork software include features such as Web-based, 
optimized schedules; zero conflict scheduling; time and 
attendance recordkeeping; e-mail notifications; audit trails; 
advanced reporting; and accessibility from anywhere any­
time. The way it works is this:
Step 1: Define labor requirements.
McGraw-Hill Education, Inc
Step 2: Establish employee availability.
McGraw-Hill Education, Inc
OSCM AT WORK
Step 3: Assign employees to particular skill sets and rank 
an employee’s skill set level from 1 to 10 (1 being novice, 5 
being average, and 10 being superlative).
Step 4: The TeamWork software automatically builds a 
schedule.
McGraw-Hill Education, Inc
ScheduleSource customers include the Transportation 
Security Administration (TSA). ScheduleSource was suc­
cessfully implemented to generate schedules for more than 
44,000 federal airport security personnel at 429 airports. 
Over 30,000,000 individual shifts were scheduled in the air­
port security deployment.
Analyze employee 
schedules in the service 
sector.
LO 22–4

606	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
per function. These figures are then tabulated, summed, and adjusted by an absence and vaca­
tion factor to give planned hours. They are then divided by the number of hours in the work­
day to yield the number of workers required. This yields the daily staff hours required. (See 
Exhibit 22.10.) This becomes the basis for a departmental staffing plan that lists the workers 
required, workers available, variance, and managerial action to deal with the variance. (See 
Exhibit 22.11.)
Scheduling Hourly Work Times
Services such as restaurants face changing requirements from hour to hour. More workers 
are needed for peak hours, and fewer are needed in between. Management must continu­
ously adjust to this changing requirement. This kind of personnel scheduling situation can 
be approached by applying a simple rule, the “first-hour” principle. This procedure can be 
best explained using the following example. Assume that each worker works continuously 
for an eight-hour shift. The first-hour rule says that for the first hour, we assign a number 
of workers equal to the requirement in that period. For each subsequent period, assign the 
exact number of additional workers to meet the requirements. When in a period one or more 
workers come to the end of their shifts, add more workers only if they are needed to meet the 
requirement. The following table shows the worker requirements for the first 12 hours in a 
24-hour restaurant:
Function
Receive
Preprocess
Microfilm
Verify
Totals
Product
Daily Volume
P/H
Hstd
P/H
Hstd
P/H
Hstd
P/H
Hstd
Hstd
Checks
2,000
1,000
2.0 
600
3.3 
240
 8.3
640
3.1 
16.8
Statements
1,000
—
—
600
1.7 
250
 4.0
150
6.7 
12.3
Notes
200
30
6.7 
15
13.3 
—
20.0
Investments
400
100
4.0 
50
8.0 
200
 2.0
150
2.7 
16.7
Collections
500
300
  1.7
300
  1.7
60
  8.4
11.7
Total hours required
14.3 
26.3 
16.0
20.8 
77.5
Times 1.25 (absences 
and vacations)
17.9 
32.9 
20.0
26.0 
Divided by 8 hours 
equals staff required
2.2 
4.1 
 2.5
3.2 
12.1
Note: P/H indicates production rate per hour; Hstd indicates required hours.
Daily Staff Hours Required to Schedule Daily Work Times
exhibit 22.10
Function
Staff Required
Staff Available
Variance (±)
Management Actions
Receive
2.3
2.0
−0.3
Use overtime.
Preprocess
4.1
4.0
−0.1
Use overtime.
Microfilm
2.5
3.0
+0.5
Use excess to verify.
Verify
3.3
3.0
−0.3
Get 0.3 from microfilm.
Staffing Plan
exhibit 22.11
Period
10 a.m. 11 a.m. Noon 1 p.m
2 p.m. 3 p.m. 4 p.m. 5 p.m. 6 p.m. 7 p.m. 8 p.m.
9 p.m.
Requirement
4
6
8
8
6
4
4
6
8
10
10
6

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
607
The schedule shows that four workers are assigned at 10 A.M., two are added at 11 A.M., and 
another two are added at noon to meet the requirement. From noon to 5 P.M. we have eight 
workers on duty. Note the overstaffing between 2 P.M. and 6 P.M. The four workers assigned at 
10 A.M. finish their eight-hour shifts by 6 P.M., and four more workers are added to start their 
shifts. The two workers starting at 11 A.M. leave by 7 P.M., and the number of workers available 
drops to six. Therefore, four new workers are assigned at 7 P.M. At 9 P.M., there are 10 workers 
on duty, which is more than the requirement, so no worker is added. This procedure continues 
as new requirements are given.
Period
10 a.m. 11 a.m. Noon 1 p.m. 2 p.m. 3 p.m. 4 p.m. 5 p.m. 6 p.m. 7 p.m. 8 p.m. 9 p.m.
Requirement
4
6
8
8
6
4
4
6
8
10
10
  6
Assigned
4
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
4
  4
  2
  0
On duty
4
6
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
10
10
10
Another option is splitting shifts. For example, the worker can come in, work for four 
hours, then come back two hours later for another four hours. The impact of this option in 
scheduling is essentially similar to that of changing the lot size in production. When workers 
start working, they have to log in, change uniforms, and probably get necessary information 
from workers in the previous shift. This preparation can be considered as the “setup cost” in a 
production scenario. Splitting shifts is like having smaller production lot sizes and thus more 
preparation (more setups). This is a complex problem that can be solved by specialized linear 
programming methods. 
Concept Connections
LO 22–1   Explain workcenter scheduling.
Summary
	∙	 A schedule is a timetable for performing work that 
indicates how resources are to be used over time. 
	∙	 This chapter focuses on short-term schedules showing 
what is to be done over the next few days or weeks. 
	∙	 One characteristic of a scheduling system is whether 
capacity is directly considered or not (finite versus 
infinite loading). Another characteristic is whether 
jobs are scheduled forward, from now and into the 
future, or backward from a due date. 
	∙	 Typically, either labor or equipment is scheduled, 
depending on what is the most limiting resource in a 
process. 
	∙	 Typically, work is done in workcenters and the main 
focus of the chapter is on scheduling jobs through 
these areas. This process involves (1) allocating jobs 
to resources, (2) sequencing the jobs at each resource, 
(3) releasing (dispatching) the jobs, and (4) monitor­
ing the status of the jobs. 
	∙	 Jobs are often sequenced (ordered) using priority 
rules based on processing time, due dates, or order of 
arrival. This entire process is often done using a com­
prehensive software package known as a manufactur­
ing execution system.
Key Terms
Manufacturing Execution System (MES)  An information 
system that schedules, dispatches, tracks, monitors, and 
controls production on the factory floor.
Workcenter  Often referred to as a job shop, a pro­
cess structure suited for low-volume production of a 
great variety of nonstandard products.  Workcenters 
sometimes are referred to as departments and are 
focused on a particular type of operation.
Infinite loading  Work is assigned to a workcenter based 
on what is needed over time. Capacity is not considered.
Finite loading  Each resource is scheduled in detail 
using the setup and run time required for each order. The 

608	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
system determines exactly what will be done by each 
resource at every moment during the working day.
Forward scheduling  Schedules from now into the future 
to tell the earliest that an order can be completed.
Backward scheduling  Starts from some date in the 
future (typically the due date) and schedules the required 
operations in reverse sequence. Tells the latest time 
when an order can be started so that it is completed by a 
specific date.
Machine-limited process  Equipment is the critical 
resource that is scheduled.
Labor-limited process  People are the key resource that 
is scheduled.
Dispatching  The activity of initiating scheduled work.
Sequencing  The process of determining which job to 
start first on a machine or workcenter.
Priority rules  The logic used to determine the sequence 
of jobs in a queue.
LO 22–2   Analyze scheduling problems using priority rules and more specialized techniques.
Summary
	∙	 Many different techniques are available for scheduling 
jobs. Three of the most common approaches are ana­
lyzed in this section. 
	∙	 Priority rules are used when there are a number of 
jobs that need to be run on a single machine. 
	∙	 A special case is when a set of jobs needs to be run 
on only two machines. In this case, a technique called 
“Johnson’s rule” can be used to minimize the time to 
complete all jobs. 
	∙	 Another special case is when there are exactly the 
same number of jobs as machines available, and the 
jobs each need to be assigned to a unique machine (not 
all of the machines are equally efficient). In this case, 
the assignment method can be used. 
	∙	 These different techniques are mixed and matched to 
real-world scheduling situations.
Key Terms
Johnson’s rule  A sequencing rule used for schedul­
ing any number of jobs on two machines. The rule is 
designed to minimize the time required to complete all 
the jobs.
Assignment method  A special case of the transporta­
tion method of linear programming that is used to allo­
cate a specific number of jobs to the same number of 
machines.
LO 22–3   Apply scheduling techniques to the manufacturing shop floor.
Summary
	∙	 The job of actually managing work in a manufacturing 
environment is called shop-floor or production activ­
ity control. 
	∙	 The system consists of computer-based tracking and 
decision support, augmented with visual charts and 
lists to quickly convey information to workers. 
	∙	 An important feature of the system is acquiring the 
ability to manage the inflow of work so the system 
is not overloaded. This is called input/output control, 
and recognizes that production systems have limited 
capacity.
Key Terms
Shop-floor (production activity) control  A system 
for utilizing data from the shop floor to maintain and 
communicate status information on shop orders and 
workcenters.
Input/output (I/O) control  Work being released into a 
workcenter should never exceed the planned work out­
put. When the input exceeds the output, backlogs build 
up at the workcenter that increase the lead time.

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
609
LO 22–4   Analyze employee schedules in the service sector.
Summary
	∙	 Service sector scheduling focuses on setting detailed per­
sonnel schedules. It answers the questions of when and 
where each employee will be working in the short term. 
	∙	 These techniques are driven by daily worker require­
ments that may vary considerably by hour and day.
Solved Problems
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
Consider the following data on jobs waiting to be processed on a single machine in a job shop. 
They are listed here in order of their arrival at the machine:
Job
Processing 
Time (days)
Due Date 
(days hence)
A
5
  8
B
3
  5
C
4
12
D
7
14
E
2
11
Develop a schedule for these jobs based on the following rules: FCFS, SOT, and EDD. In 
each schedule, list the flow time and lateness for each job (the lateness of a job that is done 
early equals zero), as well as the mean for each measure.
Solution
FCFS Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (days)
Due Date 
(days hence)
Flow 
Time (days)
Lateness 
(days)
A
5
8
  0 + 5 =   5
  5 −   8 =    0
B
3
5
  5 + 3 =   8
  8 −   5 =    3
C
4
12  
  8 + 4 = 12
12 − 12 =    0
D
7
14  
12 + 7 = 19
19 − 14 =    5
E
2
11  
19 + 2 = 21
21 − 11 = 10
​Average flow time = ​ 5 + 8 + 12 + 19 + 21 
 
_________________ 
5 
​ = 13.0​
​Average flow time = ​ 0 + 3 + 0 + 5 + 10 
 
_________________ 
5 
​ = 3.6​
SOT Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (days)
Due Date 
(days hence)
Flow 
Time (days)
Lateness 
(days)
E
2
11  
  0 + 2 =    2
  2 − 11 = 0
B
3
5
  2 + 3 =    5
  5 −   5 = 0
C
4
12  
  5 + 4 =    9
  9 − 12 = 0
A
5
8
  9 + 5 = 14
14 −   8 = 6
D
7
14  
14 + 7 = 21
21 − 14 = 7
​Average flow time = ​ 2 + 5 + 9 + 14 + 21 
 
__________________ 
5 
​ = 10.2​
​Average flow time = ​ 0 + 0 + 0 + 6 + 7 
 
________________ 
5 
​ = 2.6​
LO 22–2

610	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
EDD Schedule
Job 
Sequence
Processing 
Time (days)
Due Date 
(days hence)
Flow 
Time (days)
Lateness 
(days)
B
3
5
  0 + 3 =   3
  3 −   5 = 0
A
5
8
  3 + 5 =   8
  8 −   8 = 0
E
2
11  
  8 + 2 = 10
10 − 11 = 0
C
4
12  
10 + 4 = 14
14 − 12 = 2
D
7
14  
14 + 7 = 21
21 − 14 = 7
​Average flow time = ​ 3 + 8 + 10 + 14 + 21 
 
____________________ 
5 
​ = 11.2​
​Average flow time = ​ 0 + 0 + 0 + 2 + 7 
 
________________ 
5 
​ = 1.8​
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
Joe’s Auto Seat Cover and Paint Shop is bidding on a contract to do all the custom work for 
Smiling Ed’s used car dealership. One of the main requirements in obtaining this contract is 
rapid delivery time, because Ed—for reasons we shall not go into here—wants the cars face-
lifted and back on his lot in a hurry. Ed has said that if Joe can refit and repaint five cars that 
Ed has just received in 24 hours or less, the contract will be his. The following is the time (in 
hours) required in the refitting shop and the paint shop for each of the five cars. Assuming 
that cars go through the refitting operations before they are repainted, can Joe meet the time 
requirements and get the contract?
Car
Refitting 
Time (hours)
Repainting 
Time (hours)
A
6
3
B
0
4
C
5
2
D
8
6
E
2
1
Solution
This problem can be viewed as a two-machine flow shop and can be easily solved using 
­Johnson’s rule. The final schedule is B–D–A–C–E.
Manually, the problem is solved as follows:
Original Data
Johnson’s Rule
Car
Refitting 
Time (hours)
Repainting 
Time (hours)
Order 
of Selection
Position 
in Sequence
A
6
3
4
3
B
0
4
1
1
C
5
2
3
4
D
8
6
5
2
E
2
1
2
5
Refit 
Repaint
21
19
14
8
0
22
21
17
14
4
8
D
B
A
D
C
C
E
E
A

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
611
SOLVED PROBLEM 3
The production scheduler for Marion Machine Shop has six jobs ready to be processed that 
can each be assigned to any of six different workstations. Due to the characteristics of each 
job and the different equipment and skills at the workstations, the time to complete a job 
depends on the station it is assigned to. The following is data on the jobs and the time it would 
take to do each job at each workstation.
Job Completion Time at Workstation (hours)
Job
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
3.2
3.5
2.9
3
4
3.6
B
2.7
2.9
2.3
3
3.1
3.7
C
3.8
4
4.3
4.5
4.1
3.6
D
2.8
2.1
2.9
2.5
3
2.2
E
6.1
6.5
6.7
7
6
6.2
F
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.9
4
3.6
Assign each job to a machine in order to minimize total processing time.
Solution
Use the assignment method following Example 22.3.
	
a.  Subtract the smallest number in each row from itself and all other numbers in that row.
Job Completion Time at Workstation (hours)
Job
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
0.3
0.6
0
0.1
1.1
0.7
B
0.4
0.6
0
0.7
0.8
1.4
C
0.2
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.5
0
D
0.7
0
0.8
0.4
0.9
0.1
E
0.1
0.5
0.7
1
0
0.2
F
0.2
0
0.6
1.6
2.7
2.3
	
b.  Subtract the smallest number in each column from itself and all other numbers in that 
column.
Job Completion Time at Workstation (hours)
Job
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
0.2
0.6
0
0
1.1
0.7
B
0.3
0.6
0
0.6
0.8
1.4
C
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.5
0
D
0.6
0
0.8
0.3
0.9
0.1
E
0
0.5
0.7
0.9
0
0.2
F
0.1
0
0.6
1.5
2.7
2.3
	
c.  Determine the minimum number of lines required to cover each zero.
Job Completion Time at Workstation (hours)
Job
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
0.2
0.6
0
0
1.1
0.7
B
0.3
0.6
0
0.6
0.8
1.4
C
0.1
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.5
0
D
0.6
0
0.8
0.3
0.9
0.1
E
0
0.5
0.7
0.9
0
0.2
F
0.1
0
0.6
1.5
2.7
2.3

612	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	
d.  We can cover every zero with just five lines. Subtract the smallest number not covered 
by lines (0.1) from itself and every other uncovered number, and add it to the number 
at each intersection of lines. Repeat part (c).
Job Completion Time at Workstation (hours)
Job
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
0.2
0.7
0.1
0
1.1
0.8
B
0.2
0.6
0
0.5
0.7
1.4
C
0
0.4
0.7
0.7
0.4
0
D
0.5
0
0.8
0.2
0.8
0.1
E
0
0.6
0.8
0.9
0
0.3
F
0
0
0.6
1.4
2.6
2.3
	
e.  It now takes six lines to cover all zeroes. Make job assignments at zero entries, starting 
with those jobs that have just one zero entry. Then, move to jobs that have more than 
one zero entry, but only one zero remaining that has not been assigned to another job 
yet, and so on. The job assignments and times are as follows:
Job
Machine
Time
A
4
3.0
B
3
2.3
D
2
2.1
F
1
1.5
C
6
3.6
E
5
6.0
Total:
18.5  
SOLVED PROBLEM 4
Albert’s Downtown Café is a very popular restaurant in Indianapolis that serves breakfast, 
lunch, and dinner six days a week. The restaurant needs its wait staff in varying numbers 
throughout the day to serve customers. Analysis of past data indicates that Albert has the fol­
lowing staffing needs throughout the day.
6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00 Noon 1:00 2:00 3:00 4:00 5:00
6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00
Servers
  needed
3
6
5
3
2
4
7
5
3
3
4
6
7
7
4
2
Currently, servers work 8-hour shifts. They eat when they can so there are no scheduled lunch 
hours.
	
a.  Use the first-hour principle to develop a schedule showing how many workers start 
a shift in each hour, how many servers are on duty each hour, and how many excess 
servers are on duty each hour. Comment on your results.
	
b.  Albert has noticed that during slow periods he often has far too many servers on duty. 
Also, the wait staff has been complaining about the long hours in the current policy. 
Therefore, Albert is considering shortening the shifts to either 6 hours or 4 hours. The 
current wait staff would prefer 6-hour shifts. Using the first-hour principle, develop 
schedules based on both 6-hour and 4-hour shifts. Comment on each.
	
c.  Assume that servers at Albert’s are paid $7.50 per hour. Cost out each of the schedules 
you have developed and compare the costs.
LO 22–4

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
613
Solution
a.
6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00 Noon 1:00 2:00 3:00 4:00 5:00 6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00
Servers 
  needed
3
6
5
3
2
4
7
5
3
3
4
6
7
7
4
2
Start shift
3
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
2
1
2
1
0
0
0
Off shift
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
On duty
3
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
4
3
4
6
7
7
6
6
Excess 
staff
0
0
1
3
4
2
0
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
2
4
There is an excess of staff during the morning lull and at the end of the workday. Due 
to the 8-hour shifts, the early morning staff end their shifts during the afternoon lull, 
so that the slow period is fairly well staffed. You should also note that the workers 
who start at 3:00 P.M. and later will not be able to finish their 8-hour shift by the 10:00 
P.M. closing time. Obviously, using only 8-hour shifts is not practical for the evenings.
b.
6-Hour Shifts
6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00 Noon 1:00 2:00 3:00 4:00 5:00 6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00
Servers 
  needed
3
6
5
3
2
4
7
5
3
3
4
6
7
7
4
2
Start shift
3
3
0
0
0
0
4
1
0
0
0
1
5
1
0
0
Off shift
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
0
4
1
0
0
On duty
3
6
6
6
6
6
7
5
5
5
5
6
7
7
7
7
Excess 
staff
0
0
1
3
4
2
0
0
2
2
1
0
0
0
3
5
Again we’re bringing on people at the end of the day that will not be able to finish out their 
full shift. We haven’t seemed to improve on the excess staff much, if at all, here either.
4-Hour Shifts
6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00 10:00 11:00 Noon 1:00 2:00 3:00 4:00 5:00 6:00 7:00 8:00 9:00
Servers 
  needed
3
6
5
3
2
4
7
5
3
3
4
6
7
7
4
2
Start shift
3
3
0
0
0
4
3
0
0
0
4
2
1
0
1
0
Off shift
0
0
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
4
3
0
0
0
4
2
On duty
3
6
6
6
3
4
7
7
7
3
4
6
7
7
4
2
Excess 
staff
0
0
1
3
1
0
0
2
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
This schedule seems to do a much better job matching staff to needs, and we only start 
one employee too late to finish the 4-hour shift.
	
c.  In costing out the schedules, simply sum the numbers on duty each hour throughout 
the day and multiply by $7.50.
Schedule
Worker-Hours
Cost
8-hour
90
$675.00  
6-hour
94
705.00
4-hour
82
615.00

614	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Because the 4-hour shift policy better matches servers to demand, it has the lower 
daily labor cost. This policy will require us to have the largest number of employees, 
though, so Albert will have to do some hiring. He should also consider the impact on 
morale of current employees if he cuts their hours in half. They would like a 6-hour 
shift policy, but given the restaurant’s demand patterns, and using the first-hour sched­
uling principle, that would result in the least efficient schedule.
Clearly, scheduling workers in a service business is not a simple task! There are 
costs as well as human issues to consider. For Albert, the best solution will likely con­
tain a mix of different length shifts—ideally, he’ll be able to match employees with 
shifts they will be happy with.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 What are the objectives of workcenter scheduling?
	  2.	 Distinguish between a workcenter, a GT cell, and an assembly line.
	  3.	 What practical considerations are deterrents to using the SOT rule?
	  4.	 What priority rule do you use in scheduling your study time for midterm examinations?
	  5.	 If you have five exams to study for, how many alternative schedules exist?
	  6.	 The SOT rule provides an optimal solution in a number of evaluation criteria. Should the 
manager of a bank use the SOT rule as a priority rule? Why?
	  7.	 Why does batching cause so much trouble in workcenters?
	  8.	 What job characteristics would lead you to schedule jobs according to “longest process­
ing time first”?
	  9.	 Why is managing bottlenecks so important in workcenter scheduling?
	10.	 Under what conditions is the assignment method appropriate?
	11.	 The chapter discusses the use of Gantt charts in shop floor control. You were introduced 
to Gantt charts in Chapter 4, “Project Management.” Projects and workcenter processes 
are rather different in nature. Why is it that the same tool can be used in both projects and 
workcenters?
	12.	 Why is it desired to have smooth, continuous flow on the shop floor?
	13.	 Data integrity is a big deal in industry. Why?
	14.	 Explain why scheduling personnel in a service operation can be challenging.
	15.	 How might planning for a special customer affect the personnel schedule in a service?
LO22–1
LO22–2
LO22–3
LO22–4
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What is the term used for an information system that links, schedules, dispatches, tracks, 
monitors, and controls customer encounters with a service organization?
	  2.	 What do we generally call an area in a business where productive resources are organized 
and work is completed?
	  3.	 What type of inventory are we trying to minimize as the result of workcenter scheduling?
	  4.	 A key part of workcenter scheduling is job sequencing—deciding in what order jobs are 
scheduled to start/complete. What is the term for the simple rules used to aid this process 
using a single piece of data about the jobs?
	  5.	 The following table gives the operation times and due dates for five jobs that are to be 
processed on a machine. Assign the jobs according to the shortest operation time and 
calculate the mean flow time. (Answer in Appendix D)
LO22–1
LO22–2

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
615
Job
Processing 
Time
Due Date 
(Days Hence)
101
6 days
5
102
7 days
3
103
4 days
4
104
9 days
7
105
5 days
2
	  6.	 The MediQuick lab has three lab technicians available to process blood samples and three 
jobs that need to be assigned. Each technician can do only one job. The following table 
represents the lab’s estimate (in dollars) of what it will cost for each job to be completed. 
Assign the technicians to the jobs to minimize costs.
 Job
Tech A
Tech B
Tech C
J-432
11
14
  6
J-487
  8
10
11
J-492
  9
12
  7
	  7.	 Christine has three cars that must be overhauled by her ace mechanic, Megan. Given the 
following data about the cars, use the least slack per remaining operation to determine 
Megan’s scheduling priority for each car.  (Answer in Appendix D)
Car
Customer Pick-Up 
Time (hours hence)
Remaining Overhaul 
Time (hours)
Remaining 
Operation
A
10
4
Painting
B
17
5
Wheel alignment, painting
C
15
1
Chrome plating, painting, seat repair
	  8.	 The following list of jobs in a critical department includes estimates of their required times.
Job
Required 
T (days)
Days to 
Delivery Promise
Slack
A
8
12
4
B
3
  9
6
C
7
  8
1
D
1
11
 10
E
10
 −10 (late)
−20
F
6
10
4
G
5
−8 (late)
−13
H
4
6
2
	
a.  Use the shortest operation time rule to schedule these jobs.
	
What is the schedule?
	
What is the mean flow time?
	
b.  The boss does not like the schedule in part (a). Jobs E and G must be done first, for 
obvious reasons. (They are already late.) Reschedule and do the best you can while 
scheduling Jobs E and G first and second, respectively.
	
What is the new schedule?
	
What is the new mean flow time?
	  9.	 A manufacturing facility has five jobs to be scheduled into production. The following 
table gives the processing times plus the necessary wait times and other necessary delays 

616	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
for each of the jobs. Assume that today is April 3, that the facility will work every day 
between now and the due dates, and the jobs are due on the dates shown:
Job
Days of Actual 
Processing 
Time Required
Days of 
Necessary 
Delay Time
Total Time 
Required
Date Job 
Due
1
2
12
14
April 30
2
5
  8
13
April 21
3
9
15
24
April 28
4
7
  9
16
April 29
5
4
22
26
April 27
  Determine two schedules, stating the order in which the jobs are to be done. Use the 
critical ratio priority rule for one. You may use any other rule for the second schedule as 
long as you state what it is. (Answer in Appendix D)
	10.	 The following table contains information regarding jobs that are to be scheduled through 
one machine.
Job
Processing 
Time
Due 
Date
A
  4
20
B
12
30
C
  2
15
D
11
16
E
10
18
F
  3
  5
G
  6
  9
	
a.  What is the first-come, first-served (FCFS) schedule?
	
b.  What is the shortest operating time (SOT) schedule?
	
c.  What is the slack time remaining (STR) schedule?
	
d.  What is the earliest due date (EDD) schedule?
	
e.  What are the mean flow times for each of the schedules above?
	11.	 Bill Edstrom, managing partner at a biomedical consulting firm, has requested your 
expert advice in devising the best schedule for the following consulting projects, starting 
on February 2.
Description of Consultation
Call Received
Due Date 
(close of business)
Task
Length
Company
Date
Time
I
3 days
Novartis Corp.
February 1
9 a.m.
February 5
II
1 day
Reardon Biotech Corp.
February 1
10 a.m.
February 6
III
2 days
Vertex Pharmaceuticals
February 1
11 a.m.
February 8
IV
2 days
OSI Pharmaceuticals
February 1
1 p.m.
February 7
The consulting firm charges a flat rate of $4,000 per day. All four firms impose fines for 
lateness. Reardon Biotech charges a $500-per-day fine for each day that the completion of the 
consulting work is past the due date; Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, and OSI Pharmaceu­
ticals all charge a fine of $1,500 per day for each day late.
Prepare alternative schedules based on the following priority rules: SOT, FCFS, EDD, 
STR, and another rule—longest processing time (LPT), which orders jobs according to lon­
gest assigned first, second-longest assigned second, and so on. For the sake of simplicity, 
assume that consulting work is performed seven days a week. Which rule provides Bill with 
the best schedule? Why?

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
617
	12.	 Seven jobs must be processed in two operations: A and B. All seven jobs must go 
through A and B in that sequence—A first, then B. Determine the optimal order (short­
est flow time to complete all the jobs) in which the jobs should be sequenced through 
the process using these times:
Job
Process A Time
Process B Time
1
9
6
2
8
5
3
7
7
4
6
3
5
1
2
6
2
6
7
4
7
	13.	 Jobs A, B, C, D, and E must go through Processes I and II in that sequence (Process I 
first, then Process II). Use Johnson’s rule to determine the optimal sequence in which to 
schedule the jobs to minimize the total required time.
Job
Required 
Processing 
Time on I
Required 
Processing 
Time on II
A
4
5
B
16
14
C
8
7
D
12  
11  
E
3
9
	14.	 Joe is the production scheduler in a brand-new custom refinishing auto service shop 
located near the border. This system is capable of handling 10 cars per day. The sequence 
is customizing first, followed by repainting.
Car
Customizing 
Time (hours)
Painting 
(hours)
Car
Customizing 
Time (hours)
Painting 
(hours)
1
3.0
1.2
6
2.1
0.8
2
2.0
0.9
7
3.2
1.4
3
2.5
1.3
8
0.6
1.8
4
0.7
0.5
9
1.1
1.5
5
1.6
1.7
10  
1.8
0.7
  In what sequence should Joe schedule the cars to minimize the time needed to com­
plete all the cars?
	15.	 Schedule the following six jobs through two machines in sequence to minimize the flow 
time using Johnson’s rule.
Operations Time
Job
Machine 1
Machine 2
A
5
2
B
16
15
C
1
9
D
13
11
E
17
3
F
18
7

618	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	16.	 The following matrix shows the costs in thousands of dollars for assigning Individuals A, B, 
C, and D to Jobs 1, 2, 3, and 4. Solve the problem showing your final assignments in order 
to minimize cost. Assume that each job will be assigned to one individual.
Jobs
Individuals
1
2
3
4
A
7
9
3
5
B
3
11
7
6
C
4
5
6
2
D
5
9
10
12
	17.	 In a workcenter, six machinists were uniquely qualified to operate any one of the five 
machines in the shop. The workcenter had considerable backlog, and all five machines were 
kept busy at all times. The one machinist not operating a machine was usually occupied 
doing clerical or routine maintenance work. Given the following value schedule for each 
machinist on each of the five machines, develop the optimal assignments. Assume only one 
machinist will be assigned to each machine. (Hint: Add a dummy column with zero cost 
values, and solve using the assignment method.)
Machine
Machinist
1
2
3
4
5
A
65
50
60
55
80
B
30
75
125
50
40
C
75
35
85
95
45
D
60
40
115
130
110
E
90
85
40
80
95
F
145
60
55
45
85
	18.	 Joe has achieved a position of some power in the institution in which he currently resides 
and works. In fact, things have gone so well that he has decided to divide the day-to-day 
operations of his business activities among four trusted subordinates: Big Bob, Dirty Dave, 
Baby Face Nick, and Tricky Dick. The question is how he should do this in order to take 
advantage of his associates’ unique skills and to minimize the costs from running all areas 
for the next year. The following matrix summarizes the costs that arise under each possible 
combination of men and areas.
Area
Associate
1
2
3
4
Big Bob
$1,400
$1,800
$   700
$1,000
Dirty Dave
600
2,200
1,500
1,300
Baby Face Nick
800
1,100
1,200
500
Tricky Dick
1,000
1,800
2,100
1,500
	19.	 The following matrix contains the costs (in dollars) associated with assigning Jobs A, B, C, 
D, and E to Machines 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Assign jobs to machines to minimize costs.
Machines
Jobs
1
2
3
4
5
A
6
11
12
3
10
B
5
12
10
7
9
C
7
14
13
8
12
D
4
15
16
7
9
E
13
17
11
12

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
619
	20.	 What is another common term for shop-floor control?
	21.	 Which graphical tool commonly used in project management is also very useful in 
shop-floor control?
	22.	 What shop-floor control document tells the supervisor which jobs are to be run, in what 
order, and how long each will take?
	23.	 What feature of manufacturing planning and control systems operates under the prem-
ise that the planned work input to a workcenter should never exceed the planned work 
output?
	24.	 A hotel has to schedule its receptionists according to hourly loads. Management has 
identified the number of receptionists needed to meet the hourly requirement, which 
changes from day to day. Assume each receptionist works a four-hour shift. Given the 
following staffing requirement in a certain day, use the first-hour principle to find the 
personnel schedule:
Period
8 a.m.
9 a.m.
10 a.m.
11 a.m.
Noon
1 p.m.
2 p.m.
3 p.m.
4 p.m.
5 p.m.
6 p.m.
7 p.m.
Requirement
2
3
5
8
8
6
5
8
8
6
4
3
Assigned
On duty
	25.	 The following wait staff members are needed at a restaurant. Use the first-hour prin-
ciple to generate a personnel schedule. Assume a four-hour shift.
Period
11 a.m. Noon 1 p.m. 2 p.m. 3 p.m. 4 p.m. 5 p.m. 6 p.m. 7 p.m. 8 p.m. 9 p.m.
Requirements
4
8
5
3
2
3
5
7
5
4
2
Assigned
On duty
	26.	 Which simple scheduling concept can be applied to help schedule workers for a service 
operation with changing staffing requirements throughout the day?
LO 22–3
LO 22–4
Good doctor–patient relations begin with both parties 
being punctual for appointments. I am Dr. Schafer, and 
being punctual is particularly important in my specialty: 
pediatrics. Mothers whose children have only minor 
problems don’t like them to sit in the waiting room with 
really sick ones, and the sick kids become fussy if they 
have to wait long.
	
But lateness—no matter who’s responsible for it—can 
cause problems in any practice. Once you’ve fallen more than 
slightly behind, it may be impossible to catch up that day. 
And although it’s unfair to keep someone waiting who may 
have other appointments, the average office patient cools his 
heels for almost 20 minutes, according to one recent survey. 
Patients may tolerate this, but they don’t like it.
	
I don’t tolerate that in my office, and I don’t believe 
you have to in yours. I see patients exactly at the appointed 
hour more than 99 times out of 100. So there are many 
GPs (grateful patients) in my busy solo practice. Parents 
often remark to me, “We really appreciate your being on 
time. Why can’t other doctors do that, too?” My answer 
is “I don’t know, but I’m willing to tell them how I do it.”
Booking Appointments Realistically
The key to successful scheduling is to allot the proper 
amount of time for each visit, depending on the services 
required, and then stick to it. This means that the phy-
sician must pace her- or himself carefully, receptionists 
must be corrected if they stray from the plan, and patients 
must be taught to respect their appointment times.
	
By actually timing a number of patient visits, I found 
that they break down into several categories. We allow half 
an hour for any new patient, 15 minutes for a well-baby 
checkup or an important illness, and either 5 or 10 minutes 
for a recheck on an illness or injury, an immunization, or 
a minor problem like warts. You can, of course, work out 
your own time allocations, geared to the way you practice.
Case: Keep Patients Waiting? Not in My Office
Source: W. B. Schafer, “Keep Patients Waiting? Not in My Office,” Medical Economics, May 12, 1986, pp. 137–41. Copyright © by Medical Economics. Reprinted 
by permission. Medical Economics is a copyrighted publication of Advanstar Communications, Inc. All rights reserved.

620	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	
When appointments are made, every patient is given 
a specific time, such as 10:30 or 2:40. It’s an absolute 
no-no for anyone in my office to say to a patient, “Come 
in 10 minutes” or “Come in a half-hour.” People often 
interpret such instructions differently, and nobody knows 
just when they’ll arrive.
	
There are three examining rooms that I use routinely, 
a fourth that I reserve for teenagers, and a fifth for emer­
gencies. With that many rooms, I don’t waste time wait­
ing for patients, and they rarely have to sit in the reception 
area. In fact, some of the younger children complain that 
they don’t get time to play with the toys and puzzles in 
the waiting room before being examined, and their moth­
ers have to let them play awhile on the way out.
	
On a light day, I see 20 to 30 patients between 9 A.M. 
and 5 P.M. But our appointment system is flexible enough 
to let me see 40 to 50 patients in the same number of 
hours if I have to. Here’s how we tighten the schedule:
	
My two assistants (three on the busiest days) have stand­
ing orders to keep a number of slots open throughout each 
day for patients with acute illnesses. We try to reserve more 
such openings in the winter months and on the days follow­
ing weekends and holidays, when we’re busier than usual.
	
Initial visits, for which we allow 30 minutes, are always 
scheduled on the hour or the half-hour. If I finish such 
a visit sooner than planned, we may be able to squeeze 
in a patient who needs to be seen immediately. And, if 
necessary, we can book two or three visits in 15 minutes 
between well-checks. With these cushions to fall back on, 
I’m free to spend an extra 10 minutes or so on a serious 
case, knowing that the lost time can be made up quickly.
	
Parents of new patients are asked to arrive in the office 
a few minutes before they’re scheduled in order to get the 
preliminary paperwork done. At that time, the reception­
ist informs them, “The doctor always keeps an accurate 
appointment schedule.” Some already know this and have 
chosen me for that very reason. Others, however, don’t 
even know that there are doctors who honor appointment 
times, so we feel it’s best to warn them on the first visit.
Fitting in Emergencies
Emergencies are the excuse doctors most often give for 
failing to stick to their appointment schedules. Well, 
when a child comes in with a broken arm or the hospi­
tal calls with an emergency Caesarean section, naturally 
I drop everything else. If the interruption is brief, I may 
just scramble to catch up. If it’s likely to be longer, the 
next few patients are given the choice of waiting or mak­
ing new appointments. Occasionally, my assistants have 
to reschedule all appointments for the next hour or two. 
Most such interruptions, though, take no more than 10 to 
20 minutes, and the patients usually choose to wait. I then 
try to fit them into the spaces we’ve reserved for acute 
cases that require last-minute appointments.
	
The important thing is that emergencies are never 
allowed to spoil my schedule for the whole day. Once 
a delay has been adjusted for, I’m on time for all later 
appointments. The only situation I can imagine that 
would really wreck my schedule is simultaneous emer­
gencies in the office and at the hospital—but that has 
never occurred.
	
When I return to the patient I’ve left, I say, “Sorry 
to have kept you waiting, I had an emergency—a bad 
cut” (or whatever). A typical reply from the parent: “No 
problem, Doctor. In all the years I’ve been coming here, 
you’ve never made me wait before. And I’d surely want 
you to leave the room if my kid were hurt.”
	
Emergencies aside, I get few walk-ins, because it’s 
generally known in the community that I see patients 
only by appointment except in urgent circumstances. A 
nonemergency walk-in is handled as a phone call would 
be. The receptionist asks whether the visitor wants advice 
or an appointment. If the latter, he or she is offered the 
earliest time available for nonacute cases.
Taming the Telephone
Phone calls from patients can sabotage an appointment 
schedule if you let them. I don’t. Unlike some pediatri­
cians, I don’t have a regular telephone hour, but my assis­
tants will handle calls from parents at any time during 
office hours. If the question is a simple one, such as “How 
much aspirin do you give a one-year-old?” the assistant 
will answer it. If the question requires an answer from me, 
the assistant writes it in the patient’s chart and brings it to 
me while I’m seeing another child. I write the answer in—
or she enters it in the chart. Then, she relays it to the caller.
	
What if the caller insists on talking with me directly? 
The standard reply is “The doctor will talk with you per­
sonally if it won’t take more than one minute. Otherwise, 
you’ll have to make an appointment and come in.” I’m 
rarely called to the phone in such cases, but if the mother 
is very upset, I prefer to talk with her. I don’t always limit 
her to one minute; I may let the conversation run two or 
three. But the caller knows I’ve left a patient to talk with 
her, so she tends to keep it brief.
Dealing with Latecomers
Some people are habitually late; others have legitimate 
reasons for occasional tardiness, such as a flat tire or “He 
threw up on me.” Either way, I’m hard-nosed enough not 
to see them immediately if they arrive at my office more 
than 10 minutes behind schedule, because to do so would 
delay patients who arrived on time. Anyone who is less 
than 10 minutes late is seen right away, but is reminded 
of what the appointment time was.
	
When it’s exactly 10 minutes past the time reserved 
for a patient and he hasn’t appeared at the office, a recep­
tionist phones his home to arrange a later appointment. 
If there’s no answer and the patient arrives at the office a 
few minutes later, the receptionist says pleasantly, “Hey, 
we were looking for you. The doctor’s had to go ahead 
with his other appointments, but we’ll squeeze you in as 

	
Workcenter Scheduling	
Chapter 22	
621
soon as we can.” A note is then made in the patient’s chart 
showing the date, how late he was, and whether he was 
seen that day or given another appointment. This helps us 
identify the rare chronic offender and take stronger mea­
sures if necessary.
	
Most people appear not to mind waiting if they know 
they themselves have caused the delay. And I’d rather 
incur the anger of the rare person who does mind than 
risk the ill will of the many patients who would otherwise 
have to wait after coming in on schedule. Although I’m 
prepared to be firm with parents, this is rarely necessary. 
My office in no way resembles an army camp. On the 
contrary, most people are happy with the way we run it, 
and tell us so frequently.
Coping with No-Shows
What about the patient who has an appointment, doesn’t 
turn up at all, and can’t be reached by telephone? Those 
facts, too, are noted in the chart. Usually there’s a simple 
explanation, such as being out of town and ­forgetting 
about the appointment. If it happens a second time, 
we follow the same procedure. A third-time offender, 
though, receives a letter reminding him that time was set 
aside for him and he failed to keep three appointments. In 
the future, he’s told, he’ll be billed for such wasted time.
	
That’s about as tough as we ever get with the few people 
who foul up our scheduling. I’ve never dropped a patient for 
doing so. In fact, I can’t recall actually billing a no-show; the 
letter threatening to do so seems to cure them. And when 
they come back—as nearly all of them do—they enjoy the 
same respect and convenience as my other patients.
Questions
	1.	 What features of the appointment scheduling 
system were crucial in capturing “many grateful 
patients”?
	2.	 What procedures were followed to keep the 
appointment system flexible enough to accommo­
date the emergency cases, and yet be able to keep 
up with the other patients’ appointments?
	3.	 How were the special cases such as latecomers and 
no-shows handled?
	4.	 Prepare a schedule starting at 9 A.M. for the follow­
ing patients of Dr. Schafer:
	 	 Johnny Appleseed, a splinter on his left thumb.
	 	 Mark Borino, a new patient.
	 	 Joyce Chang, a new patient.
	 	 Amar Gavhane, 102.5 degree (Fahrenheit) fever.
	 	 Sarah Goodsmith, an immunization.
	 	 Tonya Johnston, well-baby checkup.
	 	 JJ Lopez, a new patient.
	 	 Angel Ramirez, well-baby checkup.
	 	 Bobby Toolright, recheck on a sprained ankle.
	 	 Rebecca White, a new patient.
	 	 	
Dr. Schafer starts work promptly at 9 A.M. and 
enjoys taking a 15-minute coffee break around 
10:15 or 10:30 A.M.
	 	 	
Apply the priority rule that maximizes sched­
uling efficiency. Indicate whether or not you see 
an exception to this priority rule that might arise. 
Round up any times listed in the case study (e.g., 
if the case study stipulates 5 or 10 minutes, then 
assume 10 minutes for the sake of this problem).
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 This is the currently used term for a system that 
schedules, dispatches, tracks, monitors, and controls 
production.
	  2.	 This is when work is assigned to workcenters based 
simply on when it is needed. Resources required to 
complete the work are not considered.
	  3.	  This is when detailed schedules are constructed that 
­consider the setup and run times required for each order.
	  4.	 This is when work is scheduled from a point in time 
and out into the future, in essence telling the earliest 
the work can be completed.
	  5.	 This is when work is scheduled in reverse from a future 
due date, to tell the time original work must be started.
	  6.	 If we were to coin the phrase “dual constrained” 
relative to the resources being scheduled, we would 
probably be referring to what two resources?
	  7.	 For a single machine scheduling problem, what 
­priority rule guarantees that the average flow time is 
minimized?
	  8.	 Consider the following three jobs that need to be 
run on two machines in sequence: A(3 1), B(2 2), 
and C(1 3), where the run times on the first and sec­
ond machine are given in parenthesis. In what order 
should the jobs be run to minimize the total time to 
complete all three jobs?
	  9.	 According to APICS, this is a system for utilizing 
data from the shop as well as data processing files 
to maintain and communicate status information on 
shop orders and workcenters.
	10.	 A resource that limits the output of a process by lim­
iting capacity is called this.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Manufacturing Execution System  2. Infinite scheduling  3. Finite scheduling  4. Forward scheduling  5. Backward 
scheduling  6. Labor and equipment (machines)  7. Shortest operating time  8. C B A  9. Shop-floor (or production activity) control  10. Bottleneck

622
This chapter is about the ideas of management guru Eli Goldratt. He proposed the 
idea that managing “constraints” is the key to maximizing the throughput and effi­
ciency of business processes. He argued that a manager should focus on manag­
ing the resource that most limits the process from achieving its goal. This resource 
is called the “bottleneck” and nothing can be achieved beyond the capability of the 
bottleneck. He suggests a simple repetitive cycle for improving a process. Step 1: Find 
the weakest step in the process, the step that is limiting performance the most. Step 2: 
Improve that weakest step so that it is no longer limiting performance. Step 3: Repeat 
steps 1 and 2 over and over again making the process better with each cycle.
To explain his ideas in an easy to understand way, Goldratt wrote a book titled The 
Goal. The book tracks the life of Alex Rogo, a plant manager struggling with keeping 
his plant on schedule, reducing inventory, meeting quality goals, and cutting costs. 
Alex’s job is on the line and his boss has given him three months to make the plant 
productive, otherwise it will be closed.
The most insightful analogy in the book is 
the description of a 20-mile overnight hike 
that Alex takes with his son. Alex is leading his 
son’s Boy Scout troop on a hike that will take 
them to a site 10 miles away where they will 
spend the night. The troop will then return the 
following morning after breakfast.
The analogy starts by describing the hike 
out to the campsite. They are way behind 
schedule and the line of scouts is spread out 
over a long distance. The fastest kids are up 
front, and poor Herbie, the slowest kid, lags 
way behind at the end of the line. The goal is 
Learning Objectives
	LO 23–1	 Explain the Theory of Constraints (TOC).
	LO 23–2	 Analyze bottleneck resources and apply TOC principles to controlling a process.
	LO 23–3	 Compare TOC to conventional approaches.
	LO 23–4	 Evaluate bottleneck scheduling problems by applying TOC principles.
Theory of 
Constraints
23
© dolgachov/123RF

	
623
to get all the kids to the campsite as quickly as possible so they can get the tents 
setup, have dinner, and enjoy some camp fire fun. Nothing can happen until all the 
kids make it to the campsite.
Alex analyzes the situation and can see that Andy, the first kid in line is trying to set a 
speed record. Herbie, who is way in the back, is the bottleneck. Herbie just cannot move 
fast enough to keep up with Andy. Alex checks the speed of Andy and finds his pace 
is three miles per hour and that compared to the speed of Herbie he will be two miles 
ahead in less than an hour. In two hours, the stragglers will be four miles behind! The plan 
had been to cover the 10 miles in five hours. Something needed to be done, and quickly.
Alex stops the leaders and tells everyone in the troop to hold hands with the per­
son before and after him, and to not let go. He then takes Herbie, who is in the back, 
and leads him to the front of the line. He keeps walking with Herbie turning the troop 
around so that Herbie, the slowest, is now leading and Andy, the fastest, is now at the 
end. Alex tells the troop that the goal of the hike is not to get there the fastest, but to 
get there together. The troop is a team—not a bunch of individuals.
And so the troop moves on with Herbie in the lead. The line is now tight with no 
gaps between the scouts. The scouts in the back of the line begin complaining that 
they want to go faster. Alex tells the troop they if they want to go faster, they need to 
figure out a way Herbie can go faster.
When the scouts check out Herbie they find that he is carrying a backpack much 
heavier than the others. He has soda, cans of spaghetti, candy bars, and all kinds of 
other stuff that the others are not carrying. No wonder he is so much slower. So the 
others decide to take some of the load off Herbie by carrying some of his stuff. Now 
Herbie can really move, since most of the weight in his pack is removed. The troop is 
now moving at twice the speed it was before and they are still staying together.
That night Alex thought about the analogy between the troop hike and his plant. 
Most of his machines were fast, but the slowest one always kept the jobs from getting 
done. This causes inventory in the plant to keep increasing, and lead-time to increase 
as well. He needed to tie all the processes in his plant together; there is no reason for 
any of them to process any faster than that slow bottleneck process. Then he needed 
to figure out how he could get more output from that bottleneck. Possibly, he could 
buy another machine, or run some overtime on that machine. Only in this way could 
he decrease his inventory, and increase throughput. Alex had learned a lot on his 
son’s camping trip. 
Explain the Theory of 
Constraints (TOC).
LO 23–1
ELI GOLDRATT’S THEORY OF CONSTRAINTS
The story of Herbie is an analogy to the problems facing plant manager Alex Rogo and comes 
from a best-selling novel, The Goal, by Dr. Eli Goldratt. Around 1980, Goldratt contended 
that manufacturers were not doing a good job in scheduling and controlling their resources and 
inventories. To solve this problem, Goldratt and his associates, at a company named Creative 
Output, developed software that scheduled jobs through manufacturing processes, taking into 
account limited facilities, machines, personnel, tools, materials, and any other constraints that 
would affect a firm’s ability to adhere to a schedule.

624	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
This was called optimized production technology (OPT). The schedules were feasible and 
accurate and could be run on a computer in a fraction of the time needed by an MRP system. This 
was because the scheduling logic was based on the separation of bottleneck and nonbottleneck 
operations. To explain the principles behind the OPT scheduling logic, Goldratt described nine 
production scheduling rules (see Exhibit 23.1). After approximately 100 large firms had installed 
this software, Goldratt went on to promote the logic of the approach rather than the software.
In broadening his scope, Goldratt developed his “Theory of Constraints” (TOC), which has 
become popular as a problem-solving approach that can be applied to many business areas. 
Exhibit 23.2 lists the “Five Focusing Steps of TOC.” His Goldratt Institute (www.goldratt.com) 
teaches courses in improving production, distribution, and project management. The common 
thread through all of these courses is Goldratt’s TOC concepts.
Before we go into detail on the theory of constraints, it is useful to compare it with two 
other popular approaches to continuous improvement: Six Sigma and lean manufacturing. 
Both Six Sigma and lean approaches focus on cost reduction through the elimination of waste 
and the reduction of variability at every step in a process or in view of every component of a 
system. In contrast, the TOC five-step approach is more focused in its application. It concen­
trates its improvement efforts only on the operation that is constraining a critical process or 
on the weakest component that is limiting the performance of the system as a whole. If these 
elements are effectively managed, then it follows that better overall performance of the system 
relative to its goal is more likely to be achieved.
In this chapter, we focus on Goldratt’s approach to manufacturing. To correctly treat the 
topic, we decided to approach it in the same way that Goldratt did: that is, by first defining 
some basic issues about firms—purposes, goals, and performance measures—and then deal­
ing with scheduling, providing buffer inventories, focusing on the influences of quality, and 
looking at interactions with marketing and accounting.
Underlying Goldratt’s work is the notion of synchronous manufacturing, which refers 
to the entire production process working in harmony to achieve the profit goal of the firm. 
1. Do not balance capacity—balance the flow.
2. The level of utilization of a nonbottleneck resource is determined not by its own potential but by 
some other constraint in the system.
3. Utilization and activation of a resource are not the same.
4. An hour lost at a bottleneck is an hour lost for the entire system.
5. An hour saved at a nonbottleneck is a mirage.
6. Bottlenecks govern both throughput and inventory in the system.
7. The transfer batch may not, and many times should not, be equal to the process batch.
8. A process batch should be variable both along its route and in time.
9. Priorities can be set only by examining the system’s constraints. Lead time is a derivative of the schedule.
Goldratt’s Rules of Production Scheduling
exhibit 23.1
1. Identify the system constraints. (No improvement is possible unless the constraint or weakest link is 
found.)
2. Decide how to exploit the system constraints. (Make the constraints as effective as possible.)
3. Subordinate everything else to that decision. (Align every other part of the system to support the 
constraints even if this reduces the efficiency of nonconstraint resources.)
4. Elevate the system constraints. (If output is still inadequate, acquire more of this resource so it no 
longer is a constraint.)
5. If, in the previous steps, the constraints have been broken, go back to Step 1, but do not let inertia 
become the system constraint. (After this constraint problem is solved, go back to the beginning and 
start over. This is a continuous process of improvement: identifying constraints, breaking them, and 
then identifying the new ones that result.)
Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints (TOC)
exhibit 23.2
Synchronous 
manufacturing
A production process 
coordinated to work in 
harmony to achieve the 
goals of the firm.

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
625
When manufacturing is truly synchronized, its emphasis is on total system performance, not 
on localized measures such as labor or machine utilization.
The Goal of the Firm
Goldratt has a very straightforward idea about the goal of any firm:
THE GOAL OF A FIRM IS TO MAKE MONEY.
Goldratt argues that although an organization may have many purposes—providing jobs, con­
suming raw materials, increasing sales, increasing share of the market, developing technology, 
or producing high-quality products—these do not guarantee long-term survival of the firm. 
They are means to achieve the goal, not the goal itself. If the firm makes money—and only 
then—it will prosper. When a firm has money, it can place more emphasis on other objectives.
Performance Measurements
To adequately measure a firm’s performance, two sets of measurements must be used: one 
from the financial point of view and the other from the operations point of view.
F in a n c i al  M e a s u r e m e n t s   We have three measures of the firm’s ability to make 
money:
	1.	 Net profit—an absolute measurement in dollars.
	2.	 Return on investment—a relative measure based on investment.
	3.	 Cash flow—a survival measurement.
All three measurements must be used together. For example, a net profit of $10 million is 
important as one measurement, but it has no real meaning until we know how much invest­
ment was needed to generate that $10 million. If the investment was $100 million, this is a 
10 percent return on investment. Cash flow is important because cash is necessary to pay bills 
for day-to-day operations; without cash, a firm can go bankrupt even though it is very sound 
in normal accounting terms. A firm can have a high profit and a high return on investment 
but still be short on cash if, for example, profit is invested in new equipment or tied up in 
inventory.
O p er at i on a l  M e a s u r e m e n t s  Financial measurements work well at the higher 
level, but they cannot be used at the operational level. We need another set of measurements 
that will give us guidance:
	1.	 Throughput—the rate at which money is generated by the system through sales.
	2.	 Inventory—all the money that the system has invested in purchasing things it 
intends to sell.
	3.	 Operating expenses—all the money that the system spends to turn inventory into 
throughput.
Throughput is specifically defined as goods sold. An inventory of finished goods is not 
throughput, but inventory. Actual sales must occur. It is specifically defined this way to pre­
vent the system from continuing to produce under the illusion that the goods might be sold. 
Such action simply increases costs, builds inventory, and consumes cash. Inventory that is 
carried (whether work-in-process or finished goods) is valued only at the cost of the materi­
als it contains. Labor cost and machine hours are ignored. (In traditional accounting terms, 
money spent is called value added.)
Although this is often an arguable point, using only the raw material cost is a conservative 
view. When the value-added method (which includes all costs of production) is used, inven­
tory is inflated and presents some serious income and balance sheet problems. Consider, for 
example, work-in-process or finished-goods inventory that has become obsolete, or for which 
Throughput
The rate at which money is 
generated by the system 
through sales (Goldratt’s 
definition).
Inventory (Goldratt’s 
definition)
All the money that the 
system has invested 
in purchasing things it 
intends to sell.
Operating expenses
All the money that the 
system spends to turn 
inventory into throughput 
(Goldratt’s definition).

626	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
a contract was canceled. A management decision to declare large amounts of inventory as 
scrap is difficult because it is often carried on the books as an asset even though it may really 
have no value. Using just raw materials cost also avoids the problem of determining which 
costs are direct and which are indirect.
Operating expenses include production costs (such as direct labor, indirect labor, inventory 
carrying costs, equipment depreciation, and materials and supplies used in production) and 
administrative costs. The key difference here is that there is no need to separate direct and 
indirect labor.
As shown in Exhibit 23.3, the objective of a firm is to treat all three measurements simul­
taneously and continually; this achieves the goal of making money.
From an operations standpoint, the goal of the firm is to
INCREASE THROUGHPUT WHILE SIMULTANEOUSLY REDUCING 
INVENTORY AND REDUCING OPERATING EXPENSE.
P r o d u c t i vi t y  Typically, productivity is measured in terms of output per labor hour. 
However, this measurement does not ensure that the firm will make money (for example, 
when extra output is not sold but accumulates as inventory). To test whether productivity has 
increased, we should ask these questions: Has the action taken increased throughput? Has it 
decreased inventory? Has it decreased operational expense? This leads us to a new definition:
PRODUCTIVITY IS ALL THE ACTIONS THAT BRING A COMPANY 
CLOSER TO ITS GOALS.
Unbalanced Capacity
Historically (and still typically in most firms), manufacturers have tried to balance capacity 
across a sequence of processes in an attempt to match capacity with market demand. However, 
this is the wrong thing to do—unbalanced capacity is better. The vignette at the beginning 
of this chapter is an example of unbalanced capacity. Some Boy Scouts were fast walkers, 
whereas Herbie was very slow. The challenge is to use this difference advantageously.
Consider a simple process line with several stations, for example. Once the output rate of 
the line has been established, production people try to make the capacities of all stations the 
same. This is done by adjusting machines or equipment used, workloads, skill and type of 
labor assigned, tools used, overtime budgeted, and so on.
In synchronous manufacturing thinking, however, making all capacities the same is viewed 
as a bad decision. Such a balance would be possible only if the output times of all stations 
were constant or had a very narrow distribution. A normal variation in output times causes 
downstream stations to have idle time when upstream stations take longer to process. Con­
versely, when upstream stations process in a shorter time, inventory builds up between the 
stations. The effect of the statistical variation is cumulative. The only way that this varia­
tion can be smoothed is by increasing work-in-process to absorb the variation (a bad choice 
because we should be trying to reduce work-in-process) or increasing capacities downstream 
Throughput
T
Inventory
I
Operating expense
OE
The operational goal of a firm is to increase throughput while reducing inventory and operating expense.
Operational Goal
exhibit 23.3
Productivity
A measure of how well 
resources are used. 
According to Goldratt’s 
definition (see Chapter 23), 
all the actions that bring 
a company closer to its 
goals.

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
627
to be able to make up for the longer upstream times. The rule here is that capacities within 
the process sequence should not be balanced to the same levels. Rather, attempts should be 
made to balance the flow of product through the system. When flow is balanced, capacities 
are unbalanced. This idea is further explained in the next section.
D e p en d en t  E v e n t s  a n d  S t a t i s t i c a l  F l u c t u a t i o n s  The term dependent 
events refers to a process sequence. If a process flows from A to B to C to D, and each process 
must be completed before passing on to the next step, then B, C, and D are dependent events. 
The ability to do the next process is dependent on the preceding one.
Statistical fluctuation refers to the normal variation about a mean or average. When statis­
tical fluctuations occur in a dependent sequence without any inventory between workstations, 
there is no opportunity to achieve the average output. When one process takes longer than the 
average, the next process cannot make up the time. We follow through an example of this to 
show what could happen.
Suppose we wanted to process five items that could come from the two distributions in 
Exhibit 23.4. The processing sequence is from A to B, with no space for inventory in between. 
Process A has a mean of 10 hours and a standard deviation of 2 hours. This means we would 
expect 95.5 percent of the processing time to be between 6 hours and 14 hours (plus or minus 
2 sigma). Process B has a constant processing time of 10 hours.
We see that the last item was completed in 66 hours, for an average of 13.2 hours per item, 
although the expected time of completion was 60, for an average of 12 hours per item (taking 
into account the waiting time for the first unit by Process B).
Suppose we reverse the processes—B feeds A. To illustrate the possible delays, we also 
reverse A’s performance times. (See Exhibit 23.5.) Again, the completion time of the last item 
is greater than the average (13.2 hours rather than 12 hours). Process A and Process B have 
the same average performance time of 10 hours, and yet performance is late. In neither case 
could we achieve the expected average output rate. Why? Because the time lost when the sec­
ond process is idle cannot be made up.
This example is intended to challenge the theory that capacities should be balanced to an 
average time. Rather than capacities being balanced, the flow of product through the system 
should be balanced.
Process A
6 
10 
Process B
10 
8
12
14
14
12
8
6
No variability in
processing time
Item 
Number
Start 
Time
Processing 
Time
Finish 
Time
 
Item 
Number
Start 
Time
Processing 
Time
Finish 
Time
1
   0 hrs
14 hrs 
14 hrs  
1
14 hrs 
10 hrs 
24 hrs 
2
14
12
26
 
2
26
10
36
3
26
10
36
 
3
36
10
46
4
36
  8
44
 
4
46
10
56
5
44
  6
50
 
5
56
10
66
Average = 10 hours
 
Average = 10 hours
Processing and Completion Times, Process A to Process B
exhibit 23.4
Here the flow is from Process A (on the left) to Process B (on the right). Process A has a mean of 10 hours and a standard deviation 
of 2 hours; Process B has a constant 10-hour processing time.

628	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
A bottleneck is defined as any resource whose capacity is less than the demand placed upon 
it. A bottleneck is a constraint within the system that limits throughput. It is that point in the 
manufacturing process where flow thins to a narrow stream. A bottleneck may be a machine, 
scarce or highly skilled labor, or a specialized tool. Observations in industry have shown that 
most plants have very few bottleneck operations.
If there is no bottleneck, then excess capacity exists and the system should be changed to 
create a bottleneck (such as more setups or reduced capacity), which we will discuss later.
Capacity is defined as the available time for production. This excludes maintenance and 
other downtime. A nonbottleneck is any resource whose capacity is greater than the demand 
placed on it. A nonbottleneck, therefore, should not be working constantly because it can pro­
duce more than is needed. A nonbottleneck contains idle time.
A capacity-constrained resource (CCR) is one whose utilization is close to capacity and 
could be a bottleneck if it is not scheduled carefully. For example, a CCR may be receiving 
work in a job-shop environment from several sources. If these sources schedule their flow in 
a way that causes occasional idle time for the CCR in excess of its unused capacity time, the 
CCR becomes a bottleneck when the surge of work arrives at a later time. This can happen if 
batch sizes are changed or if one of the upstream operations is not working for some reason 
and does not feed enough work to the CCR.
Basic Manufacturing Building Blocks
All manufacturing processes and flows can be simplified to four basic configurations, as 
shown in Exhibit 23.6. In configuration A of Exhibit 23.6, product that flows through Process 
X feeds into Process Y. In configuration B, Y is feeding X. In C, Process X and Process Y 
are creating subassemblies, which are then combined, say, to feed the market demand. In D, 
Process X and Process Y are independent of each other and are supplying their own markets. 
The last column in the exhibit shows possible sequences of nonbottleneck resources, which 
can be grouped and displayed as Y to simplify the representation.
BOTTLENECKS, CAPACITY-CONSTRAINED RESOURCES, 
AND SYNCHRONOUS MANUFACTURING
Item 
Number
Start 
Time
Processing 
Time
Finish 
Time
 
Item 
Number
Start 
Time
Processing 
Time
Finish 
Time
1
   0 hrs
10 hrs
10 hrs  
1
10 hrs
6 hrs
16 hrs
2
10
10
20
 
2
20
8
28
3
20
10
30
 
3
30
10
40
4
30
10
40
 
4
40
12
52
5
40
10
50
 
5
52
14
66
Average = 10 hours
 
Average = 10 hours
Process A
Process B
6 
 
8
6 
 
8
 10 
 12 
 14
 10 
 12 
 14
No variability
in processing time
Processing and Completion Times, Process A to Process B
exhibit 23.5
This is similar to Exhibit 23.4. However, the processing sequence has been reversed, as well as the order of the Process A times.
Analyze bottleneck 
resources and apply TOC 
principles to controlling a 
process.
LO 23–2
Bottleneck
A resource that limits the 
capacity or maximum 
output of the process.
Nonbottleneck
Any resource whose 
capacity is greater than 
the demand placed on it 
(Goldratt’s definition).
Capacity-constrained 
resource (CCR)
A resource whose 
utilization is close to 
capacity and could be a 
bottleneck if not scheduled 
carefully (Goldratt’s 
definition).

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
629
The value in using these basic building blocks is that a production process can be greatly 
simplified for analysis and control. Rather than track and schedule all of the steps in a produc­
tion sequence through nonbottleneck operations, for example, attention can be placed at the 
beginning and end points of the building block groupings.
Methods for Synchronous Control
Exhibit 23.7 shows how bottleneck and nonbottleneck resources should be managed.
Resource X and Resource Y are workcenters that can produce a variety of products. Each 
of these workcenters has 200 hours available per month. For simplicity, assume that we are 
dealing with only one product and we will alter the conditions and makeup for four differ­
ent situations. Each unit of X takes one hour of production time, and the market demand is 
200 units per month. Each unit of Y takes 45 minutes of production time, and the market 
demand is also 200 units per month.
Exhibit 23.7A shows a bottleneck feeding a nonbottleneck. Product flows from Workcen­
ter X to Workcenter Y. X is the bottleneck because it has a capacity of 200 units (200 hours/
1 hour per unit) and Y has a capacity of 267 units (200 hours/45 minutes per unit). Because 
Y has to wait for X, and Y has a higher capacity than X, no extra product accumulates in the 
system. It all flows through to the market.
Exhibit 23.7B is the reverse of A, with Y feeding X. This is a nonbottleneck feeding a 
bottleneck. Because Y has a capacity of 267 units and X has a capacity of only 200 units, 
we should produce only 200 units of Y (75 percent of capacity) or else work-in-process will 
accumulate in front of X.
Exhibit 23.7C shows that the products produced by X and Y are assembled and then sold to 
the market. Because one unit from X and one unit from Y form an assembly, X is the bottle­
neck with 200 units of capacity and, therefore, Y should not work more than 75 percent or else 
extra parts will accumulate.
In Exhibit 23.7D, equal quantities of product from X and Y are demanded by the mar­
ket. In this case, we can call these products “finished goods” because they face independent 
demands. Here, Y has access to material independent of X and, with a higher capacity than 
needed to satisfy the market (in essence, the market is the bottleneck), it can produce more 
product than the market will take. However, this would create an inventory of unneeded fin­
ished goods.
DESCRIPTION
BASIC BUILDING BLOCKS SIMPLIFIED
BY GROUPING NONBOTTLENECKS
ORIGINAL REPRESENTATION
A. Bottleneck feeding
 
nonbottleneck
B. Nonbottleneck feeding 
 
bottleneck
C. Output of bottleneck and 
 
nonbottleneck assembled
 
into a product
D. Bottleneck and nonbottleneck
 
have independent markets 
 
for their output
X is a bottleneck.
Y is a nonbottleneck (has excess capacity).
X
Y
Market
X
A
B
C
D
Market
Y
X
Market
A
B
C
D
X
Market
Y
X
Y
Market
Final
Assembly
X
Market
Final
Assembly
A
B
C
D
Y
Y
X
Y
Market
Market
X
Market
Market
A
B
C
D
Y
The Basic Building Blocks of Manufacturing Derived by Grouping Process Flows
exhibit 23.6

630	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
The four situations just discussed demonstrate bottleneck and nonbottleneck resources and 
their relationships to production and market demand. They show that the industry practice 
of using resource utilization as a measure of performance can encourage the overuse of non­
bottlenecks and result in excess inventories.
T i m e  C o m p o n e n t s  The following kinds of time make up production cycle time:
	1.	 Setup time—the time that a part spends waiting for a resource to be set up to work on 
this same part.
	2.	 Processing time—the time that the part is being processed.
	3.	 Queue time—the time that a part waits for a resource while the resource is busy with 
something else.
	4.	 Wait time—the time that a part waits not for a resource but for another part so that 
they can be assembled together.
	5.	 Idle time—the unused time; that is, the cycle time minus the sum of the setup time, 
processing time, queue time, and wait time.
For a part waiting to go through a bottleneck, queue time is usually the greatest. As we 
discuss later in this chapter, this is because the bottleneck has a fairly large amount of work 
to do in front of it (to make sure it is always working). For a nonbottleneck, wait time is usu­
ally the greatest. The part is just sitting there waiting for the arrival of other parts so that an 
assembly can take place.
Schedulers are tempted to save setup times. Suppose that the batch sizes are doubled to 
save half the setup times. Then, with a double batch size, all of the other times (processing 
time, queue time, and wait time) increase twofold. Because these times are doubled while 
saving only half of the setup time, the net result is that the work-in-process is approximately 
doubled, as is the investment in inventory.
F i n d i n g  t h e  Bo t t l e n e c k   There are two ways to find the bottleneck (or bottlenecks) 
in a system. One is to run a capacity resource profile; the other is to use our knowledge of the 
particular plant, look at the system in operation, and talk with supervisors and workers.
Y
A.
B.
Market
WIP
200 units 
of product
(200 hours)
200 units 
of product
(150 hours)
Y can be used only 75% of the time
or work-in-process will build up.
C.
D.
Y can be used only 75% of the time
or spare parts will accumulate.
Y can be used only 75% of the time
or finished goods inventory will build up.
X
Y
X used ___ = 100%
200 
200
Y used ___ = 75%
150 
200
Market
Market
Market
FG
X
Y
X
Y
Spare parts
Market
Assembly
X
X is a bottleneck; Y is a nonbottleneck. Both X and Y have 200 hours available.
Product Flow through Bottlenecks and Nonbottlenecks
exhibit 23.7

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
631
A capacity resource profile is obtained by looking at the loads placed on each resource 
by the products that are scheduled through them. In running a capacity profile, we assume 
that the data are reasonably accurate, although not necessarily perfect. As an example, con­
sider that products have been routed through Resources M1 through M5. Suppose that our 
first computation of the resource loads on each resource caused by these products shows the 
following:
​
M1
​ 
130 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M2
​ 
120 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M3​  105 percent of capacity​ 
 
 
M4
​ 
  95 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M5
​ 
  85 percent of capacity
  ​
For this first analysis, we can disregard any resources at lower percentages because they 
are nonbottlenecks and should not be a problem. With this list in hand, we should physically 
go to the facility and check all five operations. Note that M1, M2, and M3 are overloaded; that 
is, they are scheduled above their capacities. We would expect to see large quantities of inven­
tory in front of M1. If this is not the case, errors must exist somewhere—perhaps in the bill 
of materials or in the routing sheets. Let’s say that our observations and discussions with shop 
personnel showed that there were errors in M1, M2, M3, and M4. We tracked them down, 
made the appropriate corrections, and ran the capacity profile again:
​
M1
​ 
115 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M2
​ 
110 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M3​  105 percent of capacity​ 
 
 
M4
​ 
  90 percent of capacity
​ 
 
 
M5
​ 
  85 percent of capacity
  ​
M1, M2, and M3 are still showing a lack of sufficient capacity, but M2 is the most serious. 
If we now have confidence in our numbers, we use M2 as our bottleneck. If the data contain 
too many errors for a reliable data analysis, it may not be worth spending time (it could take 
months) making all the corrections.
S a v i ng T i m e  Recall that a bottleneck is a resource whose capacity is less than the 
demand placed on it. Because we focus on bottlenecks as restricting throughput (defined as 
sales), a bottleneck’s capacity is less than the market demand. There are a number of ways we 
can save time on a bottleneck (better tooling, higher-quality labor, larger batch sizes, reduction 
in setup times, and so forth), but how valuable is the extra time? Very, very valuable!
AN HOUR SAVED AT THE BOTTLENECK ADDS AN EXTRA HOUR 
TO THE ENTIRE PRODUCTION SYSTEM.
How about time saved on a nonbottleneck resource?
AN HOUR SAVED AT A NONBOTTLENECK IS A MIRAGE AND 
ONLY ADDS AN HOUR TO ITS IDLE TIME.
Because a nonbottleneck has more capacity than the system needs for its current through­
put, it already contains idle time. Implementing any measures to save more time does not 
increase throughput but only serves to increase its idle time.
Avoid Changing a Nonbottleneck into a Bottleneck  When nonbottleneck resources 
are scheduled with larger batch sizes, this action could create a bottleneck that we certainly 
would want to avoid. Consider the case in Exhibit 23.8, where Y1, Y2, and Y3 are nonbottleneck 
resources. Y1 currently produces Part A, which is routed to Y3, and Part B, which is routed to 
Y2. To produce Part A, Y1 has a 200-minute setup time and a processing time of 1 minute per 
part. Part A is currently produced in batches of 500 units. To produce Part B, Y1 has a setup 

632	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
time of 150 minutes and 2 minutes’ processing time per part. Part B is currently produced 
in batches of 200 units. With this sequence, Y2 is utilized 70 percent of the time and Y3 is 
utilized 80 percent of the time.
Because setup time is 200 minutes for Y1 on Part A, both worker and supervisor mistak­
enly believe that more production can be gained if fewer setups are made. Let’s assume that 
the batch size is increased to 1,500 units and see what happens. The illusion is that we have 
saved 400 minutes of setup. (Instead of three setups taking 600 minutes to produce three 
batches of 500 units each, there is just one setup with a 1,500-unit batch.)
The problem is that the 400 minutes saved served no purpose, but this delay did interfere with 
the production of Part B because Y1 produces Part B for Y2. The sequence before any changes were 
made was Part A (700 minutes), Part B (550 minutes), Part A (700 minutes), Part B (550 min­
utes), and so on. Now, however, when the Part A batch is increased to 1,500 units (1,700 minutes), 
Y2 and Y3 could well be starved for work and have to wait more time than they have available 
(30 percent idle time for Y2 and 20 percent for Y3). The new sequence would be Part A (1,700 
minutes), Part B (1,350 minutes), and so on. Such an extended wait for Y2 and Y3 could be disrup­
tive. Y2 and Y3 could become temporary bottlenecks and lose throughput for the system.
D r u m ,  B u ffe r ,  R o p e  Every production system needs some control point or points 
to control the flow of product through the system. If the system contains a bottleneck, the 
bottleneck is the best place for control. This control point is called the drum because it strikes 
the beat that the rest of the system (or those parts that it influences) uses to function. Recall 
that a bottleneck is defined as a resource that does not have the capacity to meet demand. 
Therefore, a bottleneck is working all the time, and one reason for using it as a control point 
is to make sure that the operations upstream do not overproduce and build up excess work-in-
process inventory that the bottleneck cannot handle.
If there is no bottleneck, the next-best place to set the drum would be a capacity-­constrained 
resource (CCR). A capacity-constrained resource, remember, is one that is operating near 
capacity but, on average, has adequate capability as long as it is not incorrectly scheduled (for 
example, with too many setups, causing it to run short of capacity, or producing too large a lot 
size, thereby starving downstream operations).
If neither a bottleneck nor a CCR is present, the control point can be designated anywhere. 
The best position would generally be at some divergent point where the output of the resource 
is used in several downstream operations.
Dealing with the bottleneck is most critical, and our discussion focuses on ensuring that 
the bottleneck always has work to do. Exhibit 23.9 shows a simple linear flow A through 
G. Suppose that Resource D, which is a machine center, is a bottleneck. This means the capac­
ities are greater both upstream and downstream from it. If this sequence is not controlled, we 
Part B: Batch size = 200 pieces
Setup time = 150 minutes
Processing time = 2 minutes/part
Utilization 70%
Utilization 80%
Part B
Part A
Part A: 
Y2
Y3
Y1
Resource Y1 produces Part A for Resource Y3 and Part B for Resource Y2.
Batch size = 500 pieces
Setup time = 200 minutes
Processing time = 1 minute/part
Nonbottleneck Resources
exhibit 23.8

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
633
would expect to see a large amount of inventory in front of Workcenter D and very little any­
where else. There would be little finished goods inventory because (by the definition of the 
term bottleneck) all the product produced would be taken by the market.
There are two things we must do with this bottleneck:
	1.	 Keep a buffer inventory in front of it to make sure it always has something to work 
on. Because it is a bottleneck, its output determines the throughput of the system.
	2.	 Communicate back upstream to A what D has produced so that A provides only that 
amount. This keeps inventory from building up. This communication is called the 
rope. It can be formal (such as a schedule) or informal (such as daily discussion).
The buffer inventory in front of a bottleneck operation is a time buffer. We want to make 
sure that Workcenter D always has work to do, and it does not matter which of the scheduled 
products are worked on. We might, for example, provide 96 hours of inventory in the buffer 
as shown in the sequence A through P in Exhibit 23.10. Jobs A through about half of E are 
scheduled during the 24 hours of Day 1; Jobs E through a portion of Job I are scheduled dur­
ing the second 24-hour day; Jobs I through part of L are scheduled during the third 24-hour 
day; and Jobs L through P are scheduled during the fourth 24-hour day, for a total of 96 hours. 
This means that through normal variation, or if something happens upstream and the output 
has been temporarily stalled, D can work for another 96 hours, protecting the throughput. 
(The 96 hours of work, incidentally, include setups and processing times contained in the job 
sheets, which usually are based on engineering standard times.)
We might ask, How large should the time buffer be? The answer: As large as it needs to be 
to ensure that the bottleneck continues to work. By examining the variation of each operation, 
we can make a guess. Theoretically, the size of the buffer can be computed statistically by 
Linear Flow of Product with a Bottleneck
exhibit 23.9
Bottleneck (drum)
A
B
D
E
F
G
Market
Inventory 
(buffer)
Communication 
(rope)
Product flows from Workcenters A through G. Workcenter D is a bottleneck.
C
Workcenter D
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
Days
24 
20 
16 
12 
8 
4
Hours
E
D
C
B
A
E
F
G
H
I
L
K
J
I
L
M
N
O
P
Capacity Profile of Workcenter D (showing assigned jobs A through P 
over a period of four 24-hour days)
exhibit 23.10

634	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
examining past performance data, or the sequence can be simulated. In any event, precision is 
not critical. We could start with an estimate of the time buffer as one-fourth of the total lead 
time of the system. Say, the sequence A to G in our example (Exhibit 23.9) took a total of 
16 days. We could start with a buffer of four days in front of D. If, during the next few days or 
weeks, the buffer runs out, we need to increase the buffer size. We do this by releasing extra 
material to the first operation, A. On the other hand, if we find that our buffer never drops 
below three days, we might want to hold back releases to A and reduce the time buffer to three 
days. Experience is the best determination of the final buffer size.
If the drum is not a bottleneck but a CCR (and thus it can have a small amount of idle 
time), we might want to create two buffer inventories: one in front of the CCR and the second 
at the end as finished goods. (See Exhibit 23.11.) The finished-goods inventory protects the 
market, and the time buffer in front of the CCR protects throughput. For this CCR case, the 
market cannot take all that we can produce, so we want to ensure that finished goods are avail­
able when the market does decide to purchase.
We need two ropes in this case: (1) a rope communicating from finished-goods inventory 
back to the drum to increase or decrease output and (2) a rope from the drum back to the 
material release point, specifying how much material is needed.
Exhibit 23.12 is a more detailed network flow showing one bottleneck. Inventory is 
­provided not only in front of that bottleneck but also after the nonbottleneck sequence of pro­
cesses that feed the subassembly. This ensures that the flow of product is not slowed down by 
having to wait after it leaves the bottleneck.
I m p o r t a n c e  o f Q u a l i t y  An MRP system allows for rejects by building a larger 
batch than actually needed. A JIT system cannot tolerate poor quality because JIT success is 
based on a balanced capacity. A defective part or component can cause a JIT system to shut 
down, thereby losing throughput of the total system. Synchronous manufacturing, however, 
has excess capacity throughout the system, except for the bottleneck. If a bad part is produced 
upstream of the bottleneck, the result is that there is a loss of material only. Because of the 
excess capacity, there is still time to do another operation to replace the one just scrapped. 
For the bottleneck, however, extra time does not exist, so there should be a quality control 
inspection just prior to the bottleneck to ensure that the bottleneck works only on good 
product. Also, there needs to be assurance downstream from the bottleneck that the passing 
product is not scrapped—that would mean lost throughput.
Batch Sizes  In an assembly line, what is the batch size? Some would say “one” because 
one unit is moved at a time; others would say “infinity” because the line continues to produce 
the same item. Both answers are correct, but they differ in their point of view. The first answer, 
“one,” in an assembly line focuses on the part transferred one unit at a time. The second focuses 
on the process. From the point of view of the resource, the process batch is infinity because it is 
continuing to run the same units. Thus, in an assembly line, we have a process batch of infinity 
(or all the units until we change to another process setup) and a transfer batch of one unit.
Capacity- 
constrained
resource
Market
Buffer
Rope
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
FG
Buffer of 
finished 
goods
Rope
Product flows through Workcenters A through H. Workcenter E is capacity constrained.
Linear Flow of Product with a Capacity-Constrained Resource
exhibit 23.11

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
635
Setup costs and carrying costs were treated in depth in Chapter 20, “Inventory Manage­
ment.” In the present context, setup costs relate to the process batch and carrying costs relate 
to the transfer batch.
A process batch is of a size large enough or small enough to be processed in a particular 
length of time. From the point of view of a resource, two times are involved: setup time and 
processing run time (ignoring downtime for maintenance or repair). Larger process batch 
sizes require fewer setups and therefore can generate more processing time and more out­
put. For bottleneck resources, larger batch sizes are desirable. For nonbottleneck resources, 
smaller process batch sizes are desirable (by using up the existing idle time), thereby reducing 
work-in-process inventory.
Transfer batches refer to the movement of part of the process batch. Rather than wait for 
the entire batch to be finished, work that has been completed by that operation can be moved 
to the next downstream workstation so it can begin working on that batch. A transfer batch can 
be equal to a process batch, but it should not be larger under a properly designed system. This 
could occur only if a completed process batch were held until sometime later when a second 
batch was processed. If this later time was acceptable in the beginning, then both jobs should 
be combined and processed together at the later time.
The advantage of using transfer batches that are smaller than the process batch quan­
tity is that the total production time is shorter so the amount of work-in-process is smaller. 
Exhibit 23.13 shows a situation where the total production lead time was reduced from 2,100 
to 1,310 minutes by (1) using a transfer batch size of 100 rather than 1,000 and (2) reducing 
the process batch sizes of Operation 2.
Network Flow with One Bottleneck
exhibit 23.12
Customer 
orders 
and/or 
forecasts
Parts and 
processing 
sequences
Raw materials
Assembly
Buffer inventory
Subassembly
Subassembly
Machine Center
A
(bottleneck)
Time buffer 
inventory
Buffer inventory
Product flows from raw materials through processing to the market. Inventory buffers protect throughput.

636	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
H o w  t o  D e t e r m i n e  P r o c e s s  B a t c h  a n d  T r a n s f e r  B a t c h  S i z e s   Logic 
would suggest that the master production schedule (however it was developed) be analyzed as 
to its effect on various workcenters. In an MRP system, this means that the master production 
schedule should be run through the MRP and the CRP (capacity requirements planning 
program) to generate a detailed load on each workcenter. From this report, probable CCRs 
and bottlenecks can be identified. There should be only one (or a few), and they should be 
reviewed by managers so that they understand which resources are actually controlling their 
plant. These resources set the drumbeat.
Rather than try to adjust the master production schedule to change resource loads, it is 
more practical to control the flow at each bottleneck or CCR to bring the capacities in line. 
The process batch sizes and transfer batch sizes are changed after comparing past perfor­
mances in meeting due dates.
Smaller transfer batches give lower work-in-process inventory and faster product flow (and 
consequently shorter lead time). More material handling is required, however. Larger transfer 
batches give longer lead times and higher inventories, but there is less material handling. 
Therefore, the transfer batch size is determined by a trade-off of production lead times, inven­
tory reduction benefits, and costs of material movement.
When trying to control the flow at CCRs and bottlenecks, there are four possible situations:
	1.	 A bottleneck (no idle time) with no setup time required when changing from one 
product to another.
	2.	 A bottleneck with setup time required to change from one product to another.
	3.	 A capacity-constrained resource with a small amount of idle time, with no setup time 
required to change from one product to another.
	4.	 A CCR with setup time required when changing from one product to another.
In the first case (a bottleneck with no setup time to change products), jobs should be 
processed in the order of the schedule so that delivery is on time. Without setups, only 
the sequence is important. In the second case, when setups are required, larger batch sizes 
Operation
Process 
batch
Transfer 
batch
1,000 
1,000 
1,000
1,000 
1,000 
1,000
1 
2 
3
Processing time
1.0 minute/unit
0.1 minute/unit
1.0 minute/unit
Process batch = 1,000 units
Transfer batch = 1,000 units
Process batches = Various sizes
Transfer batches = 100 units
1,000 
minutes
1,000 minutes
100 
minutes
1,000 minutes
1,000 
minutes
Total lead time:
2,100 minutes
Total lead time:
1,310 minutes
Operation
Process 
batch
Transfer 
batch
1,000
100
100
100
300, 300, 
200, 200
1,000
1 
2 
3
Operation 1
Operation 2
Operation 3
300
300
200 200
Effect of Changing the Process Batch Sizes on Production Lead Time for a Job Order of 
1,000 Units
exhibit 23.13

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
637
combine separate similar jobs in the sequence. This means reaching ahead into future time 
periods. Some jobs will therefore be done early. Because this is a bottleneck resource, larger 
batches save setups and thereby increase throughput. (The setup time saved is used for pro­
cessing.) The larger process batches may cause the early-scheduled jobs to be late. Therefore, 
frequent small transfer batches are necessary to try to shorten the lead time.
Situations 3 and 4 include a CCR without a setup and a CCR with setup time requirements, 
respectively. Handling the CCR would be similar to handling a nonbottleneck, though more 
carefully. That is, a CCR has some idle time. It would be appropriate here to cut the size 
of some of the process batches so that there can be more frequent changes of product. This 
would decrease lead time, and jobs would be more likely to be done on time. In a make-to-
stock situation, cutting process batch sizes has a much more profound effect than increasing 
the number of transfer batches. This is because the resulting product mix is much greater, 
leading to reduced WIP and production lead time.
H o w  t o T r e a t  I n v e n t o r y   The traditional view of inventory is that its only negative 
impact on a firm’s performance is its carrying cost. We now realize inventory’s negative 
impact also comes from lengthening lead times and creating problems with engineering 
changes. (When an engineering change on a product comes through, which commonly occurs, 
product still within the production system often must be modified to include the changes. 
Therefore, less work-in-process reduces the amount of product rework necessary.)
From a constraint management perspective, inventory is a loan given to the manufacturing 
unit. The value of the loan is based only on the purchased items that are part of the inventory. 
As we stated earlier, inventory is treated in this chapter as material cost only, without any 
accounting-type value added from production. If inventory is carried as a loan to manufactur­
ing, we need a way to measure how long the loan is carried. One measurement is dollar days.
D o ll ar  D a y s   A useful performance measurement is the concept of dollar days, a 
measurement of the value of inventory and the time it stays within an area. To use this measure, 
we could simply multiply the total value of inventory by the number of days inventory spends 
within a department.
Suppose Department X carries an average inventory of $40,000, and, on average, the 
inventory stays within the department five days. In dollar days, Department X is charged with 
$40,000 times five days, or $200,000 dollar days of inventory. At this point, we cannot say 
the $200,000 is high or low, but it does show where the inventory is located. Management can 
then see where it should focus attention and determine acceptable levels. Techniques can be 
instituted to try to reduce the number of dollar days while being careful that such a measure 
does not become a local objective (that is, minimizing dollar days) and hurt the global objec­
tives (such as increasing ROI, cash flow, and net profit).
Dollar days could be beneficial in a variety of ways. Consider the current practice of using 
efficiencies or equipment utilization as a performance measurement. To get high utilization, 
large amounts of inventory are held to keep everything working. However, high inventories 
would result in a high number of dollar days, which would discourage high levels of work-in-
process. Dollar day measurements also could be used in other areas:
∙	 Marketing—to discourage holding large amounts of finished-goods inventory. The net 
result would be to encourage the sales of finished products.
∙	 Purchasing—to discourage placing large purchase orders that on the surface appear to 
take advantage of quantity discounts. This would encourage just-in-time purchasing.
∙	 Manufacturing—to discourage large work-in-process and producing earlier than 
needed. This would promote rapid flow of material within the plant.
∙	 Project management—to quantify a project’s limited resource investments as a function 
of time. This promotes the proper allocation of resources to competing projects. See the 
OSCM at Work box titled “Critical Chain Project Management” for Goldratt’s ideas on 
scheduling projects.

638	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Critical Chain Project Management
Critical Chain Project Management is the name of the 
approach that Eli Goldratt developed for scheduling and 
managing projects. The approach borrows many ideas from 
those used for manufacturing processes. The conventional 
critical path method was covered in Chapter 4, and Goldratt 
goes beyond those ideas by considering resource con­
straints and special time buffers in the project. The follow­
ing are specific ideas included in his Critical Chain Project 
Management approach:
1.	 Schedules are level-loaded based on the limitations of 
available resources (constraints). This produces the “critical 
chain”—the longest set of sequential tasks (due to both task 
dependency and resource contention)—which dictates the 
shortest overall project duration.
OSCM AT WORK
2.	 Time buffers are inserted at strategic locations in the plan—
at the end of the critical chain and at every point where a 
task enters the critical chain—to absorb the adverse effects 
of uncertainty without damaging performance. To create the 
buffers, some of the slack time built into tasks in planning is 
repositioned to these strategic locations.
3.	 Projects are “pipelined” or staged based on resource 
availability to combat the cascade effect of shared 
resources across projects and create viable multiproject 
plans.
4.	 Buffer management is used to dynamically set task priorities 
in execution. As uncertainty changes the original plan, 
tasks are prioritized based on the buffer burn rate (the 
amount of buffer consumed versus the percentage of the 
work complete). Tasks with critical buffer penetration take 
precedence over those with lower burn rates.
MRP and JIT
MRP uses backward scheduling after having been fed a master production schedule. MRP 
schedules production through a bill of materials explosion in a backward manner—working 
backward in time from the desired completion date. As a secondary procedure, MRP, through 
its capacity resource planning module, develops capacity utilization profiles of workcenters. 
When workcenters are overloaded, either the master production schedule must be adjusted or 
enough slack capacity must be left unscheduled in the system so that work can be smoothed 
at the local level (by workcenter supervisors or the workers themselves). Trying to smooth 
capacity using MRP is so difficult and would require so many computer runs that capacity 
overloads and underloads are best left to local decisions, such as at the machine centers. An 
MRP schedule becomes invalid just days after it was created.
The synchronous manufacturing approach uses forward scheduling because it focuses on 
the critical resources. These are scheduled forward in time, ensuring that loads placed on 
them are within capacity. The noncritical (or nonbottleneck) resources are then scheduled to 
support the critical resources. This can be done backward to minimize the length of time that 
inventories are held. This procedure ensures a feasible schedule. To help reduce lead time and 
work-in-process, in synchronous manufacturing the process batch size and transfer batch size 
are varied—a procedure that MRP is not able to do.
Comparing JIT to synchronous manufacturing, JIT does an excellent job of reducing lead 
times and work-in-process, but it has several drawbacks:
	1.	 JIT is most often used in repetitive manufacturing environments.
	2.	 JIT requires a stable production level (usually about a month long).
	3.	 JIT does not allow very much flexibility in the products produced. (Products must be 
similar with a limited number of options.)
	4.	 JIT still requires work-in-process when used with kanbans so that there is “something 
to pull.” This means that completed work must be stored on the downstream side of 
each workstation to be pulled by the next workstation.
	5.	 Vendors need to be located nearby because the system depends on smaller, more fre­
quent deliveries.
COMPARING SYNCHRONOUS MANUFACTURING (TOC) TO 
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES
Compare TOC to 
conventional approaches.
LO 23–3

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
639
Because synchronous manufacturing uses a schedule to assign work to each workstation, 
there is no need for more work-in-process other than that being worked on. The exception is 
for inventory specifically placed in front of a bottleneck to ensure continual work, or at spe­
cific points downstream from a bottleneck to ensure flow of product.
Concerning continual improvements to the system, JIT is a trial-and-error procedure 
applied to a real system. In synchronous manufacturing, the system can be programmed and 
simulated on a computer because the schedules are realistic (can be accomplished) and com­
puter run time is short.
Relationship with Other Functional Areas
The production system must work closely with other functional areas to achieve the best oper­
ating system. This section briefly discusses accounting and marketing—areas where conflicts 
can occur and where cooperation and joint planning should occur.
A c c ou nt i n g ’ s  I n f l u e n c e  Sometimes we are led into making decisions to suit the 
measurement system rather than to follow the firm’s goals. Consider the following example: 
Suppose that two old machines are currently being used to produce a product. The processing 
time for each is 20 minutes per part and, because each has the capacity of three parts per hour, 
they have the combined capacity of six per hour, which exactly meets the market demand 
of six parts per hour. Suppose that engineering finds a new machine that produces parts in 
12 minutes rather than 23. However, the capacity of this one machine is only five per hour, 
which does not meet the market demand. Logic would seem to dictate that the supervisor 
should use an old machine to make up the lacking of one unit per hour. However, the system 
does not allow this. The standard has been changed from 20 minutes each to 12 minutes each 
and performance would look very bad on paper because the variance would be 67 percent 
[(20 – 12)/12] for units made on the old machines. The supervisor, therefore, would work the 
new machine on overtime.
P r o b l em s  i n  C o s t  A c c o u n t i n g  M e a s u r e m e n t s  Cost accounting is used 
for performance measurement, cost determinations, investment justification, and inventory 
valuation. Two sets of accounting performance measurements are used for evaluation: 
(1)  global measurements, which are financial statements showing net profit, return on 
investment, and cash flow (with which we agree); and (2) local cost accounting measurements 
showing efficiencies (as variances from standard) or utilization rate (hours worked/hours 
present).
From the cost accounting (local measurement) viewpoint, then, performance has tradi­
tionally been based on cost and full utilization. This logic forces supervisors to activate their 
workers all the time, which leads to excess inventory. The cost accounting measurement sys­
tem also can instigate other problems. For example, attempting to use the idle time to increase 
utilization can create a bottleneck, as we discussed earlier in this chapter. Any measurement 
system should support the objectives of the firm and not stand in the way. Fortunately, the cost 
accounting measurement philosophy is changing.
M a r k et i n g  a n d  Pr o d u c t i o n  Marketing and production should communicate and 
conduct their activities in close harmony. In practice, however, they act very independently. 
There are many reasons for this. The difficulties range from differences in personalities and 
cultures to unlike systems of merits and rewards in the two functions. Marketing people 
are judged on the growth of the company in terms of sales, market share, and new products 
introduced. Marketing is sales oriented. Manufacturing people are evaluated on cost and 
utilization. Therefore, marketing wants a variety of products to increase the company’s 
position, whereas manufacturing is trying to reduce cost.
Data used for evaluating marketing and manufacturing are also quite different. Marketing 
data are “soft” (qualitative); manufacturing data are “hard” (quantitative). The orientation and 
experiences of marketing and production people also differ. Those in marketing management 
have likely come up through sales and a close association with customers. Top manufacturing 

640	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
managers have likely progressed through production operations and therefore have plant per­
formance as a top objective.
Cultural differences also can be important in contrasting marketing and manufacturing 
personnel. Marketing people tend to have a greater ego drive and are more outgoing. Manu­
facturing personnel tend to be more meticulous and perhaps more introverted (at least less 
extroverted than their marketing counterparts).
The solution to coping with these differences is to develop an equitable set of measure­
ments to evaluate performance in each area and to promote strong lines of communication so 
they both contribute to reaching the firm’s goals.
THEORY OF CONSTRAINTS—PROBLEMS ABOUT WHAT TO 
PRODUCE
We now present three examples to show that different objectives and measurement criteria 
can lead to the wrong decisions. These examples also show that, even though you may have 
all the data required, you still may not be able to solve the problem—unless you know how!
EXAMPLE 23.1: What to Produce?
In this first example, three products (A, B, and C) are sold in the market at $50, $75, and 
$60 per unit, respectively. The market will take all that can be supplied.
	
Three workcenters (X, Y, and Z) process the three products as shown in Exhibit 23.14. 
Processing times for each workcenter also are shown. Note that each workcenter works on all 
three products. Raw materials, parts, and components are added at each workcenter to pro­
duce each product. The per unit cost of these materials is shown as RM.
	
Which product or products should be produced?
RM = Added raw materials, components, and parts
Selling price
Product B
Workcenter Z 
2 min./part
Workcenter Y 
3 min./part
Workcenter X  
6 min./part
$75
RM 
$30
RM 
$18
RM 
$12
Workcenter Y   
3 min./part
Product C
Workcenter Z 
5 min./part
$60
Workcenter X  
4 min./part
RM 
$15
RM 
$20
RM 
$5
Workcenter Y 
10 min./part
Workcenter X 
4 min./part
$50
Workcenter Z  
5 min./part
Product A
RM 
$10
RM 
$4
RM 
$6
There is only one of workcenter X, Y, and Z.
Prices and Production Requirements for Three Products and Three 
Workcenters
exhibit 23.14
Evaluate bottleneck 
scheduling problems by 
applying TOC principles.
LO 23–4

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
641
SOLUTION
Three different objectives could exist that lead to different conclusions:
	1.	 Maximize sales revenue because marketing personnel are paid commissions based on 
total revenue.
	2.	 Maximize per unit gross profit.
	3.	 Maximize total gross profit.
	
In this example, we use gross profit as selling price less materials. We also could include 
other expenses such as operating expenses, but we left them out for simplicity. (We include 
operating expenses in our next example.)
	
Objective 1: Maximize sales commission. Sales personnel in this case are unaware of the 
processing time required so, therefore, they will try to sell only B at $75 per unit and none of 
A or C. Maximum revenue is determined by the limiting resource as follows:
Product
Limiting 
Resource
Time 
Required
Number Produced 
per Hour
Selling 
Price
Sales Revenue 
per Hour
A
Y
10 min
  6
$50
$300
B
X
6 min
10
   75
   750
C
Z
5 min
12
   60
   720
	
Objective 2: Maximize per unit gross profit.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Product
Selling 
Price
Raw 
Material Cost
Gross Profit 
per Unit (2) − (3)
A
$50
$20
$30
B
$75
$60
$15
C
$60
$40
$20
The decision would be to sell only Product A, which has a $30 per unit gross profit.
	
Objective 3: Maximize total gross profit. We can solve this problem by finding either total 
gross profit for the period or the rate at which profit is generated. We use rate to solve the 
problem both because it is easier and because it is a more appropriate measure. We use profit 
per hour as the rate.
	
Note that each product has a different workcenter that limits its output. The rate at which 
the product is made is then based on this bottleneck workcenter.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Product
Limiting 
Work 
Center
Processing
Time per Unit
(Minutes)
Product 
Output Rate 
(per Hour)
Selling 
Price
Raw 
Material 
Cost
Profit 
per Unit
Profit 
per Hour 
(4) × (7)
A
Y
10
   6
$50
$20
$30
$180
B
X
   6
10
   75
   60
   15
   150
C
Z
   5
12
   60
   40
   20
   240
	
From our calculations, and if we only consider a single product, Product C provides the 
highest profit of $240 per hour. Note that we get three different answers:
	1.	 We choose B to maximize sales revenue.
	2.	 We choose A to maximize profit per unit.
	3.	 We choose C to maximize total profit.
Choosing Product C is obviously the correct answer for the firm if we restrict ourselves to 
making a single product. Profit can be improved to $280/hour by producing a mix of A-3, 
B-2, and C-8 units each hour. This solution can be obtained by solving the “product mix” 
problem described in Appendix A (see Example A.1).

642	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
EXAMPLE 23.2: How Much to Produce?
In this example, shown in Exhibit 23.15, two workers are producing four products. The plant 
works three shifts. The market demand is unlimited and takes all the products that the work­
ers can produce. The only stipulation is that the ratio of products sold cannot exceed 10 to 1 
between the maximum sold of any one product and the minimum of another. For example, if 
the maximum number sold of any one of the products is 100 units, the minimum of any other 
cannot be fewer than 10 units. Workers 1 and 2, on each shift, are not cross-trained and can 
work only on their own operations. The time and raw material (RM) costs are shown in the 
exhibit, and a summary of the costs and times involved is on the lower portion of the exhibit. 
Weekly operating expenses are $3,000.
	
What quantities of A, B, C, and D should be produced?
SOLUTION
As in the previous example, there are three answers to this question, depending on each of the 
following objectives:
	1.	 Maximize revenue for sales personnel, who are paid on commission.
	2.	 Maximize per unit gross profit.
	
In this example, all workcenters were required for each product and each product had a dif­
ferent workcenter as a constraint. We did this to simplify the problem and to ensure that only 
one product would surface as the answer. If there were more workcenters or the same work­
center constraint in different products, the problem could still easily be solved using linear 
programming (as in Appendix A).
Product D
$32
RM = Raw materials
Selling price
Product B
$32
Product C
$30
$30
Product A
Worker 1
5 minutes/unit
Worker 1
5 minutes/unit
Worker 1
5 minutes/unit
Worker 1
5 minutes/unit
Worker 1
10 minutes/unit
Worker 2
10 minutes/unit
Worker 2
20 minutes/unit
RM 
$5
RM 
$3
RM 
$7
RM 
$3
RM 
$7
RM 
$5
RM 
$10
One Worker 1 and one Worker 2 operate on each shift. Three shifts. Five days per week. Eight hours per shift. Operating expenses $3,000 per week.
Raw material
cost per unit
$18 
22 
18 
22
Worker 2
20 
20 
30 
30
Worker 1
15 
15
5
5
Selling price
$30           
  32     
  30 
  32
Product
A 
B 
C 
D
(each)
min.
min.
Processing time per unit
The Production Requirements and Selling Price of Four Products
exhibit 23.15

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
643
	3.	 Maximize the utilization of the bottleneck resource (leading to maximum gross 
profit).
	
Objective 1: Maximize sales commission on sales revenue. Sales personnel prefer to sell B 
and D (selling price $32) rather than A and C (selling price $30). Weekly operating expenses 
are $3,000.
	
The ratio of units sold will be: 1A : 10B : 1C : 10D.
	
Worker 2 on each shift is the bottleneck and therefore determines the output. Note that if 
this truly is a bottleneck with an unlimited market demand, this should be a seven-day-per-
week operation, not just a five-day workweek.
5 days per week × 3 shifts × 8 hours × 60 minutes = 7,200 minutes per week available
Worker 2 spends these times on each unit:
A  20 minutes    B  20 minutes    C  30 minutes    D  30 minutes
The ratio of output units is 1 : 10 : 1 : 10. Therefore,
​
1x​(​20​)​ + 10x​(​20​)​ + 1x​(​30​)​ + 10x​(​30​)​
​ 
= 7, 200
​ 
 
550x​ = 7, 200​ 
x
​ 
= 13.09
​
Therefore, the numbers of units produced are
​A = 13    B = 131    C = 13    D = 131​
Total revenue is
​13​(​30​)​ + 131​(​32​)​ + 13​(​30​)​ + 131​(​32​)​ = $9, 164 per week​
For comparison with Objectives 2 and 3, we will compute gross profit per week.
	
Gross profit per week (selling price less raw material less weekly expenses) is
​
​
​ 
13​(​30 − 18​)​ + 131​(​32 − 22​)​ + 13​(​30 − 18​)​ + 131​(​32 − 22​)​ − 3, 000
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​​              = 156 + 1, 310 + 156 + 1, 310 − 3, 000​ 
 
 
 
​
​ 
            = ​(​$68​)​loss
 
​
Objective 2: Maximize per unit gross profit.
Gross Profit
=
Selling Price
−
Raw Material Cost
A
12
=
30
−
18
B
10
=
32
−
22
C
12
=
30
−
18
D
10
=
32
−
22
	
A and C have the maximum gross profit, so the ratio will be 10 : 1 : 10 : 1 for A, B, C, and 
D. Worker 2 is the constraint and has
​5 days × 3 shifts × 8 hours × 60 minutes = 7,200 minutes available per week​
	
As before, A and B take 20 minutes, while C and D take 30 minutes. Thus
​
10x​(​20​)​ + 1x​(​20​)​ + 10x​(​30​)​ + 1x​(​30​)​
​ 
= 7, 200
​ 
 
550x​  = 7, 200​ 
x
​ 
= 13
 
​
Therefore, the number of units produced is
​A = 131    B = 13    C = 131    D = 13​

644	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
Gross profit (selling price less raw materials less $3,000 weekly expense) is
​
​
​ 
131​(​30 − 18​)​ + 13​(​32 − 22​)​ + 131​(​30 − 18​)​ + 13​(​32 − 22​)​ − 3, 000
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
​​            = 1, 572 + 130 + 1, 572 + 130 − 3, 000​ 
 
 
 
​
​ 
          = $404 profit
 
​
	
Objective 3: Maximize the use of the bottleneck resource, Worker 2. For every hour Worker 
2 works, the following numbers of products and gross profits result.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Product
Production 
Time
Units Produced 
per Hour
Selling Price 
Each
Raw Material 
Cost per Unit
Gross Profit per Hour 
(3) × [(4) − (5)]
A
20 minutes
3
$30
$18
$36
B
20
3
   32
   22
   30
C
30
2
   30
   18
   24
D
30
2
   32
   22
   20
Product A generates the greatest gross profit per hour of Worker 2 time, so the ratio is 10 : 1 
: 1 : 1 for A, B, C, and D.
	
Available time for Worker 2 is the same as before:
​3 shifts × 5 days × 8 hours × 60 minutes = 7,200 minutes​
	
Worker 2 should produce 10 As for every 1 B, 1 C, and 1 D. Worker 2’s average production 
rate is
​
10x​(​20​)​ + 1x​(​20​)​ + 1x​(​30​)​ + 1x​(​30​)​
​ 
= 7, 200
​ 
 
280x​ = 7, 200​ 
x
​ 
= 25.7
  ​
	
Therefore, the number of units that should be produced is
​A = 257    B = 25.7    C = 25.7    D = 25.7​
	
Gross profit (price less raw materials less $3,000 weekly expenses) is
​
257​(​30 − 18​)​ + 25.7​(​32 − 22​)​ + 25.7​(​30 − 18​)​ + 25.7​(​32 − 22​)​ − 3, 000
​ 
 
 
 
 
 
             = 3, 084 + 257 + 308.4 + 257 − 3, 000​ 
 
 
 
             = $906.40
 
​
	
In summary, using three different objectives to decide how many of each product to make 
gave us three different results:
	1.	 Maximizing sales commission resulted in a $68 loss in gross profit.
	2.	 Maximizing gross profit gave us a profit of $404.
	3.	 Maximizing the use of the capacity-constrained worker gave us the best gross profit: 
$906.40.
Both examples demonstrate that production and marketing need to interact. Marketing 
should sell the most profitable use of available capacity. However, to plan capacity, produc­
tion needs to know from marketing what products could be sold.

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
645
EXAMPLE 23.3: TOC Applied to Bank Loan Application Processing3
In this example, Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints five-step approach (see Exhibit 23.2) to 
removing bottlenecks is applied to a bank loan application process. As can be seen through 
the example, the ideas can be applied to all types of applications, including service processes.
	
Step 1: Identify the system constraint. Assume that the bank is a private-sector institu­
tion and that its goal is to make more money now and in the future. Furthermore, sup­
pose that the initial constraint is internal, namely, the loan officers are unable to carry 
out all of their responsibilities in a timely manner. That is, given the current demand for 
bank loan application processing, the loan officers are unable to perform all of the steps 
in the loan approval process in a responsive manner that is viewed as satisfactory by its 
customers.
	
Step 2: Decide how to exploit the system constraint. Once a constraint is identified, 
management must effectively maximize the usage of the constraint’s capacity and capabil­
ity to fulfill the system’s goal. By calculating the throughput yield per unit of time at the 
constraining resource, management has the information necessary to prioritize the work 
performed at the constraint. For example, the loan department manager could measure the 
throughput yield associated with each hour spent working on each type of loan request, 
such as home mortgage, automobile, and small business. The sequence of loans processed 
at the constraint would then be established by the “profitability” of the different types of 
loans so that the bank’s goal can be expeditiously met. An optional approach to exploitation 
that complements prioritization is assuring that the constraint is always being effectively 
utilized. Thus, it may be possible to redesign the loan approval process so that some of the 
loan officers’ current workload is offloaded to available personnel who are currently only 
being partially utilized.
	
Step 3: Subordinate everything else to the preceding decisions. Subordination involves 
aligning all of the nonconstraint resources in support of maximizing the performance of the 
constraint resource. In this case, the bank management would want to schedule appointments 
for potential customers seeking to complete their loan applications with bank agents so that 
there was always an abundant supply of completed loan requests waiting for the loan officers 
to process. Also, the manager of the bank’s loan approval process would control the release 
of loan applications into the approval process so that the loan officers were not overwhelmed. 
Finally, the bank would have a non–fully occupied clerk assure that each application was 
complete and met process quality standards prior to being given to the loan officers. (Note 
that having a supply of finished applications available assured a highly productive usage of 
loan officer time; this approach to subordination would produce only a small increase in 
throughput. It would move the bank toward its goal; the constraint would remain with the 
loan officers.)
	
Step 4: Elevate the constraint. Elevating the constraining resource means adding enough 
new capacity so that the current constraint no longer limits system throughput. In contrast 
to the previous two steps, elevation often requires a monetary outlay or investment for new 
resources or capabilities. In the bank’s loan subsystem illustration, despite increases in loan 
officer productivity that were presumed to result from steps 2 and 3, the system constraint has 
remained with the bank’s loan officers. Thus, because these improvements were insufficient 
to break the constraint, it is necessary to address the constraining factor directly. The obvious 
step is to hire an additional loan officer. This action elevates the existing constraint by provid­
ing more than sufficient capacity to meet existing demand for processing loan applications. 
While this decision would produce a sizable increase in operating expenses, it could be justi­
fied by management as the best approach to meeting their process goal as well as the bank’s 
overall goal.
	
Step 5: Return to step 1, but do not allow inertia to cause a system constraint. After the 
original constraint has been overcome in step 4, it is necessary to revisit all of the changes 
made in steps 2 and 3 to determine if they are still appropriate to effective process and 

646	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
system performance. In the loan example, a review of the implemented changes in step 2 
might show that offloading the responsibilities for assembling the loan package and some 
of the credit checking activities to bank clerical personnel was working well and that there 
is no need to go back to the original procedure. With regard to step 3, although the bank 
might still seek to aggressively schedule bank agents to meet with customers to help them 
complete their loan applications, it might not be possible to have a large inventory of loan 
requests in progress because the constraint in the loan application and approval process had 
shifted to the marketplace. Thus, it is appropriate to return to step 1 of the five-step focusing 
process.
	
Extending the process. Exhibit 23.16 shows how the application of the five-step focus­
ing process might realistically unfold in managing the bank’s loan application process 
over the next couple of years. Elevating the capacity of the original approval process 
constraint by hiring a new loan officer leads to a new constraint. This time it resides in the 
marketplace. Suppose this new constraint turns out to be a policy constraint, namely, bank 
management does not extend consumer loans to clients who do not use the bank’s credit 
card services. Reconsideration of this policy leads to an exemption for a bank customer 
who has had any type of an account at the bank for at least the past year. Next, because 
there are insufficient monetary reserves to fund all of the approved loads, the new system 
constraint resides in the supply of capital. To address this new constraint, assume that the 
bank negotiates for additional funds from a wholesale lender and is now able to provide 
more loans than customers are currently demanding. Now, a new market constraint devel­
ops because the monetary supply of funds is greater than the demand in the marketplace. 
With some effort, the bank marketing team is able to break this constraint by creating a 
special loan product-service bundle to serve the needs of local university students. Finally 
in this example, the constraint shifts back inside the bank’s loan approval process, where 
the loan officers and bank clerks are unable to process applications fast enough to keep 
up with demand. Bank management purchases a new software package that has been 
designed to augment loan application processing and fully trains the loan officer staff and 
clerical assistants on its use.
Constraint 
Location
Constraint 
Type
Constraint Identification
Approach to Constraint Alleviation
Bank loan 
application 
process
Physical
Loan officers and bank clerks are unable 
to process all customer loan applications 
in a timely manner.
Some loan officer tasks offloaded to clerks and 
additional loan officers hired. Now sufficient capac­
ity exists in the loan application process.
Marketplace
Policy
Current bank policy: If a loan applicant 
does not have a credit card account with 
the bank, then he or she is not eligible to 
apply for a consumer loan.
New bank policy: Every loan applicant must have 
some type of active account with the bank. Now 
demand for loans increases because more poten­
tial applicants qualify.
Supply
Physical
The availability of funds is insufficient to 
meet all approved customer loan requests.
Bank negotiates for additional funds from whole­
sale lenders. Now capital reserves are greater than 
customers are demanding.
Marketplace
Policy
Loan markets are saturated relative to cur­
rent loan products, and excess funds are 
available to loan to qualified customers.
Bank develops new loan product designed for 
local college students. Now total demand for loans 
in the marketplace increases.
Bank loan 
application 
process
Physical
Loan officers and bank clerks are unable 
to process all customer loan applications 
in a timely manner.
Bank invests in the acquisition of a new software 
package to facilitate loan application processing. 
Now process capacity exceeds demand.
Source: Richard A. Reid, “Applying the TOC Five-Step Focusing Process in the Service Sector: A Banking Subsystem,” Managing Service 
Quality 17, no. 2 (2007), pp. 209–234. Copyright © 2007 Emerald Group Publishing Ltd.
Sequential Application of the Five-Step Focusing Process in Managing the Bank’s Loan 
Subsystem
exhibit 23.16

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
647
Concept Connections
LO 23–1   Explain the Theory of Constraints (TOC).
Summary
	∙	 Eli Goldratt developed his Theory of Constraints as 
an alternative way to think about improving processes. 
His ideas have stimulated thought by practitioners due 
to their applicability to many areas, including produc­
tion, distribution, and project management. 
	∙	 His underlying philosophy is that it is essential to con­
centrate on system limitations imposed by capacity-
constrained resources, and for a firm to make money, 
it must systematically remove these limitations. 
	∙	 He argues that, to do this, the firm must simultaneously 
increase throughput, reduce inventory, and reduce 
operating expenses.  He argues that improving labor 
productivity will not necessarily make money for the 
firm, and will only do so when it increases throughput, 
reduces inventory, or reduces operating expenses. 
	∙	 Goldratt argues that trying to maintain perfectly bal­
anced capacity leads to many problems because this 
makes every resource dependent on every other. Since 
statistical fluctuations are inherent in any process, 
perfect balance leads to disruptions. He argues that 
not capacity, but flow through the process, should be 
balanced.
Key Terms
Synchronous manufacturing  A production process 
coordinated to work in harmony to achieve the goals of 
the firm.
Throughput  The rate at which money is generated by 
the system through sales (Goldratt’s definition).
Inventory  All the money that the system has invested in 
purchasing things it intends to sell (Goldratt’s definition).
Operating expenses  All the money that the system 
spends to turn inventory into throughput (Goldratt’s 
definition).
Productivity  A measure of how well resources are used. 
According to Goldratt’s definition (see Chapter 23), all 
the actions that bring a company closer to its goals.
LO 23–2   Analyze bottleneck resources and apply TOC principles to controlling a process.
	∙	 Managing the flow through the bottlenecks is essen­
tial to the TOC synchronous manufacturing approach. 
	∙	 Bottlenecks are identified by calculating the expected 
utilization (percentage of capacity used) for each 
resource. 
	∙	 Saving time on a bottleneck resource is the only way 
to increase throughput. 
	∙	 A technique that paces work through the system 
according to the speed of the bottleneck is used to 
manage flow through the system.
Summary
Key Terms
Bottleneck  A resource that limits the capacity or maxi­
mum output of the process.
Nonbottleneck  Any resource whose capacity is greater 
than the demand placed on it (Goldratt’s definition).
Capacity-constrained resource (CCR)  A resource whose 
utilization is close to capacity and could be a bottleneck 
if not scheduled carefully (Goldratt’s definition).
LO 23–3   Compare TOC to traditional approaches.
	∙	 MRP uses a backward scheduling approach and is ori­
ented toward meeting due dates and maximizing the 
use of capacity. 
	∙	 JIT pulls material based on need, but does not allow 
much flexibility for changes, particularly when capac­
ity is tight. 
Summary

648	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	∙	 Synchronous manufacturing (TOC) is more flexible 
and focused on maximizing flow through the system 
while minimizing cost. 
	∙	 In order for TOC to be successfully applied, the 
firm must recognize how it can be in conflict with 
conventional accounting and marketing/sales thought. 
Traditional cost accounting is based on a goal of fully 
utilizing resources and minimizing cost. This can be 
in direct conflict with TOC goals, which include max­
imizing profit by improving throughput.
LO 23–4   Evaluate bottleneck scheduling problems by applying TOC principles.
	∙	 TOC can be used to schedule production. The solu­
tions are often very different compared to those using 
conventional rules such as discussed in Chapter 22.
Summary
Solved Problem
Here is the process flow for Products A, B, and C. Products A, B, and C sell for $20, $25, 
and $30, respectively. There are only one Resource X and one Resource Y, which are used 
to produce A, B, and C for the numbers of minutes stated on the diagram. Raw materials are 
needed at the process steps as shown, with the costs in dollars per unit of raw material. (One 
unit is used for each product.)
The market will take all that you can produce.
	
a.  Which product would you produce to maximize gross margin per unit?
	
b.  If sales personnel are paid on commission, which product or products would they sell 
and how many could they sell?
	
c.  Which and how many product or products should you produce to maximize gross 
profit for one week?
	
d.  From part (c), how much gross profit would there be for the week?
LO23–4
Selling Price
$20
$25
$30
Resource X
RM 
$1
RM 
$2
RM 
$5
X
3 min./part
X
4 min./part
X
1 min./part
Resource Y
RM 
$2
RM 
$5
RM 
$9
Y
5 min./part
Y
3 min./part
Y
2 min./part
A
C
B
Solution
	
a.  Maximizing gross margin per unit:
Gross 
Margin
=
Selling 
Price
−
Raw 
Material Cost
A
17
=
20
−
   3
B
18
=
25
−
   7
C
16
=
30
−
14  

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
649
Product B will be produced.
	
b.  Maximizing sales commission: Sales personnel would sell the highest-priced product, 
C (unless they knew the market and capacity limitations). If we assume the market 
will take all that we can make, then we would work 7 days/week, 24 hours/day. Y is 
the constraint in producing C. The number of C we can make in a week is
​C = ​ 24 hours/day × 7 days/week × 60 minutes/hour 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
 
5 minutes/part 
​
= 2, 016 units​
	
c.  To maximize profit, we need to compare profits per hour for each product:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Product
Constraint 
Resource
Production 
Time on 
Resource
Number 
of Units 
Output 
per Hour
Selling 
Price ($)
RM 
Cost ($)
Gross Profit 
per Hour 
(4) × (5 − 6)
A
Y
2
30
20
   3
$510  
B
X
4
15
25
   7
   270
C
Y
5
12
30
14
   192
If the constraining resource were the same for all three products, our problem would be solved 
and the answer would be to produce just A, and as many as possible. However, X is the con­
straint for B, so the answer could be a combination of A and B. To test this, we can see that 
the value of each hour of Y while producing B is
​ 60 minutes/hour 
 
______________ 
 
3 minutes/unit  ​ × ​(​$25 − 7​)​ = $360 / hour​
This is less than the $510 per hour producing A, so we would produce only A. The number of 
units of A produced during the week is
​ 60 minutes/hour × 24 hours/day × 7 days/week 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
 
2 minutes/unit 
​ = 5, 040​
	
d.  Gross profit for the week is 5,040 × $17 = $85,680.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 How does Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints (TOC) differ from other current approaches 
to continuous improvement in organizations? How is it similar?
	  2.	 State the global performance measurements and operational performance measurements 
and briefly define each. How do these differ from traditional accounting measurements?
	  3.	 Most manufacturing firms try to balance capacity for their production sequences. Some 
believe this is an invalid strategy. Explain why balancing capacity does not work.
	  4.	 Individually or in a small group, examine your own experiences either working in a com­
pany or as a customer of a company. Describe an instance where TOC was successfully 
applied to improve a process, or where you saw the potential for TOC to improve the 
process.
	  5.	 Discuss why transfer batches and process batches often may not and should not be equal.
	  6.	 Discuss process batches and transfer batches. How might you determine what the sizes 
should be?
	  7.	 Define and explain the cause or causes of a moving bottleneck.
	  8.	 Explain how a nonbottleneck can become a bottleneck.
	  9.	 Discuss the concept of “drum–buffer–rope.”
LO 23–1
LO 23–2

650	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	10.	 Compare and contrast JIT, MRP, and synchronized manufacturing, stating their 
main features, such as where each is or might be used, amounts of raw materials and 
work-in-process inventories, production lead times and cycle times, and methods for 
control.
	11.	 Compare the importance and relevance of quality control in JIT, MRP, and synchronous 
manufacturing.
	12.	 Discuss how a production system is scheduled using MRP logic, JIT logic, and synchro­
nous manufacturing logic.
	13.	 Discuss what is meant by forward loading and backward loading.
	14.	 Define process batch and transfer batch and their meaning in each of these applications: 
MRP, JIT, and bottleneck or constrained resource logic.
	15.	 From the standpoint of the scheduling process, how are resource limitations treated in 
an MRP application? How are they treated in a synchronous manufacturing application?
	16.	 What are operations people’s primary complaints against the accounting procedures 
used in most firms? Explain how such procedures can cause poor decisions for the total 
company.
	17.	 As an individual or small group, visit your favorite fast-food restaurant during lunch 
period. As you order, and while you are eating, observe as much of the process as you 
can. Where are the bottlenecks in the system? What recommendations can you come up 
with to relieve them?
	18.	 When making decisions about what product(s) to produce in a manufacturing system, 
why is it not enough to simply consider the selling prices and demands for different 
items?
LO23–3
LO23–4
Objective Questions
	  1.	 What is the name of the software Goldratt developed to implement his idea of TOC?
	  2.	 What are the three financial measurements necessary to adequately measure a firm’s 
performance?
	  3.	 What is the term that refers to the entire production process working in harmony to 
achieve the profit goals of the firm?
  4.	 What classic operational measurement does Goldratt redefine as “all the actions that 
bring a company closer to its goals”?
	  5.	 The following production flow shows Parts O, Q, and T; Subassembly U; and the final 
assembly for Product V.
       M to N to O
       P to Q
       R to S to T
       O and Q to U
       U and T to V
	 	 	 N involves a bottleneck operation, and S involves a capacity-constrained resource. Draw 
the process flow.
	  6.	 For the four basic configurations that follow, assume that the market is demanding prod­
uct that must be processed by both Resource X and Resource Y for Cases I, II, and III. 
For Case IV, both resources supply separate but dependent markets; that is, the number of 
units of output from both X and Y must be equal.
	 	 	   Plans are being made to produce a product that requires 40 minutes on Resource X and 
30 minutes on Resource Y. Assume that there is only one of each of these resources and 
that market demand is 1,400 units per month.
	 	 	   How many hours of production time would you schedule for X and Y? What would 
happen if both were scheduled for the same number of hours? (Answer in Appendix D)
LO23–1
LO23–2

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
651
Case I
Case II
X
Market
Case III
Case IV
Market
Market
Y
Y
Market
X
Market
X
Y
Assembly
X
Y
	  7.	 Following are the process flow sequences for three products: A, B, and C. There are 
two bottleneck operations—on the first leg and fourth leg—marked with an X. Boxes 
represent processes, which may be either machine or manual. Suggest the location of the 
drum, buffer, and ropes.
Market
Final product
assembly
A
B
C
X
BN
X
BN
	  8.	 Willard Lock Company is losing market share because of horrendous due-date perfor­
mance and long delivery lead times. The company’s inventory level is high and includes 
many finished goods that do not match the short-term orders. Material control analysis 
shows that purchasing has ordered on time, the vendors have delivered on time, and the 
scrap/rework rates have been as expected. However, the buildable mix of components and 
subassemblies does not generally match the short-term and past-due requirements at final 
assembly. End-of-month expediting and overtime are the rule, even though there is idle 
time early in the month. Overall efficiency figures are around 70 percent for the month. 
These figures are regarded as too low.
	 	 	   You have just been hired as a consultant and must come up with recommendations. 
Help the firm understand its problems. State some specific actions it should take. The 
product flow is shown in the following diagram.

652	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
	  9.	 The accompanying figure shows a production network model with the parts and process­
ing sequences. State clearly on the figure (1) where you would place inventory; (2) where 
you would perform inspection; and (3) where you would emphasize high-quality output.
Final 
Assembly
Subassemblies
Fabrication
Raw Material
RM
Knobs
Strike 
plates
Trim 
piece
Lock body 
subassembly
Cylinder 
subassembly
RM
RM
RM
RM
RM
RM
Market
Final assembly
Bottleneck
	10.	 The following production flow shows Parts E, I, and N; Subassembly O; and the final 
assembly for Product P.
       A to B to C to D to E
       F to G to H to I
       J to K to L to M to N
       E and I to O
       N and O to P
	 	 	 B involves a bottleneck operation, and M involves a CCR.
	
a.  Draw the process flow.
	
b.  Where would you locate buffer inventories?
	
c.  Where would you place inspection points?
	
d.  Where would you stress the importance of quality production?

	
Theory of Constraints	
Chapter 23	
653
	11.	 Here are average process cycle times for several workcenters. State which are bottle­
necks, nonbottlenecks, and capacity-constrained resources.
	
Processing time	
Setup time
	
Processing time	
Setup	
Idle
	
Processing time	
Setup	
	 Idle
	
Processing time	
Setup	
Idle
	
Processing time	
Setup	
Idle
	12.	 The following diagram shows the flow process, raw material costs, and machine process­
ing time for three products: A, B, and C. There are three machines (W, X, and Y) used in 
the production of these products; the times shown are in required minutes of production 
per unit. Raw material costs are shown in cost per unit of product. The market will take 
all that can be produced.
	
a.  Assuming that sales personnel are paid on a commission basis, which product should 
they sell?
	
b.  On the basis of maximizing gross profit per unit, which product should be sold?
	
c.  To maximize total profit for the firm, which product should be sold?
A 
$50
B 
$60
C 
$70
Selling Price
X
4 min.
Y
4 min.
$10
W
$20
5 min.
$30
Y
5 min.
$20
X
6 min.
$10
W
2 min.
$15
$10
Y
3 min.
$15
W
2 min.
X
1 min.
$15
	13.	 How does synchronous manufacturing differ from MRP with respect to scheduling?
	14.	 JIT is limited to what type of manufacturing environment?
	15.	 Cost accounting logic can lead managers to keep their resources busy all the time, increas­
ing productivity with no regard to demand. What is the negative result from this effect?
	16.	 The solution to coping with natural differences between marketing and production func­
tions is to do what two things?
	17.	 The M–N plant manufactures two different products: M and N. Selling prices and weekly 
market demands are shown in the following diagram. Each product uses raw materials 
with costs as shown. The plant has three different machines: A, B, and C. Each performs 
different tasks and can work on only one unit of material at a time.
	 	 	   Process times for each task are shown in the diagram. Each machine is available 2,400 
minutes per week. There are no “Murphys” (major opportunities for the system to foul 
up). Setup and transfer times are zero. Demand is constant.
	 	 	   Operating expenses (including labor) total a constant $12,000 per week. Raw materials 
are not included in weekly operating expenses. (Answers in Appendix D)
	
a.  Where is the constraint in this plant?
	
b.  What product mix provides the highest profit?
	
c.  What is the maximum weekly profit this plant can earn?
LO 23–3
LO 23–4

654	
Section 4	
Supply and Demand Planning and Control
RM-3 
$40/unit
RM-2 
$40/unit
RM-1 
$60/unit
$190/unit 
100 units/week
Product M
Product N
$200/unit 
50 units/week
C 
15 min./unit
C 
15 min./unit
B 
15 min./unit
B 
15 min./unit
A 
20 min./unit
Resources:  A, B, C (one each)
Availability:  2,400 min./week
Operating expense:  $12,000/week
	18.	 A steel product is manufactured by starting with raw material (carbon steel wire) 
and then processing it sequentially through five operations using machines A to E, 
respectively (see following table). This is the only use that the five machines are 
put to. The hourly rates for each machine are given in the table.
Operation:
1
2
3
4
5
Machine:
A
B
C
D
E
Hourly unit 
output rate:
100
80
40
60
90
Consider the following questions.
	
a.  What is the maximum output per hour of the steel product?
	
b.  By how much would the output be improved if the output of B was increased to 
90 per hour?
	
c.  By how much would the output be improved if the output for C was increased to 
50 per hour?
	
d.  By how much would the output be improved if the output for C was increased to 
70 per hour?
	
e.  What is the effect on the system if machine A can only manage an output of 90 
in one hour?
	
 f.  What is the effect on the system if machine C can only manage an output of 30 
in one hour?
	
g.  What is the effect on the system if machine B is allowed to drop to an output of 
30 in one hour?
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 According to Goldratt, the goal of a firm is to do what?
	  2.	 At the operational level, Goldratt suggests that these 
three measures should guide decisions.
	  3.	 The goal related to these three measures is this.
	  4.	 Goldratt argues that, rather than capacity, this should 
be balanced.
	  5.	 This is any resource whose capacity is less than the 
demand placed on it.
	  6.	 Goldratt suggests that a production system should be 
controlled using these three mechanisms.
	  7.	 A bottleneck should have this placed in front of it to 
ensure it never runs out of work.
	  8.	 A rope is used for this purpose in controlling a pro­
duction system.
	  9.	 To pace the production system, this is used.
	10.	 This is a measure of the value of inventory and the 
time it stays within an area.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Make money  2. Throughput, inventory, operating expenses  3. Increase throughput while simultaneously reducing 
inventory and reducing operating expense  4. Flow  5. Bottleneck  6. Drum, buffer, and rope  7. Buffer  8. Communication  9. Drum  10. Dollar days

	
655
In this section of the book, we include chapters that 
show how the operations and supply chain manage­
ment (OSCM) concepts that were developed in the 
rest of the book can be applied to specific indus­
tries. Concepts such as lean manufacturing, waste 
elimination, value chain analysis, and all others are 
applicable to all types of businesses, not just pure 
manufacturing or service companies.
Many of you may be interested in jobs in the finan­
cial industry, for example. Many of the processes 
used in this industry are repetitive, just like manu­
facturing processes. Take, for example, sending out 
a mutual fund prospectus to investors. These docu­
ments need to be prepared and printed, are stored 
in a warehouse with thousands of similar documents, 
and are then mailed to actual and potential investors 
at the proper time. Given the volume sent by a large 
company, such as Fidelity Investments, this process 
needs to be done quickly, in response to the needs 
of investors, and efficiently. This process has manu­
facturing and logistics elements, and companies can 
draw on the ideas studied here to minimize cost 
while delivering the documents quickly.
We study two specific industries: health care 
and consulting. We selected these because we 
know that many of you may be interested in pursu­
ing careers in these areas. Part of the process of 
becoming a business professional is applying what 
you learn in new and different ways that go beyond 
the specific examples you studied in the classroom. 
These chapters are designed to help you develop 
this expertise.
It’s Not Just Applicable to 
Manufacturing and Services
	24.	Health Care
	25.	Operations Consulting
Special Topics
SECTION
FIVE

656
THE INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH CARE 
OPTIMIZATION
The Institute for Health Care Optimization (IHO) is dedicated to applying the tools and 
methodologies that have been used in operations and supply chain management for 
years to the heaIth care industry. Businesses have used tools such as queuing models and 
simulation to design operations and material flow to minimize cost and maximize quality. 
These same tools have not usually been applied for similar effect in the health care set­
ting. The Institute for Health Care Optimization has been built on a multidisciplinary foun­
dation that will bring together the science of operations management, clinical knowledge, 
analytical skills, and an understanding of organizational behavior in the health care field.
Learning Objectives
	LO 24–1	 Understand health care operations and contrast these operations to manufacturing and 
service operations.
	LO 24–2	 Exemplify performance measures used in health care.
	LO 24–3	 Illustrate future trends in health care.
Health Care
24 
© Image Source/Jupiterimages RF
IHO Variability Methodology™ services are 
based on a unique three-phase approach for 
patient flow redesign for hospitals and other 
health care delivery organizations: Phase 1—­
Separate homogenous groups, such as elective 
versus nonelective and inpatient versus outpa­
tient flows. The purpose is to reduce waiting times 
for urgent/emergency cases, increase throughput 
in the operating rooms and cath labs, decrease 
overtime, and decrease delays for scheduled 
cases. Phase 2—Smooth the flow of electively 
scheduled cases by decreasing the competition 
between unscheduled emergency procedures 
and elective scheduled procedures. The goal is 
to increase hospital-wide throughput, achieve 
consistent nurse-to-patient staffing, and increase 

	
657
patient placement in appropriate units. Phase 3—Estimate resource (e.g., beds, ORs, 
MRIs, staff) needs for each type of flow to ensure the right care at the right time and 
place for every patient.
A hospital is a combination care facility, hotel, restaurant, and store staffed by 
highly skilled professionals supported by semiskilled and low-skilled workers, 
using state-of-the-art technology and employing precise discipline to perform 
work of zero-defect quality on a heterogeneous population, all while trying to be 
affordable.
It’s not easy . . .
Health care is the most intensive of service industries in the range of service activities and the 
impact these activities have on the customer. Nowhere is this more evident than in a hospital, 
where operational excellence is central to the clinical treatment of patients, the quality of their 
experience, and, of course, cost. This is particularly critical in the United States, where more 
than $2 trillion is spent on health care each year. It’s not just high cost alone—recent surveys 
show that more than 55 percent of all Americans said they were dissatisfied with the quality 
of health care. Nevertheless, numerous health care organizations are innovative and excel in 
their operations performance. In this chapter, we will discuss some of the unique features of 
hospitals and health care centers and how OSCM concepts and tools are used to achieve out­
standing results in this critical service industry.
Understand health care 
operations and contrast 
these operations to 
manufacturing and service 
operations.
LO 24–1
THE NATURE OF HEALTH CARE OPERATIONS
Health care operations management may be defined as the design, management, and 
improvement of the systems that deliver health care services. Health care as a service is char­
acterized by extensive customer contact, a wide variety of providers, and literally life or death 
as potential outcomes.
The focus of our discussion of health care operations is the hospital, although everything 
here is also applicable to the smaller health care clinic. The standard definition of a hospital 
is a facility whose staff provides services relating to observation, diagnosis, and treatment to 
cure or lessen the suffering of patients. Observation involves studying patients and conduct­
ing tests to arrive at a diagnosis; diagnosis is the medical expert’s explanation of the cause 
of a patient’s symptoms; and treatment is the course of action to be followed based upon the 
diagnosis. All of the services provided in a hospital are generally organized around at least 
one of these three areas.
The following are important factors that set hospitals’ operations apart from other 
organizations:
∙	 The key operators in the core processes are highly trained professionals (medical spe­
cialists) who generate requests for service (orders) but are also involved in delivering 
the service.
∙	 The relationship between the prices that can be charged and actual performance is not 
as direct as in most other production environments. Quality and service measures are 
largely based on opinion rather than hard evidence.
Health care operations 
management
The design, management, 
and improvement of 
the systems that create 
and deliver health care 
services.
Hospital
A facility whose staff 
provides services relating 
to observation, diagnosis, 
and treatment to cure or 
lessen the suffering of 
patients.
Source: From the Institute for Health Care Optimization Website: www.ihoptimize.org.

658	
Section 5	
Special Topics
∙	 Hospitals do not have a simple line of command, but are characterized by a delicate 
balance of power between different interest groups (management, medical specialists, 
nursing staff, and referring doctors), each of them having ideas about what should be 
targets for operations performance.
∙	 Production control approaches presuppose complete and explicit specifications of end 
product requirements and delivery requirements; in hospitals product specifications are 
often subjective and vague.
∙	 Hospital care is not a commodity that can be stocked; the hospital is a resource-oriented 
service organization.
Classification of Hospitals
The American Hospital Association classifies hospitals as follows:
∙	 General hospital/emergency room—Provides a broad range of services for multiple 
conditions.
∙	 Specialty—Provides services for a specific medical condition; for example, cardiology 
(heart conditions).
∙	 Psychiatric—Provides care for behavioral and mental disorders.
∙	 Rehabilitation—Provides services focused on restoring health.
As in other industries, the complexity of hospital operations has a major impact on perfor­
mance. In Exhibit 24.1, we have arrayed these four types of hospitals in a product–process 
framework matching range of health care product lines with complexity of operations. The 
inherent complexity of general hospitals is magnified by their need for physical size and 
extensive technology to handle a wide range of patient needs. Chris Hani Baragwanath Hos­
pital is the largest hospital in the world, occupying 173 acres, with 3,200 beds and 6,760 staff 
members. The hospital is in the Soweto area of Johannesburg, South Africa. Specialty hos­
pital facilities may be large as well, but they tend to have a narrower range of medical skills 
and technology onsite. An example would be the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, which 
focuses on cancer patients. Psychiatric hospitals are in a sense specialty hospitals, but because 
their clinical focus is on the mind rather than the body, they are generally less technology-
intense than those focusing on physical illnesses. An example of a psychiatric hospital is 
McLean Hospital, affiliated with Harvard University. It is well known for its patient list of 
famous people. Rehabilitation facilities are seen as least complex because, although they use 
technology, the type of work done is more custodial compared to the active treatment found in 
other hospitals. Veterans Administration hospitals are representative of this category.
General
Hospital/Emergency
Room
Specialty
Hospital
Psychiatric
Hospital
Rehabilitation
Hospital
High
Complexity of Operations
Variety of Technologies and Skills Required
Low
Wide
Narrow
Range of
Products
Offered
Hospital Product–Process Framework
exhibit 24.1

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
659
Hospital Layout and Care Chains
The layout sets the physical constraints on a hospital’s operations. The goal of hospital layout 
is to move patients and resources through the units and floors to minimize wait and transport 
times. The layout can be determined using software models that minimize the total combined 
costs of travel of patients and staff. For those situations where the numerical flow of patients 
and staff does not reveal quantitative factors, manual methods such as systematic layout plan­
ning (discussed in the layout chapter) may be more appropriate.
A general rule for the design of a hospital is to separate patient and guest traffic flows from 
staff flows. Use of separate elevators and dedicated resource corridors is particularly impor­
tant in avoiding congestion and delays. The principal element of the overall layout of a hos­
pital is the nursing station, which is the area support staff work from. Many nursing stations 
are located in the hospital to support the various patient areas. Nursing stations today tend to 
be more compact shapes than the elongated rectangles of the past. Compact rectangles, modi­
fied triangles, or even circles have been used in an attempt to shorten the distance between the 
nursing station and the patient’s bed. The choice depends on such issues as the organization of 
the nursing program, number of beds to a nursing unit, and number of beds to a patient room. 
The growth of more holistic, patient-centered treatment and environments is leading to modi­
fications in layout to include providing small medical libraries and computer terminals so 
patients can research their conditions and treatments, and locating kitchens and dining areas 
in patient units so family members can prepare food for patients and families to eat together.
The flow of work through a hospital is sometimes referred to as a care chain, consisting of 
the services for patients provided by various medical specialties and functions, within and 
across departments. Exhibit 24.2 lists typical characteristics of care chain processes for key 
patient groups within general surgery. A major distinction among health care processes shown 
in the exhibit is the extent to which access to medical treatment and resources can be sched­
uled efficiently. Emergency situations such as trauma must be dealt with immediately, require 
rapid access to medical staff, and, as a result, are inherently inefficient. Elective procedures, 
on the other hand, can be scheduled to achieve more efficient use of resources. The number of 
steps, the time of each step, and whether the care chain has a definite end affects resource use 
and schedule complexity. A chronic condition, for example, may lack a clearly identifiable 
ending. Complexity is also increased by the need for rapid diagnostics, extensive consultation, 
and the need to work with other specialties. Decoupling points are steps in the process where 
waiting takes place, either before or after the procedure is performed. For many operations, it 
is after diagnosis; for trauma cases, it might be after the emergency treatment and when the 
patient is transferred from the recovery room to a ward.
A work flow diagram of a care chain is shown in Exhibit 24.3. It focuses on the con­
tacts between the patient and the provider for surgery such as a hip replacement. The actual 
flow can be lengthier, as when the patient wants a second opinion, and we have left out 
Care chain
The flow of work through 
a hospital consisting of 
the services for patients 
provided by various 
medical specialties and 
functions, within and 
across departments.
Decoupling points
Stages in the process 
where waiting takes place, 
either before or after the 
procedure is performed.
Characteristic of Process/Care 
Chain
Trauma Patients
Cancer (Oncology) 
Patients
Joint Replacement 
Patients
Emergency or elective
Emergency
Elective
Elective
Urgency
High
Moderate
Low
Volume
High
Medium
High
Short, long, or chronic treatment
Short
Chronic
Short
Diagnostic requirements
Immediate
Ongoing
Ongoing
Consultation requirements
Limited time possible
Involved
Little
Number of specialties involved
Depends on situation
Many
Few
Bottleneck
Operating room
Operating room
Operating room
Decoupling point
After surgery
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Characteristics of Processes/Care Chain in a Typical General 
Surgery Unit
exhibit 24.2

660	
Section 5	
Special Topics
recuperation at home. Also omitted are process flow modifications resulting from, say, the 
patient’s medical tests indicating a particular issue like a drop in blood pressure. In this case, 
the patient can either be processed serially by different specialties (e.g., blood pressure first 
and hip replacement second), in parallel (blood pressure and hip replacement at the same time 
with one specialty assisting the other), or as a team (both specialties present in the operating 
room to work at the same time).
T r a c k i n g  o f  W o r k f l o w  U s i n g  R F I D   Radio frequency identification uses 
electronic tags that can store, send, and receive data over wireless frequencies. They are 
now being used in a few of the more progressive hospitals to track the location of patients, 
medical staff, and physical assets as they move through the hospital. Among the benefits 
of using RFID for patient flow are improvement of the patient check-in process and tighter 
links between patient and medical records. For example, RFID readers placed on doors 
throughout the hospital can automatically detect patients as they pass through. With this 
knowledge, clerks can determine where bottlenecks are likely to occur and redirect patients 
to other treatment areas if the process is not sequence dependent. Thus, for example, rather 
than waiting in the cardiology department for a cardiogram, a hip replacement patient could 
be sent to X-ray for a required test where there is no waiting. With regard to physical assets, 
RFID can pinpoint the location of equipment such as gurneys, portable X-ray machines, 
and wheelchairs to help get them to the patient when needed. In addition, knowing where 
each piece of equipment is can save hours that are spent at the end of the day conducting 
“equipment round-ups.”
Capacity Planning
Capacity planning entails matching an organization’s resources to current and future demand. 
Determination of the resource requirements is primarily a function of the number of cus­
tomers in the hospital’s local market and the length of stay. Length of stay can be shortened 
by technologies and process management, which can increase patient throughput. In health 
care, capacity is measured in terms of multiple resources including beds, clinics, and treat­
ment rooms; availability of physicians, nurses, and other providers, medical technologies, and 
equipment such as X-ray machines; facility space such as hallways and elevators; and various 
support services such as cafeteria and parking.
Referral by GP
and wait for
appointment
with a surgeon
First meeting
with the surgeon
to determine if
surgery is needed
Medical tests to
determine
patient’s ability
to handle surgery
Surgeon
discusses the
results and
advises of risks
Schedule OR
Cycle Time and Cost Increasing
Patient Flow
Operation
Legend
Admission
to the
hospital
Procedural
decisions
Surgeon checks
on progress and
advises on
rehabilitation
Appointment
Wait List
Queue
Surgery Wait
List
Postoperation
Stay at Ward
Surgery
Surgery
Preparation
2nd Visit
Lab Test
First
Consultation
Care Chain Diagram of Hip Replacement Surgery
exhibit 24.3

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
661
The starting point in developing a capacity plan is determining the effective capacity of 
a resource over some period of time. This is accomplished by multiplying design capacity 
(which is the capacity if the resource is operated continuously) by the average utilization rate. 
The formula is
Effective capacity = Design capacity × Utilization
For example, if average utilization is 70 percent on an X-ray machine that could operate 
24 hours per day, 7 days a week, then its effective capacity per day is 16.8 hours per day 
(24 hours × 0.7 = 16.8 hours). It should be noted that the 70 percent utilization figure is in 
line with the 70 percent utilization target common to companies seeking a high level of ser­
vice. The subsequent steps consist of (1) forecasting patient demand by hour, location, spe­
cialty, and so on; (2) translating this demand, adjusted by productivity estimates, into capacity 
requirements; (3) determining the current capacity level in terms of hours of staff, facilities, 
and equipment; (4) calculating the gap between demand and capacity on a per-hour basis; and 
(5) developing a strategy to close the gap. This can be done by several common approaches, 
including transferring capacity from other units, increasing capacity through overtime, sub­
contracting with other hospitals, and bottleneck reduction.
Workforce Scheduling
The primary areas of importance in hospital scheduling are nurse shift scheduling and operat­
ing room scheduling. Nurses constitute the largest component of the hospital’s workforce, and 
operating rooms (or surgical suites) are typically the largest revenue-generating centers.
The nurse shift schedules can be classified as either permanent (cyclical) or flexible (dis­
cretionary). In cyclical scheduling, the work is usually planned for a four- to six-week period, 
where employees work on a fixed schedule each week over the period (for example, the con­
ventional fixed, five 8-hour days each week). Several types of flexible scheduling are used, 
but the most popular is the flexible week, where nurses maintain 8-hour days and average 
40 hours per week but can alternate between, say, 8 hours for four days and 8 hours for six 
days. Both cyclical and flexible schedules have their pros and cons, though the edge seems to 
go to flexible systems because they are better suited to handle fluctuations in demand, as well 
as meeting the desires of nurses to change from full- to part-time. Several personnel schedul­
ing techniques are described in Chapter 22.
Quality Management and Process Improvement
Ever since the work of Florence Nightingale (see the OSCM at Work box later in this sec­
tion), hospitals have been seeking ways to achieve quality and process improvement. TQM 
approaches have been a staple for decades, and within the past few years Six Sigma and lean 
concepts are being instituted in many hospitals. Hospital personnel are well suited to analytics 
of TQM because so much of health care involves precise measuring of patient responses to 
drugs and clinical procedures.
G a p  E r r or s  a n d  B o t t l e n e cks  Two problems that get frequent attention in quality 
programs are dealing with gap errors and bottlenecks. Gap errors are information mistakes 
that arise when a task is transferred or handed off between people or groups. Many professional 
routines, such as formal handoff procedures between shifts of nurses and physicians are 
designed to bridge gaps. Handoffs may be as significant a source of serious patient harm as are 
medication-related events. In a study of formal handoff procedures, 94 percent of the handoffs 
were conducted face-to-face, more than half of the 161 residents surveyed reported that they 
were rarely done in a quiet, private setting, and over a third reported frequent interruptions. 
One successful approach to managing handoffs is the SBAR (Situation-Background-
Assessment-Recommendation) checklist technique for communicating information about 
a patient’s condition between members of the health care team. Adapted from a program 
used to provide quick briefings of nuclear submariners during a change in command, SBAR 

662	
Section 5	
Special Topics
is an easy-to-remember tool for framing any conversation requiring a clinician’s immediate 
attention and action.
As discussed elsewhere in the book, a bottleneck is that part of the system that has the 
smallest capacity relative to the demand on it. Bottlenecks frequently result from individual 
departments optimizing their own throughput—the number of patients or procedures per 
hour—without considering the effects on upstream or downstream departments. If changes are 
made to improve parts of a system without addressing the constraint, the changes may not result 
in a reduction of delays and waiting times for the entire system. To identify the constraint, 
observe where the work is piling up or where lines are forming, and perform some simple cal­
culations. For example, Exhibit 24.4 shows the capacity of the five processes in a preoperative 
clinic at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. (Note that nursing is the bottleneck.)
The handbook provides suggestions for eliminating bottlenecks. These are presented in 
Exhibit 24.5.
Service Quality  Hospitals, like other customer contact businesses, have been raising 
the level of their customer service to improve the patient experience. This has been shown to 
Florence Nightingale, Hospital Quality 
Improvement Pioneer
Long before Deming, Crosby, and the other industrial quality 
gurus, Britain’s Florence Nightingale was leading a quality 
OSCM AT WORK
revolution in hospitals. During the Crimean War, the British 
public was shocked by reports of the terrible conditions 
of British hospitals, and Nightingale, founder of the mod­
ern profession of nursing, was sent to Scutari, Turkey, to 
improve them. In addition to overseeing the introduction of 
nurses to the hospitals, she also led the effort to improve 
sanitary conditions in the hospitals. Central to her approach 
was collecting, tabulating, interpreting, and graphically dis­
playing data relating to process care changes on outcomes. 
(She is credited as being the developer of the pie chart.) 
For example, to quantify the overcrowding of hospitals, she 
compared the amount of space per patient in London hos­
pitals, 1,600 square feet, to that in Scutari, 400 square feet. 
She also developed a standard statistical form to enable the 
collection of data for analysis and comparison. The results 
of these innovations were astounding: The mortality of 
patients decreased from 42 percent in February 1855 to 2.2 
percent in June of that year. Nightingale’s approach, termed 
evidence-based medicine, underlies current approaches to 
medical practices.
© Hulton Archive/Getty Images
Anesthesia
Nursing
Phlebotomy
EXG
X-ray
Total process (minutes including 
paperwork)
15
18
8
10
9
Estimated capacity (number of visits 
per day) with breaks, calls, lunch
48
36
58
42
On-call
Range of visits per day (4-day period)
27−45
23−11
22−41
11−30
7−21
Average number of visits per day 
(4-day period)
35
27
29
20
14
Pre-op Clinical Capacity at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
exhibit 24.4

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
663
save money through reductions in malpractice suits, reductions in no-shows, and lower nurse 
turnover. The standard philosophy is an end-to-end customer focus. An example of this focus 
is at Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles. When patients arrive at “Good Sam” for an 
appointment, rather than having to sit in a waiting room they are greeted at a modern hotel-like 
lobby and escorted directly to the unit of the hospital where they are to be treated. During their 
stay, efforts are made to ensure that their comfort needs are anticipated (such as having an extra 
pillow in the room), and before leaving a patient, every employee is to ask, “Is there anything 
else I can do for you?” In addition, hospital patients can use the Red Carpet Hospitality 
Program, which provides concierge-like services such as the ordering-in of meals from local 
restaurants and providing information about local accommodations and spas for families.
Health Care Supply Chains
H o s p i t al  S u p p l y  C h a i n s   Exhibit 24.6 presents a hospital supply chain, showing 
the flow of three essential resources: information, funds, and goods and services. Goods and 
services move downstream from manufacturers to distributors/third-party logistics providers 
(3PL) and retailers to the hospital warehouse to receiving to central stores, and then to 
nursing and patients. Cash/funds flow upstream. On a day-to-day basis, hospital supply chain 
management focuses on medical supplies and pharmaceutical supplies. Traditionally, these 
activities are operated as separate organizational units. The medical-surgical supplies are 
complex, and are ordered from multiple vendors and from manufacturers. For the pharmacy, 
the vast majority of medications come directly from the distributors. Very few ship directly 
How to Manage the Constraint
Diagnoses (Dxs)
Remedies (Rxs)
Constraints should not have idle 
time.
The doctor is in the exam room 
waiting to see the first patient of 
the day while the patient is being 
registered.
Register the patient after the 
exam.
If experts are the constraint, they 
should be doing only work for 
which an expert is needed.
In preoperative testing, patients 
are backed up waiting for the 
nurse (the constraint in the 
process).
The receptionist or assistant 
assumes tasks that are being 
done by the nurse but that do 
not require nursing skills.
Put inspection in front of a 
constraint.
On the day of the surgery, key 
X-rays are not available.
One person coordinates and 
expedites all necessary informa­
tion on the day of the surgery.
Diagnoses and Remedies for Eliminating Bottlenecks
exhibit 24.5
Patients
Hospital
Distributors
Manufacturers
Goods and Services
Cash/Funds Flow
Health Care Supply Chain
exhibit 24.6

664	
Section 5	
Special Topics
from the manufacturer. Current approaches involve merging of the two procurement operations 
within one department to reduce the number of vendors and to get better transparency.
Physician-Driven Service Chains  The widespread use of computerized 
physician order entry (CPOE) systems for prescriptions has led experts to propose broadening 
their application to include scheduling all resources needed by physicians to treat their individual 
patients. Called “event management,” the way it works is that the admission order for a patient—
for example, for a surgery procedure—triggers a series of follow-up events that are automatically 
entered into the information system (see Exhibit 24.7). The information system then initiates an 
admission date and books an operating room date, a surgical team (including an anesthesiologist 
and nurses), recovery room, and lab tests. These activities and processes are linked as well. For 
example, an electronically issued lab order for blood work is routed directly to the phlebotomist, 
who then draws and ships blood to the lab for analysis. Lab managers use the information to 
batch orders. Behind the scenes, accounting transactions are generated for billing insurance 
companies, recording copayments, placing purchase orders for supplies, and so on.
Inventory Management
Average inventory for medium-size hospitals is about $3.5 million. It represents 5 to 15 percent 
of current assets and 2 to 4 percent of total assets; typically, inventory is the largest working 
capital requirement. The cost of inventory is directly related to the hospital’s case mix. A case-
mix index is calculated based on classifications such as diagnosis-related groups (DRGs).
DRGs classify patients by diagnosis or surgical procedure (sometimes including age) into 
major diagnostic categories (each containing specific diseases, disorders, or procedures) 
based on the premise that treatment of similar medical diagnoses generate similar costs. Over 
1,000 DRGs have been developed for Medicare as part of the payment system. 
Hospital inventory management systems can be broken down into two general categories: 
push systems, consisting of fixed–order quantity systems and fixed–time period systems (cov­
ered in Chapter 20), and pull systems, using just-in-time delivery (covered in Chapter 14). The 
basic difference between the two categories is that push systems either place reorders for a set 
amount in anticipation of need (fixed–order quantity systems) or count inventory at set time peri­
ods and place orders to bring inventory to a predetermined level (fixed–time period systems). Pull 
Accounting
Purchasing
Materials
inventory
Imaging
Radiology
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Pharmacy
Phlebotomist
Lab
Operating
room schedule
Instructions
Recovery
Food service
Admission
Supply Chain Event Management
exhibit 24.7
Diagnosis-related 
groups (DRGs)
Homogeneous units 
of hospital activity for 
planning and costing 
surgeries—essentially a bill 
of labor and materials.

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
665
systems, by contrast, have mechanisms called pull signals to supply inventory just-in-time (JIT) 
for use. Push systems make sense when a hospital owns its own inventory or buys in bulk and 
then breaks it down to distribute to nursing units or floors when required. JIT makes sense for 
expensive items such as implants, which are supplied by a partner vendor on a pull-system basis.
A major distinction between health care inventory management and that of other busi­
nesses is planning safety stock. The standard calculation of safety stock is predicated on trad­
ing off the cost of carrying an additional unit of inventory with the cost of being out of stock. 
In a department store, we can easily balance the cost of holding too many pairs of jeans with 
the cost (or lost profit) caused by running out of them. In hospitals, such trade-offs are much 
trickier when faced with balancing the cost of holding, say, a unit of type A blood with the 
cost of running out of it. The problem with estimating the cost of a stockout in a hospital is 
that consequences such as prolonged patient pain or even (though rarely) a threat to the life of 
the patient may be an issue. For critical items, backup contingency plans such as borrowing 
from a nearby hospital are often developed.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
The following are typical indicators used to measure performance at a health care clinic: 
∙	 Customer satisfaction—Survey rating of primary care provided and subspecialty care 
provided.
∙	 Clinical productivity and efficiency—Patient visits per physician per workday. 
∙	 Internal operations—Patient complaints per 1,000 patients. Patient waiting time for 
appointments. 
∙	 Mutual respect and diversity—Percentage of staff from underrepresented groups. 
Employee satisfaction survey.
As can be seen, most of the performance indicators are tied to operations management.
Performance Dashboards
Current practice is to present detailed day-to-day performance measures on dashboards in 
three major categories: customer service, clinical operations, and key processes. A customer 
service dashboard provides such scoring information as percentage of patients who would 
recommend the hospital to others and rating of such items as inpatient parking, courtesy of 
staff, cleanliness, caring of staff, meal quality, follow-up education and instruction, and pain 
management, as well as an overall satisfaction. A clinical dashboard measures performance 
metrics such as mortality rate, quality improvement, readmission rate, and various procedure-
specific key performance indicators. A key process dashboard would display, for example, 
percentage of transfusions having reactions, accurate performance of transfusions protocols, 
adverse drug reactions, medicine error severity, autopsy rate, employee exposures to blood 
and bodily fluids, and code response times.
TRENDS IN HEALTH CARE
Among the major trends in health care that relate to OSCM are the following.
Evidence-based medicine (EBM): EBM is the application of the scientific method to 
evaluate alternative treatment methods and create guidelines for similar clinical situations. 
Essentially, it is the development of standard methods for therapeutic interventions.
Integrated medical care: Developed by the Mayo Clinic, this approach has a number of 
philosophical as well as operational features, including staff/team work with multispecialty 
integration, unhurried examination with time to listen to the patient, the hospital physician 
taking personal responsibility for directing patient care over time in a partnership with the 
local physician, and integrated medical records with common support services for all patients.
Exemplify performance 
measures used in health 
care.
LO 24–2
Illustrate future trends in 
health care.
LO 24–3

666	
Section 5	
Special Topics
Electronic medical records: Digital technologies are revolutionizing the way patient records 
are gathered and stored. For example, emergency department doctors and nurses at Kaiser 
Permanente in Oakland carry flat computer tablets that can access every patient’s entire med­
ical record. These tablets also enable doctors and nurses to call up medical test records and 
X-rays right at the patient’s bedside. Similar technologies are now within the reach of smaller 
medical practices with handheld tablet PCs for medical records being sold by Walmart.
Health information exchanges (HIEs): HIEs provide the capability to electronically 
move clinical information over various kinds of information systems while maintaining the 
meaning of the information being exchanged. For example, the Indiana Health Information 
Remote Doctor Consultation!
You broke your ankle playing tennis yesterday afternoon. 
What a mess—the whole joint dislocated and three broken 
bones. The doctor says that it might be a year before you 
are back to normal. Your surgery was performed last night. 
No pain right now, but the medication coming through that 
tube connected to your arm may be the reason for that. 
The doctor wanted to get the surgery done last night 
since he was leaving for vacation early this morning. Just 
prior to going under the knife, he assured you that every­
thing would be fine and that he would talk to you in the 
morning. He is 700 miles away by now, so how could this be? 
OSCM AT WORK
The nurse comes in and asks how things are going. 
She says the doctor wants to talk and asks if I am up for that. 
“Sure,” I say, but I am still unsure how this can be done. “No 
problem, I’ll be right in with the doctor” says the nurse. The 
nurse rolls in a device like I had never seen before. It looks to 
be a little over 5 feet high and has a computer monitor on top. 
I hear a voice say, “Hi, how are you doing?” I look up 
and sure enough there is my doctor on the screen. He tells 
me about how well the surgery went. He describes how he 
put a plate in my ankle and seven screws to hold everything 
together. He explains that it is going to take time for all of this 
to heal and that after six months he would probably do another 
surgical procedure and take the plate and screws out. It is all 
part of the process. He said he would check in with me again 
tomorrow morning and that it might be four or five days before 
I could leave the hospital. Also, I should let the nurses know if I 
am feeling any pain. He assured me that he was connected to 
the gadget through an app and that the nurses could contact 
him quickly, even better than if he were at the local office. 
This type of electronic physician assistant gives the 
doctor direct access to current data related to the patient—
heart rate, blood pressure, sleep and active periods, and 
current drugs being administered. In many ways, this is even 
better than the old way of doing hospital rounds. Everything 
is at the doctor’s finger tips; the information is in real-time 
and accurate. 
The “Remote Presence Robot” is a reality and is being 
used by many hospitals today. Physician-to-patient commu­
nication is now possible regardless of whether a physician 
is out of town or out of the country. Doctors can now make 
rounds off-site or from their office any time of the day via an 
app on the physician’s cell phone. Patients are still monitored 
by the hospital nursing staff, but now they have a direct link to 
the doctor via the app with real-time ability to communicate.
Many patients are impressed with the new technology 
as it gives doctors the ability to provide better coverage to 
patients, rather than everything being done face-to-face. 
For example, the doctor is now able to connect and see the 
patient when family members are visiting. This is so much bet­
ter when the need to communicate with the family is critical.
The Remote Presence Robot (RP-7) from InTouch Health is a 
mobile telemedicine unit that connects physicians and specialists 
with patients and other doctors in real time through computers 
equipped with cameras and microphones. 
© Patrick Farrell/Miami Herald/MCT/Getty Images

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
667
Exchange (IHIE) allows physicians to track in real time those patients who are due for pre­
ventive screenings and chronic disease follow-up care.
Computer-assisted diagnosis: This approach uses expert system software programs to 
arrive at a diagnosis. Suppose the doctor with a child patient who has pain in the joints wants 
to determine its most likely cause. The expert system matches the child’s symptoms with the 
criteria tables for each type of illness and reaches diagnostic conclusions at three different 
levels of certainty: definite, probable, and possible. If the diagnosis is suggested at the “pos­
sible” level, the system recommends looking for further clues to exclude or include it.
Remote diagnosis: Called telemedicine, it uses electronic devices for measuring blood 
pressure, heart rate, blood oxygen levels, and so on, for diagnosing patients who are far 
from the hospital. This is especially valuable in areas where few specialists are available to 
rapidly diagnose a patient’s problem.
Robots: Robots are being used in the operating room for a range of illnesses that include 
breast cancer and gall bladder removal. In using robots, surgeons employ a tiny camera to 
guide them as they manipulate the robot’s instruments from a console. Benefits of robots 
are that their “hands” are steady and they have a wide range of motions, which can result in 
less pain and blood loss than with manual surgery. An interesting low-tech robotic applica­
tion is Mr. Rounder, described in the OSCM at Work box.
Concept Connections
LO 24–1   Understand health care operations and contrast these operations to manufacturing and 
service operations.
Summary
	∙	 Health care is an industry that requires operational 
excellence. The focus of this discussion was hospitals, 
but these ideas are also applicable to more specialized 
clinics. 
	∙	 Hospitals are categorized in a manner similar to the 
way production processes are, using the product/
process matrix. Layouts, capacity management, qual­
ity and process improvement, supply chains, and 
inventory, all in the context of hospitals, are described.
Key Terms
Health care operations management  The design, man­
agement, and improvement of the systems that create 
and deliver health care services.
Hospital  A facility whose staff provides services relat­
ing to observation, diagnosis, and treatment to cure or 
lessen the suffering of patients.
Care chain  The flow of work through a hospital con­
sisting of the services for patients provided by various 
medical specialties and functions, within and across 
departments.
Decoupling points  Stages in the process where wait­
ing takes place, either before or after the procedure is 
performed.
Diagnosis-related groups (DRGs)  Homogeneous units 
of hospital activity for planning and costing surgeries—
essentially a bill of labor and materials.
LO 24–2   Exemplify performance measures used in health care.
Summary
	∙	 A diverse set of performance measures are used in 
health care. 
	∙	 In addition to traditional customer satisfaction and 
worker (physician) productivity measures, other ways 
to capture patient mortality, and follow-ups from the 
administration of procedures, for example, may be 
used.

668	
Section 5	
Special Topics
LO 24–3   Illustrate future trends in health care.
Summary
	∙	 The application of new technologies drives change in 
the health care area. 
	∙	 The integration of information, remote and computer-
assisted diagnosis, and the use of remotely controlled 
robots have all resulted in dramatic changes in produc­
tivity, while improving the quality of patient care.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Where would you place Shouldice Hospital on the product–process framework (see 
the Chapter 5 case, “Shouldice Hospital—A Cut Above”)? What are the implications of 
adding a specialty such as cosmetic surgery?
	  2.	 Think about your latest trip to a hospital/health care facility. How many different hand­
offs did you encounter? How would you rate the quality of the service relative to the 
patient experience and relative to that of the friends and family?
	  3.	 Some have argued that, for hospitals, both medical schools and nursing schools should be 
considered part of the supply chain. Do you agree?
	  4.	 Hospitals are major users of poka-yoke (fail-safe) devices. Which ones can you think of 
that would apply?
	  5.	 Could a hospital or physician offer a service guarantee? Explain.
	  6.	 How does a physician-driven supply chain differ from a typical materials supply chain?
	  7.	 What could a hospital learn from benchmarking a Ritz-Carlton Hotel? Southwest Air­
lines? Disneyland?
	  8.	 As in manufacturing, productivity and capacity utilization are important performance 
measures in health care operations. What are the similarities and differences in how these 
measures might be used in the two different industries?
	  9.	 What would you consider to be the most important performance measure in a hospital? 
Explain.
	10.	 As the “baby-boomer” generation ages, the percentage of the U.S. population over age 65 
will grow at a faster rate than the size of the workforce paying taxes and health insurance 
premiums. How do you expect that to impact health care operations and supply chain 
management?
LO24–1
LO24–2
LO24–3
Objective Questions
	  1.	 In manufacturing, quality measures are largely based on hard evidence. In health care, 
what are quality and service measures largely based on?
	  2.	 A general rule of designing hospital layouts is to separate patient/visitor flow from 
what?  (Answer in Appendix D)
	  3.	 What is the term used to refer to the flow of work through a hospital?
	  4.	 What inventory-related term is used to refer to points in a health care process where wait­
ing takes place, either before or after treatment takes place?
	  5.	 What type of worker constitutes the largest component of the hospital’s workforce?
	  6.	 In hospitals, dashboards are often used to display performance measures on a routine 
basis. What type of dashboard tracks metrics such as mortality rate, quality improvement, 
and readmission rates? (Answer in Appendix D)
	  7.	 What dashboard would display metrics such as accurate performance of transfusion pro­
tocols and code response time?
	  8.	 Remote diagnosis uses electronic devices for diagnosing patients at a distance. What is 
another term used to refer to this practice?
LO24–1
LO24–2
LO24–3

	
Health Care	
Chapter 24 	
669
	  9.	 What is the term used to describe arrangements to move clinical information across vari­
ous information systems while still maintaining the meaning of the information being 
exchanged?
	10.	 What is the term used to refer to the application of the scientific method to evaluate alter­
native treatment methods and create guidelines for similar clinical situations?
You have a job assisting the Medical Director at a Family 
Medical Clinic in New York City. The Medical Director 
is concerned about the long wait times of patients visit­
ing the clinic and would like to improve operations. The 
following are facts about the clinic:
∙	 The patients are seen in the clinic between the 
hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 P.M. and between 1:00 
and 5:00 P.M. 
∙	 On average the clinic sees 150 patients per day. 
∙	 Nine physicians are usually on duty to see patients 
at the clinic. Physicians arrive at 9:00 A.M. and are 
on duty until 5:00 P.M. with a one-hour break dur­
ing the day.
∙	 They are supported by seven medical assistants 
who take vital signs and put patients in exam 
rooms. 
∙	 Four registration clerks are present to register 
patients, enroll them in federal and local aid pro­
grams, prep their medical records, and collect 
copayments. 
∙	 There are three coordinators who make follow-up 
appointments and arrange referrals. Coordinators 
see patients from 9:00 A.M. until 5:30 P.M., with a 
one-hour break during the day. 
∙	 There is one security guard who is available from 
7 A.M. to 6 P.M.
∙	 There is one pharmacist, and two pharmacy tech­
nicians. The pharmacy is open from 9:00 A.M. to 
5:30 P.M., with a lunch break from noon to 1:00.
∙	 The facility itself has a security window at the 
front door with a guard-controlled entry door, a 
large waiting area, five registration windows, 11 
provider rooms (3 of which are used for taking 
vitals and 8 by physicians for exams), and four 
coordinator’s desks.
Patient Flow Through the Clinic
An average of 120 patients have appointments at the 
clinic each day. An additional 30 patients come for pre­
scription refills each day. 
Step 1—Security/Check-in
When patients arrive, they all must first pass through 
security. Often, there is a small wait outside at the door. 
The average wait time at security is 10 minutes, while the 
average processing time is 2 minutes. The guard at the 
door double-checks the appointment time and issues 
the patient a colored card with a number on it—either 
red or yellow. Red cards are reserved for patients without 
appointments who need only medication refills. These 
patients must pass through registration but do not need 
to see a provider. 
Step 2—Registration
All patients then proceed to the waiting room where they 
wait for their color and number to be called. This wait 
can often be quite long, but on average takes 24 minutes.
	
Once patients are called by a registration clerk, their 
information is verified. This process can take anywhere 
from 1 minute up to 40 minutes if the patient is new and 
needs to be enrolled in several programs. On average, 
eight new patients come per day. The average time to 
complete registration is 7 minutes for returning patients 
and 22 minutes for new patients, with an overall average 
registration time of 8 minutes. Patients seeking medica­
tion refills (with red cards) proceed directly to the phar­
macy (step 6) after registration.
Step 3—Vitals
The yellow card patients return to the waiting area and 
wait another 15 minutes to be called by a medical assis­
tant to have their vital signs taken. This takes 6 minutes, 
after which they return again to the waiting area. 
Step 4—Doctor Visit
Patients wait 8 minutes more in the waiting room and 
are then called back to a provider room. Once in a pro­
vider room, the patient waits 17 minutes, on average, for 
the provider (doctor) to arrive. Providers spend approxi­
mately 20 minutes with each patient.
Step 5—Coordinator/Follow-up
After the patient has seen the doctor, the patient’s chart 
goes to a coordinator. The patient waits 25 minutes to be 
called by a coordinator who schedules further laboratory 
tests, get referrals to specialists, and makes follow-up 
appointments, which takes an additional 7 minutes.
	
On average, 50 percent of patients with appointments 
(yellow cards) continue onto the pharmacy following 
their medical visit. 
Case: Managing Patient Wait Times at a Family Clinic

670	
Section 5	
Special Topics
Step 6—Pharmacy
If the patient needs a prescription, the wait is 13 min­
utes before the pharmacy calls them to process the pre­
scription, with an average of 11 minutes spent filling 
the prescription. Each pharmacy technician works inde­
pendently and fills the prescription after consulting the 
pharmacist.
	
In general, patient satisfaction with the quality of medi­
cal services at VFC remains high, but there are still com­
plaints each day about the waiting times for these services. 
Wait times are critical for these patients, because they often 
directly lead to lost income during the hours spent waiting.
The Physicians’ Workflow
Each physician is assigned to a team; A, B, or C. These 
groups of two or three physicians all see the same 
patients, helping to ensure continuity for the patients. 
Each patient, therefore, will see one of the team’s phy­
sicians at any given visit and has a higher likelihood of 
seeing the same doctor each time.
	
Physicians arrive at 9:00 A.M. and wait for their first 
patients to arrive. Often, due to the lag at registration and the 
wait for open rooms for the medical assistants to take vitals, 
patients are not in the exam rooms until well after 9:30.
	
In addition, because of the team system, one provider 
may have three patients waiting, while another is still wait­
ing for his or her first patient to check in at registration. 
The registration desk has no communication link to the 
physicians’ area or other form of coordination; so clerks 
may check in three patients in a row for one team, but 
none for another. Added to this, new patients are randomly 
assigned to teams regardless of who is busiest that day. 
	
Once a patient is in an exam room, the chart is placed in 
a rack for the physician to review prior to seeing the patient. 
If key lab report or X-ray results are missing, the physician 
must call for medical records or call outside facilities and 
wait for the results to be faxed or called in before seeing the 
patient. This happens 60 to 70 percent of the time, causing 
a 10-minute delay per patient. These challenges often lead 
to inefficient use of the provider’s time.
	
After seeing a patient, the physician will either have the 
patient wait in the waiting room to see the coordinator or 
have the patient wait in the exam room for further testing 
or nursing procedures. Rarely, if no follow-up or prescrip­
tions are needed, the patient is free to leave the clinic.
	
The physicians generally are extremely committed to 
the clinic’s mission but are frustrated with their patients’ 
long wait times, the incomplete medical records, and the 
disorganized patient flow through the clinic.
The Registration Clerks’ Workflow
At the start of each day, the four registration clerks prepare 
by printing out copies of that day’s scheduled appoint­
ments. Charts of patients with appointments are pulled the 
night before and placed within easy reach of the clerks. 
The four clerks work from 8:30 until 11:00 A.M. and close 
the registration windows until 12:30 P.M. During this time, 
in addition to eating lunch, the clerks pull the charts for 
the afternoon clinic and finish up paperwork. At 12:30, 
the registration windows are reopened for the afternoon 
clinic and patients are checked in until 4:00 P.M.
Questions
	1.	 Draw two process flow diagrams. One for the phar­
macy customers, and another for the regular and 
new patients.
	2.	 Calculate the capacity and utilization of each 
resource (people, rooms) and identify bottlenecks.
	3.	 Calculate the average wait and time in service for 
patients with appointments (new and returning) 
and for those seeking a prescription refill.
	4.	 What are your recommendations for improvement?
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 A hospital consists of these three basic services. 
What are these?
	  2.	 The most complex type of health care facility.
	  3.	 The type of schedule where workers work on a fixed 
schedule each week over a four- to six-week period.
	  4.	 The hospital quality pioneer who is credited as the 
developer of the pie chart.
	  5.	 A term used to refer to information mistakes at 
handoffs.
	  6.	 A checklist technique developed by submariners that 
is now used in hospitals.
	  7.	 A widely used case-mix index classification scheme.
	  8.	 Use of the scientific method to develop standard 
methods for therapeutic interventions.
	  9.	 The two general categories of hospital inventory 
management systems.
	10.	 A nickname for InTouch Health’s RP-6 for Remote 
Presence.
	11.	 Stage in a health care process where waiting takes 
place.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Observation, diagnosis, and treatment  2. General hospital/emergency room  3. Cyclical schedule  4. Florence Night­
ingale  5. Gap error  6. SBAR (Situation-Background-Assessment-Recommendation)  7. Diagnosis-related groups  8. Evidence-based medicine  
9. Push systems and pull systems  10. Mr. Rounder  11. Decoupling point

	
671
PITTIGLIO RABIN TODD & MCGRATH 
(PRTM)—A LEADING OPERATIONS 
CONSULTING COMPANY
Good business strategy plots changes in where a company is going. A winning opera­
tional strategy translates that direction into operational reality, creating strategic com­
petitive advantage in the process. PRTM is a leading company specializing in finding 
ways to structure business operations to create breakout results in top-line growth, 
earnings, and valuation.
Today’s operational CEOs realize that brilliant business strategies and operational 
strategies are interconnected. Business strategies drive the need for new operational 
capabilities, and evolving operational capabilities shape the future business strategies. 
PRTM Consultants focus on the following six essential ingredients of operational strategy:
	 •	 Transform market forces into operational advantage.    This is the kind of 
insight that Black & Decker used to turn a regulatory requirement for double-
insulated power tools into a new modular product platform that redefined cost 
and performance in category after category. The same type of insight helped 
Progressive Insurance transform automobile claims from an unproductive 
part of its cost structure into a far more economical and valued source of 
competitive advantage.
	 •	 Do one thing extraordinarily well.    Consider the case of Apple iTunes. 
Its gigantic share of the digital music player market is fueled by Apple’s 
relentless pursuit of ease of use as a basis of competition. Companies 
like Walmart are all about cost leadership, attaining the lowest end-to-end 
operational cost, and the highest productivity.
	 •	 Think end-to-end, continuous, real time, and horizontally.    Every 
organization has a set of core operational domains that make up its 
Learning Objectives
	LO 25–1	 Explain operations consulting and how money is made in the industry.
	LO 25–2	 Illustrate the operations analysis tools used in the consulting industry.
	LO 25–3	 Analyze processes using business process reengineering concepts.
Operations 
Consulting
25 

672
WHAT IS OPERATIONS CONSULTING?
operational model. For most, these comprise some combination of the 
product development chain, the supply chain, and the customer chain. 
Operational strategy configures these operational domains to deliver against 
business strategy, and create advantage in their own right.
	 •	 Think and execute globally.    Due to global markets for products and the 
global availability of supply, many companies need to consider strategies that 
best position the firm to compete in this domain. Global opportunities are 
often the key driver to changes to both business and operational strategies.
	 •	 Drive innovation in your operations and business model.    Peter Drucker 
defined innovation as change that creates a new dimension of performance. 
He also stated that a key accountability of the CEO is innovation. Too often, 
innovation is perceived to be a technical or product-oriented activity. The 
reality is that operational innovation is creating the commanding leaders 
today.
	 •	 Execute relentlessly.    A complete operational strategy requires a 
commitment to execution. Companies with commanding leads in their 
markets execute relentlessly, informed by their global marketplace insight, 
and are aligned to a singular competitive focus, emboldened by a clear 
innovation intent, and guided by a sound operational model aligned with 
business strategy and business economics.
In the twenty-first century, companies that make all aspects of their operations a 
source of strategic innovation will dominate their markets, delivering unparalleled rev­
enue growth, earnings performance, and shareholder return.
Operations consulting has become one of the major areas of employment for business 
school graduates. The page cited from the PRTM Website nicely summarizes the importance 
of operations on bottom-line performance. In this chapter, we discuss how one goes about 
consulting for operations, as well as the nature of the consulting business in general. We also 
survey the tools and techniques used in operations consulting and provide an overview of busi­
ness process reengineering because much OSCM consulting entails this activity.
Operations consulting deals with assisting clients in developing operations strategies and 
improving production processes. In strategy development, the focus is on analyzing the capabili­
ties of operations in light of the firm’s competitive strategy. It has been suggested that market 
leadership can be attained in one of three ways: through product leadership, through operational 
excellence, or through customer intimacy. Each of these strategies may well call for different 
operations capabilities and focus. The operations consultant must be able to assist management 
in understanding these differences and be able to define the most effective combination of tech­
nology and systems to execute the strategy. In process improvement, the focus is on employing 
analytical tools and methods to help operating managers enhance performance of their depart­
ments. Deloitte & Touche Consulting lists the actions to improve processes as follows: refine/
Explain operations 
consulting and how money 
is made in the industry.
LO 25–1
Operations consulting
Assisting clients in 
developing operations 
strategies and improving 
production processes.
Source: Adapted from a statement by Tom Godward and Mark Deck, partners in PRTM’s Worldwide 
Operational Strategy Practice, www.prtm.com.

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
673
revise processes, revise activities, reconfigure flows, revise policies/procedures, change outputs, 
and realign structure. We say more about both strategy issues and tools later. Regardless of 
where one focuses, an effective job of operations consulting results in an alignment between 
strategy and process dimensions that enhances the business performance of the client.
The Management Consulting Industry
The management consulting industry can be categorized in three ways: by size, by specializa­
tion, and by in-house and external consultants. Most consulting firms are small, generating 
less than $1 million in annual revenue. Relative to specialization, although all large firms 
provide a variety of services, they also may specialize by function, such as operations man­
agement, or by industry, such as manufacturing. Most large consulting companies are built on 
information technology (IT) and accounting work. The third basis for segmentation, in-house 
versus external, refers to whether a company maintains its own consulting organization or 
buys consulting services from the outside. Internal consulting arms are common in large com­
panies and are often affiliated with planning departments.
Consulting firms are also frequently characterized according to whether their primary skill 
is in strategic planning or in tactical analysis and implementation. McKinsey & Company 
and the Boston Consulting Group are standard examples of strategy-type companies, whereas 
Gemini Consulting and A. T. Kearney focus rather extensively on tactical and implementation 
projects. The big accounting firms and Accenture are known for providing a wide range of ser­
vices. The major new players in the consulting business are the large information technology 
firms such as Infosys Technology, Computer Sciences Corporation (CSC), Electronic Data 
Systems (EDS), and IBM. Consultancies are faced with problems similar to those of their 
clients: the need to provide a global presence, the need to computerize to coordinate activities, 
and the need to continually recruit and train their workers. This has led consultancies to make 
the hard choice of being very large or being a boutique firm. Being in the middle creates prob­
lems of lack of scale economies on the one hand and lack of focus and flexibility on the other.
The hierarchy of the typical consulting firm can be viewed as a pyramid. At the top of the 
pyramid are the partners or seniors, whose primary function is sales and client relations. In 
the middle are managers, who manage consulting projects or “engagements.” At the bottom 
are juniors, who carry out the consulting work as part of a consulting team. There are grada­
tions in rank within each of these categories (such as senior partners). The three categories are 
frequently referred to colloquially as the finders (of new business), the minders (or manag­
ers) of the project teams, and the grinders (the consultants who do the work). Consulting 
firms typically work in project teams, selected according to client needs and the preferences 
of the project managers and the first-line consultants themselves. Getting oneself assigned to 
interesting, high-visibility projects with good co-workers is an important career strategy of 
most junior consultants. Being in demand for team membership and obtaining quality con­
sulting experiences are critical for achieving long-term success with a consulting firm (or 
being attractive to another firm within or outside consulting).
Economics of Consulting Firms
The economics of consulting firms have been written about extensively by David H. Maister. In 
his classic article “Balancing the Professional Service Firm,” he draws the analogy of the con­
sulting firm as a job shop, where the right kinds of “machines” (professional staff) must be cor­
rectly allocated to the right kinds of jobs (consulting projects). As in any job shop, the degree 
of job customization and attendant complexity is critical. The most complex projects, which 
Maister calls brain surgery projects, require innovation and creativity. Next come gray hair 
projects, which require a great deal of experience but little in the way of innovation. A third 
type of project is the procedures project, where the general nature of the problem is well known 
and the activities necessary to complete it are similar to those performed on other projects.
Because consulting firms are typically partnerships, the goal is to maximize profits for 
the partners. This, in turn, is achieved by leveraging the skills of the partners through the 
effective use of midlevel and junior consultants. This is often presented as a ratio of part­
ners to midlevel and junior consultants for the average project. (See Exhibit 25.1 for a 
Minders
Managers of a consulting 
firm whose primary 
function is managing 
consulting projects.
Finders
Partners or senior 
consultants whose primary 
function is sales and client 
relations.
Grinders
Junior consultants whose 
primary function is to do 
the work.

674	
Section 5	
Special Topics
numerical example of how profitability is calculated for a hypothetical consulting firm, 
Guru Associates.) Because most consulting firms are engaged in multiple projects simul­
taneously, the percentage of billable employee hours assigned to all projects (target utiliza­
tion) will be less than 100 percent. A practice that specializes in cutting-edge, high-client 
risk (brain surgery) work must be staffed with a high partner-to-junior ratio because lower-
level people will not be able to deliver the quality of services required. In contrast, practices 
that deal with more procedural, low-risk work will be inefficient if they do not have a lower 
ratio of partners to juniors because high-priced staff should not be doing low-value tasks.
The most common method for improving efficiency is the use of uniform approaches to 
each aspect of a consulting job. Accenture, the company most famous for this approach, sends 
its new consultants through a boot camp at its St. Charles, Illinois, training facility. At this 
boot camp, it provides highly refined, standardized methods for such common operations 
work as systems design, process reengineering, and continuous improvement, and for the 
project management and reporting procedures by which such work is carried out. Of course, 
other large consulting firms have their own training methods and step-by-step procedures for 
selling, designing, and executing consulting projects.
When Operations Consulting Is Needed
The following are some of the major strategic and tactical areas where companies typically 
seek operations consulting. Looking first at manufacturing consulting areas (grouped under 
what could be called the 5 Ps of production), we have
∙	 Plant: Adding and locating new plants; expanding, contracting, or refocusing existing 
facilities.
∙	 People: Quality improvement, setting/revising work standards, learning curve analysis.
∙	 Parts: Make or buy decisions, vendor selection decisions.
∙	 Processes: Technology evaluation, process improvement, reengineering.
∙	 Planning and control systems: Supply chain management, ERP, MRP, shop-floor con­
trol, warehousing, distribution.
Obviously, many of these issues are interrelated, calling for systemwide solutions. Exam­
ples of common themes reflecting this are developing manufacturing strategy; designing and 
implementing JIT systems; implementing MRP or proprietary ERP software such as SAP; 
and systems integration involving client–server technology. Typical questions addressed are: 
Level
No.
Target 
Utilization
Target Billable 
Hours @ 2,000 
Hours per Person 
per Year
Billing 
Rate
Fees
Salary per 
Individual
Total 
Salaries
Partner (senior)
   4
75%
 6,000
$400
$2,400,000
(see calculations 
below)
Middle
   8
75%
12,000
$200
$2,400,000
$150,000
$1,200,000
Junior
20
90%
36,000
$100
$3,600,000
$  64,000
$1,280,000
Totals
$8,400,000
$2,480,000
Fees
$8,400,000
Salaries
(2,480,000)
Contributions
$5,920,000
Overhead*
$2,560,000
Partner profits
$3,360,000
Per partner
$   840,000
*Assume overhead costs of $80,000 per professional.
The Economics of Guru Associates
exhibit 25.1

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
675
How can the client cut lead times? How can inventory be reduced? How can better control 
be maintained over the shop floor? Among the hot areas of manufacturing strategy consult­
ing are sustainability, outsourcing, supply chain management, and global manufacturing net­
works. At the tactical level, there is a huge market for consulting in e-operations, product 
development, ISO 9000 quality certification, and design and implementation of decentralized 
production control systems.
Turning to services, while consulting firms in manufacturing may have broad specialties 
in process industries on the one hand and assembly or discrete product manufacture on the 
other, service operations consulting typically has a strong industry or sector focus. A common 
consulting portfolio of specialties in services (and areas of consulting need) would include the 
following:
Financial services (staffing, automation, quality studies)
Health care (staffing, billing, office procedures, phone answering, layout)
Transportation (route scheduling and shipping logistics for goods haulers, reservation sys­
tems, and baggage handling for airlines)
Hospitality (reservations, staffing, cost containment, quality programs)
For both manufacturing and service industries, the current hot area for consultants, as well 
as in-house teams, is Lean Six Sigma. The reason is companies have reached their limit on 
how much can be done by downsizing and are thus focusing on rigorously measuring and per­
fecting various processes. Pharmaceutical companies, large retailers, and food companies are 
examples of industries with heavy demand for consultants who specialize in such programs.
W h en A r e  O p e r a t i o n s  C o n s u l t a n t s  N e e d e d ?  Companies typically seek 
out operations consultants when they are faced with major investment decisions or when they 
believe they are not getting maximum effectiveness from their productive capacity. As an 
example of the first type of situation, consider the following:
A national pie restaurant chain retained consultants to determine if a major addi­
tion to its freezer storage capacity was needed at its pie-making plant. Its lease 
had run out on a nearby freezer warehouse, so the firm had to make a decision 
rather quickly. The pie plant manager wanted to spend $500,000 for a capacity 
increase. After analysis of the demand for various types of pies, the distribution 
system, and the contractual arrangement with the shipper, the consultant con­
cluded that management could avoid all but a $30,000 investment in capacity if 
they did the following: Run a mixed-model production schedule for pies accord­
ing to a forecast for each of 10 kinds of pies (for example, 20 percent strawberry, 
30 percent cherry, 30 percent apple, and 20 percent other pies each two-day pie 
production cycle). To do this, more timely information about pie demand at each 
of the chain restaurants had to be obtained. This in turn required that information 
links for pie requirements go directly to the factory. Previously the distributor 
bought the pies and resold them to the restaurants. Finally, the company rene­
gotiated pickup times from the pie plant to enable just-in-time delivery at the 
restaurants. The company was in a much stronger bargaining situation than it had 
been five years previously, and the distributor was willing to make reasonable 
adjustments.
The lesson from this is that few investment decisions in operations are all or nothing, 
and good solutions can be obtained by simply applying standard OSCM concepts of produc­
tion planning, forecasting, and scheduling. The solution recognized that the problem must be 
viewed at a systemwide level to see how better planning and distribution could substitute for 
brick-and-mortar capacity.

676	
Section 5	
Special Topics
The broad steps in the operations consulting process (see Exhibit 25.2) are roughly the same 
as for any type of management consulting. The major differences exist in the nature of the 
problem to be analyzed and the kinds of analytical methods to be employed. Like general 
management consulting, operations consulting may focus on the strategic level or tactical 
level, and the process itself generally requires extensive interviewing of employees, manag­
ers, and, frequently, customers. If there is one large difference, it is that operations consulting 
leads to changes in physical or information processes whose results are measurable immedi­
ately. General management consulting usually calls for changes in attitudes and culture, which 
take longer to yield measurable results. The roles in which consultants find themselves range 
from an expert, to a pair of hands, to a collaborative or process consultant. Generally, the col­
laborative or process consultation role is most effective in operations management consulting 
projects. Some consulting firms now provide the expert role online.
The steps in a typical operations consulting process are summarized in Exhibit 25.2. A 
book by Ethan M. Rasiel on the McKinsey & Company approach offers some practical guide­
lines for conducting consulting projects:
∙	 Be careful what you promise in structuring an engagement. Underpromise and overde­
liver is a good maxim.
∙	 Get the team mix right. You can’t just throw four random people at a problem and 
expect them to solve it. Think about what sorts of skills and personalities work best for 
the project at hand, and choose your teammates accordingly.
∙	 The 80–20 rule is a management truth. Eighty percent of sales come from 20 percent of 
the sales force; 80 percent of your time is taken up with 20 percent of your job; and so on.
∙	 Don’t boil the ocean. Don’t try to analyze everything—be selective in what you investigate.
∙	 Use the elevator test. If you know your solution so well that you can explain it clearly 
and precisely to your client in a 30-second elevator ride, you are doing well enough to 
sell it to the client.
∙	 Pluck the low-hanging fruit. If you can make an immediate improvement even though you 
are in the middle of a project, do it. It boosts morale and gives credibility to your analysis.
∙	 Make a chart every day. Commit your learning to paper; it will help push your thinking 
and assure that you won’t forget it.
∙	 Hit singles. You can’t do everything, so don’t try. It’s better to get to first base consis­
tently than to try to hit a home run and strike out 9 times out of 10.
THE OPERATIONS CONSULTING PROCESS
1. Sales and
 proposal
 development
2. Analyze
 problem
3. Design,
 develop,
 and test
 alternative
 solutions
4. Develop
 systematic
 performance
 measures
5. Present
 final
 report
6. Implement
 changes
 (as agreed upon)
7. Assure client
 satisfaction
8. Assemble
 learnings
 from the
 study
Client
Success
Stages in the Operations Consulting Process
exhibit 25.2
Illustrate the operations 
analysis tools used in the 
consulting industry
LO 25–2

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
677
Problem Definition
Data Analysis and
Solution Development
Cost Impact and
Payoff Analysis
Data Gathering
Implementation
Problem analysis
   (SPC tools)
Bottleneck analysis
Computer simulation
Statistical tools
Decision trees
Balanced scorecard
Stakeholder analysis
Responsibility charts
Project management techniques
Plant tours/audits
Work sampling
Organization charts
Flowcharts
Customer surveys
Gap analysis
Five forces model
Employee surveys
Issue trees 
Operations Consulting Tool Kit
exhibit 25.3
∙	 Don’t accept “I have no idea.” Clients and their staff always know something, so probe 
them for some educated guesses.
∙	 Engage the client in the process. If the client doesn’t support you, the project will stall. 
Keep your clients engaged by keeping them involved.
∙	 Get buy-in throughout the organization. If your solution is to have lasting impact on 
your client, you have to get support for it throughout the organization.
∙	 Be rigorous about implementation. Making change happen takes a lot of work. Be 
­rigorous and thorough. Make sure someone takes responsibility for getting the job done.
Operations Consulting Tool Kit
Operations consulting tools can be categorized as tools for problem definition, data gath­
ering, data analysis and solution development, cost impact and payoff analysis, and 
implementation. These—along with some tools from strategic management, market­
ing, and information systems that are commonly used in OSCM consulting—are noted in 
Exhibit 25.3 and are described next. Note that several of these tools are used in more than 
one stage of a project.
Problem Definition Tools
I s s u e T r ee s  Issue trees are used by McKinsey to structure or map the key problems 
to be investigated and provide a working initial hypothesis as to the likely solution to these 
problems. As can be seen in Exhibit 25.4, a tree starts with the general problem (increase 

678	
Section 5	
Special Topics
E. M. Rasiel, The McKinsey Way: Using the Techniques of the World’s Top Strategic Consultants to Help You and Your 
Business, (New York, McGraw-Hill, 1998), p. 12. Used with permission.
Sales force
organization
Sales force
skill base
Promotion
strategy
Product quality
Packaging
Consumer
advertising
strategy
Raw materials
sourcing
Production process
Distribution system
Increase
widget
sales
Change
sales
strategy
Improve
marketing
strategy
Reduce
unit cost
widget sales) and then goes level by level until potential sources of the problem are identified. 
Once the tree is laid out, the relationships it proposes and possible solutions are debated, and 
the project plan is then specified.
C u s t o m e r  S u r v e y s   Frequently, OSCM consultants are called in to address problems 
identified by customer surveys performed by marketing consultants or marketing staff. 
Often, however, these are out of date or are in a form that does not separate process issues 
from advertising or other marketing concerns. Even if the surveys are in good form, calling 
customers and soliciting their experience with the company is a good way to get a feel for 
process performance. A key use of customer surveys is customer loyalty analysis, although 
in reality customers are not so much “loyal” (your dog, Spot, is loyal) as “earned” through 
effective performance. Nevertheless, the term loyalty captures the flavor of how well an 
organization is performing according to three critical market measures: customer retention, 
share of wallet, and price sensitivity relative to competitors. Having such information available 
helps the OSCM consultant drill down into the organization to find what operational factors 
are directly linked to customer retention. Although loyalty studies are usually performed by 
marketing groups, OSCM consultants should be aware of their importance.
G a p  A n a lys i s   Gap analysis is used to assess the client’s performance relative to the 
expectations of its customers, or relative to the performance of its competitors. An example is 
shown in Exhibit 25.5.
Issue Tree for Acme Widgets
exhibit 25.4

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
679
Another form of gap analysis is benchmarking particular client company processes against 
exemplars in the process and measuring the differences. For example, if one is interested in 
billing process accuracy and problem resolution, American Express would be the benchmark; 
for timeliness and efficiency in railway transportation, Japanese Railways; for order entry in 
catalog sales, it would be L.L.Bean.
E m p l oy ee S u r v e y s  Such surveys range from employee satisfaction surveys 
to suggestion surveys. A key point to remember is if the consultant requests employee 
suggestions, such information must be carefully evaluated and acted upon by management. A 
few years ago, Singapore Airlines distributed a questionnaire to its flight personnel, but made 
the mistake of not following through to address their concerns. As a result, the employees 
were more critical of the company than if the survey had not been taken, and to this day the 
company does not use this form of evaluation.
T h e F i v e F o r c e s  M o d e l  This is one of the better-known approaches to evaluating 
a company’s competitive position in light of the structure of its industry. The five forces 
are buyer power, potential entrants, raw material suppliers, substitute products, and industry 
rivals. The consultant applies the model by developing a list of factors that fit under each of 
these headings. Some examples of where a client’s competitive position might be strong are 
when buyers have limited information, there are major barriers to potential entrants, there are 
many alternative suppliers, there are few substitute products (or services), or there are few 
industry rivals.
Often used with the five forces model is the value chain, such as shown in Exhibit 25.6. 
The value chain provides a structure to capture the linkage of organizational activities that 
create value for the customer and profit for the firm. It is particularly useful to get across the 
notion that operations and the other activities must work cross-functionally for optimal orga­
nizational performance (and avoid the dreaded “functional silo” syndrome).
A tool similar to the five forces model is SWOT analysis. This is a somewhat more gen­
eral method of evaluating an organization and has the advantage of being easy to remember: 
Strengths of the client, Weaknesses of the client, Opportunities for the client in the industry, 
and Threats from competitors or the economic and market environment.
Data Gathering
P la n t  T ou r s / A u d i t s  These can be classified as manufacturing tours/audits and 
service facility tours/audits. Full manufacturing audits are a major undertaking, entailing 
measurement of all aspects of the production facility and processes, as well as support 
activities such as maintenance and inventory stockkeeping. Frequently these require several 
Source: Deloitte & Touche Consulting Group
Service level
Quality
Customization
Availability
Response time
One-call resolution
Critical Success Factors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Actual versus Desired Performance
Actual
Desired
Gap
Issue Tree for Acme Widgets
exhibit 25.5

680	
Section 5	
Special Topics
weeks, utilizing checklists developed explicitly for the client’s industry. Plant tours, on the 
other hand, are usually much less detailed and can be done in a half day. The purpose of 
the tour is to get a general understanding of the manufacturing process before focusing on a 
particular problem area. To collect consistent information, the members of the study team in 
a tour use the same generic checklist or general questions.
The quick plant assessment (QPA) tour is designed to enable a study team to determine 
the “leanness” of a plant in just 45 minutes. The approach uses a 20-item questionnaire and 
an 9-category item rating sheet (see “Quick Plant Assessment” Exercise at the end of the 
­chapter). During the tour, team members talk with workers and managers and look for evi-
dence of best practices.  At the end of the tour, members discuss their impressions and fill 
out the worksheets. The categories are key to the tour. Their features are summarized in the 
nearby OSCM at Work box, “Quick Plant Assessment.”
Complete service facility audits are also a major undertaking, but they differ from manu-
facturing audits in that, when properly done, they focus on the customer’s experience as much 
as on the utilization of resources. Typical questions in a service audit address time to get ser-
vice, the cleanliness of the facility, staff sizing, and customer satisfaction. A service facility 
tour or walk-through can often be done as a mystery shopper, where the consultant actually 
partakes of the service and records his or her experiences.
Upstream value activities
Downstream value activities
Inbound
logistics
Outbound
logistics
Marketing
and sales
Operations
Service
Margin
Margin
Firm infrastructure
Human resource management
Technology development
Procurement
Support
activities
Value Chain
exhibit 25.6
Quick Plant Assessment
1.	
Customer focus. A customer-oriented workforce will 
take pride in satisfying both external and internal cus-
tomers. The extent of this orientation should be appar-
ent even in a brief plant tour. For example, when asked 
about the next step in the process, customer-aware 
employees will respond by giving a person’s name 
or product, rather than saying that they just put it on 
the pallet and it’s moved later. Cordiality to the touring 
group and posted quality and customer satisfaction 
OSCM AT WORK
ratings are other signs of a customer-oriented work-
force. (Questions 1, 2, and 20 on the QPA questionnaire 
relate to this measure. This questionnaire is included at 
the end of this chapter.)
2.	
Safety, cleanliness, and order. The physical environ-
ment of a plant is important to operating effective-
ness. Cleanliness, low noise levels, good lighting, and 
air quality are obvious things to look for. Labeling and 
tracking of all inventory items, not just expensive ones, 
should be in evidence. (Not having the required nuts 
Based on Harvard Business School Press. From M. E. Porter, Competition in Global Industries, (Boston,MA, 1986), p. 24. 

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
681
and bolts can be as disruptive to production as lacking 
a major component.) (Questions 3–5 and 20)
3.	
Visual management/Scheduling. Production manage-
ment tools such as work instructions, kanban sched-
ules, and quality and productivity charts should be 
easily visible. Posted workflow diagrams linking each 
stage of a process are particularly effective visual cues. 
In addition, scheduling typically involves some mecha-
nism for pacing of the workflow based on demand. 
(Questions 2, 4, 6–10, 11, and 20)
4.	
Use of space, movement efficiency, and product line 
flow. Good indicators of efficient space utilization are 
minimum material movement over short distances, use 
of efficient containers; materials stored at the point of 
use, not in separate inventory storage areas; tooling 
kept near the machines; and product flow layout rather 
than process layout. (Questions 7, 12, 13, and 20)
5.	
Teamwork. Discussions with workers and visible indica-
tors of teamwork such as names of teams over a work 
area and productivity award banners are quick ways of 
determining how the workforce feels about their jobs, 
the company, and their co-workers. (Questions 9, 14, 15, 
and 20)
6.	
Maintenance of equipment. Purchase dates and 
equipment costs should be stenciled on the side of 
machinery, and maintenance records should be posted 
nearby. Asking people on the factory floor how things 
are working and whether they are involved in purchas-
ing tools and equipment is also indicative of the extent 
to which workers are encouraged to address these 
issues. (Questions 16 and 20)
7.	
Management of complexity and variability. This 
depends greatly on the type of industry. Obviously, 
industries with narrow product lines have less diffi-
culty handling complexity and variability. Indicators to 
watch for in general are the number of people manually 
recording data and the number of keyboards available 
for data entry. (Questions 8, 17, and 20)
8.	
Supply chain integration. It is generally desirable to 
work closely with a relatively small number of dedi-
cated and supportive suppliers. A rough estimate of 
the number of suppliers can be ascertained by looking 
at container labels to see what supplier names appear 
on containers. Containers that appear to be designed 
and labeled specifically for customized parts shipped 
to a plant indicate the extent to which a strong supplier 
partnership exists. A sign of poor supply chain integra-
tion is lots of paperwork on the receiving dock. This 
indicates lack of a smooth pull system where plants 
pull the materials from their suppliers as if it was just 
another link in the pull system for each product line. 
(Questions 18 and 20)
9.	
Quality commitment. Attention to quality is evidenced 
in many ways, including posting of quality awards, qual-
ity scorecards, and quality goal statements.  Quality is 
reflected in many of the other plant activities such as 
product development and startups. (Questions 8, 9, 15, 
17, 19, and 20)
Modified from R. Eugene Goodson, “Read a Plant—Fast,” Harvard 
Business Review 80, no. 5 (May 2002), pp. 105–13.
Manufacturing 
professionals take a 
tour of the Lincoln 
Electric Machine 
Division of the 
Cleveland headquarters 
and factory, where 
they see the Lincoln 
manufacturing plan 
in action on the plant 
floor. The tours 
highlight five different 
locations on the 
manufacturing floor 
where more than 300 
welding machine models 
and 1,600 accessories 
are made each day. 
Courtesy of The Lincoln 
Electric Company

682	
Section 5	
Special Topics
W o r k  S a m p l i n g   Work sampling entails random sampling observations of work 
activities, designed to give a statistically valid picture of how time is spent by a worker or the 
utilization of equipment. Diary studies are another way to collect activity data. These are used 
by consultants to get an understanding of specific tasks being performed by the workforce. 
In these, the employee simply writes down the activities he or she performs during the week 
as they occur. This avoids the problem of having analysts look over a worker’s shoulder to 
gather data. Examples of where these studies are used include library front desks, nursing, 
and knowledge work.
F l o w c h a r t s  Flowcharts can be used in both manufacturing and services to track 
materials, information, and people flows. Workflow software such as Optima! and BPR 
Capture are widely used for process analysis. In addition to providing capabilities for defining 
a process, most workflow software provides four other basic functions: work assignment 
and routing, scheduling, work list management, and automatic status and process metrics. 
Flowcharts used in services—service blueprints—are basically the same thing, but add the 
important distinction of the line of visibility to clearly differentiate activities that take place 
with the customer versus those that are behind the scenes. In our opinion, the service blueprint 
is not used to its full potential by consulting firms, perhaps because relatively few consultants 
are exposed to them in their training.
O r g a n i z a t i o n  C h a r t s   Organization charts are often subject to change, so care must 
be taken to see who really reports to whom. Some companies are loath to share organization 
charts externally. Several years ago, a senior manager from a large electronics firm told us that 
a detailed organization chart gives free information to the competition.
Data Analysis and Solution Development
P r o b l e m  A n a l ys i s  ( S P C  T o o l s )  Pareto analysis, fishbone diagrams, run charts, 
scatter diagrams, and control charts are fundamental tools in virtually every continuous 
improvement project. Pareto analysis is applied to inventory management under the heading 
of ABC analysis. Such ABC analysis is still the standard starting point of production control 
consultants when examining inventory management problems. Fishbone diagrams (or cause-
and-effect diagrams) are a great way to organize one’s first cut at a consulting problem (and 
they make a great impression when used to analyze, for example, a case study as part of 
the employment selection process for a consulting firm). Run charts, scatter diagrams, and 
control charts are tools that one is simply expected to know when doing operations consulting.
B o t t l e n e ck A n a l y s i s   Resource bottlenecks appear in most OSCM consulting 
projects. In such cases, the consultant has to specify how available capacity is related to 
required capacity for some product or service in order to identify and eliminate the bottleneck. 
This isn’t always evident, and abstracting the relationships calls for the same kind of logical 
analysis used in the classic “word problems” you loved in high school algebra.
C o m p u t e r  S i m u l a t i o n  Computer simulation analysis has become a very common 
tool in OSCM consulting. The most common general-purpose simulation packages are 
Extend and Crystal Ball. SimFactory and ProModel (for manufacturing systems), MedModel 
(hospital simulation), and Service Model are examples of specialized packages. For smaller 
and less complex simulation, consultants often use Excel. Chapter 10 introduces the topic of 
simulation in this book.
A growing interest in simulation is in the analysis of “system dynamics.” System dynam­
ics is a language that helps us see the patterns that underlie complex situations. These com­
plex situations are modeled using causal loop diagrams that are useful when factors either 
enhance or degrade system performance. Causal loops are of two types: reinforcing loops and 
balancing loops. Reinforcing loops are positive feedback loops driving positive values in cri­
teria important to the system. Balancing loops reflect the mechanisms that counter reinforcing 
loops, thereby driving the system toward equilibrium. By way of example, with reference to 

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
683
Exhibit 25.7, suppose you have a quality goal that is reflected in a quality standard. The rein­
forcing loop (R) indicates that the standard, if left unmodified, would yield an ever-increasing 
(or decreasing) level of actual quality. In reality, what happens is that the balancing loop (B) 
comes into play. Effective time required to meet the standard determines time pressure (on the 
workers), which, in turn, modifies the actual quality achieved and ultimately achievement of 
the quality standard itself. An obvious use of the system shown here would be to hypothesize 
the consequences of raising the quality goal, or raising or lowering the values of the other 
variables in the system. In addition to its use in problem analysis, causal loop analysis simula­
tions are often used by consultants to help client companies become more effective learning 
organizations.
S t a t i s t i c a l  T o o l s  Correlation analysis and regression analysis are expected skills for 
consulting in OSCM. The good news is that these types of analyses are easily performed with 
spreadsheets. Hypothesis testing is mentioned frequently in the consulting firm methodology 
manuals, and one should certainly be able to perform Chi-square and t-tests in analyzing data. 
Two other widely used tools that use statistical analysis are queuing theory and forecasting. 
Consultants frequently use queuing theory to investigate how many service channels are 
needed to handle customers in person or on the phone. Forecasting problems likewise arise 
continually in OSCM consulting (such as forecasting the incoming calls to a call center).
A newly emerging tool (not shown on our exhibit) is data envelopment analysis. DEA 
is a linear programming technique used to measure the relative performance of branches of 
multisite service organizations such as banks, franchise outlets, and public agencies. A DEA 
model compares each branch with all other branches and computes an efficiency rating based 
on the ratio of resource inputs to product or service outputs. The key feature of the approach 
is that it permits using multiple inputs such as materials and labor hours, and multiple outputs 
such as products sold and repeat customers, to get an efficiency ratio. This feature provides a 
more comprehensive and reliable measure of efficiency than a set of operating ratios or profit 
measures.
Cost Impact and Payoff Analysis
D e ci s i on  T r e e s   Decision trees represent a fundamental tool from the broad area of 
risk analysis. They are widely used in examining plant and equipment investments and R&D 
projects. Decision trees are built into various software packages such as TreeAge (www.
treeage.com).
S t a k eh ol d e r  A n a l y s i s  Most consulting projects impact in some way each of five 
types of stakeholders: customers, stockholders, employees, suppliers, and the community. 
The importance of considering the interest of all stakeholders is reflected in the mission 
statements of virtually all major corporations and, as such, provides guidance for consultants 
in formulating their recommendations.
Quality
standard
Quality
goal
Time
pressure
Actual
quality
Effective
time
required
B
R
R - Reinforcing loop
B - Balancing loop
Causal Loop Analysis
exhibit 25.7

684	
Section 5	
Special Topics
B a l a n c e d S c o r e c a r d  In an attempt to reflect the particular needs of each stakeholder 
group in a performance measurement system, accountants have developed what is termed a 
balanced scorecard. (Balanced refers to the fact that the scorecard looks at more than just 
the bottom line or one or two other performance measures.) The Bank of Montreal has used 
the balanced scorecard notion in setting specific goals and measures for customer service, 
employee relations, return to owners, and community relations. A key feature of the system is 
that it is tailored to what senior management and branch-level management can control.
P r o c e s s  Da s h b o a r d s  In contrast to the balanced scorecard, which focuses on 
organizationwide performance data, process dashboards are designed to provide summary 
performance updates for specific processes. Dashboards consist of a selection of performance 
metrics presented in graphical form with color-coding of trend lines, alarms in the form of 
exclamation marks, and so forth, to show when key indicators are nearing a problem level. For 
example, three different dials on a dashboard for suppliers are shown in Exhibit 25.8.
Implementation
R e s p o n s i b i l i t y C h a r t s  A responsibility chart is used in planning the task 
responsibilities for a project. It usually takes the form of a matrix with tasks listed across the 
top and project team members down the side. The goal is to make sure that a checkmark exists 
in each cell to assure that a person is assigned to each task.
P r o j e c t  
Ma n a g e m e n t  
T e c h n i q u e s   Consulting firms use the project 
management techniques of CPM/PERT and Gantt charts to plan and monitor the entire 
portfolio of consulting engagements of the firm, as well as individual consulting projects. 
Microsoft Project and Primavera Project Planner are examples of commonly used software to 
automate such tools. Evolve Software has developed a software suite for professional service 
firms, modeled on ERP for manufacturing, that allows management to integrate opportunity 
management (the selling process), resource management, and delivery management. It should 
be emphasized that these planning tools are very much secondary to the people management 
skills needed to successfully execute a consulting project. This admonition is likewise true for 
all of the tools we have discussed in this section.
BUSINESS PROCESS REENGINEERING (BPR)
0
Accessories
E-Link
Source
Motion
Sights
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
0
10
20
30
40 50
60
70 80
90
100
110
120
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Accessories
E-Link
Source
Motion
Sights
Accessories
E-Link
Source
Motion
Sights
Delivery Days
[SupplierType]
Delivered Qty (×100,000)
[SupplierType]
Damaged Qty (×10)
[SupplierType]
Dashboard for Suppliers
exhibit 25.8
Business process reengineering is the radically restructuring of business processes to signifi­
cantly improve customer service, reduce cost, and become competitive.  It uses many of the 
tools just discussed to achieve these goals.
The concept of reengineering has been around for nearly two decades and was imple­
mented in a piecemeal fashion in organizations. Production organizations have been in the 
vanguard without knowing it. They have undertaken reengineering by implementing concur­
rent engineering, lean production, cellular manufacturing, group technology, and pull-type 
production systems. These represent a fundamental rethinking of the manufacturing process.
Analyze processes 
using business process 
reengineering concepts.
LO 25–3

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
685
Reengineering is often compared to total quality management (TQM), a topic covered 
in Chapter 12. Some people have said that the two are, in fact, the same, whereas others 
have even argued that they are incompatible. Both concepts are centered on a customer 
focus. The concepts of teamwork, worker participation and empowerment, cross-function­
ality, process analysis and measurement, supplier involvement, and benchmarking are sig­
nificant contributions from quality management. In addition, the need for a “total” view 
of the organization has been reemphasized by quality management in an era of extensive 
functionalization of business. Quality management has also influenced company culture 
and values by exposing organizations to the need for change. The basic difference between 
the two is that quality management has emphasized continuous and incremental improve­
ment of processes that are in control, whereas reengineering is about radical, discontinu­
ous change through process innovation. Thus, a given process is enhanced by TQM until 
its useful lifetime is over, at which point it is reengineered. Then, enhancement is resumed 
and the entire cycle starts again. As business circumstances change in major ways, so must 
process designs.
Principles of Reengineering
Reengineering is about achieving a significant improvement in processes so that contempo­
rary customer requirements of quality, speed, innovation, customization, and service are met. 
The following are seven principles or rules for reengineering and integration that can be used 
to guide a process reengineering project.
Rule 1. Organize around Outcomes, Not Tasks  Several specialized tasks 
previously performed by different people should be combined into a single job. This could be 
performed by an individual “case worker” or by a “case team.” The new job created should 
involve all the steps in a process that creates a well-defined outcome. Organizing around 
outcomes eliminates the need for handoffs, resulting in greater speed, productivity, and customer 
responsiveness. It also provides a single knowledgeable point of contact for the customer.
R u l e  2 .  H a v e  T h o s e  W h o  U s e  t h e  O u t p u t  o f  t h e  P r o c e s s  P e r f o r m 
t h e  P r o c e s s   In other words, work should be carried out where it makes the most sense 
to do it. This results in people closest to the process actually performing the work, which shifts 
work across traditional intra- and interorganizational boundaries. For instance, employees 
can make some of their own purchases without going through purchasing, customers can 
perform simple repairs themselves, and suppliers can be asked to manage parts inventories. 
Relocating work in this fashion eliminates the need to coordinate the performers and users 
of a process.
R u l e  3 .  M e r g e  I n f o r m a t i o n - P r o c e s s i n g  W o r k  i n t o  t h e  R e a l 
W o r k  t h a t  P r o d u c e s  t h e  I n f o r m a t i o n   This means that people who 
collect information should also be responsible for processing it. It minimizes the need 
for another group to reconcile and process that information, and greatly reduces errors by 
cutting the number of external contact points for a process. A typical accounts payable 
department that reconciles purchase orders, receiving notices, and supplier invoices is a 
case in point. By eliminating the need for invoices by processing orders and receiving 
information online, much of the work done in the traditional accounts payable function 
becomes unnecessary.
Rule 4. Treat Geographically Dispersed Resources as Though 
They Were Centralized  Information technology now makes the concept of hybrid 
centralized/decentralized operations a reality. It facilitates the parallel processing of work 
by separate organizational units that perform the same job, while improving the company’s 
overall control. For instance, centralized databases and telecommunication networks now 
allow companies to link with separate units or individual field personnel, providing them with 
economies of scale while maintaining their individual flexibility and responsiveness to customers.
Reengineering
The radically resturcturing 
of business processes 
to significantly improve 
customer service, reduce 
cost, and become 
competitive.

686	
Section 5	
Special Topics
R u l e  5 .  L i n k P a r a l l e l  A c t i v i t i e s  I n s t e a d  o f  I n t e g r a tin g  T h e i r 
R e s u l t s  The concept of integrating only the outcomes of parallel activities that must 
eventually come together is the primary cause for rework, high costs, and delays in the final 
outcome of the overall process. Such parallel activities should be linked continually and 
coordinated during the process.
R u l e  6 .  P u t  t h e  D e c i s i o n  P o i n t  W h e r e  t h e  W o r k  I s  P er f o r m e d , 
a n d  B u i l d  C o n t r o l  i n t o  t h e  P r o c e s s   Decision making should be made part 
of the work performed. This is possible today with a more educated and knowledgeable 
workforce plus decision-aiding technology. Controls are now made part of the process. The 
vertical compression that results produces flatter, more responsive organizations.
R u l e  7 .  C a p t u r e  I n f o r m a t i o n  O n c e — a t  t h e  S o u r c e   Information should 
be collected and captured in the company’s online information system only once—at the 
source where it was created. This approach avoids erroneous data entries and costly reentries.
Guidelines for Implementation
The principles of business process reengineering just enumerated are based on a common 
platform of the innovative use of information technology. But creating a new process and sus­
taining the improvement requires more than a creative application of information technology. 
A detailed study of reengineering applications in 765 hospitals yielded the following three 
managerial guidelines that apply to almost every organization contemplating reengineering:
	1.	 Codification of reengineering. Organizationwide change programs such as reengi­
neering are complex processes whose implementation may be separated by space and 
time. Middle managers are often left to implement significant portions of reengineer­
ing proposals. Codifying provides guidance and direction for consistent, efficient 
implementation.
	2.	 Clear goals and consistent feedback. Goals and expectations must be clearly estab­
lished, preapplication baseline data gathered, and the results monitored and fed back 
to employees. Without clear feedback, employees often became dissatisfied and their 
perceptions of reengineering success can be quite different from actual outcomes. 
The British retailer Marks & Spencer has gone through company 
reengineering, producing Plan A, a 100-point eco-plan. It is reducing how 
much of its clothing and packaging ends up as landfill by improving 
packaging, recycling more, and using fewer plastic bags. 
© Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg via Getty Images
For example, the hospital researchers 
found that, at 10 hospitals they stud­
ied in depth, most employees in 4 of 
them felt that the reengineering pro­
gram had done little to change costs, 
even though their costs had actually 
dropped 2 to 12 percent relative 
to their competitors’. On the other 
hand, 4 hospitals in which most felt 
that reengineering had lowered costs 
actually experienced an increase in 
relative costs and a deterioration of 
their cost position.
	3.	 High executive involvement in 
process changes. A high level of 
involvement by the chief executive 
officer in major process changes 
(procedure changes in hospitals, 
for example) improves reengineer­
ing outcomes. Changes that require 
reductions of managers and employ­
ees are certainly less popular and 
more difficult. It is better that these 
be done using a more long-term plan.

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
687
Concept Connections
LO 25–1   Explain operations consulting and how money is made in the industry.
Summary
	∙	 Consulting firms specializing in operations and sup­
ply chain management focus on improving a firm’s 
competitiveness by improving processes. 
	∙	 These firms can bring expertise that the client firm 
does not have. The consultant can do specialized anal­
ysis, such as simulation and optimization. 
	∙	 A consulting firm makes money by charging for ser­
vices, typically based on a set of rates that depend on 
the relative experience of the consultant. The most 
experienced consultants run the projects and are billed 
at the highest rates. Partners share the profits of the 
consulting practice.
Key Terms
Operations consulting  Assisting clients in develop­
ing operations strategies and improving production 
processes.
Finders  Partners or senior consultants whose primary 
function is sales and client relations.
Minders  Managers of a consulting firm whose primary 
function is managing consulting projects.
Grinders  Junior consultants whose primary function is 
to do the work.
Key Terms
Reengineering  The radically resturcturing of business 
processes to significantly improve customer service, 
reduce cost, and become competitive.
LO 25–2   Illustrate the operations analysis tools used in the consulting industry.
Summary
	∙	 The consulting firm uses tools to aid in understanding 
problems, collecting data, developing solutions, ana­
lyzing the payoff from proposed changes, and imple­
menting recommendations. 
	∙	 These tools provide structure to the consulting prac­
tice and are matched to the needs of the client. Many 
of these tools have already been discussed in earlier 
chapters of this book.
LO 25–3   Analyze processes using business process reengineering concepts.
Summary
	∙	 Compared to the approach normally taken to improve 
a process, reengineering is different. Here the idea is 
to radically rethink how business processes are done 
with the goal of achieving a dramatic improvement in 
performance.
Discussion Questions
	  1.	 Check the Websites of the consulting companies listed in the chapter. Which ones 
impressed you most as a potential client and as a potential employee?
Boston Consulting Group (www.bcg.com)
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu (www.deloitte.com)
McKinsey & Co. (www.McKinsey.com)
	  2.	 What does it take to be a good consultant? Is this the career for you?
LO 25–1

688	
Section 5	
Special Topics
Objective Questions
	  1.	 In what three ways can market leadership be obtained?
	  2.	 The process of running a consulting firm is analogous to what type of manufacturing 
process structure?
	  3.	 What are the 5 Ps of production in which firms typically seek operations consulting?
	  4.	 What is the current “hot area” for operations consultants in both manufacturing and services?
	  5.	 What methodology is used to assess a client’s performance relative to the expectations of 
its customers or the performance of its competitors?
	  6.	 What type of plant tour is designed to determine the “leanness” of a plant in just 30 minutes?
	  7.	 What tool is used to reflect the particular needs of each stakeholder group in a perfor­
mance measurement system? (Answer in Appendix D)
	  8.	 What tool is used to ensure that all tasks in a project have the right mix of project team 
members assigned?
	  9.	 An equipment manufacturer has the following steps in its order entry process:
	
a.  Take the order and fax it to order entry.
	
b.  Enter the order into the system (10 percent unclear or incorrect).
	
c.  Check stock availability (stock not available for 15 percent of orders).
	
d.  Check customer credit (10 percent of orders have credit questions).
	
e.  Send bill of materials to warehouse.
	 	 	 The order receipt to warehouse cycle time is typically 48 hours; 80 percent of the orders 
are handled without error; and order-handling costs are 6 percent of order revenue. Should 
you reengineer this process or is continuous improvement the appropriate approach? If 
you choose to reengineer, how would you go about it?
	10.	 Is the business reengineering process more gradual, more radical, or about the same as 
the TQM process?
	11.	 What concept provides guidance and direction for consistent, efficient implementation of 
BPR projects? (Answer in Appendix D)
LO25–1
LO25–2
LO25–3
	  3.	 In discussing characteristics of efficient plants, Goodson, developer of rapid plant assess­
ments (see the OSCM at Work box), suggests that numerous forklifts are a sign of poor 
space utilization. What do you think is behind this observation?
	  4.	 Think about the registration process at your university. Develop a flowchart to understand 
it. How would you radically redesign this process?
	  5.	 Have you driven a car lately? Try not to think of the insurance claim settlement process 
while you drive! How would you reengineer your insurance company’s claim process?
LO25–2
LO25–3
This exercise is designed to support a plant tour event 
conducted as part of a class. 
This questionnaire is focused on assessing the “lean­
ness” of a manufacturing plant. It might be useful to review 
the material on “lean” processes in Chapter 14 where the 
concepts considered in the questionnaire are described.
The questionnaire can be modified for non-manu­
facturing type processes, for example services or ware­
houses, depending on the facility that is being visited. 
We would suggest working with a team of two to 
four people and taking at least a 45-minute tour of a plant. 
It would be most useful if your tour guide were knowl­
edgeable about the operation of the plant and willing to 
answer questions. At the conclusion of the tour, rate what 
you observed using the Quick Plant Assessment (QPA) 
questionnaire and Score Sheet. 
In class, discuss those areas where leanness is gener­
ally lacking across the plant(s) visited.
Additional analysis for a consulting report: 
	1.	 Use the results from filling out the QPA Question­
naire in Exhibit 25.9 and your team’s observations 
to develop a consensus score for each Assessment 
Category in the QPA Score Sheet.  
	2.	 Prioritize targets of opportunity for management.  
	3.	 Develop a two-page action plan that you would 
present to management to help them make 
improvements.
Exercise: Quick Plant Assessment

	
Operations Consulting	
Chapter 25 	
689
Assessment category
Relevant 
Questions
Number 
of Yes’s
Ratio of Yes’s to 
Number of Relevant 
Questions
Customer focus
1, 2, 20
Safety, cleanliness, and order
3, 4, 5, 20
Visual management/Scheduling
2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 20
Use of space, movement efficiency, and product 
line flow
7, 12, 13, 20
Teamwork
9, 14, 15, 20
Maintenance of equipment
16, 20
Management of complexity and variability
8, 17, 20
Supply chain integration
18, 20
Quality commitment
8, 9, 15, 17, 19, 20
Yes
No
1.  Are visitors welcome to the plant and given information about how the plant operates, the workforce, cus­
tomers, and products?
2.  Are ratings for product quality and customer satisfaction displayed for the workforce and customers to view?
3.  Is the plant clean, orderly, and well lit? Is the air quality good, and are noise levels low?
4.  Is a visual labeling system used to identify inventory locations, storage places for tools, process areas, and 
movement lanes?
5.  Does it appear that everything has a specific place, and everything is stored in its place?
6.  Are performance measures and goals for these measures prominently posted and up to date?
7.  Are production materials brought to and stored near where they are used rather than in separate remote 
storage areas?
8.  Are specific instructions for how work is to be done and quality specifications visible at all workstations?
9.  Are up to date charts that show productivity, quality, and safety visible in all process areas?
10.  Is each process area scheduled using some type of pacing mechanism so workers can see real-time status 
against the schedule?
11.  Can the current state of the plant be viewed from a central control room, on a status board, or online 
computer display?
12.  Is material moved only once and as short a distance as possible? Is material moved efficiently in appropri­
ate containers?
13.  Is the plant laid out in continuous product line flows rather than in “shops”?
14.  Are workers organized in teams and are they trained and empowered to engage in problem solving and 
ongoing improvements?
15.  Do employees seem committed to continuously improving processes?
16.  Is there a formal plan for equipment preventive maintenance and improvement of tools and processes?
17.  Is there a process for managing projects (especially new product start-ups), with cost and timing goals?
18.  Is there a supplier certification process with measures for delivery, cost, and quality performance? Are these 
measures shared with suppliers frequently?
19.  Are fail-safe methods used in the processes to prevent common product quality problems?
20.  Would you buy the products this plant produces?
Quick Plant Assessment Questionnaire 
exhibit 25.9
QPA Score Sheet
exhibit 25.10

690	
Section 5	
Special Topics
Practice Exam
In each of the following, name the term defined or answer 
the question. Answers are listed at the bottom.
	  1.	 Name the three categories of consultants.
	  2.	 This type of project requires a great deal of experi­
ence but little innovation.
	  3.	 Accenture is well known for this type of approach to 
training consultants.
	  4.	 Target utilization is usually highest for which level of 
consultant?
	  5.	 McKinsey uses these to structure or map the key 
problems to be investigated.
	  6.	 These are the five forces of the five forces model.
	  7.	 Gap analysis measures the difference between these 
two factors.
	  8.	 Rapid plant assessment is used to measure this 
variable.
	  9.	 An accounting approach to reflect the needs of each 
stakeholder is called this.
	10.	 In contrast to TQM, this approach seeks radical 
change through innovation.
Answers to Practice Exam  1. Finders, minders, and grinders  2. Gray hair  3. Uniform approaches  4. Junior level  5. Issue trees  6. Buyer power, 
potential entrants, suppliers, substitute products, and industry rivals  7. Actual and desired performance  8. Leanness of a plant  9. Balanced scorecard  
10. Business process reengineering

691
A PPENDIX A
L I N E A R  P R O G R A M M I N G  U S I N G  T H E 
E X C E L  S O LV E R
The key to profitable operations is making the best use of available resources of people, mate­
rial, plant and equipment, and money. Today’s manager has a powerful mathematical model­
ing tool available for this purpose with linear programming. In this appendix, we will show 
how the use of the Microsoft Excel Solver to solve LP problems opens a whole new world to 
the innovative manager and provides an invaluable addition to the technical skill set for those 
who seek careers in consulting. In this appendix, we use a product-planning problem to intro­
duce this tool. Here we find the optimal mix of products that have different costs and resource 
requirements. This problem is certainly relevant to today’s competitive market. Extremely 
successful companies provide a mix of products, from standard to high-end luxury models. 
All these products compete for the use of limited production and other capacity. Maintaining 
the proper mix of these products over time can significantly bolster earnings and the return 
on a firm’s assets.
We begin with a quick introduction to linear programming and conditions under which the 
technique is applicable. Then, we solve a simple product-mix problem. Other linear program­
ming applications appear throughout the rest of the book.
Linear programming (or simply LP) refers to several related mathematical techniques 
used to allocate limited resources among competing demands in an optimal way. LP is the 
most widely used of the approaches falling under the general heading of mathematical opti­
mization techniques and has been applied to many operations management problems. The 
following are typical applications:
Aggregate sales and operations planning: Finding the minimum-cost production schedule. 
The problem is to develop a three- to six-month plan for meeting expected demand given 
constraints on expected production capacity and workforce size. Relevant costs considered 
in the problem include regular and overtime labor rates, hiring and firing, subcontracting, 
and inventory carrying cost.
Service/manufacturing productivity analysis: Comparing how efficiently different service 
and manufacturing outlets are using their resources compared to the best-performing unit. 
This is done using an approach called data envelopment analysis.
Product planning: Finding the optimal product mix where several products have different 
costs and resource requirements. Examples include finding the optimal blend of chemicals 
for gasoline, paints, human diets, and animal feeds. Examples of this problem are covered 
in this chapter.
Product routing: Finding the optimal way to produce a product that must be processed 
sequentially through several machine centers, with each machine in the center having its 
own cost and output characteristics.
Vehicle/crew scheduling: Finding the optimal way to use resources such as aircraft, buses, 
or trucks and their operating crews to provide transportation services to customers and 
materials to be moved between different locations.
Process control: Minimizing the amount of scrap material generated by cutting steel, 
leather, or fabric from a roll or sheet of stock material.
Linear programming 
(LP)
Refers to several 
related mathematical 
techniques used 
to allocate limited 
resources among 
competing demands in 
an optimal way.
Use Microsoft Excel 
Solver to solve a linear 
programming problem.
LO A–1

692	
	
APPENDIX A
Inventory control: Finding the optimal combination of products to stock in a network of 
warehouses or storage locations.
Distribution scheduling: Finding the optimal shipping schedule for distributing products 
between factories and warehouses or between warehouses and retailers.
Plant location studies: Finding the optimal location of a new plant by evaluating shipping 
costs between alternative locations and supply and demand sources.
Material handling: Finding the minimum-cost routings of material-handling devices (such 
as forklift trucks) between departments in a plant, or, for example, hauling materials from 
a supply yard to work sites by trucks. Each truck might have different capacities and per­
formance capabilities.
Linear programming is gaining wide acceptance in many industries due to the availabil­
ity of detailed operating information and the interest in optimizing processes to reduce cost. 
Many software vendors offer optimization options to be used with enterprise resource plan­
ning systems. Some firms refer to these as advanced planning option, synchronized planning, 
and process optimization.
For linear programming to pertain in a problem situation, five essential conditions 
must be met. First, there must be limited resources (such as a limited number of workers, 
equipment, finances, and material); otherwise, there would be no problem. Second, there 
must be an explicit objective (such as maximize profit or minimize cost). Third, there 
must be linearity (two is twice as much as one; if three hours are needed to make a part, 
then two parts would take six hours and three parts would take nine hours). Fourth, there 
must be homogeneity (the products produced on a machine are identical, or all the hours 
available from a worker are equally productive). Fifth, there must be divisibility: Normal 
linear programming assumes products and resources can be subdivided into fractions. 
If this subdivision is not possible (such as flying half an airplane or hiring one-fourth 
of a  person), a modification of linear programming, called integer programming, can 
be used.
When a single objective is to be maximized (like profit) or minimized (like costs), we 
can use linear programming. When multiple objectives exist, goal programming is used. If 
a problem is best solved in stages or time frames, dynamic programming is employed. Other 
restrictions on the nature of the problem may require that it be solved by other variations of 
the technique, such as nonlinear programming or quadratic programming.
T h e  L i n e a r  P r o g r a m m i n g  M o d e l
Stated formally, the linear programming problem entails an optimizing process in which non­
negative values for a set of decision variables X1, X2, . . . , Xn are selected so as to maximize (or 
minimize) an objective function in the form
Maximize (minimize) Z = C1X1 + C2X2 + . . . + CnXn
subject to resource constraints in the form
​
​A​ 11​ ​X​ 1​ + ​A​ 12​ ​X​ 2​ + . . . +​A​ 1n​ ​X​ n​ ≤ ​B​ 1​
​ 
 
 
​A​ 21​ ​X​ 1​ + ​A​ 22​ ​X​ 2​ + . . . +​A​ 2n​ ​X​ n​ ≤ ​B​ 2​
​ 
 
 
.
​ .​ 
.
​ 
​A​ m1​ ​X​ 1​ + ​A​ m2​ ​X​ 2​ + . . . +​A​ mn​ ​X​ n​ ≤ ​B​ m​
​
where Cn, Amn, and Bm are given constants.
Depending on the problem, the constraints also may be stated with equal signs (=) or 
greater-than-or-equal-to signs (≥).

	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
693
EXAMPLE A.1: Puck and Pawn Company
We describe the steps involved in solving a simple linear programming model in the context 
of a sample problem, that of Puck and Pawn Company, which manufactures hockey sticks 
and chess sets. Each hockey stick yields an incremental profit of $2, and each chess set, $4. 
A hockey stick requires 4 hours of processing at machine center A and 2 hours at machine 
center B. A chess set requires 6 hours at machine center A, 6 hours at machine center B, and 
1 hour at machine center C. Machine center A has a maximum of 120 hours of available 
capacity per day, machine center B has 72 hours, and machine center C has 10 hours.
	
If the company wishes to maximize profit, how many hockey sticks and chess sets should 
be produced per day?
SOLUTION
Formulate the problem in mathematical terms. If H is the number of hockey sticks and C is 
the number of chess sets, to maximize profit the objective function may be stated as
Maximize Z = $2H + $4C
The maximization will be subject to the following constraints:
​
4H + 6C ≤ 120 (machine center A constraint )
​ 
 
 
 
2H + 6C ≤ 72 (machine center B constraint )​ 
 
 
 
          1C ≤ 10 (machine center C constraint )​ 
 
 
 
       H, C ≤ 0
 
​
This formulation satisfies the five requirements for standard LP stated in the first section 
of this appendix:
1.	 There are limited resources (a finite number of hours available at each machine center).
2.	 There is an explicit objective function (we know what each variable is worth and what 
the goal is in solving the problem).
3.	 The equations are linear (no exponents or cross-products).
4.	 The resources are homogeneous (everything is in one unit of measure, machine hours).
5.	 The decision variables are divisible and nonnegative (we can make a fractional part of 
a hockey stick or chess set; however, if this were deemed undesirable, we would have 
to use integer programming).
G r a p h i c a l  L i n e a r  P r o g r a m m i n g
Though limited in application to problems involving two decision variables (or three variables 
for three-dimensional graphing), graphical linear programming provides a quick insight into 
the nature of linear programming. We describe the steps involved in the graphical method in the 
context of Puck and Pawn Company. The following steps illustrate the graphical approach.
1.	 Formulate the problem in mathematical terms.  The equations for the problem are 
given previously.
2.	 Plot constraint equations.  The constraint equations are easily plotted by letting one 
variable equal zero and solving for the axis intercept of the other. (The inequality portions 
of the restrictions are disregarded for this step.) For the machine center A constraint equa­
tion, when H = 0, C = 20, and when C = 0, H = 30. For the machine center B constraint 
equation, when H = 0, C = 12, and when C = 0, H = 36. For the machine center C con­
straint equation, C = 10 for all values of H. These lines are graphed in Exhibit A.1.
3.	 Determine the area of feasibility.  The direction of inequality signs in each constraint 
determines the area where a feasible solution is found. In this case, all inequalities are 
of the less-than-or-equal-to variety, which means it would be impossible to produce any 
Graphical linear 
programming
Provides a quick insight 
into the nature of linear 
programming.

694	
	
APPENDIX A
combination of products that would lie to the right of any constraint line on the graph. The 
region of feasible solutions is unshaded on the graph and forms a convex polygon. A con­
vex polygon exists when a line drawn between any two points in the polygon stays within 
the boundaries of that polygon. If this condition of convexity does not exist, the problem 
is either incorrectly set up or is not amenable to linear programming.
4.	 Plot the objective function. The objective function may be plotted by assuming some 
arbitrary total profit figure and then solving for the axis coordinates, as was done for 
the constraint equations. Other terms for the objective function when used in this con­
text are the iso-profit or equal contribution line, because it shows all possible produc­
tion combinations for any given profit figure. For example, from the dotted line closest 
to the origin on the graph, we can determine all possible combinations of hockey sticks 
and chess sets that yield $32 by picking a point on the line and reading the number of 
each product that can be made at that point. The combination yielding $32 at point a 
would be 10 hockey sticks and three chess sets. This can be verified by substituting 
H = 10 and C = 3 in the objective function:
$2(10) + $4(3) = $20 + $12 = $32
30
Chess
sets per
day
20
16
12
10
8
4
(3)
(2)
(1)
10
16
20
30
32
36
24
Optimum
2H + 6C = 72 (2)
4H + 6C = 120 (1)
2H + 4C = $64
2H + 4C = $32
Objective
function
lines
C = 10 (3)
a
Infeasible region
Feasible
region
Hockey sticks per day
Graph of Hockey Stick and Chess Set Problem
exhibit A.1
H
C
Explanation
0
120/6 = 20
Intersection of Constraint (1) and C axis
120/4 = 30
0
Intersection of Constraint (1) and H axis
0
72/6 = 12
Intersection of Constraint (2) and C axis
72/2 = 36
0
Intersection of Constraint (2) and H axis
0
10
Intersection of Constraint (3) and C axis
0
32/4 = 8
Intersection of $32 iso-profit line (objective function) and C axis
32/2 = 16
0
Intersection of $32 iso-profit line and H axis
0
64/4 = 16
Intersection of $64 iso-profit line and C axis
64/2 = 32
0
Intersection of $64 iso-profit line and H axis
5.	 Find the optimum point. It can be shown mathematically that the optimal combination 
of decision variables is always found at an extreme point (corner point) of the convex 
polygon. In Exhibit A.1, there are four corner points (excluding the origin), and we can 
determine which one is the optimum by either of two approaches. The first approach is 
to find the values of the various corner solutions algebraically. This entails simultane­
ously solving the equations of various pairs of intersecting lines and substituting the 

	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
695
quantities of the resultant variables in the objective function. For example, the calcula­
tions for the intersection of 2H + 6C = 72 and C = 10 are as follows:
Substituting C = 10 in 2H + 6C = 72 gives 2H + 6(10) = 72, 2H = 12, or H = 6. Substitut­
ing H = 6 and C = 10 in the objective function, we get
​Profit​  = $2H + $4C = $2​(​6​)​ + $4​(​10​)​​ 
 
 
​​ 
= $12 + $40 = $52 
​
A variation of this approach is to read the H and C quantities directly from the graph and 
substitute these quantities into the objective function, as shown in the previous calculation. 
The drawback in this approach is that, in problems with a large number of constraint equa­
tions, there will be many possible points to evaluate, and the procedure of testing each one 
mathematically is inefficient.
The second and generally preferred approach entails using the objective function or iso-
profit line directly to find the optimum point. The procedure involves simply drawing a 
straight line parallel to any arbitrarily selected initial iso-profit line so the iso-profit line is 
farthest from the origin of the graph. (In cost minimization problems, the objective would 
be to draw the line through the point closest to the origin.) In Exhibit A.1, the dashed line 
labeled $2H + $4C = $64 intersects the most extreme point. Note that the initial arbitrarily 
selected iso-profit line is necessary to display the slope of the objective function for the 
particular problem. (Note, the slope of the objective function is –2. If P = profit, P = $2H 
+ $4C; $2H = P + $4C; H = P/2 – 2C. Thus, the slope is –2.) This is important because a 
different objective function (try Profit = 3H + 3C) might indicate that some other point is 
farthest from the origin. Given that $2H + $4C = $64 is optimal, the amount of each vari­
able to produce can be read from the graph: 24 hockey sticks and four chess sets. No other 
combination of the products yields a greater profit.
L i n e a r  P r o g r a m m i n g  U s i n g  M i c r o s o f t  E x c e l
Spreadsheets can be used to solve linear programming problems. Microsoft Excel has an 
optimization tool called Solver that we will demonstrate by solving the hockey stick and 
chess problem. We invoke the Solver from the Data tab. A dialogue box requests information 
required by the program. The following example describes how our sample problem can be 
solved using Excel.
If the Solver option does not appear in your Data tab, click on File → Options → Add-Ins 
→ Go (Manage Excel Add-Ins) → Select the Solver Add-in. Solver should then be available 
directly from the Data tab for future use.
In the following example, we work in a step-by-step manner, setting up a spreadsheet and then 
solving our Puck and Pawn Company problem. Our basic strategy is to first define the problem 
within the spreadsheet. Following this, we invoke the Solver and feed it required information. 
Finally, we execute the Solver and interpret results from the reports provided by the program.
S t e p  1 :  D e f i n e  C h a n g i n g  C e l l s   A convenient starting point is to identify cells 
to be used for the decision variables in the problem. These are H and C, the number of hockey 
sticks and the number of chess sets to produce. Excel refers to these cells as changing cells in 
Solver. Referring to our Excel screen (Exhibit A.2), we have designated B4 as the location for 
the number of hockey sticks to produce and C4 for the number of chess sets. Note that we have 
set these cells equal to two initially. We could set these cells to anything, but a value other 
than zero will help verify that our calculations are correct.
S t e p  2 :  C a l c u l a t e  T o t a l  P r o fi t  ( o r  C o s t )  This is our objective function 
and is calculated by multiplying profit associated with each product by the number of units 
produced. We have placed the profits in cells B5 and C5 ($2 and $4), so the profit is calculated 
by the following equation: B4*B5 + C4*C5, which is calculated in cell D5. Solver refers to 
this as the Target Cell, and it corresponds to the objective function for a problem.

696	
	
APPENDIX A
S t e p  3 :  S e t  U p  R e s o u r c e  U s a g e   Our resources are machine centers A, B, 
and C as defined in the original problem. We have set up three rows (9, 10, and 11) in our 
spreadsheet, one for each resource constraint. For machine center A, 4 hours of processing 
time are used for each hockey stick produced (cell B9) and 6 hours for each chess set (cell C9). 
For a particular solution, the total amount of the machine center A resource used is calculated 
in D9 (B9*B4 + C9*C4). We have indicated in cell E9 that we want this value to be less 
than the 120-hour capacity of machine center A, which is entered in F9. Resource usage for 
machine centers B and C is set up in the exact same manner in rows 10 and 11.
S t e p  4 :  S e t  U p  S o l v e r  Go to the Data tab and select the Solver option.
© McGraw-Hill Education
Microsoft Excel Screen for Puck and Pawn Company
exhibit A.2

	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
697
1.	 Set Objective: is set to the location where the value that we want to optimize is calcu­
lated. This is the profit calculated in D5 in our spreadsheet.
2.	 To: is set to Max because the goal is to maximize profit.
3.	 By Changing Variable Cells: are the cells that Solver can change to maximize profit. 
Cells B4 through C4 are the changing cells in our problem.
4.	 Subject to the Constraints: corresponds to our machine center capacity. Here we click on 
Add and indicate that the total used for a resource is less than or equal to the capacity avail­
able. A sample for machine center A follows. Click OK after each constraint is specified.
5.	
Select a Solving Method allows us to tell Solver what type of problem we want it to solve 
and how we want it solved. Solver has numerous options, but we will need to use only a few.
Most of the options relate to how Solver attempts to solve nonlinear problems. These can be 
very difficult to solve, and optimal solutions difficult to find. Luckily, our problem is a linear 
problem. We know this because our constraints and our objective function are all calculated 
using linear equations. Select Simplex LP to tell Solver that we want to use the linear program­
ming option for solving the problem. In addition, we know our changing cells (decision vari­
ables) must be numbers that are greater than or equal to zero because it makes no sense to create 
a negative number of hockey sticks or chess sets. We indicate this by selecting Make Uncon­
strained Variables Non-Negative as an option. We are now ready to actually solve the problem.
S t e p  5 :  S o l v e  t h e  Pr o b l e m  Click Solve. We immediately get a Solver Results 
acknowledgment like that shown as follows.
Solver acknowledges that a solution was found that appears to be optimal. On the right side of this 
box are options for three reports: an Answer Report, a Sensitivity Report, and a Limits Report. Click 
on each report to have Solver provide these. After highlighting the reports, click OK to exit back to 
the spreadsheet. Three new tabs have been created that correspond to these reports.

698	
	
APPENDIX A
Answer Report
Target Cell (Max)
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$D$5
Profit Total
$12
$64
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$B$4
Changing Cells Hockey Sticks
2
24
$C$4
Changing Cells Chess Sets
2
  4
Sensitivity Report
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Reduced 
Cost
Objective 
Coefficient
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$B$4
Changing Cells Hockey 
Sticks
24
0
2
0.666666667
0.666666667
$C$4
Changing Cells Chess 
Sets
4
0
4
2 
1 
Constraints
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Shadow 
Price
Constraint 
R.H. Side
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$D$11
Machine C Used
 4
0
10
1E + 30
6
$D$10
Machine B Used
72
0.333333333
72
18
12
$D$9
Machine A Used
120
0.333333333
120
24
36
Constraints
Cell
Name
Cell Value
Formula
Status
Slack
$D$11
Machine C Used
4
$D$1<=$F$11
Not Binding
6
$D$10
Machine B Used
72
$D$10<=$F$10
Binding
0
$D$9
Machine A Used
120
$D$9<=$F$9
Binding
0
Excel Solver Answer and Sensitivity Reports
exhibit A.3
The most interesting reports for our problem are the Answer Report and the Sensitivity 
Report, both of which are shown in Exhibit A.3. The Answer Report shows the final answers 
for the total profit ($64) and the amounts produced (24 hockey sticks and 4 chess sets). In the 
constraints section of the Answer Report, the status of each resource is given. All of machine 
A and machine B are used, and there are six units of slack for machine C.
The Sensitivity Report is divided into two parts. The first part, titled “Adjustable 
Cells,” corresponds to objective function coefficients. The profit per unit for the hockey 
sticks can be either up or down $0.67 (between $2.67 and $1.33) without having an 
impact on the solution. Similarly, the profit of the chess sets could be between $6 and 
$3 without changing the solution. In the case of machine A, the right-hand side could 
increase to 144 (120 + 24) or decrease to 84 with a resulting $0.33 increase or decrease 
per unit in the objective function. The right-hand side of machine B can increase to 
90 units or decrease to 60 units with the same $0.33 change for each unit in the objec­
tive function. For machine C, the right-hand side could increase to infinity (1E + 30 is 
scientific notation for a very large number) or decrease to 4 units with no change in the 
objective function.

	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
699
Concept Connections
LO A–1:   Use Microsoft Excel Solver to solve a linear programming problem.
Summary
	∙	 Linear programming is a powerful tool for today’s 
business because it allows managers to make the best 
use of the available resources of material, plant, and 
equipment. 
	∙	 Using Microsoft Excel Solver, we can solve lin­
ear programming problems dealing with aggregate 
sales and operations planning, service/manufacturing 
productivity analysis, product planning, product rout­
ing, and more. 
	∙	 Linear programming problems can be solved in Micro­
soft Excel Solver using the following steps: (1) Define 
changing cells; (2) Calculate total profit (or cost); (3) 
Set up resource usage; (4) Set up the Solver; (5) Solve 
the problem.
Linear programming (LP)  Refers to several related math­
ematical techniques used to allocate limited resources 
among competing demands in an optimal way.
Graphical linear programming  Provides a quick insight 
into the nature of linear programming.
Key Terms
SOLVED PROBLEM 1
A furniture company produces three products: end tables, sofas, and chairs. These products are 
processed in five departments: the saw lumber, fabric cutting, sanding, staining, and assembly 
departments. End tables and chairs are produced from raw lumber only, and the sofas require 
lumber and fabric. Glue and thread are plentiful and represent a relatively insignificant cost 
that is included in operating expense. The specific requirements for each product are as follows.
Resource or Activity 
(quantity available 
per month)
Required per 
End Table
Required 
per Sofa
Required per 
Chair
Lumber (4,350 board feet)
10 board feet @ 
  $10/foot = $100/table
7.5 board feet @ 
  $10/foot = $75
4 board feet @ 
  $10/foot = $40
Fabric (2,500 yards)
None
10 yards @ $17.50/yard = $175
None
Saw lumber (280 hours)
30 minutes
24 minutes
30 minutes
Cut fabric (140 hours)
None
24 minutes
None
Sand (280 hours)
30 minutes
   6 minutes
30 minutes
Stain (140 hours)
24 minutes
12 minutes
24 minutes
Assemble (700 hours)
60 minutes
90 minutes
30 minutes
The company’s direct labor expenses are $75,000 per month for the 1,540 hours of labor, at $48.70 
per hour. Based on current demand, the firm can sell 300 end tables, 180 sofas, and 400 chairs per 
month. Sales prices are $400 for end tables, $750 for sofas, and $240 for chairs. Assume that labor 
cost is fixed and the firm does not plan to hire or fire any employees over the next month.
Required:
	1.	 What is the most limiting resource to the furniture company?
	2.	 Determine the product mix needed to maximize profit at the company. What is the optimal 
number of end tables, sofas, and chairs to produce each month?
Solution
Define X1 as the number of end tables, X2 as the number of sofas, and X3 as the number of 
chairs to produce each month. Profit is calculated as the revenue for each item minus the cost 
Solved Problem

of materials (lumber and fabric), minus the cost of labor. Because labor is fixed, we subtract 
this out as a total sum. Mathematically, we have (400 – 100)X1 + (750 – 75 – 175)X2 + (240 – 
40)X3 – 75,000. Profit is calculated as follows:
Profit = 300X1 + 500X2 + 200X3 – 75,000
Constraints are the following:
Lumber:	
10X1 + 7.5X2 + 4X3 ≤ 4,350
Fabric:	
10X2 ≤ 2,500
Saw:	
.5X1 + .4X2 + .5X3 ≤ 280
Cut:	
.4X2 ≤ 140
Sand:	
.5X1 + .1X2 + .5X3 ≤ 280
Stain:	
.4X1 + .2X2 + .4X3 ≤ 140
Assemble:	
1X1 + 1.5X2 + .5X3 ≤ 700
Demand:	
    Table:	
X1 ≤ 300
    Sofa:	
X2 ≤ 180
    Chair:	
X3 ≤ 400
Step 1: Define Changing Cells  These are B3, C3, and D3. Note that these cells have 
been set equal to zero.
Step 2: Calculate Total Profit  This is E4 (this is equal to B3 times the $300 revenue 
associated with each end table, plus C3 times the $500 revenue for each sofa, plus D3 times 
the $200 revenue associated with each chair). Note the $75,000 fixed expense that has been 
subtracted from revenue to calculate profit.
Step 3: Set Up Resource Usage  In cells E6 through E15, the usage of each resource is 
calculated by multiplying B3, C3, and D3 by the amount needed for each item and summing 
the product (for example, E6 = B3*B6 + C3*C6 + D3*D6). The limits on these constraints 
are entered in cells G6 to G15.
700	
	
APPENDIX A

Step 4: Set Up Solver  Go to Tools and select the Solver option.
	
a.  Set Objective: is set to the location where the value that we want to optimize is calcu­
lated. This is the profit calculated in E4 in this spreadsheet.
	
b.  To: is set to Max because the goal is to maximize profit.
	
c.  By Changing Variable Cells: are the cells that Solver can change to maximize profit 
(cells B3 through D3 in this problem).
	
d.  Subject to the Constraints: is where a constraint set is added; we indicate that the 
range E6 to E15 must be less than or equal to G6 to G15.
Step 5: Select a Solving Method  There are a few options here, but for our purposes we 
just need to indicate Simplex LP and Make Unconstrained Variables Non-Negative. Simplex 
LP means all of our formulas are simple linear equations. Make Unconstrained Variables 
Non-Negative indicates that changing cells must be greater than or equal to zero.
Step 6: Solve the Problem  Click Solve. We can see the solution and two special reports 
by highlighting items on the Solver Results acknowledgment that is displayed after a solution 
is found. Note that in the following report, Solver indicates that it has found a solution and 
all constraints and optimality conditions are satisfied. In the Reports box on the right, the 
	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
701

Answer, Sensitivity, and Limits options have been highlighted, indicating we would like to 
see these items. After highlighting the reports, click OK to exit back to the spreadsheet.
Note that three new tabs have been created: an Answer Report, a Sensitivity Report, and a 
Limits Report. The Answer Report indicates in the Target Cell section that the profit associ­
ated with this solution is $93,000 (we started at –$75,000). From the Target Cell section, we 
should make 260 end tables, 180 sofas, and no chairs. From the Constraints section, notice 
that the only constraints limiting profit are the staining capacity and the demand for sofas. We 
can see this from the column indicating whether a constraint is binding or nonbinding. Non­
binding constraints have slack, as indicated in the last column.
Target Cell (Max)
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$E$4
Profit Total
−$75,000
$93,000
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$B$3
Changing cells End Tables
0
260
$C$3
Changing cells Sofas
0
180
$D$3
Changing cells Chairs
0
     0
Constraints
Cell
Name
Cell Value
Formula
Status
Slack
$E$6
Lumber Total
3950
$E$6<=$G$6
Not Binding
400
$E$7
Fabric Total
1800
$E$7<=$G$7
Not Binding
700
$E$8
Saw Total
  202
$E$8<=$G$8
Not Binding
  78
$E$9
Cut fabric Total
    72
$E$9<=$G$9
Not Binding
  68
$E$10
Sand Total
  148
$E$10<=$G$10
Not Binding
132
$E$11
Stain Total
  140
$E$1<=$G$11
Binding
    0
$E$12
Assemble Total
  530
$E$12<=$G$12
Not Binding
170
$E$13
Table Demand Total
  260
$E$13<=$G$13
Not Binding
  40
$E$14
Sofa Demand Total
  180
$E$14<=$G$14
Binding
    0
$E$15
Chair Demand Total
      0
$E$15<=$G$15
Not Binding
400
702	
	
APPENDIX A

Of course, we may not be too happy with this solution because we are not meeting all 
the demand for tables, and it may not be wise to totally discontinue the manufacturing of 
chairs.
The Sensitivity Report (shown as follows) gives additional insight into the solution. 
The Adjustable Cells section of this report shows the final value for each cell and the 
reduced cost. The reduced cost indicates how much the target cell value would change if 
a cell that was currently set to zero were brought into the solution. Because the end tables 
(B3) and sofas (C3) are in the current solution, their reduced cost is zero. For each chair 
(D3) we make, our target cell would be reduced $100 (just round these numbers for inter­
pretation purposes). The final three columns in the adjustable cells section of the report 
are the Objective Coefficient from the original spreadsheet and columns titled Allowable 
Increase and Allowable Decrease. Allowable Increase and Decrease show by how much 
the value of the corresponding coefficient could change so there would not be a change 
in the changing cell values (of course, the target cell value would change). For example, 
revenue for each end table could be as high as $1,000 ($300 + $700) or as low as $200 
($300 – $100), and we would still want to produce 260 end tables. Keep in mind that these 
values assume nothing else is changing in the problem. For the allowable increase value 
for sofas, note the value 1E + 30. This is a very large number, essentially infinity, repre­
sented in scientific notation.
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Reduced 
Cost
Objective 
Coefficient
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$B$3
Changing cells End Tables
260
0
299.9999997
700.0000012
100.0000004
$C$3
Changing cells Sofas
180
0
500.0000005
1E + 30
350.0000006
$D$3
Changing cells Chairs
    0
−100.0000004
199.9999993
100.0000004
1E + 30
Constraints
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Shadow 
Price
Constraint 
R.H. Side
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$E$6
Lumber Total
3950
0
4350
1E + 30
400
$E$7
Fabric Total
1800
0
2500
1E + 30
700
$E$8
Saw Total
202
0
280
1E + 30
78
$E$9
Cut fabric Total
72
0
140
1E + 30
68
$E$10
Sand Total
148
0
280
1E + 30
132
$E$11
Stain Total
140
749.9999992
140
16
104
$E$12
Assemble Total
530
0
700
1E + 30
170
$E$13
Table Demand Total
260
0
300
1E + 30
40
$E$14
Sofa Demand Total
180
350.0000006
180
70
80
$E$15
Chair Demand Total
0
0
400
1E + 30
400
For the Constraints section of the report, the actual final usage of each resource is given 
in Final Value. The Shadow Price is the value to our target cell for each unit increase in the 
resource. If we could increase staining capacity, it would be worth $750 per hour. The Con­
straint Right-Hand Side is the current limit on the resource. Allowable Increase is the amount 
the resource could be increased while the shadow price is still valid. Another 16 hours’ work 
of staining capacity could be added with a value of $750 per hour. Similarly, the Allow­
able Decrease column shows the amount the resource could be reduced without changing the 
shadow price. There is some valuable information available in this report.
The Limits Report provides additional information about our solution.
Cell
Target Name
Value
$E$4
Profit Total
$93,000
	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
703

Cell
Adjustable Name
Value
Lower 
Limit
Target 
Result
Upper Limit
Target 
Result
$B$3
Changing cells End Tables
260
0
15000
260.0000002
93000
$C$3
Changing cells Sofas
180
0
  3000
180
93000
$D$3
Changing cells Chairs
    0
0
93000
    0
93000
Total profit for the current solution is $93,000. Current value for B3 (end tables) is 260 
units. If this were reduced to 0 units, profit would be reduced to $15,000. At an upper limit 
of 260, profit is $93,000 (the current solution). Similarly, for C3 (sofas), if this were reduced 
to 0, profit would be reduced to $3,000. At an upper limit of 180, profit is $93,000. For D3 
(chairs), if this were reduced to 0, profit is $93,000 (current solution), and in this case the 
upper limit on chairs is also 0 units.
Acceptable answers to the questions are as follows:
	  1.	 What is the most limiting resource to the furniture company?
	 	 	 In terms of our production resources, staining capacity is really hurting profit at this time. 
We could use another 16 hours of capacity.
	  2.	 Determine the product mix needed to maximize profit at the furniture company.
The product mix would be to make 260 end tables, 180 sofas, and no chairs.
Of course, we have only scratched the surface with this solution. We could actually 
experiment with increasing staining capacity. This would give insight into the next most limit­
ing resource. We also could run scenarios where we are required to produce a minimum num­
ber of each product, which is probably a more realistic scenario. This could help us determine 
how we could possibly reallocate the use of labor in our shop.
SOLVED PROBLEM 2
It is 2:00 on Friday afternoon and Joe Bob, the head chef (grill cook) at Bruce’s Diner, is 
trying to decide the best way to allocate the available raw material to the four Friday night 
specials. The decision has to be made in the early afternoon because three of the items must 
be started now (Sloppy Joes, Tacos, and Chili). The following table contains the information 
on the food in inventory and the amounts required for each item.
Food
Cheeseburgers
Sloppy Joes
Tacos
Chili
Available
Ground Beef (lbs.)
0.3
0.25
0.25
0.4
100 lbs.
Cheese (lbs.)
0.1
0
0.3
0.2
50 lbs.
Beans (lbs.)
0
0
0.2
0.3
50 lbs.
Lettuce (lbs.)
0.1
0
0.2
0
15 lbs.
Tomato (lbs.)
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.2
50 lbs.
Buns
1
1
0
0
80 buns
Taco Shells
0
0
1
0
80 shells
One other fact relevant to Joe Bob’s decision is the estimated market demand and selling 
price.
Cheeseburgers
Sloppy Joes
Tacos
Chili
Demand
75
60
100
55
Selling Price
$2.25
$2.00
$1.75
$2.50
Joe Bob wants to maximize revenue because he has already purchased all the materials that 
are sitting in the cooler.
Required:
	1.	 What is the best mix of the Friday night specials to maximize Joe Bob’s revenue?
	2.	 If a supplier offered to provide a rush order of buns at $1.00 a bun, is it worth the money?
704	
	
APPENDIX A

SOLUTION
Define X1 as the number of Cheeseburgers, X2 as the number of Sloppy Joes, X3 as the number 
of Tacos, and X4 as the number of bowls of Chili made for the Friday night specials.
Revenue = $2.25 X1 + $2.00 X2 + $1.75 X3 + $2.50 X4
Constraints are the following:
Ground Beef:	
0.30 X1 + 0.25 X2 + 0.25 X3 + 0.40 X4 ≤ 100
Cheese:	
0.10 X1 + 0.30 X3 + 0.20 X4 ≤ 50
Beans:	
0.20 X3 + 0.30 X4 ≤ 50
Lettuce:	
0.10 X1 + 0.20 X3 ≤ 15
Tomato:	
0.10 X1 + 0.30 X2 + 0.20 X3 + 0.20 X4 ≤ 50
Buns:	
X1 + X2 ≤ 80
Taco Shells:	
X3 ≤ 80
Demand	
    Cheeseburger	
X1 ≤ 75
    Sloppy Joes	
X2 ≤ 60
    Tacos	
X3 ≤ 100
    Chili	
X4 ≤ 55
Step 1: Define the Changing Cells  These are B3, C3, D3, and E3. Note the values in 
the changing cell are set to 10 each so the formulas can be checked.
Step 2: Calculate Total Revenue  This is in cell F7 (this is equal to B3 times the $2.25 
for each Cheeseburger, plus C3 times the $2.00 for a Sloppy Joe, plus D3 times the $1.75 for 
each Taco, plus E3 times the $2.50 for each bowl of Chili; the SUMPRODUCT function in 
	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
705

Excel was used to make this calculation faster). Note that the current value is $85, which is a 
result of selling 10 of each item.
Step 3: Set Up the Usage of the Food  In cells F11 to F17, the usage of each food is 
calculated by multiplying the changing cells row times the per item use in the table and then 
summing the result. The limits on each of these food types are given in H11 through H17.
Step 4: Set Up Solver and Select the Solver Option
	
a.  Set Objective: is set to the location where the value that we want to optimize is calcu­
lated. The revenue is calculated in F7 in this spreadsheet.
	
b.  To: is set to Max because the goal is to maximize revenue.
	
c.  By Changing Variable Cells: are the cells that tell how many of each special to 
produce.
	
d.  Subject to the Constraints: is where we add two separate constraints, one for demand 
and one for the usage of food.
Step 5: Select a Solving Method  We will leave all the settings as the default values and 
only make sure of two changes: (1) Simplex LP option and (2) check the Make Unconstrained 
Variables Non-Negative. These two options make sure that Solver knows that this is a linear 
programming problem and that all changing cells should be nonnegative.
706	
	
APPENDIX A

Step 6: Solve the Problem  Click Solve. We will get a Solver Results box. Make sure it 
says it has the following statement: “Solver found a solution. All constraints and optimality 
conditions are satisfied.”
On the right-hand side of the box, there is an option for three reports: Answer, Sensitiv­
ity, and Limit. Click on all three reports and then click OK. This will exit you back to the 
spreadsheet, but you will have three new worksheets in your workbook.
The answer report indicates that the target cell has a final solution of $416.25 and started 
at $85. From the adjustable cells area, we can see that we should make 20 Cheeseburgers, 
60 Sloppy Joes, 65 Tacos, and 55 bowls of Chili. This answers the first requirement from the 
problem of what the mix of Friday night specials should be.
Target Cell (Max)
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$F$7
Revenue Total
$85.00
$416.25
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Original Value
Final Value
$B$3
Changing Cells Cheeseburgers
10
20
$C$3
Changing Cells Sloppy Joes
10
60
$D$3
Changing Cells Tacos
10
65
$E$3
Changing Cells Chili
10
55
Constraints
Cell
Name
Cell Value
Formula
Status
Slack
$F$11
Ground Beef (lbs.) Total
59.25
$F$11<=$H$11
Not Binding
40.75
$F$12
Cheese (lbs.) Total
32.50
$F$12<=$H$12
Not Binding
17.5
$F$13
Beans (lbs.) Total
29.50
$F$13<=$H$13
Not Binding
20.5
$F$14
Lettuce (lbs.) Total
15.00
$F$14<=$H$14
Binding
   0
$F$15
Tomato (lbs.) Total
44.00
$F$15<=$H$15
Not Binding
   6
$F$16
Buns Total
80.00
$F$16<=$H$16
Binding
   0
$F$17
Taco Shells Total
65.00
$F$17<=$H$17
Not Binding
15
$B$3
Changing Cells Cheeseburgers
20
$B$3<=$B$5
Not Binding
55
$C$3
Changing Cells Sloppy Joes
60
$C$3<=$C$5
Binding
   0
$D$3
Changing Cells Tacos
65
$D$3<=$D$5
Not Binding
35
$E$3
Changing Cells Chili
55
$E$3<=$E$5
Binding
   0
	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
707

The second required answer was whether it is worth it to pay a rush supplier $1 a bun for 
additional buns. The answer report shows us that the buns constraint was binding. This means 
that if we had more buns, we could make more money. However, the answer report does not 
tell us whether a rush order of buns at $1 a bun is worthwhile. In order to answer that ques­
tion, we have to look at the sensitivity report.
Adjustable Cells
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Reduced 
Cost
Objective 
Coefficient
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$B$3
Changing Cells Cheeseburgers
20
0   
2.25
0.625 
1.375
$C$3
Changing Cells Sloppy Joes
60
0.625
2  
1E + 30
0.625
$D$3
Changing Cells Tacos
65
0   
1.75
2.75 
1.25 
$E$3
Changing Cells Chili
55
2.5   
2.5 
1E + 30
2.5  
Constraints
Cell
Name
Final 
Value
Shadow 
Price
Constraint 
R.H. Side
Allowable 
Increase
Allowable 
Decrease
$F$11
Ground Beef (lbs.) Total
59.25
0.00
100
1E + 30
40.75
$F$12
Cheese (lbs.) Total
32.50
0.00
50
1E + 30
17.5 
$F$13
Beans (lbs.) Total
29.50
0.00
50
1E + 30
20.5 
$F$14
Lettuce (lbs.) Total
15.00
8.75
15
3
13   
$F$15
Tomato (lbs.) Total
44.00
0.00
50
1E + 30
   6  
$F$16
Buns Total
80.00
1.38
80
55
20  
$F$17
Taco Shells Total
65.00
0.00
80
1E + 30
15   
We have highlighted the buns row to answer the question. We can see that buns have a 
shadow price of $1.38. This shadow price means that each additional bun will generate $1.38 
of profit. We also can see that other foods such as ground beef have a shadow price of $0. The 
items with a shadow price of $0 add nothing to profit because we are currently not using all 
that we have now. The other important piece of information that we have on the buns is that 
they are only worth $1.38 up until the next 55 buns, and that is why the allowable increase is 
55. We also can see that a pound of lettuce is worth $8.75. It might be wise to also look for a 
rush supplier of lettuce so we can increase our profit on Friday nights.
Acceptable answers to the questions are as follows:
	  1.	 What is the best mix of the Friday night specials to maximize Joe Bob’s revenue?
20 Cheeseburgers, 60 Sloppy Joes, 65 Tacos, and 55 bowls of Chili
	  2.	 If a supplier offered to provide a rush order of buns at $1.00 a bun, is it worth the money?
Yes, each additional bun brings in $1.38, so if they cost us $1, then we will net $0.38 per 
bun. However, this is true only up to 55 additional buns.
Objective Questions
	  1.	 Solve the following problem with Excel Solver:
​
Maximize Z
​ 
= 3X + Y.
​ 
 
12X + 14Y​  ≤ 85​ 
 
3X + 2Y​  ≤ 18​ 
Y
​ 
≤ 4
 
​
	  2.	 Solve the following problem with Excel Solver: (Answer in Appendix D)
​
Maximize Z
​ 
= 2A + 4B.
​ 
 
4A + 6B​  ≥ 120​ 
 
2A + 6B​  ≥ 72​ 
B
​ 
≥ 10
 
​
708	
	
APPENDIX A

	  3.	 A manufacturing firm has discontinued production of a certain unprofitable product line. 
Considerable excess production capacity was created as a result. Management is consid­
ering devoting this excess capacity to one or more of three products: X1, X2, and X3.
  Machine hours required per unit are:
Product
Machine Type
X1
X2
X3
Milling machine
8
2
3
Lathe
4
3
0
Grinder
2
0
1
  The available time in machine hours per week is:
Machine Hours per Week
Milling machines
800
Lathes
480
Grinders
320
  The salespeople estimate they can sell all the units of X1 and X2 that can be made. But 
the sales potential of X3 is 80 units per week maximum.
  Unit profits for the three products are:
Unit Profits
X1
$20    
X2
6
X3
8
a.  Set up the equations that can be solved to maximize the profit per week.
	
b.  Solve these equations using the Excel Solver.
	
c.  What is the optimal solution? How many of each product should be made, and what 
should the resultant profit be?
	
d.  What is this situation with respect to the machine groups? Would they work at ­capacity, 
or would there be unused available time? Will X3 be at maximum sales capacity?
	
e.  Suppose an additional 200 hours per week can be obtained from the milling machines 
by using staff overtime. The incremental cost would be $1.50 per hour. Would you 
recommend doing this? Explain how you arrived at your answer.
	  4.	 A diet is being prepared for the University of Arizona dorms. The objective is to feed 
the students at the least cost, but the diet must have between 1,800 and 3,600 calories. 
No more than 1,400 calories can be starch, and no fewer than 400 can be protein. The 
varied diet is to be made of two foods: A and B. Food A costs $0.75 per pound and 
contains 600 calories, 400 of which are protein and 200 starch. No more than two 
pounds of food A can be used per resident. Food B costs $0.15 per pound and contains 
900 calories, of which 700 are starch, 100 are protein, and 100 are fat. (Answers in 
Appendix D)
	
a.  Write the equations representing this information.
	
b.  Solve the problem graphically for the amounts of each food that should be used.
	  5.	 Repeat problem 4 with the added constraint that not more than 150 calories shall be 
fat and that the price of food has escalated to $1.75 per pound for food A and $2.50 per 
pound for food B.
	  6.	 Logan Manufacturing wants to mix two fuels, A and B, for its trucks to minimize cost. 
It needs no fewer than 3,000 gallons to run its trucks during the next month. It has a 
maximum fuel storage capacity of 4,000 gallons. There are 2,000 gallons of fuel A and 
4,000 gallons of fuel B available. The mixed fuel must have an octane rating of no less 
than 80.
	
	
	
APPENDIX A	
	
709

  When fuels are mixed, the amount of fuel obtained is just equal to the sum of the 
amounts put in. The octane rating is the weighted average of the individual octanes, 
weighted in proportion to the respective volumes.
  The following is known: Fuel A has an octane of 90 and costs $1.20 per gallon. Fuel B 
has an octane of 75 and costs $0.90 per gallon.
	
a.  Write the equations expressing this information.
	
b.  Solve the problem using the Excel Solver, giving the amount of each fuel to be used. 
State any assumptions necessary to solve the problem.
	  7.	 You are trying to create a budget to optimize the use of a portion of your disposable 
income. You have a maximum of $1,500 per month to be allocated to food, shelter, and 
entertainment. The amount spent on food and shelter combined must not exceed $1,000. 
The amount spent on shelter alone must not exceed $700. Entertainment cannot exceed 
$300 per month. Each dollar spent on food has a satisfaction value of 2, each dollar spent 
on shelter has a satisfaction value of 3, and each dollar spent on entertainment has a sat­
isfaction value of 5.
  Assuming a linear relationship, use the Excel Solver to determine the optimal alloca­
tion of your funds.
	  8.	 C-Town Brewery brews two beers: Expansion Draft and Burning River. Expansion Draft 
sells for $20 per barrel, while Burning River sells for $8 per barrel. Producing a barrel 
of Expansion Draft takes 8 pounds of corn and 4 pounds of hops. Producing a barrel of 
Burning River requires 2 pounds of corn, 6 pounds of rice, and 3 pounds of hops. The 
brewery has 500 pounds of corn, 300 pounds of rice, and 400 pounds of hops. Assuming 
a linear relationship, use Excel Solver to determine the optimal mix of Expansion Draft 
and Burning River that maximizes C-Town’s revenue.
	  9.	 BC Petrol manufactures three chemicals at its chemical plant in Kentucky: BCP1, BCP2, 
and BCP3. These chemicals are produced in two production processes known as zone 
and man. Running the zone process for an hour costs $48 and yields three units of BCP1, 
one unit of BCP2, and one unit of BCP3. Running the man process for one hour costs 
$24 and yields one unit of BCP1 and one unit of BCP2. To meet customer demands, at 
least 20 units of BCP1, 10 units of BCP2, and 6 units of BCP3 must be produced daily. 
Assuming a linear relationship, use Excel Solver to determine the optimal mix of pro­
cesses zone and man to minimize costs and meet BC Petrol daily demands.
	10.	 A farmer in Wood County has 900 acres of land. She is going to plant each acre with 
corn, soybeans, or wheat. Each acre planted with corn yields a $2,000 profit; each with 
soybeans yields $2,500 profit; and each with wheat yields $3,000 profit. She has 100 
workers and 150 tons of fertilizer. The following table shows the requirement per acre 
of each of the crops. Assuming a linear relationship, use Excel Solver to determine the 
optimal planting mix of corn, soybeans, and wheat to maximize her profits.
Corn
Soybeans
Wheat
Labor (workers)
0.1
0.3
0.2
Fertilizer (tons)
0.2
0.1
0.4
710	
	
APPENDIX A

711
A PPE NDIX B
O P E R AT I O N S  T E C H N O L O G Y
Much of the recent growth in productivity has come from the application of operations tech­
nology. In services, this comes primarily from soft technology—information processing. In 
manufacturing, it comes from a combination of soft and hard (machine) technologies. Given 
that most readers of this book have covered information technologies in services in MIS 
courses, our focus in this supplement is on manufacturing.
Te c h n o l o g i e s  i n  M a n u f a c t u r i n g
Some technological advances in recent decades have had a significant, widespread impact on 
manufacturing firms in many industries. These advances, which are the topic of this section, 
can be categorized in two ways: hardware systems and software systems.
Hardware technologies have generally resulted in greater automation of processes; they 
perform labor-intensive tasks originally performed by humans. Examples of these major 
types of hardware technologies are numerically controlled machine tools, machining centers, 
industrial robots, automated materials handling systems, and flexible manufacturing systems. 
These are all computer-controlled devices that can be used in the manufacturing of products. 
Software-based technologies aid in the design of manufactured products and in the analysis 
and planning of manufacturing activities. These technologies include computer-aided design 
and automated manufacturing planning and control systems. Each of these technologies will 
be described in greater detail in the following sections.
H a r d war e S y s t e m s  Numerically controlled (NC) machines are comprised of (1) a 
typical machine tool used to turn, drill, or grind different types of parts and (2) a computer 
that controls the sequence of processes performed by the machine. NC machines were first 
adopted by U.S. aerospace firms in the 1960s, and they have since proliferated to many 
other industries. In more recent models, feedback control loops determine the position of the 
machine tooling during the work, constantly compare the actual location with the programmed 
location, and correct as needed. This is often called adaptive control.
Machining centers represent an increased level of automation and complexity relative to 
NC machines. Machining centers not only provide automatic control of a machine, they also 
may carry many tools that can be automatically changed depending on the tool required for 
each operation. In addition, a single machine may be equipped with a shuttle system so that a 
finished part can be unloaded and an unfinished part loaded while the machine is working on 
a part. To help you visualize a machining center, we have included a diagram in Exhibit B.1A.
Industrial robots are used as substitutes for workers for many repetitive manual activi­
ties and tasks that are dangerous, dirty, or dull. A robot is a programmable, multifunctional 
machine that may be equipped with an end effector. Examples of end effectors include a 
gripper to pick things up or a tool such as a wrench, a welder, or a paint sprayer. Exhibit 
B.1B examines the human motions a robot can reproduce. Advanced capabilities have been 
designed into robots to allow vision, tactile sensing, and hand-to-hand coordination. In addi­
tion, some models can be “taught” a sequence of motions in a three-dimensional pattern. As 
a worker moves the end of the robot arm through the required motions, the robot records this 
pattern in its memory and repeats it on command. Newer robotic systems can conduct quality 
control inspections and then transfer, via mobile robots, those parts to other robots down­
stream. As shown in the OSCM at Work box “Formula for Evaluating a Robot Investment,” 
robots are often justified based on labor savings.
Explain how the 
application of operations 
technology has affected 
manufacturing.
LO B–1

712	
	
APPENDIX B
L. V. Ottinger, “Robotics for the IE: Terminology, Types of Robots,” Industrial 
Engineering, November 1981, p. 30.
Pallet exchanger
Work piece
Controller
Cutting tool
Tool changer
Jointed arm
Wrist axes
1
3
2
2
3
1
1
1
3
2
3
2
Spherical coordinate
Cylindrical coordinate
A. The CNC Machining Center 	
B. Typical Robot Axes of Motion
exhibit B.1
J. T. Black, The Design of the Factory with a Future (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1991), p. 39, with permission of The McGraw-Hill Companies.
Automated materials handing (AMH) systems improve efficiency of transportation, stor­
age, and retrieval of materials. Examples are computerized conveyors and automated storage 
and retrieval systems (AS/RS) in which computers direct automatic loaders to pick and place 
items. Automated guided vehicle (AGV) systems use embedded floor wires to direct driv­
erless vehicles to various locations in the plant. Benefits of AMH systems include quicker 
material movement, lower inventories and storage space, reduced product damage, and higher 
labor productivity.
Formula for Evaluating a Robot Investment
Many companies use the following modification of the 
basic payback formula in deciding if a robot should be 
purchased:
​P = ​ 
I 
____________ 
 
L − E + q​(​L + Z​)​ ​
where
P = Payback period in years
  I = Total capital investment required in robot and 
accessories
 L = Annual labor costs replaced by the robot (wage 
and benefit costs per worker times the number of 
shifts per day)
E = Annual maintenance cost for the robot
q = Fractional speedup (or slowdown) factor
Z = Annual depreciation
Example:
  I = $50,000
 L = $60,000 (two workers × $20,000 each working 
one of two shifts; overhead is $10,000 each)
E = $9,600 ($2/hour × 4,800 hours/year)
q = 1.5 (robot works 150 percent as fast as a worker)
Z = $10,000
then
​P​ = ​ 
$50, 000 
 
 
___________________________________ 
 
 
 
$60, 000 − $9, 600 + 1.5​(​$60, 000 + $10, 000​)​ ​​ 
 
 
 
 
​
​ 
 = 1 / 3 year
 
​
OSCM AT WORK

	
	
	
APPENDIX B	
	
713
These individual pieces of automation can be combined to form manufacturing cells or 
even complete flexible manufacturing systems (FMS). A manufacturing cell might consist 
of a robot and a machining center. The robot could be programmed to automatically insert 
and remove parts from the machining center, thus allowing unattended operation. An FMS is 
a totally automated manufacturing system that consists of machining centers with the auto­
mated loading and unloading of parts, an automated guided vehicle system for moving parts 
between machines, and other automated elements to allow the unattended production of parts. 
In an FMS, a comprehensive computer control system is used to run the entire system.
A good example of an FMS is the Cincinnati Milacron facility in Mt. Orab, Ohio, which 
has been in operation for over 30 years. Exhibit B.2 is a layout of this FMS. In this system, 
parts are loaded onto standardized fixtures (these are called “risers”), which are mounted on 
pallets that can be moved by the AGVs. Workers load and unload tools and parts onto the 
standardized fixtures at the workstations shown on the right side of the diagram. Most of this 
loading and unloading is done during a single shift. The system can operate virtually unat­
tended for the other two shifts each day.
Within the system there are areas for the storage of tools (Area 7) and for parts (Area 5). 
This system is designed to machine large castings used in the production of the machine tools 
made by Cincinnati Milacron. The machining is done by the four CNC machining centers 
(Area 1). When the machining has been completed on a part, it is sent to the parts washing 
station (Area 4), where it is cleaned. The part is then sent to the automated inspection station 
(Area 6) for a quality check. The system is capable of producing hundreds of different parts.
S o f t war e S y s t e m s   Computer-aided design (CAD) is an approach to product and 
process design that utilizes the power of the computer. CAD covers several automated 
technologies, such as computer graphics to examine the visual characteristics of a product 
and computer-aided engineering (CAE) to evaluate its engineering characteristics. Rubbermaid 
used CAD to refine dimensions of its ToteWheels to meet airline requirements for checked 
baggage. CAD also includes technologies associated with the manufacturing process design, 
referred to as computer-aided process planning (CAPP). CAPP is used to design the computer 
part programs that serve as instructions to computer-controlled machine tools and to design 
the programs used to sequence parts through the machine centers and other processes (such 
One of the four large 
machining centers (see 
Exhibit B.2) that are 
part of the flexible 
manufacturing systems 
at Cincinnati Milacron’s 
Mt. Orab, Ohio, Plant.
Courtesy of Cincinnati 
Milacron, Mt. Orab, Ohio 
plant

714	
	
APPENDIX B
as the washing and inspection) needed to complete the part. These programs are referred to as 
process plans. Sophisticated CAD systems also are able to do on-screen tests, replacing the 
early phases of prototype testing and modification.
CAD has been used to design everything from computer chips to potato chips. Frito-Lay, for 
example, used CAD to design its O’Grady’s double-density, ruffled potato chip. The problem 
in designing such a chip is that if it is cut improperly, it may be burned on the outside and soggy 
on the inside, be too brittle (and shatter when placed in the bag), or display other characteristics 
that make it unworthy for, say, a guacamole dip. However, through the use of CAD, the proper 
angle and number of ruffles were determined mathematically; the O’Grady’s model passed its 
stress test in the infamous Frito-Lay “crusher” and made it to your grocer’s shelf. But despite 
some very loyal fans, O’Grady’s has been discontinued, presumably due to lack of sales.
CAD is now being used to custom-design swimsuits. Measurements of the wearer are fed 
into the CAD program, along with the style of suit desired. Working with the customer, the 
designer modifies the suit design as it appears on a human-form drawing on the computer 
screen. Once the design is decided upon, the computer prints out a pattern, and the suit is cut 
and sewn on the spot.
Automated manufacturing planning and control systems (MP&CS) are simply computer-
based information systems that help plan, schedule, and monitor a manufacturing operation. 
1   Four Milacron T-30 CNC Machining
 
Centers.
2   Four tool interchange stations, one per
 
machine, for tool storage chain delivery
 
via computer-controlled cart.
3   Cart maintenance station. Coolant
 
monitoring  and maintenance area.
4   Parts wash station, automatic handling.
11   Control center, computer room (elevated).
12   Centralized chip/coolant collection/recovery  
    system (----flume path).
13   Three computer-controlled carts, with
 
  wire-guided path.
 
Cart turnaround station
 
(up to 360° around its own axis)
Key:
Conference
room
3
4
5
6
7
10
11
13
2
1
12
8
9
5   Automatic Workchanger (10 pallets) for
     online pallet queue.
6   One inspection module—horizontal type
 
coordinate measuring machine.
7   Three queue stations for tool delivery
 
chains.
8   Tool delivery chain load/unload stations.
9   Four part load/unload stations.
     Pallet/fixture build station.
10
The Cincinnati Milacron Flexible Manufacturing System
exhibit B.2
Source: A tour brochure from the plant

	
	
	
APPENDIX B	
	
715
They obtain information from the factory floor continuously about work status, material arriv­
als, and so on, and they release production and purchase orders. Sophisticated manufacturing 
and planning control systems include order-entry processing, shop-floor control, purchasing, 
and cost accounting.
C o m p u t e r - I n t e g r a t e d  M a n u f a c t u r i n g  ( C I M )
All of these automation technologies are brought together under computer-integrated manu­
facturing (CIM). CIM is the automated version of the manufacturing process, where the three 
major manufacturing functions—product and process design, planning and control, and the 
manufacturing process itself—are replaced by the automated technologies just described. Fur­
ther, the traditional integration mechanisms of oral and written communication are replaced 
by computer technology. Such highly automated and integrated manufacturing also goes 
under the names total factory automation and the factory of the future.
All of the CIM technologies are tied together using a network and integrated database. For 
instance, data integration allows CAD systems to be linked to computer-aided manufacturing 
(CAM), which consists of numerical-control parts programs; and the manufacturing planning 
and control system can be linked to the automated material handling systems to facilitate parts 
pick list generation. Thus, in a fully integrated system, the areas of design, testing, fabrication, 
assembly, inspection, and material handling are not only automated but also integrated with 
each other and with the manufacturing planning and scheduling function.
E v a l u at i on  o f  T e c h n o l o g y I n v e s t m e n t s  Modern technologies such as 
flexible manufacturing systems or computerized order processing systems represent large 
capital investments. Hence, a firm has to carefully assess its financial and strategic benefits 
from a technology before acquiring it. Evaluating such investments is especially hard because 
the purpose of acquiring new technologies is not just to reduce labor costs but also to increase 
product quality and variety, to shorten production lead times, and to increase the flexibility 
of an operation. Some of these benefits are intangible relative to labor cost reduction, so 
justification becomes difficult. Further, rapid technological change renders new equipment 
obsolete in just a few years, making the cost–benefit evaluation more complex.
But never assume that new automation technologies are always cost-effective. Even when 
there is no uncertainty about the benefits of automation, it may not be worthwhile to adopt 
it. For instance, many analysts predicted that integrated CAD/CAM systems would be the 
answer to all manufacturing problems. But a number of companies investing in such systems 
lost money in the process. The idea was to take a lot of skilled labor out of the process of tool­
ing up for new or redesigned products and to speed up the process. However, it can take less 
time to mill complex, low-volume parts than to program the milling machine, and program­
mer time is more expensive than the milling operator time. Also, it may not always be easy to 
transfer all the expert knowledge and experience that a milling operator has gained over the 
years into a computer program. CAD/CAM integration software has attained sufficient levels 
of quality and cost-effectiveness that it is now routinely utilized even in high-variety low-
volume manufacturing environments.
B e n ef i t s  o f  T e c h n o l o g y  I n ve s t m e n t s   The typical benefits from adopting 
new manufacturing technologies are both tangible and intangible. The tangible benefits can 
be used in traditional modes of financial analysis such as discounted cash flow to make sound 
investment decisions. Specific benefits can be summarized as follows:
Cost Reduction
Labor costs. Replacing people with robots, or enabling fewer workers to run semiauto­
matic equipment.
Material costs. Using existing materials more efficiently, or enabling the use of high-
tolerance materials.
Inventory costs. Fast changeover equipment allowing for JIT inventory management.

716	
	
APPENDIX B
Quality costs. Automated inspection and reduced variation in product output.
Maintenance costs. Self-adjusting equipment.
Other Benefits
Increased product variety. Scope economies due to flexible manufacturing systems.
Improved product features. Ability to make things that could not be made by hand (e.g., 
microprocessors).
Shorter cycle times. Faster setups and changeovers.
Greater product output.
R i s k s  i n  A d o p t i n g  N e w  T e c h n o l o g i e s  Although there may be many benefits 
in acquiring new technologies, several types of risk accompany the acquisition of new 
technologies. These risks have to be evaluated and traded off against the benefits before the 
technologies are adopted. Some of these risks are described next.
Technological Risks
An early adopter of a new technology has the benefit of being ahead of the competition, but 
he or she also runs the risk of acquiring an untested technology whose problems could disrupt 
the firm’s operations. There is also the risk of obsolescence, especially with electronics-based 
technologies where change is rapid and when the fixed cost of acquiring new technologies or 
the cost of upgrades is high. Also, alternative technologies may become more cost-effective in 
the future, negating the benefits of a technology today.
Operational Risks
There also could be risks in applying a new technology to a firm’s operations. Installation of 
a new technology generally results in significant disruptions, at least in the short run, in the 
form of plantwide reorganization, retraining, and so on. Further risks are due to the delays and 
errors introduced in the production process and the uncertain and sudden demands on various 
resources.
Organizational Risks
Firms may lack the organizational culture and top management commitment required to 
absorb the short-term disruptions and uncertainties associated with adopting a new technol­
ogy. In such organizations, there is a risk that the firm’s employees or managers may quickly 
abandon the technology when there are short-term failures or they will avoid major changes 
by simply automating the firm’s old, inefficient process and therefore not obtain the benefits 
of the new technology.
Environmental or Market Risks
In many cases, a firm may invest in a particular technology only to discover a few years later 
that changes in some environmental or market factors make the investment worthless. For 
instance, in environmental issues, auto firms have been reluctant to invest in technology for 
making electric cars because they are uncertain about future emission standards of state and 
federal governments, the potential for decreasing emissions from gasoline-based cars, and 
the potential for significant improvements in battery technology. Typical examples of market 
risks are fluctuations in currency exchange rates and interest rates.

Concept Connections
LO B–1: Explain how the application of operations technology has affected manufacturing.
Summary
	∙	 Technology has played the dominant role in the pro­
ductivity growth of most nations and has provided the 
competitive edge to firms that have adopted it early 
and implemented it successfully. 
	∙	 Although each of the manufacturing and informa­
tion technologies described here is a powerful tool 
by itself and can be adopted separately, their benefits 
grow exponentially when they are integrated with 
each other. This is particularly the case with CIM 
technologies.
	•∙	 With more modern technologies, the benefits are 
not entirely tangible and many benefits may be real­
ized only on a long-term basis. Thus, typical cost 
accounting methods and standard financial analysis 
may not adequately capture all the potential benefits 
of technologies such as CIM. Hence, we must take 
into account the strategic benefits in evaluating such 
investments. Further, because capital costs for many 
modern technologies are substantial, the various risks 
associated with such investments have to be carefully 
assessed.
	∙	 Implementing flexible manufacturing systems or com­
plex decision support systems requires a significant 
commitment for most firms. Such investments may 
even be beyond the reach of small to medium-size 
firms. However, as technologies continue to improve 
and are adopted more widely, their costs may decline 
and place them within the reach of smaller firms. 
Given the complex, integrative nature of these tech­
nologies, the total commitment of top management 
and all employees is critical for the successful imple­
mentation of these technologies.
Discussion Questions
	1.	 Do robots have to be trained? Explain.
	2.	 How does the axiom used in industrial selling “You don’t sell the product; you sell the 
company” pertain to manufacturing technology?
	3.	 List three analytical tools (other than financial analysis) covered elsewhere in the book that 
can be used to evaluate technological alternatives.
	4.	 The Belleville, Ontario, Canada, subsidiary of Atlanta-based Interface Inc., one of the 
world’s largest makers of commercial flooring, credits much of its profitability to “green 
manufacturing” or “eco-efficiency.” What do you believe these terms mean, eh? And how 
could such practices lead to cost reduction?
	5.	 Give two examples each of recent process and product technology innovations.
	6.	 What is the difference between an NC machine and a machining center?
	7.	 The major auto companies are planning to invest millions of dollars in developing new 
product and process technologies required to make electric cars. Describe briefly why they 
are investing in these technologies. Discuss the potential benefits and risks involved in 
these investments.
	
	
	
APPENDIX B	
	
717

718
F I N A N C I A L  A N A LY S I S
A PPE NDIX C
Evaluate capital 
investments using the 
various types of cost, risk 
and expected value, and 
depreciation.
LO C–1
Total cost
Fixed cost
Variable cost
Units of output
Production 
cost
Fixed and Variable Cost Components of Total Cost
exhibit C.1
In this appendix, we review the basic concepts and tools of financial analysis for OSCM. 
These include the types of cost (fixed, variable, sunk, opportunity, avoidable), risk and 
expected value, and depreciation (straight line, sum-of-the-years’-digits, declining balance, 
double-declining-balance, and depreciation-by-use). We also discuss activity-based costing 
and cost-of-capital calculations. Our focus is on capital investment decisions.
C o n c e p t s  a n d  D e f i n i t i o n s
We begin with some basic definitions.
F i x e d  C o s t s  A fixed cost is any expense that remains constant regardless of the level 
of output. Although no cost is truly fixed, many types of expense are virtually fixed over a 
wide range of output. Examples are rent, property taxes, most types of depreciation, insurance 
payments, and salaries of top management.
V a r i a b l e  C o s t s  Variable costs are expenses that fluctuate directly with changes in the 
level of output. For example, each additional unit of sheet steel produced by USx requires 
a specific amount of material and labor. The incremental cost of this additional material 
and labor can be isolated and assigned to each unit of sheet steel produced. Many overhead 
expenses are also variable because utility bills, maintenance expense, and so forth, vary with 
the production level.
Exhibit C.1 illustrates the fixed and variable cost components of total cost. Note that total 
cost increases at the same rate as variable costs because fixed costs are constant.
S u n k  C o s t s  Sunk costs are past expenses or investments that have no salvage value and 
therefore should not be taken into account in considering investment alternatives. Sunk costs 
also could be current costs that are essentially fixed such as rent on a building. For example, 
suppose an ice cream manufacturing firm occupies a rented building and is considering 
making sherbet in the same building. If the company enters sherbet production, its cost 
accountant will assign some of the rental expense to the sherbet operation. However, the 

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
719
building rent remains unchanged and therefore is not a relevant expense to be considered in 
making the decision. The rent is sunk; that is, it continues to exist and does not change in 
amount regardless of the decision.
O p p or t u ni t y  C o s t s   Opportunity cost is the benefit forgone, or advantage lost, that 
results from choosing one action over the best-known alternative course of action.
Suppose a firm has $100,000 to invest and then two alternatives of comparable risk present 
themselves, each requiring a $100,000 investment. Investment A will net $25,000; Investment B 
will net $23,000. Investment A is clearly the better choice, with a $25,000 net return. If the decision 
is made to invest in B instead of A, the opportunity cost of B is $2,000, which is the benefit forgone.
A v o i d ab l e  C o s t s   Avoidable costs include any expense that is not incurred if an 
investment is made but that must be incurred if the investment is not made. Suppose a 
company owns a metal lathe that is not in working condition but is needed for the firm’s 
operations. Because the lathe must be repaired or replaced, the repair costs are avoidable if a 
new lathe is purchased. Avoidable costs reduce the cost of a new investment because they are 
not incurred if the investment is made. Avoidable costs are an example of how it is possible to 
“save” money by spending money.
Expected Value  Risk is inherent in any investment because the future can never be 
predicted with absolute certainty. To deal with this uncertainty, mathematical techniques such as 
expected value can help. Expected value is the expected outcome multiplied by the probability 
of its occurrence. Recall that in the preceding example the expected outcome of Alternative A 
was $25,000 and B, $23,000. Suppose the probability of A’s actual outcome is 80 percent while 
B’s probability is 90 percent. The expected values of the alternatives are determined as follows:
​Expected​ 
outcome ​     ×     ​
Probability that actual
​ 
 
outcome will be the​ 
 
expected outcome 
 
​     =    ​ Expected​ 
value  ​
​Investment A: $25,000 × 0.80 = $20, 000​ 
 
 
 
Investment B: $23,000 × 0.90 = $20, 700 ​
Investment B is now seen to be the better choice, with a net advantage over A of $700.
E c o nom i c  L i f e  a n d  O b s o l e s c e n c e  When a firm invests in an income-producing 
asset, the productive life of the asset is estimated. For accounting purposes, the asset is 
depreciated over this period. It is assumed that the asset will perform its function during this 
time and then be considered obsolete or worn out, and replacement will be required. This 
view of asset life rarely coincides with reality.
Assume that a machine expected to have a productive life of 10 years is purchased. If at any 
time during the ensuing 10 years a new machine is developed that can perform the same task 
more efficiently or economically, the old machine has become obsolete. Whether or not it is 
“worn out” is irrelevant.
The economic life of a machine is the period over which it provides the best method for 
performing its task. When a superior method is developed, the machine has become obsolete. 
Thus, the stated book value of a machine can be a meaningless figure.
D e p r ec i at i o n  Depreciation is a method for allocating costs of capital equipment. 
The value of any capital asset—buildings, machinery, and so forth—decreases as its useful 
life is expended. Amortization and depreciation are often used interchangeably. Through 
convention, however, depreciation refers to the allocation of cost due to the physical or 
functional deterioration of tangible (physical) assets such as buildings or equipment, whereas 
amortization refers to the allocation of cost over the useful life of intangible assets such as 
patents, leases, franchises, and goodwill.
Depreciation procedures may not reflect an asset’s true value at any point in its life because 
obsolescence may at any time cause a large difference between true value and book value. 

720	
	
APPENDIX C
Also, because depreciation rates significantly affect taxes, a firm may choose a particular 
method from the several alternatives with more consideration for its effect on taxes than its 
ability to make the book value of an asset reflect the true resale value.
Next we describe five commonly used methods of depreciation.
Straight-Line Method
Under this method, an asset’s value is reduced in uniform annual amounts over its estimated 
useful life. The general formula is
​Annual amount to be depreciated = ​ Cost − Salvage value 
 
_________________ 
 
Estimated useful life ​
A machine costing $10,000 with an estimated salvage value of $0 and an estimated life 
of 10 years would be depreciated at the rate of $1,000 per year for each of the 10 years. If its 
estimated salvage value at the end of the 10 years is $1,000, the annual depreciation charge is
​ $10, 000 − $1, 000 
 
_______________ 
10 
​ = $900​
Sum-of-the-Years’-Digits (SYD) Method
The purpose of the SYD method is to reduce the book value of an asset rapidly in early years 
and at a lower rate in the later years of its life.
Suppose that the estimated useful life is five years. The numbers add up to 15: 1 + 2 + 3 + 
4 + 5 = 15. Therefore, we depreciate the asset by 5 ÷ 15 after the first year, 4 ÷ 15 after the 
second year, and so on, down to 1 ÷ 15 in the last year.
Declining-Balance Method
This method also achieves an accelerated depreciation. The asset’s value is decreased by reduc­
ing its book value by a constant percentage each year. The percentage rate selected is often the 
one that just reduces book value to salvage value at the end of the asset’s estimated life. In any 
case, the asset should never be reduced below estimated salvage value. Use of the declining-
balance method and allowable rates are controlled by Internal Revenue Service regulations. As a 
simplified illustration, the preceding example is used in the next table with an arbitrarily selected 
rate of 40 percent. Note that depreciation is based on full cost, not cost minus salvage value.
Year
Depreciation 
Rate
Beginning 
Book Value
Depreciation 
Charge
Accumulated 
Depreciation
Ending 
Book Value
1
0.40
$17,000
$6,800
$  6,800
$10,200
2
0.40
10,200
4,080
10,880
6,120
3
0.40
6,120
2,448
13,328
3,672
4
0.40
3,672
1,469
14,797
2,203
5
2,203
   203
15,000
2,000
In the fifth year, reducing book value by 40 percent would have caused it to drop below 
salvage value. Consequently, the asset was depreciated by only $203, which decreased book 
value to salvage value.
Double-Declining-Balance Method
Again, for tax advantages, the double-declining-balance method offers higher depreciation early in 
the life span. This method uses a percentage twice the straight line for the life span of the item but 
applies this rate to the undepreciated original cost. The method is the same as the declining-balance 
method, but the term double-declining balance means double the straight-line rate. Thus, equip­
ment with a 10-year life span would have a straight-line depreciation rate of 10 percent per year and 
a double-declining-balance rate (applied to the undepreciated amount) of 20 percent per year.
Depreciation-by-Use Method
The purpose of this method is to depreciate a capital investment in proportion to its use. It is 
applicable, for example, to a machine that performs the same operation many times. The life 

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
721
of the machine is estimated not in years but rather in the total number of operations it may rea­
sonably be expected to perform before wearing out. Suppose that a metal-stamping press has 
an estimated life of one million stamps and costs $100,000. The charge for depreciation per 
stamp is then $100,000 ÷ 1,000,000, or $0.10. Assuming a $0 salvage value, the depreciation 
charges are as shown in the following table.
Year
Total Yearly 
Stamps
Cost 
per 
Stamp
Yearly 
Depreciation 
Charge
Accumulated 
Depreciation
Ending 
Book 
Value
1
150,000
0.10
$15,000  
$ 15,000
$85,000  
2
300,000
0.10
30,000
45,000
55,000
3
200,000
0.10
20,000
65,000
35,000
4
200,000
0.10
20,000
85,000
15,000
5
100,000
0.10
10,000
95,000
  5,000
6
  50,000
0.10
  5,000
100,000  
        0
The depreciation-by-use method is an attempt to gear depreciation charges to actual use and 
thereby coordinate expense charges with productive output more accurately. Also, because a 
machine’s resale value is related to its remaining productive life, it is hoped that book value 
will approximate resale value. The danger, of course, is that technological improvements will 
render the machine obsolete, in which case book value will not reflect true value.
Activity-Based Costing
To know the costs incurred to make a certain product or deliver a service, some method of 
allocating overhead costs to production activities must be applied. The traditional approach is 
to allocate overhead costs to products on the basis of direct labor dollars or hours. By divid­
ing the total estimated overhead costs by total budgeted direct labor hours, an overhead rate 
can be established. The problem with this approach is that direct labor as a percentage of total 
costs has fallen dramatically over the past decade. For example, the introduction of advanced 
manufacturing technology and other productivity improvements has driven direct labor to as 
low as 7 to 10 percent of total manufacturing costs in many industries. As a result, overhead 
rates of 600 percent or even 1,000 percent are found in some highly automated plants.
This traditional accounting practice of allocating overhead to direct labor can lead to ques­
tionable investment decisions. For example, automated processes may be chosen over labor-
intensive processes based on a comparison of projected costs. Unfortunately, overhead does 
not disappear when the equipment is installed and overall costs may actually be lower with 
the labor-intensive process. It also can lead to wasted effort because an inordinate amount of 
time is spent tracking direct labor hours. For example, one plant spent 65 percent of computer 
costs tracking information about direct labor transactions even though direct labor accounted 
for only 4 percent of total production costs.
Activity-based costing techniques have been developed to alleviate these problems by 
refining the overhead allocation process to more directly reflect actual proportions of over­
head consumed by the production activity. Causal factors, known as cost drivers, are identi­
fied and used as the means for allocating overhead. These factors might include machine 
hours, beds occupied, computer time, flight hours, or miles driven. The accuracy of overhead 
allocation, of course, depends on the selection of appropriate cost drivers.
Activity-based costing involves a two-stage allocation process, with the first stage assigning 
overhead costs to cost activity pools. These pools represent activities such as performing machine 
setups, issuing purchase orders, and inspecting parts. In the second stage, costs are assigned from 
these pools to activities based on the number or amount of pool-related activity required in their 
completion. Exhibit C.2 compares traditional cost accounting and activity-based costing.
Consider the example of activity-based costing in Exhibit C.3. Two products, A and B, 
are produced using the same number of direct labor hours. The same number of direct labor 
hours produces 5,000 units of Product A and 20,000 units of Product B. Applying traditional 

722	
	
APPENDIX C
Note: See R. Garrison, Managerial Accounting, 12th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007).
Traditional Costing
Activity-Based Costing
Total overhead
End product cost
Total overhead
Cost pools
End product costs
Labor-hour allocation
Pooled based on activities
Cost-driver allocation
Traditional and Activity-Based Costing
exhibit C.2
Basic Data
Traceable 
Costs
Events of Transactions
Activity
Total
Product A
Product B
Machine setups
$230,000
5,000
3,000
2,000
Quality inspections
  160,000
8,000
5,000
3,000
Production orders
    81,000
   600
200
400
Machine-hours worked
  314,000
40,000
12,000
28,000
Material receipts
     90,000
   750
150
600
Number of units produced
25,000
5,000
20,000
$875,000
Overhead Rates by Activity
(a)
(b)
(a) ÷ (b)
Activity
Traceable 
Costs
Total Events or 
Transactions
Rate per Event 
or Transaction
Machine setups
$230,000
  5,000
$46/setups
Quality inspections
  160,000
  8,000
$20/inspection
Production orders
    81,000
     600
$135/order
Machine-hours worked
  314,000
40,000
$7.85/hour
Material receipts
    90,000
     750
$120/receipt
Overhead Cost per Unit of Product
Product A
Product B
Events or 
Transactions
Amount
Events or 
Transactions
Amount
Machine setups, at $46/setup
3,000
$138,000
   2,000
$  92,000
Quality inspections, at $20/inspection
5,000
  100,000
   3,000
    60,000
Product orders, at $135/order
200
    27,000
       400
    54,000
Machine-hours worked, at $7.85/hour
12,000
    94,200
 28,000
  219,800
Material receipts, at $120/receipt
150
     18,000
      600
     72,000
      Total overhead cost assigned
$377,200
$497,800
Number of units produced
5,000
    20,000
$     75.44
    $24.89
Overhead Allocations by an Activity Approach
exhibit C.3

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
723
costing, identical overhead costs would be charged to each product. By applying activity-based 
costing, traceable costs are assigned to specific activities. Because each product required a 
different amount of transactions, different overhead amounts are allocated to these products 
from the pools.
As stated earlier, activity-based costing overcomes the problem of cost distortion by creat­
ing a cost pool for each activity or transaction that can be identified as a cost driver, and by 
assigning overhead cost to products or jobs on a basis of the number of separate activities 
required for their completion. Thus, in the previous situation, the low-volume product would 
be assigned the bulk of the costs for machine setup, purchase orders, and quality inspections, 
thereby showing it to have high unit costs compared to the other product.
Finally, activity-based costing is sometimes referred to as transactions costing. This trans­
actions focus gives rise to another major advantage over other costing methods: It improves the 
traceability of overhead costs and thus results in more accurate unit cost data for management.
The Effects of Taxes
Tax rates and the methods of applying them occasionally change. When analysts evaluate 
investment proposals, tax considerations often prove to be the deciding factor because depre­
ciation expenses directly affect taxable income and therefore profit. The ability to write off 
depreciation in early years provides an added source of funds for investment. Before 1986, 
firms could employ an investment tax credit, which allowed a direct reduction in tax liability. 
But tax laws change, so it is crucial to stay on top of current tax laws and try to predict future 
changes that may affect current investments and accounting procedures.
Choosing among Investment Proposals
The capital investment decision has become highly rationalized, as evidenced by the vari­
ety of techniques available for its solution. In contrast to pricing or marketing decisions, the 
capital investment decision can usually be made with a higher degree of confidence because 
the variables affecting the decision are relatively well known and can be quantified with fair 
accuracy.
Investment decisions may be grouped into six general categories:
	1.	 Purchase of new equipment or facilities.
	2.	 Replacement of existing equipment or facilities.
	3.	 Make-or-buy decisions.
	4.	 Lease-or-buy decisions.
	5.	 Temporary shutdowns or plant abandonment decisions.
	6.	 Addition or elimination of a product or product line.
Investment decisions are made with regard to the lowest acceptable rate of return on invest­
ment. As a starting point, the lowest acceptable rate of return may be considered to be the cost 
of investment capital needed to underwrite the expenditure. Certainly, an investment will not 
be made if it does not return at least the cost of capital.
Investments are generally ranked according to the return they yield in excess of their cost 
of capital. In this way, a business with only limited investment funds can select investment 
alternatives that yield the highest net returns. (Net return is the earnings an investment yields 
after gross earnings have been reduced by the cost of the funds used to finance the invest­
ment.) In general, investments should not be made unless the return in funds exceeds the 
marginal cost of investment capital. (Marginal cost is the incremental cost of each new acqui­
sition of funds from outside sources.)
D e t er m i n i n g  t h e  C o s t  o f  C a p i t a l   The cost of capital is calculated from a 
weighted average of debt and equity security costs. This average will vary depending on the 
financing strategy employed by the company. The most common sources of financing are 

724	
	
APPENDIX C
short-term debt, long-term debt, and equity securities. A bank loan is an example of short-
term debt. Bonds normally provide long-term debt. Finally, stock is a common form of equity 
financing. In the following, we give a short example of each form of financing, and then show 
how they are combined to find the weighted average cost of capital.
The cost of short-term debt depends on the interest rate on the loan and whether the loan is 
discounted. Remember that interest is a tax-deductible expense for a company.
​Cost of short-term debt = ​ 
Interest paid 
 
_______________ 
 
Proceeds received ​
If a bank discounts a loan, interest is deducted from the face of the loan to get the proceeds. 
When a compensating balance is required (that is, a percentage of the face value of the loan is 
held by the bank as collateral), proceeds are also reduced. In either case, the effective or real 
interest rate on the loan is higher than the face interest rate owing to the proceeds received 
from the loan being less than the amount (face value) of the loan.
Example of Short-Term Debt
A company takes a $150,000, one-year, 13 percent loan. The loan is discounted, and a 
10 percent compensating balance is required. The effective interest rate is computed as 
follows:
​ 13 %  × $150, 000 
 
_______________ 
 
$115, 500 
​ = ​ $19, 500 
________ 
$115, 500 ​ = 16.89%​
Proceeds received equal
Face of loan
$150,000 
Less interest
(19,500)
Compensating balance (10% × $150,000)
   (15,000)
  Proceeds
$115,500 
Notice how the effective cost of the loan is significantly greater than the stated interest rate.
Long-term debt is normally provided through the sale of corporate bonds. The real cost of 
bonds is obtained by computing two types of yield: simple (face) yield and yield to maturity 
(effective interest rate). The first involves an easy approximation, but the second is more accu­
rate. The nominal interest rate equals the interest paid on the face (maturity value) of the bond 
and is always stated on a per-annum basis. Bonds are generally issued in $1,000 denomina­
tions and may be sold above face value (at a premium) or below (at a discount, termed original 
issue discount, or OID). A bond is sold at a discount when the interest rate is below the going 
market rate. In this case, the yield will be higher than the nominal interest rate. The opposite 
holds for bonds issued at a premium.
The issue price of a bond is the par (or face value) times the premium (or discount).
​ 
Simple yield
​ 
= ​  Nominal interest 
 
________________ 
 
Issue price of bond ​
​ 
 
 
 
Yield to maturity
​ 
= ​ 
Nominal interest +  ​ Discount​(​or premium​)​ 
 
___________________ 
 
Years 
​ 
 
 
 
___________________________________ 
 
 
​ Issue price + Maturity value 
 
 
________________________ 
 
2 
​
 
​
​
Example of Long-Term Debt
A company issues a $400,000, 12 percent, 10-year bond for 97 percent of face value. Yield 
computations are as follows:
Nominal annual payment	= 12% × $400,000
	
= $48,000
                Bond proceeds	= 97% × $400,000
	
= $388,000

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
725
​Bond discount = 3 %  × $400, 000
= $12, 000
Simple yield = ​ 12 %  × $400, 000 
 
_______________ 
 
97 %  × $400, 000 ​ = ​ $48, 000 
________ 
$388, 000 ​ = 12.4%
Yield to maturity = ​ 
$48, 000 + ​ $12, 000 
_______ 
10 
​ 
 
____________________ 
 
​ $388, 000  +  $400, 000 
 
___________________ 
2 
​
 ​ = ​ $48, 000 + $1, 200 
 
_______________ 
 
$394, 000 
​ = 12.5%​
Note that because the bonds were sold at a discount, the yield exceeds the nominal interest 
rate (12 percent). Bond interest is tax deductible to the corporation.
The actual cost of equity securities (stocks) comes in the form of dividends, which are not 
tax deductible to the corporation.
​Cost of common stock = ​ Dividends per share 
 
_________________ 
 
Value per share  ​ + Growth rate of dividends​
Here the value per share equals the market price per share minus flotation costs (that is, the 
cost of issuing securities such as brokerage fees and printing costs). It should be noted that 
this valuation does not consider what the investor expects in market price appreciation. This 
expectation is based on the expected growth in earnings per share and the relative risk taken 
by purchasing the stock. The capital asset pricing model (CAPM) can be used to capture this 
impact.
Example of the Cost of Common Stock
A company’s dividend per share is $10, net value is $70 per share, and the dividend growth 
rate is 5 percent.
​Cost of the stock = ​ $10 
____ 
$70 ​ + 0.05 = 19.3%​
To compute the weighted average cost of capital, we consider the percentage of the total 
capital that is being provided by each financing alternative. We then calculate the after-tax 
cost of each financing alternative. Finally, we weight these costs in proportion to their use.
Example of Calculating the Weighted Average Cost of Capital
Consider a company that shows the following figures in its financial statements:
Short-term bank loan (13%)
$1 million
Bonds payable (16%)
$4 million
Common stock (10%)
$5 million
For our example, assume that each of the percentages given represents the cost of the 
source of capital. In addition to this, we need to consider the tax rate of the firm because the 
interest paid on the bonds and on the short-term loan is tax deductible. Assume a corporate 
tax rate of 40 percent.
Percent
After-Tax Cost
Weighted 
Average Cost
Short-term bank loan
  10%
13% × 60% = 7.8%
  .78%
Bonds payable
  40%
16% × 60% = 9.6%
3.84%
Common stock
  50%
10%
     5%
  Total
100%
    
9.62%
Keep in mind that in developing this section we have made many assumptions in these 
calculations. When these ideas are applied to a specific company, many of these assumptions 

726	
	
APPENDIX C
may change. The basic concepts, though, are the same; keep in mind that the goal is to simply 
calculate the after-tax cost of the capital used by the company. We have shown the cost of 
capital for the entire company, though often only the capital employed for a specific project is 
used in the calculation.
I n t e r e s t  R a t e  E f f e c t s   There are two basic ways to account for the effects of interest 
accumulation. One is to compute the total amount created over the time period into the future 
as the compound value. The other is to remove the interest rate effect over time by reducing all 
future sums to present-day dollars, or the present value.
C o m p o u n d  V a l u e  o f  a  S i n g l e  A m o u n t   Albert Einstein was quoted as saying 
that compound interest is the eighth wonder of the world. After reviewing this section showing 
compound interest’s dramatic growth effects over a long time, you might wish to propose a 
new government regulation: On the birth of a child, the parents must put, say, $1,000 into a 
retirement fund for that child, available at age 65. This might reduce the pressure on Social 
Security and other state and federal pension plans. Although inflation would decrease the 
value significantly, there would still be a lot left over. At a 14 percent return on investment, 
our $1,000 would increase to $500,000 after subtracting the $4.5 million for inflation. That is 
still a 500-fold increase. (Many mutual funds today have long-term performances in excess of 
14 percent per year.)
Spreadsheets and calculators make such computation easy. The OSCM at Work box titled 
“Using a Spreadsheet” shows the most useful financial functions. However, many people still 
refer to tables for compound values. Using Appendix I, Table I.1 (compound sum of $1), for 
example, we see that the value of $1 at 10 percent interest after three years is $1.331. Multi­
plying this figure by $10 gives $13.31.
C o m p o u n d  V a l u e  o f  a n  A n n u i t y  An annuity is the receipt of a constant sum 
each year for a specified number of years. Usually an annuity is received at the end of a period 
and does not earn interest during that period. Therefore, an annuity of $10 for three years 
would bring in $10 at the end of the first year (allowing the $10 to earn interest if invested for 
the remaining two years), $10 at the end of the second year (allowing the $10 to earn interest 
for the remaining one year), and $10 at the end of the third year (with no time to earn interest). 
If the annuity receipts were placed in a bank savings account at 5 percent interest, the total or 
compound value of the $10 at 5 percent for the three years would be
Year
Receipt at End 
of Year
Compound Interest 
Factor (1 + i)n
Value at End of 
Third Year
1
$10.00  
×
(1 + 0.05)2
=
$11.02  
2
10.00
×
(1 + 0.05)1
=
10.50
3
10.00
×
(1 + 0.05)0
=
  10.00  
$31.52  
The general formula for finding the compound value of an annuity is
Sn = R[(1 + i)n–1 + (1 + i)n–2 + . . . + (1 + i)1 + 1]
where
​
​S​ n​
​ 
=
​ 
Compound value of an annuity
​ 
 
 
R​  =​ Periodic receipts in dollars​ 
 
 
n
​ 
=
​ 
Length of the annuity in years
 ​
Applying this formula to the preceding example, we get
​​S​ n​​  ​= R​[​ ​(​1 + i​)​ 2​ + ​(​1 + i​)​ + 1​]​​ 
 
 
​​  ​= $10​[​ ​(​1 + 0.05​)​ 2​ + ​(​1 + 0.05​)​ + 1​]​ = $31.52​​

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
727
Using a Spreadsheet
We hope you are doing these calculations using a spread­
sheet program. Even though the computer makes these cal­
culations simple, it is important that you understand what 
the computer is actually doing. Further, you should check 
your calculations manually to make sure you have the for­
mulas set up correctly in your spreadsheet. There are many 
stories of the terrible consequences of making a wrong 
decision based on a spreadsheet with errors!
For your quick reference, the following are the finan­
cial functions you will find most useful. These are from the 
Microsoft Excel help screens.
PV (rate, nper, pmt)—Returns the present value of an invest­
ment. The present value is the total amount that a series 
of future payments is worth now. For example, when you 
borrow money, the loan amount is the present value to the 
lender. Rate is the interest rate per period. For example, if 
you obtain an automobile loan at a 10% annual interest rate 
and make monthly payments, your interest rate per month is 
10%/12, or .83%. You would enter 10%/12, or .83%, or .0083, in 
the formula as the rate. Nper is the total number of payment 
periods in an annuity. For example, if you get a four-year car 
loan and make monthly payments, your loan has 4*12 (or 48) 
periods. You would enter 48 into the formula for nper. Pmt 
is the payment made each period and cannot change over 
the life of the annuity. Typically, this includes principal and 
interest but no other fees or taxes. For example, the monthly 
payment on a $10,000, four-year car loan at 12% is $263.33. 
You would enter 263.33 into the formula as pmt.
FV (rate, nper, pmt)—Returns the future value of an invest­
ment based on periodic, constant payments and a constant 
interest rate. Rate is the interest rate per period. Nper is the 
total number of payment periods in an annuity. Pmt is the 
payment made each period; it cannot change over the life of 
the annuity. Typically, pmt contains principal and interest but 
no other fees or taxes.
NPV (rate, value1, value2, . . .)—Returns the net present value 
of an investment based on a series of periodic cash flows and 
a discount rate. The net present value of an investment is 
today’s value of a series of future payments (negative values) 
and income (positive values). Rate is the rate of discount over 
the length of one period. Value1, value2. . ., must be equally 
spaced in time and occur at the end of each period.
IRR(values)—Returns the internal rate of return for a series 
of cash flows represented by the numbers in values. (Values 
is defined as follows.) These cash flows do not have to be 
even, as they would be for an annuity. The internal rate of 
return is the interest rate received for an investment con­
sisting of payments (negative values) and income (positive 
values) that occur at regular periods. Values is an array or a 
reference to cells that contain numbers for which you want 
to calculate the internal rate of return. Values must contain 
at least one positive value and one negative value to calcu­
late the internal rate of return. IRR uses the order of values 
to interpret the order of cash flows. Be sure to enter your 
payment and income values in the sequence you want.
Source: From Microsoft Excel. Copyright © 2016 Microsoft Corporation.
OSCM AT WORK
In Appendix I, Table I.2 lists the compound value factor of $1 for 5 percent after three 
years as 3.152. Multiplying this factor by $10 yields $31.52.
In a fashion similar to our previous retirement investment example, consider the beneficial 
effects of investing $2,000 each year, just starting at the age of 21. Assume investments in 
AAA-rated bonds are available today yielding 9 percent. From Table I.2 in Appendix I, after 
30 years (at age 51) the investment is worth 136.3 times $2,000, or $272,600. Fourteen years 
later (at age 65) this would be worth $963,044 (using a hand calculator, because the table goes 
only to 30 years, and assuming the $2,000 is deposited at the end of each year)! But what 
21-year-old thinks about retirement?
Present Value of a Future Single Payment  Compound values are used to 
determine future value after a specific period has elapsed; present value (PV) procedures accomplish 
just the reverse. They are used to determine the current value of a sum or stream of receipts expected 
to be received in the future. Most investment decision techniques use present value concepts rather 
than compound values. Because decisions affecting the future are made in the present, it is better 
to convert future returns into their present value at the time the decision is being made. In this way, 
investment alternatives are placed in better perspective in terms of current dollars.
An example makes this more apparent. If a rich uncle offers to make you a gift of $100 
today or $250 after 10 years, which should you choose? You must determine whether the $250 
in 10 years will be worth more than the $100 now. Suppose that you base your decision on 

728	
	
APPENDIX C
the rate of inflation in the economy and believe that inflation averages 10 percent per year. By 
deflating the $250, you can compare its relative purchasing power with $100 received today. 
Procedurally, this is accomplished by solving the compound formula for the present sum, P, 
where V is the future amount of $250 in 10 years at 10 percent. The compound value formula is
V = P(1 + i)n
Dividing both sides by (1 + i)n gives
​
P
​ 
= ​ 
V 
______ 
​(​1 + i​)​ n​ ​
​ 
​
​ 
= ​ 
250 
_________ 
​(​1 + 0.10​)​ 10​ ​ = $96.39
​
This shows that, at a 10 percent inflation rate, $250 in 10 years will be worth $96.39 today. 
The rational choice, then, is to take the $100 now.
The use of tables is also standard practice in solving present value problems. With refer­
ence to Appendix I, Table I.3, the present value factor for $1 received 10 years hence is 0.386. 
Multiplying this factor by $250 yields $96.50.
Pr e s e n t  V a l u e  o f  a n  A n n u i t y   The present value of an annuity is the value of an 
annual amount to be received over a future period expressed in terms of the present. To find 
the value of an annuity of $100 for three years at 10 percent, find the factor in the present value 
table that applies to 10 percent in each of the three years in which the amount is received and 
multiply each receipt by this factor. Then sum the resulting figures. Remember that annuities 
are usually received at the end of each period.
Year
Amount Received 
at End of Year
Present Value
Factor at 10%
Present 
Value
1
$100  
×
0.909
=
$  90.90
2
100
×
0.826
=
    82.60
3
  100  
×
0.751
=
    75.10
Total receipts
$300  
Total present value
=
$248.60
The general formula used to derive the present value of an annuity is
​A​ n​ = R​[​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + i​)​ ​ + ​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + i​)​ 2​ ​ + . . . +​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + i​)​ n​ ​]​
where
​
​A​ n ​
​ 
=
​ 
Present value of an annuity of n years
​ 
 
 
 
R​  =​ Periodic receipts​ 
 
n 
​ 
=
​ 
Length of the annuity in years
 
​
Applying the formula to the preceding example gives
​
​A​ n​
​ 
= $100​[​ ​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + 0.10​)​ ​ + ​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + 0.10​)​ 2​ ​ + ​ 
1 
_ 
​(​1 + 0.10​)​ 3​ ​]​
​ 
 
 
 
​
​ 
= $100​(​2.487​)​ = $248.70
 
​
In Appendix I, Table I.4 contains present values of an annuity for varying maturities. The 
present value factor for an annuity of $1 for three years at 10 percent (from Table I.4) is 2.487. 
Given that our sum is $100 rather than $1, we multiply this factor by $100 to arrive at $248.70.
When the stream of future receipts is uneven, the present value of each annual receipt must 
be calculated. The present values of the receipts for all years are then summed to arrive at total 
present value. This process can sometimes be tedious, but it is unavoidable.

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
729
D i s c ou nt e d  C a s h  Fl o w  The term discounted cash flow refers to the total stream of 
payments that an asset will generate in the future discounted to the present time. This is simply 
present value analysis that includes all flows: single payments, annuities, and all others.
Methods of Ranking Investments
N e t  Pr es e n t  V a l u e  The net present value method is commonly used in business. 
With this method, decisions are based on the amount by which the present value of a projected 
income stream exceeds the cost of an investment.
A firm is considering two alternative investments. The first costs $30,000 and the second, 
$50,000. The expected yearly cash income streams are shown in the following table.
Cash Inflow
Year
Alternative A
Alternative B
1
$10,000  
$15,000  
2
10,000
15,000
3
10,000
15,000
4
10,000
15,000
5
10,000
15,000
To choose between Alternatives A and B, find which has the higher net present value. 
Assume an 8 percent cost of capital.
Alternative A
Alternative B
3.993 (PV factor)
    × $10,000
= $39,930
3.993 (PV factor)
    × $15,000
= $59,895
Less cost of investment =   30,000
Less cost of investment =   50,000
Net present value
= $  9,930
Net present value
= $  9,895
Investment A is the better alternative. Its net present value exceeds that of Investment B by 
$35 ($9,930 – $9,895 = $35).
P a y b ac k  P e r i o d  The payback method ranks investments according to the time required 
for each investment to return earnings equal to the cost of the investment. The rationale is that 
the sooner the investment capital can be recovered, the sooner it can be reinvested in new 
revenue-producing projects. Thus, supposedly, a firm will be able to get the most benefit from 
its available investment funds.
Consider two alternatives requiring a $1,000 investment each. The first will earn $200 per 
year for six years; the second will earn $300 per year for the first three years and $100 per year 
for the next three years.
If the first alternative is selected, the initial investment of $1,000 will be recovered at the 
end of the fifth year. The income produced by the second alternative will total $1,000 after 
only four years. The second alternative will permit reinvestment of the full $1,000 in new 
revenue-producing projects one year sooner than the first.
Though the payback method is declining in popularity as the sole measure in investment 
decisions, it is still frequently used in conjunction with other methods to indicate the time 
commitment of funds. The major problems with payback are that it does not consider income 
beyond the payback period and it ignores the time value of money. A method that ignores the 
time value of money must be considered questionable.
I n t er nal  R a t e  o f  R e t u r n   The internal rate of return may be defined as the interest 
rate that equates the present value of an income stream with the cost of an investment. There 
is no procedure or formula that may be used directly to compute the internal rate of return—it 
must be found by interpolation or iterative calculation.

730	
	
APPENDIX C
Suppose we wish to find the internal rate of return for an investment costing $12,000 that will 
yield a cash inflow of $4,000 per year for four years. We see that the present value factor sought is
​ $12, 000 
_______ 
$4, 000 ​ = 3.000​
and we seek the interest rate that will provide this factor over a four-year period. The interest rate 
must lie between 12 and 14 percent because 3.000 lies between 3.037 and 2.914 (in the fourth row 
of Appendix I, Table I.4). Linear interpolation between these values, according to the equation
​
I
​ 
= 12 + ​(​14 − 12​)​ ​(​3.037 − 3.000​)​ 
 
____________ 
 
​(​3.037 − 2.914​)​ ​
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
= 12 + 0.602 = 12.602%
 
​
gives a good approximation to the actual internal rate of return.
When the income stream is discounted at 12.6 percent, the resulting present value closely 
approximates the cost of investment. Thus, the internal rate of return for this investment is 
12.6 percent. The cost of capital can be compared with the internal rate of return to determine 
the net rate of return on the investment. If, in this example, the cost of capital were 8 percent, 
the net rate of return on the investment would be 4.6 percent.
The net present value and internal rate of return methods involve procedures that are essen­
tially the same. They differ in that the net present value method enables investment alterna­
tives to be compared in terms of the dollar value in excess of cost, whereas the internal rate 
of return method permits comparison of rates of return on alternative investments. Moreover, 
the internal rate of return method occasionally encounters problems in calculation, as multiple 
rates frequently appear in the computation.
R a n k i n g  I n ve s t m e n t s  w i t h  U n e v e n  L i v e s  When proposed investments 
have the same life expectancy, comparison among them using the preceding methods will 
give a reasonable picture of their relative value. When lives are unequal, however, there is the 
question of how to relate the two different time periods. Should replacements be considered 
the same as the original? Should productivity for the shorter-term unit that will be replaced 
earlier be considered higher? How should the cost of future units be estimated?
No estimate dealing with investments unforeseen at the time of decision can be expected to 
reflect a high degree of accuracy. Still, the problem must be dealt with, and some assumptions 
must be made in order to determine a ranking.
Sample Problems: Investment Decisions
EXAMPLE C.1: An Expansion Decision
William J. Wilson Ceramic Products, Inc., leases plant facilities in which firebrick is manufac­
tured. Because of rising demand, Wilson could increase sales by investing in new equipment 
to expand output. The selling price of $10 per brick will remain unchanged if output and sales 
increase. Based on engineering and cost estimates, the accounting department provides manage­
ment with the following cost estimates based on an annual increased output of 100,000 bricks.
Cost of new equipment having an expected life of five years
$500,000
Equipment installation cost
20,000
Expected salvage value
0
New operation’s share of annual lease expense
40,000
Annual increase in utility expenses
40,000
Annual increase in labor costs
160,000
Annual additional cost for raw materials
400,000
The sum-of-the-years’-digits method of depreciation will be used, and taxes are paid at 
a rate of 40 percent. Wilson’s policy is not to invest capital in projects earning less than a 
20 percent rate of return. Should the proposed expansion be undertaken?

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
731
SOLUTION
Compute the cost of investment:
Acquisition cost of equipment
$500,000
Equipment installation costs
    20,000
       Total cost of investment
$520,000
Determine yearly cash flows throughout the life of the investment.
The lease expense is a sunk cost. It will be incurred whether or not the investment is 
made and is therefore irrelevant to the decision and should be disregarded. Annual production 
expenses to be considered are utility, labor, and raw materials. These total $600,000 per year.
Annual sales revenue is $10 × 100,000 units of output, which totals $1,000,000. Yearly 
income before depreciation and taxes is thus $1,000,000 gross revenue, less $600,000 
expenses, or $400,000.
Next, determine the depreciation charges to be deducted from the $500,000 income each 
year using the SYD method (sum-of-years’-digits = 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 = 15).
Year
Proportion of $500,000 
to Be Depreciated
Depreciation 
Charge
1
5/15 × 500,000
=
$166,667  
2
4/15 × 500,000
=
133,333
3
3/15 × 500,000
=
100,000
4
2/15 × 500,000
=
  66,667
5
1/15 × 500,000
=
    33,333  
Accumulated depreciation
$500,000 
Find each year’s cash flow when taxes are 40 percent. Cash flow for only the first year is 
illustrated:
Earnings before depreciation and taxes
$400,000
      Deduct: Taxes at 40% (40% × 400,000)
$160,000
      Tax benefit of depreciation expense (0.4 × 166,667)
    66,667
     93,333
      Cash flow (first year)
$306,667
Determine the present value of the cash flow. Because Wilson demands at least a 20 ­percent 
rate of return on investments, multiply the cash flows by the 20 percent present value factor 
for each year. The factor for each respective year must be used because the cash flows are not 
an annuity.
Year
Present Value Factor
Cash Flow
Present Value
1
0.833
×
$306,667  
=
$255,454  
2
0.694
×
293,333
=
203,573
3
0.579
×
280,000
=
162,120
4
0.482
×
266,667
=
128,533
5
0.402
×
253,334
=
  101,840  
Total present value of cash flows (discounted at 20%)
=
$851,520 
Now find whether net present value is positive or negative:
Total present value of cash flows
$851,520
Total cost of investment
  520,000
Net present value
$331,520
Net present value is positive when returns are discounted at 20 percent. Wilson will earn 
an amount in excess of 20 percent on the investment. The proposed expansion should be 
undertaken.

732	
	
APPENDIX C
EXAMPLE C.2: A Replacement Decision
For five years, Bennie’s Brewery has been using a machine that attaches labels to bottles. The 
machine was purchased for $4,000 and is being depreciated over 10 years to a $0 salvage value 
using straight-line depreciation. The machine can be sold now for $2,000. Bennie can buy a new 
labeling machine for $6,000 that will have a useful life of five years and cut labor costs by $1,200 
annually. The old machine will require a major overhaul in the next few months at an estimated cost 
of $300. If purchased, the new machine will be depreciated over five years to a $500 salvage value 
using the straight-line method. The company will invest in any project earning more than the 12 per­
cent cost of capital. The tax rate is 40 percent. Should Bennie’s Brewery invest in the new machine?
SOLUTION
Determine the cost of investment:
Price of the new machine
$6,000
   Less: Sale of old machine
$2,000
          Avoidable overhaul costs
     300    
  2,300  
Effective cost of investment
$3,700
Determine the increase in cash flow resulting from investment in the new machine:
Yearly cost savings = $1,200
Differential depreciation
    Annual depreciation on old machine:
​​ Cost  −  Salvage 
 
_____________ 
 
Expected life  ​​ =​ ​ $4, 000  −  $0 
 
___________ 
10 
​​ =​ $400​
Annual depreciation on new machine:
​​ Cost  −  Salvage 
 
_____________ 
 
Expected life  ​​ =​ ​ $6, 000  −  $500 
 
_____________ 
5 
​​ =​ $1,100​
Differential depreciation = $1,100 – $400 = $700
Yearly net increase in cash flow into the firm:
Cost savings	
	
$1,200
  Deduct: Taxes at 40%	
$480	
  Add: Advantage of increase in 
depreciation (0.4 × $700) 	
280	
   200
Yearly increase in cash flow	
  	
  $1,000
  The five-year cash flow of $1,000 per year is an annuity.
  Discounted at 12 percent, the cost of capital, the present value is 
  3.605 × $1,000 = $3,605.
  The present value of the new machine, if sold at its salvage value of $500 at the end of the 
  fifth year, is 
  0.567 × $500 = $284
  Total present value of the expected cash flows is 
  $3,605 + $284 = $3,889
Determine whether net present value is positive:
Total present value
$3,889
Cost of investment
  3,700  
Net present value
$   189   
Bennie’s Brewery should make the purchase because the investment will return slightly 
more than the cost of capital.
Note: The importance of depreciation has been shown in this example. The present value 
of the yearly cash flow resulting from operations is
​
​(​Cost saving − Taxes) × ​(​Present value factor​)​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
​    ​(​$1, 200 − $480​)​      ×      ​(​3.605​)​
​ 
= $2, 596
​

	
	
	
APPENDIX C	
	
733
Concept Connections
LO C–1: Evaluate capital investment decisions using the various types of cost, risk and expected 
value, and depreciation.
Summary
	∙	 Financial analysis is essential to OSCM because many 
management decisions relate to major capital invest­
ments. In this appendix, we discuss basic concepts that 
are most useful in OSCM. 
	∙	 Understanding how costs are categorized and the 
most common techniques for depreciating assets 
are reviewed. We use activity-based costing to 
allocate common and overhead costs relative to OSCM 
activities.
	∙	 A medium- to long-term time horizon is used when 
choosing among alternative investments. When this is 
the case, consideration of the time value of money by 
present value analysis is useful. These decisions are 
modeled using spreadsheets.
This figure is $1,104 less than the $3,700 cost of the investment. Only a very large deprecia­
tion advantage makes this investment worthwhile. The total present value of the advantage is 
$1,009:
​
​(​Tax rate × Differential depreciation​)​ × (PV factor​)​
​ 
​
​ 
 
 
 
 
                     (0.4 × $700 )                  ×     (3.605 )
​ 
= $1, 009
​
EXAMPLE C.3: A Make-or-Buy Decision
Triple X Company manufactures and sells refrigerators. It makes some of the parts for the 
refrigerators and purchases others. The engineering department believes it might be possible 
to cut costs by manufacturing one of the parts currently being purchased for $8.25 each. The 
firm uses 100,000 of these parts each year. The accounting department compiles the follow­
ing list of costs based on engineering estimates:
Fixed costs will increase by $50,000.
Labor costs will increase by $125,000.
Factory overhead, currently running $500,000 per year, may be expected to increase 12 
percent.
Raw materials used to make the part will cost $600,000.
Given the preceding estimates, should Triple X make the part or continue to buy it?
SOLUTION
Find the total cost incurred if the part were manufactured:
Additional fixed costs
$  50,000
Additional labor costs
  125,000
Raw materials cost
  600,000
Additional overhead costs = 0.12 × $500,000
    60,000
    Total cost to manufacture
$835,000  
Find the cost per unit to manufacture:
​ $835, 000 
________ 
100, 000 ​ = $8.35 per unit​
Triple X should continue to buy the part. Manufacturing costs exceed the present cost to 
purchase by $0.10 per unit.

734
A N S W E R S  T O  S E L E C T E D  O B J E C T I V E  Q U E S T I O N S
A PPE NDIX D
Chapter 1
	  1.	 Strategy, Processes, and Analytics
	  9.	 a. Receivable turnover ratio = 5.453, b. inventory 
turnover ratio = 4.383, c. asset turnover ratio = 2.306
Chapter 2
	  1.	 Triple bottom line
	17.	 Productivity (hours), Deluxe = 0.20, Limited = 0.20; 
Productivity (dollars), Deluxe = 133.33, Limited = 
135.71
Chapter 3
	  1.	 Testing and refinement
	  9.	 Time to market, productivity, and quality
Chapter 4
	  7.	 b. A-C-F-G-I and A-D-F-G-I, 18 weeks; c. C: one 
week, D: one week, G: one week; d. Two paths: A-C-
F-G-I and A-D-F-G-I, 16 weeks.
	12.	 a. A-E-G-C-D; b. 26 weeks; c. No difference in com­
pletion date.
Chapter 5
	  1.	 Capacity utilization rate = 89.1%
	  8.	 NPV – Small factory = $4.8 million; NPV – Large 
factory = $2.6 million. Therefore, build small factory.
	10.	 Capacity utilization rate = 75%. They are in the criti­
cal zone on these nights.
Chapter 6
	  5.	 4,710 hours
	  7.	 Learning rate – Labor = 80%, Learning rate – Parts = 
90%; Labor = 11,556 hours, Parts = $330,876
Chapter 7
	  9.	 Break-even = 7,500 units
	16.	 80 units/hour
Chapter 8
	  5.	 b. 120 seconds/unit; c. station 1 (AD), station 2 (BC), 
station 3 (EF), station 4 (GH); d. 87.5%
	10.	 a. 33.6 seconds/unit; b. 3.51 → 4 workstations; d. sta­
tion 1 (AB), station 2 (DF), station 3 (C), station 4 
(EF), station 5 (H); e. 70.2%; f. Reduce cycle time to 
32 seconds and work 6.67 minutes overtime; g. 1.89 
hours overtime, may be better to rebalance.
Chapter 9
	  1.	 Service package
	  4.	 Face-to-face tight specs
Chapter 10
	  6.	 a. 33.33%, b. 1/3 hour or 20 minutes, c. 1.33 students, 
d. 44.44%
	21.	 a. .2333 minutes or 14 seconds; b. 2.083 cars in 
queue, 2.92 cars in the system
Chapter 11
	10.	 Traditional method = 40 minutes, alternative method 
= 51 minutes. Traditional method is best.
	12.	 a. The market can only be served at 3 gal/hour and 
in 50 hours the bathtub will overflow; b. The average 
amount being serviced is 2.5 gal/hour, so that is the 
output rate.
Chapter 12
	  6.	 DPMO = 15,333; this is not very good.
	11.	 Opportunity flow diagram
Chapter 13
	  1.	 a. Cost when not inspecting = $20/hr, cost to inspect 
= $9/hr, therefore inspect; b. $0.18 each; c. $0.22 per 
unit.
	  6.	 a. .333, b. No, the machine is not capable of high 
enough quality.
	  9.	 UCL = 1014.965, LCL = 983.235 for X-bar chart; 
UCL = 49.552, LCL = 0.00 for the R-chart.
Chapter 14
	10.	 Five kanban card sets
	14.	 Five kanban card sets
Chapter 15
	  9.	 Total cost $1,056.770; b. Should consider closing the 
Philadelphia plant because we are using very little of 
the capacity from that plant.
	10.	 Cx = 373.8, Cy = 356.9

Chapter 16
	11.	 Buy NPV = $143,226.27, make NPV = $84,442.11, 
we should accept the bid.
	16.	 Inventory turn = 148.6, weeks of supply = .350 (1/3 
of a week’s supply on hand)
Chapter 17
	  5.	 Manufacturing and logistics
	11.	 9.61 days
Chapter 18
	  3.	 3rd most recent = 1,000, 2nd most recent = 1,175, 
most recent = 975
	  6.	 a. February 84, March 86, April 90, May 88, June 84; 
b. MAD = 15
	21.	 a. MAD = 90, TS = –1.67; b. TS acceptable for now, 
but is trending downward.
Chapter 19
	  7.	 Total cost = $416,600
	10.	 Total cost = $413,750
Chapter 20
	  4.	 Purchase 268 boxes of lettuce.
	14.	 q = 713
	17.	 a. Q = 1,225, R = 824; b. q = 390 – I
Chapter 21
	11.	 a.
	21.	 Least total cost order 180 to cover periods 4 through 
8. Least unit cost is tied for ordering 180 for periods 4 
through 8, or order 220 units to cover 4 through 9.
Chapter 22
	  5.	 Run the jobs in the following order: 103, 105, 101, 
102, 104. Mean flow time = 16.2 days.
	  7.	 Select car C first, then A and B tie for second.
	  9.	 Critical ratio schedule: 5, 3, 2, 4, 1; Earliest due date 
schedule: 2, 5, 3, 4, 1; Shortest processing time: 2, 1, 
4, 3, 5
Chapter 23
	  6.	 Case I:	
X used = 933.3 hours, Y used 
= 700 hours
Case II:	
X used = 933.3 hours, Y used 
= 700 hours
Case III:	
X used = 933.3 hours, Y used 
= 700 hours
Case IV:	
X used = 933.3 hours, Y used 
= 700 hours
With no restrictions.
Case I:	
No problem
Case II:	
Excess WIP
Case III:	
Excess spare parts
Case IV:	
Excess finished goods
	17.	 a. Machine B is the constraint; b. All 100 of M, as 
many N as possible; c. $600 (100 M and 30 N)
Chapter 24
	  2.	 Staff flows
	  6.	 Clinical dashboard
Chapter 25
	  7.	 Balanced scorecard
	11.	 Codification of reengineering
Appendix A
	  2.	 Optimal combination is B = 10, A = 15, and Z = 70.
	  4.	
​
a.
​ 
600A + 900B  <  = 3, 600
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
600A + 900B  >  = 1, 800
​ 
 
 
​​ 
200A + 700B  <  = 1, 400​ 
 
 
​
​ 
400A + 100B  >  = 400
​ 
 
 
​
​ 
A  <  = 2
​ 
​
​ 
Minimize .75A + .15B
 
​
​
b.
​ 
A = 0.54
​ 
​​ 
B  =  1.85​ 
​
​ 
Obj = 0.68
​
Z
0
Level
1
2
3
A(2)
C(3)
D(4)
E(2)
B(4)
	
	
	
APPENDIX D	
	
735

736
A PPE NDIX E
P R E S E N T  VA L U E  TA B L E
Year
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
  1
.862
.847
.833
.806
.781
.758
.735
.714
.667
.625
.588
.556
.526
  2
.743
.718
.694
.650
.610
.574
.541
.510
.444
.391
.346
.309
.277
  3
.641
.609
.579
.524
.477
.435
.398
.364
.296
.244
.204
.171
.146
  4
.552
.516
.482
.423
.373
.329
.292
.260
.198
.153
.120
.095
.077
  5
.476
.437
.402
.341
.291
.250
.215
.186
.132
.095
.070
.053
.040
  6
.410
.370
.335
.275
.227
.189
.158
.133
.088
.060
.041
.029
.021
  7
.354
.314
.279
.222
.178
.143
.116
.095
.059
.037
.024
.016
.011
  8
.305
.266
.233
.179
.139
.108
.085
.068
.039
.023
.014
.009
.006
  9
.263
.226
.194
.144
.108
.082
.063
.048
.026
.015
.008
.005
.003
10
.227
.191
.162
.116
.085
.062
.046
.035
.017
.009
.005
.003
.002
11
.195
.162
.135
.094
.066
.047
.034
.025
.012
.006
.003
.002
.001
12
.168
.137
.112
.076
.052
.036
.025
.018
.008
.004
.002
.001
.001
13
.145
.116
.093
.061
.040
.027
.018
.013
.005
.002
.001
.001
.000
14
.125
.099
.078
.049
.032
.021
.014
.009
.003
.001
.001
.000
.000
15
.108
.084
.065
.040
.025
.016
.010
.006
.002
.001
.000
.000
.000
16
.093
.071
.054
.032
.019
.012
.007
.005
.002
.001
.000
.000
17
.080
.060
.045
.026
.015
.009
.005
.003
.001
.000
.000
18
.069
.051
.038
.021
.012
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
19
.060
.043
.031
.017
.009
.005
.003
.002
.000
.000
20
.051
.037
.026
.014
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
25
.024
.016
.010
.005
.002
.001
.000
.000
30
.012
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
Using Microsoft Excel, these are calculated with the equation: (1 + interest)–years.
Year
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
12%
14%
15%
  1
.990
.980
.971
.962
.952
.943
.935
.926
.917
.909
.893
.877
.870
  2
.980
.961
.943
.925
.907
.890
.873
.857
.842
.826
.797
.769
.756
  3
.971
.942
.915
.889
.864
.840
.816
.794
.772
.751
.712
.675
.658
  4
.961
.924
.889
.855
.823
.792
.763
.735
.708
.683
.636
.592
.572
  5
.951
.906
.863
.822
.784
.747
.713
.681
.650
.621
.567
.519
.497
  6
.942
.888
.838
.790
.746
.705
.666
.630
.596
.564
.507
.456
.432
  7
.933
.871
.813
.760
.711
.665
.623
.583
.547
.513
.452
.400
.376
  8
.923
.853
.789
.731
.677
.627
.582
.540
.502
.467
.404
.351
.327
  9
.914
.837
.766
.703
.645
.592
.544
.500
.460
.424
.361
.308
.284
10
.905
.820
.744
.676
.614
.558
.508
.463
.422
.386
.322
.270
.247
11
.896
.804
.722
.650
.585
.527
.475
.429
.388
.350
.287
.237
.215
12
.887
.788
.701
.625
.557
.497
.444
.397
.356
.319
.257
.208
.187
13
.879
.773
.681
.601
.530
.469
.415
.368
.326
.290
.229
.182
.163
14
.870
.758
.661
.577
.505
.442
.388
.340
.299
.263
.205
.160
.141
15
.861
.743
.642
.555
.481
.417
.362
.315
.275
.239
.183
.140
.123
16
.853
.728
.623
.534
.458
.394
.339
.292
.252
.218
.163
.123
.107
17
.844
.714
.605
.513
.436
.371
.317
.270
.231
.198
.146
.108
.093
18
.836
.700
.587
.494
.416
.350
.296
.250
.212
.180
.130
.095
.081
19
.828
.686
.570
.475
.396
.331
.276
.232
.194
.164
.116
.083
.070
20
.820
.673
.554
.456
.377
.312
.258
.215
.178
.149
.104
.073
.061
25
.780
.610
.478
.375
.295
.233
.184
.146
.116
.092
.059
.038
.030
30
.742
.552
.412
.308
.231
.174
.131
.099
.075
.057
.033
.020
.015
Costs of Four Production Plans
exhibit E.1

737
A PPENDIX F
X
e–X 
(VALUE)
0.00
1.00000
0.01
.99005
0.02
.98020
0.03
.97045
0.04
.96079
0.05
.95123
0.06
.94176
0.07
.93239
0.08
.92312
0.09
.91393
0.10
.90484
0.11
.89583
0.12
.88692
0.13
.87809
0.14
.86936
0.15
.86071
0.16
.87514
0.17
.84366
0.18
.83527
0.19
.82696
0.20
.81873
0.21
.81058
0.22
.80252
0.23
.79453
0.24
.78663
0.25
.77880
0.26
.77105
0.27
.76338
0.28
.75578
0.29
.74826
0.30
.74082
0.31
.73345
0.32
.72615
0.33
.71892
0.34
.71177
0.35
.70469
0.36
.69768
0.37
.69073
0.38
.68386
0.39
.67706
0.40
.67032
0.41
.66365
0.42
.65705
0.43
.65051
0.44
.64404
0.45
.63763
0.46
.63128
0.47
.62500
0.48
.61878
0.49
.61263
0.50
.60653
X
e–X 
(VALUE)
0.51
.60050
0.52
.59452
0.53
.58860
0.54
.58275
0.55
.57695
0.56
.57121
0.57
.56553
0.58
.55990
0.59
.55433
0.60
.54881
0.61
.54335
0.62
.53794
0.63
.53259
0.64
.52729
0.65
.52205
0.66
.51685
0.67
.51171
0.68
.50662
0.69
.50158
0.70
.49659
0.71
.49164
0.72
.48675
0.73
.48191
0.74
.47711
0.75
.47237
0.76
.46767
0.77
.46301
0.78
.45841
0.79
.45384
0.80
.44933
0.81
.44486
0.82
.44043
0.83
.43605
0.84
.43171
0.85
.42741
0.86
.42316
0.87
.41895
0.88
.41478
0.89
.41066
0.90
.40657
0.91
.40252
0.92
.39852
0.93
.39455
0.94
.39063
0.95
.38674
0.96
.38289
0.97
.37908
0.98
.37531
0.99
.37158
1.00
.36788
X
e–X 
(VALUE)
1.01
.36422
1.02
.36060
1.03
.35701
1.04
.35345
1.05
.34994
1.06
.34646
1.07
.34301
1.08
.33960
1.09
.33622
1.10
.33287
1.11
.32956
1.12
.32628
1.13
.32303
1.14
.31982
1.15
.31664
1.16
.31349
1.17
.31037
1.18
.30728
1.19
.30422
1.20
.30119
1.21
.29820
1.22
.29523
1.23
.29229
1.24
.28938
1.25
.28650
1.26
.28365
1.27
.28083
1.28
.27804
1.29
.27527
1.30
.27253
1.31
.26982
1.32
.26714
1.33
.26448
1.34
.26185
1.35
.25924
1.36
.25666
1.37
.25411
1.38
.25158
1.39
.24908
1.40
.24660
1.41
.24414
1.42
.24171
1.43
.23931
1.44
.23693
1.45
.23457
1.46
.23224
1.47
.22993
1.48
.22764
1.49
.22537
1.50
.22313
X
e–X 
(VALUE)
1.51
.22091
1.52
.21871
1.53
.21654
1.54
.21438
1.55
.21225
1.56
.21014
1.57
.20805
1.58
.20598
1.59
.20393
1.60
.20190
1.61
.19989
1.62
.19790
1.63
.19593
1.64
.19398
1.65
.19205
1.66
.19014
1.67
.18825
1.68
.18637
1.69
.18452
1.70
.18268
1.71
.18087
1.72
.17907
1.73
.17728
1.74
.17552
1.75
.17377
1.76
.17204
1.77
.17033
1.78
.16864
1.79
.16696
1.80
.16530
1.81
.16365
1.82
.16203
1.83
.16041
1.84
.15882
1.85
.15724
1.86
.15567
1.87
.15412
1.88
.15259
1.89
.15107
1.90
.14957
1.91
.14808
1.92
.14661
1.93
.14515
1.94
.14370
1.95
.14227
1.96
.14086
1.97
.13946
1.98
.13807
1.99
.13670
2.00
.13534
NEGATIVE EXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTION: VALUES OF E –X
1.0
1.0 
.5
e –x
.5
1.5
x
Using Microsoft Excel, these values are calculated with the equation: 1 − EXPONDIST(x, 1, TRUE).

738
A PPE NDIX G
A R E A S  O F  T H E  C U M U L AT I V E  S TA N D A R D  N O R M A L 
D I S T R I B U T I O N
z
An entry in the table is the proportion under the curve cumulated from the negative tail.
z
G(z)
−4.00
0.00003
−3.95
0.00004
−3.90
0.00005
−3.85
0.00006
−3.80
0.00007
−3.75
0.00009
−3.70
0.00011
−3.65
0.00013
−3.60
0.00016
−3.55
0.00019
−3.50
0.00023
−3.45
0.00028
−3.40
0.00034
−3.35
0.00040
−3.30
0.00048
−3.25
0.00058
−3.20
0.00069
−3.15
0.00082
−3.10
0.00097
−3.05
0.00114
−3.00
0.00135
−2.95
0.00159
−2.90
0.00187
−2.85
0.00219
−2.80
0.00256
−2.75
0.00298
−2.70
0.00347
−2.65
0.00402
−2.60
0.00466
−2.55
0.00539
−2.50
0.00621
−2.45
0.00714
−2.40
0.00820
−2.35
0.00939
−2.30
0.01072
−2.25
0.01222
−2.20
0.01390
−2.15
0.01578
−2.10
0.01786
−2.05
0.02018
−2.00
0.02275
z
G(z)
−1.95
0.02559
−1.90
0.02872
−1.85
0.03216
−1.80
0.03593
−1.75
0.04006
−1.70
0.04457
−1.65
0.04947
−1.60
0.05480
−1.55
0.06057
−1.50
0.06681
−1.45
0.07353
−1.40
0.08076
−1.35
0.08851
−1.30
0.09680
−1.25
0.10565
−1.20
0.11507
−1.15
0.12507
−1.10
0.13567
−1.05
0.14686
−1.00
0.15866
−0.95
0.17106
−0.90
0.18406
−0.85
0.19766
−0.80
0.21186
−0.75
0.22663
−0.70
0.24196
−0.65
0.25785
−0.60
0.27425
−0.55
0.29116
−0.50
0.30854
−0.45
0.32636
−0.40
0.34458
−0.35
0.36317
−0.30
0.38209
−0.25
0.40129
−0.20
0.42074
−0.15
0.44038
−0.10
0.46017
−0.05
0.48006
0.00
0.50000
0.05
0.51994
z
G(z)
0.10
0.53983
0.15
0.55962
0.20
0.57926
0.25
0.59871
0.30
0.61791
0.35
0.63683
0.40
0.65542
0.45
0.67364
0.50
0.69146
0.55
0.70884
0.60
0.72575
0.65
0.74215
0.70
0.75804
0.75
0.77337
0.80
0.78814
0.85
0.80234
0.90
0.81594
0.95
0.82894
1.00
0.84134
1.05
0.85314
1.10
0.86433
1.15
0.87493
1.20
0.88493
1.25
0.89435
1.30
0.90320
1.35
0.91149
1.40
0.91924
1.45
0.92647
1.50
0.93319
1.55
0.93943
1.60
0.94520
1.65
0.95053
1.70
0.95543
1.75
0.95994
1.80
0.96407
1.85
0.96784
1.90
0.97128
1.95
0.97441
2.00
0.97725
2.05
0.97982
2.10
0.98214
z
G(z)
2.15
0.98422
2.20
0.98610
2.25
0.98778
2.30
0.98928
2.35
0.99061
2.40
0.99180
2.45
0.99286
2.50
0.99379
2.55
0.99461
2.60
0.99534
2.65
0.99598
2.70
0.99653
2.75
0.99702
2.80
0.99744
2.85
0.99781
2.90
0.99813
2.95
0.99841
3.00
0.99865
3.05
0.99886
3.10
0.99903
3.15
0.99918
3.20
0.99931
3.25
0.99942
3.30
0.99952
3.35
0.99960
3.40
0.99966
3.45
0.99972
3.50
0.99977
3.55
0.99981
3.60
0.99984
3.65
0.99987
3.70
0.99989
3.75
0.99991
3.80
0.99993
3.85
0.99994
3.90
0.99995
3.95
0.99996
4.00
0.99997
Using Microsoft Excel, these probabilities are generated with the NORMSDIST(z) function.

739
A PPENDIX H
U N I F O R M LY  D I S T R I B U T E D  R A N D O M  D I G I T S
56970
10799
52098
04184
54967
72938
50834
23777
08392
83125
85077
60490
44369
66130
72936
69848
59973
08144
55503
21383
02464
26141
68779
66388
75242
82690
74099
47019
06683
33203
29603
54553
25971
69573
83854
24715
84828
61152
79526
29554
84580
37859
28504
61980
34997
08021
31331
79227
05748
51276
57143
31926
00915
45821
36458
28285
30424
98420
72925
40729
22337
48293
86847
05752
96045
36847
87729
81679
59126
59437
33225
31280
26768
02513
58454
56958
20575
76746
40878
06846
32828
42613
72456
43030
58085
06766
60227
96414
32671
45587
95457
12176
65482
25596
02678
54592
63607
82096
21913
95276
67524
63564
95958
39750
64379
46059
51666
10433
66954
53574
64776
92345
95110
59448
77249
54044
67942
17457
44151
14113
02462
02798
54977
48340
66738
60184
03704
23322
83214
59337
01695
60666
97410
55064
17427
21538
16997
33210
60337
27976
70661
08250
69509
60264
57178
16730
08310
70348
11317
71623
55510
64750
87759
31048
40058
94953
55866
96283
40620
52087
80817
74533
69799
83300
16498
80733
96422
58078
99643
39847
96884
90595
65017
59231
17772
67831
33317
00520
90401
41700
33570
34761
08039
78784
09977
29398
93896
78227
90110
15340
82760
57477
13898
48431
72936
78160
87240
52710
64079
07733
36512
56186
99098
48850
72527
08486
10951
63491
84886
67118
62063
74958
20946
28147
39338
32109
92003
76568
41034
28260
79708
00770
88643
21188
01850
52360
46658
66511
04172
73085
11795
52594
13287
82531
74622
12142
68355
65635
21828
39539
18988
53609
04001
04157
50070
61343
64315
70836
82857
35335
87900
36194
86003
60070
66241
32836
27573
11479
94114
81641
00496
41208
80187
20351
09630
84668
42486
71303
19512
50277
06433
80674
24520
18222
10610
05794
37515
48619
62866
39298
47829
72648
37414
75755
04717
29899
78817
03509
89884
59651
67533
68123
17730
95862
08034
19473
63971
61512
32155
51906
61662
64430
16688
37275
51262
11569
99653
47635
12506
88535
36553
23757
34209
55803
96275
95913
11085
13772
76638
48423
25018
99041
77529
81360
55804
44004
13122
44115
01601
50541
00147
77685
58788
35334
82410
91601
40617
72876
33967
73830
15405
96554
57729
88646
76487
11622
96297
24160
09903
14047
22917
86648
89317
63677
70119
94739
25875
38829
68377
43918
30574
06039
07967
32422
76791
30725
53711
93385
13421
81307
13114
83580
79974
45929
85113
72268
09858
52104
02410
96385
79067
54939
21410
86980
91772
93307
34116
18969
87444
52233
62319
08598
09066
95288
04794
01534
87863
80514
66860
62297
80198
19347
73234
86265
49096
08397
10538
15438
62311
72844
60203
46412
65943
79232
28520
45247
58729
10854
99058
18260
38765
90038
94209
44285
09452
15867
70418
57012
72122
36634
97283
95943
86299
22510
33571
23309
57040
29285
67870
21913
72958
84842
05748
90894
61658
15001
94005
36308
41161
37341

740
A PPE NDIX I
I N T E R E S T  TA B L E S
Year
10%
12%
14%
15%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
1
1.100
1.120
1.140
1.150
1.160
1.180
1.200
1.240
1.280
2
1.210
1.254
1.300
1.322
1.346
1.392
1.440
1.538
1.638
3
1.331
1.405
1.482
1.521
1.561
1.643
1.728
1.907
2.067
4
1.464
1.574
1.689
1.749
1.811
1.939
2.074
2.364
2.684
5
1.611
1.762
1.925
2.011
2.100
2.288
2.488
2.932
3.436
6
1.772
1.974
2.195
2.313
2.436
2.700
2.986
3.635
4.398
7
1.949
2.211
2.502
2.660
2.826
3.185
3.583
4.508
5.629
8
2.144
2.476
2.853
3.059
3.278
3.759
4.300
5.590
7.206
9
2.358
2.773
3.252
3.518
3.803
4.435
5.160
6.931
9.223
10
2.594
3.106
3.707
4.046
4.411
5.234
6.192
8.594
11.806
11
2.853
3.479
4.226
4.652
5.117
6.176
7.430
10.657
15.112
12
3.138
3.896
4.818
5.350
5.936
7.288
8.916
13.216
19.343
13
3.452
4.363
5.492
6.153
6.886
8.599
10.699
16.386
24.759
14
3.797
4.887
6.261
7.076
7.988
10.147
12.839
20.319
31.691
15
4.177
5.474
7.138
8.137
9.266
11.974
15.407
25.196
40.565
16
4.595
6.130
8.137
9.358
10.748
14.129
18.488
31.243
51.923
17
5.054
6.866
9.276
10.761
12.468
16.672
22.186
38.741
66.461
18
5.560
7.690
10.575
12.375
14.463
19.673
26.623
48.039
85.071
19
6.116
8.613
12.056
14.232
16.777
23.214
31.948
59.568
108.89  
20
6.728
9.646
13.743
16.367
19.461
27.393
38.338
73.864
139.38  
25
10.835
17.000
26.462
32.919
40.874
62.669
95.396
216.542
478.90  
30
17.449
29.960
50.950
66.212
85.850
143.371
237.376
634.820
1645.5    
Using Microsoft Excel, these are calculated with the equation: (1 + interest)years.
Compound Sum of $1
exhibit I.1
Year
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
1
1.010
1.020
1.030
1.040
1.050
1.060
1.070
1.080
1.090
2
1.020
1.040
1.061
1.082
1.102
1.124
1.145
1.166
1.188
3
1.030
1.061
1.093
1.125
1.158
1.191
1.225
1.260
1.295
4
1.041
1.082
1.126
1.170
1.216
1.262
1.311
1.360
1.412
5
1.051
1.104
1.159
1.217
1.276
1.338
1.403
1.469
1.539
6
1.062
1.126
1.194
1.265
1.340
1.419
1.501
1.587
1.677
7
1.072
1.149
1.230
1.316
1.407
1.504
1.606
1.714
1.828
8
1.083
1.172
1.267
1.369
1.477
1.594
1.718
1.851
1.993
9
1.094
1.195
1.305
1.423
1.551
1.689
1.838
1.999
2.172
10
1.105
1.219
1.344
1.480
1.629
1.791
1.967
2.159
2.367
11
1.116
1.243
1.384
1.539
1.710
1.898
2.105
2.332
2.580
12
1.127
1.268
1.426
1.601
1.796
2.012
2.252
2.518
2.813
13
1.138
1.294
1.469
1.665
1.886
2.133
2.410
2.720
3.066
14
1.149
1.319
1.513
1.732
1.980
2.261
2.579
2.937
3.342
15
1.161
1.346
1.558
1.801
2.079
2.397
2.759
3.172
3.642
16
1.173
1.373
1.605
1.873
2.183
2.540
2.952
3.426
3.970
17
1.184
1.400
1.653
1.948
2.292
2.693
3.159
3.700
4.328
18
1.196
1.428
1.702
2.026
2.407
2.854
3.380
3.996
4.717
19
1.208
1.457
1.754
2.107
2.527
3.026
3.617
4.316
5.142
20
1.220
1.486
1.806
2.191
2.653
3.207
3.870
4.661
5.604
25
1.282
1.641
2.094
2.666
3.386
4.292
5.427
6.848
8.623
30
1.348
1.811
2.427
3.243
4.322
5.743
7.612
10.063
13.268

	
	
	
APPENDIX I	
	
741
Using Microsoft Excel, these are calculated with the function: FV(interest, years, −1).
Year
9%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
24%
1
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
2
2.090
2.100
2.120
2.140
2.160
2.180
2.200
2.240
3
3.278
3.310
3.374
3.440
3.506
3.572
3.640
3.778
4
4.573
4.641
4.770
4.921
5.066
5.215
5.368
5.684
5
5.985
6.105
6.353
6.610
6.877
7.154
7.442
8.048
6
7.523
7.716
8.115
8.536
8.977
9.442
9.930
10.980
7
9.200
9.487
10.089
10.730
11.414
12.142
12.916
14.615
8
11.028
11.436
12.300
13.233
14.240
15.327
16.499
19.123
9
13.021
13.579
14.776
16.085
17.518
19.086
20.799
24.712
10
15.193
15.937
17.549
19.337
21.321
23.521
25.959
31.643
11
17.560
18.531
20.655
23.044
25.733
28.755
32.150
40.238
12
20.141
21.384
24.133
27.271
30.850
34.931
39.580
50.985
13
22.953
24.523
28.029
32.089
36.786
42.219
48.497
64.110
14
26.019
27.975
32.393
37.581
43.672
50.818
59.196
80.496
15
29.361
31.772
37.280
43.842
51.660
60.965
72.035
100.815
16
33.003
35.950
42.753
50.980
60.925
72.939
87.442
126.011
17
36.974
40.545
48.884
59.118
71.673
87.068
105.931
157.253
18
41.301
45.599
55.750
68.394
84.141
103.740
128.117
195.994
19
46.018
51.159
63.440
78.969
98.603
123.414
154.740
244.033
20
51.160
57.275
72.052
91.025
115.380
146.628
186.688
303.601
25
84.701
93.347
133.334
181.871
249.214
342.603
471.981
898.092
30
136.308
164.494
241.333
356.787
530.312
790.948
1181.882
2640.916
Year
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
1
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
2
2.010
2.020
2.030
2.040
2.050
2.060
2.070
2.080
3
2.030
3.060
3.019
3.122
3.152
3.184
3.215
3.246
4
4.060
4.122
4.184
4.246
4.310
4.375
4.440
4.506
5
5.101
5.204
5.309
5.416
5.526
5.637
5.751
5.867
6
6.152
6.308
6.468
6.633
6.802
6.975
7.153
7.336
7
7.214
7.434
7.662
7.898
8.142
8.394
8.654
8.923
8
8.286
8.583
8.892
9.214
9.549
9.897
10.260
10.637
9
9.369
9.755
10.159
10.583
11.027
11.491
11.978
12.488
10
10.462
10.950
11.464
12.006
12.578
13.181
13.816
14.487
11
11.567
12.169
12.808
13.486
14.207
14.972
15.784
16.645
12
12.683
13.412
14.192
15.026
15.917
16.870
17.888
18.977
13
13.809
14.680
15.618
16.627
17.713
18.882
20.141
21.495
14
14.947
15.974
17.086
18.292
19.599
21.051
22.550
24.215
15
16.097
17.293
18.599
20.024
21.579
23.276
25.129
27.152
16
17.258
18.639
20.157
21.825
23.657
25.673
27.888
30.324
17
18.430
20.012
21.762
23.698
25.840
28.213
30.840
33.750
18
19.615
21.412
23.414
25.645
28.132
30.906
33.999
37.450
19
20.811
22.841
25.117
27.671
30.539
33.760
37.379
41.446
20
22.019
24.297
26.870
29.778
33.066
36.786
40.995
45.762
25
28.243
32.030
36.459
41.646
47.727
54.865
63.249
73.106
30
34.785
40.568
47.575
56.085
66.439
79.058
94.461
113.283
Sum of an Annuity of $1 for N Years
exhibit I.2

742	
	
APPENDIX I
Year
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
12%
14%
15%
1
.990
.980
.971
.962
.952
.943
.935
.926
.917
.909
.893
.877
.870
2
.980
.961
.943
.925
.907
.890
.873
.857
.842
.826
.797
.769
.756
3
.971
.942
.915
.889
.864
.840
.816
.794
.772
.751
.712
.675
.658
4
.961
.924
.889
.855
.823
.792
.763
.735
.708
.683
.636
.592
.572
5
.951
.906
.863
.822
.784
.747
.713
.681
.650
.621
.567
.519
.497
6
.942
.888
.838
.790
.746
.705
.666
.630
.596
.564
.507
.456
.432
7
.933
.871
.813
.760
.711
.665
.623
.583
.547
.513
.452
.400
.376
8
.923
.853
.789
.731
.677
.627
.582
.540
.502
.467
.404
.351
.327
9
.914
.837
.766
.703
.645
.592
.544
.500
.460
.424
.361
.308
.284
10
.905
.820
.744
.676
.614
.558
.508
.463
.422
.386
.322
.270
.247
11
.896
.804
.722
.650
.585
.527
.475
.429
.388
.350
.287
.237
.215
12
.887
.788
.701
.625
.557
.497
.444
.397
.356
.319
.257
.208
.187
13
.879
.773
.681
.601
.530
.469
.415
.368
.326
.290
.229
.182
.163
14
.870
.758
.661
.577
.505
.442
.388
.340
.299
.263
.205
.160
.141
15
.861
.743
.642
.555
.481
.417
.362
.315
.275
.239
.183
.140
.123
16
.853
.728
.623
.534
.458
.394
.339
.292
.252
.218
.163
.123
.107
17
.844
.714
.605
.513
.436
.371
.317
.270
.231
.198
.146
.108
.093
18
.836
.700
.587
.494
.416
.350
.296
.250
.212
.180
.130
.095
.081
19
.828
.686
.570
.475
.396
.331
.276
.232
.194
.164
.116
.083
.070
20
.820
.673
.554
.456
.377
.312
.258
.215
.178
.149
.104
.073
.061
25
.780
.610
.478
.375
.295
.233
.184
.146
.116
.092
.059
.038
.030
30
.742
.552
.412
.308
.231
.174
.131
.099
.075
.057
.033
.020
.015
Year
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
1
.862
.847
.833
.806
.781
.758
.735
.714
.667
.625
.588
.556
.526
2
.743
.718
.694
.650
.610
.574
.541
.510
.444
.391
.346
.309
.277
3
.641
.609
.579
.524
.477
.435
.398
.364
.296
.244
.204
.171
.146
4
.552
.516
.482
.423
.373
.329
.292
.260
.198
.153
.120
.095
.077
5
.476
.437
.402
.341
.291
.250
.215
.186
.132
.095
.070
.053
.040
6
.410
.370
.335
.275
.227
.189
.158
.133
.088
.060
.041
.029
.021
7
.354
.314
.279
.222
.178
.143
.116
.095
.059
.037
.024
.016
.011
8
.305
.266
.233
.179
.139
.108
.085
.068
.039
.023
.014
.009
.006
9
.263
.226
.194
.144
.108
.082
.063
.048
.026
.015
.008
.005
.003
10
.227
.191
.162
.116
.085
.062
.046
.035
.017
.009
.005
.003
.002
11
.195
.162
.135
.094
.066
.047
.034
.025
.012
.006
.003
.002
.001
12
.168
.137
.112
.076
.052
.036
.025
.018
.008
.004
.002
.001
.001
13
.145
.116
.093
.061
.040
.027
.018
.013
.005
.002
.001
.001
.000
14
.125
.099
.078
.049
.032
.021
.014
.009
.003
.001
.001
.000
.000
15
.108
.084
.065
.040
.025
.016
.010
.006
.002
.001
.000
.000
.000
16
.093
.071
.054
.032
.019
.012
.007
.005
.002
.001
.000
.000
17
.080
.060
.045
.026
.015
.009
.005
.003
.001
.000
.000
18
.069
.051
.038
.021
.012
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
19
.060
.043
.031
.017
.009
.005
.003
.002
.000
.000
20
.051
.037
.026
.014
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
25
.024
.016
.010
.005
.002
.001
.000
.000
30
.012
.007
.004
.002
.001
.000
.000
Present Value of $1
exhibit I.3
Using Microsoft Excel, these are calculated with the equation: (1 + interest)–years.

	
	
	
APPENDIX I	
	
743
Year
1%
2%
3%
4%
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
10%
1
0.990
0.980
0.971
0.962
0.952
0.943
0.935
0.926
0.917
0.909
2
1.970
1.942
1.913
1.886
1.859
1.833
1.808
1.783
1.759
1.736
3
2.941
2.884
2.829
2.775
2.723
2.673
2.624
2.577
2.531
2.487
4
3.902
3.808
3.717
3.630
3.546
3.465
3.387
3.312
3.240
3.170
5
4.853
4.713
4.580
4.452
4.329
4.212
4.100
3.993
3.890
3.791
6
5.795
5.601
5.417
5.242
5.076
4.917
4.766
4.623
4.486
4.355
7
6.728
6.472
6.230
6.002
5.786
5.582
5.389
5.206
5.033
4.868
8
7.652
7.325
7.020
6.733
6.463
6.210
6.971
5.747
5.535
5.335
9
8.566
8.162
7.786
7.435
7.108
6.802
6.515
6.247
5.985
5.759
10
9.471
8.983
8.530
8.111
7.722
7.360
7.024
6.710
6.418
6.145
11
10.368
9.787
9.253
8.760
8.306
7.887
7.449
7.139
6.805
6.495
12
11.255
10.575
9.954
9.385
8.863
8.384
7.943
7.536
7.161
6.814
13
12.134
11.348
10.635
9.986
9.394
8.853
8.358
7.904
7.487
7.103
14
13.004
12.106
11.296
10.563
9.899
9.295
8.745
8.244
7.786
7.367
15
13.865
12.849
11.938
11.118
10.380
9.712
9.108
8.559
8.060
7.606
16
14.718
13.578
12.561
11.652
10.838
10.106
9.447
8.851
8.312
7.824
17
15.562
14.292
13.166
12.166
11.274
10.477
9.763
9.122
8.544
8.022
18
16.398
14.992
13.754
12.659
11.690
10.828
10.059
9.372
8.756
8.201
19
17.226
15.678
14.324
13.134
12.085
11.158
10.336
9.604
8.950
8.365
20
18.046
16.351
14.877
13.590
12.462
11.470
10.594
9.818
9.128
8.514
25
22.023
19.523
17.413
15.622
14.094
12.783
11.654
10.675
9.823
9.077
30
25.808
22.397
19.600
17.292
15.373
13.765
12.409
11.258
10.274
9.427
Year
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
24%
28%
32%
36%
1
0.893
0.877
0.862
0.847
0.833
0.806
0.781
0.758
0.735
2
1.690
1.647
1.605
1.566
1.528
1.457
1.392
1.332
1.276
3
2.402
2.322
2.246
2.174
2.106
1.981
1.868
1.766
1.674
4
3.037
2.914
2.798
2.690
2.589
2.404
2.241
2.096
1.966
5
3.605
3.433
3.274
3.127
2.991
2.745
2.532
2.345
2.181
6
4.111
3.889
3.685
3.498
3.326
3.020
2.759
2.534
2.339
7
4.564
4.288
4.039
3.812
3.605
3.242
2.937
2.678
2.455
8
4.968
4.639
4.344
4.078
3.837
3.421
3.076
2.786
2.540
9
5.328
4.946
4.607
4.303
4.031
3.566
3.184
2.868
2.603
10
5.650
5.216
4.833
4.494
4.193
3.682
3.269
2.930
2.650
11
5.988
5.453
5.029
4.656
4.327
3.776
3.335
2.978
2.683
12
6.194
5.660
5.197
4.793
4.439
3.851
3.387
3.013
2.708
13
6.424
5.842
5.342
4.910
4.533
3.912
3.427
3.040
2.727
14
6.628
6.002
5.468
5.008
4.611
3.962
3.459
3.061
2.740
15
6.811
6.142
5.575
5.092
4.675
4.001
3.483
3.076
2.750
16
6.974
6.265
5.669
5.162
4.730
4.033
3.503
3.088
2.758
17
7.120
6.373
5.749
5.222
4.775
4.059
3.518
3.097
2.763
18
7.250
6.467
5.818
5.273
4.812
4.080
3.529
3.104
2.767
19
7.366
6.550
5.877
5.316
4.844
4.097
3.539
3.109
2.770
20
7.469
6.623
5.929
5.353
4.870
4.110
3.546
3.113
2.772
25
7.843
6.873
6.097
5.467
4.948
4.147
3.564
3.122
2.776
30
8.055
7.003
6.177
5.517
4.979
4.160
3.569
3.124
2.778
Present Value of an Annuity of $1
exhibit I.4
Using Microsoft Excel, these are calculated with the function: PV(interest, years, −1).

744
INDEX
A. T. Kearney, 673
ABC classification, 518, 538–539, 682
Accenture, 673, 674
Acceptable quality level (AQL), 333–335
Acceptance sampling, 333–335
Accommodation strategies, 207
Accounting function, 639–640
Accurate response, 493
Acquisition costs, 414–415
Activities
changing the sequence of, 285–286
defined, 78
fitting to strategy, 30
parallel, 270, 285
Activity-based costing, 721–723
Activity direct costs, 86
Activity relationship diagram, 174
Activity-system maps, 30–31
Actual customer contact, 207
Adaptive control, 711
Adaptive forecasting, 453
Additive seasonal variation, 458
Adjacency patterns, 174
Advanced Optical Components, 495
Advanced planning, 692
After-sale support, 28
Aggregate operations plan, 490, 492–496; 
See also Sales and operations 
planning
Agile supply chains, 407
Air, as a transportation method, 380
Airline industry
learning curves and, 130
use of straddling, 29
yield management, 503–505
Aisle characteristics, 184
Alibaba.com, 265
Alliance and partnerships, 74, 353, 
470–471
Alternative path structures, 229
Amazon, 3, 14, 265, 311
Ambient conditions, 184
AMD, 411
American Airlines, 504
American Express, 679
American Hospital Association, 658
Amortization, 719
Ampere, Inc., 567
Analytics, business, 13
Annuity, 726–728
ANSI/ASQ Z1.4-2003, 311
A.P. Moller-Maersk Group, 110
APICS, 379
APICS Supply Chain Council, 436
Apple Computer, 14, 43, 44, 183, 185, 201, 
402, 671
Appraisal costs, 302
AQL, 333–335
Arm’s length relationships, 409
Arrival patterns, 226
Arrival rate, 121, 224
Arrival variability, 207
Arrivals, 223; See also Waiting line analysis
Artifacts, 185
Assemble-to-order, 150
Assembly charts (gozinto), 155–156
Assembly drawing, 155
Assembly line
balancing of, 175–178
batch sizes, 634–635
defined, 152–153, 170
to deliver services, 212–213
development of, 11
facility layout and, 152–153, 174–175
pacing, 174, 273
Asset turnover, 16–17
Assignable variation, 318
Assignment method, 599–601
Attributes, 325–328
Auction, reverse, 403
Audits, manufacturing, 679–681
Autocorrelation, 447
Automated guided vehicle (AGV), 712
Automated materials handling systems 
(AMH), 712–713
Automation
of manufacturing, 712–713
total factory, 715
Available to promise, 562–563
Average aggregate inventory value, 
416–417
Avoidable costs, 719
Awards, for quality, 12, 299–300
Backflush, 360
Backorder, 520
Backordering costs, 495
Backward scheduling, 592, 638
Balance, system, 114
Balanced scorecard, 684
Balancing, of assembly lines, 175–178
Balancing loops, 682
Baldrige National Quality Award, 12, 
299–300
Balking, 227
Bar chart, 90–91
Bar coding, 540, 593, 603
Base-case financial model, 58–60
Batch arrival, 226
Batch sizes, 634–635
Behavioral science approach, 207–211
Benchmarking, 15, 274, 279, 311–312, 679
Best operating level, 112
Best practices, 310
Bias errors, 464
Bid, request for, 403
Bill of materials (BOM), 563–565, 568–569
Black & Decker, 44, 671
Black belt program, 12, 308
Blocking, 270
Blueprints, service, 211–212, 682
BMW, 27, 113
Boeing, 32, 130, 151, 381, 383
Boston Consulting Group, 673
Bottlenecks
adding capacity to eliminate, 114
analysis of, 682
capacity constrained resources, 628, 
632–634, 636–637
defined, 628, 632
drum, buffer, rope, 632–634
finding, 630–631
in hospitals, 662–663
methods for control, 629–637
in multiple-stage process, 270
saving time, 631
BPR Capture, 682
Brain surgery projects, 673–674
Brainstorming, 42, 52
Break-even analysis, 153–155
Breakthrough projects, 74
British Airways, 364
British Petroleum, 32
Brue, Greg, 309
Budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP), 
91–92
Budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS), 
91–92
Budgets, 495
Buffered core, 205
Buffering, 270, 275, 276, 632–634
Bullwhip effect, 404–405
Bundling, product-service, 9
Burger King, 271–273
Business analytics, 13
Business process reengineering (BPR), 12, 
684–686
c-charts, 328–329
CAD, 52, 713–714
Campbell Soup, 404–405
Canon, 47

	
	
	
INDEX	
	
745
Capability index, 322–325
Capability sourcing, 410
Capability variability, 207
Capacity
defined, 112, 628
overutilization, 360
unbalanced, 626–628
underutilization, 360
Capacity-constrained resources (CCR), 
628, 632–634, 636–637
Capacity cushion, 115
Capacity management, 110–129
changing capacity, 114–115
decision trees, 117–120, 683
defined, 111
determining requirements, 115–117
economies of scale, 110, 112–113
flexibility of, 113
focused factory, 113
hospitals, 660–661
intermediate range, 111
long range, 111
objective of, 111
restaurant example, 281–283
in services, 120–122, 203–204, 
281–285
sharing of, 114
short range, 111
strategic, 111
time dimensions of, 111
Capacity utilization rate, 112, 121
Capital, cost of, 723–726
Capital asset pricing model (CAPM), 725
Capital equipment; See Equipment
Care chains, 659–660
Careers, in OSCM, 9–10
Carrying costs, 519, 635
Cash flows, 58–60, 625, 639
Cash-to-cash cycle time, 436–439
Causal forecasting, 446
Causal loops, 682, 683
Causal relationship forecasting, 466–468
Cause-and-effect diagrams, 305, 307, 682
Cell layout, 152, 170, 181–182, 713
Central America Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA), 382
Centroid method, 384, 387–388
Certification, quality, 12, 310–312
Champions, 308, 309
Changeover time, 356, 363
Chase, R. B., 207
Chase strategy, 494
Checksheets, 305, 306
Chief Operating Officer (COO), 10
Chrysler, 311
Cincinnati Milacron, 713
Circulation paths, 184
Classic accommodation strategy, 207
Classic reduction strategy, 207
Clinical dashboard, 665
Cloud computing, 426
Coca-Cola, 411
Collaborative planning, forecasting, and 
replenishment (CPFR), 470–471
Common stock, cost of, 725
Common variation, 318
Competitive advantage, 382–383
Competitive dimensions, 27–29
Complementary products, 493
Complex systems, 46, 48–49
Complexity, 56
Compound value, 726–727
Computer-aided design (CAD), 52, 713–714
Computer-aided engineering (CAE), 713
Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), 715
Computer-aided process planning 
(CAPP), 713
Computer-assisted diagnosis, 667
Computer graphics, 713
Computer-integrated manufacturing 
(CIM), 715–716
Computer Sciences Corporation, 673
Computer simulation; See Simulation
Computerized physician order entry 
(CPOE), 664
Concept development, 46, 49
Concurrent engineering, 49, 204, 285
Conformance quality, 61, 301
Consolidation warehouses, 381
Constant arrival distribution, 224
Consulting, 671–690
defined, 672
economics of, 673–674
industry, 673
manufacturing consulting areas, 674
need for, 674–675
process, 676–684
for services, 675
tool kit, 677
Consumer’s risk, 333
Container system, 361
Continental Airlines, 29
Continuous improvement, 624, 682
Continuous process layout, 153
Continuous replenishment, 404
Continuous simulation models, 244–245
Contract manufacturers, 43–44, 408
Control charts
continuous improvement, 682
defined, 305
features of, 307
for process monitoring, 321
for project management, 90–91
Control limits, 329–330
Core competencies, 43–44, 409–410
Core goods/services, 8–9
Corporate goals, 286
Correlation analysis, 683
Cost accounting, 639
Cost activity pools, 721
Cost avoidance, 51
Cost drivers, 721
Cost of goods sold, 416–417
Cost of quality (COQ), 301–303
Cost schedule status report (CSSR), 91
Cost trade-off decision, 222
Costing rules, 91
Costs
acquisition, 414–415
activity-based, 721–723
activity direct, 86
to add capacity, 114
appraisal, 302
avoidable, 719
backordering, 495
capital, 723–726
carrying, 519, 635
development, 60
external failure, 302
fixed, 718
holding, 495, 519
indirect, 86
internal failure, 302
inventory, 495, 519–520
opportunity, 719
ordering, 520
overhead, 721–723
ownership, 414–416
prevention, 302
versus price, 27
production, 495
quality, 301–303
setup, 363, 519, 635
sunk, 718–719
variable, 718
CPFR, 470–471
Cpk, 322–325
CPM, 78–85, 684
Cradle-to-grave, 25
Crashing, project, 86–89
Creation of service, 203
Creative Output, 623
Creativity, 42
Critical Chain Project Management, 638
Critical customer requirement (CCR), 304
Critical path, 79
Critical path method (CPM), 78–85, 684
Critical processes, 285
Critical ratio (CR), 594–595
Critical zone, 121
Crosby, Philip, 299
Cross-docking, 381
Cumulative average time, 131–132
Cumulative standard normal distribution, 
522, 529, 738
Customer loyalty analysis, 678
Customer order decoupling point, 149–150, 
445, 516, 659
Customer requirements, 50, 304
Customer service dashboard, 665
Customer surveys, 678
Customer value, 14, 351, 353
Customers
accommodation of, 207
arrival of, 223
contact with, 8, 203
in control of process, 209
designing for, 49–51
lean, 354
needs of, 30–31
new role of, 206–207
segmenting, 223
self-service approach, 30–31, 213
touch points for, 14
waiting lines; See Waiting line analysis
Customization, mass, 12
Customized products, 46, 48
Cut-and-try approach, 496–501

746	
	
INDEX
Cycle counting, 518, 539–541
Cycle time
cash-to-cash, 436–439
components of, 630
defined, 267, 360
as a performance metric, 275
in a two-stage process, 270
work sampling, 279, 682
workstation, 174
Cyclical scheduling, 661
Daily dispatch list, 602–603
Dashboards, 665, 684
Dasu, Sriram, 207
Data
analysis of, 312, 682–683
gathering of, 679–681
Data analytics, 13
Data envelopment analysis, 683
Data integration, 431
Data integrity, 602–603
Data responsibility, 603
Data warehouse, 431
Days-of-supply, 276
Debt, 724–725
Decision making, break-even analysis 
and, 153–155
Decision points, 268–269
Decision rules, 176
Decision support, 428–429
Decision trees, 117–120, 683
Declining-balance method, 720
Decomposition, 458–463
Decoupling point, 149–150, 445, 516, 659
Defects, 298, 303–304, 309; See also 
Quality
Defects per million opportunities (DPMO), 
61, 304
Define, measure, analyze, improve, and 
control (DMAIC), 304–305
Delivery
defined, 7
reliability and speed of, 28
Dell Computer, 114, 150, 168
Deloitte & Touche, 672
Delphi method, 469–470
Demand
changes in, 28
components of, 447
dependent, 520–521
economies of scale, 110, 112–113
independent, 520–521
for product, 563
uncertainty of supply and, 405–407
volatility of, 120–121
Demand management, 567–568; See also 
Forecasting
Demand-pull scheduling, 366
Deming, W. Edwards, 299
Dependent demand, 520–521
Dependent events, 627
Depreciation, of capital equipment, 719–721
Depreciation-by-use method, 720–721
Derivative projects, 74
Design for manufacturing and assembly 
(DFMA), 52–56, 204
Design of experiments (DOE), 308
Design of jobs; See Job design
Design of products; See Product design/
development
Design quality, 27–28, 61, 300–301
Development cost, 60
DFMA, 52–56, 204
DHL, 379
Diagnosis-related groups (DRGs), 664–665
Diary studies, 682
Dimensions of quality, 301–302
Direct distribution, 516
Direct observation, 279
Direct-to-store approach, 516
Discounted cash flow, 729
Discrete distribution, 226
Discrete simulation models, 244–245
Diseconomies of scale, 112–113
Dispatching, 593
Distribution; See also Warehouses
of arrivals, 224
direct, 516
exponential, 225
poisson, 225–227, 328
service time, 228
Distribution center bypass, 516
Divergence, 56
Divisibility, 692
DMAIC, 304–305
DOE, 308
Dollar days, 637
Double-declining balance method, 720
DPMO, 304
Drum, 632–634
DuPont, 78
Dynamic programming, 692
E-commerce, 12
E-procurement, 353
Earliest due date first rule, 596
Early adopter, 716
Early start schedules, 80–81, 83
Earned value management (EVM), 91–94
Earning rules, 91
eBay, 207
Ecodesign, 54–56
Economic analysis, of new projects, 57–61
Economic order quantity (EOQ), 524, 
572–574
Economic prosperity, 25
Economics of waiting lines; See Waiting 
line analysis
Economies of scale, 110, 112–113
Economies of scope, 114
Effectiveness, 14, 25–26
Efficiency, 14–17, 274
Efficient supply chains, 407
Effort variability, 207
Einstein, Albert, 726
Electronic commerce, 12
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 404
Electronic Data Systems, 673
Electronic medical records, 666
Eli Lilly, 404
Employee scheduling, 605–607, 661
Employee surveys, 679
Engineer-to-order, 150–151
Enrichment, job, 278–279
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 426–443
cash-to-cash cycle time, 436–439
in the cloud, 426
decision support and, 428–429
defined, 427
evaluation of effectiveness, 435–439
example, 432–435
integration of business functions and, 
429–431
major vendors, 427
SAP, 427, 433–435
software features, 428
Environment
ecodesign, 54–56
green sourcing, 411–413
ISO 9000/14000, 310–312
Environmental footprint, 349
Environmental stewardship, 25
EOQ, 524, 572–574
Equal contribution line, 694
Equipment
break-even analysis, 153–155
capacity planning and, 115–117
depreciation of, 719–721
economic life of, 719
general/specific purpose, 153
minimizing downtime of, 112
Equity securities, 724
Errors
versus defects, 309
in forecasts, 463–466
gap, 661
task/treatment, 209
Ethics, 210
Event management, 664
Event simulation, 245
Event triggered, 524
Everyday low price, 404
Evidence-based medicine (EBM), 665
Evolve Software, 684
Evolving supply process, 406–407
Executive judgment, 469
Executive leaders, 308
Expected value, 719
Expediting, 86, 593
Experience curves; See Learning curves
Explicit objective, 692
Explicit services, 202
Explosion process, 566–567
Exponential distribution, 225
Exponential smoothing, 452–454
Extent of contact, 203
External benchmarking, 311–312
External failure costs, 302
Face-to-face contact, 206
Facility layout, 168–200
assembly line; See Assembly line
basic formats, 170
continuous process, 153
flexible lines, 179–180
functional, 170
hospitals, 659–660
inputs to, 169

	
	
	
INDEX	
	
747
job shop, 151, 170
lean, 357–358
manufacturing cell, 152, 170, 181–182, 713
mixed-model line balancing, 179–180
office layout, 185
product-process matrix, 153
project layout, 151, 170, 181–182
retail sector, 183–185
spatial, 184
systematic layout planning, 174–175, 659
u-shaped layouts, 179
workcenter, 151–152, 170–174
Facility location, 381–390
Factor-rating system, 384
Factory of the future, 715
Factoryless goods producers, 402
Fail-safe procedures, 309–310
Fail-safing, 211–212
Failure mode and effect analysis (FMEA), 
305, 308
FCFS, 228, 596–597
Federal Express, 28, 365, 379, 409
Feedback, 686
Finance function, ERP and, 430
Financial analysis, 718–733
activity based costing, 721–723
base-case model, 58–60
cash flows, 58–60, 625, 639
choosing investment proposals, 723–729
concepts, 718–721
debt, 724–725
effects of taxes, 723
elements of, 625
net present value (NPV), 58–60, 729
ranking investments, 729–730
return on investment (ROI), 625, 639
Financial ratios, 15–17
Finders, of new business, 673
Finished goods inventory, 271, 518
Finite loading, 592
Finite population, 224
First Bank/Dallas, 364
First come, first served (FCFS), 228, 
596–597
First-hour principle, 606–607
First party certification, 311
Fishbone diagrams, 305, 307, 682
Fitness for use, 301
Five forces model, 679
5 Ps of production, 674
Fixed costs, 718
Fixed-order interval system, 524
Fixed-order quantity model, 517, 524–532
Fixed-order quantity systems, 664
Fixed-time period model, 518, 524–526, 
532–534
Fixed-time period systems, 664
Flexibility
capacity, 113
in product development, 28
Flexible line layouts, 179–180
Flexible manufacturing systems (FMS), 711, 
713–714
Flexible plants, 113
Flexible processes, 113–114
Flexible scheduling, 661
Flexible workers, 114
Flextronics, 408
Flow design, 155–157
Flow of service experience, 207
Flow-shop layout, 170
Flow time
defined, 275
Little’s law and, 277–278
reduction of, 285–287
Flowcharting
as analytical tools, 305, 306
process, 156–157, 268–269
service blueprints and, 211–212, 682
use of, 682
FMEA, 305, 308
Focused factory, 113
Ford, Henry, 11–12, 351
Ford Motor Company, 42, 112, 311, 312
Forecast including trend, 453–454
Forecasting, 444–488
adaptive, 453
capacity planning, 115–117
causal, 446, 466–468
components of demand, 447
CPFR, 470–471
demand management, 567–568
errors in, 463–466
historical analogy, 469
market research, 469
panel consensus, 469
purpose of, 445
qualitative techniques, 446, 468–470
selecting method, 448–449
strategic, 445
tactical, 445
time series analysis, 448–463
decomposition of, 458–463
defined, 446
exponential smoothing, 452–454
linear regression analysis, 455–458
simple moving average, 449–451
weighted moving average, 451–452
trend, 447–448, 453–454
types of, 446
use by consultants, 683
web-based, 470–471
Forward buying, 404
Forward scheduling, 592, 638
Foxconn, 402
Free trade zone, 382
Freeze window, 359
Frito-Lay, 714
Frozen, 562–563
Fujitsu, 410
Functional layout, 170
Functional managers, 76
Functional products, 405–407
Functional projects, 75–76
Functional silo, 435–436
Functionality, 184
Funnel, process as a, 287
Gantt, Henry L., 90
Gantt chart
development of, 79
drawback of, 79
example, 90
for project management, 684
shop-floor control and, 601–602
tracking, 95
Gap analysis, 679–680
Gap errors, 661
Geddes, Patrick, 24
Gemini Consulting, 673
General Electric, 298, 303
General Motors, 32, 311, 404, 492
General purpose equipment, 153
Global enterprise resource planning 
systems, 13
Global logistics, 379
Go/no-go milestones, 57
Goal programming, 692
Goals
clear, 686
corporate, 286
of the firm, 625
of TQM, 299
Goldratt, Eli, 622–625, 638
Goldratt Institute, 624
Good housekeeping, 364
Goods, versus services, 7–8
Goods-services continuum, 8–9
Google Cardboard, 49
Gozinto, Zeparzat, 167n
Gozinto chart, 155–156
Graphical linear programming, 693–695; 
See also Linear programming
Gray hair projects, 673
Green belt program, 12, 308–309
Green sourcing, 411–413
Greenfield, Karl Taro, 258
Grinders, 673
Gross requirements, 567, 570
Group technology, 170, 358, 591
Grouping-by-association philosophy, 184
Hackers Computer Store, 117–120
Hand delivery, 381
Hardware systems, 711–713
Health care operations management, 
656–670
capacity planning, 660–661
care chains, 659–660
classification of, 658
defined, 657
inventory management, 664–665
layout, 659–660
performance measures, 665
quality management, 661–663
scheduling, 590–591, 661
supply chains, 663–664
trends, 665–667
Health information exchanges (HIEs), 
666–667
Hedging supply chains, 407
Heterogeneous process, 8
Hewlett-Packard, 334, 404, 409
High degree of customer contact, 203, 204
High-risk products, 46, 48
Highway, 380
Hill, Terry J., 29
Histograms, 305

748	
	
INDEX
Historical analogy, 469
Hitachi, 410
Holding costs, 495, 519
Home Depot, 184
Homogeneity, 692
Hon Hai Precision Industry, 402
Honda Motors, 43, 112, 266
Honeywell, 364
Horizontal job enlargement, 278–279
Hospitality (hotel) industry, 213–215
Hospitals, 656–670
capacity planning, 660–661
care chains, 659–660
classification of, 658
defined, 657
inventory management, 664–665
layout, 659–660
performance measures, 665
quality management, 661–663
scheduling, 590–591, 661
supply chains, 663–664
trends, 665–667
House of quality, 50–51
Housekeeping, good, 364
Hub-and-spoke systems, 381
Human resources, ERP and, 430–431
Hybrid process, 271–272
Hypothesis testing, 683
IBM, 9, 404, 673
IDEO, 42–43, 49
Idle time, 630
IKEA, 30–31, 69–71, 184
Immediate predecessors, 79–80
Impatient arrival, 227
Implicit services, 202
In-transit inventory, 518
Independent demand, 520–521
Indirect costs, 86
Indirect observation, 279
Individual learning, 131, 138–139
Industrial design, 49
Industrial robots, 667, 711–712
Infinite loading, 591
Infinite population, 223–224
Infinite potential length, 227
Information systems, 94–95
Infosys Technology, 673
Initiatives, 26
Innovation, 205–206
Innovative products, 406–407
Input/output control, 602–603
Inputs, 111, 169
Inspection, 309
Institute for Health Care Optimization, 656
Intangible assets, 719
Intangible processes, 7–8
Integer programming, 692
Integrated medical care, 665
Integrated supply chain metrics, 436–438
Intel, 409–411
Interest rate, 726
Interest tables, 740–743
Intermediate range capacity 
management, 111
Intermediate-range planning, 491–492
Internal failure costs, 302
Internal rate of return, 729–730
Internal sourcing agents, 412
International logistics, 379; See also 
Logistics
International Organization for 
Standardization, 12, 310
Internet; See also Technology
e-procurement, 353
electronic commerce, 12
electronic data interchange (EDI), 404
web-based forecasting, 470–471
Interworkcenter flows, 171–173
Inventory
accuracy of, 538–541
buffer, 270, 275, 276, 632–634
costs, 495, 519–520
days-of-supply, 276
defined, 518, 625
finished goods, 271, 518
in-transit, 518
purposes of, 518–519
turnover of, 16–17, 276, 416–417, 
534–535
types of, 517
vendor managed, 404
work-in-process, 179, 271, 276, 518
Inventory management, 515–558
ABC classification, 518, 538–539, 682
bar coding, 540, 593, 603
cycle counting, 518, 539–541
fixed-order quantity models, 517, 
524–532
fixed-time period models, 518, 524–526, 
532–534
hospitals, 664–665
independent versus dependent demand, 
520–521
multiperiod systems, 524–525
price-break models, 535–538
RFID, 540, 593, 660
safety stock; See Safety stock
single-period model, 517, 521–524
Inventory on hand, 492
Inventory position, 526
Inventory records, 565–566, 569
Inventory replenishment, 404, 471
Inventory transactions file, 566
ISO 9000/14000, 12, 310–312
Iso-profit line, 694
ISO/TS 16949, 311
Issue trees, 677–678
Jaguar, 112
Japanese Railways, 679
JC Company, 496–501
J.D. Power and Associates, 301
JDA Software, 427
Job design
behavioral considerations in, 278–279
decision to make, 278–280
defined, 278
specialization of labor, 278
work measurement, 279–280
Job enrichment, 278–279
Job sequencing, 594–595
Job shop, 151, 170
Job standards, 279–280
Johnson’s rule, 594, 598–599
Joint business planning, 471
Jones, D. T., 364
Judging encounter performance, 207
Juran, Joseph M., 299, 301
Just-in-time (JIT); See also Lean 
production/manufacturing
defined, 11
evolution of, 351
in hospitals, 665
mixed-model line balancing, 179–180
production, 359
versus synchronous manufacturing, 
638–640
Kaizen, 356
Kanban, 360–363
Kanban pull system, 360
Kawasaki, 361
Kelley, David M., 42
Key process dashboard, 665
Kmart, 184
Labor, specialization of, 278
Labor-limited process, 592
Labor productivity measures, 15–16
Land’s End, 4
Largest-number-of-following-tasks rules, 
177–178
Last-come, first-served, 595
Late start schedules, 80–81, 83
Launch, of new products, 45, 46
Layout, facility; See Facility layout
Lead time, 149
Leaders, executive, 308
Lean customers, 354
Lean layouts, 357–358
Lean logistics, 354
Lean procurement, 353
Lean production/manufacturing; See also 
Manufacturing
defined, 150, 351
design principles, 357–364
evolution of, 11–12
JIT and, 308
kanbans, 360–363
lean layouts, 357–358
make-to-stock and, 150, 271–273
minimized setup time, 363
outcome of, 353–354
overview of, 351–352
scheduling and, 359–363
versus theory of constraints, 624
Toyota Production System, 352–353
value stream mapping, 276, 355–357
Lean services, 364–366
Lean Six Sigma, 308
Lean suppliers, 353
Lean supply chains, 353–354, 363–364
Lean warehousing, 354
Learning curves, 130–146
assumptions of, 131–132
defined, 131
individual learning, 131, 138–139

	
	
	
INDEX	
	
749
managerial considerations, 140
organizational learning, 131, 139–140
plotting of, 132–138
tables, 133–137
Learning percentage, 138
Least-slack rule, 594
Least square regression analysis, 455–458, 
461–463
Least total cost (LTC), 572, 574
Least unit cost, 572, 574–576
Level schedule, 359–360
Level strategy, 494
Life cycle, product, 55, 206
Limited line capacity, 227
Limited resources, 692
Line structure, 228–229; See also Waiting 
line analysis
Linear programming, 691–710
applications, 691–692
defined, 691
graphical, 693–695
model, 692–693
transportation method, 384–387, 599
using Excel, 695–698
Linear regression forecasting, 455–458
Linearity, 692
Liquid, 562–563
Little’s Law, 277–278
L.L. Bean, 4, 679
Lockheed Martin, 151
Logistics, 378–401; See also Warehouses
cross-docking, 381
decision areas, 380–381
defined, 283, 379, 408
ERP and, 430
example, 283–285
facility location criteria, 381–383
green sourcing and, 411–413
international, 379
lean, 354
outsourcing of, 408–409
plant location methods, 383–388
third-party providers, 379, 408, 663
Logistics-System Design Matrix, 380
Long range capacity management, 111
Long-range planning, 491–492
Long-term debt, 724–725
Long term forecasting, 448
Loss function, 320
Lot-for-lot (L4L), 572–573
Lot size, 335, 572–576
Lot tolerance percent defective (LTPD), 
333–335
Low-cost accommodation, 207
Low degree of customer contact, 203, 204
Low-level coding, 565
Lower control limit (LCL), 326–332
Loyalty, customer, 678
Machine-limited process, 592
Machining centers, 711
Maintenance, preventive, 358
Maister, David H., 673
Make-to-order, 150–151, 271–273
Make-to-stock, 150, 271–273
Making, 7
Malaysian Airlines, 208
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, 
12, 299–300
Management efficiency ratios, 15–17
Managers, 74
Manpower, 366
Manufacturing
audit of, 679–681
automation, 712–713
CAM, 715
capacity planning; See Capacity 
management
CIM, 715–716
consulting areas, 674
contract, 43–44, 408
DFMA, 52–56, 204
ERP and, 430
FMS, 711, 713–714
JIT; See Just-in-time (JIT)
lean; See Lean production/manufacturing
manufacturing execution systems 
(MES), 591
plant location methods, 383–388
process analysis; See Process analysis
robot use, 667, 711–712
scheduling; See Scheduling
synchronous, 624–625, 634, 638–640
technology in, 711–715
Manufacturing cell, 152, 170, 181–182, 713
Manufacturing execution systems (MES), 591
Manufacturing inventory, 518
Manufacturing planning and control 
systems (MP&CS), 714
Manufacturing processes, 148–167
break-even analysis, 153–155
customer order decoupling point, 149–
150, 445, 516, 659
flow design, 155–157
organization of, 151–155
overview of, 149–151
types of, 593
Manufacturing strategy paradigm, 11
Marginal cost, 723
Market-pull products, 46
Market research, 469
Market risk, 716
Marketing function, 639–640
Marketing-operations link, 29–30
Mass customization, 12
Master black belt, 308
Master production schedule (MPS), 561–
563, 568, 636
Material handling, 174, 181, 712–713
Material requirements planning (MRP), 
559–589
applications, 560–561
benefits of, 560–561
bill of materials (BOM), 563–565, 
568–569
computer programs, 566–567
defined, 560
example using, 567–572
lot sizing, 335, 572–576
master production schedule, 561–563, 
568, 636
scheduling and, 592
versus synchronous manufacturing, 
638–640
system structure, 563–567
Matrix projects, 76–77
McDonald’s, 12, 52, 212–213, 221, 266, 
271–273, 365, 366, 384
McKinsey & Company, 673, 676
Mean, 318
Mean absolute deviation (MAD), 464–466
Mean absolute percent error (MAPE), 
465–466
Mean squared error, 464
Measurement by attributes, 325–328
Medium term forecasting, 448
Merchandise groupings, 185
Metrics, 91, 273–275
Microsoft, 30, 94, 427
Microsoft Project, 684
Milestone chart, 90–91
Miller Brewing Company, 364
Minders, 673
Minimum-cost scheduling, 86
Mixed line structure, 229
Mixed-model line balancing, 179–180
Mixed strategy, 494
Mixed virtual customer contact, 207
M&M Mars, 112
Modular bill of materials, 564
Motivation, 138
Motorola, 303, 321, 404
Moving average, 449–452
Multichannel, multiphase line structure, 229
Multichannel, single phase line structure, 
228–229
Multifactor productivity measure, 34
Multiperiod inventory systems, 524–525
Multiple lines, 227
Multiple regression analysis, 468
Multiple-stage processes, 270
Multiple-to-single channel structures, 229
Multiplicative seasonal variation, 458
Multivariate testing, 308
Musk, Elon, 23
NAFTA, 382
Nakamura, Toshihiro, 169
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, 12
NEC, 410
Net change systems, 567
Net income per employee, 15
Net present value (NPV), 58–60, 729
Net profit, 625, 639
Net requirements, 567, 570
Net return, 723
Netflix, 207
Network, supply, 4–5
Network-planning models
critical path method, 78–85, 684
time-cost models/crashing, 86–89
New product development; See Product 
design/development
Newsperson problem, 521–524
Nightingale, Florence, 662
Nissan, 112
Non-steady state, 282

750	
	
INDEX
Nonbottleneck, 628; See also Bottlenecks
Nonlinear programming, 692
Nonpaced production process, 273
Nordstrom Department Stores, 213–214
North America Free Trade Agreement, 382
NTN Driveshafts Inc., 381
Numerically controlled machines, 711
Objective function, 694
Objectives
of capacity management, 111
stretch, 309
Obsolescence, 521, 719
Office Depot, 30
Office layout, 185
OfficeMax, 30
Ohno, Tai-ichi, 351
Online catalogs, 403
Operating characteristic curves, 334–335
Operating cycle, 436
Operating expenses, 625–626
Operation and route sheet, 155–156
Operation time, 275
Operational design decisions, 58
Operational risks, 716
Operations, 4
Operations and supply chain management 
(OSCM)
careers in, 9–10
categorizing of processes, 6–7
current issues, 13–14
defined, 3
development of, 11–14
professional societies for, 10
services versus goods, 7–8
supply network, 4–5
Operations and supply chain strategy, 
23–41
agile supply chains, 407
competitive dimensions, 27–29
defined, 25–26
efficient supply chain, 407
fitting activities to strategy, 30
at IKEA, 30–31
order winners/qualifiers, 29–30
production planning, 493–494
productivity measurement, 33–35
responsive supply chains, 407
risk and, 31–33, 333, 683, 716
risk-hedging supply chains, 407
sustainability strategy, 13, 24–25
trade-offs, 29
Operations consulting, 671–690
defined, 672
economics of, 673–674
industry, 673
manufacturing consulting areas, 674
need for, 674–675
process, 676–684
for services, 675
tool kit, 677
Operations effectiveness, 25–26
Operations scheduling; See Scheduling
Operations technology, 711–717; See also 
Technology
Opportunity costs, 719
Opportunity flow diagrams, 305, 307
Optima!, 682
Optimal order quantity Qopt, 527–529
Optimized production technology (OPT), 624
Oracle, 427
Order qualifiers/winners, 29–30
Ordering costs, 520
Organization, of production processes, 
151–155
Organization charts, 155, 682
Organizational learning, 131, 139–140
Organizational risks, 716
Outputs, 34, 111
Outsourcing
benefits, 408
capacity planning and, 114–115
contract manufacturers, 43–44, 408
defined, 408
drawbacks to, 409
growth of, 13
of logistics, 408–409
reasons to, 408
supplier relationships, 409–411
Overhead costs, 721–723
Overutilization, 360
Ownership costs, 414–416
p-charts, 326–327
P-model, 524
Pacing, 174, 273
Package of features, 8
Panel consensus, 469
Parallel activities, 270, 285
Parallel workstations, 179
Pareto, Vilfredo, 538
Pareto analysis, 682
Pareto charts, 305, 306
Pareto principle, 538
Partial factor productivity, 274
Partial productivity measure, 34
Partnerships, 74, 353, 470–471
Patient arrival, 226–227
Payback period, 729
Payoff analysis, 683–684
Peg record, 566
People Express, 504
Perceived quality, 300–301
Performance dashboards, 665, 684
Performance measurement
benchmarking, 15, 274, 279, 311–312, 679
dollar days, 637
financial; See Financial analysis
hospitals, 665
operational measurements, 625–626
process analysis, 273–275
product development, 61
productivity measures, 12, 33–35, 274, 626
of sourcing, 416–417
using ERP, 435–439
work measurement, 279–280
Period cash flow, 59
Periodic review system, 524
Periodic system, 524
Perishable process, 8
Permeable system, 205
Perpetual system, 525
Personal-attention approach, 213–215
Personnel scheduling, 605–607
PERT, 78–79, 83, 684
Peters, Tom, 75
Phase zero, 46
Phillips, 32
Physician-driven service chains, 664
Pipeline, 381
Pittiglio Rabin Todd & McGrath, 671–672
Planned-order receipts, 567, 570
Planned-order release, 567
Planned value (PV), 91
Planning; See also Operations and supply 
chain strategy
for capacity; See Capacity management
ERP; See Enterprise resource 
planning (ERP)
operations and supply chain strategy, 26
process of, 6–7
product development, 46
production, 493–494
strategic, 26
Plant location methods, 383–388
Plant tours, 679–681
Plant within a plant (PWP), 113
Platform products, 46, 47–48
Poisson distribution
arrivals and, 225–227
process control, 328
Poka-yokes, 212–213, 309–310
Porter, M. E., 31, 680
Precedence relationship, 175
Predetermined motion-time data systems 
(PMTS), 279
Present value (PV), 726–728, 736
Prevention costs, 302
Preventive maintenance, 358
Price
versus cost, 27
everyday low, 404
sales, 60
Price-break models, 535–538
Primavera, 94–95
Primavera Project Planner, 684
Priority rules, 228, 595–601
Probability analysis, 86–89
Probability approach, 529
Probability of reservice, 230
Problem analysis, 682
Problem definition tools, 677–679
Problem-solving groups, 364
Procedures projects, 673
Process analysis, 266–297
examples, 280–287
flow time reduction, 285–287
Little’s law, 277–278
make-to-stock, 150, 271–273
measuring performance, 273–275
multiple-stage process, 270
production process mapping, 275–278
single-stage process, 270
slot machine example, 266–269
Process batch, 634–637
Process capability, 321–325; See also 
Statistical process control (SPC)
Process change, 74

	
	
	
INDEX	
	
751
Process control charts, 305, 307
Process control procedures, 325–332
Process dashboards, 684
Process flow design, 155–157
Process flowcharting, 156–157
Process improvement, 661–663
Process-intensive products, 46, 48
Process mapping, 275–278
Process optimization, 692
Process plans, 714
Process quality, 27–28
Process selection, 151
Process velocity, 275
Processes
categorizing of, 6–7
characterizing, 270
control of, 209
critical, 285
defined, 266
flexible, 113–114
flowcharting of, 156–157, 268–269
as funnel, 287
hybrid, 271–272
multiple-stage, 270
operations versus supply chain, 4–6
serial, 273, 285
service; See Service processes
single-stage, 270
Processing time, 630
Procter & Gamble, 311, 404
Procurement, lean, 353
Producer’s risk, 333
Product change, 74
Product design/development, 42–72
brainstorming, 42, 52
concept development, 46, 49
contract manufacturers, 43–44
creativity, 42
DFMA, 52–56, 204
ecodesign, 54–56
economic analysis of projects, 57–61
flexibility, 28
launch of new products, 45, 46
measuring performance, 61
process, 44–49
role of customers, 49–51
service products, 56–57
testing and refinement phase, 46
value analysis, 51–52
Product launch, 45, 46
Product learning, 131
Product life cycle, 55, 206
Product-process matrix, 153
Product-service bundling, 9
Product structure file, 564, 568–569
Product support, 28–29
Product tree, 564
Production activity control, 601
Production change costs, 519
Production-line approach, 212–213
Production planning, 493–494
Production planning strategies, 494
Production process mapping, 275–278
Production pull system, 352
Production ramp-up, 46
Production rate, 492
Production requirements, 497
Production scheduling, 624
Production setup, 181
Productivity, 12, 33–35, 61, 274, 626
Professional service organizations 
(PSO), 204
Program Evaluation and Review Technique 
(PERT), 78–79, 83, 684
Progress curves, 131
Project, defined, 75
Project crashing, 86–89
Project development time, 60
Project indirect costs, 86
Project layout, 151, 170, 181–182
Project management, 74–109
breakthrough projects, 74
control charts, 90–91
critical chain, 638
defined, 74–75
derivative projects, 74
earned value management, 91–94
functional projects, 75–76
information systems for, 94–95
matrix projects, 76–77
network-planning models
critical path method, 78–85, 684
time-cost models/crashing, 86–89
organizing tasks, 77–78
organizing the team, 75
probability analysis, 86–89
project types, 75–77
pure projects, 75
statement of work, 77
work breakdown structure, 77–78
Project management information systems 
(PMIS), 95
Project Management Institute, 94
Project manager, 74, 76
Project milestones, 77
Projected available balance, 570
Prototypes, 46
Pull signals, 665
Pull system, 352
Purchasing function, measurement of, 435
Pure goods/services, 8–9
Pure project, 75
Pure strategy, 494
Pure virtual customer contact, 207
Push systems, 665
Q-model, 524
QFD, 50–51
QS-9000, 311
Quadratic programming, 692
Qualitative forecasting techniques, 
446, 468–470
Quality
acceptable quality level (AQL), 333–335
certification, 12, 310–312
continuous improvement, 624, 682
cost of, 301–303
defects, 298, 303–304, 309
defined, 61
design, 27–28, 300–301
dimensions of, 301–302
DPMO, 304
external benchmarking, 311–312
gap errors, 661
hospitals, 661–663
house of quality, 50–51
importance of, 634
inspection, 309
ISO standards, 12, 310–312
job enrichment and, 278–279
Malcolm Baldrige Quality Award, 12, 
299–300
process, 27–28
QFD, 50–51
reengineering and, 685
of service, 121, 661–663
versus service, 27–28
Shingo system, 309–310
Six-Sigma
analytical tools for, 305–308
defined, 12, 298, 303
lean, 308
methodology, 304–305
process capability and, 321–325
roles and responsibilities, 308–309
versus theory of constraints, 624
specifications, 300–301
statistical process control; See Statistical 
process control (SPC)
total quality control, 11
total quality management (TQM)
defined, 299
development of, 12
goals of, 299
versus reengineering, 685
use in hospitals, 661–663
Quality at the source, 301, 358–359
Quality function deployment (QFD), 50–51
Quality Gurus, 299
Quantitative layout techniques, 169, 182
Queue discipline, 228
Queue time, 630
Queues, 223
Queuing systems, 223–230; See also 
Waiting line analysis
Queuing theory, 683
Quick-build products, 46, 48
Quick plant assessment (QPA), 680–681
Quill, 30
R-chart, 329–332
Radio frequency identification (RFID), 540, 
593, 660
Rail, as a transportation method, 380
Raisel, Ethan M., 676
Random errors, 464
Random variation, 318, 447
Randon order rule, 595
Rate cutting, 279
Rate fences, 504
Rath and Strong Consulting, 209
Ratios, financial, 15–17
Raw materials, 518
Reactive system, 205
Real time, 431
Receivables turnover ratio, 16–17
Redbox, 207
Reengineering, 12, 684–686

752	
	
INDEX
Regression analysis, 455–458, 468, 683
Regression model, 389
Reid, Richard A., 654n
Reinforcing loops, 682
Relative measure, 34
Reliability, 28
Remote diagnosis, 667
Reneging, 227
Reorder point, 528–529
Request for bid (RFB), 403
Request for proposal (RFP), 403
Request variability, 207
Research and development, 74
Reservice, 230
Residuals, 463
Resource inputs, 111
Resources, 592
Respect for people, 353
Responsibility charts, 684
Responsive supply chains, 407
Restaurant industry, 271–273, 281–283
Retail sector
layout, 183–185
self-service model, 30–31, 213
Return on investment (ROI), 625, 639
Returning, 7
Revenue per employee, 15
Reverse auction, 403
Rewards, 309
RFID, 540, 593, 660
Risk, 31–33, 333, 521, 683, 716
Risk-hedging supply chains, 407
Risk priority number (RPN), 305
Ritz-Carlton, 213–215
Roadway Logistics, 409
Robots, 667, 711–712
Rogo, Alex, 622–623
Rope, 632–634
Route sheets, 155–156
Routine service organizations 
(RSOs), 204
Routing matrix, 181–182
Ruck, Bill, 37
Run charts, 305, 306, 682
Run time, 274
Ryder, 408
Safety stock
establishing, 529
fixed-order quantity model, 517, 530
fixed-time period model, 518, 524, 
533–534
in the health care industry, 665
probability approach, 529
Sales and marketing, ERP and, 430
Sales and operations planning, 490–514
aggregate operations plan, 490, 
492–496
applied to services, 501–503
defined, 490
intermediate-range, 491–492
level scheduling, 359–360
long-range, 491–492
overview of, 490–492
production planning environment, 
493–494
short-range, 491–492
techniques, 496–503
yield management, 503–505
Sales price, 60
Sampling
acceptance, 333–335
by attributes, 325–328
by variables, 329–332
work, 279, 682
Sampson, Scott, 207
Sam’s Club, 431
SAP, 427, 433–435
Sawtooth effect, 526
SBAR, 661–662
Scalzitti, Gary, 401
Scandinavian Airlines, 185
Scatter diagrams, 682
Scheduled receipt, 570
Scheduling, 590–621
backward, 592, 638
critical path method, 78–85, 684
demand pull, 366
FCFS rule, 228, 595–597
finite loading, 592
forward, 592, 638
functions performed, 593–594
in health care, 590–591
infinite loading, 591
input/output control, 602–603
job sequencing, 594–595
lean production and, 359–363
level, 359–360
manufacturing execution systems, 591
master production, 561–563, 568, 636
material requirements planning 
(MRP); See Material requirements 
planning (MRP)
minimum-cost, 86
objectives of, 594
on one machine, 595–598
of personnel, 605–607
principles of, 604
priority rules, 228, 595–601
production, 624
set jobs on same number of machines, 
599–601
shop-floor control, 593, 601–604
simulation; See Simulation
on two machines, 598–599
workcenter, 591–595
workforce, 661
Scorecard, balanced, 684
Seasonal variation, 458–463
Second Life, 207
Second party certification, 311
Segmented service experience, 208–209
Self-check, 309
Self-service approach to service, 30–31, 213
Sensitivity analysis, 60–61
Sequencing, job, 594–595
Serial process, 273, 285
Service blueprinting, 211–212, 682
Service bookends, 207–208
Service Executive System (SES), 591
Service experience fit, 56
Service facilities, location of, 388–389
Service guarantees, 209–210
Service package, 202
Service processes, 201–220
behavioral science approach, 207–211
blueprinting, 211–212, 682
customer contact, 203
customer encounters, 207–211
designing service organizations, 203–211
Internet and, 206–207
managing variability, 207
nature of, 202–203
personal-attention approach, 213–215
production-line approach, 212–213
service guarantees, 209–210
service-system design matrix, 205–207
well-designed, 215
Service rate, 121, 228
Service recovery, 209
Service-system design matrix, 205–207
Service time distribution, 228
Service triangle, 202
Serviceability, of a product, 300
Services; See also Service processes
aggregate planning and, 501–503
capacity planning and, 120–122, 203–
204, 281–285
classification of, 203
consulting and, 675
design of new, 56–57
versus goods, 7–8
lean, 364–366
personnel scheduling, 605–607
pure, 8–9
versus quality, 27–28
quality of, 121, 661–663
retail layout, 183–185
self-service delivery of, 30–31, 213
Service Execution System (SES), 591
virtual, 206–207
yield management, 503–505
Servicescapes, 183–185
Setup costs, 363, 519, 635
Setup time, 181, 274–275, 363, 630
7-Eleven, 410
Shareholders, 24
Shell Oil Company, 24
Shibaura Seisaku-Sho, 168
Shingo, Shigeo, 309
Shingo system, 309–310
Shop discipline, 603
Shop-floor control, 593, 601–604
Short-range capacity management, 111
Short-range planning, 491–492
Short-term debt, 724
Short term forecasting, 448
Shortage costs, 520
Shortest operating time (SOT), 595
Sigma, 319
Signs, symbols, and artifacts, 185
Simple moving average, 449–451
Simulation
consulting and, 682–683
forecasting and, 446
waiting lines, 239–245
Singapore Airlines, 679
Single arrival, 226

	
	
	
INDEX	
	
753
Single channel, multiphase line structure, 
228–229
Single channel, single phase line structure, 
228–229
Single-minute exchange of die (SMED), 309
Single-period model, 517, 521–524
Single sampling plan, 333–335
Single-stage process, 270
SIPOC, 305
Situation-Background-Assessment-
Recommendation, 661–662
Six-Sigma
analytical tools for, 305–308
defined, 12, 298, 303
lean, 308
methodology, 304–305
process capability and, 321–325
roles and responsibilities, 308–309
versus theory of constraints, 624
Skunkworks, 75
Slack time, 80
Slack time remaining per operation (STR/
OP), 595
Slack time remaining (STR), 595
Slot machine analysis, 266–269
Slushy, 562–563
SMED, 309
Smoothing, exponential, 452–454
Smoothing constant alpha, 452
Smoothing constant delta, 453
Social responsibility, 24
Software, 713–715; See also Technology
Sony, 3
Source inspection, 309
Sourcing
capability, 410
defined, 6–7, 403
green, 411–413
measuring performance, 416–417
strategic, 403–407
Sourcing/purchasing design matrix, 403
Southwest Airlines, 2–3, 14, 29, 351–352
Spatial layout, 184
Specialization of labor, 278
Specialized plants, 364
Specific purpose equipment, 153
Specifications, quality, 300–301
Specificity, 403
Speed, 28, 271
Speedi-Lube, 365
Spend cost analysis, 412
Splitting tasks, 178–179
Spot purchase, 403
Stable supply process, 406–407
Stable workforce, 494
Stakeholder analysis, 683
Stakeholders, 24
Standard deviation, 319
Standard error, 464
Standard Meat Company, 364
Standardization, 153
Staples, 30
Starbucks, 201, 444–445
Starving, 270
State Farm Insurance, 384
Statement of work (SOW), 77
Statistical analysis, 683
Statistical fluctuations, 627
Statistical process control (SPC); See also 
Quality
acceptance sampling, 333–335
defined, 325
operating characteristic curves, 334–335
procedures, 325–332
Statistical quality control (SQC), 317–347; See 
also Statistical process control (SPC)
application of, 318
capability index, 322–325
process capability, 321–325
variation and, 318–320
Steady state, 230, 283
Stock, cost of, 725
Straddling, 29
Straight-line method, 720
Strategic activities, 411
Strategic analysis, 26
Strategic capacity planning, 111; See also 
Capacity management
Strategic forecasts, 445
Strategic planning, 26; See also Operations 
and supply chain strategy
Strategic sourcing, 403–407
Stretch objectives, 309
Subcontracting, 494–495
Subjective preference variability, 207
Subtask, 77
Successive check inspection, 309
Sum-of-the-years’-digits (SYD) method, 720
Sunk costs, 718–719
Super bill of materials, 565
Supermaids, 365
Supplier, input, process, output, customer 
(SIPOC), 305
Supplier networks, 366
Suppliers
lean, 353
relationships with, 409–411
Supply chain management, 12
Supply chain risk, 31–33; See also Risk
Supply chain strategies; See Operations 
and supply chain strategy
Supply chains
agile, 407
bullwhip effect, 404–405
defined, 4
efficient, 407
hedging, 407
hospital, 663–664
lean, 353–354, 363–364
responsive, 407
Supply network, 4–5
Surveys, 678–679
Sustainability, 13, 24–25
SWOT analysis, 679
Synchronized planning, 692
Synchronous control, 629–637
Synchronous manufacturing, 624–625, 
634, 638–640
System balance, 114
System dynamics, 682
System-level design, 46
Systematic layout planning, 174–175, 659
Taco Bell, 14, 221
Tactical forecasts, 445
Taguchi, Genichi, 320, 321
Target, 265
Task errors, 209
Task ordering, 151, 181
Task sharing/splitting, 178–179
Tasks, 77, 175–176, 268–269
Taxes, effects of, 723
Technology; See also Internet
benefits of investments in, 715–716
CAD, 52, 713–714
CAE, 713
CAM, 715
evaluation of investments, 715
group, 170, 358, 591
hardware, 711–713
in manufacturing, 711–715
MRP software, 566–567
operations, 711–717
optimized production technology 
(OPT), 624
push development, 46–47
risks in adopting new, 716
software, 713–715
Technology platform, 47
Telemedicine, 667
Tesla Motors, 23–24, 44
Testing and refinement phase, 46
Theory of constraints, 622–654
basic configurations, 628–629
batch sizes, 634–637
capacity constrained resources, 628, 
632–634, 636–637
goal of the firm, 625
methods for control, 629–637
performance measurement, 625–626
relationship with other areas, 639–640
versus Six Sigma, 624
synchronous manufacturing, 624–625, 
634, 638–640
unbalanced capacity, 626–628
what to produce, 640–646
Third party certification, 311
Third-party logistics providers, 379, 408, 663
3-D printing, 148
Three T’s, 212
3M, 381
3PL, 663
Throughput rate, 275, 277–278, 625, 631
Throughput ratio, 275
Time, 120
Time buckets, 565
Time buffer, 633–634
Time-cost models, 86–89
Time dependent process, 8
Time fences, 562–563
Time per unit, 131
Time series analysis, 448–463
decomposition of, 458–463
defined, 446
exponential smoothing, 452–454
linear regression analysis, 455–458
simple moving average, 449–451
weighted moving average, 451–452
Time study, 279

754	
	
INDEX
Time to market, 61
Time triggered, 524–525
TL 9000, 311
Tokoyo Electric Company, 168
Tokoyo Shibaura Denki, 168
Toshiba, 151, 168–169
Total average value of inventory, 276
Total cost of ownership (TCO), 414–416
Total factor measure of productivity, 34
Total factory automation, 715
Total quality control (TQC), 11
Total quality management (TQM); See also 
Quality
defined, 299
development of, 12
goals of, 299
versus reengineering, 685
use in hospitals, 661–663
Tours, plant, 679–681
Toyota Motor Corporation, 32, 47, 50, 112, 
179, 309, 350, 351, 360
Toyota New Global Architecture, 350
Toyota Production System (TPS), 352–353
Toys “R” Us, 381
TQC, 11
TQM; See Total quality management (TQM)
Tracking Gantt chart, 95
Tracking signal, 465–466
Trade-offs
concept of, 29
waiting line analysis, 222
Trading blocs, 382
Training
to improve performance, 138
in Six Sigma, 308
Transaction cost, 520
Transaction processing, 428
Transactions costing, 723
Transfer batch, 634–637
Transportation method of linear 
programming, 384–387, 599
Transportation modes, 380–381
Treatment errors, 209
Trend, 447–448, 453–454
Triple bottom line, 13, 24
Trucking, 380
Tucson Parks and Recreation, 501–503
Turnover
of assets, 16–17
of inventory, 16–17, 276, 416–417, 
534–535
Two-bin logic, 520
Two-card kanban system, 360–362
U-shaped layouts, 179
Unbalanced capacity, 626–628
Uncertainty, of supply, 405–407
Uncompromised reduction, 207
Underutilization, 360
Uniform plant loading, 360
United Parcel Service (UPS), 279, 379
Upper and lower process limits, 321
Upper and lower specification limits, 319
Upper control limit (UCL), 326–332
Utilization, 112, 121, 267, 274–275
Value, 14, 351
Value-added, 351, 625
Value-added time, 275
Value analysis/value engineering, 51–52
Value chain, 351, 679, 680
Value stream, 353
Value stream mapping (VSM), 276, 
355–357
Variability
customer-introduced, 207, 208, 210
types of, 207
Variable arrival, 224
Variable costs, 718
Variables
defined, 329
by sampling, 329–332
Variation
assignable, 318
common, 318
measuring, 319–320
random, 318, 447
seasonal, 458–463
Vendor managed inventory (VMI), 404
Vertical integration, 409
Vertical job enlargement, 279
Virtual manufacturing cells, 181
Virtual service, 206–207
Volvo, 43, 113
Wait time, 236–239, 630
Waiting line analysis, 221–264
computer simulation, 242–244
customer arrivals, 223
customer wait time, 236–239
exiting the system, 230
factors to consider, 227–228
line structure, 228–229
models, 204, 230–231
queuing system, 223–230
service guarantees and, 209–210
Walmart, 184, 265, 312, 431, 539, 671
Warehouses; See also Distribution; 
Logistics
consolidation of, 381
cross-docking, 381
facility location criteria, 381–383
layout; See Facility layout
lean, 354
material handling, 174, 181, 712–713
Waste
defined, 351
elimination of, 351–353
reduction of, 353, 411
Water, as a transportation 
method, 380
Weeks of supply, 416–417
Weighted average cost of capital, 
725–726
Weighted moving average, 451–452
Welch, Jack, 298
Wendy’s, 271–273, 366
Whim rule, 595
Wikipedia, 207
W.L. Gore & Associates, 47
Womack, J. P., 364
Work breakdown structure, 77–78
Work flow diagram, 659–660
Work-in-process inventory, 179, 271, 
276, 518
Work measurement; See also Job design
purpose of, 279
techniques for, 279–280
work sampling, 279, 682
Work package, 77
Work sampling, 279, 682
Work specialization, 138
Workcenter layout, 151–152, 170–174
Workcenter scheduling, 591–595
Workforce
flexible, 114
scheduling of, 605–607, 661
stable, 494
Workforce level, 492
Workstation cycle time, 174
Workstations, parallel, 179
X chart, 329–332
Yield management, 503–505
YouTube, 207
Zero-changeover-time, 113
Zero defects, 298, 309
Zero variability, 319

Social
Responsibility
Economic
Prosperity
Environmental
Stewardship
The
Triple
Bottom
Line
The Triple Bottom Line
Manufacturing
Cell
Project
Inefficient
Processes
Mass Customization
Low
Product Volume
High
Low—
one-of-a-kind
High—
standardized
commodity
product
Product
Standardization
Workcenter
Assembly
Line
Continuous
Process
Product–Process Matrix: Framework Describing Layout Strategies
High
Low
High
Process
efficiency
Degree of customer/server contact
Buffered
core (none)
Permeable
system (some)
Reactive
system (much)
Mail 
contact
Internet and
on-site
technology
Face-to-face 
tight specs
Face-to-face 
loose specs
Face-to-face
total 
customization
Phone 
contact
Low
High
Low
Sales
opportunity
Degree of customer/server contact
Low
High
Worker
requirements
Technological
innovations
Focus of
operations
Clerical
skills
Paper
handling
Office
automation
Helping
skills
Demand
management
Routing
methods
Verbal
skills
Scripting
calls
Computer
databases
Procedural
skills
Flow
control
Electronic
aids
Trade
skills
Capacity
management
Self-serve
Diagnostic
skills
Client mix
Client/worker
teams
Characteristics of Workers, Operations, and Innovations Relative to the Degree of Customer/Service Contact
Service-System Design Matrix

Slow
Speed of delivery
Fast
Low
High
Cost
High
Low
Volume
Highway
Air
Hand
delivery
Pipeline
Rail
Water
Logistics-System Design Matrix: Framework Describing Logistics Processes
Request for
proposal
Spot
purchase
Short
Long
Contract
duration
Low
High
Specificity
Strategic
alliance
High
Low
Transaction costs
Request for bid
and
reverse auctions
Electronic
catalog
Vendor
managed
inventory
The Sourcing/Purchasing Design Matrix
Reorder point/equal
order period
Manual
two-bin
High
Transaction costs
Low
Independent
Dependent
Demand
High
Low
Obsolete
inventory
(risk)
Material
requirements
planning
Rate-based
synchronous
planning
Inventory-Control-System Design Matrix: Framework Describing Inventory Control Logic

