
Operations Management

This page intentionally left blank

 William J.  Stevenson 
 Saunders College of Business
Rochester Institute of Technology 
 Operations Management 
 Twelfth Edition 

 www.mhhe.com 
 This book is dedicated to you.  
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT, TWELFTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2015 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2012, 2009, and 
2007. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in 
a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education including, but not 
limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4
ISBN 
978-0-07-802410-8
MHID 
0-07-802410-2
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, Content Production & Technology Services: Kimberly Meriwether David
Managing Director: Douglas Reiner
Senior Brand Manager: Thomas Hayward
Executive Director of Development: Ann Torbert
Senior Development Editor: Wanda J. Zeman
Director of Digital Content: Doug Ruby
Digital Development Editor: Kevin Shanahan, Meg Maloney
Senior Marketing Manager: Heather A. Kazakoff
Director, Content Production: Terri Schiesl
Content Project Manager: Kristin Bradley
Content Project Manager: Rachel Townsend
Buyer II: Debra R. Sylvester
Design: Srdjan Savanovic
Cover Image: Airlines image: © Bloomberg via Getty Images; Apple store image: © FP/Getty Images; 
Surgeons: © Michie Turpin/Piedmont Healthcare; Workplace image: © Jeff Gilbert/Alamy
Lead Content Licensing Specialist: Keri Johnson
Typeface: 10/12 Times New Roman
Compositor: Laserwords Private Limited
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.

 The McGraw-Hill Series in Operations 
and Decision Sciences 
 Operations Management 
 Beckman and Rosenfield,  Operations, 
Strategy: Competing in the 21st Century, 
 First Edition 
 Benton,  Purchasing and Supply Chain 
Management,  Second Edition 
 Bowersox, Closs, Cooper, and Bowersox, 
 Supply Chain Logistics Management, 
 Fourth Edition 
 Brown and Hyer,  Managing Projects: 
A Team-Based Approach,  First Edition 
 Burt, Petcavage, and Pinkerton,  Supply 
Management,  Eighth Edition 
 Cachon and Terwiesch,  Matching  Supply 
with Demand: An Introduction to 
 Operations Management,  Third Edition 
 Cooper and Schindler,  Business Research 
Methods,  Twelfth Edition 
 Finch,  Interactive Models for Operations 
and Supply Chain Management,  First 
Edition 
 Fitzsimmons, Fitzsimmons, and  Bordoloi, 
 Service Management: Operations, 
 Strategy, Information Technology,  Eighth 
Edition 
 Gehrlein,  Operations Management Cases, 
 First Edition 
 Harrison and Samson,  Technology 
 Management,  First Edition 
 Hayen,  SAP R/3 Enterprise Software: 
An Introduction,  First Edition 
 Hill,  Manufacturing Strategy: Text 
& Cases,  Third Edition 
 Hopp,  Supply Chain Science,  First Edition 
 Jacobs, Berry, Whybark, and Vollmann, 
 Manufacturing Planning & Control for 
Supply Chain Management,  Sixth Edition 
 Jacobs and Chase,  Operations and Supply 
Management: The Core,  Third Edition 
 Jacobs and Chase,  Operations and Supply 
Management,  Fourteenth Edition 
 Jacobs and Whybark,  Why ERP?  First 
Edition 
 Larson and Gray,  Project Management: 
The Managerial Process,  Sixth Edition 
 Leenders, Johnson, and Flynn,  Purchasing 
and Supply Management,  Fourteenth 
Edition 
 Olson,  Introduction to Information 
 Systems Project Management,  Second 
Edition 
 Schroeder, Goldstein, Rungtusanatham, 
 Operations Management: Contemporary 
Concepts and Cases,  Sixth Edition 
 Seppanen, Kumar, and Chandra,  Process 
Analysis and Improvement,  First Edition 
  Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky, and  Simchi-Levi, 
 Designing and Managing the Supply 
Chain: Concepts, Strategies, Case  Studies, 
 Third Edition  
 Sterman,  Business Dynamics: Systems 
Thinking and Modeling for Complex 
World,  First Edition 
 Stevenson,  Operations Management, 
 Twelfth Edition 
 Swink, Melnyk, Cooper, and Hartley, 
 Managing Operations Across the Supply 
Chain,  Second Edition 
 Thomke,  Managing Product and  Service 
Development: Text and Cases,  First 
Edition 
 Ulrich and Eppinger,  Product Design and 
Development,  Fourth Edition 
 Zipkin,  Foundations of Inventory 
 Management,  First Edition 
 Quantitative Methods 
and Management Science 
 Hillier and Hillier,  Introduction to 
 Management Science: A  Modeling 
and Case Studies Approach with 
 Spreadsheets,  Fifth Edition 
 Stevenson and Ozgur,  Introduction to 
Management Science with Spreadsheets, 
 First Edition 

This page intentionally left blank

vii
 •  New material and more emphasis have been devoted to 
these topics:
  
  
 Service 
  
  
 Supply chain management 
  
  
Sustainability 
  
  
 Step-by-step problem solving 
 •  Throughout the text, there are new, updated readings, 
and photos to provide students with a motivating view of 
the critical importance of operations management today. 
 •  Connect Plus for Operations Management is now 
 available with LearnSmart, McGraw-Hill’s adaptive 
learning component. LearnSmart provides assignable 
modules that help students master core concepts and 
come to class better prepared. 
 Acknowledgments 
  I want to thank the many contributors to this edition. Review-
ers and adopters of the text have provided a “continuously 
improving” wealth of ideas and suggestions. It is encourag-
ing to me as an author. I hope all reviewers and readers will 
know their suggestions were valuable, were carefully consid-
ered, and are sincerely appreciated. The list includes post- 
publication reviewers.
 Robert Aboolian, California State University—
San Marcos 
 Pamela Barnes, Kansas State University 
 Greg Bier, University of Missouri 
 Gary Black, University of Southern Indiana 
 Jeff Brand, Marquette University 
 Cenk Caliskan, Utah Valley University 
 Cem Canel, University of North Carolina—Wilmington 
 Jen-Yi Chen, Cleveland State University 
 Robert Clark, Stony Brook University 
 Dinesh Dave, Appalachian State University 
 Abdelghani Elimam, San Francisco State 
 Kurt Engemann, Iona College 
 Michael Fathi, Georgia Southwestern State 
 Warren Fisher, Stephen F. Austin State University 
 Gene Fliedner, Oakland University 
 Theodore Glickman, George Washington University 
 Haresh Gurnani, University of Miami 
 Johnny Ho, Columbus State University 
 Ron Hoffman, Greenville Technical College 
 Preface 
 The material in this book is intended as an introduction to the 
field of operations management. The topics covered include 
both strategic issues and practical applications. Among the 
topics are forecasting, product and service design, capacity 
planning, management of quality and quality control, inven-
tory management, scheduling, supply chain management, and 
project management. 
 My purpose in revising this book continues to be to pro-
vide a clear presentation of the concepts, tools, and appli-
cations of the field of operations management. Operations 
management is evolving and growing, and I have found 
updating and integrating new material to be both reward-
ing and challenging, particularly due to the plethora of new 
developments in the field, while facing the practical limits on 
the length of the book. 
 This text offers a comprehensive and flexible amount 
of content that can be selected as appropriate for different 
courses and formats, including undergraduate, graduate, and 
executive education. 
 This allows instructors to select the chapters, or portions 
of chapters, that are most relevant for their purposes. That 
flexibility also extends to the choice of relative weighting of 
the qualitative or quantitative aspects of the material and the 
order in which chapters are covered because chapters do not 
depend on sequence. For example, some instructors cover 
project management early, others cover quality or lean early, 
etc. 
 As in previous editions, there are major pedagogical fea-
tures designed to help students learn and understand the 
material. This section describes the key features of the book, 
the chapter elements, the supplements that are available for 
teaching the course, highlights of the eleventh edition, and 
suggested applications for classroom instruction. By pro-
viding this support, it is our hope that instructors and stu-
dents will have the tools to make this learning experience a 
rewarding one. 
 What’s New in This Edition 
  This edition has been revised to incorporate and integrate 
changes in the field of Operations Management, and the 
many suggestions for improvement received from instructors 
around the world who are using the text. The following are 
key among the revisions:
 •  New examples, discussion questions, and problems have 
been incorporated throughout. 
 •  Some content has been rewritten or added to include 
current information, improve clarity and help 
understanding.  

viii 
Preface
 Lisa Houts, California State University—Fresno 
 Stella Hua, Western Washington University 
 Neil Hunt, Suffolk University 
 Faizul Huq, Ohio University 
 Richard Jerz, St. Ambrose University 
 George Kenyon, Lamar University 
 Casey Kleindienst, California State University—Fullerton 
 John Kros, East Carolina University 
 Anita Lee-Post, University of Kentucky 
 Nancy Levenburg, Grand Valley State University 
 F. Edward Ziegler, Kent State University 
 Other contributors include accuracy checkers: Gary Black, 
University of Southern Indiana, Michael Godfrey, University 
of Wisconsin at Oshkosh, and Richard White, University of 
North Texas; Test Bank: Alan Cannon, University of Texas at 
Arlington; PowerPoints: David Cook, Old Dominion Univer-
sity; Data Sets: Mehdi Kaighobadi, Florida Atlantic Univer-
sity; Excel Templates and ScreenCam tutorials: Lee Tangedahl, 
University of Montana; Instructors Manual: Michael Godfrey. 
 Special thanks goes out to Larry White, Eastern Illinois 
University, who helped revise, design, and develop interactive 
content in  Connect ®  Operations Management  for this edition: 
 Finally I would like to thank all the people at McGraw-
Hill/Irwin for their efforts and support. It is always a plea-
sure to work with such a professional and competent group of 
people. Special thanks go to Thomas Hayward, Senior Brand 
Manager; Wanda Zeman, Senior Development Editor; Kristin 
Bradley, Project Manager; Debra Sylvester, Buyer; Heather 
Kazakoff, Senior Marketing Manager; Srdjan Savanovic, 
Designer; Rachel Townsend, Content Project Manager; Keri 
Johnson, Senior Photo Research Coordinator, and many 
 others who worked “behind the scenes.” 
 I would also like to thank the many reviewers of previ-
ous editions for their contributions. Vikas Agrawal, Fay-
etteville State University; Bahram Alidaee, University of 
Mississippi; Ardavan Asef-Faziri, California State Uni-
versity at Northridge; Prabir Bagchi, George Washington 
State University; Gordon F. Bagot, California State Uni-
versity at Los Angeles; Ravi Behara, Florida Atlantic Uni-
versity; Michael Bendixen, Nova Southeastern; Ednilson 
Bernardes, Georgia Southern University; Prashanth N. 
Bharadwaj, Indiana University of Pennsylvania; Greg Bier, 
University of Missouri at Columbia; Joseph Biggs, Cal 
Poly State University; Kimball Bullington, Middle Ten-
nessee State University; Alan Cannon, University of Texas 
at Arlington; Injazz Chen, Cleveland State University; 
Alan Chow, University of Southern Alabama at Mobile; 
Chrwan-Jyh, Oklahoma State University; Chen Chung, 
University of Kentucky; Robert Clark, Stony Brook Uni-
versity; Loretta Cochran, Arkansas Tech University; 
Lewis Coopersmith, Rider University; Richard Crandall, 
Appalachian State University; Dinesh Dave, Appalachian 
State University; Scott Dellana, East Carolina University; 
Kathy Dhanda, DePaul University; Xin Ding, University 
of Utah; Ellen Dumond, California State University at Ful-
lerton; Richard Ehrhardt, University of North Carolina at 
Greensboro; Kurt Engemann, Iona College; Diane Ervin, 
DeVry University; Farzaneh Fazel, Illinois State Univer-
sity; Wanda Fennell, University of Mississippi at Hatties-
burg; Joy Field, Boston College; Warren Fisher, Stephen 
F. Austin State University; Lillian Fok, University of New 
Orleans; Charles Foley, Columbus State Community Col-
lege; Matthew W. Ford, Northern Kentucky University; 
Phillip C. Fry, Boise State University; Charles A. Gates Jr., 
Aurora University; Tom Gattiker, Boise State University; 
Damodar Golhar, Western Michigan University; Robert 
Graham, Jacksonville State University; Angappa Gunas-
ekaran, University of Massachusetts at Dartmouth; Haresh 
Gurnani, University of Miami; Terry Harrison, Penn State 
University; Vishwanath Hegde, California State Univer-
sity at East Bay; Craig Hill, Georgia State University; Jim 
Ho, University of Illinois at Chicago; Seong Hyun Nam, 
University of North Dakota; Jonatan Jelen, Mercy Col-
lege; Prafulla Joglekar, LaSalle University; Vijay Kannan, 
Utah State University; Sunder Kekre, Carnegie-Mellon 
University; Jim Keyes, University of Wisconsin at Stout; 
Seung-Lae Kim, Drexel University; Beate Klingenberg, 
Marist College; John Kros, East Carolina University; 
Vinod Lall, Minnesota State University at Moorhead; Ken-
neth Lawrence, New Jersey Institute of Technology; Jooh 
Lee, Rowan University; Anita Lee-Post, University of 
Kentucky; Karen Lewis, University of Mississippi; Bing-
guang Li, Albany State University; Cheng Li, California 
State University at Los Angeles; Maureen P. Lojo, Califor-
nia State University at Sacramento; F. Victor Lu, St. John’s 
University; Janet Lyons, Utah State University; James 
Maddox, Friends University; Gita Mathur, San Jose State 
University; Mark McComb, Mississippi College; George 
Mechling, Western Carolina University; Scott Metlen, Uni-
versity of Idaho; Douglas Micklich, Illinois State Univer-
sity; Ajay Mishra, SUNY at Binghamton; Scott S. Morris, 
Southern Nazarene University; Philip F. Musa, University 
of Alabama at Birmingham; Roy Nersesian, Monmouth 
University; Jeffrey Ohlmann, University of Iowa at Iowa 
City; John Olson, University of St. Thomas; Ozgur Ozluk, 
San Francisco State University; Kenneth Paetsch, Cleve-
land State University; Taeho Park, San Jose State Univer-
sity; Allison Pearson, Mississippi State University; Patrick 
Penfield, Syracuse University; Steve Peng, California 
State University at Hayward; Richard Peschke, Minne-
sota State University at Moorhead; Andru Peters, San Jose 
State University; Charles Phillips, Mississippi State Uni-
versity; Frank Pianki, Anderson University; Sharma Pil-
lutla, Towson University; Zinovy Radovilsky, California 
State University at Hayward; Stephen A. Raper, Univer-
sity of Missouri at Rolla; Pedro Reyes, Baylor University; 
Buddhadev Roychoudhury, Minnesota State University 

 
Preface 
ix
at Mankato; Narendra Rustagi, Howard University; Herb 
Schiller, Stony Brook University; Dean T. Scott, DeVry 
University; Scott J. Seipel, Middle Tennessee State Uni-
versity; Raj Selladurai, Indiana University; Kaushic Sen-
gupta, Hofstra University; Kenneth Shaw, Oregon State 
University; Dooyoung Shin, Minnesota State University at 
Mankato; Michael Shurden, Lander University; Raymond 
E. Simko, Myers University; John Simon, Governors State 
University; Jake Simons, Georgia Southern University; 
Charles Smith, Virginia Commonwealth University; Ken-
neth Solheim, DeVry University; Young Son, Bernard M. 
Baruch College; Victor Sower, Sam Houston State Uni-
versity; Jeremy Stafford, University of North Alabama; 
Donna Stewart, University of Wisconsin at Stout; Dothang 
Truong, Fayetteville State University; Mike Umble, Baylor 
University; Javad Varzandeh, California State University 
at San Bernardino; Timothy Vaughan, University of Wis-
consin at Eau Claire; Emre Veral, Baruch College; Mark 
Vroblefski, University of Arizona; Gustavo Vulcano, New 
York University; Walter Wallace, Georgia State University; 
James Walters, Ball State University; John Wang, Mont-
clair State University; Tekle Wanorie, Northwest Missouri 
State University; Jerry Wei, University of Notre Dame; 
Michael Whittenberg, University of Texas; Geoff Wil-
lis, University of Central Oklahoma; Pamela Zelbst, Sam 
Houston State University; Jiawei Zhang, NYU; Zhenying 
Zhao, University of Maryland; Yong-Pin Zhou, University 
of Washington. 
 William J.  Stevenson 

x
 MAJOR STUDY AND LEARNING FEATURES 
 A number of key features in this text have been specifically designed 
to help introductory students learn, understand, and apply Operations 
concepts and problem-solving techniques. 
 Walkthrough 
Sales of new houses and three-month lagged unemployment are shown in the following table. 
Determine if unemployment levels can be used to predict demand for new houses and, if so, 
derive a predictive equation.
Period ................................
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Units sold ..........................
20
41
17
35
25
31
38
50
15
19
14
Unemployment % 
(three-month lag) .....
7.2
4.0
7.3
5.5
6.8
6.0
5.4
3.6
8.4
7.0
9.0
E X A M P L E  1 0
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
S O L U T I O N
 1. 
Plot the data to see if a linear model seems reasonable. In this case, a linear model seems 
appropriate for the range of the data.
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
Level of unemployment (%), x
Units sold, y
 2. Check the correlation coefficient to confirm that it is not close to zero using the Web site 
template, and then obtain the regression equation:
.966
r  
  
This is a fairly high negative correlation. The regression equation is
71.85
6.91
y
x


  
Note that the equation pertains only to unemployment levels in the range 3.6 to 9.0, 
because sample observations covered only that range.
 Examples with Solutions 
 Throughout the text, wherever a quantitative or 
analytic technique is introduced, an example is 
included to illustrate the application of that tech-
nique. These are designed to be easy to follow. 

 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 The tasks shown in the following precedence diagram are to be assigned to workstations with the 
intent of minimizing idle time. Management has designed an output rate of 275 units per day. Assume 
440 minutes are available per day. 
 a. Determine the appropriate cycle time. 
 b. What is the minimum number of stations possible? 
   c. Assign tasks using the “positional weight” rule: Assign tasks with highest following times 
(including a task’s own time) first. Break ties using greatest number of following tasks.  
 d. Compute efficiency.   
 Problem 1 
a
c
e
b
d
f
g
h
i
0.3 minute
0.2 minute
0.1 minute
0.5 minute
0.3 minute
0.4 minute
0.6 minute
0.6 minute
1.2 minutes
 a. Cycle time
Operating time
Desired output
440 minutes per day
275 units per day
1.6 minutes



 Solution 
per unit
xi
 Solved Problems 
 At the end of chapters and 
chapter supplements, “solved 
problems” are provided to 
 illustrate problem  solving 
and the core concepts in 
the  chapter. These have 
been  carefully prepared to 
help students understand 
the steps involved in solving 
 different types of problems. 
The Excel logo indicates that 
a  spreadsheet is available on 
the text’s Web site, to help 
solve the problem. 
 TABLE 16.5 
 Excel solution for Example 2a 
 Excel Spreadsheet 
Solutions 
 Where applicable, the 
examples and solved prob-
lems include screen shots 
of a spreadsheet solution. 
Many of these were taken 
from the Excel templates, 
which are on the text’s 
website. Templates are 
programmed to be fully 
functional in Excel 2013 
and earlier. 

xii
 CHA P TE R 
 4 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 4.1 Introduction,  136 
 What Does Product and Service Design 
Do?  136  
 Key Questions,  136 
 Reasons for Product or Service Design or 
Redesign,  137 
 4.2 Idea Generation,  139 
 4.3 Legal and Ethical Considerations,  141 
 4.4 Human Factors,  142 
 4.5 Cultural Factors,  143 
 4.6 Global Product and Service Design,  143 
 4.7 Environmental Factors: 
Sustainability,  144 
 Cradle-to-Grave Assessment,  144 
 End-of-Life Programs,  144 
 The Three Rs: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle,  144 
 Reduce: Value Analysis,  145 
 Reuse: Remanufacturing,  145 
 Recycle,  146 
 4.8   Other Design Considerations  149 
 Strategies for Product or Service Life 
Stages,  149 
 Degree of Standardization,  151 
 Designing for Mass Customization,  151 
 Reliability,  153 
 Robust Design,  154 
 Degree of Newness,  155 
 Quality Function Deployment,  155 
 The Kano Model,  158 
 4.9    Phases in Product Design and 
Development,  159 
 4.10  Designing for Production,  160 
 Concurrent Engineering,  160 
 Computer-Aided Design,  160 
 Production Requirements,  161 
 Component Commonality,  162 
 4.11  Service Design,  162 
 Overview of Service Design,  163 
 Differences between Service Design and 
Product Design,  163 
 Phases in the Service Design 
Process,  164 
 Service Blueprinting,  164 
 Characteristics of Well-Designed Service 
Systems,  165 
 Challenges of Service Design,  166 
 Guidelines for Successful 
Service Design,  166   
 4.12  Operations Strategy,  167 
Operations Tour: High Acres Landfill, 170
 Chapter Supplement: Reliability,  171 
 Product and 
Service Design 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO4.1 
Explain the  strategic importance of product and service design. 
 LO4.2 
Describe what product and service design does. 
 LO4.3 
Name the key questions of product and service design. 
 LO4.4 
Identify some reasons for design or redesign. 
 LO4.5 
List some of the main sources of design ideas. 
 LO4.6 
Discuss the importance of legal, ethical, and sustainability 
considerations in product and service design. 
 LO4.7 
Explain the purpose and goal of life cycle assessment. 
 LO4.8 
Explain the phrase “the 3 Rs.” 
 LO4.9 
Briefly describe the phases in product design and development. 
 LO4.10 
Discuss several key issues in product or service design. 
 LO4.11 
Discuss the two key issues in service design. 
 LO4.12 
List the characteristics of well-designed service systems. 
 LO4.13 
List some guidelines for successful service design.   
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 The essence of a business organization is the products and services it offers, and every aspect 
of the organization and its supply chain are structured around those products and services. 
Organizations that have well-designed products or services are more likely to realize their 
goals than those with poorly designed products or services. Hence, organizations have a stra-
tegic interest in product and service design. Product or service design should be closely tied to 
an organization’s strategy. It is a major factor in cost, quality, time-to-market, customer satisfaction, and competitive advantage. 
Consequently, marketing, finance, operations, accounting, IT, and HR need to be involved. Demand forecasts and projected 
costs are important, as is the expected impact on the supply chain. It is significant to note that an important cause of operations 
failures can be traced to faulty design. Designs that have not been well thought out, or incorrectly implemented, or instructions 
for assembly or usage that are wrong or unclear, can be the cause of product and service failures, leading to lawsuits, injuries 
and deaths, product recalls, and damaged reputations. 
 The introduction of new products or services, or changes to product or service designs, can have impacts throughout the 
organization and the entire supply chain. Some processes may change very little, while others may have to change consider-
ably in terms of what they do or how and when they do it. New processes may have to be added, and some current ones may 
be eliminated. New suppliers and distributors may need to be found and integrated into the system, and some current suppliers 
and distributors may no longer be an appropriate fit. Moreover, it is necessary to take into account projected impact on demand 
as well as financial, marketing, and distribution implications. Because of the potential for widespread effects, taking a “big 
picture” systems approach early and throughout the design or redesign process is imperative to reduce the chance of missing 
some implications and costs, and to understand the time it will take. Likewise, input from engineering, operations, marketing, 
finance, accounting, and supply chains is crucial. 
 In this chapter you will discover insights into the design process that apply to both product and service design. 
 LO4.1  Explain the strategic 
importance of product and 
service design.
 CHAPTER ELEMENTS 
 Within each chapter, you will find the following elements that are 
designed to facilitate study and learning. All of these have been 
 carefully developed over many editions and have proven to be 
successful. 
 Chapter Outlines 
 Every chapter and supplement includes 
an outline of the topics covered. 
 Learning Objectives 
 Every chapter and supplement lists the 
learning objectives to achieve when studying 
the chapter material. The learning objectives 
are also included next to the specific material 
in the margins of the text. 
 Opening Vignettes 
 Each chapter opens with an introduction to the 
important operations topics covered in the  chapter. 
This enables students to see the relevance of 
 operations management in order to actively engage 
in learning the material. 

xiii
 Figures and Photos 
 The text includes photographs and 
graphic illustrations to support 
 student learning and provide interest 
and motivation. Approximately 100 
 carefully selected photos highlight the 
twelfth edition. The photos illustrate 
applications of operations and supply 
chain concepts in many successful 
companies. More than 400 graphic 
illustrations, more than any other 
text in the field, are included and all 
are color coded with  pedagogical 
 consistency to assist students in 
understanding concepts. 
 FIGURE 6.1 
 Process selection and capacity 
planning influence system design 
Forecasting
Product and
service design
Technological
change
Facilities and
equipment
Layout
Work
design
Capacity
Planning
Process
Selection
Inputs
Outputs
 A major key to Apple’s 
continued success is its ability 
to keep pushing the boundaries 
of innovation. Apple has 
demonstrated how to create 
growth by dreaming up products 
so new and ingenious that they 
have upended one industry after 
another. 
 Icons 
 Icons are included in the text, to point out relevant applications in a discussion or concept. 
These include: Excel icons    to point out Excel applications; and ScreenCam Tutorial 
icons   to link to the tutorials on the text’s website. 
e cel
x
www.mhhe.com/stevenson11e
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL

5.12 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 The strategic implications of capacity decisions can be enormous, impacting all areas of the 
organization. From an operations management standpoint, capacity decisions establish a set 
of conditions within which operations will be required to function. Hence, it is extremely 
important to include input from operations management people in making capacity decisions. 
 Flexibility can be a key issue in capacity decisions, although flexibility is not always an option, 
particularly in capital-intensive industries. However, where possible, flexibility allows an organi-
zation to be agile—that is, responsive to changes in the marketplace. Also, it reduces to a certain 
extent the dependence on long-range forecasts to accurately predict demand. And flexibility makes 
it easier for organizations to take advantage of technological and other innovations. Maintaining 
excess capacity (a capacity cushion) may provide a degree of flexibility, albeit at added cost. 
 Some organizations use a strategy of maintaining a capacity cushion for the purpose of 
blocking entry into the market by new competitors. The excess capacity enables them to pro-
duce at costs lower than what new competitors can. However, such a strategy means higher-
than-necessary unit costs, and it makes it more difficult to cut back if demand slows, or to 
shift to new product or service offerings. 
 Efficiency improvements and utilization improvements can provide capacity increases. 
Such improvements can be achieved by streamlining operations and reducing waste. The 
chapter on lean operations describes ways for achieving those improvements. 
 Bottleneck management can be a way to increase effective capacity, by scheduling non-
bottleneck operations to achieve maximum utilization of bottleneck operations. 
 In cases where capacity expansion will be undertaken, there are two strategies for deter-
mining the timing and degree of capacity expansion. One is the  expand-early  strategy (i.e., 
before demand materializes). The intent might be to achieve economies of scale, to expand 
market share, or to preempt competitors from expanding. The risks of this strategy include an 
oversupply that would drive prices down, and underutilized equipment that would result in 
higher unit costs. 
 The other approach is the  wait-and-see strategy  (i.e., to expand capacity only after demand 
materializes, perhaps incrementally). Its advantages include a lower chance of oversupply due 
to more accurate matching of supply and demand, and higher capacity utilization. The key risks 
are loss of market share and the inability to meet demand if expansion requires a long lead time. 
gy (i.e., to expand capacity only after demand 
ges include a lower chance of oversupply due 
, and higher capacity utilization. The key risks
demand if expansion requires a long lead time. 
 The labels are applied automatically, quite a feat, considering their 
complexity, size, and the hollow handle they likely encounter during 
application. MacDonald admits, “Label application was a challenge. We 
had to modify the bottle several times to accommodate the labeling 
machinery available.” 
 Source: “Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints,”  Packaging Digest, October 2002. 
Copyright © 2002 Reed Business Information. Used with permission. 
 Sherwin-Williams’ Dutch Boy Group has put a revolutionary spin on 
wall/house painting with its new square-shaped Twist & Pour ™ paint-
delivery container for the Dirt Fighter interior latex paint line. The four-
piece square container could be the first major change in how house 
paint is packaged in decades. Lightweight but sturdy, the Twist & Pour 
“bucket” is packed with so many conveniences, it’s next to impossible 
to mess up a painting project. 
 Winning Best of Show in an AmeriStar packaging competition spon-
sored by the Institute of Packaging Professionals, the exclusive, all-
plastic paint container stands almost 7½ in. tall and holds 126 oz., a bit 
less than 1 gal. Rust-resistant and moisture-resistant, the plastic bucket 
gives users a new way to mix, brush, and store paint. 
 A hollow handle on one side makes it comfortable to pour and 
[carry]. A convenient, snap-in pour spout neatly pours paint into a tray 
with no dripping but can be removed if desired, to allow a wide brush to 
be dipped into the 5¾-in.-dia. mouth. Capping the container is a large, 
twist-off lid that requires no tools to open or close. Molded with two lugs 
for a snug-finger-tight closing, the threaded cap provides a tight seal to 
extend the shelf life of unused paint. 
 While the lid requires no tools to access, the snap-off carry bail is 
assembled on the container in a “locked-down position” and can be pulled 
up after purchase for toting or hanging on a ladder. Large, nearly 4½-in.-
tall label panels allow glossy front and back labels printed and UV-coated 
to wrap around the can’s rounded corners, for an impressive display. 
 Jim MacDonald, co-designer of the Twist & Pour and a packaging 
engineer at Cleveland-based Sherwin-Williams, tells  Packaging Digest 
that the space-efficient, square shape is easier to ship and for retail-
ers to stack in stores. It can also be nested, courtesy of a recess in the 
bottom that mates with the lid’s top ring. “The new design allows for 
one additional shelf facing on an eight-foot rack or shelf area.” 
 READING 
 Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints 
xiv
 Operations Strategies 
 An Operations Strategy section 
is included at the ends of most 
chapters. These sections discuss 
how the chapters’ concepts can 
be applied and how they impact 
the operations of a company. 
 Readings 
 Readings highlight impor-
tant real-world applications, 
 provide examples of production/ 
operations issues, and offer 
further elaboration of the text 
material. They also provide a 
basis for classroom  discussion 
and generate interest in the 
subject matter. Many of the 
end-of-chapter readings include 
assignment questions. 

xv
 END-OF-CHAPTER RESOURCES 
 For student study and review, the following items are provided at the 
end of each chapter or chapter supplement. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 This item appears at the end of each chapter. It is intended to focus your attention on three key issues for 
business organizations in general, and operations management in particular. Those issues are trade-off 
decisions, collaboration among various functional areas of the organization, and the impact of technol-
ogy. You will see three or more questions relating to these issues. Here is the first set of questions:
    1. What are trade-offs? Why is careful consideration of trade-offs important in decision making? 
   2. Why is it important for the various functional areas of a business organization to collaborate? 
 3. In what general ways does technology have an impact on operations management decision making? 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 This item also will appear in every chapter. It allows you to critically apply information you learned in 
the chapter to a practical situation. Here is the first set of exercises:
 1. Many organizations offer a combination of goods and services to their customers. As you learned in 
this chapter, there are some key differences between production of goods and delivery of services. 
What are the implications of these differences relative to managing operations? 
   2. Why is it important to match supply and demand? If a manager believes that supply and demand 
will not be equal, what actions could the manager take to increase the probability of achieving a 
match?  
   3. One way that organizations compete is through technological innovation. However, there can be 
downsides for both the organization and the consumer. Explain.  
 1. Demand forecasts are essential inputs for many business decisions; they help managers decide how 
much supply or capacity will be needed to match expected demand, both within the organization and 
in the supply chain. 
   2. Because of random variations in demand, it is likely that the forecast will not be perfect, so managers 
need to be prepared to deal with forecast errors. 
   3. Other, nonrandom factors might also be present, so it is necessary to monitor forecast errors to check 
for nonrandom patterns in forecast errors. 
 4. It is important to choose a forecasting technique that is cost-effective and one that minimizes forecast 
error. 
 KEY POINTS 
 1. Determine the utilization and the efficiency for each of these situations:
 a. A loan processing operation that processes an average of 7 loans per day. The operation has a 
design capacity of 10 loans per day and an effective capacity of 8 loans per day. 
 b. A furnace repair team that services an average of four furnaces a day if the design capacity is six 
furnaces a day and the effective capacity is five furnaces a day. 
 c. Would you say that systems that have higher efficiency ratios than other systems will always 
have higher utilization ratios than those other systems? Explain. 
 2. In a job shop, effective capacity is only 50 percent of design capacity, and actual output is 
80  percent of effective output. What design capacity would be needed to achieve an actual output of 
eight jobs per week? 
 3. A producer of pottery is considering the addition of a new plant to absorb the backlog of demand 
that now exists. The primary location being considered will have fixed costs of $9,200 per month 
and variable costs of 70 cents per unit produced. Each item is sold to retailers at a price that 
 averages 90 cents. 
 a. What volume per month is required in order to break even? 
 b. What profit would be realized on a monthly volume of 61,000 units? 87,000 units? 
 c. What volume is needed to obtain a profit of $16,000 per month? 
 d. What volume is needed to provide a revenue of $23,000 per month? 
 PROBLEMS 
 Summaries 
 Chapters contain summaries that provide an 
overview of the material covered. 
 Key Points 
 The key points of the chapter are emphasized. 
 Key Terms 
 Key terms are highlighted in the text and then 
repeated in the margin with brief definitions for 
emphasis. They are listed at the end of each 
chapter (along with page references) to aid in 
reviewing. 
 Discussion and Review Questions 
 Each chapter and each supplement have a 
list of discussion and review questions. These 
precede the problem sets and are intended to 
serve as a student self-review or as class dis-
cussion starters. 
 Problem Sets 
 Each chapter includes a set of problems 
for assignment. The problems have been 
refined over many editions and are intended 
to be challenging but doable for students. 
Short answers to most of the problems are 
included in Appendix A so that students can 
check their understanding and see immedi-
ately how they are progressing. 
 Taking Stock and Critical 
Thinking Exercises 
 These activities encourage analytical thinking and 
help broaden conceptual understanding. A question 
related to ethics is included in the Critical Thinking 
Exercises. 

xvi
 Bruegger's Bagel Bakery makes and sells a variety of bagels, includ-
ing plain, onion, poppyseed, and cinnamon raisin, as well as assorted 
flavors of cream cheese. Bagels are the major source of revenue for 
the company. 
 The bagel business is a $3 billion industry. Bagels are very popular 
with consumers. Not only are they relatively low in fat, they are filling, 
and they taste good! Investors like the bagel industry because it can be 
highly profitable: it only costs about $.10 to make a bagel, and they can 
be sold for $.50 each or more. Although some bagel companies have 
done poorly in recent years, due mainly to poor management, Brueg-
ger's business is booming; it is number one nationally, with over 450 
shops that sell bagels, coffee, and bagel sandwiches for takeout or on-
premise consumption. Many stores in the Bruegger's chain generate an 
average of $800,000 in sales annually. 
 Production of bagels is done in batches, according to flavor, with 
each flavor being produced on a daily basis. Production of bagels at 
Bruegger's begins at a processing plant, where the basic ingredients 
of flour, water, yeast, and flavorings are combined in a special mixing 
machine. After the dough has been thoroughly mixed, it is transferred 
to another machine that shapes the dough into individual bagels. Once 
the bagels have been formed, they are loaded onto refrigerated trucks 
for shipping to individual stores. When the bagels reach a store, they 
output at each step in the process. At the stores, 
employees are instructed to watch for deformed 
bagels and to remove them when they find them. (Deformed bagels 
are returned to a processing plant where they are sliced into bagel 
chips, packaged, and then taken back to the stores for sale, thereby 
reducing the scrap rate.) Employees who work in the stores are care-
fully chosen and then trained so that they are competent to operate 
the necessary equipment in the stores and to provide the desired level 
of service to customers. 
 The company operates with minimal inventories of raw materials 
and inventories of partially completed bagels at the plant and very little 
inventory of bagels at the stores. One reason for this is to maintain a 
high degree of freshness in the final product by continually supplying 
fresh product to the stores. A second reason is to keep costs down; 
minimal inventories mean less space is needed for storage. 
 Questions 
 1. Bruegger's maintains relatively little inventory at either its plants 
or its retail stores. List the benefits and risks of this policy.  
 2. Quality is very important to Bruegger's. 
  
a.  What features of bagels do customers look at to judge their 
quality?  
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Bruegger's Bagel Bakery 
(D f
d b
l
 Operations Tours 
 These provide a simple “walkthrough” of an opera-
tion for students, describing the company, its product 
or service, and its process of managing operations. 
Companies featured include Wegmans Food Markets, 
Morton Salt, Stickley Furniture, and Boeing. 
 Production of bagels is done in batches, according to flavor, with
minimal inven
ons
gger
reta
ty is
hat f
ality
 Background 
 Harvey Industries, a Wisconsin company, specializes in the assembly of high-
pressure washer systems and in the sale of repair parts for these systems. 
The products range from small portable high-pressure washers to large 
industrial installations for snow removal from vehicles stored outdoors during 
the winter months. Typical uses for high-pressure water cleaning include:  
 Industrial customers include General Motors, 
Ford, Chrysler, Delta Airlines, United Parcel Service, 
and Shell Oil Company. 
 Although the industrial applications are a significant part of its sales, 
Harvey Industries is primarily an assembler of equipment for coin oper-
ated self-service car wash systems. The typical car wash is of concrete 
block construction with an equipment room in the center, flanked on 
either side by a number of bays. The cars are driven into the bays where 
the owner can wash and wax the car, utilizing high-pressure hot water 
and liquid wax. A dollar bill changer is available to provide change for the 
use of the equipment and the purchase of various products from dispens-
ers. The products include towels, tire cleaner, and upholstery cleaner.  
 CASE 
 Harvey Industries 
 Automobiles 
 Airplanes 
 Building maintenance 
 Barns 
 Engines 
 Ice cream plants 
 Lift trucks 
 Machinery 
 Swimming pools 
 
 
 
Manufacturing
manager
Sales
manager
Purchasing
manager
Controller
President
Stockroom
foreman
Assembly
foreman
Quality
engineer
 Cases 
 The text includes short cases. The cases were 
selected to provide a broader, more integrated 
thinking opportunity for students without taking 
a full case approach. 

xvii
 INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES 
 Online Learning Center (OLC)  www.mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
 The Online Learning Center provides complete materials for study and review. At this book’s 
website, instructors have access to teaching supports such as electronic files of the ancillary 
materials: Solutions Manual, Instructor’s Manual, test bank, PowerPoint Lecture Slides, Digi-
tal Image Library, and Excel Lecture scripts. 
 Instructor’s Manual.  Prepared by Michael Godfrey, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh, 
with contributions from William J. Stevenson, this manual includes teaching notes, chapter 
overview, an outline for each chapter, and solutions to the problems in the text. 
 Test Bank.  Prepared by the Alan Cannon, University of Texas-Arlington, the Test Bank 
includes over 2,000 true/false, multiple-choice, and discussion questions/problems at varying 
levels of difficulty. 
 EZ Test Online.  All test bank questions are available in EZ Test Online, a flexible elec-
tronic testing program. The answers to all questions are given, along with a rating of the 
level of difficulty, chapter learning objective met, Bloom’s taxonomy question type, and the 
AACSB knowledge category. 
 PowerPoint Lecture Slides.  Prepared by David Cook, Old Dominion University, the 
PowerPoint slides draw on the highlights of each chapter and provide an opportunity for the 
instructor to emphasize the key concepts in class discussions. 
 Digital Image Library.  All the figures in the book are included for insertion in PowerPoint 
slides or for class discussion. 
 Excel Lecture Scripts. Prepared by Lee Tangedahl, University of Montana, the scripts 
provide suggestions on using Excel and the Excel templates in class. 
 Operations Management Video Series 
 The operations management video series, free to text adopters, includes professionally devel-
oped videos showing students applications of key manufacturing and service topics in real 
companies. Each segment includes on-site or plant footage, interviews with company manag-
ers, and focused presentations of OM applications in use to help the companies gain competi-
tive advantage. Companies such as Zappos, FedEx, Subaru, Disney, BP, Chase Bank, DHL, 
Louisville Slugger, McDonald’s, Noodles & Company, and Honda are featured. 
 STUDENT RESOURCES 
 Online Learning Center (OLC)  www.mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
 Students have access to study materials created specifically for the text.
 •  Quizzes—self-grading to assess knowledge of the material. 
 •  PowerPoint Slides—give an overview of the chapter content. 
 •  Excel Data Files—import into Excel for quick calculation and analysis. 
 •  Study Outlines—provide a framework for taking notes. 
 •  Screencam Tutorials—describe how to solve problems in the text (see below). 

xviii
 •  Excel Templates—provide a handy Excel-based tool for solving problems in the text 
(see below). 
 •  And more . . . 
TABLE 3.1 
Excel solution for Example 5
 Excel Templates 
 Templates created by Lee Tangedahl, University of Montana, are included on the OLC. The  templates, over 70 total, 
include dynamically linked graphics and variable controls. They allow you to solve a number of problems in the text 
or additional problems. All templates have been revised to allow formatting of all cells, hiding rows or columns, and 
entering data or calculations in blank cells. Many ofthe templates have been expanded to accommodate solving larger 
problems and cases. 
 Trend-Adjusted Exponential Smoothing 
 A variation of simple exponential smoothing can be used when a time series exhibits a  linear
trend. It is called   trend-adjusted exponential smoothing   or, sometimes,  double smoothing, 
to differentiate it from simple exponential smoothing, which is appropriate only when data 
vary around an average or have step or gradual changes. If a series exhibits trend, and simple 
smoothing is used on it, the forecasts will all lag the trend: If the data are increasing, each 
forecast will be too low; if decreasing, each forecast will be too high. 
 The trend-adjusted forecast (TAF) is composed of two elements: a smoothed error and a 
trend factor. 
 TAF
1
S
T
t
t
t



 
 (3–11) 
 where
 S  t      Previous forecast plus smoothed error 
 T  t      Current trend estimate 
 and
 
TAF
(
TAF )
(TAF
TAF
)
1
1
1
S
A
T
T
T
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t

 


 





 
 (3–12) 
 Trend-adjusted exponential 
smoothing    Variation of expo-
nential smoothing used when 
a time series exhibits a linear 
trend.   
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO3.12  Prepare a trend-
adjusted exponential smoothing 
forecast.
 ScreenCam Tutorials 
 These screen “movies” and voiceover tutorials explain key chapter 
content, using Excel and other software platforms.  
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL

xix
 CourseSmart (ISBN: 0077640403)  
 CourseSmart is a convenient way to find and buy eTextbooks. At CourseSmart you can save 
up to 60 percent off the cost of a print textbook, reduce your impact on the environment, 
and gain access to powerful Web tools for learning. CourseSmart has the largest selection of 
eTextbooks available anywhere, offering thousands of the most commonly adopted textbooks 
from a wide variety of higher education publishers. CourseSmart eTextbooks are available in 
one standard online reader with full text search, notes and highlighting, and e-mail tools for 
sharing notes between classmates. Visit  www.CourseSmart.com for more information. 
 E-LEARNING AND ASSESSMENT 
 McGraw-Hill  Connect ® Operations Management   
 McGraw-Hill  Connect ®  Operations Management  is an online assignment and assessment 
solution that connects students with the tools and resources they’ll need to achieve success 
through faster learning, higher retention, and more efficient studying. It provides instructors with 
tools to quickly pick content and assignments according to the topics they want to emphasize. 
 Online Assignments.   Connect Operations Management  helps students learn more 
 efficiently by providing practice material and feedback when they are needed.  Connect 
grades homework automatically and provides feedback on any questions that students may 
have missed. 
 Integration of Excel Data Sets.  A convenient feature is the inclusion of an Excel data 
file link in many problems using data files in their calculation. The link allows students to eas-
ily launch into Excel, work the problem, and return to  Connect to key in the answer. 

xx
 Guided Examples.  These narrated video walkthroughs provide students with step-by-step 
guidelines for solving problems similar to those contained in the text. The student is given 
personalized instruction on how to solve a problem by applying the concepts presented in the 
chapter. The narrated voiceover shows the steps to take to work through an exercise. Students 
can go through each example multiple times if needed. 
 LearnSmart. LearnSmart adaptive self-study technology with  Connect Operations Man-
agement  helps students make the best use of their study time. LearnSmart provides a seam-
less combination of practice, assessment, and remediation for every concept in the textbook. 
LearnSmart’s intelligent software adapts to students by supplying questions on a new concept 
when students are ready to learn it. With LearnSmart students will spend less time on topics 
they understand and instead focus on the topics they need to master. 
 Simple Assignment Management and Smart Grading.  When it comes to studying, 
time is precious.  Connect Operations Management  helps students learn more efficiently by 
providing feedback and practice material when they need it, where they need it. When it 
comes to teaching, your time also is precious. The grading function enables you to:
 •  Have assignments scored automatically, giving students immediate feedback on their 
work and side-by-side comparisons with correct answers. 
 •  Access and review each response; manually change grades or leave comments for stu-
dents to review. 
 Student Reporting.   Connect Operations Management keeps instructors informed about 
how each student, section, and class is performing, allowing for more productive use of lec-
ture and office hours. The progress-tracking function enables you to:
 •  View scored work immediately (Add Assignment Results Screen) and track individual 
or group performance with assignment and grade reports. 
 •  Access an instant view of student or class performance relative to learning objectives. 
 •  Collect data and generate reports required by many accreditation organizations, such as 
AACSB.
 Student Resource Library.  The  Connect Business Statistics  Student Library is the place 
for students to access additional resources. The Student Library provides quick access to 
recorded lectures, practice materials, eBooks, and more. 

xxi
 Instructor Library. The  Connect Operations Management  Instructor Library is your repos-
itory for additional resources to improve student engagement in and out of class. You can 
select and use any asset that enhances your lecture. The  Connect Business Statistics Instructor 
Library includes:
 • eBook 
 • PowerPoint presentations 

xxii
 • Test Bank 
 • Instructor’s Manual 
 • Digital Image Library 
 Connect ®  Plus Operations Management  includes a seamless integration of an eBook and 
 Connect Operations Management with rich functionality integrated into the product.  
 Integrated Media-Rich eBook.  An integrated media-rich eBook allows students to 
access media in context with each chapter. Students can highlight, take notes, and access 
shared instructor highlights/notes to learn the course material. 
 Dynamic Links.  Dynamic links between the problems or questions you assign to your stu-
dents and the location in the eBook where that problem or question is covered. 
 Powerful Search Function.  A powerful search function to pinpoint and connect key 
concepts in a snap. This state-of-the-art, thoroughly tested system supports you in prepar-
ing students for the world that awaits. For more information about  Connect,  go to  www.
mcgrawhillconnect.com or contact your local McGraw-Hill sales representative. 
SmartBook SmartBook is the first and only adaptive reading experience avaible today. 
SmartBook changes reading from a passive and linear experience, to an engaging and 
dynamic one, in which students are more likely to master and retain important concepts, com-
ing to class better prepared. Valuable reports provide instructors insight as to how students are 
progressing through textbook content, and are useful for shaping in-class time or assessment.
This revolutionary technology suite is available only from McGraw-Hill Education. To learn 
more, go to http://learnsmartadvantage.com/ or contact your representative for a demo.

xxiii
 Tegrity Campus: Lectures 24/7 
Tegrity Campus  is a service that makes class time available 24/7 by automatically capturing 
every lecture in a searchable format for students to review when they study and complete 
assignments. With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all computer screens 
and corresponding audio. Students can replay any part of any class with easy-to-use browser-
based viewing on a PC or Mac.  
 Educators know that the more students can see, hear, and experience class resources, the 
better they learn. In fact, studies prove it. With  Tegrity Campus,  students quickly recall key 
moments by using  Tegrity Campus ’s unique search feature. This search helps students effi-
ciently find what they need, when they need it, across an entire semester of class recordings. 
Help turn all your students’ study time into learning moments immediately supported by your 
lecture. To learn more about  Tegrity,  watch a two-minute Flash demo at  http://tegritycampus.
mhhe.com .  
 Online Course Management 
 No matter what online course management system you use (WebCT, BlackBoard, or  eCollege), 
we have a course content ePack available for your course. Our new ePacks are specifically 
designed to make it easy for students to navigate and access content online. For help, our 
online Digital Learning Consultants are ready to assist you with your online course needs. 
They provide training and will answer any questions you have throughout the life of your 
adoption. McGraw-Hill Higher Education and Blackboard have teamed up. What does this 
mean for you?
  1.  Single sign-on. Now you and your students can access McGraw-Hill’s Connect and 
Create right from within your Blackboard course—all with one single sign-on. 
   2.  Deep integration of content and tools. You get a single sign-on with Connect and 
Create, and you also get integration of McGraw-Hill content and content engines 
right into Blackboard. Whether you’re choosing a book for your course or building 
 Connect assignments, all the tools you need are right where you want them—inside of 
Blackboard. 
  3.  One gradebook. Keeping several gradebooks and manually synchronizing grades into 
Blackboard is no longer necessary. When a student completes an integrated  Connect 
assignment, the grade for that assignment automatically (and instantly) feeds your 
Blackboard grade center. 
  4.  A solution for everyone. Whether your institution is already using Blackboard or you 
just want to try Blackboard on your own, we have a solution for you. McGraw-Hill 
and Blackboard can now offer you easy access to industry-leading technology and 
 content, whether your campus hosts it, or we do. Be sure to ask your local McGraw-Hill 
 representative for details.
McGraw-Hill Create™ 
The future of custom publishing is here. McGraw-
Hill CreateTM is a new, self-service website that 
allows you to quickly and easily create custom course 
materials by drawing upon McGraw-Hill’s compre-
hensive, cross-disciplinary content and other third party resources. Creating your own custom 

xxiv
book is easy. You, as an instructor, can: third party resources. Creating your own custom book 
is easy. You, as an instructor, can:
  • Select, then arrange the content in a way that makes the most sense for your course.
  • Combine material from different sources and even upload your own content.
  • Choose the best format for your students—print or eBook.
  • Edit and update your course materials as often as you’d like.
  • Receive your PDF review copy in minutes or a print review copy in just a few days.
Begin creating now at www.mcgrawhillcreate.com.
 Connect/LearnSmart Packaging Options: 
 Connect with LearnSmart 1 Semester Access Card: 0077640349 
 Connect Plus with LearnSmart 1 Semester Access Card: 0077640357 
 McGraw-Hill Customer Experience Contact Information 
 At McGraw-Hill, we understand that getting the most from new technology can be chal-
lenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You can e-mail 
our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product training online. Or you can search our 
knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. For Customer Sup-
port, call  800-331-5094,  or visit  www.mhhe.com/support . One of our Customer Experience 
Team members will be able to assist you in a timely fashion. 
 ASSURANCE OF LEARNING READY 
 Many educational institutions today are focused on the notion of  assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards.  Operations Management  is designed spe-
cifically to support your assurance of learning initiatives with a simple, yet powerful, solution. 
 Each test bank question for  Operations Management  maps to a specific chapter learning 
outcome/objective listed in the text. You can use our test bank software, EZ Test and EZ Test 
Online, or Connect Operations Management to easily query for learning outcomes/objectives 
that directly relate to the learning objectives for your course. You can then use the reporting 
features of EZ Test to aggregate student results in similar fashion, making the collection and 
presentation of assurance of learning data simple and easy. 
 AACSB STATEMENT 
 McGraw-Hill Education is a proud corporate member of AACSB International. Understand-
ing the importance and value of AACSB accreditation,  Operations Management recognizes 
the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB standards for business accreditation by con-
necting selected questions in the test bank to the six general knowledge and skill areas in the 
AACSB’s Assessment of Learning Standards. 
 The statements contained in  Operations Management  are provided only as a guide for 
the users of this textbook. The AACSB leaves content coverage and assessment within the 
purview of individual schools, the mission of the school, and the faculty. While  Operations 
Management  and the teaching package make no claim of any specific AACSB qualification 
or evaluation, we have within the test bank labeled questions according to the six general 
knowledge and skill areas. 

xxv
  4.  Recognize applications of the concepts and techniques 
covered. 
  5.  Discuss the subject matter in some depth, including its 
relevance, managerial considerations, and advantages 
and limitations.    
 You will encounter a number of chapter supplements. Check 
with your instructor to determine whether to study them. 
 This book places an emphasis on problem solving. There 
are many examples throughout the text illustrating solutions. 
In addition, at the end of most chapters and supplements you 
will find a group of solved problems. The examples within 
the chapter itself serve to illustrate concepts and techniques. 
Too much detail at those points would be counterproductive. 
Yet, later on, when you begin to solve the end-of-chapter 
problems, you will find the solved problems quite helpful. 
Moreover, those solved problems usually illustrate more and 
different details than the problems within the chapter. 
 I suggest the following approach to increase your chances 
of getting a good grade in the course:
  1. Look over the chapter outline and learning objectives. 
  2. Read the chapter summary, and then skim the chapter. 
  3. Read the chapter and take notes. 
  4. Look over and try to answer the discussion and review 
questions.  
  5. Solve the problems, referring to the solved problems and 
chapter examples as needed. 
  6. Take the quizzes on the text’s website. 
 Note that the answers to many problems are given at the 
end of the book. Try to solve each problem before turning to 
the answer. Remember—tests don’t come with answers. 
 An Online Learning Center ( www.mhhe.com/ stevenson12e ) 
is also available, containing many of the same study tools 
found in the text. 
 And here is one final thought: Homework is on the High-
way to Happiness! Enjoy the journey! 
 W.J.S. 
 The material in this text is part of the core knowledge in your 
education. Consequently, you will derive considerable ben-
efit from your study of operations management,  regardless 
of your major.  Practically speaking, operations is a course in 
 management. 
 This book describes principles and concepts of operations 
management. You should be aware that many of these prin-
ciples and concepts are applicable to other aspects of your 
professional and personal life. You can expect the benefits of 
your study of operations management to serve you in those 
other areas as well. 
 Some students approach this course with apprehension, 
and perhaps even some negative feelings. It may be that they 
have heard that the course contains a certain amount of quan-
titative material that they feel uncomfortable with, or that 
the subject matter is dreary, or that the course is about “fac-
tory management.” This is unfortunate, because the subject 
matter of this book is interesting and vital for all business 
students. While it is true that some of the material is quan-
titative, numerous examples, solved problems, and answers 
at the back of the book will help you with the quantitative 
material. As for “factory management,” there is material 
on manufacturing as well as on services. Manufacturing is 
important, and something that you should know about for a 
number of reasons. Look around you. Most of the “things” 
you see were manufactured: cars, trucks, planes, cloth-
ing, shoes, computers, books, pens and pencils, desks, and 
cell phones. And these are just the tip of the iceberg. So it 
makes sense to know something about how these things are 
produced. Beyond all that is the fact that manufacturing is 
largely responsible for the high standard of living people 
have in industrialized countries. 
 After reading each chapter or supplement in the text, 
attending related classroom lectures, and completing assigned 
questions and problems, you should be able to do each of the 
following:
  1.  Identify the key features of that material. 
  2.  Define and use terminology. 
  3.  Solve typical problems. 
 Note to Students 

and a table; add a solved problems and three new problems; and 
provided additional guidance in the use of several formulas. 
 Chapter 8:  Added content on automation; added a reading 
and deleted several readings; and moved the Clicks or Bricks 
reading to the supply chain chapter. 
 Chapter 8S.  This supplement has been moved to the 
Online Learning Center. 
 Chapter 9:  Rearranged the sequence of some topics to 
improve the flow; shortened the chapter; Deleted several read-
ings; and added material on Six Sigma. 
 Chapter 10:  Modified several diagrams to improve under-
standing; added a Critical Thinking Exercise; and modified 
the formula summary table to make it easier to select the 
appropriate formula. 
 Chapter 10S:  This supplement has been moved to the 
Online Learning Center. 
 Chapter 11:  Added more explanation of aggregation; 
added three new problems and renumbered some problems; 
and added an excel screenshot. 
 Chapter 12: Revised the introduction completely; added 
detail to the starting tree diagram; added new material on 
ERP, including a new figure; added a setup guide for devel-
oping an MRP plan; added a new solved problem and a new 
problem; and deleted the last part of problem 9. 
 Chapter 13:  Revised the chapter opening material; 
updated Example 3; added more explanation of the EPQ 
model; and added a new problem 1 and revised problems 2, 
11, 27 and 28. 
 Chapter 14:  Added a description of the characteristics of 
lean systems; added benefits and risks of lean systems; 
deleted a reading; added a reading; and added more material 
on value stream mapping. 
 Chapter 15:  Added new sections on risk and resiliency, 
shortening the supply chain, and small businesses; added a 
new reading; added material on ERP and the supply chain; 
added some material on CPFR and SCORE; and added the 
Clicks and Bricks reading from chapter 8. 
 Chapter 16: Added some excel screen shots for clarity. 
 Chapter 17:  Revised the description of project cycle and 
definition of terms; added a new Solved Problem; revised 
problems so they can be solved using either AOA or AON. 
 Chapter 18:  Deleted readings on hotels and waiting at 
stop lights; added some starter problems. 
  All Chapters 
 Major sections within each chapter are numbered for easy 
reference.
Learning objectives are positioned with related content 
within each chapter.
Many minor changes have been made to improve clarity 
and understanding.
The Bibliography & Additional Reading sections have 
been updated/revised. 
 Most Chapters 
  Learning Objectives have been revised to incorporate new 
content. Questions have been added to some readings that did 
not have questions. 
 Additional Changes 
 Chapter 1:  Updated product examples to make them more 
current; changed the sequence of some content; updated 
the reading on why manufacturing matters; added opera-
tions management job descriptions; added new readings on 
analytics and agility; and added a format to guide problem 
solving. 
 Chapter 2:  Added examples of Balanced Scorecard fac-
tors; added new reading on productivity advantage; and added 
the USPS sustainability scorecard to the USPS reading 
 Chapter 3:  Added a simpler example to illustrate seasonal 
computations; revised Discussion and Review question 4; 
revised problems 2, 5, and 23; renumbered problems 8-18; 
added new problem 13. 
 Chapter 4:  Added a reading; added several Discussion 
and Review Questions; and updated Problem 1. 
 Chapter 5:  Added formula (and renumbered the formulas); 
added a new example; added a new Solved Problem; added a 
new Critical Thinking Exercise; and added five new problems. 
 Chapter 6:  Modified the introduction to process selection 
and the figure that relates volume and variety to process type; 
added content on RFID tags; added a reading and deleted two 
readings; added material on restaurant and hospital layouts 
and a reading on the hospital room of the future; and added a 
Critical Thinking Exercise. 
 Chapter 7:  Changed the sequence of topics slightly to 
improve the flow; shortened the chapter by deleting a few lists 
 Chapter-by-Chapter Revisions for the Twelfth Edition 
xxvi

xxvii
Preface vii
 
1 Introduction to Operations Management 2
 
2 Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 40
 
3 Forecasting 74
 
4 Product and Service Design 134
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 4: Reliability 171
 
5 Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 184
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 5: Decision Theory 216
 
6 Process Selection and Facility Layout 236
 
7 Work Design and Measurement 288
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 7: Learning Curves 325
 
8 Location Planning and Analysis 336
 
9 Management of Quality 366
 
10 Quality Control 410
 
11 Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 456
 
12 MRP and ERP 494
 
13 Inventory Management 546
 
14 JIT and Lean Operations 604
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 14: Maintenance 640
 
15 Supply Chain Management 648
 
16 Scheduling 688
 
17 Project Management 730
 
18 Management of Waiting Lines 782
 
19 Linear Programming 822
Appendix A: Answers to Selected Problems 854
Appendix B: Tables 867
Appendix C: Working with the Normal Distribution 872
Photo Credits 877
Company Index 878
Subject Index 880 
 Brief Contents 

xxviii
Reading:
AMAZON Tops in Customer Service 45
Operations Strategy 51
Reading:
Productivity Gains Curb Inflation 53
Implications of Organization Strategy for Operations 
Management 54
Transforming Strategy into Action: The Balanced 
Scorecard 54
Productivity 56
Readings:
Why Productivity Matters 59
Dutch Tomato Growers’ Productivity 
Advantage 60
Productivity Improvement 62
Summary 62
Key Points 62
Key Terms 63
Solved Problems 63
Discussion and Review Questions 64
Taking Stock 64
Critical Thinking Exercises 65
Problems 65
Cases:
An American Tragedy: How a Good Company 
Died 66
Home-Style Cookies 67
Hazel Revisited 69
“Your Garden Gloves” 69
Operations Tour:
The U.S. Postal Service 70
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 73
 3 
Forecasting 74
Introduction 75
Features Common to All Forecasts 77
Elements of a Good Forecast 78
Forecasting and the Supply Chain 78
Steps in the Forecasting Process 79
Forecast Accuracy 79
Preface vii
 1 
Introduction to Operations 
Management 2
Introduction 3
Production of Goods Versus Providing Services 7
Why Learn About Operations Management? 9
Career Opportunities and Professional Societies 11
Process Management 12
The Scope of Operations Management 14
Reading:
Why Manufacturing Matters 17
Operations Management and Decision Making 17
Reading:
Analytics 20
The Historical Evolution of Operations 
Management 21
Operations Today 24
Reading:
Agility Creates a Competitive Edge 26
Key Issues for Today’s Business Operations 27
Readings:
Universities Embrace Sustainability 28
Diet and the Environment: Vegetarian vs. 
Nonvegetarian 29
Summary 36
Key Points 36
Key Terms 36
Discussion and Review Questions 36
Taking Stock 37
Critical Thinking Exercises 37
Case:
Hazel 37
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 38
Problem-Solving Guide 38
 2 
Competitiveness, Strategy, 
and Productivity 40
Introduction 41
Competitiveness 42
Mission And Strategies 44
Contents

 
Contents 
xxix
Readings:
Best Buy Wants Your Junk 145
Kraft Foods’ Recipe for Sustainability 146
Xerox Diverts 2 Billion Pounds of Waste from 
Landfills through Green Initiatives 147
Recycle City: Maria’s Market 148
Other Design Considerations 149
Reading:
Lego A/S in the Pink 151
Phases in Product Design and Development 159
Designing for Production 160
Service Design 162
Reading:
The Challenges of Managing Services 166
Operations Strategy 167
Summary 167
Key Points 168
Key Terms 168
Discussion and Review Questions 168
Taking Stock 169
Critical Thinking Exercises 169
Problems 169
Operations Tour:
High Acres Landfill 170
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 170
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 4: Reliability 171
 5 
Strategic Capacity Planning for Products 
and Services 184
Introduction 185
Reading:
Excess Capacity Can Be Bad News! 186
Capacity Decisions Are Strategic 187
Defining and Measuring Capacity 188
Determinants of Effective Capacity 189
Strategy Formulation 191
Forecasting Capacity Requirements 192
Additional Challenges of Planning Service 
Capacity 194
Do it In-House or Outsource It? 195
Developing Capacity Strategies 196
Reading:
My Compliments to the Chef, er, Buyer 196
Reading:
High Forecasts Can Be Bad News 80
Approaches to Forecasting 82
Qualitative Forecasts 82
Forecasts Based on Time-Series Data 84
Associative Forecasting Techniques 100
Monitoring Forecast Error 106
Choosing a Forecasting Technique 110
Using Forecast Information 112
Computer Software in Forecasting 112
Reading:
Gazing at the Crystal Ball 113
Summary 114
Key Points 115
Key Terms 117
Solved Problems 117
Discussion and Review Questions 123
Taking Stock 124
Critical Thinking Exercises 124
Problems 124
Cases:
M&L Manufacturing 132
Highline Financial Services, Ltd. 133
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 133
 4 
Product and Service Design 134
Introduction 136
Readings:
Design as a Business Strategy 136
Product Redesign, Not Offshoring, Holds Cost 
Advantage for U.S. Manufacturers 137
Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints 138
Idea Generation 139
Reading:
Vlasic on a Roll with Huge Pickle Slices 140
Legal and Ethical Considerations 141
Human Factors 142
Cultural Factors 143
Global Product and Service Design 143
Reading:
Do You Want Pickled Beets with That? 143
Environmental Factors: Sustainability 144

xxx 
Contents
Methods Analysis 299
Motion Study 303
Work Measurement 305
Operations Strategy 316
Summary 317
Key Points 317
Key Terms 318
Solved Problems 319
Discussion and Review Questions 319
Taking Stock 320
Critical Thinking Exercise 320
Problems 320
Case:
Making Hotplates 323
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 324
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 7: Learning Curves 325
 8 
Location Planning and Analysis 336
The Need for Location Decisions 337
The Nature of Location Decisions 338
Global Locations 340
General Procedure for Making Location 
Decisions 342
Identifying a Country, Region, Community, and Site 343
Reading:
Innovative MCI Unit Finds Culture Shock in 
Colorado Springs 344
Service and Retail Locations 351
Reading:
Site Selection Grows Up: Improved Tech Tools 
Make the Process Faster, Better 352
Evaluating Location Alternatives 353
Summary 358
Key Points 358
Key Terms 359
Solved Problems 359
Discussion and Review Questions 360
Taking Stock 360
Critical Thinking Exercises 361
Problems 361
Case:
Hello, Walmart? 364
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 364
 9 
Management of Quality 366
Introduction 367
The Evolution of Quality Management 368
Constraint Management 201
Evaluating Alternatives 201
Operations Strategy 207
Summary 207
Key Points 208
Key Terms 208
Solved Problems 208
Discussion and Review Questions 211
Taking Stock 211
Critical Thinking Exercises 211
Problems 212
Case:
Outsourcing of Hospital Services 215
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 215
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 5: Decision Theory 216
 6 
Process Selection and Facility Layout 236
Introduction 237
Process Selection 238
Technology 244
Reading:
Foxconn Shifts Its Focus to Automation 246
Process Strategy 249
Strategic Resource Organization: Facilities 
Layout 250
Reading:
A Safe Hospital Room of the Future 260
Designing Product Layouts: Line Balancing 262
Reading:
BMW’s Strategy: Flexibility 270
Designing Process Layouts 271
Summary 275
Key Points 276
Key Terms 276
Solved Problems 276
Discussion and Review Questions 280
Taking Stock 280
Critical Thinking Exercises 280
Problems 281
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 287
 7 
Work Design and Measurement 288
Introduction 289
Job Design 289
Quality of Work Life 294
Reading:
Choosing Incentive Plans 298

 
Contents 
xxxi
Statistical Process Control 417
Process Capability 435
Operations Strategy 440
Reading:
Bar Codes Might Cut Drug Errors in Hospitals 441
Summary 441
Key Points 441
Key Terms 441
Solved Problems 443
Discussion and Review Questions 447
Taking Stock 448
Critical Thinking Exercises 448
Problems 448
Cases:
Toys, Inc. 454
Tiger Tools 454
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 455
 11 Aggregate Planning and Master 
Scheduling 456
Introduction 458
Reading:
Duplicate Orders Can Lead to Excess Capacity 462
Basic Strategies for Meeting Uneven Demand 465
Techniques for Aggregate Planning 468
Aggregate Planning in Services 475
Disaggregating the Aggregate Plan 477
Master Scheduling 477
The Master Scheduling Process 478
Summary 483
Key Points 483
Key Terms 484
Solved Problems 484
Discussion and Review Questions 487
Taking Stock 487
Critical Thinking Exercise 487
Problems 487
Case:
Eight Glasses a Day (EGAD) 492
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 492
 12 MRP and ERP 494
Introduction 495
An Overview of MRP 495
MRP Inputs 496
MRP Processing 500
MRP Outputs 507
Other Considerations 508
Reading:
Whatever Happened to Quality? 368
The Foundations of Modern Quality Management: 
The Gurus 369
Insights on Quality Management 372
Readings:
The Sounds of Quality 374
Hyundai: Kissing Clunkers Goodbye 378
Quality Awards 380
Reading:
Rework and Morale 380
Quality Certification 381
Quality and the Supply Chain 383
Total Quality Management 384
Reading:
Improving Quality and Reducing Risk in 
Offshoring 384
Problem Solving and Process Improvement 388
Reading:
What Keeps Six Sigma Practitioners Up at 
Night? 391
Quality Tools 392
Reading:
Benchmarking Corporate Web Sites of Fortune 500 
Companies 400
Operations Strategy 400
Summary 400
Key Points 401
Key Terms 401
Solved Problem 401
Discussion and Review Questions 402
Taking Stock 403
Critical Thinking Exercises 403
Problems 403
Cases:
Chick-n-Gravy Dinner Line 405
Tip Top Markets 406
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 408
 10 Quality Control 410
Introduction 411
Inspection 412
Reading:
In the Chips at Jays 415

xxxii 
Contents
Cases:
UPD Manufacturing 596
Harvey Industries 596
Grill Rite 598
Farmers Restaurant 599
Operations Tours:
Bruegger’s Bagel Bakery 600
PSC, Inc. 601
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 603
 14 JIT and Lean Operations 604
Introduction 606
Reading:
Toyota Recalls 608
Supporting Goals 609
Building Blocks 610
Readings:
General Mills Turns to NASCAR to Reduce 
Changeover Time 612
“People” Firms Boost Profits, Study Shows 617
Lean Tools 627
Transitioning to a Lean System 629
Reading:
Nearby Suppliers Match Ford’s Mix 629
Lean Services 630
Reading:
To Build a Better Hospital, Virginia Mason Takes 
Lessons from Toyota Plants 632
JIT II 633
Operations Strategy 633
Summary 634
Key Points 635
Key Terms 635
Solved Problems 635
Discussion and Review Questions 636
Taking Stock 636
Critical Thinking Exercises 636
Problems 636
Case:
Level Operations 637
Operations Tour:
Boeing 638
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 639
SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER 14: Maintenance 640
MRP in Services 510
Benefits and Requirements of MRP 510
MRP II 511
Capacity Requirements Planning 513
ERP 516
Readings:
The ABCs of ERP 518
The Top 10 ERP Mistakes 522
Operations Strategy 524
Summary 524
Key Points 524
Key Terms 525
Solved Problems 525
Discussion and Review Questions 534
Taking Stock 534
Critical Thinking Exercises 535
Problems 535
Cases:
Promotional Novelties 540
DMD Enterprises 541
Operations Tour:
Stickley Furniture 541
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 544
 13 Inventory Management 546
Introduction 547
The Nature and Importance of Inventories 548
Requirements for Effective Inventory 
Management 551
Reading:
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Tags 553
Inventory Ordering Policies 557
How Much to Order: Economic Order Quantity 
Models 557
Reorder Point Ordering 569
How Much to Order: Fixed-Order-Interval Model 573
The Single-Period Model 576
Operations Strategy 581
Summary 581
Key Points 581
Key Terms 582
Solved Problems 583
Discussion and Review Questions 588
Taking Stock 588
Critical Thinking Exercises 588
Problems 589

 
Contents 
xxxiii
Cases:
Master Tag  685
B&L Inc. 686
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 687
 16 Scheduling 688
Scheduling Operations 690
Scheduling in Low-Volume Systems 693
Scheduling Services 711
Readings:
Servicing Passenger Planes 713
Summary 716
Key Points 716
Key Terms 716
Solved Problems 716
Discussion and Review Questions 721
Taking Stock 721
Critical Thinking Exercises 721
Problems 722
Case:
Hi-Ho, Yo-Yo, Inc. 728
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 728
 17 Project Management 730
Introduction 732
Project Life Cycle 732
Behavioral Aspects of Project Management 733
Reading:
Project Managers Have Never Been More 
Critical 737
Work Breakdown Structure 739
Planning and Scheduling with Gantt Charts 739
PERT and CPM 740
Deterministic Time Estimates 743
A Computing Algorithm 744
Probabilistic Time Estimates 751
Determining Path Probabilities 754
Simulation 756
Budget Control 757
Time–Cost Trade-Offs: Crashing 757
Advantages of Using PERT and Potential Sources 
of Error 760
Critical Chain Project Management 761
Other Topics in Project Management 761
 15 Supply Chain Management 648
Introduction 649
Reading:
Veggie Tales 652
Trends in Supply Chain Management 653
Reading:
At 3M, a Long Road Became a Shorter Road 655
Global Supply Chains 656
ERP and Supply Chain Management 656
Ethics and the Supply Chain 657
Small Businesses 657
Management Responsibilities 658
Procurement 660
E-Business 663
Readings:
IBM’s Supply Chain Social Responsibility 663
Desperately Seeking E-Fulfillment 665
E-Procurement at IBM 666
Supplier Management 667
Reading:
NestléUSA and Ocean Spray Form Strategic 
Operations Alliance 669
Inventory Management 670
Order Fulfillment 671
Logistics 672
Operations Tour:
Wegmans’ Shipping System 673
Readings:
Springdale Farm 675
RFID Tags: Keeping the Shelves Stocked 675
Active RFID vs. Passive RFID 676
Rise of the 3PL 677
Creating An Effective Supply Chain 678
Reading:
Clicks or Bricks, or Both? 679
Strategy 683
Summary 683
Key Points 684
Key Terms 684
Discussion and Review Questions 684
Taking Stock 684
Critical Thinking Exercises 685
Problems 685

xxxiv 
Contents
Taking Stock 815
Critical Thinking Exercises 815
Problems 816
Case:
Big Bank 819
Readings:
Stopped at a Light? Why Not Read This, You May 
Have Time 819
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 821
 19 Linear Programming 822
Introduction 823
Linear Programming Models 824
Graphical Linear Programming 826
The Simplex Method 838
Computer Solutions 838
Sensitivity Analysis 841
Summary 
844
Key Points 
844
Key Terms 
844
Solved Problems 
844
Discussion and Review Questions 
847
Problems 
847
Cases:
Son, Ltd. 851
Custom Cabinets, Inc. 852
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 
853
Appendix A 
Answers to Selected Problems 854
Appendix B 
Tables 867
Appendix C 
Working with the Normal Distribution 872
Photo Credits 877
Company Index 878
Subject Index 880
Project Management Software 762
Risk Management 763
Summary 764
Key Points 765
Key Terms 765
Solved Problems 765
Discussion and Review Questions 772
Taking Stock 772
Critical Thinking Exercises 772
Problems 772
Cases:
The Case of the Mexican Crazy Quilt 779
Time, Please 781
Selected Bibliography and Further Readings 781
 18 Management of Waiting Lines 782
Why is There Waiting? 784
Managerial Implications of Waiting Lines 785
Goal of Waiting-Line Management 785
Reading:
New Yorkers do not Like Waiting in Line 785
Characteristics of Waiting Lines 786
Measures of Waiting-Line Performance 790
Queuing Models: Infinite-Source 790
Queuing Model: Finite-Source 805
Constraint Management 810
The Psychology of Waiting 811
Readings:
David H. Maister on the Psychology of 
Waiting 811
Managing Waiting Lines at Disney World 812
Operations Strategy 812
Summary 812
Key Points 813
Key Terms 813
Solved Problems 813
Discussion and Review Questions 815

This page intentionally left blank


2
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 1.1 Introduction,  3 
 1.2 Production of Goods versus 
Providing Services,  7 
 1.3 Why Learn about Operations 
Management?,  9 
 1.4 Career Opportunities and Professional 
Societies,  11 
 1.5 Process Management,  12 
 Managing a Process to Meet Demand,  13 
 Process Variation,  13 
 1.6 The Scope of Operations 
Management,  14 
 Managing the Supply Chain to Achieve 
Schedule, Cost, and Quality Goals, 15
 1.7 Operations Management and 
Decision Making,  17 
 Models,  18 
 Quantitative Approaches,  19 
 Performance Metrics,  19 
 Analysis of Trade-Offs,  19 
 Degree of Customization,  20 
 A Systems Approach,  20 
 Establishing Priorities,  20 
 1.8 The Historical Evolution of Operations 
Management,  21 
 The Industrial Revolution,  21 
 Scientific Management,  21 
 The Human Relations 
Movement,  23 
 Decision Models and 
Management Science,  23  
 The Influence of Japanese 
Manufacturers,  24 
 1.9   Operations Today,  24 
 1.10  Key Issues for Today’s Business 
Operations,  27 
 Environmental Concerns,  27 
 Ethical Conduct,  29 
 The Need to Manage the Supply Chain,  31  
 Elements of Supply Chain Management,  32  
 Operations Tour: Wegmans Food 
Markets,  33 
 Case: Hazel,  37 
 Problem Solving Guide, 38
 CHAP TE R
1 
 Introduction 
to Operations 
Management 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO1.1 
Define the terms  operations management and  supply chain. 
 LO1.2 
Identify similarities and differences between production and 
service operations. 
 LO1.3 
Explain the importance of learning about operations 
management. 
 LO1.4 
Identify the three major functional areas of organizations and 
describe how they interrelate. 
 LO1.5 
Summarize the two major aspects of process management. 
 LO1.6 
Describe the operations function and the nature of the 
operations manager’s job. 
 LO1.7 
Explain the key aspects of operations management 
decision making. 
 LO1.8 
Briefly describe the historical evolution of 
operations management. 
 LO1.9 
Describe current issues in business that impact 
operations management. 
 LO1.10 
Explain the need to manage the supply chain. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

3
 1.1 INTRODUCTION  
 Operations is that part of a business organization that is responsible for producing goods 
and/or services.    Goods    are physical items that include raw materials, parts, subassemblies 
such as motherboards that go into computers, and final products such as cell phones and 
automobiles.    Services    are activities that provide some combination of time, location, form, 
or psychological value. Examples of goods and services are found all around you. Every 
book you read, every video you watch, every e-mail or text message you send, every tele-
phone conversation you have, and every medical treatment you receive involves the opera-
tions function of one or more organizations. So does everything you wear, eat, travel in, sit 
on, and access the Internet with. The operations function in business can also be viewed 
from a more far-reaching perspective: The collective success or failure of companies’ oper-
ations functions has an impact on the ability of a nation to compete with other nations, and 
on the nation’s economy. 
 Goods  Physical items produced 
by business organizations. 
 Services  Activities that 
 provide some combination 
of time,  location, form, and 
 psychological value. 
      This book is about operations management. The subject mat-
ter is relevant for you regardless of your major. Productivity, 
quality, e-business, competition, and customer satisfaction are 
important for every aspect of a business organization. This first 
chapter presents an introduction and overview of operations 
management. Among the issues it addresses are: What is opera-
tions management? Why is it important? What do operations 
management professionals do? 
 The chapter also provides an interesting description of the 
historical evolution of operations management and a discussion 
of the trends and issues that impact operations management. 
 You will learn about (1) the economic balance that every business organization seeks to achieve; (2) the condition that 
generally exists that makes achieving the economic balance challenging; (3) the line function that is the core of every business 
organization; (4) key steps in the history and evolution of operations management; (5) the differences and similarities between 
producing products and delivering services; (6) what a supply chain is, and why it is essential to manage it; and (7) the key 
issues for today’s business operations. 
 Recalls of automobiles, foods, toys, and other products; 
major oil spills; and even dysfunctional state and federal 
legislatures are all examples of operations failures. They 
underscore the need for effective operations management. 
 Examples of operations successes include the many elec-
tronic devices we all use, medical breakthroughs in diag-
nosing and treating ailments, and high-quality goods and 
services that are widely available. 

4 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 The ideal situation for a business organization is to achieve an economic match of sup-
ply and demand. Having excess supply or excess capacity is wasteful and costly; having 
too little means lost opportunity and possible customer dissatisfaction. The key func-
tions on the supply side are operations and supply chains, and sales and marketing on the 
demand side. 
 While the operations function is responsible for producing products and/or delivering ser-
vices, it needs the support and input from other areas of the organization. Business organi-
zations have three basic functional areas, as depicted in  Figure 1.1 : finance, marketing, and 
operations. It doesn’t matter whether the business is a retail store, a hospital, a manufacturing 
firm, a car wash, or some other type of business; all business organizations have these three 
basic functions.  
 Finance is responsible for securing financial resources at favorable prices and allocating 
those resources throughout the organization, as well as budgeting, analyzing investment pro-
posals, and providing funds for operations. Marketing is responsible for assessing consumer 
wants and needs, and selling and promoting the organization’s goods or services. Operations 
is responsible for producing the goods or providing the services offered by the organiza-
tion. To put this into perspective, if a business organization were a car, operations would be 
its engine. And just as the engine is the core of what a car does, in a business organization, 
operations is the core of what the organization does. Operations management is responsible 
for managing that core. Hence,   operations management is the management of systems or 
processes that create goods and/or provide services. 
 Operations and supply chains are intrinsically linked, and no business organization could 
exist without both. A   supply chain  is the sequence of organizations—their facilities, func-
tions, and activities—that are involved in producing and delivering a product or service. The 
sequence begins with basic suppliers of raw materials and extends all the way to the final 
customer, as seen in  Figure 1.2 . Facilities might include warehouses, factories, processing 
centers, offices, distribution centers, and retail outlets. Functions and activities include fore-
casting, purchasing, inventory management, information management, quality assurance, 
scheduling, production, distribution, delivery, and customer service.  Figure  1.3  provides 
another illustration of a supply chain: a chain that begins with wheat growing on a farm and 
ends with a customer buying a loaf of bread in a supermarket. Note that the value of the prod-
uct increases as it moves through the supply chain. 
 Supply chains are both external and internal to the organization. The external parts of 
a supply chain provide raw materials, parts, equipment, supplies, and/or other inputs to 
the organization, and they deliver outputs that are goods to the organization’s customers. 
The internal parts of a supply chain are part of the operations function itself, supply-
ing operations with parts and materials, performing work on products, and/or performing 
services. 
LO1.1 Define the terms 
operations management and 
supply chain.
 Operations management  
The management of systems or 
processes that  create goods and/
or provide services. 
 Supply chain  A sequence 
of activities and organizations 
involved in producing and deliv-
ering a good or service.  
 FIGURE 1.1 
 The three basic functions of 
business organizations 
Organization
Operations
Marketing
Finance
 FIGURE 1.2 
 A simple product supply chain 
 
Final
customers
Distributor
Producer
Direct
suppliers
Suppliers’
suppliers

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
5
 The creation of goods or services involves transforming or converting inputs into outputs. 
Various inputs such as capital, labor, and information are used to create goods or services 
using one or more  transformation processes  (e.g., storing, transporting, repairing). To ensure 
that the desired outputs are obtained, an organization takes measurements at various points in 
the transformation process (  feedback ) and then compares them with previously established 
standards to determine whether corrective action is needed ( control ).  Figure 1.4 depicts the 
conversion system. 
  Table  1.1  provides some examples of inputs, transformation processes, and outputs. 
Although goods and services are listed separately in  Table 1.1 , it is important to note that 
 FIGURE 1.3 
 A supply chain for bread  
Supermarket
Bakery
Mill
Farm
Bread
$1.29
Suppliers:
Trucking
Trucking
Trucking
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Feed, seed, fertilizers, pesticides
Energy/fuel
Suppliers:
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Other ingredients
Energy
Suppliers:
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Energy
Suppliers:
Fuel
Repairs
Tires
Drivers
Trucks
 FIGURE 1.4 
 The operations function 
involves the conversion of 
inputs into outputs 
 
Value-added
Control
Inputs
   Land
   Labor
   Capital
   Information
Outputs
   Goods
   Services
Transformation/
conversion
process
Measurement and
Feedback
Measurement and
Feedback
Measurement and Feedback

6 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 FIGURE 1.5 
 The goods–service continuum 
 
Goods
Service
Songwriting, software development
Computer repair, restaurant meal
Automobile repair, fast food
Home remodeling, retail sales
Automobile assembly, steelmaking
Surgery, teaching
TABLE 1.1
Examples of inputs, 
transformation, and outputs
Inputs
Transformation
Outputs
Land
Processes
High goods percentage
Human
  Cutting, drilling
  Houses
  Physical labor
  Transporting
  Automobiles
  Intellectual labor
  Teaching
  Clothing
Capital
  Farming
  Computers
Raw materials
  Mixing
  Machines
  Water
  Packing
  Televisions
  Metals
  Copying, faxing
  Food products
  Wood
  Analyzing
  Textbooks
Equipment
  Developing
  CD players
  Machines
  Searching
High service percentage
  Computers
  Researching
  Health care
  Trucks
  Repairing
  Entertainment
  Tools
  Innovating
  Car repair
Facilities
  Debugging
  Legal
  Hospitals
  Selling
  Banking
  Factories
  Communication
  Retail stores
Energy
Other
  Information
  Time
  Legal constraints
  Government regulations
goods and services often occur jointly. For example, having the oil changed in your car is a 
service, but the oil that is delivered is a good. Similarly, house painting is a service, but the 
paint is a good. The goods–service combination is a continuum. It can range from primar-
ily goods, with little service, to primarily service, with few goods.  Figure 1.5  illustrates this 
continuum. Because there are relatively few pure goods or pure services, companies usually 
sell  product packages,  which are a combination of goods and services. There are elements of 
both goods production and service delivery in these product packages. This makes managing 
operations more interesting, and also more challenging. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
7
 Table 1.2 provides some specific illustrations of the transformation process.  
 The essence of the operations function is to  add value  during the transformation process: 
 Value-added  is the term used to describe the difference between the cost of inputs and the 
value or price of outputs. In nonprofit organizations, the value of outputs (e.g., highway con-
struction, police and fire protection) is their value to society; the greater the value-added, the 
greater the effectiveness of these operations. In for-profit organizations, the value of outputs 
is measured by the prices that customers are willing to pay for those goods or services. Firms 
use the money generated by value-added for research and development, investment in new 
facilities and equipment, worker salaries, and  profits. Consequently, the greater the value-
added, the greater the amount of funds available for these purposes. Value can also be psycho-
logical, as in  branding. 
 Many factors affect the design and management of operations systems. Among them are 
the degree of involvement of customers in the process and the degree to which technology 
is used to produce and/or deliver a product or service. The greater the degree of customer 
involvement, the more challenging it can be to design and manage the operation. Technology 
choices can have a major impact on productivity, costs, flexibility, and quality and customer 
satisfaction. 
 1.2  PRODUCTION OF GOODS VERSUS 
PROVIDING SERVICES 
 Although goods and services often go hand in hand, there are some very basic differences 
between the two, differences that impact the management of the goods portion versus man-
agement of the service portion. There are also many similarities between the two. 
 Production of goods results in a  tangible output,  such as an automobile, eyeglasses, a 
golf ball, a refrigerator—anything that we can see or touch. It may take place in a factory, 
but it can occur elsewhere. For example, farming and restaurants produce  nonmanufactured 
goods. Delivery of service, on the other hand, generally implies an  act.  A physician’s exami-
nation, TV and auto repair, lawn care, and the projection of a film in a theater are examples of 
 services. The majority of service jobs fall into these categories:
 Professional services (e.g., financial, health care, legal). 
 Mass services (e.g., utilities, Internet, communications). 
 Service shops (e.g., tailoring, appliance repair, car wash, auto repair/maintenance). 
 Personal care (e.g., beauty salon, spa, barbershop). 
 Value-added  The difference 
between the cost of inputs and 
the value or price of outputs.  
LO1.2 Identify the similarities 
and differences between pro-
duction and service operations.
 TABLE 1.2 
 Illustrations of the 
transformation process 
Inputs
Processing
Output
Food Processor
Raw vegetables
Cleaning
Canned vegetables
Metal sheets
Making cans
Water
Cutting
Energy
Cooking
Labor
Packing
Building
Labeling
Equipment
Hospital
Doctors, nurses
Examination
Treated patients
Hospital
Surgery
Medical supplies
Monitoring
Equipment
Medication
Laboratories
Therapy

8 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 Government (e.g., Medicare, mail, social services, police, fire). 
 Education (e.g., schools, universities). 
 Food service (e.g., catering). 
  Services within organizations (e.g., payroll, accounting, maintenance, IT, HR, janitorial).  
 Retailing and wholesaling. 
 Shipping and delivery (e.g., truck, railroad, boat, air). 
  Residential services (e.g., lawn care, painting, general repair, remodeling, interior design).  
 Transportation (e.g., mass transit, taxi, airlines, ambulance). 
 Travel and hospitality (e.g., travel bureaus, hotels, resorts). 
 Miscellaneous services (e.g., copy service, temporary help). 
 Manufacturing and service are often different in terms of  what  is done but quite similar in 
terms of  how it is done. 
 Consider these points of comparison:
 Degree of customer contact.  Many services involve a high degree of customer con-
tact, although services such as Internet providers, utilities, and mail service do not. 
When there is a high degree of contact, the interaction between server and customer 
becomes a “moment of truth” that will be judged by the customer every time the ser-
vice occurs.  
 Labor content of jobs.  Services often have a higher degree of labor content than manu-
facturing jobs do, although automated services are an exception. 
 Uniformity of inputs.  Service operations are often subject to a higher degree of vari-
ability of inputs. Each client, patient, customer, repair job, and so on presents a some-
what unique situation that requires assessment and flexibility. Conversely, manufacturing 
operations often have a greater ability to control the variability of inputs, which leads to 
more-uniform job requirements. 
 Measurement of productivity.  Measurement of productivity can be more difficult for 
service jobs due largely to the high variations of inputs. Thus, one doctor might have a 
higher level of routine cases to deal with, while another might have more-difficult cases. 
Unless a careful analysis is conducted, it may appear that the doctor with the difficult 
cases has a much lower productivity than the one with the routine cases. 
 Quality assurance. Quality assurance is usually more challenging for services due to the 
higher variation in input, and because delivery and consumption occur at the same time. 
Unlike manufacturing, which typically occurs away from the customer and allows mis-
takes that are identified to be corrected, services have less opportunity to avoid exposing 
the customer to mistakes. 
 Inventory. Many services tend to involve less use of inven-
tory than manufacturing operations, so the costs of having 
inventory on hand are lower than they are for manufactur-
ing. However, unlike manufactured goods, services cannot 
be stored. Instead, they must be provided “on demand.” 
 Wages.  Manufacturing jobs are often well paid, and have 
less wage variation than service jobs, which can range 
from highly paid professional services to minimum-wage 
workers.  
 Ability to patent.  Product designs are often easier to patent 
than service designs, and some services cannot be patented, 
making them easier for competitors to copy. 
 There are also many  similarities  between managing the pro-
duction of products and managing services. In fact, most of the 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
9
topics in this book pertain to both. When there are important service considerations, these are 
highlighted in separate sections. Here are some of the primary factors for both:
 a. Forecasting and capacity planning to match supply and demand. 
 b. Process management. 
 c. Managing variations. 
 d. Monitoring and controlling costs and productivity. 
 e. Supply chain management. 
 f. Location planning, inventory management, quality control, and scheduling. 
 Note that many service activities are essential in goods-producing companies. These include 
training, human resource management, customer service, equipment repair, procurement, and 
administrative services. 
  Table 1.3  provides an overview of the differences between production of goods and service 
operations. Remember, though, that most systems involve a blend of goods and services. 
 1.3  WHY LEARN ABOUT OPERATIONS 
MANAGEMENT? 
  Whether operations management is your major or not, the skill set you gain studying opera-
tions management will serve you well in your career. 
 There are many career-related reasons for wanting to learn about operations management, 
whether you plan to work in the field of operations or not. This is because every aspect of 
business affects or is affected by operations. Operations and sales are the two line functions 
in a business organization. All other functions—accounting, finance, marketing, IT, and so 
on—support the two line functions. Among the service jobs that are closely related to opera-
tions are financial services (e.g., stock market analyst, broker, investment banker, and loan 
officer), marketing services (e.g., market analyst, marketing researcher, advertising manager, 
and product manager), accounting services (e.g., corporate accountant, public accountant, and 
budget analyst), and information services (e.g., corporate intelligence, library services, man-
agement information systems design services). 
 A common complaint from employers is that college graduates come to them very focused, 
when employers would prefer them to have more of a general knowledge of how business 
organizations operate. This book provides some of the breadth that employers are looking 
for in their new hires. Apart from the career-related reasons is a not so obvious one: Through 
learning about operations and supply chains, you will have a much better understanding of the 
world you live in, the global dependencies of companies and nations, some of the reasons that 
companies succeed or fail, and the importance of working with others. 
LO1.3 Explain the importance 
of learning about operations 
management.
 TABLE 1.3 
 Typical differences between 
production of goods and 
provision of services 
Characteristic
Goods
Services
Output
Tangible
Intangible
Customer contact
Low
High
Labor content
Low
High
Uniformity of input
High
Low
Measurement of productivity
Easy
Difficult
Opportunity to correct problems 
before delivery
High
Low
Inventory
Much
Little
Wages
Narrow range
Wide range
Patentable
Usually
Not usually

10 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 Working together successfully means that all members of the organization understand not 
only their own role, but they also understand the roles of others. In practice, there is signifi-
cant interfacing and  collaboration  among the various functional areas, involving  exchange of 
information  and  cooperative decision making.  For example, although the three primary func-
tions in business organizations perform different activities, many of their decisions impact the 
other areas of the organization. Consequently, these functions have numerous interactions, as 
depicted by the overlapping circles shown in  Figure 1.6 . 
 Finance and operations management personnel cooperate by exchanging information and 
expertise in such activities as the following:
 1. 
 Budgeting. Budgets must be periodically prepared to plan financial requirements. 
Budgets must sometimes be adjusted, and performance relative to a budget must be 
evaluated. 
 2. 
 Economic analysis of investment proposals. Evaluation of alternative investments in 
plant and equipment requires inputs from both operations and finance people. 
 3. 
 Provision of funds. The necessary funding of operations and the amount and timing of 
funding can be important and even critical when funds are tight. Careful planning can 
help avoid cash-flow problems. 
 Marketing’s focus is on selling and/or promoting the goods or services of an organization. 
Marketing is also responsible for assessing customer wants and needs, and for communicat-
ing those to operations people (short term) and to design people (long term). That is, opera-
tions needs information about demand over the short to intermediate term so that it can plan 
accordingly (e.g., purchase materials or schedule work), while design people need informa-
tion that relates to improving current products and services and designing new ones. Market-
ing, design, and production must work closely together to successfully implement design 
changes and to develop and produce new products. Marketing can provide valuable insight 
on what competitors are doing. Marketing also can supply information on consumer prefer-
ences so that design will know the kinds of products and features needed; operations can 
supply information about capacities and judge the  manufacturability  of designs. Operations 
will also have advance warning if new equipment or skills will be needed for new products or 
services. Finance people should be included in these exchanges in order to provide informa-
tion on what funds might be available (short term) and to learn what funds might be needed 
for new products or services (intermediate to long term). One important piece of information 
marketing needs from operations is the manufacturing or service   lead time  in order to give 
customers realistic estimates of how long it will take to fill their orders. 
 Thus, marketing, operations, and finance must interface on product and process design, 
forecasting, setting realistic schedules, quality and quantity decisions, and keeping each other 
informed on the other’s strengths and weaknesses. 
 People in every area of business need to appreciate the importance of managing and coor-
dinating operations decisions that affect the supply chain and the matching of supply and 
demand, and how those decisions impact other functions in an organization. 
LO1.4 Identify the three major 
functional areas of organiza-
tions and describe how they 
interrelate.
 Lead time  The time between 
ordering a good or service and 
receiving it. 
 FIGURE 1.6 
 The three major functions of 
business organizations overlap 
 
Marketing
and Sales
Operations
Finance

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
11
 Operations also interacts with other functional areas of the organization, including legal, 
management information systems (MIS), accounting, personnel/human resources, and public 
relations, as depicted in  Figure 1.7 . 
 The  legal  department must be consulted on contracts with employees, customers, suppli-
ers, and transporters, as well as on liability and environmental issues. 
 Accounting  supplies information to management on costs of labor, materials, and over-
head, and may provide reports on items such as scrap, downtime, and inventories. 
 Management information systems (MIS)  is concerned with providing management with the 
information it needs to effectively manage. This occurs mainly through designing systems to 
capture relevant information and designing reports. MIS is also important for managing the 
control and decision-making tools used in operations management. 
 The  personnel  or  human resources  department is concerned with recruitment and training 
of personnel, labor relations, contract negotiations, wage and salary administration, assisting 
in manpower projections, and ensuring the health and safety of employees. 
 Public relations  has responsibility for building and maintaining a positive public image of 
the organization. Good public relations provides many potential benefits. An obvious one is 
in the marketplace. Other potential benefits include public awareness of the organization as a 
good place to work (labor supply), improved chances of approval of zoning change requests, 
community acceptance of expansion plans, and instilling a positive attitude among employees.   
 1.4  CAREER OPPORTUNITIES AND 
PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES 
 There are many career opportunities in the operations management and supply chain fields. 
Among the numerous job titles are operations manager, production analyst, production man-
ager, inventory manager, purchasing manager, schedule coordinator, distribution manager, 
supply chain manager, quality analyst, and quality manager. Other titles include office man-
ager, store manager, and service manager. 
 People who work in the operations field should have a skill set that includes both peo-
ple skills and knowledge skills. People skills include political awareness; mentoring abil-
ity; and collaboration, negotiation, and communication skills. Knowledge skills, necessary 
for credibility and good decision making, include product and/or service knowledge, process 
knowledge, industry and global knowledge, financial and accounting skills, and project man-
agement skills. See  Table 1.4 . 
 If you are thinking of a career in operations management, you can benefit by joining one or 
more of the professional societies.
 FIGURE 1.7 
 Operations interfaces with a 
number of supporting functions 
 
Legal
Public
relations
Personnel/
Human
resources
Accounting
Operations
MIS

12 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 APICS, the Association for Operations Management 
8430 West Bryn Mawr Avenue, Suite 1000, Chicago, Illinois 60631  www.apics.org 
 American Society for Quality (ASQ) 
230 West Wells Street, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53203  www.asq.org 
 Institute for Supply Management (ISM) 
2055 East Centennial Circle, Tempe, Arizona 85284  www.ism.ws 
 Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS) 
901 Elkridge Landing Road, Linthicum, Maryland 21090-2909  www.informs.org 
 The Production and Operations Management Society (POMS) 
College of Engineering, Florida International University, EAS 2460, 
10555 West Flagler Street, Miami, Florida 33174  www.poms.org 
 The Project Management Institute (PMI) 
4 Campus Boulevard, Newtown Square, Pennsylvania 19073-3299  www.pmi.org 
 Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals (CSCMP) 
333 East Butterfield Road, Suite 140, Lombard, Illinois 60148  http//cscmp.org 
 APICS, ASQ, ISM, and other professional societies offer a practitioner certification 
examination that can enhance your qualifications. Information about job opportunities can 
be obtained from all of these societies as well as from other sources, such as the Decision 
Sciences Institute (University Plaza, Atlanta, Georgia 30303) and the Institute of Industrial 
Engineers (25 Technology Park, Norcross, Georgia 30092). 
 1.5 PROCESS MANAGEMENT  
 A key aspect of operations management is process management. A   process  consists of one or 
more actions that transform inputs into outputs. In essence, the central role of all management 
is process management. 
 Businesses are composed of many interrelated processes. Generally speaking, there are 
three categories of business processes:
 1. 
 Upper-management processes. These govern the operation of the entire organization. 
Examples include organizational governance and organizational strategy. 
 2. 
 Operational processes. These are the core processes that make up the value stream. 
Examples include purchasing, production and/or service, marketing, and sales. 
 3. 
 Supporting processes. These support the core processes. Examples include accounting, 
human resources, and IT (information technology). 
 Process  One or more actions 
that transform inputs into 
outputs. 
 TABLE 1.4 
 Sample operations management 
job descriptions 
Production Supervisor Supply Chain Manager
Social Media Product 
Manager
• Manage a production staff 
of 10–20.
• Ensure the department 
meets daily goals through 
the management of 
productivity.
• Enforce safety policies.
• Coordinate work between 
departments.
• Have good problem-solving 
skills, and good written and 
oral communication skills.
• Have a general knowledge 
of materials management, 
information systems, and 
basic statistics.
• Direct, monitor, evaluate, 
and motivate employee 
performance.
• Be knowledgeable about 
shipping regulations.
• Manage budgetary accounts
• Manage projects.
• Identify ways to increase consumer 
engagement.
• Analyze the key performance indica-
tors and recommend improvements.
• Lead cross-functional teams to 
define product specifications.
• Collaborate with design and 
technical to create key product 
improvements.
• Develop requirements for new 
Web site enhancements.
• Monitor the competition to identify 
need for changes.

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
13
 Business processes, large and small, are composed of a series of supplier–customer rela-
tionships, where every business organization, every department, and every individual opera-
tion is both a customer of the previous step in the process and a supplier to the next step in the 
process.  Figure 1.8 illustrates this concept. 
 A major process can consist of many subprocesses, each having its own goals that con-
tribute to the goals of the overall process. Business organizations and supply chains have 
many such processes and subprocesses, and they benefit greatly when management is using a 
process perspective. Business process management (BPM) activities include process design, 
process execution, and process monitoring. Two basic aspects of this for operations and sup-
ply chain management are managing processes to meet demand and dealing with process 
variability. 
 Managing a Process to Meet Demand 
 Ideally, the capacity of a process will be such that its output just matches demand. Excess 
capacity is wasteful and costly; too little capacity means dissatisfied customers and lost rev-
enue. Having the right capacity requires having accurate forecasts of demand, the ability 
to translate forecasts into capacity requirements, and a process in place capable of meeting 
expected demand. Even so, process variation and demand variability can make the achieve-
ment of a match between process output and demand difficult. Therefore, to be effective, it is 
also necessary for managers to be able to deal with variation. 
 Process Variation 
 Variation occurs in all business processes. It can be due to variety or variability. For example, 
random variability is inherent in every process; it is always present. In addition, variation can 
occur as the result of deliberate management choices to offer customers variety. 
 There are four basic sources of variation:
 1. 
 The variety of goods or services being offered. The greater the variety of goods and 
services, the greater the variation in production or service requirements. 
 2. 
 Structural variation in demand. These variations, which include trends and sea-
sonal variations, are generally predictable. They are particularly important for capacity 
planning.  
 3. 
 Random variation. This natural variability is present to some extent in all processes, 
as well as in demand for services and products, and it cannot generally be influenced by 
managers. 
 4. 
 Assignable variation. These variations are caused by defective inputs, incorrect work 
methods, out-of-adjustment equipment, and so on. This type of variation can be reduced 
or eliminated by analysis and corrective action. 
 Variations can be disruptive to operations and supply chain processes, interfering with 
optimal functioning. Variations result in additional cost, delays and shortages, poor quality, 
and inefficient work systems. Poor quality and product shortages or service delays can lead 
to dissatisfied customers and can damage an organization’s reputation and image. It is not 
surprising, then, that the ability to deal with variability is absolutely necessary for managers. 
 Throughout this book, you will learn about some of the tools managers use to deal with 
variation. An important aspect of being able to deal with variation is to use metrics to describe 
it. Two widely used metrics are the  mean  (average) and the  standard deviation. The stan-
dard deviation quantifies variation around the mean. The mean and standard deviation are 
used throughout this book in conjunction with variation. So, too, is the normal distribution. 
LO1.5 Summarize the two 
major aspects of process 
management.
 FIGURE 1.8 
 Business processes form a 
sequence of suppliers and 
customers 
 
Supplier(s)
Customer(s)
A business
organization, a
department, or an
individual operation
Input(s) from one
or more suppliers
Output(s) to one or
more customers
Transformation

14 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
Because you will come across many examples of how the normal distribution is used, you 
may find the overview on working with the normal distribution in the appendix at the end of 
the book helpful. 
 1.6  THE SCOPE OF OPERATIONS 
MANAGEMENT 
 The scope of operations management ranges across the organization. Operations management 
people are involved in product and service design, process selection, selection and manage-
ment of technology, design of work systems, location planning, facilities planning, and qual-
ity improvement of the organization’s products or services. 
 The operations function includes many interrelated activities, such as forecasting, capacity 
planning, scheduling, managing inventories, assuring quality, motivating employees, deciding 
where to locate facilities, and more. 
 We can use an airline company to illustrate a service organization’s operations system. 
The system consists of the airplanes, airport facilities, and maintenance facilities, sometimes 
spread out over a wide territory. The activities include:
 Forecasting  such things as weather and landing conditions, seat demand for flights, and 
the growth in air travel. 
 Capacity planning,  essential for the airline to maintain cash flow and make a reasonable 
profit. (Too few or too many planes, or even the right number of planes but in the wrong 
places, will hurt profits.) 
 Locating facilities  according to managers’ decisions on which cities to provide ser-
vice for, where to locate maintenance facilities, and where to locate major and minor 
hubs.  
 Facilities and layout, important in achieving effective use of workers and equipment. 
LO1.6 Describe the operations 
function and the nature of the 
operations manager’s job.
 Scheduling planes, cargo, 
and flight and ground crews 
is an operations function for 
an airline. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
15
 Scheduling  of planes for flights and for routine maintenance; scheduling of pilots and 
flight attendants; and scheduling of ground crews, counter staff, and baggage handlers.  
 Managing inventories of such items as foods and beverages, first-aid equipment, in-
flight magazines, pillows and blankets, and life preservers.  
 Assuring quality,  essential in flying and maintenance operations, where the emphasis is 
on safety, and important in dealing with customers at ticket counters, check-in, telephone 
and electronic reservations, and curb service, where the emphasis is on efficiency and 
courtesy. 
 Motivating and training employees in all phases of operations. 
 Managing the Supply Chain to Achieve 
Schedule, Cost, and Quality Goals 
 Now consider a bicycle factory. This might be primarily an  assembly  operation: buying com-
ponents such as frames, tires, wheels, gears, and other items from suppliers, and then assem-
bling bicycles. The factory also might do some of the  fabrication  work itself, forming frames, 
making the gears and chains, and it might buy mainly raw materials and a few parts and 
materials such as paint, nuts and bolts, and tires. Among the key management tasks in either 
case are scheduling production, deciding which components to make and which to buy, order-
ing parts and materials, deciding on the style of bicycle to produce and how many, purchasing 
new equipment to replace old or worn-out equipment, maintaining equipment, motivating 
workers, and ensuring that quality standards are met. 
 Obviously, an airline company and a bicycle factory are completely different types of 
operations. One is primarily a service operation, the other a producer of goods. Nonetheless, 
these two operations have much in common. Both involve scheduling activities, motivating 
employees, ordering and managing supplies, selecting and maintaining equipment, satisfying 
quality standards, and—above all—satisfying customers. And in both businesses, the success 
of the business depends on short- and long-term planning. 
 A primary function of an operations manager is to guide the system by decision mak-
ing. Certain decisions affect the  design  of the system, and others affect the  operation of 
the system. 
 A worker is making the bottom 
bracket lug for a Trek OCLV 
carbon road bike at Trek 
Bicycle Company in Waterloo, 
Wisconsin, world headquarters 
for Trek. Trek is a world 
leader in bicycle products 
and accessories, with 1,500 
employees worldwide. Designers 
and engineers incorporate 
the most advanced technology 
into Trek products, resulting 
in award-winning bikes and 
components. 

16 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 System design  involves decisions that relate to system capacity, the geographic loca-
tion of facilities, arrangement of departments and placement of equipment within physical 
structures, product and service planning, and acquisition of equipment. These decisions 
usually, but not always, require long-term commitments. Moreover, they are typically 
 strategic  decisions.  System operation  involves management of personnel, inventory plan-
ning and control, scheduling, project management, and quality assurance. These are 
generally  tactical  and  operational  decisions. Feedback on these decisions involves  mea-
surement  and  control.  In many instances, the operations manager is more involved in 
day-to-day operating decisions than with decisions relating to system design. However, 
the operations manager has a vital stake in system design because  system design essen-
tially determines many of the parameters of system operation.  For example, costs, space, 
capacities, and quality are directly affected by design decisions. Even though the opera-
tions manager is not responsible for making all design decisions, he or she can provide 
those decision makers with a wide range of information that will have a bearing on 
their decisions. 
 A number of other areas are part of, or support, the operations function. They include pur-
chasing, industrial engineering, distribution, and maintenance. 
 Purchasing has responsibility for procurement of materials, supplies, and equipment. 
Close contact with operations is necessary to ensure correct quantities and timing of 
purchases. The purchasing department is often called on to evaluate vendors for quality, 
reliability, service, price, and ability to adjust to changing demand. Purchasing is also 
involved in receiving and inspecting the purchased goods. 
 Industrial engineering  is often concerned with scheduling, performance standards, 
work methods, quality control, and material handling. 
 Distribution  involves the shipping of goods to warehouses, retail outlets, or final 
customers. 
 Maintenance  is responsible for general upkeep and repair of equipment, buildings and 
grounds, heating and air-conditioning; removing toxic wastes; parking; and perhaps 
security. 
 The operations manager is the key figure in the system: He or she has the ultimate responsibil-
ity for the creation of goods or provision of services. 
 The kinds of jobs that operations managers oversee vary tremendously from organization 
to organization largely because of the different products or services involved. Thus, manag-
ing a banking operation obviously requires a different kind of expertise than managing a 
steelmaking operation. However, in a very important respect, the  jobs are the same: They are 
both essentially  managerial.  The same thing can be said for the job of any operations manager 
regardless of the kinds of goods or services being created. 
 The service sector and the manufacturing sector are both important to the economy. The 
service sector now accounts for more than 70 percent of jobs in the United States, and it is 
growing in other countries as well. Moreover, the number of people working in services is 
increasing, while the number of people working in manufacturing is not. The reason for the 
decline in manufacturing jobs is twofold: As the operations function in manufacturing com-
panies finds more productive ways of producing goods, the companies are able to maintain 
or even increase their output using fewer workers. Furthermore, some manufacturing work 
has been  outsourced  to more productive companies, many in other countries, that are able to 
produce goods at lower costs. Outsourcing and productivity will be discussed in more detail 
in this and other chapters. 
 Many of the concepts presented in this book apply equally to manufacturing and service. 
Consequently, whether your interest at this time is on manufacturing or on service, these con-
cepts will be important, regardless of whether a manufacturing example or service example is 
used to illustrate the concept. 
 The reading on page 17 gives another reason for the importance of manufacturing jobs. 

17
Why Manufacturing Matters
READING
 The U.S. economy is becoming more and more service-based. The per-
centage of employment in manufacturing continues to decrease while 
the percentage employed in services continues to increase. However, it 
would be unwise to assume that manufacturing isn’t important to the 
economy, or that service is more important. Let’s see why. 
 Not only is the percentage of manufacturing jobs decreasing, but 
the actual number of manufacturing jobs is also decreasing. There 
are two main reasons for the decline: increases in productivity, which 
means fewer workers are needed to maintain manufacturing output; 
and outsourcing, especially to countries that have much lower wages, 
an attractive option for companies seeking to maintain their competi-
tiveness and boost their bottom lines. 
 However, when companies outsource part (or in some cases, all) of 
their manufacturing to lower-cost countries, the loss of jobs results in 
the loss of service jobs as well. Some are lost in the community in retail 
businesses patronized by the manufacturing workers. Also included in 
that figure are factory service workers (e.g., workers who do machine 
repairs, maintenance, material handling, packaging, and so on). General 
estimates are that four service jobs are lost for each manufacturing 
job lost. 
 As the manufacturing base shrinks, workers who lose their manu-
facturing job are finding it tougher to find another opening in manufac-
turing. Instead they join the ranks of the unemployed, or take a service 
job, usually at a lower wage rate than what manufacturing paid. 
 From a national perspective, not only is work 
transferred to a foreign country, intellectual knowl-
edge is transferred. Moreover, as time passes, the 
domestic base of manufacturing skills and know-how is lost. 
 There are important consequences for taxes as well. Unemploy-
ment benefits are costly, and the erosion of federal, state, and local 
tax bases results in lower tax revenues collected from individuals and 
from corporations. 
 Lastly, manufacturing is an important source of innovation. It is 
responsible for 70 percent of private-sector R&D and 90 percent of U.S. 
patents (Rana Foroohar, “Go Glocal,” Time, August 20, 2012, p. 30). Much 
of the work in getting a product ready for volume production is high-value-
added knowledge work that supports future innovation. And innovation 
generates jobs. “Intel has invested tens of billions of dollars in its facto-
ries in Oregon, Arizona, and New Mexico so that they are able to produce 
the most advanced semiconductors” (Willy Shih and Gary Pisano,“Why 
Manufacturing Matters for America,” Special to CNN, Sept. 21, 2012). 
 Questions 
 1. How important is the loss of manufacturing jobs to the nation? 
 2. Can you suggest some actions the government (federal, state, or 
local) can take to stem the job loss?  
   3. What evidence is there of the importance of manufacturing 
innovation? 
 1.7  OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT 
AND DECISION MAKING 
 The chief role of an operations manager is that of planner/decision maker. In this capacity, 
the operations manager exerts considerable influence over the degree to which the goals and 
objectives of the organization are realized. Most decisions involve many possible alternatives 
that can have quite different impacts on costs or profits. Consequently, it is important to make 
informed decisions. 
 Operations management professionals make a number of key decisions that affect the 
entire organization. These include the following:
What: What resources will be needed, and in what amounts? 
When:  When will each resource be needed? When should the work be scheduled? When 
should materials and other supplies be ordered? When is corrective action needed? 
Where: Where will the work be done? 
How:  How will the product or service be designed? How will the work be done (organi-
zation, methods, equipment)? How will resources be allocated? 
Who: Who will do the work? 
 An operations manager’s daily concerns include costs (budget), quality, and schedules (time). 
 Throughout this book, you will encounter the broad range of decisions that operations 
managers must make, and you will be introduced to the tools necessary to handle those deci-
sions. This section describes general approaches to decision making, including the use of 
LO1.7 Explain the key aspects 
of operations management 
decision making.
rk
l-
k 

18 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
models, quantitative methods, analysis of trade-offs, establishing priorities, ethics, and the 
systems approach. Models are often a key tool used by all decision makers. 
 Models 
 A  model  is an abstraction of reality, a simplified representation of something. For example, 
a child’s toy car is a model of a real automobile. It has many of the same visual features 
(shape, relative proportions, wheels) that make it suitable for the child’s learning and play-
ing. But the toy does not have a real engine, it cannot transport people, and it does not weigh 
2,000 pounds. 
 Other examples of models include automobile test tracks and crash tests; formulas, 
graphs and charts; balance sheets and income statements; and financial ratios. Common 
statistical models include descriptive statistics such as the mean, median, mode, range, and 
standard deviation, as well as random sampling, the normal distribution, and regression 
equations. 
 Models are sometimes classified as physical, schematic, or mathematical:
 Physical models  look like their real-life counterparts. Examples include miniature cars, 
trucks, airplanes, toy animals and trains, and scale-model buildings. The advantage of 
these models is their visual correspondence with reality. 
 Schematic models  are more abstract than their physical counterparts; that is, they have 
less resemblance to the physical reality. Examples include graphs and charts, blue-
prints, pictures, and drawings. The advantage of schematic models is that they are often 
relatively simple to construct and change. Moreover, they have some degree of visual 
correspondence.  
 Mathematical models  are the most abstract: They do not look at all like their real-life 
 counterparts. Examples include numbers, formulas, and symbols. These models are 
usually the easiest to manipulate, and they are important forms of inputs for computers 
and calculators.  
 The variety of models in use is enormous. Nonetheless, all have certain common features: 
They are all decision-making aids and simplifications of more complex real-life phenomena. 
Real life involves an overwhelming amount of detail, much of which is irrelevant for any par-
ticular problem. Models omit unimportant details so that attention can be concentrated on the 
most important aspects of a situation. 
 Because models play a significant role in operations management decision making, they 
are heavily integrated into the material of this text. For each model, try to learn (1) its pur-
pose, (2) how it is used to generate results, (3) how these results are interpreted and used, and 
(4) what assumptions and limitations apply. 
 The last point is particularly important because virtually every model has an associated 
set of assumptions or conditions under which the model is valid. Failure to satisfy all of the 
assumptions will make the results suspect. Attempts to apply the results to a problem under 
such circumstances can lead to disastrous consequences. 
 Managers use models in a variety of ways and for a variety of reasons. Models are benefi-
cial because they
 1. Are generally easy to use and less expensive than dealing directly with the actual 
situation.  
 2. 
Require users to organize and sometimes quantify information and, in the process, often 
indicate areas where additional information is needed. 
 3. 
Increase understanding of the problem. 
 4. 
Enable managers to analyze what-if questions. 
 5. 
Serve as a consistent tool for evaluation and provide a standardized format for analyzing 
a problem. 
 6. 
Enable users to bring the power of mathematics to bear on a problem. 
 Model  An abstraction of reality; 
a simplified representation of 
something. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
19
 This impressive list of benefits notwithstanding, models have certain limitations of which 
you should be aware. The following are three of the more important limitations:
 1. 
Quantitative information may be emphasized at the expense of qualitative information. 
 2. 
Models may be incorrectly applied and the results misinterpreted. The widespread use 
of computerized models adds to this risk because highly sophisticated models may be 
placed in the hands of users who are not sufficiently knowledgeable to appreciate the 
subtleties of a particular model; thus, they are unable to fully comprehend the circum-
stances under which the model can be successfully employed. 
 3. 
The use of models does not guarantee good decisions. 
 Quantitative Approaches 
 Quantitative approaches to problem solving often embody an attempt to obtain mathemati-
cally optimal solutions to managerial problems.  Linear programming and related math-
ematical techniques are widely used for optimum allocation of scarce resources.  Queuing 
techniques  are useful for analyzing situations in which waiting lines form.  Inventory models 
are widely used to control inventories.  Project models  such as PERT (program evaluation 
and review technique) and CPM (critical path method) are useful for planning, coordinating, 
and controlling large-scale projects.  Forecasting techniques  are widely used in planning and 
scheduling.  Statistical models are currently used in many areas of decision making. 
 In large measure,  quantitative approaches  to decision making in operations management 
(and in other functional business areas) have been accepted because of calculators and com-
puters capable of handling the required calculations. Computers have had a major impact on 
operations management. Moreover, the growing availability of software packages for quanti-
tative techniques has greatly increased management’s use of those techniques. 
 Although quantitative approaches are widely used in operations management decision 
making, it is important to note that managers typically use a combination of qualitative and 
quantitative approaches, and many important decisions are based on qualitative approaches. 
 Performance Metrics 
 All managers use metrics to manage and control operations. There are many metrics in use, 
including those related to profits, costs, quality, productivity, flexibility, assets, inventories, 
schedules, and forecast accuracy. As you read each chapter, note the metrics being used and 
how they are applied to manage operations. 
 Analysis of Trade-Offs 
 Operations personnel frequently encounter decisions that can be described as  trade-off deci-
sions. For example, in deciding on the amount of inventory to stock, the decision maker must 
take into account the trade-off between the increased level of customer service that the addi-
tional inventory would yield and the increased costs required to stock that inventory. 
 Throughout this book you will be presented with decision models that reflect these kinds 
of trade-offs. Decision makers sometimes deal with these decisions by listing the advantages 
and disadvantages—the pros and cons—of a course of action to better understand the conse-
quences of the decisions they must make. In some instances, decision makers add weights to 
the items on their list that reflect the relative importance of various factors. This can help them 
“net out” the potential impacts of the trade-offs on their decision. 
   Degree of Customization 
 A major influence on the entire organization is the degree of customization of products or ser-
vices being offered to its customers. Providing highly customized products or services such as 
home remodeling, plastic surgery, and legal counseling tends to be more labor intensive than 
providing standardized products such as those you would buy “off the shelf” at a mall store 

20
or a supermarket or standardized services such as public utilities and Internet services. Fur-
thermore, production of customized products or provision of customized services is generally 
more time consuming, requires more highly skilled people, and involves more flexible equip-
ment than what is needed for standardized products or services. Customized processes tend 
to have a much lower volume of output than standardized processes, and customized output 
carries a higher price tag. The degree of customization has important implications for process 
selection and job requirements. The impact goes beyond operations and supply chains. It 
affects marketing, sales, accounting, finance, and information systems. 
 A Systems Approach 
 A systems viewpoint is almost always beneficial in decision making. Think of it as a “big pic-
ture” view. A   system  can be defined as a set of interrelated parts that must work together. In a 
business organization, the organization can be thought of as a system composed of  subsystems 
(e.g., marketing subsystem, operations subsystem, finance subsystem), which in turn are com-
posed of lower subsystems. The systems approach emphasizes interrelationships among sub-
systems, but its main theme is that  the whole is greater than the sum of its individual parts.
Hence, from a systems viewpoint, the output and objectives of the organization as a whole 
take precedence over those of any one subsystem. An alternative approach is to concentrate 
on efficiency within subsystems and thereby achieve overall efficiency. But that approach 
overlooks the facts that organizations must operate in an environment of scarce resources and 
that subsystems are often in direct competition for those scarce resources, so that an orderly 
approach to the allocation of resources is called for. 
 A systems approach is essential whenever something is being designed, redesigned, imple-
mented, improved, or otherwise changed. It is important to take into account the impact on all 
parts of the system. For example, if the upcoming model of an automobile will add antilock 
brakes, a designer must take into account how customers will view the change, instructions 
for using the brakes, chances for misuse, the cost of producing the new brakes, installation 
procedures, recycling worn-out brakes, and repair procedures. In addition, workers will need 
training to make and/or assemble the brakes, production scheduling may change, inventory 
procedures may have to change, quality standards will have to be established, advertising 
must be informed of the new features, and parts suppliers must be selected. 
 Establishing Priorities 
 In virtually every situation, managers discover that certain issues or items are more important 
than others. Recognizing this enables the managers to direct their efforts to where they will 
do the most good. 
 Typically, a relatively few issues or items are very important, so that dealing with those 
factors will generally have a disproportionately large impact on the results achieved. This 
well-known effect is referred to as the   Pareto phenomenon   .  This is one of the most impor-
tant and pervasive concepts in operations management. In fact, this concept can be applied 
at all levels of management and to every aspect of decision making, both professional 
and personal.  
 System  A set of interrelated 
parts that must work together. 
 Pareto phenomenon  A few 
factors account for a high per-
centage of the occurrence of 
some event(s). 
READING
Analytics
 Analytics uses descriptive and predictive models to obtain insight from 
data and then uses that insight to recommend action or to guide deci-
sion making. 
 Commercial analytics software is available for the challenges of 
analyzing very large, dynamic data sets, referred to as big data. Analyz-
ing big data presents opportunities for businesses such as those that 
operate transactional online systems that gener-
ate massive volumes of data. For example, the 
McKinsey Global Institute estimates that the U.S. 
health care system could save $300 billion from analyzing big data. 1 
 1“Big Data: The next frontier for innovation, competition and productivity as 
reported in Building with Big Data” The Economist, May 26, 2011. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
21
 1.8  THE HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF 
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT 
 Systems for production have existed since ancient times. For example, the construction of 
pyramids and Roman aquaducts involved operations management skills. The production of 
goods for sale, at least in the modern sense, and the modern factory system had their roots in 
the Industrial Revolution. 
 The Industrial Revolution 
 The Industrial Revolution began in the 1770s in England and spread to the rest of Europe and 
to the United States during the 19th century. Prior to that time, goods were produced in small 
shops by craftsmen and their apprentices. Under that system, it was common for one person 
to be responsible for making a product, such as a horse-drawn wagon or a piece of furniture, 
from start to finish. Only simple tools were available; the machines in use today had not 
been invented. 
 Then, a number of innovations in the 18th century changed the face of production forever 
by substituting machine power for human power. Perhaps the most significant of these was 
the steam engine, because it provided a source of power to operate machines in factories. 
Ample supplies of coal and iron ore provided materials for generating power and making 
machinery. The new machines, made of iron, were much stronger and more durable than the 
simple wooden machines they replaced. 
 In the earliest days of manufacturing, goods were produced using   craft production: 
highly skilled workers using simple, flexible tools produced goods according to customer 
specifications. 
 Craft production had major shortcomings. Because products were made by skilled crafts-
men who custom-fitted parts, production was slow and costly. And when parts failed, the 
replacements also had to be custom made, which was also slow and costly. Another shortcom-
ing was that production costs did not decrease as volume increased; there were no  economies 
of scale,  which would have provided a major incentive for companies to expand. Instead, 
many small companies emerged, each with its own set of standards. 
 A major change occurred that gave the Industrial Revolution a boost: the development of 
standard gauging systems. This greatly reduced the need for custom-made goods. Factories 
began to spring up and grow rapidly, providing jobs for countless people who were attracted 
in large numbers from rural areas. 
 Despite the major changes that were taking place, management theory and practice had not 
progressed much from early days. What was needed was an enlightened and more systematic 
approach to management. 
 Scientific Management 
 The scientific management era brought widespread changes to the management of factories. 
The movement was spearheaded by the efficiency engineer and inventor Frederick Winslow 
Taylor, who is often referred to as the father of scientific management. Taylor believed in a 
“science of management” based on observation, measurement, analysis and improvement of 
work methods, and economic incentives. He studied work methods in great detail to identify 
the best method for doing each job. Taylor also believed that management should be respon-
sible for planning, carefully selecting and training workers, finding the best way to perform 
each job, achieving cooperation between management and workers, and separating manage-
ment activities from work activities. 
 Taylor’s methods emphasized maximizing output. They were not always popular with 
workers, who sometimes thought the methods were used to unfairly increase output without 
a corresponding increase in compensation. Certainly some companies did abuse workers in 
their quest for efficiency. Eventually, the public outcry reached the halls of Congress, and 
hearings were held on the matter. Taylor himself was called to testify in 1911, the same year 
LO1.8 Briefly describe 
the  historical evolution of 
 operations management.
 Craft production  System in 
which highly skilled workers use 
simple, flexible tools to produce 
small quantities of customized 
goods. 

22 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
in which his classic book,  The Principles of Scientific Management,  was published. The pub-
licity from those hearings actually helped scientific management principles to achieve wide 
acceptance in industry. 
 A number of other pioneers also contributed heavily to this movement, including the 
following:
 Frank Gilbreth  was an industrial engineer who is often referred to as the father of motion 
study. He developed principles of motion economy that could be applied to incredibly 
small portions of a task. 
 Henry Gantt  recognized the value of nonmonetary rewards to motivate workers, and 
developed a widely used system for scheduling, called Gantt charts. 
 Harrington Emerson  applied Taylor’s ideas to organization structure and encouraged 
the use of experts to improve organizational efficiency. He testified in a congressional 
hearing that railroads could save a million dollars a day by applying principles of scien-
tific management. 
 Henry Ford,  the great industrialist, employed scientific management techniques in his 
factories. 
 During the early part of the 20th century, automobiles were just coming into vogue in the 
United States. Ford’s Model T was such a success that the company had trouble keeping up 
with orders for the cars. In an effort to improve the efficiency of operations, Ford adopted the 
scientific management principles espoused by Frederick Winslow Taylor. He also introduced 
the  moving assembly line,  which had a tremendous impact on production methods in many 
industries. 
 Among Ford’s many contributions was the introduction of   mass production  to the auto-
motive industry, a system of production in which large volumes of standardized goods are 
produced by low-skilled or semiskilled workers using highly specialized, and often costly, 
equipment. Ford was able to do this by taking advantage of a number of important concepts. 
Perhaps the key concept that launched mass production was  interchangeable parts , some-
times attributed to Eli Whitney, an American inventor who applied the concept to assembling 
muskets in the late 1700s. The basis for interchangeable parts was to standardize parts so 
that any part in a batch of parts would fit any automobile coming down the assembly line. 
This meant that parts did not have to be custom fitted, as they were in craft production. The 
standardized parts could also be used for replacement parts. The result was a tremendous 
 Mass production  System in 
which low-skilled workers use 
specialized machinery to pro-
duce high volumes of standard-
ized goods. 
 Interchangeable parts  Parts 
of a product made to such preci-
sion that they do not have to be 
custom fitted. 
 Row of “Tin Lizzies,” or Model 
T’s, being manufactured on an 
early Ford assembly line. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
23
decrease in assembly time and cost. Ford accomplished this by standardizing the gauges used 
to measure parts during production and by using newly developed processes to produce uni-
form parts.  
 A second concept used by Ford was the  division of labor , which Adam Smith wrote about 
in  The Wealth of Nations  (1776). Division of labor means that an operation, such as assem-
bling an automobile, is divided up into a series of many small tasks, and individual workers 
are assigned to one of those tasks. Unlike craft production, where each worker was respon-
sible for doing many tasks, and thus required skill, with division of labor the tasks were so 
narrow that virtually no skill was required. 
 Together, these concepts enabled Ford to tremendously increase the production rate at his 
factories using readily available inexpensive labor. Both Taylor and Ford were despised by 
many workers, because they held workers in such low regard, expecting them to perform like 
robots. This paved the way for the human relations movement. 
 The Human Relations Movement 
 Whereas the scientific management movement heavily emphasized the technical aspects of 
work design, the human relations movement emphasized the importance of the human ele-
ment in job design. Lillian Gilbreth, a psychologist and the wife of Frank Gilbreth, worked 
with her husband, focusing on the human factor in work. (The Gilbreths were the subject of 
a classic film,  Cheaper by the Dozen. ) Many of her studies dealt with worker fatigue. In the 
following decades, there was much emphasis on motivation. Elton Mayo conducted studies 
at the Hawthorne division of Western Electric. His studies revealed that in addition to the 
physical and technical aspects of work, worker motivation is critical for improving productiv-
ity. Abraham Maslow developed motivational theories, which Frederick Hertzberg refined. 
Douglas McGregor added Theory X and Theory Y. These theories represented the two ends 
of the spectrum of how employees view work. Theory X, on the negative end, assumed that 
workers do not like to work, and have to be controlled—rewarded and punished—to get them 
to do good work. This attitude was quite common in the automobile industry and in some 
other industries, until the threat of global competition forced them to rethink that approach. 
Theory Y, on the other end of the spectrum, assumed that workers enjoy the physical and 
mental aspects of work and become committed to work. The Theory X approach resulted in 
an adversarial environment, whereas the Theory Y approach resulted in empowered workers 
and a more cooperative spirit. William Ouchi added Theory Z, which combined the Japanese 
approach with such features as lifetime employment, employee problem solving, and con-
sensus building, and the traditional Western approach that features short-term employment, 
specialists, and individual decision making and responsibility. 
 Decision Models and Management Science 
 The factory movement was accompanied by the development of several quantitative tech-
niques. F. W. Harris developed one of the first models in 1915: a mathematical model for 
inventory order size. In the 1930s, three coworkers at Bell Telephone Labs, H. F. Dodge, H. 
G. Romig, and W. Shewhart, developed statistical procedures for sampling and quality con-
trol. In 1935, L.H.C. Tippett conducted studies that provided the groundwork for statistical-
sampling theory. 
 At first, these quantitative models were not widely used in industry. However, the onset 
of World War II changed that. The war generated tremendous pressures on manufacturing 
output, and specialists from many disciplines combined efforts to achieve advancements in 
the military and in manufacturing. After the war, efforts to develop and refine quantitative 
tools for decision making continued, resulting in decision models for forecasting, inventory 
management, project management, and other areas of operations management. 
 During the 1960s and 1970s, management science techniques were highly regarded; in 
the 1980s, they lost some favor. However, the widespread use of personal computers and 
user-friendly software in the workplace contributed to a resurgence in the popularity of 
these techniques. 
 Division of labor  The break-
ing up of a production process 
into small tasks, so that each 
worker performs a small portion 
of the overall job. 

24 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 The Influence of Japanese Manufacturers 
 A number of Japanese manufacturers developed or refined management practices that increased 
the productivity of their operations and the quality of their products, due in part to the influence 
of Americans W. Edwards Deming and Joseph Juran. This made them very competitive, spark-
ing interest in their approaches by companies outside Japan. Their approaches emphasized 
quality and continual improvement, worker teams and empowerment, and achieving customer 
satisfaction. The Japanese can be credited with spawning the “quality revolution” that occurred 
in industrialized countries, and with generating widespread interest in lean production. 
 The influence of the Japanese on U.S. manufacturing and service companies has been 
enormous and promises to continue for the foreseeable future. Because of that influence, this 
book will provide considerable information about Japanese methods and successes. 
  Table 1.5  provides a chronological summary of some of the key developments in the evolu-
tion of operations management. 
 1.9 OPERATIONS TODAY  
 Advances in information technology and global competition have had a major influence on 
operations management. While the  Internet  offers great potential for business organizations, 
the potential as well as the risks must be clearly understood in order to determine if and how 
to exploit this potential. In many cases, the Internet has altered the way companies compete 
in the marketplace. 
 Electronic business, or   e-business  ,  involves the use of the Internet to transact business. 
E-business is changing the way business organizations interact with their customers and their 
suppliers. Most familiar to the general public is   e-commerce , consumer–business transac-
tions such as buying online or requesting information. However, business-to-business transac-
tions such as e-procurement represent an increasing share of e-business. E-business is receiving 
 E-business  Use of the Internet 
to transact business.  
 E-commerce  Consumer-to-
business transactions.
Approximate Date Contribution/Concept
Originator
1776
Division of labor
Adam Smith
1790
Interchangeable parts
Eli Whitney
1911
Principles of scientific management
Frederick W. Taylor
1911
Motion study, use of industrial psychology
Frank and Lillian Gilbreth
1912
Chart for scheduling activities
Henry Gantt
1913
Moving assembly line
Henry Ford
1915
Mathematical model for inventory ordering
F. W. Harris
1930
Hawthorne studies on worker motivation
Elton Mayo
1935
Statistical procedures for sampling and 
quality control
H. F. Dodge, H. G. Romig, 
W. Shewhart, L.H.C. Tippett
1940
Operations research applications in warfare
Operations research groups
1947
Linear programming
George Dantzig
1951
Commercial digital computers
Sperry Univac, IBM
1950s
Automation
Numerous
1960s
Extensive development of quantitative tools
Numerous
1960s
Industrial dynamics
Jay Forrester
1975
Emphasis an manufacturing strategy
W. Skinner
1980s
Emphasis on flexibility, time-based competition, 
lean production
T. Ohno, S. Shingo, Toyota
1980s
Emphasis on quality
W. Edwards Deming, J. Juran, 
K. Ishikawa
1990s
Internet, supply chain management
Numerous
2000s
Applications service providers and outsourcing
Numerous
Social media, YouTube, and others.
Numerous
 TABLE 1.5 
 Historical summary of operations 
management 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
25
increased attention from business owners and managers in developing strategies, planning, and 
decision making. 
 The word   technology  has several definitions, depending on the context. Generally,  tech-
nology  refers to the application of scientific discoveries to the development and improve-
ment of goods and services. It can involve knowledge, materials, methods, and equipment. 
The term  high technology  refers to the most advanced and developed machines and methods. 
Operations management is primarily concerned with three kinds of technology: product and 
service technology, process technology, and information technology (IT). All three can have a 
major impact on costs, productivity, and competitiveness. 
 Product and service technology  refers to the discovery and development of new products 
and services. This is done mainly by researchers and engineers, who use the scientific 
approach to develop new knowledge and translate that into commercial applications. 
 Process technology  refers to methods, procedures, and equipment used to produce goods 
and provide services. They include not only processes within an organization but also 
supply chain processes. 
 Information technology (IT)  refers to the science and use of computers and other elec-
tronic equipment to store, process, and send information. Information technology is 
heavily ingrained in today’s business operations. This includes electronic data process-
ing, the use of bar codes to identify and track goods, obtaining point-of-sale information, 
data transmission, the Internet, e-commerce, e-mail, and more. 
 Management of technology  is high on the list of major trends, and it promises to be high 
well into the future. For example, computers have had a tremendous impact on businesses in 
many ways, including new product and service features, process management, medical diag-
nosis, production planning and scheduling, data processing, and communication. Advances in 
materials, methods, and equipment also have had an impact on competition and productivity. 
Advances in information technology also have had a major impact on businesses. Obviously 
there have been—and will continue to be—many benefits from technological advances. How-
ever, technological advance also places a burden on management. For example, management 
must keep abreast of changes and quickly assess both their benefits and risks. Predicting 
advances can be tricky at best, and new technologies often carry a high price tag and usually a 
high cost to operate or repair. And in the case of computer operating systems, as new systems 
are introduced, support for older versions is discontinued, making periodic upgrades neces-
sary. Conflicting technologies can exist that make technological choices even more difficult. 
Technological innovations in both  products  and  processes  will continue to change the way 
businesses operate, and hence require continuing attention. 
 The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) opened borders for trade between 
the United States and Canada and Mexico. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) of 1994 reduced tariffs and subsidies in many countries, expanding world trade. The 
resulting global competition and global markets have had an impact on the strategies and 
operations of businesses large and small around the world. One effect is the importance busi-
ness organizations are giving to management of their supply chains. 
 Globalization  and the need for global supply chains have broadened the scope of supply 
chain management. However, tightened border security in certain instances has slowed some 
movement of goods and people. Moreover, in some cases, organizations are reassessing their 
use of offshore outsourcing. 
 Competitive pressures and changing economic conditions have caused business organiza-
tions to put more emphasis on
 Operations strategy. 
 Working with fewer resources. 
 Revenue management. 
 Process analysis and improvement, and quality improvement. 
 Agility. 
 Lean production. 
 Technology  The application 
of scientific discoveries to the 
development and improvement 
of goods and services.  

26 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 During the latter part of the 1900s, many companies neglected to include  operations strat-
egy in their corporate strategy. Some of them paid dearly for that neglect. Now more and more 
companies are recognizing the importance of operations strategy on the overall success of 
their business as well as the necessity for relating it to their overall business strategy. 
Working with fewer resources  due to layoffs, corporate downsizing, and general cost cut-
ting is forcing managers to make trade-off decisions on resource allocation, and to place 
increased emphasis on cost control and productivity improvement. 
Revenue management  is a method used by some companies to maximize the revenue they 
receive from fixed operating capacity by influencing demand through price manipulation. 
Also known as yield management, it has been successfully used in the travel and tourism 
industries by airlines, cruise lines, hotels, amusement parks, and rental car companies, and in 
other industries such as trucking and public utilities. 
 Process analysis and improvement  includes cost and time reduction, productivity improve-
ment, process yield improvement, and quality improvement and increasing customer satisfac-
tion. This is sometimes referred to as a  six sigma process. 
 Given a boost by the “quality revolution” of the 1980s and 1990s,  quality is now ingrained 
in business. Some businesses use the term  total quality management (TQM)  to describe their 
quality efforts. A quality focus emphasizes  customer satisfaction  and often involves  team-
work. Process improvement  can result in improved quality, cost reduction, and  time reduction.
Time relates to costs and to competitive advantage, and businesses seek ways to reduce the 
time to bring new products and services to the marketplace to gain a competitive edge. If two 
companies can provide the same product at the same price and quality, but one can deliver 
it four weeks earlier than the other, the quicker company will invariably get the sale. Time 
reductions are being achieved in many companies now. Union Carbide was able to cut $400 
million of fixed expenses, and Bell Atlantic was able to cut the time needed to hook up long-
distance carriers from 15 days to less than 1, at a savings of $82 million. 
 Agility  refers to the ability of an organization to respond quickly to demands or oppor-
tunities. It is a strategy that involves maintaining a flexible system that can quickly respond 
to changes in either the volume of demand or changes in product/service offerings. This is 
particularly important as organizations scramble to remain competitive and cope with increas-
ingly shorter product life cycles and strive to achieve shorter development times for new or 
improved products and services. 
 Six sigma  A process for reduc-
ing costs, improving quality, and 
increasing customer satisfaction.  
 Agility  The ability of an orga-
nization to respond quickly to 
demands or opportunities. 
Lean production,  a new approach to production, emerged in the 1990s. It incorporates a 
number of the recent trends listed here, with an emphasis on quality, flexibility, time reduc-
tion, and teamwork. This has led to a  flattening  of the organizational structure, with fewer 
levels of management. 
 Lean systems   are so named because they use much less of certain resources than typi-
cal mass production systems use—space, inventory, and workers—to produce a comparable 
amount of output. Lean systems use a highly skilled workforce and flexible equipment. In 
effect, they incorporate advantages of both mass production (high volume, low unit cost) and 
 Lean system  System that uses 
minimal amounts of resources to 
produce a high volume of high-
quality goods with some variety. 
READING
Agility Creates a Competitive Edge
There is a huge demand in the United States and elsewhere for affordable 
women’s clothing. Low-cost clothing retailers such as Spain’s Zara and 
Sweden’s H & M are benefiting from their ability to quickly get mass-
produced, trendy new fashions to store shelves while some less-agile 
competitors like Macy’s and Gap struggle to achieve the same results. A 
key factor for the agile retailers is their nearness to low-cost producers in 
Romania and Turkey, which greatly shortens transportation time. Ameri-
can retailers often source from China, but increasing wages there and the 
longer distance lessen their ability to take advan-
tage of quickly introducing new low-cost fashions.
Question
What possible solutions do you see for competitors such as Macy’s and 
Gap?
Source: Based on Roya Wolverson, “Need for Speed: Glamorizing Cheap Fashion 
Costs More than You Think,” Time, August 6, 2012, p. 18.

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
27
craft production (variety and flexibility). And quality is higher than in mass production. This 
approach has now spread to services, including health care, offices, and shipping and delivery. 
 The skilled workers in lean production systems are more involved in maintaining and 
improving the system than their mass production counterparts. They are taught to stop an 
operation if they discover a defect, and to work with other employees to find and correct the 
cause of the defect so that it won’t recur. This results in an increasing level of quality over 
time and eliminates the need to inspect and rework at the end of the line. 
 Because lean production systems operate with lower amounts of inventory, additional 
emphasis is placed on anticipating when problems might occur  before  they arise and avoiding 
those problems through planning. Even so, problems can still occur at times, and quick reso-
lution is important. Workers participate in both the planning and correction stages. 
 Compared to workers in traditional systems, much more is expected of workers in lean 
production systems. They must be able to function in teams, playing active roles in operating 
and improving the system. Individual creativity is much less important than team success. 
Responsibilities also are much greater, which can lead to pressure and anxiety not present in 
traditional systems. Moreover, a flatter organizational structure means career paths are not 
as steep in lean production organizations. Workers tend to become generalists rather than 
 specialists, another contrast to more traditional organizations. 
 1.10  KEY ISSUES FOR TODAY’S 
BUSINESS OPERATIONS 
 There are a number of issues that are high priorities of many business organizations. Although 
not every business is faced with these issues, many are. Chief among the issues are the 
following:
 Economic conditions. The lingering recession and slow recovery in various sectors of 
the economy has made managers cautious about investment and rehiring workers who 
had been laid off during the recession. 
 Innovating.  Finding new or improved products or services are only two of the many 
possibilities that can provide value to an organization. Innovations can be made in pro-
cesses, the use of the Internet, or the supply chain that reduce costs, increase productivity, 
expand markets, or improve customer service. 
 Quality problems.  The numerous operations failures mentioned at the beginning of the 
chapter underscore the need to improve the way operations are managed. That relates to 
product design and testing, oversight of suppliers, risk assessment, and timely response 
to potential problems. 
 Risk management.  The need for managing risk is underscored by recent events that 
include the crisis in housing, product recalls, oil spills, and natural and man-made disas-
ters, and economic ups and downs. Managing risks starts with identifying risks, assessing 
vulnerability and potential damage (liability costs, reputation, demand), and taking steps 
to reduce or share risks. 
 Competing in a global economy.  Low labor costs in third-world countries have 
increased pressure to reduce labor costs. Companies must carefully weigh their options, 
which include outsourcing some or all of their operations to low-wage areas, reducing 
costs internally, changing designs, and working to improve productivity. 
 Three other key areas require more in-depth discussion: environmental concerns, ethical 
 conduct, and managing the supply chain. 
 Environmental Concerns 
 Concern about global warming and pollution has had an increasing effect on how businesses 
operate. 
LO1.9 Describe current issues 
in business that impact opera-
tions management.

Universities and colleges are increasingly embracing sustainability, link-
ing it to global warming, biodiversity, and global commerce. Some are 
building sustainability into existing courses, while others are offering 
new courses, certificate programs, or degree programs. And some, such 
as Arizona State University and the Rochester Institute of Technology, 
are offering advanced degree programs.
Some universities are also “practicing what they preach,” by apply-
ing sustainable practices in their operations. Among them are Dart-
mouth College, Harvard University, Stanford, Williams College, and the 
University of British Columbia, which was named 
by the environmental magazine Grist as one of the 
top 15 universities in the world in reducing greenhouse gas emissions 
and being energy efficient.
Source: Based on “The Sustainable University: Saving the Planet by Degrees,” 
Chronicle of Higher Education, Special Report, October 20, 2006, Stanford News 
Service, January 2007, and “B.C.’s School of Greener Learning,” Toronto Globe 
and Mail, August 25, 2007, p. A6.
READING
Universities Embrace Sustainability
28 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 Stricter environmental regulations, particularly in developed nations, are being imposed. Fur-
thermore, business organizations are coming under increasing pressure to reduce their carbon 
footprint (the amount of carbon dioxide generated by their operations and their supply chains) 
and to generally operate sustainable processes.   Sustainability   refers to service and production 
processes that use resources in ways that do not harm ecological systems that support both current 
and future human existence. Sustainability measures often go beyond traditional environmental 
and economic measures to include measures that incorporate social criteria in decision making. 
 All areas of business will be affected by this. Areas that will be most affected include 
product and service design, consumer education programs, disaster preparation and response, 
supply chain waste management, and outsourcing decisions. Note that outsourcing of goods 
production increases not only transportation costs, but also fuel consumption and carbon 
released into the atmosphere. Consequently, sustainability thinking may have implications for 
outsourcing decisions. 
 Because they all fall within the realm of operations, operations management is central 
to dealing with these issues. Sometimes referred to as “green initiatives,” the possibilities 
include reducing packaging, materials, water and energy use, and the environmental impact 
of the supply chain, including buying locally. Other possibilities include reconditioning used 
equipment (e.g., printers and copiers) for resale, and recycling. 
 Sustainability  Using resources 
in ways that do not harm ecolog-
ical systems that support human 
existence. 
 Puma’s “Clever Little Bag” 
changes the idea of the shoebox 
by wrapping footwear in a 
cardboard structure with 65 
percent less cardboard. It uses 
a bag made of recycled plastic 
as the outer layer that holds 
the inner cardboard structure 
together. Puma expects to 
cut carbon dioxide emissions 
by 10,000 tons per year and 
water, energy, and diesel use 
by 60 percent by using fewer 
materials—8,500 fewer tons of 
paper to be specific—and the 
new packaging’s lighter weight. 
house gas emissions
ed
he 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
29
 The following reading suggests that even our choice of diet can affect the environment. 
READING
Diet and the Environment: Vegetarian vs. Nonvegetarian
 Ethical Conduct 
 The need for ethical conduct in business is becoming increasingly obvious, given numerous exam-
ples of questionable actions in recent history. In making decisions, managers must consider how 
their decisions will affect  shareholders, management, employees, customers, the community at 
large, and the environment. Finding solutions that will be in the best interests of all of these stake-
holders is not always easy, but it is a goal that all managers should strive to achieve. Furthermore, 
even managers with the best intentions will sometimes make mistakes. If mistakes do occur, man-
agers should act responsibly to correct those mistakes as quickly as possible, and to address any 
negative consequences.  
 Many organizations have developed  codes of ethics  to guide employees’ or members’ con-
duct.   Ethics  is a standard of behavior that guides how one should act in various situations. 
The Markula Center for Applied Ethics at Santa Clara University identifies five principles 
for thinking ethically: 
 • The  Utilitarian Principle is that the good done by an action or inaction should 
 outweigh any harm it causes or might cause. An example is not allowing a person who 
has had too much to drink to drive. 
 • The  Rights Principle is that actions should respect and protect the moral rights of 
 others. An example is not taking advantage of a vulnerable person. 
 • The  Fairness Principle is that equals should be held to, or evaluated by, the same 
 standards. An example is equal 
pay for equal work. 
 • The  Common Good Principle 
is that actions should contrib-
ute to the common good of the 
community. An example is an 
ordinance on noise abatement. 
 • The  Virtue Principle is that 
actions should be consistent with 
certain ideal virtues. Examples 
include honesty, compassion, 
generosity, tolerance, fidelity, 
integrity, and self-control.  
 Ethics  A standard of behavior 
that guides how one should act 
in various situations.  
 The Fair Trade Certified™ label 
guarantees to consumers that 
strict economic, social, and 
environmental criteria were met 
in the production and trade of an 
agricultural product. 
 It is interesting to examine the environmental impact of dietary choices. 
There’s ample evidence that agricultural practices pollute the soil, air, 
and water. Factors range from the distance food travels to get to the 
consumer, to the amount of water and fertilizer used. Of particular con-
cern is the environmental impact of a diet high in animal protein. The 
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United Nations recently 
reported that livestock production is one of the major causes of global 
warming and air and water pollution. Using a methodology that considers 
the entire supply chain, the FAO estimated that livestock accounts for 
18 percent of greenhouse gas emissions. 
 A Vegetarian versus Nonvegetarian Diet and the Envi-
ronment  The eco-friendliness of a meat eater’s diet was the subject of 
a study conducted by researchers from the Departments of Environmental 
Health and Nutrition of Loma Linda University in 
 California. They compared the environmental effects 
of a vegetarian vs. nonvegetarian diet in California in 
terms of agricultural production inputs, including pesticides and fertilizers, 
water and energy. 
 “The study results showed that for the combined production of 11 
food items the nonvegetarian diet required 2.9 times more water, 2.5 
times more primary energy, 13 times more fertilizer, and 1.4 times more 
pesticides than did the vegetarian diet. The biggest differences came 
from including beef in the diet.” 
 Source: Based on “Finding a Scientific Connection Between Food Choices and 
the Environment,”  Environmental Nutrition Newsletter, October 2009, p. 3. 

30 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 The center expands these principles to create a framework for ethical conduct. An   ethical 
framework  is a sequence of steps intended to guide thinking and subsequent decisions or 
actions. Here is the one developed by the Markula Center for Applied Ethics:
 1. 
Recognize an ethical issue by asking if an action could be damaging to a group or an 
individual. Is there more to it than just what is legal? 
 2. 
Make sure the pertinent facts are known, such as who will be impacted, and what 
options are available. 
 3. 
Evaluate the options by referring to the appropriate preceding ethical principle. 
 4. 
Identify the “best” option and then further examine it by asking how someone you 
respect would view it. 
 5. 
In retrospect, consider the effect your decision had and what you can learn from it. 
 More detail is available at the Center’s Web site:  http://www.scu.edu/ethics/practicing/ 
decision/framework.html . 
 Operations managers, like all managers, have the responsibility to make ethical decisions. 
Ethical issues arise in many aspects of operations management, including
 • Financial statements: accurately representing the organization’s financial condition. 
 • Worker safety: providing adequate training, maintaining equipment in good working 
condition, maintaining a safe working environment. 
 • Product safety: providing products that minimize the risk of injury to users or damage to 
property or the environment. 
 • Quality: honoring warranties, avoiding hidden defects. 
 • The environment: not doing things that will harm the environment. 
 • The community: being a good neighbor. 
 • Hiring and firing workers: avoiding false pretenses (e.g., promising a long-term job 
when that is not what is intended). 
 • Closing facilities: taking into account the impact on a community, and honoring com-
mitments that have been made. 
 • Workers’ rights: respecting workers’ rights, dealing with workers’ problems quickly 
and fairly. 
 The Ethisphere Institute recognizes companies worldwide for their ethical leadership. 
Here are some samples from their list:
 Apparel: Gap. 
 Automotive: Ford Motor Company. 
 Business services: Paychex. 
 Café: Starbucks. 
 Computer hardware: Intel. 
 Computer software: Adobe Systems, Microsoft. 
 Consumer electronics: Texas Instruments, Xerox. 
 E-commerce: eBay. 
 General retail: Costco, Target. 
 Groceries: Safeway, Wegmans, Whole Foods. 
 Health and beauty: L’Oreal. 
 Logistics: UPS. 
 You can see a complete list of recent recipients and the selection criteria at  Ethisphere.com . 
 Ethical framework  A 
sequence of steps intended to 
guide thinking and subsequent 
decision or action. 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
31
 The Need to Manage the Supply Chain 
 Supply chain management is being given increasing attention as business organizations face mount-
ing pressure to improve management of their supply chains. In the past, most organizations did little 
to manage their supply chains. Instead, they tended to concentrate on their own operations and on 
their immediate suppliers. Moreover, the planning, marketing, production and inventory manage-
ment functions in organizations in supply chains have often operated independently of each other. 
As a result, supply chains experienced a range of problems that were seemingly beyond the con-
trol of individual organizations. The problems included large oscillations of inventories, inventory 
stockouts, late deliveries, and quality problems. These and other issues now make it clear that man-
agement of supply chains is essential to business success. The other issues include the following:  
 1.  The need to improve operations.  Efforts on cost and time reduction, and productivity and 
quality improvement, have expanded in recent years to include the supply chain. Oppor-
tunity now lies largely with procurement, distribution, and logistics—the supply chain.  
  2.  Increasing levels of outsourcing.  Organizations are increasing their levels of    outsourcing , 
buying goods or services instead of producing or providing them themselves. As out-
sourcing increases, organizations are spending increasing amounts on supply-related 
activities (wrapping, packaging, moving, loading and unloading, and sorting). A signifi-
cant amount of the cost and time spent on these and other related activities may be unnec-
essary. Issues with imported products, including tainted food products, toothpaste, and pet 
foods, as well as unsafe tires and toys, have led to questions of liability and the need for 
companies to take responsibility for monitoring the safety of outsourced goods.  
 3.  Increasing transportation costs.  Transportation costs are increasing, and they need to 
be more carefully managed. 
 4.  Competitive pressures.  Competitive pressures have led to an increasing number of 
new products, shorter product development cycles, and increased demand for custom-
ization. And in some industries, most notably consumer electronics, product life cycles 
are relatively short. Added to this are adoption of quick-response strategies and efforts 
to reduce lead times. 
 5.  Increasing globalization. Increasing globalization has expanded the physical length of 
supply chains. A global supply chain increases the challenges of managing a supply chain. 
Having far-flung customers and/or suppliers means longer lead times and greater opportu-
nities for disruption of deliveries. 
Often currency differences and 
monetary fluctuations are factors, 
as well as language and cultural 
differences. Also, tightened bor-
der security in some instances 
has slowed shipments of goods.  
 6.  Increasing 
importance 
of 
e-business. 
The 
increasing 
importance of e-business has 
added new dimensions to busi-
ness buying and selling and has 
presented new challenges. 
 7.  The complexity of supply 
chains.  
Supply 
chains 
are 
complex; they are dynamic, 
and they have many inherent 
uncertainties that can adversely 
affect them, such as inaccurate 
forecasts, late deliveries, sub-
standard 
quality, 
equipment 
breakdowns, and canceled or 
changed orders. 
LO1.10 Explain the need to 
manage the supply chain.
 Outsourcing  Buying goods or 
services instead of producing or 
providing them in-house. 
In Kachchh, India, Fairtrade 
allows cotton farmers to have the 
assurance of a minimum price, 
which gives them more security 
to plan their business and invest 
in their communities.

32 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 8.  The need to manage inventories.  Inventories play a major role in the success or failure 
of a supply chain, so it is important to coordinate inventory levels throughout a supply 
chain. Shortages can severely disrupt the timely flow of work and have far-reaching 
impacts, while excess inventories add unnecessary costs. It would not be unusual to find 
inventory shortages in some parts of a supply chain and excess inventories in other parts 
of the same supply chain. 
 Elements of Supply Chain Management 
 Supply chain management involves coordinating activities across the supply chain. Central to 
this is taking customer demand and translating it into corresponding activities at each level of 
the supply chain. 
 The key elements of supply chain management are listed in  Table 1.6 . The first element, 
customers, is the driving element. Typically, marketing is responsible for determining what 
customers want as well as forecasting the quantities and timing of customer demand. Product 
and service design must match customer wants with operations capabilities. 
 Processing occurs in each component of the supply chain: it is the core of each organization. 
The major portion of processing occurs in the organization that produces the product or service 
for the final customer (the organization that assembles the computer, services the car, etc.). A 
major aspect of this for both the internal and external portions of a supply chain is scheduling. 
 Inventory is a staple in most supply chains. Balance is the main objective; too little causes 
delays and disrupts schedules, but too much adds unnecessary costs and limits flexibility. 
 Purchasing is the link between an organization and its suppliers. It is responsible for 
obtaining goods and/or services that will be used to produce products or provide services for 
the organization’s customers. Purchasing selects suppliers, negotiates contracts, establishes 
alliances, and acts as liaison between suppliers and various internal departments. 
 The supply portion of a value chain is made up of one or more suppliers, all links in the 
chain, and each one capable of having an impact on the effectiveness—or the  ineffectiveness—
of the supply chain. Moreover, it is essential that the planning and execution be carefully 
coordinated between suppliers and all members of the demand portion of their chains. 
 Location can be a factor in a number of ways. Where suppliers are located can be important, 
as can location of processing facilities. Nearness to market, nearness to sources of supply, or 
nearness to both may be critical. Also, delivery time and cost are usually affected by location. 
 Two types of decisions are relevant to supply chain management—strategic and opera-
tional. The strategic decisions are the design and policy decisions. The operational decisions 
relate to day-to-day activities: managing the flow of material and product and other aspects of 
the supply chain in accordance with strategic decisions. 
 TABLE 1.6 
 Elements of supply chain 
management  
Element
Typical Issues
Chapter(s)
Customers
Determining what products and/or services customers want
3, 4
Forecasting
Predicting the quantity and timing of customer demand
3
Design
Incorporating customers, wants, manufacturability, and time to 
market
4
Capacity planning
Matching supply and demand
5, 11
Processing
Controlling quality, scheduling work
10, 16
Inventory
Meeting demand requirements while managing the costs of hold-
ing inventory
12, 13, 14
Purchasing
Evaluating potential suppliers, supporting the needs of operations 
on purchased goods and services
15
Suppliers
Monitoring supplier quality, on-time delivery, and flexibility; main-
taining supplier relations
15
Location
Determining the location of facilities
8
Logistics
Deciding how to best move information and materials
15

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
33
 Wegmans Food Markets, Inc., is one of the premier grocery chains in 
the United States. Headquartered in Rochester, New York, Wegmans 
operates over 70 stores, mainly in Rochester, Buffalo, and Syracuse. 
There are also a handful of stores elsewhere in New York State and 
in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. The company employs over 
45,000 people, and has annual sales of over $3 billion. 
 Wegmans has a strong reputation for offering its customers high 
product quality and excellent service. Through a combination of market 
research, trial and error, and listening to its customers, Wegmans has 
evolved into a very successful organization. Its sales per square foot are 
50 percent higher than the industry average. 
 Superstores 
 Many of the company’s stores are giant 100,000-square-foot super-
stores, double or triple the size of average supermarkets. You can get an 
idea about the size of these stores from this: they usually have between 
25 and 35 checkout lanes, and during busy periods, all of the checkouts 
are in operation. A superstore typically employs from 500 to 600 people. 
 Individual stores differ somewhat in terms of actual size and some 
special features. Aside from the features normally found in supermar-
kets, they generally have a full-service deli (typically a 40-foot display 
case), a 500-square-foot fisherman’s wharf that has perhaps 10 differ-
ent fresh fish offerings most days, a large bakery section (each store 
bakes its own bread, rolls, cakes, pies, and pastries), and extra-large 
produce sections. They also offer film processing, 
a complete pharmacy, a card shop, video rentals, 
and an Olde World Cheese section. In-store floral shops range in size up 
to 800 square feet of floor space and offer a wide variety of fresh-cut 
flowers, flower arrangements, vases, and plants. In-store card shops 
cover over 1,000 square feet of floor space. The bulk foods department 
provides customers with the opportunity to select the quantities they 
desire from a vast array of foodstuffs and some nonfood items such as 
birdseed and pet food. 
 Each store is a little different. Among the special features in some 
stores are a dry cleaning department, a wokery, and a salad bar. Some 
stores feature a Market Café that has different food stations, each 
devoted to preparing and serving a certain type of food. For example, 
one station will have pizza and other Italian specialties, and another 
oriental food, and still another chicken or fish. There also will be a sand-
wich bar, a salad bar, and a dessert station. Customers often wander 
among stations as they decide what to order. In some Market Cafés, 
diners can have wine with their meals and have brunch on Sundays. 
In several affluent locations, customers can stop in on their way home 
from work and choose from a selection of freshly prepared dinner 
entrees such as medallions of beef with herb butter, chicken Mar-
sala, stuffed flank steak with mushrooms, Cajun tuna, crab cakes, and 
accompaniments such as roasted red potatoes, grilled vegetables, and 
OPERATIONS TOUR
Wegmans Food Markets
(continued)
 The major decision areas in supply chain management are location, production, distribu-
tion, and inventory. The  location  decision relates to the choice of locations for both produc-
tion and distribution facilities. Production and transportation costs and delivery lead times are 
important.  Production  and  distribution  decisions focus on what customers want, when they 
want it, and how much is needed. Outsourcing can be a consideration. Distribution decisions 
are strongly influenced by transportation cost and delivery times, because transportation costs 
often represent a significant portion of total cost. Moreover, shipping alternatives are closely 
tied to production and inventory decisions. For example, using air transport means higher 
costs but faster deliveries and less inventory in transit than sea, rail, or trucking options. Dis-
tribution decisions must also take into account capacity and quality issues. Operational deci-
sions focus on scheduling, maintaining equipment, and meeting customer demand. Quality 
control and workload balancing are also important considerations.  Inventory  decisions relate 
to determining inventory needs and coordinating production and stocking decisions through-
out the supply chain. Logistics management plays the key role in inventory decisions. 
 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) is being increasingly used to provide information 
sharing in real time among organizations and their major supply chain partners. This impor-
tant topic is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12. 
 Operations Tours 
 Throughout the book you will discover operations tours that describe operations in all sorts of 
companies. The tour you are about to read is Wegmans Food Markets, a major regional super-
market chain and one of the largest privately held companies in the United States. Wegmans 
has been consistently ranked high on  Fortune  magazine’s list of the 100 Best Companies to 
Work For since the inception of the survey a decade ago. In 2005 Wegmans was ranked num-
ber one on the list. 
h
i
i

Caesar salad. Many Wegmans stores offer ready-made sandwiches as 
well as made-to-order sandwiches. Some stores have a coffee-shop 
section with tables and chairs where shoppers can enjoy regular or spe-
cialty coffees and a variety of tempting pastries. 
 Produce Department 
 The company prides itself on fresh produce. Produce is replenished as 
often as 12 times a day. The larger stores have produce sections that 
are four to five times the size of a produce section in an average super-
market. Wegmans offers locally grown produce in season. Wegmans 
uses a “farm to market” system whereby some local growers deliver 
their produce directly to individual stores, bypassing the main ware-
house. That reduces the company’s inventory holding costs and gets 
the produce into the stores as quickly as possible. Growers may use 
specially designed containers that go right onto the store floor instead 
of large bins. This avoids the bruising that often occurs when fruits and 
vegetables are transferred from bins to display shelves and the need to 
devote labor to transfer the produce to shelves. 
 Meat Department 
 In addition to large display cases of both fresh and frozen meat prod-
ucts, many stores have a full-service butcher shop that offers a variety 
of fresh meat products and where butchers are available to provide cus-
tomized cuts of meat for customers. 
 Meat department employees attend Wegmans’ “Meat University,” 
where they learn about different cuts of meat and how to best pre-
pare them. They also learn about other items to pair with various meats, 
and suggest side dishes, breads, and wine. This helps instill a “selling 
culture” among employees, who often spend 75 percent of their time 
talking with customers. 
 Wegmans continually analyzes store operations to improve pro-
cesses. In the meat department, a change from in-store cutting and 
traditional packaging to using a centralized meat processing facility and 
vacuum packaging extended the shelf life of meats and reduced staff-
ing requirements in meat departments, reducing costs and providing 
customers with an improved product. 
 Ordering 
 Each department handles its own ordering. Although sales records are 
available from records of items scanned at the checkouts, they are not 
used directly for replenishing stock. Other factors—such as pricing, 
special promotions, and local circumstances (e.g., festivals, weather 
conditions)—must all be taken into account. However, for seasonal 
periods, such as holidays, managers often check scanner records to 
learn what past demand was during a comparable period. 
 The superstores typically receive one truckload of goods per day 
from the main warehouse. During peak periods, a store may receive 
two truckloads from the main warehouse. The short lead time greatly 
reduces the length of time an item might be out of stock, unless the 
main warehouse is also out of stock. 
 The company exercises strict control over suppliers, insisting on 
product quality and on-time deliveries. 
 Inventory Management 
 Some stores carry as many as 70,000 individual units. Wegmans uses 
a companywide system to keep track of inventory. Departments take 
a monthly inventory count to verify the amount shown in the com-
panywide system. Departments receive a periodic report indicating 
how many days of inventory the department has on hand. Having an 
 Wegmans’ Patisserie is an authentic French pastry shop. 
(continued)
34 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management

appropriate amount on hand is important to department managers: If 
they have too much inventory on hand, that will add to their depart-
ment’s costs, whereas having too little inventory will result in shortages 
and thus lost sales and dissatisfied customers. 
 Employees 
 The company recognizes the value of good employees. It typically 
invests an average of $7,000 to train each new employee. In addition to 
learning about store operations, new employees learn the importance of 
good customer service and how to provide it. The employees are help-
ful, cheerfully answering customer questions or handling complaints. 
Employees are motivated through a combination of compensation, 
profit sharing, and benefits. Employee turnover for full-time workers is 
about 6 percent, compared to the industry average of about 20 percent.  
 Quality 
 Quality and customer satisfaction are utmost in the minds of Wegmans’ 
management and its employees. Private-label food items as well as 
name brands are regularly evaluated in test kitchens, along with poten-
tial new products. Managers are responsible for checking and main-
taining product and service quality in their departments. Moreover, 
employees are encouraged to report problems to their managers. 
 If a customer is dissatisfied with an item, and returns it, or even a 
portion of the item, the customer is offered a choice of a replacement or 
a refund. If the item is a Wegmans brand food item, it is then sent to the 
test kitchen to determine the cause of the problem. If the cause can be 
determined, corrective action is taken. 
 Technology 
 Wegmans continues to adopt new technologies to maintain its competi-
tive edge, including new approaches to tracking inventory and manag-
ing its supply chain, and new ways to maintain freshness in the meat 
and produce departments. 
 Sustainability 
 Wegmans began replacing incandescent light bulbs with compact fluo-
rescent bulbs in 2007, generating 3,000 fewer tons of carbon dioxide 
each year. Also the company installed sensors in its dairy cases that 
reduced the time the cooling systems run by 50 percent.  
 Questions 
 1. How do customers judge the quality of a supermarket? 
 2. Indicate how and why each of these factors is important to the suc-
cessful operation of a supermarket:
 
 a. Customer satisfaction. 
 
 b. Forecasting.  
 
 c. Capacity planning.  
 
 d. Location. 
 
 e. Inventory management.  
 
 f. Layout of the store. 
 
 g. Scheduling. 
 3. What are some of the ways Wegmans uses technology to gain an 
edge over its competition? 
 Fresh seafood is delivered daily, often direct from boat to 
store the same day it was caught. 
 Wegmans’ chefs fill the Chef’s Case with ready-to-eat and 
ready-to-heat entrees, side dishes, and salads. 
 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management 
35

36 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
 The operations function in business organizations is responsible for producing goods and providing 
services. It is a core function of every business. Supply chains are the sequential system of suppliers 
and customers that begins with basic sources of inputs and ends with final customers of the system. 
Operations and supply chains are interdependent—one couldn’t exist without the other, and no business 
organization could exist without both. 
 Operations management involves system design and operating decisions related to product and ser-
vice design, capacity planning, process selection, location selection, work management, inventory and 
supply management, production planning, quality assurance, scheduling, and project management. 
 The historical evolution of operations management provides interesting background information on 
the continuing evolution of this core business function. 
 The Operations Tours and Readings included in this and subsequent chapters provide insights into 
actual business operations. 
 SUMMARY 
 1. The operations function is that part of every business organization that produces products and/or 
delivers services. 
 2. Operations consists of processes that convert inputs into outputs. Failure to manage those processes 
effectively will have a negative impact on the organization. 
 3. A key goal of business organizations is to achieve an economic matching of supply and 
demand. The operations function is responsible for providing the supply or service capacity for 
expected demand. 
 4. All processes exhibit variation that must be managed. 
 5. Although there are some basic differences between services and products that must be taken into 
account from a managerial standpoint, there are also many similarities between the two. 
 6. Environmental issues will increasingly impact operations decision making. 
 7. Ethical behavior is an integral part of good management practice. 
 8. All business organizations have, and are part of, a supply chain that must be managed. 
 KEY POINTS 
 agility, 26 
 craft production, 21 
 division of labor, 23 
 e-business, 24 
 e-commerce, 24 
 ethical framework, 30 
 ethics, 29 
 goods, 3 
 interchangeable parts, 22 
 lead time, 10 
 lean system, 26 
 mass production, 22 
 model, 18 
 operations management, 4 
 outsourcing, 31 
 Pareto phenomenon, 20 
 process, 12 
 services, 3 
 six sigma, 26 
 supply chain, 4 
 sustainability, 28 
 system, 20 
 technology, 25 
 value-added, 7 
 KEY TERMS 
 1. Briefly describe the terms  operations management and  supply chain. 
 2. Identify the three major functional areas of business organizations and briefly describe how they 
interrelate. 
 3. Describe the operations function and the nature of the operations manager’s job. 
 4. List five important differences between goods production and service operations; then list five 
important similarities. 
 5. Briefly discuss each of these terms related to the historical evolution of operations management:
  a. Industrial Revolution 
  b. Scientific management 
  c. Interchangeable parts 
 d. Division of labor 
 6. Why are services important? Why is manufacturing important? What are nonmanufactured goods? 
 7. What are models and why are they important? 
 8. Why is the degree of customization an important consideration in process planning? 
 9. List the trade-offs you would consider for each of these decisions:
  a. Driving your own car versus public transportation. 
  b. Buying a computer now versus waiting for an improved model. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
37
 c. Buying a new car versus buying a used car. 
 d. Speaking up in class versus waiting to get called on by the instructor. 
 e. A small business owner having a Web site versus newspaper advertising. 
 10. Describe each of these systems: craft production, mass production, and lean production. 
 11. Why might some workers prefer not to work in a lean production environment? 
 12. Discuss the importance of each of the following:
 a. Matching supply and demand 
 b. Managing a supply chain 
 13. List and briefly explain the four basic sources of variation, and explain why it is important for 
managers to be able to effectively deal with variation. 
 14. Why do people do things that are unethical? 
 15. Explain the term  value-added. 
 16. Discuss the various impacts of outsourcing. 
 17. Discuss the term  sustainability, and its relevance for business organizations. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 This item appears at the end of each chapter. It is intended to focus your attention on three key issues for 
business organizations in general, and operations management in particular. Those issues are trade-off 
decisions, collaboration among various functional areas of the organization, and the impact of technol-
ogy. You will see three or more questions relating to these issues. Here is the first set of questions:
 1. What are trade-offs? Why is careful consideration of trade-offs important in decision making? 
 2. Why is it important for the various functional areas of a business organization to collaborate? 
 3. In what general ways does technology have an impact on operations management decision making? 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 This item also will appear in every chapter. It allows you to critically apply information you learned in 
the chapter to a practical situation. Here is the first set of exercises:
 1. Many organizations offer a combination of goods and services to their customers. As you learned in 
this chapter, there are some key differences between production of goods and delivery of services. 
What are the implications of these differences relative to managing operations? 
 2. Why is it important to match supply and demand? If a manager believes that supply and demand 
will not be equal, what actions could the manager take to increase the probability of achieving a 
match? 
 3. One way that organizations compete is through technological innovation. However, there can be 
downsides for both the organization and the consumer. Explain. 
 4.  a. What are some possible reasons a business person would make an unethical decision? 
  b. What are the risks of doing so? 
 Hazel had worked for the same Fortune 500 company for almost 15 
years. Although the company had gone through some tough times, 
things were starting to turn around. Customer orders were up, and 
quality and productivity had improved dramatically from what they had 
been only a few years earlier due to a companywide quality improve-
ment program. So it came as a real shock to Hazel and about 400 of 
her coworkers when they were suddenly terminated following the new 
CEO’s decision to downsize the company. 
 After recovering from the initial shock, Hazel tried to find employ-
ment elsewhere. Despite her efforts, after eight months of searching 
she was no closer to finding a job than the day she started. Her funds 
were being depleted and she was getting more discouraged. There was 
one bright spot, though: She was able to bring in a 
little money by mowing lawns for her neighbors. 
She got involved quite by chance when she heard one neighbor remark 
that now that his children were on their own, nobody was around to 
cut the grass. Almost jokingly, Hazel asked him how much he’d be will-
ing to pay. Soon Hazel was mowing the lawns of five neighbors. Other 
neighbors wanted her to work on their lawns, but she didn’t feel that 
she could spare any more time from her job search. 
 However, as the rejection letters began to pile up, Hazel knew she 
had to make a decision. On a sunny Tuesday morning, she decided, like 
many others in a similar situation, to go into business for herself—taking 
CASE
Hazel
(continued)

38 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
care of neighborhood lawns. She was relieved to give up the stress of 
job hunting, and she was excited about the prospect of being her own 
boss. But she was also fearful of being completely on her own. Never-
theless, Hazel was determined to make a go of it. 
 At first, business was a little slow, but once people realized Hazel 
was available, many asked her to take care of their lawns. Some people 
were simply glad to turn the work over to her; others switched from 
professional lawn care services. By the end of her first year in busi-
ness, Hazel knew she could earn a living this way. She also performed 
other services such as fertilizing lawns, weeding gardens, and trimming 
shrubbery. Business became so good that Hazel hired two part-time 
workers to assist her and, even then, she believed she could expand 
further if she wanted to. 
 Questions 
    1. Hazel is the operations manager of her business. Among her respon-
sibilities are forecasting, inventory management, scheduling, quality 
assurance, and maintenance. 
  a. What kinds of things would likely require forecasts? 
    b.  What inventory items does Hazel probably have? Name one 
inventory decision she has to make periodically. 
    c.  What scheduling must she do? What things might occur to dis-
rupt schedules and cause Hazel to reschedule?  
    d.  How important is quality assurance to Hazel’s business? Explain.  
  e. What kinds of maintenance must be performed? 
   2. In what ways are Hazel’s customers most likely to judge the quality 
of her lawn care services? 
   3. What are some of the trade-offs that Hazel probably considered 
relative to:
  a. Working for a company instead of for herself? 
  b. Expanding the business? 
  c. Launching a Web site? 
  4. The town is considering an ordinance that would prohibit putting 
grass clippings at the curb for pickup because local landfills can-
not handle the volume. What options might Hazel consider if the 
ordinance is passed? Name two advantages and two drawbacks of 
each option. 
 5. Hazel decided to offer the students who worked for her a bonus of 
$25 for ideas on how to improve the business, and they provided 
several good ideas. One idea that she initially rejected now appears 
to hold great promise. The student who proposed the idea has left, 
and is currently working for a competitor. Should Hazel send that 
student a check for the idea? What are the possible trade-offs? 
 6. All managers have to cope with variation.
     a.   What are the major sources of variation that Hazel has to con-
tend with? 
    b.   How might these sources of variation impact Hazel’s ability to 
match supply and demand? 
  c. What are some ways she can cope with variation? 
   7. Hazel is thinking of making some of her operations sustainable. 
What are some ideas she might consider?  
(continued)
Bloomberg Businessweek 
 Bowie, Norman E., ed.  The Blackwell Guide to Busi-
ness Ethics. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2002. 
 Fitzsimmons, James, and Mona Fitzsimmons.  Service 
Management, 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill/
Irwin, 2011. 
Fortune magazine.  
 Womack, James P., Daniel Jones, and Daniel Roos. 
The Machine That Changed the World. New York: 
Harper Perennial, 1991, 2007. 
 Wisner, Joel D., and Linda L. Stanley.  Process Man-
agement: Creating Value Along the Supply Chain. 
Mason, OH: Thomson South-Western, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
 PROBLEM-SOLVING GUIDE 
 Here is a procedure that will help you solve most of the end-of-chapter problems in this book and 
on exams:
 1. Identify the question to be answered. This is critical. 
 2. Summarize the information given in the problem statement using the appropriate symbols. 
 3. Determine what type of problem it is so you can select the appropriate problem-solving tools 
such as a formula or table. Check your notes from class, chapter examples, and the Solved Prob-
lems section of the chapter, and any preceding chapter problems you have already solved for 
guidance. 
 4. Solve the problem and indicate your answer. 
 Example 1 
 Department A can produce parts at a rate of 50/day. Department B uses those parts are the rate of 10/
day. Each day unused parts are added to inventory. At what rate does the inventory of unused parts 
build up? 

 
Chapter One Introduction to Operations Management
39
 1. The question to be answered: At what rate does inventory of unused parts build up (i.e., 
increase) per day? 
 2. The given information:  Production rate  50 parts/day
Usage rate          10 parts/day
 3. For this simple problem, no formula or table is needed. Inventory buildup is simply the differ-
ence between the production and usage rates. 
 4. Production rate       50 parts/day
Usage rate              10 parts/day
Inventory buildup  40 parts/day
 Solution 
 Example 2 
 Companies often use this formula to determine how much of a certain item to order:  Q
DS
H
=
2
 
 where 
Problem-Solving Template
Problem number:
The question to be answered:
Information given:
Solve using:
  Q     order quantity 
  D     annual demand  
  S   ordering cost  
  H     annual holding cost per unit 
 If annual demand is 400 units, ordering cost is $36, and annual holding cost is $2 per unit, what 
is the order quantity? 
 Solution 
 1. The question to be answered: What is the order quantity,  Q? 
 2. The information given in the problem:  D     400 units/year,  S     $36,  H     $2 per year 
 3. To solve the problem, substitute the values given in the problem into the formula. 
 4. Solution:  
=
=
2(400
/
.)$36
$2/
/
.
120 units
Q
units yr
unit yr
 

40
 CHAP TE R 
 2 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 2.1 Introduction,  41 
 2.2 Competitiveness,  42 
 Why Some Organizations Fail,  43 
 2.3 Mission and Strategies,  44 
 Strategies and Tactics,  45 
 Strategy Formulation,  46 
 Supply Chain Strategy,  50 
 Sustainability Strategy,  50 
 Global Strategy,  50 
 2.4 Operations Strategy,  51 
 Strategic Operations Management Decision 
Areas,  52 
 Quality and Time Strategies,  53 
 2.5 Implications of Organization Strategy 
for Operations Management,  54 
 2.6 Transforming Strategy into Action: The 
Balanced Scorecard,  54 
 2.7 Productivity,  56 
 Computing Productivity,  57 
 Productivity in the Service Sector,  59 
 Factors That Affect Productivity,  60 
 Improving Productivity,  61 
 Cases:  An American Tragedy: How a Good 
Company Died,  66 
 Home-Style Cookies,  67 
 Hazel Revisited,  69 
 “Your Garden Gloves,”  69 
 Operations Tour:  The U.S. Postal 
Service,  70 
 Competitiveness, 
Strategy, and 
Productivity 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO2.1 
List several ways that business organizations 
compete. 
 LO2.2 
Name several reasons that business organizations fail. 
 LO2.3 
Define the terms  mission and  strategy and explain why they 
are important. 
 LO2.4 
Discuss and compare organization strategy and operations 
strategy and explain why it is important to link the two. 
 LO2.5 
Describe and give examples of  time-based strategies. 
 LO2.6 
Define the term  productivity and explain why it is important to 
organizations and to countries. 
 LO2.7 
Describe several factors that affect productivity. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

41
 This chapter discusses competitiveness, strategy, and productiv-
ity, three separate but related topics that are vitally important 
to business organizations.  Competitiveness  relates to the effec-
tiveness of an organization in the marketplace relative to other 
organizations that offer similar products or services. Operations 
and marketing have a major impact on competitiveness.  Strategy 
relates to the plans that determine how an organization pursues 
its goals. Operations strategy is particularly important in this 
regard.  Productivity  relates to the effective use of resources, and 
it has a direct impact on competitiveness. Operations manage-
ment is chiefly responsible for productivity. 
 THE COLD HARD FACTS 
    The name of the game is competition. The playing field is 
global. Those who understand how to play the game will 
succeed; those who don’t are doomed to failure. And don’t 
think the game is just companies competing with each 
other. In companies that have multiple factories or divi-
sions producing the same good or service, factories or divi-
sions sometimes find themselves competing with each other. 
When a competitor—another company or a sister factory 
or division in the same company—can turn out products 
better, cheaper, and faster, that spells real trouble for the 
factory or division that is performing at a lower level. The 
trouble can be layoffs or even a shutdown if the managers 
can’t turn things around. The bottom line? Better quality, 
higher productivity, lower costs, and the ability to quickly 
respond to customer needs are more important than ever, 
and the bar is getting higher. Business organizations need 
to develop solid strategies for dealing with these issues. 
 2.1 INTRODUCTION  
 In this chapter you will learn about the different ways companies compete and why some 
firms do a very good job of competing. You will learn how effective strategies can lead to 
competitive organizations, and you will learn what productivity is, why it is important, and 
what organizations can do to improve it. 

42 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 2.2 COMPETITIVENESS 
 Companies must be competitive to sell their goods and services in the marketplace. 
 Competitiveness    is an important factor in determining whether a company prospers, barely 
gets by, or fails. Business organizations compete through some combination of price, delivery 
time, and product or service differentiation. 
 Marketing influences competitiveness in several ways, including identifying consumer 
wants and needs, pricing, and advertising and promotion.
 1. 
 Identifying consumer wants and/or needs is a basic input in an organization’s 
 decision-making process, and central to competitiveness. The ideal is to achieve a per-
fect match between those wants and needs and the organization’s goods and/or services. 
 2. 
 Price and quality are key factors in consumer buying decisions. It is important to 
understand the trade-off decision consumers make between price and quality. 
 3. 
 Advertising and promotion are ways organizations can inform potential customers 
about features of their products or services, and attract buyers. 
 Operations has a major influence on competitiveness through product and service design, 
cost, location, quality, response time, flexibility, inventory and supply chain management, and 
service. Many of these are interrelated.
 1. 
 Product and service design should reflect joint efforts of many areas of the firm to 
achieve a match between financial resources, operations capabilities, supply chain capa-
bilities, and consumer wants and needs. Special characteristics or features of a product 
or service can be a key factor in consumer buying decisions. Other key factors include 
 innovation and the  time-to-market for new products and services. 
 2. 
 Cost  of an organization’s output is a key variable that affects pricing decisions and prof-
its. Cost-reduction efforts are generally ongoing in business organizations.  Productivity  
(discussed later in the chapter) is an important determinant of cost. Organizations with 
higher productivity rates than their competitors have a competitive cost advantage. A 
company may outsource a portion of its operation to achieve lower costs, higher produc-
tivity, or better quality.  
 3. 
 Location can be important in terms of cost and convenience for customers. Location 
near inputs can result in lower input costs. Location near markets can result in lower 
transportation costs and quicker delivery times. Convenient location is particularly 
important in the retail sector. 
 4. 
 Quality refers to materials, workmanship, design, and service. Consumers judge qual-
ity in terms of how well they think a product or service will satisfy its intended purpose. 
Customers are generally willing to pay more for a product or service if they perceive the 
product or service has a higher quality than that of a competitor. 
 5. 
 Quick response can be a competitive advantage. One way is quickly bringing new or 
improved products or services to the market. Another is being able to quickly deliver 
existing products and services to a customer after they are ordered, and still another is 
quickly handling customer complaints. 
 6. 
 Flexibility is the ability to respond to changes. Changes might relate to alterations in 
design features of a product or service, or to the volume demanded by customers, or the 
mix of products or services offered by an organization. High flexibility can be a com-
petitive advantage in a changeable environment. 
 7. 
 Inventory management can be a competitive advantage by effectively matching sup-
plies of goods with demand. 
 8. 
 Supply chain management involves coordinating internal and external operations (buyers 
and suppliers) to achieve timely and cost-effective delivery of goods throughout the system. 
 9. 
 Service might involve after-sale activities customers perceive as value-added, such as 
delivery, setup, warranty work, and technical support. Or it might involve extra atten-
tion while work is in progress, such as courtesy, keeping the customer informed, and 
 Competitiveness  How effec-
tively an organization meets the 
wants and needs of customers 
relative to others that offer simi-
lar goods or services.  
LO2.1 List several ways 
that business organizations 
compete.

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
43
attention to details.  Service quality can be a key differentiator; and it is one that is often 
sustainable. Moreover, businesses rated highly by their customers for service quality 
tend to be more profitable, and grow faster, than businesses that are not rated highly. 
 10.  Managers and  workers are the people at the heart and soul of an organization, and if 
they are competent and motivated, they can provide a distinct competitive edge by their 
skills and the ideas they create. One often overlooked skill is answering the telephone. 
How complaint calls or requests for information are handled can be a positive or a nega-
tive. If a person answering is rude or not helpful, that can produce a negative image. 
Conversely, if calls are handled promptly and cheerfully, that can produce a positive 
image and, potentially, a competitive advantage. 
 Why Some Organizations Fail 
 Organizations fail, or perform poorly, for a variety of reasons. Being aware of those reasons 
can help managers avoid making similar mistakes. Among the chief reasons are the following:
 1. 
Neglecting operations strategy. 
 2. 
Failing to take advantage of strengths and opportunities, and/or failing to recognize 
competitive threats. 
 3. 
Putting too much emphasis on short-term financial performance at the expense of 
research and development. 
 4. 
Placing too much emphasis on product and service design and not enough on process 
design and improvement. 
 5. 
Neglecting investments in capital and human resources. 
 6. 
Failing to establish good internal communications and cooperation among different 
functional areas. 
 7. 
Failing to consider customer wants and needs. 
 The key to successfully competing is to determine what customers want and then directing efforts 
toward meeting (or even exceeding) customer expectations. Two basic issues must be addressed. 
First: What do the customers want? (Which items on the preceding list of the ways business organi-
zations compete are important to customers?) Second: What is the best way to satisfy those wants? 
 Operations must work with marketing to obtain information on the relative importance of 
the various items to each major customer or target market. 
 Understanding competitive issues can help managers develop successful strategies. 
LO2.2 Name several reasons 
that business organizations fail.
 Indian operators take calls at 
Quatro call center in Gurgaon 
on the outskirts of New Delhi. 
Companies take advantage of 
communications and software 
support offshore to drive down 
costs. This industry in India 
already provides over one 
million jobs. 

44 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 2.3 MISSION AND STRATEGIES 
 An organization’s  mission    is the reason for its existence. It is expressed in its    mission 
 statement.    For a business organization, the mission statement should answer the question 
“What business are we in?” Missions vary from organization to organization, depending on 
the nature of their business.  Table 2.1 provides several examples of mission statements. 
 A mission statement serves as the basis for organizational    goals,    which provide more detail 
and describe the scope of the mission. The mission and goals often relate to how an organiza-
tion wants to be perceived by the general public, and by its employees, suppliers, and custom-
ers. Goals serve as a foundation for the development of organizational strategies. These, in 
turn, provide the basis for strategies and tactics of the functional units of the organization. 
 Organizational strategy is important because it guides the organization by providing direc-
tion for, and alignment of, the goals and    strategies    of the functional units. Moreover, strate-
gies can be the main reason for the success or failure of an organization. 
 There are three basic business strategies:
 • Low cost. 
 • Responsiveness. 
 • Differentiation from competitors. 
LO2.3 Define the terms mis-
sion and strategy and explain 
why they are important.
 Mission  The reason for the 
existence of an organization. 
 Mission statement  States the 
purpose of an organization. 
 Goals  Provide detail and scope 
of the mission. 
 Strategies  Plans for achieving 
organizational goals. 
 Microsoft 
 To help people and businesses throughout the world to realize their full potential. 
 Verizon 
 To help people and businesses communicate with each other. 
Starbucks
To inspire and nurture the human spirit—one cup and one neighborhood at a time.
U.S. Dept. of
Education
To promote student achievement and preparation for global competitiveness and fostering
educational excellence and ensuring equal access.
 TABLE 2.1 
 Selected portions of company 
mission statements 
 IS IT A STRATEGIC, TACTICAL, OR 
OPERATIONAL ISSUE? 
 Sometimes the same issue may apply to all three levels. However, 
a key difference is the time frame. From a strategic perspective, 
long-term implications are most relevant. From tactical and opera-
tional perspectives, the time frames are much shorter. In fact, the 
operational time frame is often measured in days. 
 Responsiveness relates to ability to respond to changing demands. Differentiation can 
relate to product or service features, quality, reputation, or customer service. Some organiza-
tions focus on a single strategy while others employ a combination of strategies. One com-
pany that has multiple strategies is  Amazon.com . Not only does it offer low cost and quick, 
reliable deliveries, it also excels in customer service. 
 Amazon’s service helped 
propel the company to double-
digit sales. Amazon started 
same-day shipping in major 
cities, launched a program to 
urge manufacturers to drop 
frustrating packaging, and 
extended its service reach by 
acquiring free-shipping pioneer 
 Zappos.com . 

45
 Strategies and Tactics 
 If you think of goals as destinations, then strategies are the roadmaps for reaching the des-
tinations. Strategies provide  focus  for decision making. Generally speaking, organizations 
have overall strategies called  organizational strategies,  which relate to the entire organization. 
They also have  functional strategies, which relate to each of the functional areas of the orga-
nization. The functional strategies should support the overall strategies of the organization, 
just as the organizational strategies should support the goals and mission of the organization. 
 Tactics    are the methods and actions used to accomplish strategies. They are more specific 
than strategies, and they provide guidance and direction for carrying out actual  operations,
which need the most specific and detailed plans and decision making in an organization. You 
might think of tactics as the “how to” part of the process (e.g., how to reach the destination, 
following the strategy roadmap) and operations as the actual “doing” part of the process. 
Much of this book deals with tactical operations. 
 It should be apparent that the overall relationship that exists from the mission down to 
actual operations is  hierarchical. This is illustrated in  Figure 2.1 . 
 A simple example may help to put this hierarchy into perspective. 
 Tactics  The methods and 
actions taken to accomplish 
strategies. 
though she had paid the merchant, not Amazon. 
And she wasn’t asked to return the book. 
 Amazon sees its customer service as a way to enhance customer 
experience, and as a way to identify potential problems with merchants. 
In fact, if merchants have problems with more than 1 percent of their 
orders, that can get them removed from the site. 
 Source: Based on “How Amazon Aims to Keep You Clicking,”  BusinessWeek, 
March 2009, p. 34. 
 Amazon received the top spot in customer service in a recent  Business-
Week  ranking. Although most Amazon customers never talk with an 
employee, when something goes wrong, Amazon excels in dealing with 
the problem. In one case, when a New Jersey woman received a work-
book she ordered that was described as “like new,” she was surprised 
to discover that it wasn’t even close to new—worksheets had already 
been filled in. She complained to the merchant but didn’t get a response. 
Then she complained to Amazon. She promptly received a refund, even 
 READING 
 AMAZON Tops in Customer Service 
 FIGURE 2.1 
 Planning and decision making are 
hierarchical in organizations 
Organizational
goals
Mission
Organizational strategies
Functional goals
Marketing
strategies
Finance
strategies
Operations
strategies
Tactics
Tactics
Tactics
Operating
procedures
Operating
procedures
Operating
procedures
to enhance customer
n.

46 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 Here are some examples of different strategies an organization might choose from:
 Low cost. Outsource operations to third-world countries that have low labor costs. 
 Scale-based strategies. Use capital-intensive methods to achieve high output volume 
and low unit costs. 
 Specialization. Focus on narrow product lines or limited service to achieve higher 
quality. 
 Newness. Focus on innovation to create new products or services. 
 Flexible operations. Focus on quick response and/or customization. 
 High quality. Focus on achieving higher quality than competitors. 
 Service. Focus on various aspects of service (e.g., helpful, courteous, reliable, etc.). 
 Sustainability. Focus on environmental-friendly and energy-efficient operations. 
 A wide range of business organizations are beginning to recognize the strategic advantages 
of sustainability, not only in economic terms, but also in promotional benefit by publicizing 
their sustainability efforts and achievements. 
 Sometimes organizations will combine two or more of these or other approaches into their 
strategy. However, unless they are careful, they risk losing focus and not achieving advan-
tage in any category. Generally speaking, strategy formulation takes into account the way 
organizations compete and a particular organization’s assessment of its own strengths and 
weaknesses in order to take advantage of its  core competencies —those special attributes or 
abilities possessed by an organization that give it a  competitive edge. 
 The most effective organizations use an approach that develops core competencies based 
on customer needs as well as on what the competition is doing. Marketing and operations 
work closely to match customer needs with operations capabilities. Competitor competen-
cies are important for several reasons. For example, if a competitor is able to supply high-
quality products, it may be necessary to meet that high quality as a baseline. However, 
merely  matching  a competitor is usually not sufficient to gain market share. It may be neces-
sary to exceed the quality level of the competitor or gain an edge by excelling in one or more 
other dimensions, such as rapid delivery or service after the sale. Walmart, for example, has 
been very successful in managing its supply chain, which has contributed to its competitive 
advantage. 
 To be effective, strategies and core competencies need to be aligned.  Table 2.2  lists exam-
ples of strategies and companies that have successfully employed those strategies. 
 Strategy Formulation 
 Strategy formulation is almost always critical to the success of a strategy. Walmart discovered 
that when it opened stores in Japan. Although Walmart thrived in many countries on its repu-
tation for low-cost items, Japanese consumers associated low cost with low quality, causing 
Walmart to rethink its strategy in the Japanese market. And many felt that Hewlett-Packard 
(HP) committed a strategic error when it acquired Compaq Computers at a cost of $19  billion. 
HP’s share of the computer market was less after the merger than the sum of the shares of 
the separate companies before the merger. In another example, U.S. automakers adopted a 
 Core competencies  The spe-
cial attributes or abilities that 
give an organization a competi-
tive edge. 
 Rita is a high school student in Southern California. She would like to have a career in busi-
ness, have a good job, and earn enough income to live comfortably. 
 A possible scenario for achieving her goals might look something like this:
 Mission: Live a good life. 
 Goal: Successful career, good income. 
 Strategy: Obtain a college education. 
 Tactics: Select a college and a major; decide how to finance college. 
 Operations: Register, buy books, take courses, study. 
 E X A M P L E  1 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
47
strategy in the early 2000s of offering discounts and rebates on a range of cars and SUVs, 
many of which were on low-margin vehicles. The strategy put a strain on profits, but custom-
ers began to expect those incentives, and the companies maintained them to keep from losing 
additional market share. 
 On the other hand, Coach, the maker of leather handbags and purses, successfully changed 
its longtime strategy to grow its market by creating new products. Long known for its highly 
durable leather goods in a market where women typically owned few handbags, Coach cre-
ated a new market for itself by changing women’s view of handbags by promoting “differ-
ent handbags for different occasions” such as party bags, totes, clutches, wristlets, overnight 
bags, purses, and day bags. And Coach introduced many fashion styles and colors. 
 To formulate an effective strategy, senior managers must take into account the core com-
petencies of the organizations, and they must  scan the environment.  They must determine 
what competitors are doing, or planning to do, and take that into account. They must criti-
cally examine other factors that could have either positive or negative effects. This is some-
times referred to as the    SWOT    approach (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats). 
Strengths and weaknesses have an internal focus and are typically evaluated by operations 
people. Threats and opportunities have an external focus and are typically evaluated by mar-
keting people. SWOT is often regarded as the link between organizational strategy and opera-
tions strategy. 
 SWOT  Analysis of strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats. 
 TABLE 2.2 
 Examples of operations strategies 
 Organization 
Strategy 
 Operations 
Strategy 
 Examples of Companies 
or Services 
 Low price 
 Low cost 
 U.S. first-class postage 
 
 
 Walmart 
 
 
 Southwest Airlines 
 Responsiveness 
 Short processing time 
 McDonald’s restaurants 
 
 
 Express Mail, UPS, FedEx 
 
 
 One-hour photo 
 
 On-time delivery 
 Domino’s Pizza 
 
 
 FedEx 
 Differentiation: 
High quality 
 High-performance design and/or 
high-quality processing 
 
 Sony TV 
Lexus 
 Disneyland 
 Five-star restaurants or hotels 
 
 Consistent quality 
 Coca-Cola, PepsiCo 
 
 
 Wegmans 
 
 
 Electrical power 
 Differentiation: 
Newness 
 Innovation 
 3M, Apple 
 Google 
 Differentiation: 
Variety 
 Flexibility 
 Burger King (“Have it your way”) 
 Hospital emergency room 
 
 Volume 
 McDonald’s (“Buses welcome”) 
 
 
 Toyota 
 
 
 Supermarkets (additional checkouts) 
 Differentiation: 
Service 
 
 Superior customer service 
 Disneyland 
 Amazon 
 IBM 
 Nordstrom 
 Differentiation: 
Location 
 
 Convenience 
 
 
 
 Supermarkets, dry cleaners 
 Mall stores 
 Service stations 
 Banks, ATMs 

48 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 An alternative to SWOT analysis is Michael Porter’s five forces model,  1   which takes into 
account the threat of new competition, the threat of substitute products or services, the bargain-
ing power of customers, the bargaining power of suppliers, and the intensity of competition. 
 In formulating a successful strategy, organizations must take into account both order quali-
fiers and order winners.    Order qualifiers    are those characteristics that potential customers 
perceive as minimum standards of acceptability for a product to be considered for purchase. 
However, that may not be sufficient to get a potential customer to purchase from the organi-
zation.  Order winners    are those characteristics of an organization’s goods or services that 
cause them to be perceived as better than the competition. 
 Characteristics such as price, delivery reliability, delivery speed, and quality can be order 
qualifiers or order winners. Thus, quality may be an order winner in some situations, but in 
others only an order qualifier. Over time, a characteristic that was once an order winner may 
become an order qualifier, and vice versa. 
 Obviously, it is important to determine the set of order qualifier characteristics and the set 
of order winner characteristics. It is also necessary to decide on the relative importance of 
each characteristic so that appropriate attention can be given to the various characteristics. 
Marketing must make that determination and communicate it to operations. 
 Environmental scanning    is the monitoring of events and trends that present either threats 
or opportunities for the organization. Generally these include competitors’ activities; chang-
ing consumer needs; legal, economic, political, and environmental issues; the potential for 
new markets; and the like. 
 Another key factor to consider when developing strategies is technological change, which 
can present real opportunities and threats to an organization. Technological changes occur in 
products (high-definition TV, improved computer chips, improved cellular telephone systems, 
and improved designs for earthquake-proof structures); in services (faster order processing, 
faster delivery); and in processes (robotics, automation, computer-assisted processing, point-
of-sale scanners, and flexible manufacturing systems). The obvious benefit is a competitive 
edge; the risk is that incorrect choices, poor execution, and higher-than-expected operating 
costs will create competitive  disadvantages. 
 Important factors may be internal or external. The following are key external factors:
 1. 
 Economic conditions. These include the general health and direction of the economy, 
inflation and deflation, interest rates, tax laws, and tariffs. 
 2. 
 Political conditions. These include favorable or unfavorable attitudes toward business, 
political stability or instability, and wars. 
 3. 
 Legal environment. This includes antitrust laws, government regulations, trade restric-
tions, minimum wage laws, product liability laws and recent court experience, labor 
laws, and patents. 
 4. 
 Technology. This can include the rate at which product innovations are occurring, current 
and future process technology (equipment, materials handling), and design technology.  
 5. 
 Competition. This includes the number and strength of competitors, the basis of com-
petition (price, quality, special features), and the ease of market entry. 
 6. 
 Markets. This includes size, location, brand loyalties, ease of entry, potential for 
growth, long-term stability, and demographics. 
 The organization also must take into account various  internal factors  that relate to possible 
strengths or weaknesses. Among the key internal factors are the following:
 1. 
 Human resources. These include the skills and abilities of managers and workers, 
 special talents (creativity, designing, problem solving), loyalty to the organization, 
expertise, dedication, and experience. 
1Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That Shape Strategy,” Harvard Business Review 86, no. 1 
(January 2008), pp. 78–93, 137.
 Order qualifiers  Character-
istics that customers perceive as 
minimum standards of accept-
ability to be considered as a 
potential for purchase.  
 Order winners  Characteris-
tics of an organization’s goods 
or services that cause it to be 
perceived as better than the 
competition. 
 Environmental scanning  
The monitoring of events and 
trends that present threats or 
opportunities for a company. 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
49
 2. 
 Facilities and equipment. Capacities, location, age, and cost to maintain or replace can 
have a significant impact on operations. 
 3. 
 Financial resources. Cash flow, access to additional funding, existing debt burden, and 
cost of capital are important considerations. 
 4. 
 Customers. Loyalty, existing relationships, and understanding of wants and needs are 
important.  
 5. 
 Products and services. These include existing products and services, and the potential 
for new products and services. 
 6. 
 Technology. This includes existing technology, the ability to integrate new technology, 
and the probable impact of technology on current and future operations. 
 7. 
 Suppliers. Supplier relationships, dependability of suppliers, quality, flexibility, and 
service are typical considerations. 
 8. 
 Other. Other factors include patents, labor relations, company or product image, dis-
tribution channels, relationships with distributors, maintenance of facilities and equip-
ment, access to resources, and access to markets. 
 After assessing internal and external factors and an organization’s distinctive competence, 
a strategy or strategies must be formulated that will give the organization the best chance of 
success. Among the types of questions that may need to be addressed are the following:
 What role, if any, will the Internet play? 
 Will the organization have a global presence? 
 To what extent will  outsourcing be used? 
 What will the supply chain management strategy be? 
 To what extent will new products or services be introduced? 
 What rate of growth is desirable and  sustainable? 
 What emphasis, if any, should be placed on lean production? 
 How will the organization differentiate its products and/or services from competitors’? 
 The organization may decide to have a single, dominant strategy (e.g., be the price leader) 
or to have multiple strategies. A single strategy would allow the organization to concentrate 
on one particular strength or market condition. On the other hand, multiple strategies may be 
needed to address a particular set of conditions. 
 Many companies are increasing their use of outsourcing to reduce overhead, gain flexibil-
ity, and take advantage of suppliers’ expertise. Dell Computers provides a great example of 
some of the potential benefits of outsourcing as part of a business strategy. 
 Growth is often a component of strategy, especially for new companies. A key aspect of 
this strategy is the need to seek a growth rate that is sustainable. In the 1990s, fast-food com-
pany Boston Markets dazzled investors and fast-food consumers alike. Fueled by its success, 
it undertook rapid expansion. By the end of the decade, the company was nearly bankrupt; it 
had overexpanded. In 2000, it was absorbed by fast-food giant McDonald’s. 
 Companies increase their risk of failure not only by missing or incomplete strategies; they 
also fail due to poor execution of strategies. And sometimes they fail due to factors beyond 
their control, such as natural or man-made disasters, major political or economic changes, or 
competitors that have an overwhelming advantage (e.g., deep pockets, very low labor costs, 
less rigorous environmental requirements). 
 A useful resource on successful business strategies is the Profit Impact of Market Strategy 
(PIMS) database ( www.pimsonline.com ). The database contains profiles of over 3,000 busi-
nesses located primarily in the United States, Canada, and western Europe. It is used by com-
panies and academic institutions to guide strategic thinking. It allows subscribers to answer 
strategy questions about their business. Moreover, they can use it to generate benchmarks and 
develop successful strategies. 

50 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 According to the PIMS Web site, 
 The  database  is a collection of statistically documented experiences drawn from thousands of 
businesses, designed to help understand what kinds of strategies (e.g. quality, pricing, vertical 
integration, innovation, advertising) work best in what kinds of business environments. The data 
constitute a key resource for such critical management tasks as evaluating business performance, 
analyzing new business opportunities, evaluating and reality testing new strategies, and screening 
business portfolios.  The primary role  of the PIMS Program of the Strategic Planning Institute is 
to help managers understand and react to their business environment. PIMS does this by assisting 
managers as they develop and test strategies that will achieve an acceptable level of winning as 
defined by various strategies and financial measures.  
 Supply Chain Strategy 
 A supply chain strategy specifies how the supply chain should function to achieve supply 
chain goals. The supply chain strategy should be aligned with the business strategy. If it is 
well executed, it can create value for the organization. It establishes how the organization 
should work with suppliers and policies relating to customer relationships and sustainability. 
Supply chain strategy is covered in more detail in a later chapter. 
 Sustainability Strategy 
 Society is placing increasing emphasis on corporate sustainability practices in the form of 
governmental regulations and interest groups. For these and other reasons, business organiza-
tions are or should be devoting attention to sustainability goals. To be successful, they will 
need a sustainability strategy. That requires elevating sustainability to the level of organiza-
tional governance; formulating goals for products and services, for processes, and for the 
entire supply chain; measuring achievements and striving for improvements; and possibly 
linking executive compensation to the achievement of sustainability goals. 
 Global Strategy 
 As globalization increased, many companies realized that strategic decisions with respect to 
globalization must be made. One issue companies must face is that what works in one country 
 In 1984, Michael Dell, then a college student, started selling personal 
computers from his dorm room. He didn’t have the resources to make 
computer components, so he let others do that, choosing instead to 
concentrate on selling the computers. And, unlike the major com-
puter producers, he didn’t sell to dealers. Instead, he sold directly to 
PC buyers, eliminating some intermediaries, which allowed for lower 
cost and faster delivery. Although direct selling of PCs is fairly com-
monplace now, in those days it was a major departure from the norm. 
 What did Dell do that was so different from the big guys? To 
start, he bought components from suppliers instead of making them. 
That gave him tremendous leverage. He had little inventory, no R&D 
expenditures, and relatively few employees. And the risks of this 
approach were spread among his suppliers. Suppliers were willing 
to do this because Dell worked closely with them, and kept them 
informed. And because he was in direct contact with his custom-
ers, he gained tremendous insight into their expectations and needs, 
which he communicated to his suppliers. 
 Having little inventory gave Dell several advantages over his 
competitors. Aside from the lower costs of inventory, when new, 
faster computer chips became available, there was little inventory to 
work off, so he was able to offer the newer models much sooner than 
competitors with larger inventories. Also, when the prices of various 
components dropped, as they frequently did, he was able to take 
advantage of the lower prices, which kept his average costs lower 
than competitors’. 
 Today the company is worth billions, and so is Michael Dell. 
 STRATEGY FORMULATION 
 The key steps in strategy formulation are:
    1. Link strategy directly to the organization’s mission or vision 
statement. 
   2. Assess strengths, weaknesses, threats and opportunities, and 
identify core competencies. 
 3. Identify order winners and order qualifiers. 
   4. Select one or two strategies (e.g., low cost, speed, customer ser-
vice) to focus on. 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
51
or region will not necessarily work in another, and strategies must be carefully crafted to take 
these variabilities into account. Another issue is the threat of political or social upheaval. Still 
another issue is the difficulty of coordinating and managing far-flung operations. Indeed, “In 
today’s global markets, you don’t have to go abroad to experience international competition. 
Sooner or later the world comes to you.” 2 
 2.4 OPERATIONS STRATEGY  
 The organization strategy provides the overall direction for the organization. It is broad in 
scope, covering the entire organization.    Operations strategy    is narrower in scope, deal-
ing primarily with the operations aspect of the organization. Operations strategy relates to 
products, processes, methods, operating resources, quality, costs, lead times, and scheduling. 
 Table 2.3  provides a comparison of an organization’s mission, its overall strategy, and its 
operations strategy, tactics, and operations. 
 In order for operations strategy to be truly effective, it is important to link it to organiza-
tion strategy; that is, the two should not be formulated independently. Rather, formulation of 
organization strategy should take into account the realities of operations’ strengths and weak-
nesses, capitalizing on strengths and dealing with weaknesses. Similarly, operations strategy 
must be consistent with the overall strategy of the organization, and with the other functional 
units of the organization. This requires that senior managers work with functional units to for-
mulate strategies that will support, rather than conflict with, each other and the overall strat-
egy of the organization. As obvious as this may seem, it doesn’t always happen in practice. 
Instead, we may find power struggles between various functional units. These struggles are 
detrimental to the organization because they pit functional units against each other rather than 
focusing their energy on making the organization more competitive and better able to serve 
the customer. Some of the latest approaches in organizations, involving teams of managers 
and workers, may reflect a growing awareness of the synergistic effects of working together 
rather than competing internally. 
2Christopher A. Bartlett and Sumantra Ghoshal, “Going Global: Lessons from Late Movers,”  Harvard Business 
Review, March–April 2000, p. 139.
LO2.4 Discuss and compare 
organization strategy and 
operations strategy and 
explain why it is important 
to link the two.
 Operations strategy  The 
approach, consistent with the 
organization strategy, that is used 
to guide the operations function.  
At this McDonald’s in Singapore, 
one variable is the use of rice as 
a staple of the Chinese diet. This 
ad highlights rice burgers.

52 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 In the 1970s and early 1980s, operations strategy in the United States was often neglected 
in favor of marketing and financial strategies. That may have occurred because many chief 
executive officers did not come from operations backgrounds and perhaps did not fully appre-
ciate the importance of the operations function. Mergers and acquisitions were common; lev-
eraged buyouts were used, and conglomerates were formed that joined dissimilar operations. 
These did little to add value to the organization; they were purely financial in nature. Deci-
sions were often made by individuals who were unfamiliar with the business, frequently to the 
detriment of that business. Meanwhile, foreign competitors began to fill the resulting vacuum 
with a careful focus on operations strategy. 
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s, many companies began to realize this approach was not 
working. They recognized that they were less competitive than other companies. This caused 
them to focus attention on operations strategy. A key element of both organization strategy 
and operations strategy is strategy formulation. 
 Operations strategy can have a major influence on the competitiveness of an organization. 
If it is well designed and well executed, there is a good chance that the organization will be 
successful; if it is not well designed or executed, the chances are much less that the organiza-
tion will be successful. 
 Strategic Operations Management Decision Areas 
 Operations management people play a strategic role in many strategic decisions in a business 
organization.  Table 2.4  highlights some key decision areas. Notice that most of the decision 
areas have cost implications. 
 Two factors that tend to have universal strategic operations importance relate to quality and 
time. The following section discusses quality and time strategies. 
 TABLE 2.3 
 Comparison of mission, organization strategy, and operations strategy 
 
 
 Management 
Level 
 Time 
Horizon 
 Scope 
 Level of 
Detail 
 Relates to 
 The overall 
organization 
 Mission 
 Top 
 Long 
 Broad 
 Low 
 Survival, profitability 
 Strategy 
 Senior 
 Long 
 Broad 
 Low 
 Growth rate, market share 
 Operations 
 Strategic 
 Senior 
 Moderate 
to long 
 Broad 
 Low 
 Product design, choice of location, choice of 
technology, new facilities 
 
 Tactical 
 Middle 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
 Moderate 
 Employment levels, output levels,  equipment 
selection, facility layout 
 
 Operational 
 Low 
 Short 
 Narrow 
 High 
 Scheduling personnel, adjusting  output 
rates, inventory management, 
purchasing 
 TABLE 2.4 
 Strategic operations 
management decisions 
 Decision Area 
 What the Decisions Affect 
 1. Product and service design 
 2. Capacity 
 3. Process selection and layout 
 4. Work design 
 5. Location 
 6. Quality 
 7. Inventory 
 8. Maintenance 
 9. Scheduling 
 10. Supply chains 
 11. Projects 
 Costs, quality, liability and environmental issues 
 Cost structure, flexibility 
 Costs, flexibility, skill level needed, capacity 
 Quality of work life, employee safety, productivity 
 Costs, visibility 
 Ability to meet or exceed customer expectations 
 Costs, shortages 
 Costs, equipment reliability, productivity 
 Flexibility, efficiency 
 Costs, quality, agility, shortages, vendor relations 
 Costs, new products, services, or operating systems 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
53
 Quality and Time Strategies 
 Traditional strategies of business organizations have tended to emphasize cost minimization 
or product differentiation. While not abandoning those strategies, many organizations have 
embraced strategies based on  quality and/or  time. 
Quality-based strategies    focus on maintaining or improving the quality of an organiza-
tion’s products or services. Quality is generally a factor in both attracting and retaining cus-
tomers. Quality-based strategies may be motivated by a variety of factors. They may reflect 
an effort to overcome an image of poor quality, a desire to catch up with the competition, a 
desire to maintain an existing image of high quality, or some combination of these and other 
factors. Interestingly enough, quality-based strategies can be part of another strategy such as 
cost reduction, increased productivity, or time, all of which benefit from higher quality. 
 Time-based strategies    focus on reducing the time required to accomplish various activi-
ties (e.g., develop new products or services and market them, respond to a change in cus-
tomer demand, or deliver a product or perform a service). By doing so, organizations seek 
to improve service to the customer and to gain a competitive advantage over rivals who take 
more time to accomplish the same tasks. 
 Quality-based strategy  Strat-
egy that focuses on quality in all 
phases of an organization. 
 Time-based strategy  Strategy 
that focuses on reduction of time 
needed to accomplish tasks.  
LO2.5 Describe and give 
examples of time-based 
strategies.
 Time-based strategies focus on reducing the time needed to conduct the various activities 
in a process. The rationale is that by reducing time, costs are generally less, productivity is 
higher, quality tends to be higher, product innovations appear on the market sooner, and cus-
tomer service is improved. 
 Organizations have achieved time reduction in some of the following:
Planning time: The time needed to react to a competitive threat, to develop strategies and 
select tactics, to approve proposed changes to facilities, to adopt new technologies, and so on.  
Product/service design time: The time needed to develop and market new or rede-
signed products or services. 
Processing time: The time needed to produce goods or provide services. This can involve 
scheduling, repairing equipment, methods used, inventories, quality, training, and the like. 
 Changeover time: The time needed to change from producing one type of product or 
service to another. This may involve new equipment settings and attachments, different 
methods, equipment, schedules, or materials. 
Delivery time: The time needed to fill orders. 
Response time for complaints: These might be customer complaints about quality, 
timing of deliveries, and incorrect shipments. These might also be complaints from 
employees about working conditions (e.g., safety, lighting, heat or cold), equipment 
problems, or quality problems. 
 It is essential for marketing and operations personnel to collaborate on strategy  formulation 
in order to ensure that the buying criteria of the most important customers in each market 
 segment are addressed. 
fries, and soft drink. This enabled the counter staff 
to enter orders with a single keystroke instead of 
multiple keystrokes on their point-of-sale machines, reducing the time 
needed to take an order. That, in turn, enabled them to take orders 
more quickly, increasing productivity and, consequently, reducing labor 
requirements, which produced higher profits. 
 Source: Based on “Despite Pay Increases, Gains in Productivity, Profits Curb 
Inflation,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 22, 1997, p. A1. 
 Wage increases can lead to inflationary pressure. They can cause the 
prices consumers pay for products and services to rise—unless, that 
is, they are offset by gains in productivity, which lead to an increase in 
profits. If that happens, a portion of the resulting profits can be used to 
cover the wage increases without having to raise prices. 
 Some Burger Kings were able to increase the starting pay of new 
workers by $1 by achieving productivity gains. The restaurants restruc-
tured the menu, combining items into meal packages such as a burger, 
 READING 
 Productivity Gains Curb Inflation 
es reducing the time
ff
of
f 
f 

54 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 Agile operations is a strategic approach for competitive advantage that emphasizes the use 
of flexibility to adapt and prosper in an environment of change. Agility involves a blending 
of several distinct competencies such as cost, quality, and reliability along with flexibility. 
Processing aspects of flexibility include quick equipment changeovers, scheduling, and inno-
vation. Product or service aspects include varying output volumes and product mix. 
 Successful agile operations requires careful planning to achieve a system that includes 
people, flexible equipment, and information technology. Reducing the time needed to  perform 
work is one of the ways an organization can improve a key metric:  productivity. 
 2.5  IMPLICATIONS OF ORGANIZATION 
STRATEGY FOR OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT  
 Organization strategy has a major impact on operations and supply chain management strate-
gies. For example, organizations that use a low-cost, high-volume strategy limit the amount 
of variety offered to customers. As a result, variations for operations and the supply chain 
are minimal, so they are easier to deal with. Conversely, a strategy to offer a wide variety 
of products or services, or to perform customized work, creates substantial operational and 
supply chain variations and, hence, more challenges in achieving a smooth flow of goods 
and  services throughout the supply chain, thus making the matching of supply to demand 
more difficult. Similarly, increasing service reduces the ability to compete on price.  Table 2.5  
 provides a brief overview of variety and some other key implications. 
 2.6  TRANSFORMING STRATEGY INTO ACTION: 
THE BALANCED SCORECARD 
 The Balanced Scorecard (BSC) is a top-down  management system  that organizations can use 
to clarify their vision and strategy and transform them into action. It was introduced in the 
early 1990s by Robert Kaplan and David Norton,  3   and it has been revised and improved 
3Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton,  Balanced Scorecard: Translating Strategy into Action (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1996).
 TABLE 2.5 
 Organization strategies and 
their implications for operations 
management 
 Organization Strategy  Implications for Operations Management 
 Low price 
 Requires low variation in products/services and a high-volume, steady flow 
of goods results in maximum use of resources through the system. 
Standardized work, material, and inventory requirements. 
 High quality 
 Entails higher initial cost for product and service design, and process 
design, and more emphasis on assuring supplier quality. 
 Quick response 
 Requires flexibility, extra capacity, and higher levels of some 
inventory items. 
 Newness/innovation 
 Entails large investment in research and development for new or improved 
products and services plus the need to adapt operations and supply 
processes to suit new products or services. 
 Product or service variety 
 Requires high variation in resource and more emphasis on product and 
service design; higher worker skills needed, cost estimation more 
difficult; scheduling more complex; quality assurance more involved; 
inventory management more complex; and matching supply to demand 
more difficult. 
 Sustainability 
 Affects location planning, product and service design, process design, 
 outsourcing decisions, returns policies, and waste management. 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
55
since then. The idea was to move away from a purely financial perspective of the organization 
and integrate other perspectives such as customers, internal business processes, and learn-
ing and growth. Using this approach, managers develop objectives, metrics, and targets for 
each objective and initiatives to achieve objectives, and they identify links among the vari-
ous perspectives. Results are monitored and used to improve strategic performance results. 
  Figure 2.2  illustrates the conceptual framework of this approach. Many organizations employ 
this or a similar approach. 
 As seen in  Figure 2.2 , the four perspectives are intended to balance not only financial 
and nonfinancial performance, but also internal and external performance as well as past and 
future performance. This approach can also help organizations focus on how they differ from 
the competition in each of the four areas if their vision is realized.  Table 2.6  has some exam-
ples of factors for key focal points. 
 Although the Balanced Scorecard helps focus managers’ attention on strategic issues and 
the implementation of strategy, it is important to note that it has no role in strategy formulation. 
FIGURE 2.2
The Balanced Scorecard
Source: Reprinted with permission of 
Harvard Business School Press from Rob-
ert Kaplan and David Norton, Balanced 
Scorecard: Translating Strategy into Action. 
Copyright © 1996 by the Harvard Business 
School Publishing Corporation. All rights 
reserved.
Financial
"To succeed
financially, how
should we
appear to our
shareholders?"
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
Learning and
Growth
"To achieve our
vision, how will
we sustain our
ability to
change and
improve?"
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
Internal Business
Processes
Vision
and
strategy
"To satisfy our
shareholders
and customers,
what business
processes must
we excel at?"
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
Customer
"To achieve our
vision, how
should we
appear to our
customers?" 
Objectives
Measures
Targets
Initiatives
 A major key to Apple’s 
continued success is its ability 
to keep pushing the boundaries 
of innovation. Apple has 
demonstrated how to create 
growth by dreaming up products 
so new and ingenious that they 
have upended one industry after 
another. 

56 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
Moreover, this approach pays little attention to suppliers and government regulations, and 
community, environmental, and sustainability issues are missing. These are closely linked, 
and business organizations need to be aware of the impact they are having in these areas and 
respond accordingly. Otherwise, organizations may be subject to attack by pressure groups 
and risk damage to their reputation. 
 2.7 PRODUCTIVITY  
 One of the primary responsibilities of a manager is to achieve  productive use  of an organiza-
tion’s resources. The term  productivity  is used to describe this.    Productivity    is an index that 
measures output (goods and services) relative to the input (labor, materials, energy, and other 
resources) used to produce it. It is usually expressed as the ratio of output to input: 
 Productivity
Output
Input

 
 (2–1) 
 Although productivity is important for all business organizations, it is particularly impor-
tant for organizations that use a strategy of low cost, because the higher the productivity, the 
lower the cost of the output. 
 A productivity ratio can be computed for a single operation, a department, an organiza-
tion, or an entire country. In business organizations, productivity ratios are used for planning 
workforce requirements, scheduling equipment, financial analysis, and other important tasks. 
 Productivity has important implications for business organizations and for entire nations. 
For nonprofit organizations, higher productivity means lower costs; for profit-based organiza-
tions, productivity is an important factor in determining how competitive a company is. For 
a nation, the rate of  productivity growth  is of great importance. Productivity growth is the 
increase in productivity from one period to the next relative to the productivity in the preced-
ing period. Thus,
 Productivity growth
Current productivity
Previous productivity
Previous productivity
100



 
 (2–2) 
 For example, if productivity increased from 80 to 84, the growth rate would be
 84
80
80
100
5%



 
LO2.6 Define the term 
productivity and explain why it 
is important to companies and 
to countries.
 Productivity  A measure of 
the effective use of resources, 
usually expressed as the ratio of 
output to input. 
 TABLE 2.6 
 Balanced scorecard factors 
examples 
 Focal Point 
 Factors 
 Suppliers 
 Delivery performance 
 Quality performance 
 
 Number of suppliers 
 
 Supplier locations 
 Duplicate activities 
 Internal Processes 
 Bottlenecks 
 
 Automation potential 
 Turnover 
 Employees 
 Job satisfaction 
 
 Learning opportunities 
 Delivery performance 
 Customers 
 Quality performance 
 
 Satisfaction 
 
 Retention rate 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
57
 Productivity growth is a key factor in a country’s rate of inflation and the standard of 
 living of its people. Productivity increases add value to the economy while keeping inflation 
in check. Productivity growth was a major factor in the long period of sustained economic 
growth in the United States in the 1990s. 
 Computing Productivity 
 Productivity measures can be based on a single input (partial productivity), on more than 
one input (multifactor productivity), or on all inputs (total productivity).  Table 2.7 lists some 
examples of productivity measures. The choice of productivity measure depends primarily on 
the purpose of the measurement. If the purpose is to track improvements in labor productivity, 
then labor becomes the obvious input measure. 
 Partial measures are often of greatest use in operations management.  Table 2.8  provides 
some examples of partial productivity measures. 
 The units of output used in productivity measures depend on the type of job performed. 
The following are examples of labor productivity: 
 Yards of carpet installed
Labor hours
Yards of carpet installed per labor hour
Number of motel rooms cleaned
Number of workers
Number of motel rooms cleaned per worker


 
 Productivity can be enhanced 
by the use of robotic equipment. 
Robots can operate for long 
periods with consistent precision 
and high speed. The Hyundai 
Motor Company manufacturing 
plant in Montgomery, Alabama, 
uses robots for assembly work. 
This $1.4 billion automotive 
plant is one of the most 
advanced assembly plants in 
North America.  
 Partial measures 
Output
Labor
Output
Machine
Output
Capital
Output
Energy
 Multifactor measures 
Output
Labor
Machine

Output
Labor
Capital
Energy


 Total measure 
Goods or servicesproduced
Allinputsused toproduce them
 
 
 TABLE 2.7 
 Some examples of different 
types of productivity measures 

58 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 Similar examples can be listed for  machine productivity  (e.g., the number of pieces per hour 
turned out by a machine). 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Labor productivity 
 Units of output per labor hour 
 
 Units of output per shift 
 
 Value-added per labor hour 
 
 Dollar value of output per labor hour 
 Machine productivity 
 Units of output per machine hour 
 
 Dollar value of output per machine hour 
 Capital productivity 
 Units of output per dollar input 
 
 Dollar value of output per dollar input 
 Energy productivity 
 Units of output per kilowatt-hour 
 
 Dollar value of output per kilowatt-hour 
 TABLE 2.8 
 Some examples of partial 
productivity measures 
 Determine the productivity for these cases:
 a. 
Four workers installed 720 square yards of carpeting in eight hours. 
 b. 
A machine produced 70 pieces in two hours. However, two pieces were unusable. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
 
720 square yards
4 workers
8 hours/worker
720 yards
32 hours
22.5 yards/hour




Productivity
Yards of carpet installed
Labor hours worked

 b. 
 
70
2
68 usable pieces
2 hours
34 pieces/hour




Productivity
Usable pieces
Production time

 Calculations of multifactor productivity measure inputs and outputs using a common unit 
of measurement, such as cost. For instance, the measure might use cost of inputs and units of 
the output:
 
Quantity of production
Labor cost
Materials cost
Overhead


 
 (2–3) 
 Note: The unit of measure must be the same for all factors in the denominator. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Determine the multifactor productivity for the combined input of labor and machine time 
using the following data:
 Output: 7,040 units 
 Input 
  Labor: $1,000 
  Materials: $520 
  Overhead: $2,000 
 E X A M P L E  3 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
59
 Productivity measures are useful on a number of levels. For an individual department or 
organization, productivity measures can be used to track performance  over time. This allows 
managers to judge performance and to decide where improvements are needed. For example, 
if productivity has slipped in a certain area, operations staff can examine the factors used to 
compute productivity to determine what has changed and then devise a means of improving 
productivity in subsequent periods. 
 Productivity measures also can be used to judge the performance of an entire industry or 
the productivity of a country as a whole. These productivity measures are  aggregate measures. 
 In essence, productivity measurements serve as scorecards of the effective use of resources. 
Business leaders are concerned with productivity as it relates to  competitiveness:  If two firms 
both have the same level of output but one requires less input because of higher productivity, 
that one will be able to charge a lower price and consequently increase its share of the mar-
ket. Or that firm might elect to charge the same price, thereby reaping a greater profit. Gov-
ernment leaders are concerned with national productivity because of the close relationship 
between productivity and a nation’s standard of living. High levels of productivity are largely 
responsible for the relatively high standards of living enjoyed by people in industrial nations. 
Furthermore, wage and price increases not accompanied by productivity increases tend to cre-
ate inflationary pressures on a nation’s economy. 
 Advantages of domestic-based operations for domestic markets often include higher 
worker productivity, better control of quality, avoidance of intellectual property losses, lower 
shipping costs, political stability, low inflation, and faster delivery. 
 S O L U T I O N 
Multifactor productivity
Output
Labor
Materials
Overhead



7,040 units
$1,000
$520
$2,000
2 units per dollar input




 Productivity in the Service Sector 
 Service productivity is more problematic than manufacturing productivity. In many situations, 
it is more difficult to measure, and thus to manage, because it involves intellectual activities 
and a high degree of variability. Think about medical diagnoses, surgery, consulting, legal 
services, customer service, and computer repair work. This makes productivity improvements 
productivity, they can afford to undercut competi-
tors’ prices to gain market share or charge the 
same prices but realize greater profits! For an industry, higher relative 
productivity means it is less likely to be supplanted by foreign industry. 
 Questions 
 1. Why is high productivity important for a nation? 
   2. Why do you suppose that service jobs have lower productivity than 
manufacturing jobs? 
   3. How can a company gain a competitive advantage by having higher 
productivity than its competitors have? 
 It is sometimes easy to overlook the importance of productivity. National 
figures are often reported in the media. They may seem to be ho-hum; 
there’s nothing glamorous about them to get our attention. But make no 
mistake; they are key economic indicators—barometers, if you will, that 
affect everybody. How? High productivity and high standard of living go 
hand-in-hand. If a country becomes more service-based, as the United 
States has become, some (but not all) high-productivity manufacturing 
jobs are replaced by lower-productivity service jobs. That makes it more 
difficult to support a high standard of living. 
 Productivity levels are also important for industries and compa-
nies. For companies, a higher productivity relative to their competitors 
gives them a competitive advantage in the marketplace. With a higher 
 READING 
 Why Productivity Matters 
dustry higher relative
i-
he 

60 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 Factors That Affect Productivity 
 Numerous factors affect productivity. Generally, they are methods, capital, quality, technol-
ogy, and management. 
 A commonly held misconception is that workers are the main determinant of productivity. 
According to that theory, the route to productivity gains involves getting employees to work 
harder. However, the fact is that many productivity gains in the past have come from  techno-
logical improvements. Familiar examples include 
 However, technology alone won’t guarantee productivity gains; it must be used wisely and 
thoughtfully. Without careful planning, technology can actually  reduce  productivity, espe-
cially if it leads to inflexibility, high costs, or mismatched operations. Another current produc-
tivity pitfall results from employees’ use of computers or smart phones for nonwork-related 
activities (playing games or checking stock prices or sports scores on the Internet or smart 
phones, and texting friends and relatives). Beyond all of these is the dip in productivity that 
results while employees learn to use new equipment or procedures that will eventually lead to 
productivity gains after the learning phase ends. 
LO2.7 Describe several  factors 
that affect productivity.
 Fax machines 
 Automation 
 GPS devices 
 Copiers 
 Calculators 
 Smart phones 
 The Internet, search engines 
 Computers 
 Apps 
 Voice mail, cellular phones 
 E-mail 
 3-D printing 
 
 Software 
 Medical imaging 
more difficult to achieve. Nonetheless, because service is becoming an increasingly large por-
tion of our economy, the issues related to service productivity will have to be dealt with. It is 
interesting to note that government statistics normally do not include service firms. 
 A useful measure closely related to productivity is  process yield. Where products are 
involved, process yield is defined as the ratio of output of good product (i.e., defective product 
is not included) to the quantity of raw material input. Where services are involved, process 
yield measurement is often dependent on the particular process. For example, in a car rental 
agency, a measure of yield is the ratio of cars rented to cars available for a given day. In educa-
tion, a measure for college and university admission yield is the ratio of student acceptances to 
the total number of students approved for admission. For subscription services, yield is the ratio 
of new subscriptions to the number of calls made or the number of letters mailed. However, 
not all services lend themselves to a simple yield measurement. For example, services such as 
automotive, appliance, and computer repair don’t readily lend themselves to such measures.  
many farmers in other countries do. That enables 
Dutch growers to more closely match supply with 
supermarket demand. Finally, the Dutch tomato has been engineered to 
achieve a firmness that allows growers to harvest and ship tomatoes at 
their peak, while the “outdoor” farmers typically need to harvest their 
tomatoes before they are fully ripe to allow for firmness during shipping. 
 Questions 
    1. What factors enable Dutch tomato growers to achieve much higher 
productivity than the Italian and Greek growers? 
 2. Discuss the importance of the Dutch growers’ supply chain. 
 Source: Based on “Tomato,” Time, March 25, 2013, pp. 9–14. 
 Tomato growers in the Netherlands have a huge productivity advantage 
over their competitors in Italy and Greece. Although those countries are 
sun drenched while the Netherlands are anything but, computerized, 
climate-controlled greenhouses, and a “soil” spun from basalt and chalk 
that resembles cotton candy, allows for precise control of humidity and 
nutrition, and enables growers to produce their crops year around. Grow-
ers in Italy and Greece generally grow their crops outdoors or in unheated 
greenhouses, and can only manage two crops a year. Dutch growers 
are able to achieve yields that are about ten times per square yard of 
those of Italian and Greek growers. And the Dutch have a supply chain 
advantage: an integrated Dutch trading company works closely with 
supermarket chains in Europe and suppliers around the world, so farmers 
are able to sell their output in high volume, rather than locally the way 
 READING 
 Dutch Tomato Growers’ Productivity Advantage 
as been engineered to
es
th
 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
61
 Other factors that affect productivity include the following:
 Standardizing processes and procedures wherever possible to reduce variability can 
have a significant benefit for both productivity and quality. 
 Quality differences may distort productivity measurements. One way this can happen 
is when comparisons are made over time, such as comparing the productivity of a fac-
tory now with one 30 years ago. Quality is now much higher than it was then, but there 
is no simple way to incorporate quality improvements into productivity measurements. 
 Use of the Internet can lower costs of a wide range of transactions, thereby increasing 
productivity. It is likely that this effect will continue to increase productivity in the fore-
seeable future. 
 Computer viruses can have an immense negative impact on productivity. 
 Searching for lost or misplaced items wastes time, hence negatively affecting productivity. 
 Scrap rates have an adverse effect on productivity, signaling inefficient use of 
resources. 
 New workers tend to have lower productivity than seasoned workers. Thus, growing 
companies may experience a productivity lag. 
 Safety should be addressed. Accidents can take a toll on productivity. 
 A shortage of technology-savvy workers hampers the ability of companies to update com-
puting resources, generate and sustain growth, and take advantage of new opportunities.  
 Layoffs often affect productivity. The effect can be positive and negative. Initially, pro-
ductivity may increase after a layoff, because the workload remains the same but fewer 
workers do the work—although they have to work harder and longer to do it. However, 
as time goes by, the remaining workers may experience an increased risk of burnout, 
and they may fear additional job cuts. The most capable workers may decide to leave. 
 Labor turnover has a negative effect on productivity; replacements need time to get up 
to speed. 
 Design of the workspace can impact productivity. For example, having tools and other 
work items within easy reach can positively impact productivity. 
 Incentive plans that reward productivity increases can boost productivity. 
 And there are still other factors that affect productivity, such as  equipment breakdowns and 
 shortages  of parts or materials. The education level and training of workers and their health 
can greatly affect productivity. The opportunity to obtain lower costs due to higher productiv-
ity elsewhere is a key reason many organizations turn to  outsourcing. Hence, an alternative to 
outsourcing can be improved productivity. Moreover, as a part of their strategy for quality, the 
best organizations strive for  continuous improvement.  Productivity improvements can be an 
important aspect of that approach. 
 Improving Productivity 
 A company or a department can take a number of key steps toward improving productivity:
 1. 
Develop productivity measures for all operations. Measurement is the first step in man-
aging and controlling an operation. 
 2. 
Look at the system as a whole in deciding which operations are most critical. It is overall 
productivity that is important. Managers need to reflect on the value of potential pro-
ductivity improvements  before okaying improvement efforts. The issue is  effectiveness.  
There are several aspects of this. One is to make sure the result will be something custom-
ers want. For example, if a company is able to increase its output through productivity 
improvements, but then is unable to sell the increased output, the increase in productiv-
ity isn’t effective. Second, it is important to adopt a systems viewpoint: A productivity 
increase in one part of an operation that doesn’t increase the productivity of the system 
would not be effective. For example, suppose a system consists of a sequence of two 
operations, where the output of the first operation is the input to the second operation, and 

62 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
each operation can complete its part of the process at a rate of 20 units per hour. If the 
productivity of the first operation is increased, but the productivity of the second opera-
tion is not, the output of the system will still be 20 units per hour.  
 3. 
Develop methods for achieving productivity improvements, such as soliciting ideas 
from workers (perhaps organizing teams of workers, engineers, and managers), studying 
how other firms have increased productivity, and reexamining the way work is done. 
 4. 
Establish reasonable goals for improvement. 
 5. 
Make it clear that management supports and encourages productivity improvement. 
Consider incentives to reward workers for contributions. 
 6. 
Measure improvements and publicize them. 
 Don’t confuse productivity with  efficiency.  Efficiency is a narrower concept that pertains to 
getting the most out of a  fixed  set of resources; productivity is a broader concept that pertains 
to effective use of overall resources. For example, an efficiency perspective on mowing a lawn 
given a hand mower would focus on the best way to use the hand mower; a productivity per-
spective would include the possibility of using a power mower. 
 Competition is the driving force in many organizations. It may involve price, quality, special features or 
services, time, or other factors. To develop effective strategies for business, it is essential for organiza-
tions to determine what combinations of factors are important to customers, which factors are order 
qualifiers, and which are order winners. 
 It is essential that goals and strategies be aligned with the organization’s mission. Strategies are 
plans for achieving organizational goals. They provide focus for decision making. Strategies must take 
into account present and future customer wants, as well as the organization’s strengths and weaknesses, 
threats and opportunities. These can run the gamut from what competitors are doing, or are likely to do, 
to technology, supply chain management, and e-business. Organizations generally have overall strate-
gies that pertain to the entire organization and strategies that pertain to each of the functional areas. 
Functional strategies are narrower in scope and should be linked to overall strategies. Time-based strat-
egies and quality-based strategies are among the most widely used strategies business organizations 
employ to serve their customers and to become more productive. The chapter includes a description of 
the Balanced Scorecard approach, which can be helpful for transforming strategies into actions, and the 
implications of organization strategy for operations management. 
 Productivity is a measure of the use of resources. There is considerable interest in productivity both 
from an organizational standpoint and from a national standpoint. Business organizations want higher 
productivity because it yields lower costs and helps them to become more competitive. Nations want 
higher productivity because it makes their goods and services more attractive, offsets inflationary pres-
sures associated with higher wages, and results in a higher standard of living for their people. 
 SUMMARY 
 1. Competitive pressure often means that business organizations must frequently assess their competi-
tors’ strengths and weaknesses, as well as their own, to remain competitive. 
 2. Strategy formulation is critical because strategies provide direction for the organization, so they can 
play a role in the success or failure of a business organization. 
 KEY POINTS 
devices through a clean room and the total time 
spent blister sealing devices was lowered. Within 
a short time, productivity nearly doubled from 36 devices per hour to 
60 devices per hour, work-in-progress inventory fell, and a 10 percent 
reduction in the standard cost of product was achieved. 
 Source: Based on Lauraine Howley, “A Strategy for Company Improvement,” 
 Medical Device Technology 11, no. 2 (March 2000), p. 33. 
 Stryker Howmedica set up a team to improve the running of its packag-
ing line. A strategy focus on productivity improvement was used. The 
team adopted an approach based on the production system of Toyota. 
The goal was to satisfy the customer expectations for delivery and qual-
ity, while achieving gains in productivity. After the team identified needs 
and set objectives, a number of improvements were implemented. A 
one-piece flow was established that reduced bottlenecks in the flow of 
 READING 
 Productivity Improvement 
6 devices per hour to
e
n
 

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
63
 competitiveness, 42 
 core competencies, 46 
 environmental scanning, 48 
 goals, 44 
 mission, 44 
 mission statement, 44 
 operations strategy, 51 
 order qualifiers, 48 
 order winners, 48 
 productivity, 56 
 quality-based strategy, 53 
 strategies, 44 
 SWOT, 47 
 tactics, 45 
 time-based strategy, 53 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
   A company that processes fruits and vegetables is able to produce 400 cases of canned peaches in 
one-half hour with four workers. What is labor productivity? 
 Problem 1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 
200 cases per labor hour

Labor productivity
Quantity produced
Labor hours
400 cases
4 workers
1/2hour/worker



 Problem 2 
   A wrapping-paper company produced 2,000 rolls of paper one day. Labor cost was $160, material 
cost was $50, and overhead was $320. Determine the multifactor productivity. 
 3. Functional strategies and supply chain strategies need to be aligned with the goals and strategies of 
the overall organization. 
 4. The three primary business strategies are low cost, responsiveness, and differentiation. 
 5. Productivity is a key factor in the cost of goods and services. Increases in productivity can become 
a competitive advantage. 
 6. High productivity is particularly important for organizations that have a strategy of low costs. 
 Solution 
2,000 rolls
$160
$50
$320
3.77 rolls per dollar input




Multifactor productivity
Quantity produced
Labor cost
Material cost
Overhead



 A variation of the multifactor productivity calculation incorporates the standard price in the numera-
tor by multiplying the units by the standard price.  
 Problem 3 
   Compute the multifactor productivity measure for an eight-hour day in which the usable output was 
300 units, produced by three workers who used 600 pounds of materials. Workers have an hourly 
wage of $20, and material cost is $1 per pound. Overhead is 1.5 times labor cost. 
 Solution 
300 units
(3 workers
8 hours
$20/hour)
(600 pounds
$1/pound)
(3 workers
8 hours
$20 /hour
1.50)
300 units
$480
$600
$720
.167 units of output per dollar of input













Multifactor productivity
Usable output
Labor cost
Material cost
Overhead cost



e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

64 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 Problem 4 
   A health club has two employees who work on lead generation. Each employee works 40 hours a 
week, and is paid $20 an hour. Each employee identifies an average of 400 possible leads a week 
from a list of 8,000 names. Approximately 10 percent of the leads become members and pay a one-
time fee of $100. Material costs are $130 per week, and overhead costs are $1,000 per week. Calcu-
late the multifactor productivity for this operation in fees generated per dollar of input. 
 Solution 
MFP
(Possible leads)(No.of workers)(Fee)(Conversion percentage)
Labor cost
Material cost
Overhead cost



(400)(2)($100)(.10)
2(40)($20)
$130
$1,000
$8,000
$2,730
2.93





 1. From time to time, various groups clamor for import restrictions or tariffs on foreign-produced 
goods, particularly automobiles. How might these be helpful? Harmful? 
 2. List the key ways that organizations compete. 
 3. Explain the importance of identifying and differentiating order qualifiers and order winners. 
 4. Select two stores you shop at, and state how they compete. 
 5. What is the Balanced Scorecard and how is it useful? 
 6. Contrast the terms  strategies and  tactics. 
 7. Contrast  organization strategy and  operations strategy. 
 8. Explain the term  time-based strategies and give three examples. 
 9. Productivity should be a concern of every business organization.
 a. How is productivity defined? 
 b. How are productivity measures used? 
 c. Why is productivity important? 
 d. What part of the organization has primary responsibility for productivity? 
 e. How is efficiency different from productivity? 
 10. List some factors that can affect productivity and some ways that productivity can be improved. 
 11. It has been said that a typical Japanese automobile manufacturer produces more cars with fewer 
workers than its U.S. counterpart. What are some possible explanations for this, assuming that 
U.S. workers are as hardworking as Japanese workers? 
 12. Boeing’s strategy appears to focus on its 777 midsize plane’s ability to fly into smaller, nonhub 
airports. Rival European Airbus’s strategy appears to focus on large planes. Compare the advan-
tages and disadvantages of these two strategies. 
 13. Name 10 ways that banks compete for customers. 
 14. Explain the rationale of an operations strategy that seeks to increase the opportunity for use of 
technology by reducing variability in processing requirements. 
 15. Identify two companies that have time-based strategies, and two that have quality-based strategies. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. Who needs to be involved in formulating organizational strategy? 
 2. Name some of the competitive trade-offs that might arise in a fast-food restaurant. 
 3. How can technology improve
 a. Competitiveness? 
 b. Productivity? 
 TAKING STOCK 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
65
 1. In the past there was concern about a “productivity paradox” related to IT services. More recently, 
there have been few references to this phenomenon. Using the Internet, explain the term “productiv-
ity paradox.” Why do you think that the discussion of that topic has faded? 
 2. A U.S. company has two manufacturing plants, one in the United States and one in another country. 
Both produce the same item, each for sale in their respective countries. However, their productivity 
figures are quite different. The analyst thinks this is because the U.S. plant uses more automated 
equipment for processing while the other plant uses a higher percentage of labor. Explain how that 
factor can cause productivity figures to be misleading. Is there another way to compare the two 
plants that would be more meaningful? 
 3. While it is true that increases in efficiency generate productivity increases, it is possible to get 
caught in an “efficiency improvement trap.” Explain what this means. 
 4. It is common knowledge that Sam’s boss Dom has been fudging the weekly productivity figures. 
Several employees, including Sam, have spoken to him about this, but he continues to do it. Sam 
has observed a drop in morale among his coworkers due to this. Sam is thinking about sending an 
anonymous note to Dom’s boss. Would that be ethical? What would you do if you were Sam? 
 5. Give two examples of what would be considered unethical involving competition and the ethical 
principles (see Chapter 1) that would be violated.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. A catering company prepared and served 300 meals at an anniversary celebration last week using 
eight workers. The week before, six workers prepared and served 240 meals at a wedding reception.
 a. For which event was the labor productivity higher? Explain. 
 b. What are some possible reasons for the productivity differences? 
 2. The manager of a crew that installs carpeting has tracked the crew’s output over the past several 
weeks, obtaining these figures: 
  
 Compute the labor productivity for each of the weeks. On the basis of your calculations, what can 
you conclude about crew size and productivity? 
 3. Compute the multifactor productivity measure for each of the weeks shown for production of choc-
olate bars. What do the productivity figures suggest? Assume 40-hour weeks and an hourly wage of 
$12. Overhead is 1.5 times weekly labor cost. Material cost is $6 per pound.  
 4. A company that makes shopping carts for supermarkets and other stores recently purchased some 
new equipment that reduces the labor content of the jobs needed to produce the shopping carts. 
Prior to buying the new equipment, the company used five workers, who produced an average of 
80 carts per hour. Workers receive $10 per hour, and machine cost was $40 per hour. With the new 
equipment, it was possible to transfer one of the workers to another department, and equipment cost 
increased by $10 per hour while output increased by four carts per hour.
 a.  Compute labor productivity under each system. Use carts per worker per hour as the measure of 
labor productivity. 
 b.  Compute the multifactor productivity under each system. Use carts per dollar cost (labor plus 
equipment) as the measure. 
 c.  Comment on the changes in productivity according to the two measures, and on which one you 
believe is the more pertinent for this situation. 
 PROBLEMS 
 Week 
 Output (units) 
 Workers 
 Material (lbs) 
 1 
 30,000 
 6 
 450 
 2 
 33,600 
 7 
 470 
 3 
 32,200 
 7 
 460 
 4 
 35,400 
 8 
 480 
 Week 
 Crew Size 
 Yards Installed 
 1 
 4 
 96 
 2 
 3 
 72 
 3 
 4 
 92 
 4 
 2 
 50 
 5 
 3 
 69 
 6 
 2 
 52 

66 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 5. An operation has a 10 percent scrap rate. As a result, 72 pieces per hour are produced. What is the 
potential increase in labor productivity that could be achieved by eliminating the scrap? 
 6. A manager checked production records and found that a worker produced 160 units while working 
40 hours. In the previous week, the same worker produced 138 units while working 36 hours. Did 
the worker’s productivity increase, decrease, or remain the same? Explain. 
 7. The following table shows data on the average number of customers processed by several bank 
service units each day. The hourly wage rate is $25, the overhead rate is 1.0 times labor cost, and 
material cost is $5 per customer. 
 a.  Compute the labor productivity and the multifactor productivity for each unit. Use an eight-hour 
day for multifactor productivity. 
 b.  Suppose a new, more standardized procedure is to be introduced that will enable each employee 
to process one additional customer per day. Compute the expected labor and multifactor produc-
tivity rates for each unit. 
 8. A property title search firm is contemplating using online software to increase its search productiv-
ity. Currently an average of 40 minutes is needed to do a title search. The researcher cost is $2 per 
minute. Clients are charged a fee of $400. Company A’s software would reduce the average search 
time by 10 minutes, at a cost of $3.50 per search. Company B’s software would reduce the average 
search time by 12 minutes at a cost of $3.60 per search. Which option would have the higher pro-
ductivity in terms of revenue per dollar of input? 
 9. A company offers ID theft protection using leads obtained from client banks. Three employees 
work 40 hours a week on the leads, at a pay rate of $25 per hour per employee. Each employee 
identifies an average of 3,000 potential leads a week from a list of 5,000. An average of 4 percent 
actually sign up for the service, paying a one-time fee of $70. Material costs are $1,000 per week, 
and overhead costs are $9,000 per week. Calculate the multifactor productivity for this operation in 
fees generated per dollar of input.  
 Unit 
 Employees 
 Customers 
Processed/Day  
 A 
 4 
 36 
 B 
 5 
 40 
 C 
 8 
 60 
 D 
 3 
 20 
 Zachary Schiller 
 The Rust Belt is back. So say bullish observers as U.S. exports surge, 
long-moribund industries glow with newfound profits, and unemploy-
ment dips to lows not seen in a decade. But in the smokestack citadels, 
there’s disquiet. Too many machine-tool and auto parts factories are 
silent; too many U.S. industries still can’t hold their own. 
 What went wrong since the heyday of the 1960s? That’s the issue 
Max Holland, a contributing editor of  The Nation,  takes up in his nutsy-
boltsy but fascinating study,  When the Machine Stopped.*  
 The focus of the story is Burgmaster Corp., a Los Angeles–area 
machine-tool maker founded in 1944 by Czechoslovakian immigrant 
Fred Burg. Holland’s father worked there for 29 years, and the author 
interviewed 22 former employees. His shop-floor view of this small 
company is a refreshing change from academic 
treatises on why America can’t compete. 
 The discussions of spindles and numerical control can be tough 
going. But Holland compensates by conveying the excitement and inno-
vation of the company’s early days and the disgust and cynicism accom-
panying its decline. Moreover, the fate of Burgmaster and its brethren is 
crucial to the U.S. industrial economy: Any manufactured item is either 
made by a machine tool or by a machine made by a machine tool. 
 Producing innovative turret drills used in a wide variety of metal 
working tasks, Burgmaster was a thriving enterprise by 1965, when 
annual sales amounted to about $8 million. The company needed 
backing to expand, however, so it sold out to Buffalo-based conglom-
erate Houdaille Industries Inc. Houdaille was in turn purchased in a 
1979 leveraged buyout (LBO) led by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. By 
1982, when debt, competition, and a sickly machine-tool market had 
 CASE 
 An American Tragedy: How a Good Company Died 
(continued)
*Max Holland,  When the Machine Stopped: A Contemporary Tale from Industrial 
America (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1988).

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
67
battered Burgmaster badly, Houdaille went to Washington with a peti-
tion to withhold the investment tax credit for certain Japanese-made 
machine tools. 
 Thanks to deft lobbying, the Senate passed a resolution supporting 
Houdaille’s position, but President Reagan refused to go along. Houdai-
lle’s subsequent attempt to link Burgmaster up with a Japanese rival 
also failed, and Burgmaster was closed. 
 Holland uses Burgmaster’s demise to explore some key issues 
of economic and trade policy. Houdaille’s charge that a cartel led by 
the Japanese government had injured U.S. toolmakers, for example, 
became a rallying point for those who would blame a fearsome Japan 
Inc. for the problems of U.S. industry. 
 Holland describes the Washington wrangling over Houdaille in 
painful detail. But he does show that such government decisions are 
often made without much knowledge of what’s going on in industry. He 
shows, too, that Japanese producers succeeded less because of gov-
ernment help than because they made better, cheaper machines. 
 For those who see LBOs as a symptom of what ails the U.S. econ-
omy, Holland offers plenty of ammunition. He argues persuasively that 
the LBO crippled Burgmaster by creating enormous pressure to gener-
ate cash. As Burgmaster pushed its products out as fast as possible, he 
writes, it routinely shipped defective machines. It promised customers 
features that engineers hadn’t yet designed. And although KKR disputes 
the claim, Holland concludes that the LBO choked off Burgmaster’s 
investment funds just when foreign competition made them most nec-
essary. As for Houdaille, it was recapitalized and sold to Britain’s Tube 
Investments Group. 
 But Burgmaster’s problems had started even before the LBO. Hol-
land’s history of the company under Houdaille is a veritable catalog 
of modern management techniques that flopped. One of the most 
disastrous was a system for computerizing production scheduling 
that was too crude for complex machine-tool manufacturing. Holland 
gives a dramatic depiction of supply snafus that resulted in delays and 
cost increases. 
 As an independent company, “Burgmaster thrived because the 
Burgs knew their business,” Holland writes. Their departure under Hou-
daille was followed by an “endless and ultimately futile search for a 
better formula.” But, he concludes: “No formula was a substitute for 
management involvement on the shop floor.” 
 In the end, however, Holland puts most of the blame for the indus-
try’s decline on government policy. He targets tax laws and macro-
economic policies that encourage LBOs and speculation instead of 
productive investment. He also criticizes Pentagon procurement policies 
for favoring exotic, custom machines over standard, low-cost models. 
This adds up to an industrial policy, Holland writes—a bad one. 
 The point is well taken, but Holland gives it excessive weight. Like 
their brethren in Detroit and Pittsburgh, domestic tool-makers in the 
1970s were too complacent when imports seized the lower end of the 
product line. The conservatism that had for years served them in their 
cyclical industry left them ill-prepared for change. Even now some of 
the largest U.S. tool-makers are struggling to restructure. Blame the 
government, yes. But blame the industry, too. 
 Questions 
    1. Write a brief report that outlines the reasons (both internal and 
external) for Burgmaster’s demise, and whether operations man-
agement played a significant role in the demise. 
   2. Do you think that inadequate strategic planning was a factor that 
resulted in the company’s asking for trade protection? 
   3. Can you think of a strategy that could have increased Burgmaster’s 
chance of survival? Explain why you think that strategy would have 
been effective. 
 Source: Reprinted from April 17, 1989, issue of  BusinessWeek by special per-
mission, copyright © 1989 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. 
(continued)
 The Company 
 The baking company is located in a small town in New York State. The 
bakery is run by two brothers. The company employs fewer than 200 
people, mainly blue-collar workers, and the atmosphere is informal. 
 The Product 
 The company’s only product is soft cookies, of which it makes over 
50 varieties. Larger companies, such as Nabisco, Sunshine, and 
Keebler, have traditionally produced biscuit cookies, in which most of 
the water has been baked out, resulting in crisp cookies. The cook-
ies have no additives or preservatives. The high quality of the cook-
ies has enabled the company to develop a strong market niche for 
its product. 
 The Customers 
 The cookies are sold in convenience stores and super-
markets throughout New York, Connecticut, and New Jersey. The company 
markets its cookies as “good food”—no additives or  preservatives—and 
this appeals to a health-conscious segment of the market. Many custom-
ers are over 45 years of age, and prefer a cookie that is soft and not too 
sweet. Parents with young children also buy the cookies.  
 The Production Process 
 The company has two continuous band ovens that it uses to bake the cook-
ies. The production process is called a batch processing system. It begins 
as soon as management gets orders from distributors. These orders are 
 CASE 
 Home-Style Cookies 
(continued)

68 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
used to schedule production. At the start of each shift, a list of the cook-
ies to be made that day is delivered to the person in charge of mixing. 
That person checks a master list, which indicates the ingredients needed 
for each type of cookie, and enters that information into the computer. 
The computer then determines the amount of each ingredient needed, 
according to the quantity of cookies ordered, and relays that information 
to storage silos located outside the plant where the main ingredients (flour, 
sugar, and cake flour) are stored. The ingredients are automatically sent to 
giant mixing machines where the ingredients are combined with proper 
amounts of eggs, water, and flavorings. After the ingredients have been 
mixed, the batter is poured into a cutting machine where it is cut into indi-
vidual cookies. The cookies are then dropped onto a conveyor belt and 
transported through one of two ovens. Filled cookies, such as apple, date, 
and raspberry, require an additional step for filling and folding. 
 The nonfilled cookies are cut on a diagonal rather than round. The 
diagonal-cut cookies require less space than straight-cut cookies, 
and the result is a higher level of productivity. In addition, the com-
pany recently increased the length of each oven by 25 feet, which also 
increased the rate of production. 
 As the cookies emerge from the ovens, they are fed onto spiral cool-
ing racks 20 feet high and 3 feet wide. As the cookies come off the 
cooling racks, workers place the cookies into boxes manually, removing 
any broken or deformed cookies in the process. The boxes are then 
wrapped, sealed, and labeled automatically. 
 Inventory 
 Most cookies are loaded immediately onto trucks and shipped to dis-
tributors. A small percentage are stored temporarily in the company’s 
warehouse, but they must be shipped shortly because of their limited 
shelf life. Other inventory includes individual cookie boxes, shipping 
boxes, labels, and cellophane for wrapping. Labels are reordered fre-
quently, in small batches, because FDA label requirements are subject 
to change, and the company does not want to get stuck with labels it 
can’t use. The bulk silos are refilled two or three times a week, depend-
ing on how quickly supplies are used. 
 Cookies are baked in a sequence that minimizes downtime for 
cleaning. For instance, light-colored cookies (e.g., chocolate chip) are 
baked before dark-colored cookies (e.g., fudge), and oatmeal cookies 
are baked before oatmeal raisin cookies. This permits the company to 
avoid having to clean the processing equipment every time a different 
type of cookie is produced. 
 Quality 
 The bakery prides itself on the quality of its cookies. Cookies are sampled 
randomly by a quality control inspector as they come off the line to assure 
that their taste and consistency are satisfactory, and that they have been 
baked to the proper degree. Also, workers on the line are responsible for 
removing defective cookies when they spot them. The company has also 
installed an X-ray machine on the line that can detect small bits of metal 
filings that may have gotten into cookies during the production process. 
The use of automatic equipment for transporting raw materials and mix-
ing batter has made it easier to maintain a sterile process.  
 Scrap 
 The bakery is run very efficiently and has minimal amounts of scrap. 
For example, if a batch is mixed improperly, it is sold for dog food. Bro-
ken cookies are used in the oatmeal cookies. These practices reduce 
the cost of ingredients and save on waste disposal costs. The com-
pany also uses heat reclamation: The heat that escapes from the two 
ovens is captured and used to boil the water that supplies the heat 
to the building. Also, the use of automation in the mixing process has 
resulted in a reduction in waste compared with the manual methods 
used previously.  
 New Products 
 Ideas for new products come from customers, employees, and observa-
tions of competitors’ products. New ideas are first examined to deter-
mine whether the cookies can be made with existing equipment. If so, a 
sample run is made to determine the cost and time requirements. If the 
results are satisfactory, marketing tests are conducted to see if there is 
a demand for the product. 
 Potential Improvements 
 There are a number of areas of potential improvement at the bakery. 
One possibility would be to automate packing the cookies into boxes. 
Although labor costs are not high, automating the process might save 
some money and increase efficiency. So far, the owners have resisted 
making this change because they feel an obligation to the community 
to employ the 30 women who now do the boxing manually. Another 
possible improvement would be to use suppliers who are located closer 
to the plant. That would reduce delivery lead times and transportation 
costs, but the owners are not convinced that local suppliers could pro-
vide the same good quality. Other opportunities have been proposed in 
recent years, but the owners rejected them because they feared that the 
quality of the product might suffer. 
 Questions 
 1. Briefly describe the cookie production process. 
   2. What are two ways that the company has increased productiv-
ity? Why did increasing the length of the ovens result in a faster 
output rate?  
   3. Do you think that the company is making the right decision by not 
automating the packing of cookies? Explain your reasoning. What 
obligation does a company have to its employees in a situation such 
as this? What obligation does it have to the community? Is the size 
of the town a factor? Would it make a difference if the company was 
located in a large city? Is the size of the company a factor? What if it 
were a much larger company? 
   4. What factors cause the company to carry minimal amounts of cer-
tain inventories? What benefits result from this policy? 
   5. As a consumer, what things do you consider in judging the quality of 
cookies you buy in a supermarket?  
   6. What advantages and what limitations stem from the company’s not 
using preservatives in cookies? 
 7. Briefly describe the company’s strategy. 
(continued)

69
 (Refer to pp. 37–38 for the Hazel Case.) 
    1. What competitive advantage does Hazel have over a professional 
lawn care service? 
   2. Hazel would like to increase her profits, but she doesn’t believe that 
it would be wise to raise her prices considering the current state of 
the local economy. Instead, she has given some thought to increas-
ing productivity.
    a. Explain how increased productivity could be an alternative to 
increased prices. 
 b. What are some ways that Hazel could increase productivity? 
   3. Hazel is thinking about the purchase of new equipment. One would 
be power sidewalk edgers. She believes edgers will lead to an 
increase in productivity. Another would be a chain saw, which would 
be used for tree pruning. What trade-offs should she consider in 
her analysis?  
   4. Hazel has been fairly successful in her neigh-
borhood, and now wants to expand to other 
neighborhoods, including some that are five miles away. What would 
be the advantages and disadvantages of doing this? 
   5. Hazel does not have a mission statement or a set of objectives. Take 
one of the following positions and defend it:
    a. Hazel doesn’t need a formal mission statement and objectives. 
Many small businesses don’t have them. 
   b. She definitely needs a mission statement and a set of objectives. 
They would be extremely beneficial. 
   c. There may be some benefit to Hazel’s business, and she should 
consider developing one. 
 CASE 
 Hazel Revisited 
 Joseph Murray ,  Grand Valley State University 
 “Your Garden Gloves” is a small gardening business located in Michigan. 
The company plants and maintains flower gardens for both commercial 
and residential clients. The company was founded about five years ago, 
and has since grown substantially, averaging about 10 new clients and 
one new employee a year. The company currently employs eight sea-
sonal employees who are responsible for a certain number of clients. 
 Each morning crews are assigned to jobs by the owner. Crew sizes 
range from two to four workers. Crew size and composition are a func-
tion of the square footage of the garden and requirements of the job. 
The owner feels that large jobs should be assigned to crews of four 
workers in order to complete the job in a reasonable amount of time. 
 From time to time, the owner noticed that some jobs, especially the 
largest ones, took longer than she had estimated, based on the square 
footage of the garden space involved. The owner’s son, Joe, decided to 
investigate. He kept records of job times and crew sizes, and then used 
those records to compute labor productivity. The results were: 
 The company operates on a small profit mar-
gin, so it is especially important to take worker 
productivity into account. 
 Questions 
    1. Which crew size had the highest productivity per worker? Which 
crew size had the lowest productivity per worker? What are some 
possible explanations for these results? 
   2. After a recent storm, a customer called in a panic, saying that she 
had planned a garden party for the upcoming weekend and her gar-
den was in shambles. The owner decided to send a crew of four 
workers, even though a two-worker crew would have a higher pro-
ductivity. Explain the rationale for this decision. 
   3. What is a possible qualitative issue that may very well influence 
productivity levels that the productivity ratios fail to take into 
account?    
 CASE 
 “Your Garden Gloves” 
 Crew Size 
 Average Productivity per Crew 
 2 
 4,234 square feet per day 
 3 
 5,352 square feet per day 
 4 
 7,860 square feet per day 

70
“ Neither rain, nor snow  . . .” 
 The U.S. Postal Service (USPS) is the largest postal service in the world, 
handling about 41 percent (630 million pieces a day) of the world’s 
mail volume. The second largest is Japan’s, which handles only about 
6 percent of the world’s mail. The USPS is huge by any standard. It 
employs over 760,000 workers, making it the largest civilian employer 
in the United States. It has over 300,000 mail collection boxes, 38,000 
post offices, 130 million mail delivery points, more than 300 processing 
plants to sort and ship mail, and more than 75,000 pieces of mail pro-
cessing equipment. It handles over 100 billion pieces of first-class mail 
a year, and ships about 3 billion pounds of mail on commercial airline 
flights, making it the airlines’ largest shipper. 
 Processing First-Class Mail 
 The essence of processing the mail is sorting, which means organizing 
the mail into smaller and smaller subgroups to facilitate its timely deliv-
ery. Sorting involves a combination of manual and automatic operations. 
Much of the mail that is processed is first-class mail. 
 Most first-class mail is handled using automated equipment. A small 
portion that cannot be handled by automated equipment must be sorted 
by hand, just the way it was done in colonial times. 
 The majority of first-class mail begins at the advanced facer 
canceling system. This system positions each letter so that it is face 
up, with the stamp in the upper corner, checks to see if the address 
is handwritten, and pulls the hand-addressed letters off the line. It 
also rejects letters that have the stamp covered by tape, have no 
postage, are third-class mail, or have meter impressions that are 
too light to read. The rejects are handled manually. The remaining 
letters are cancelled and date stamped, and then sorted to one of 
seven stackers. 
 Next the letters go to the multiline optical character readers, 
which can handle both printed and pre–bar-coded mail, but not hand-
addressed mail. The optical reader sprays a bar code on the mail that 
hasn’t been pre–bar-coded, which represents up to an 11-digit zip 
code. For hand-addressed mail, a camera focuses on the front of the 
letter, and the image is displayed on a remote terminal, often in another 
city, where an operator views the image and provides the information 
that the optical readers could not determine so that a bar code can 
be added. 
 Bar-code readers then sort the mail into one of 96 stackers, doing 
this at a rate of more than 500 a minute. The mail goes through another 
sort using manually controlled mechanical equipment. At that point, the 
mail is separated according to whether it is local or out-of-town mail. 
The out-of-town mail is placed into appropriate sacks according to its 
destination, and moved to the outgoing send area where it will be loaded 
on trucks. 
 The local mail is moved to another machine that not only sorts the 
mail into local carrier delivery routes, it sorts it according to delivery 
walk sequence! 
 Small parcels, bundles of letters, and bundles of flats are sorted by 
a bundle-sorting machine. 
 Productivity 
 Over the years, the USPS has experienced an ever-
increasing volume of mail. Productivity has been an important factor 
for the USPS in keeping postal rates low and maintaining rapid deliv-
ery service. Two key factors in improved productivity have been the 
increased use of automation and the introduction of zip codes. 
 Mail processing underwent a major shift to mechanization during 
the 1950s and 1960s, which led to more rapid processing and higher 
productivity. In 1978, an expanded zip code was introduced. That was 
followed in 1983 by a four-digit expansion in zip codes. These changes 
required new, automated processing equipment, and the use of bar 
codes and optical readers. All of these changes added greatly to pro-
ductivity. But even with these improvements, the USPS faced increasing 
competitive pressures. 
 Competition 
 In the late 1980s, the USPS experienced a slowdown in the volume of 
mail. Some of this was due to a slowing of the economy, but most of it was 
the result of increasing competition. Delivery giants FedEx and UPS, as 
well as other companies that offer speedy delivery and package tracking, 
gave businesses and the general public convenient alternatives for some 
mail services. At the same time, there was a growing use of fax machines 
and electronic communications and increased use of alternate forms of 
advertising such as cable TV, all of which cut into the volume of mail. Early 
in this century, e-mail and automated bill paying also cut into mail volume.  
 Strategies and Tactics Used to Make 
the Postal Service More Competitive 
 To meet these challenges, the USPS developed several strategies to 
become more competitive. These included reorganizing, continuing to 
seek ways to keep costs down, increasing productivity, and emphasiz-
ing quality and customer service. Here is an overview of the situation 
and the strategies and tactics used by the USPS. 
 The USPS began working more closely with customers to identify better 
ways to meet their needs and expanded customer conveniences such as 
stamps on consignment. With the help of business mailers, the USPS con-
tinued support for rates reflecting customer work-sharing features, many 
tied to automation, to give customers more flexibility. At the same time, 
the USPS began forming Customer Advisory Councils—groups of citizens 
who volunteered to work with local postal management on postal issues 
of interest to the community. In 1990, the USPS awarded two contracts to 
private firms to measure first-class mail service and customer satisfac-
tion. In 1992, the USPS stepped up its quest to become more competitive 
by reducing bureaucracy and overhead in order to improve service and 
customer satisfaction, and to reduce the need to increase postage rates. 
 To help accomplish these goals, the USPS underwent a reorganiza-
tion. Layers of management were eliminated and overhead positions 
were cut by about 30,000. Five regions and 73 field divisions were 
replaced by 10 areas, each with a manager for customer services and 
a manager for processing and distribution. Ten customer service areas 
were established, with managers for customer service and processing 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 The U.S. Postal Service 

and to overhaul and simplify its complex rate structure. It also awarded 
contracts for two more external tracking systems, one to measure sat-
isfaction levels of business mailers, and the other to measure service 
performance of third-class mail. 
 The reorganization eliminated some programs, cut costs, attracted 
new business, and reduced the USPS’s projected deficit. 
 The postal services’ sustainability scorecard for 2012 is shown 
below.    
and distribution in each area, as well as a marketing and sales office. 
The new structure allowed postal managers to be focused, improved 
communications, and empowered employees to meet customer needs. 
The USPS also took other steps to improve service. In 1993 it imple-
mented improvements in processing and mail delivery at major postal 
facilities, expanded retail hours, and developed a more user-friendly 
Domestic Mail Manual. In cooperation with business customers, the 
USPS began to develop new services to meet specific mailer needs 
(continued)
 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
71

72 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity
 6. What effect does the increased use of e-mail have on postal 
productivity?  
 7. How does the use of standard shipping containers and flat-rate 
mailers help competitiveness? 
 Source:  http://about.usps.com/what-we-are-doing/green/pdf/
omb-scorecard-2012.pdf 
 Questions 
 1. Why is it important for the USPS to have a high volume of mail to 
process?  
 2. What caused productivity to increase? 
 3. What impact did competitive pressures have on the USPS? 
 4. What measures did the USPS adopt to increase competitiveness? 
 5. What results were achieved by the USPS’s changes? 
(continued)

 
Chapter Two Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
73
 Fortune. 
 Hammer, Michael, and Steven Stanton. “Ignore Opera-
tions at Your Peril.”  Harvard Business Review 6565 
(April 2004). 
 Hill, Terry.  Manufacturing Strategy: Text and Cases, 
3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
 Michael E. Porter, “The Five Competitive Forces That 
Shape Strategy,”  Harvard Business Review 86, 
no. 1 (January 2008), pp. 78–93, 137. 
 Slack, Nigel, and Michael Lewis.  Operations Strategy, 
3e, Prentice-Hall, 2011.  www.weforum.org/issues/
global-competitiveness: Global Competitiveness 
Report 
 Werbach, Adam.  Strategy for Sustainability: A Business 
Manifesto. Boston: Harvard Business Press, 2009. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

74
 CHAP TE R 
 3 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 3.1 Introduction,  75 
 3.2 Features Common to All Forecasts,  77 
 3.3 Elements of a Good Forecast,  78 
 3.4 Forecasting and the Supply Chain  78 
 3.5 Steps in the Forecasting Process,  79 
 3.6 Forecast Accuracy,  79 
 Summarizing Forecast Accuracy,  81 
 3.7 Approaches to Forecasting,  82 
 3.8 Qualitative Forecasts  82 
 Executive Opinions,  83 
 Salesforce Opinions,  83 
 Consumer Surveys,  83 
 Other Approaches,  83 
 3.9    Forecasts Based on Time-Series 
Data,  84 
 Naive Methods,  84 
 Techniques for Averaging,  86 
 Other Forecasting Methods,  91 
 Techniques for Trend,  91 
 Trend-Adjusted Exponential Smoothing,  95 
 Techniques for Seasonality,  95 
 Techniques for Cycles,  100 
 3.10  Associative Forecasting 
Techniques,  100 
 Simple Linear Regression,  101 
 Comments on the Use of Linear 
Regression Analysis,  104 
 Nonlinear and Multiple Regression 
Analysis,  106 
 3.11  Monitoring Forecast Error,  106 
 3.12  Choosing a Forecasting 
Technique,  110 
 3.13  Using Forecast Information,  112 
 3.14  Computer Software in Forecasting,  112 
 3.15  Operations Strategy,  112 
 Cases: M&L Manufacturing,  132 
 Highline Financial Services, Ltd.,  133 
 Forecasting 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO3.1 
List features common to all forecasts. 
 LO3.2 
Explain why forecasts are generally wrong. 
 LO3.3 
List the elements of a good forecast. 
 LO3.4 
Outline the steps in the forecasting process. 
 LO3.5 
Summarize forecast errors and use summaries to 
make decisions. 
 LO3.6 
Describe four qualitative forecasting techniques. 
 LO3.7 
Use a naive method to make a forecast. 
 LO3.8 
Prepare a moving average forecast. 
 LO3.9 
Prepare a weighted-average forecast. 
 LO3.10 
Prepare an exponential smoothing forecast. 
 LO3.11 
Prepare a linear trend forecast. 
 LO3.12 
Prepare a trend-adjusted exponential smoothing forecast. 
 LO3.13 
Compute and use seasonal relatives. 
 LO3.14 
Compute and use regression and correlation coefficients. 
 LO3.15 
Construct control charts and use them to monitor 
forecast errors. 
 LO3.16 
Describe the key factors and trade-offs to consider when 
choosing a forecasting technique.   
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

75
 Weather forecasts are one of the many types of forecasts used by some business organizations. Although some businesses sim-
ply rely on publicly available weather forecasts, others turn to firms that specialize in weather-related forecasts. For example, 
Home Depot, Gap, and JCPenney use such firms to help them take weather factors into account for estimating demand. 
 Many new car buyers have a thing or two in common. Once they make the decision to buy a new car, they want it as soon 
as possible. They usually don’t want to order it and then have to wait six weeks or more for delivery. If the car dealer they visit 
doesn’t have the car they want, they’ll look elsewhere. Hence, it is important for a dealer to  anticipate  buyer wants and to have 
those models, with the necessary options, in stock. The dealer who can correctly forecast buyer wants, and have those cars 
available, is going to be much more successful than a competitor who guesses instead of forecasting—and guesses wrong—and 
gets stuck with cars customers don’t want. So how does the dealer know how many cars of each type to stock? The answer is, 
the dealer  doesn’t  know for sure, but by analyzing previous buying patterns, and perhaps making allowances for current condi-
tions, the dealer can come up with a reasonable  approximation of what buyers will want. 
 Planning is an integral part of a manager’s job. If uncertainties cloud the planning horizon, managers will find it difficult to 
plan effectively. Forecasts help managers by reducing some of the uncertainty, thereby enabling them to develop more mean-
ingful plans. A  forecast  is an estimate about the future value of a variable such as demand. The better the estimate, the more 
informed decisions can be. Some forecasts are long range, covering several years or more. Long-range forecasts are especially 
important for decisions that will have long-term consequences for an organization or for a town, city, country, state, or nation. 
One example is deciding on the right capacity for a planned power plant that will operate for the next 20 years. Other forecasts 
are used to determine if there is a profit potential for a new service or a new product: Will there be sufficient demand to make 
the innovation worthwhile? Many forecasts are short term, covering a day or week. They are especially helpful in planning and 
scheduling day-to-day operations. This chapter provides a survey of business forecasting. It describes the elements of good 
forecasts, the necessary steps in preparing a forecast, basic forecasting techniques, and how to monitor a forecast. 
 3.1 INTRODUCTION 
 Forecasts  are a basic input in the decision processes of operations management because they 
provide information on future demand. The importance of forecasting to operations manage-
ment cannot be overstated. The primary goal of operations management is to match supply 
to demand. Having a forecast of demand is essential for determining how much capacity or 
supply will be needed to meet demand. For instance, operations needs to know what capacity 
 Forecast  A statement about 
the future value of a variable of 
interest. 

76 
Chapter Three Forecasting
will be needed to make staffing and equipment decisions, budgets must be prepared, purchas-
ing needs information for ordering from suppliers, and supply chain partners need to make 
their plans. 
 Businesses make plans for future operations based on anticipated future demand. Antici-
pated demand is derived from two possible sources, actual customer orders and forecasts. For 
businesses where customer orders make up most or all of anticipated demand, planning is 
straightforward, and little or no forecasting is needed. However, for many businesses, most or 
all of anticipated demand is derived from forecasts. 
Two aspects of forecasts are important. One is the expected level of demand; the other is 
the degree of accuracy that can be assigned to a forecast (i.e., the potential size of forecast 
error). The expected level of demand can be a function of some structural variation, such as a 
trend or seasonal variation. Forecast accuracy is a function of the ability of forecasters to cor-
rectly model demand, random variation, and sometimes unforeseen events. 
 Forecasts are made with reference to a specific time horizon. The time horizon may be 
fairly short (e.g., an hour, day, week, or month), or somewhat longer (e.g., the next six months, 
the next year, the next five years, or the life of a product or service). Short-term forecasts per-
tain to ongoing operations. Long-range forecasts can be an important strategic planning tool. 
Long-term forecasts pertain to new products or services, new equipment, new facilities, or 
something else that will require a somewhat long lead time to develop, construct, or otherwise 
implement. 
 Forecasts are the basis for budgeting, planning capacity, sales, production and inventory, 
personnel, purchasing, and more. Forecasts play an important role in the planning process 
because they enable managers to anticipate the future so they can plan accordingly. 
 Forecasts affect decisions and activities throughout an organization, in accounting, finance, 
human resources, marketing, and management information systems (MIS), as well as in oper-
ations and other parts of an organization. Here are some examples of uses of forecasts in 
 business organizations:
 Accounting. New product/process cost estimates, profit projections, cash management. 
 Finance.  Equipment/equipment replacement needs, timing and amount of funding/ 
borrowing needs. 
 The Walt Disney World 
forecasting department has 
20 employees who formulate 
forecasts on volume and 
revenue for the theme parks, 
water parks, resort hotels, as 
well as merchandise, food, and 
beverage revenue by location. 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
77
 Human resources.  Hiring activities, including recruitment, interviewing, and training; 
layoff planning, including outplacement counseling. 
 Marketing. Pricing and promotion, e-business strategies, global competition strategies. 
 MIS. New/revised information systems, Internet services. 
 Operations.  Schedules, capacity planning, work assignments and workloads, inventory 
planning, make-or-buy decisions, outsourcing, project management. 
 Product/service design.  Revision of current features, design of new products or services.    
 In most of these uses of forecasts, decisions in one area have consequences in other areas. 
Therefore, it is very important for all affected areas to agree on a common forecast. How-
ever, this may not be easy to accomplish. Different departments often have very different 
perspectives on a forecast, making a consensus forecast difficult to achieve. For example, 
salespeople, by their very nature, may be overly optimistic with their forecasts, and may want 
to “reserve” capacity for their customers. This can result in excess costs for operations and 
inventory storage. Conversely, if demand exceeds forecasts, operations and the supply chain 
may not be able to meet demand, which would mean lost business and dissatisfied customers. 
 Forecasting is also an important component of  yield management,  which relates to the per-
centage of capacity being used. Accurate forecasts can help managers plan tactics (e.g., offer dis-
counts, don’t offer discounts) to match capacity with demand, thereby achieving high yield levels. 
 There are two uses for forecasts. One is to help managers  plan the system,  and the other 
is to help them  plan the use of the system.  Planning the system generally involves long-range 
plans about the types of products and services to offer, what facilities and equipment to have, 
where to locate, and so on. Planning the use of the system refers to short-range and interme-
diate-range planning, which involve tasks such as planning inventory and workforce levels, 
planning purchasing and production, budgeting, and scheduling. 
 Business forecasting pertains to more than predicting demand. Forecasts are also used to 
predict profits, revenues, costs, productivity changes, prices and availability of energy and 
raw materials, interest rates, movements of key economic indicators (e.g., gross domestic 
product, inflation, government borrowing), and prices of stocks and bonds. For the sake of 
simplicity, this chapter will focus on the forecasting of demand. Keep in mind, however, that 
the concepts and techniques apply equally well to the other variables. 
 In spite of its use of computers and sophisticated mathematical models, forecasting is not 
an exact science. Instead, successful forecasting often requires a skillful blending of science 
and intuition. Experience, judgment, and technical expertise all play a role in developing use-
ful forecasts. Along with these, a certain amount of luck and a dash of humility can be helpful, 
because the worst forecasters occasionally produce a very good forecast, and even the best 
forecasters sometimes miss completely. Current forecasting techniques range from the mun-
dane to the exotic. Some work better than others, but no single technique works all the time. 
 3.2 FEATURES COMMON TO ALL FORECASTS  
 A wide variety of forecasting techniques are in use. In many respects, they are quite different 
from each other, as you shall soon discover. Nonetheless, certain features are common to all, 
and it is important to recognize them.
 1. 
Forecasting techniques generally assume that the same underlying causal system that 
existed in the past will continue to exist in the future. 
 Comment  A manager cannot simply delegate forecasting to models or computers and then 
forget about it, because unplanned occurrences can wreak havoc with forecasts. For instance, 
weather-related events, tax increases or decreases, and changes in features or prices of com-
peting products or services can have a major impact on demand. Consequently, a manager 
must be alert to such occurrences and be ready to override forecasts, which assume a stable 
causal system. 
 LO3.1 List features common 
to all forecasts.

78 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 2. 
Forecasts are not perfect; actual results usually differ from predicted values; the 
 presence of randomness precludes a perfect forecast. Allowances should be made for 
forecast errors. 
 3. 
Forecasts for groups of items tend to be more accurate than forecasts for individual 
items because forecasting errors among items in a group usually have a canceling effect. 
Opportunities for grouping may arise if parts or raw materials are used for multiple 
products or if a product or service is demanded by a number of independent sources. 
 4. 
Forecast accuracy decreases as the time period covered by the forecast—the  time 
 horizon —increases. Generally speaking, short-range forecasts must contend with fewer 
uncertainties than longer-range forecasts, so they tend to be more accurate. 
 An important consequence of the last point is that flexible business organizations—those 
that can respond quickly to changes in demand—require a shorter forecasting horizon and, 
hence, benefit from more accurate short-range forecasts than competitors who are less flex-
ible and who must therefore use longer forecast horizons. 
 3.3 ELEMENTS OF A GOOD FORECAST 
 A properly prepared forecast should fulfill certain requirements:
 1. 
The forecast should be  timely. Usually, a certain amount of time is needed to respond to 
the information contained in a forecast. For example, capacity cannot be expanded over-
night, nor can inventory levels be changed immediately. Hence, the forecasting horizon 
must cover the time necessary to implement possible changes. 
 2. 
The forecast should be  accurate, and the degree of accuracy should be stated. This will 
enable users to plan for possible errors and will provide a basis for comparing alterna-
tive forecasts. 
 3. 
The forecast should be  reliable; it should work consistently. A technique that some-
times provides a good forecast and sometimes a poor one will leave users with the 
uneasy feeling that they may get burned every time a new forecast is issued. 
 4. 
The forecast should be expressed in  meaningful units. Financial planners need to know 
how many  dollars will be needed, production planners need to know how many  units 
will be needed, and schedulers need to know what  machines and  skills will be required. 
The choice of units depends on user needs. 
 5. 
The forecast should be  in writing. Although this will not guarantee that all concerned 
are using the same information, it will at least increase the likelihood of it. In addition, 
a written forecast will permit an objective basis for evaluating the forecast once actual 
results are in. 
 6. 
The forecasting technique should be  simple to understand and use. Users often lack 
confidence in forecasts based on sophisticated techniques; they do not understand either 
the circumstances in which the techniques are appropriate or the limitations of the tech-
niques. Misuse of techniques is an obvious consequence. Not surprisingly, fairly simple 
forecasting techniques enjoy widespread popularity because users are more comfortable 
working with them.  
 7. 
The forecast should be  cost-effective: The benefits should outweigh the costs. 
 3.4 FORECASTING AND THE SUPPLY CHAIN 
  Accurate forecasts are very important for the supply chain. Inaccurate forecasts can lead to 
shortages and excesses throughout the supply chain. Shortages of materials, parts, and ser-
vices can lead to missed deliveries, work disruption, and poor customer service. Conversely, 
overly optimistic forecasts can lead to excesses of materials and/or capacity, which increase 
LO3.2 Explain why forecasts 
are generally wrong.
 LO3.3 List the elements of a 
good forecast.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
79
costs. Both shortages and excesses in the supply chain have a negative impact not only on 
customer service but also on profits. Furthermore, inaccurate forecasts can result in temporary 
increases and decreases in orders to the supply chain, which can be misinterpreted by the 
 supply chain. 
 Organizations can reduce the likelihood of such occurrences in a number of ways. One, 
obviously, is by striving to develop the best possible forecasts. Another is through collabora-
tive planning and forecasting with major supply chain partners. Yet another way is through 
information sharing among partners and perhaps increasing supply chain visibility by allow-
ing supply chain partners to have real-time access to sales and inventory information. Also 
important is rapid communication about poor forecasts as well as about unplanned events that 
disrupt operations (e.g., flooding, work stoppages), and changes in plans. 
 3.5 STEPS IN THE FORECASTING PROCESS 
 There are six basic steps in the forecasting process:
 1. 
 Determine the purpose of the forecast. How will it be used and when will it be 
needed? This step will provide an indication of the level of detail required in the fore-
cast, the amount of resources (personnel, computer time, dollars) that can be justified, 
and the level of accuracy necessary. 
 2. 
 Establish a time horizon. The forecast must indicate a time interval, keeping in mind 
that accuracy decreases as the time horizon increases. 
 3. 
 Obtain, clean, and analyze appropriate data. Obtaining the data can involve signifi-
cant effort. Once obtained, the data may need to be “cleaned” to get rid of outliers and 
obviously incorrect data before analysis. 
 4. 
 Select a forecasting technique. 
 5. 
 Make the forecast. 
 6. 
 Monitor the forecast errors. The forecast errors should be monitored to determine if 
the forecast is performing in a satisfactory manner. If it is not, reexamine the method, 
assumptions, validity of data, and so on; modify as needed; and prepare a revised forecast. 
 Note too that additional action may be necessary. For example, if demand was much less 
than the forecast, an action such as a price reduction or a promotion may be needed. Con-
versely, if demand was much more than predicted, increased output may be advantageous. 
That may involve working overtime, outsourcing, or taking other measures. 
 3.6 FORECAST ACCURACY 
  Accuracy and control of forecasts is a vital aspect of forecasting, so forecasters want to min-
imize forecast errors. However, the complex nature of most real-world variables makes it 
almost impossible to correctly predict future values of those variables on a regular basis. 
Moreover, because random variation is always present, there will always be some residual 
error, even if all other factors have been accounted for. Consequently, it is important to include 
an indication of the extent to which the forecast might deviate from the value of the variable 
that actually occurs. This will provide the forecast user with a better perspective on how far 
off a forecast might be. 
 Decision makers will want to include accuracy as a factor when choosing among different 
techniques, along with cost. Accurate forecasts are necessary for the success of daily activi-
ties of every business organization. Forecasts are the basis for an organization’s schedules, 
and unless the forecasts are accurate, schedules will be generated that may provide for too 
few or too many resources, too little or too much output, the wrong output, or the wrong tim-
ing of output, all of which can lead to additional costs, dissatisfied customers, and headaches 
for managers. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO3.4  Outline the steps in the 
forecasting process.

80 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Some forecasting applications involve a series of forecasts (e.g., weekly revenues), whereas 
others involve a single forecast that will be used for a one-time decision (e.g., the size of a power 
plant). When making periodic forecasts, it is important to monitor forecast errors to determine if the 
errors are within reasonable bounds. If they are not, it will be necessary to take corrective action.  
 Forecast  error is the difference between the value that occurs and the value that was 
 predicted for a given time period. Hence, Error    Actual    Forecast: 
 et
At
Ft


 
 (3–1) 
 where
 t     Any given time period 
 Positive errors result when the forecast is too low, negative errors when the forecast is too 
high. For example, if actual demand for a week is 100 units and forecast demand was 90 units, 
the forecast was too low; the error is 100    90      10. 
 Forecast errors influence decisions in two somewhat different ways. One is in making a 
choice between various forecasting alternatives, and the other is in evaluating the success or 
failure of a technique in use. We shall begin by examining ways to summarize forecast error 
over time, and see how that information can be applied to compare forecasting alternatives. 
 Error  Difference between the 
actual value and the value that 
was predicted for a given period. 
new orders while they work off their inventories, 
creating a ripple effect that hits the entire sup-
ply chain, from shippers, to producers, to suppliers of raw materials. 
Moreover, the cutbacks to the supply chain could be misinterpreted. The 
message is clear: Overly optimistic forecasts can be bad news. 
 Overly optimistic forecasts by retail store buyers can easily lead retail-
ers to overorder, resulting in bloated inventories. When that happens, 
there is pressure on stores to cut prices in order to move the excess 
merchandise. Although customers delight in these markdowns, retailer 
profits generally suffer. Furthermore, retailers will naturally cut back on 
 READING 
 High Forecasts Can Be Bad News 
ers of raw materials
s,
p-

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
81
 Summarizing Forecast Accuracy 
 Forecast accuracy is a significant factor when deciding among forecasting alternatives. Accu-
racy is based on the historical error performance of a forecast. 
 Three commonly used measures for summarizing historical errors are the   mean absolute 
deviation (MAD)   , the    mean squared error (MSE)   , and the    mean absolute percent error 
(MAPE)  .  MAD is the average absolute error, MSE is the average of squared errors, and 
MAPE is the average absolute percent error. The formulas used to compute MAD,  1 MSE, and 
MAPE are as follows: 
 

t
t
n
MAD
Actual
Forecast
 
 (3–2) 
t
t
n
MSE
(Actual
Forecast )2
1
 


 
 (3–3) 




MAPE
Actual
Forecast
Actual
100
t
t
t
n
 
 (3–4) 
 Example 1 illustrates the computation of MAD, MSE, and MAPE. 
 From a computational standpoint, the difference between these measures is that MAD 
weights all errors evenly, MSE weights errors according to their  squared  values, and MAPE 
weights according to relative error. 
1  The absolute value, represented by the two vertical lines in Formula 3–2, ignores minus signs; all data are treated 
as positive values. For example,   2 becomes   2. 
 Mean absolute deviation 
(MAD)  The average absolute 
forecast error. 
 Mean squared error (MSE)  
The average of squared forecast 
errors. 
 Mean absolute percent 
error (MAPE)  The average 
absolute percent error. 
 Compute MAD, MSE, and MAPE for the following data, showing actual and forecasted 
 numbers of accounts serviced.
 Period 
 Actual 
 Forecast 
 (A    F) 
Error 
 |Error| 
 Error  2  
 [ |Error|   Actual ]    100 
 1............................. 
 217 
 215 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 .92% 
 2............................. 
 213 
 216 
  3 
 3 
 9 
 1.41  
 3............................. 
 216 
 215 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 .46  
 4............................. 
 210 
 214 
  4 
 4 
 16 
 1.90  
 5............................. 
 213 
 211 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 .94  
 6............................. 
 219 
 214 
 5 
 5 
 25 
 2.28  
 7............................. 
 216 
 217 
  1 
 1 
 1 
 .46  
 8............................. 
 212 
 216 
  4 
   4 
 16 
   1.89  
 
 
  2 
 22 
 76 
 10.26% 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 E X A M P L E  1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 Using the figures shown in the table,
e
n
e
n
n
MAD
22
8
2.75
MSE
2
1
76
8
1
10.86
MAPE
Actual
100
10.26%
8
1.28%
e
 
 LO3.5  Summarize forecast 
errors and use summaries to 
make decisions.

82 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 One use for these measures is to compare the accuracy of alternative forecasting methods. 
For instance, a manager could compare the results to determine one which yields the  lowest 
MAD, MSE, or MAPE for a given set of data. Another use is to track error performance over 
time to decide if attention is needed. Is error performance getting better or worse, or is it stay-
ing about the same? 
 In some instances, historical error performance is secondary to the ability of a forecast to 
respond to changes in data patterns. Choice among alternative methods would then focus on 
the cost of not responding quickly to a change relative to the cost of responding to changes 
that are not really there (i.e., random fluctuations). 
 Overall, the operations manager must settle on the relative importance of historical perfor-
mance versus responsiveness and whether to use MAD, MSE, or MAPE to measure historical 
performance. MAD is the easiest to compute, but weights errors linearly. MSE squares errors, 
thereby giving more weight to larger errors, which typically cause more problems. MAPE 
should be used when there is a need to put errors in perspective. For example, an error of 10 
in a forecast of 15 is huge. Conversely, an error of 10 in a forecast of 10,000 is insignificant. 
Hence, to put large errors in perspective, MAPE would be used. 
 3.7 APPROACHES TO FORECASTING 
  There are two general approaches to forecasting: qualitative and quantitative. Qualitative 
methods consist mainly of subjective inputs, which often defy precise numerical descrip-
tion. Quantitative methods involve either the projection of historical data or the develop-
ment of associative models that attempt to utilize  causal (explanatory) variables  to make 
a forecast. 
 Qualitative techniques permit inclusion of  soft  information (e.g., human factors, personal 
opinions, hunches) in the forecasting process. Those factors are often omitted or downplayed 
when quantitative techniques are used because they are difficult or impossible to quantify. 
Quantitative techniques consist mainly of analyzing objective, or  hard,  data. They usually 
avoid personal biases that sometimes contaminate qualitative methods. In practice, either 
approach or a combination of both approaches might be used to develop a forecast. 
 The following pages present a variety of forecasting techniques that are classified as judg-
mental, time-series, or associative. 
 Judgmental forecasts  rely on analysis of subjective inputs obtained from various sources, 
such as consumer surveys, the sales staff, managers and executives, and panels of experts. 
Quite frequently, these sources provide insights that are not otherwise available. 
 Time-series forecasts  simply attempt to project past experience into the future. These 
techniques use historical data with the assumption that the future will be like the past. Some 
models merely attempt to smooth out random variations in historical data; others attempt to 
identify specific patterns in the data and project or extrapolate those patterns into the future, 
without trying to identify causes of the patterns. 
 Associative models use equations that consist of one or more  explanatory variables that 
can be used to predict demand. For example, demand for paint might be related to variables 
such as the price per gallon and the amount spent on advertising, as well as to specific charac-
teristics of the paint (e.g., drying time, ease of cleanup). 
 3.8 QUALITATIVE FORECASTS 
 In some situations, forecasters rely solely on judgment and opinion to make forecasts. If 
management must have a forecast quickly, there may not be enough time to gather and ana-
lyze quantitative data. At other times, especially when political and economic conditions are 
changing, available data may be obsolete and more up-to-date information might not yet be 
available. Similarly, the introduction of new products and the redesign of existing products 
 Judgmental forecasts   
Forecasts that use subjective 
inputs such as opinions from 
consumer surveys, sales staff, 
managers, executives, and 
experts. 
 Time-series forecasts  
Forecasts that project patterns 
identified in recent time-series 
observations. 
 Associative model   Forecasting 
technique that uses  explanatory 
variables to predict future 
demand. 
 LO3.6 Describe four qualita-
tive forecasting techniques.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
83
or packaging suffer from the absence of historical data that would be useful in forecasting. In 
such instances, forecasts are based on executive opinions, consumer surveys, opinions of the 
sales staff, and opinions of experts. 
 Executive Opinions 
 A small group of upper-level managers (e.g., in marketing, operations, and finance) may meet 
and collectively develop a forecast. This approach is often used as a part of long-range plan-
ning and new product development. It has the advantage of bringing together the considerable 
knowledge and talents of various managers. However, there is the risk that the view of one 
person will prevail, and the possibility that diffusing responsibility for the forecast over the 
entire group may result in less pressure to produce a good forecast. 
 Salesforce Opinions 
 Members of the sales staff or the customer service staff are often good sources of informa-
tion because of their direct contact with consumers. They are often aware of any plans the 
customers may be considering for the future. There are, however, several drawbacks to using 
salesforce opinions. One is that staff members may be unable to distinguish between what cus-
tomers would  like  to do and what they actually  will  do. Another is that these people are some-
times overly influenced by recent experiences. Thus, after several periods of low sales, their 
estimates may tend to become pessimistic. After several periods of good sales, they may tend 
to be too optimistic. In addition, if forecasts are used to establish sales quotas, there will be a 
conflict of interest because it is to the salesperson’s advantage to provide low sales estimates. 
 Consumer Surveys 
 Because it is the consumers who ultimately determine demand, it seems natural to solicit 
input from them. In some instances, every customer or potential customer can be contacted. 
However, usually there are too many customers or there is no way to identify all potential 
 customers. Therefore, organizations seeking consumer input usually resort to consumer sur-
veys, which enable them to  sample  consumer opinions. The obvious advantage of consumer 
surveys is that they can tap information that might not be available elsewhere. On the other 
hand, a considerable amount of knowledge and skill is required to construct a survey, admin-
ister it, and correctly interpret the results for valid information. Surveys can be expensive and 
time-consuming. In addition, even under the best conditions, surveys of the general public 
must contend with the possibility of irrational behavior patterns. For example, much of the 
consumer’s thoughtful information gathering before purchasing a new car is often under-
mined by the glitter of a new car showroom or a high-pressure sales pitch. Along the same 
lines, low response rates to a mail survey should—but often don’t—make the results suspect. 
 If these and similar pitfalls can be avoided, surveys can produce useful information. 
 Other Approaches 
 A manager may solicit opinions from a number of other managers and staff people. Occasion-
ally, outside experts are needed to help with a forecast. Advice may be needed on political or 
economic conditions in the United States or a foreign country, or some other aspect of impor-
tance with which an organization lacks familiarity. 
 Another approach is the   Delphi method  ,  an iterative process intended to achieve a con-
sensus forecast. This method involves circulating a series of questionnaires among individu-
als who possess the knowledge and ability to contribute meaningfully. Responses are kept 
anonymous, which tends to encourage honest responses and reduces the risk that one person’s 
opinion will prevail. Each new questionnaire is developed using the information extracted 
from the previous one, thus enlarging the scope of information on which participants can base 
their judgments. 
 The Delphi method has been applied to a variety of situations, not all of which involve 
forecasting. The discussion here is limited to its use as a forecasting tool. 
 Delphi method  An iterative 
process in which managers and 
staff complete a series of ques-
tionnaires, each developed from 
the previous one, to achieve a 
consensus forecast.  

84 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 As a forecasting tool, the Delphi method is useful for  technological forecasting, that is, 
for assessing changes in technology and their impact on an organization. Often the goal is to 
predict  when  a certain event will occur. For instance, the goal of a Delphi forecast might be 
to predict when video telephones might be installed in at least 50 percent of residential homes 
or when a vaccine for a disease might be developed and ready for mass distribution. For the 
most part, these are long-term, single-time forecasts, which usually have very little hard infor-
mation to go by or data that are costly to obtain, so the problem does not lend itself to analyti-
cal techniques. Rather, judgments of experts or others who possess sufficient knowledge to 
make predictions are used. 
 3.9 FORECASTS BASED ON TIME-SERIES DATA 
 A  time series   is a time-ordered sequence of observations taken at regular intervals (e.g., 
hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually). The data may be measurements of 
demand, earnings, profits, shipments, accidents, output, precipitation, productivity, or the 
consumer price index. Forecasting techniques based on time-series data are made on the 
assumption that future values of the series can be estimated from past values. Although no 
attempt is made to identify variables that influence the series, these methods are widely used, 
often with quite satisfactory results. 
 Analysis of time-series data requires the analyst to identify the underlying behavior of the 
series. This can often be accomplished by merely  plotting the data  and visually examining 
the plot. One or more patterns might appear: trends, seasonal variations, cycles, or variations 
around an average. In addition, there will be random and perhaps irregular variations. These 
behaviors can be described as follows:
 1. 
 Trend refers to a long-term upward or downward movement in the data. Population 
shifts, changing incomes, and cultural changes often account for such movements. 
 2. 
 Seasonality refers to short-term, fairly regular variations generally related to factors 
such as the calendar or time of day. Restaurants, supermarkets, and theaters experience 
weekly and even daily “seasonal” variations. 
 3. 
 Cycles are wavelike variations of more than one year’s duration. These are often related 
to a variety of economic, political, and even agricultural conditions. 
 4. 
 Irregular variations are due to unusual circumstances such as severe weather condi-
tions, strikes, or a major change in a product or service. They do not reflect typical 
behavior, and their inclusion in the series can distort the overall picture. Whenever pos-
sible, these should be identified and removed from the data. 
 5. 
 Random variations are residual variations that remain after all other behaviors have 
been accounted for. 
 These behaviors are illustrated in  Figure 3.1 . The small “bumps” in the plots represent 
random variability. 
 The remainder of this section describes the various approaches to the analysis of time-
series data. Before turning to those discussions, one point should be emphasized: A demand 
forecast should be based on a time series of past  demand  rather than unit sales. Sales would 
not truly reflect demand if one or more  stockouts occurred. 
 Naive Methods  
 A simple but widely used approach to forecasting is the naive approach. A   naive forecast  
uses a single previous value of a time series as the basis of a forecast. The naive approach can 
be used with a stable series (variations around an average), with seasonal variations, or with 
trend. With a stable series, the last data point becomes the forecast for the next period. Thus, 
if demand for a product last week was 20 cases, the forecast for this week is 20 cases. With 
seasonal variations, the forecast for this “season” is equal to the value of the series last “sea-
son.” For example, the forecast for demand for turkeys this Thanksgiving season is equal to 
 Time series  A time-ordered 
sequence of observations taken 
at regular intervals. 
 Trend  A long-term upward or 
downward movement in data. 
 Seasonality  Short-term regular 
variations related to the calendar 
or time of day. 
 Cycle  Wavelike variations 
 lasting more than one year. 
 Irregular variation  Caused 
by unusual circumstances, not 
reflective of typical behavior. 
 Random variations  Residual 
variations after all other 
 behaviors are accounted for. 
 Naive forecast  A forecast for 
any period that equals the previ-
ous period’s actual value. 
 LO3.7 Use a naive method to 
make a forecast.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
85
demand for turkeys last Thanksgiving; the forecast of the number of checks cashed at a bank 
on the first day of the month next month is equal to the number of checks cashed on the first 
day of this month; and the forecast for highway traffic volume this Friday is equal to the high-
way traffic volume last Friday. For data with trend, the forecast is equal to the last value of 
the series plus or minus the difference between the last two values of the series. For example, 
suppose the last two values were 50 and 53. The next forecast would be 56: 
 FIGURE 3.1 
 Trend, cyclical, and seasonal data 
plots, with random and irregular 
variations  
y
0
Time
y
J
Time
y
y
y
y
0
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
Year 4
Year 3
Year 2
Year 1
Seasonal variations
Month
Cycles
Irregular
variation
Trend
 Period 
 Actual 
 Change from 
Previous Value 
 Forecast 
 1 
 50 
 
 
 2 
 53 
  3 
 
 3 
 
 
 53    3    56 
 Although at first glance the naive approach may appear  too  simplistic, it is nonetheless 
a legitimate forecasting tool. Consider the advantages: It has virtually no cost, it is quick 
and easy to prepare because data analysis is nonexistent, and it is easily understandable. The 
main objection to this method is its inability to provide highly accurate forecasts. However, 
if resulting accuracy is acceptable, this approach deserves serious consideration. Moreover, 
even if other forecasting techniques offer better accuracy, they will almost always involve a 
greater cost. The accuracy of a naive forecast can serve as a standard of comparison against 
which to judge the cost and accuracy of other techniques. Thus, managers must answer the 
question: Is the increased accuracy of another method worth the additional resources required 
to achieve that accuracy? 

86 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Techniques for Averaging 
 Historical data typically contain a certain amount of random variation, or  white noise, that 
tends to obscure systematic movements in the data. This randomness arises from the com-
bined influence of many—perhaps a great many—relatively unimportant factors, and it can-
not be reliably predicted. Averaging techniques smooth variations in the data. Ideally, it would 
be desirable to completely remove any randomness from the data and leave only “real” varia-
tions, such as changes in the demand. As a practical matter, however, it is usually impossible 
to distinguish between these two kinds of variations, so the best one can hope for is that the 
small variations are random and the large variations are “real.” 
 Averaging techniques smooth fluctuations in a time series because the individual highs and 
lows in the data offset each other when they are combined into an average. A forecast based 
on an average thus tends to exhibit less variability than the original data (see  Figure 3.2 ). This 
can be advantageous because many of these movements merely reflect random variability 
rather than a true change in the series. Moreover, because responding to changes in expected 
demand often entails considerable cost (e.g., changes in production rate, changes in the size 
of a workforce, inventory changes), it is desirable to avoid reacting to minor variations. Thus, 
minor variations are treated as random variations, whereas larger variations are viewed as 
more likely to reflect “real” changes, although these, too, are smoothed to a certain degree. 
 Averaging techniques generate forecasts that reflect recent values of a time series (e.g., the 
average value over the last several periods). These techniques work best when a series tends to 
vary around an average, although they also can handle step changes or gradual changes in the 
level of the series. Three techniques for averaging are described in this section:
 1. 
Moving average. 
 2. 
Weighted moving average. 
 3. 
Exponential smoothing. 
 Moving Average.   One weakness of the naive method is that the forecast just  traces the 
actual data, with a lag of one period; it does not smooth at all. But by expanding the amount of 
historical data a forecast is based on, this difficulty can be overcome. A   moving average fore-
cast uses a  number  of the most recent actual data values in generating a forecast. The moving 
average forecast can be computed using the following equation: 









Ft
n
At i
i
n
At
n
At
At
n
MA
1
...
2
1
−
=
∑
n
 
 (3–5) 
 where
 F  t      Forecast for time period  t 
 MA  n       n period moving average 
 A  t  i      Actual value in period  t      i 
 n     Number of periods (data points) in the moving average 
 For example, MA 3  would refer to a three-period moving average forecast, and MA 5 would 
refer to a five-period moving average forecast. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 Moving average  Technique 
that averages a number of recent 
actual values, updated as new 
values become available. 
 FIGURE 3.2 
 Averaging applied to three possible patterns 
Data
Forecast
Ideal
Step change
(Forecast lags)
Gradual change
(Forecast lags)
 LO3.8 Prepare a moving 
 average forecast.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
87
 Note that in a moving average, as each new actual value becomes available, the forecast is 
updated by adding the newest value and dropping the oldest and then recomputing the aver-
age. Consequently, the forecast “moves” by reflecting only the most recent values. 
 In computing a moving average, including a  moving total  column—which gives the sum of 
the  n  most current values from which the average will be computed—aids computations. To 
update the moving total: Subtract the oldest value from the newest value and add that amount 
to the moving total for each update. 
  Figure 3.3  illustrates a three-period moving average forecast plotted against actual demand 
over 31 periods. Note how the moving average forecast  lags  the actual values and how  smooth 
the forecasted values are compared with the actual values. 
 The moving average can incorporate as many data points as desired. In selecting the number 
of periods to include, the decision maker must take into account that the number of data points 
in the average determines its sensitivity to each new data point: The fewer the data points in 
an average, the more sensitive (responsive) the average tends to be. (See  Figure 3.4A .) 
 If responsiveness is important, a moving average with relatively few data points should be 
used. This will permit quick adjustment to, say, a step change in the data, but it also will cause 
S O L U T I O N
F6
43
40
41
3
41.33




If actual demand in period 6 turns out to be 38, the moving average forecast for period 7 
would be
F7
40
41
38
3
39.67




Compute a three-period moving average forecast given demand for shopping carts for the last 
five periods.
Period
Demand
1
42
2
40
3
43
the 3 most recent demands
4
40
5
41
E X A M P L E  2
}
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 FIGURE 3.3 
 A moving average forecast tends 
to smooth and lag changes in 
the data 
y
50
40
30
20
10
5
Period
10
15
20
25
30
0
t
Demand
3-period moving average (MA)
Demand

88 
Chapter Three Forecasting
the forecast to be somewhat responsive even to random variations. Conversely, moving aver-
ages based on more data points will smooth more but be less responsive to “real” changes. 
Hence, the decision maker must weigh the cost of responding more slowly to changes in the 
data against the cost of responding to what might simply be random variations. A review of 
forecast errors can help in this decision. 
 The advantages of a moving average forecast are that it is easy to compute and easy to 
understand. A possible disadvantage is that all values in the average are weighted equally. For 
instance, in a 10-period moving average, each value has a weight of 1/10. Hence, the oldest 
value has the  same weight  as the most recent value. If a change occurs in the series, a moving 
average forecast can be slow to react, especially if there are a large number of values in the 
average. Decreasing the number of values in the average increases the weight of more recent 
values, but it does so at the expense of losing potential information from less recent values. 
 Weighted Moving Average.   A  weighted average  is similar to a moving average, except 
that it typically assigns more weight to the most recent values in a time series. For instance, 
the most recent value might be assigned a weight of .40, the next most recent value a weight 
of .30, the next after that a weight of .20, and the next after that a weight of .10. Note that the 
weights must sum to 1.00, and that the heaviest weights are assigned to the most recent values. 
 F
w
A
A
A
w
A
(
)
...
(
)
(
)
(
)
...
(
)
t
t
n
t
n
t
t
t
t
2
2
1
1
1
1
w
w
w
A
t
t
t
n
t
n

















  
 
(3–6) 
 where
   w  t  1     Weight for period  t     1, etc. 
   A  t  1     Actual value for period  t     1, etc. 
 Weighted average  More 
recent values in a series are 
given more weight in computing 
a forecast.  
 FIGURE 3.4A 
 The more periods in a moving 
average, the greater the forecast 
will lag changes in the data 
Period
6
4
5
3
2
1
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
40
35
30
Demand
Data
MA 3
MA 5
Given the following demand data,
 a. 
Compute a weighted average forecast using a weight of .40 for the most recent period, 
.30 for the next most recent, .20 for the next, and .10 for the next.
 b. 
If the actual demand for period 6 is 39, forecast demand for period 7 using the same 
weights as in part a.
Period
Demand
1
42
2
40
3
43
4
40
5
41
E X A M P L E  3
LO3.9 Prepare a weighted-
average forecast.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
89
 Note that if four weights are used, only the  four most recent  demands are used to prepare 
the forecast. 
 The advantage of a weighted average over a simple moving average is that the weighted 
average is more reflective of the most recent occurrences. However, the choice of weights 
is somewhat arbitrary and generally involves the use of trial and error to find a suitable 
 weighting scheme. 
 Exponential Smoothing.   Exponential smoothing   is a sophisticated weighted averaging 
method that is still relatively easy to use and understand. Each new forecast is based on the 
previous forecast plus a percentage of the difference between that forecast and the actual 
value of the series at that point. That is: 
 Next forecast
Previous forecast
(Actual
Previous forecast)

 

 
 where (Actual    Previous forecast) represents the forecast error and    is a percentage of the 
error. More concisely, 
(
)
1
1
1
F
F
A
F
t
t
t
t

 




 
 (3–7a) 
 where
 F  t      Forecast for period  t 
 F  t  1     Forecast for the previous period (i.e., period  t     1) 
      Smoothing constant (percentage) 
 A  t  1     Actual demand or sales for the previous period 
 The smoothing constant    represents a percentage of the forecast error. Each new forecast 
is equal to the previous forecast plus a percentage of the previous error. For example, suppose 
the previous forecast was 42 units, actual demand was 40 units, and       .10. The new forecast 
would be computed as follows:
 
42
.10(40
42)
41.8
Ft 



 
 Then, if the actual demand turns out to be 43, the next forecast would be 
 
41.8
.10(43
41.8)
41.92
Ft 



 
 An alternate form of Formula 3–7a reveals the weighting of the previous forecast and the 
latest actual demand: 
 
(1
)
1
1
F
F
A
t
t
t

 
 

  
 (3–7b) 
 For example, if       .10, this would be 
.90
.10
1
1
F
F
A
t
t
t



  
 The quickness of forecast adjustment to error is determined by the smoothing constant,   . 
The closer its value is to zero, the slower the forecast will be to adjust to forecast errors (i.e., 
the greater the smoothing). Conversely, the closer the value of   is to 1.00, the greater the 
responsiveness and the less the smoothing. This is illustrated in  Figure 3.4B . 
 Exponential smoothing  A 
weighted averaging method 
based on previous forecast plus a 
percentage of the forecast error. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
S O L U T I O N
 a. 
F6  .10(40)  .20(43)  .30(40)  .40(41)  41.0
 b. 
F7  .10(43)  .20(40)  .30(41)  .40(39)  40.2
LO3.10 Prepare an exponen-
tial smoothing forecast.

90 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Selecting a smoothing constant is basically a matter of judgment or trial and error, using 
forecast errors to guide the decision. The goal is to select a smoothing constant that balances 
the benefits of smoothing random variations with the benefits of responding to real changes if 
and when they occur. Commonly used values of    range from .05 to .50. Low values of   are 
used when the underlying average tends to be stable; higher values are used when the underly-
ing average is susceptible to change. 
 Some computer packages include a feature that permits automatic modification of the 
smoothing constant if the forecast errors become unacceptably large. 
 Exponential smoothing is one of the most widely used techniques in forecasting, partly 
because of its ease of calculation and partly because of the ease with which the weighting 
scheme can be altered—simply by changing the value of   . 
 Note Exponential smoothing should begin several periods back to enable forecasts to adjust 
to the data, instead of starting one period back. A number of different approaches can be 
used to obtain a  starting forecast,  such as the average of the first several periods, a subjective 
estimate, or the first actual value as the forecast for period 2 (i.e., the naive approach). For 
simplicity, the naive approach is used in this book. In practice, using an average of, say, the 
first three values as a forecast for period 4 would provide a better starting forecast because 
that would tend to be more representative. 
 FIGURE 3.4B 
 The closer   is to zero, the 
greater the smoothing 
Period
Actual
α = .4
α = .1
45
40
Demand
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
Period (t )
Actual 
Demand
   .10 
Forecast
   .40 
Forecast
1
42
—
—
2
40
42
42
3
43
41.8
41.2
4
40
41.92
41.92
5
41
41.73
41.15
6
39
41.66
41.09
7
46
41.39
40.25
8
44
41.85
42.55
9
45
42.07
43.13
10
38
42.35
43.88
11
40
41.92
41.53
12
41.73
40.92
starting forecast
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
Compare the error performance of these three forecasting techniques using MAD, MSE, 
and MAPE: a naive forecast, a two-period moving average, and exponential smoothing with 
  .10 for periods 3 through 11, using the data shown in Figure 3.4B.
E X A M P L E  4

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
91
 Other Forecasting Methods 
 You may find two other approaches to forecasting interesting. They are briefly described in 
this section. 
 Focus Forecasting.  Some companies use forecasts based on a “best recent performance” 
basis. This approach, called   focus forecasting   ,  was developed by Bernard T. Smith, and is 
described in several of his books.  2   It involves the use of several forecasting methods (e.g., 
moving average, weighted average, and exponential smoothing) all being applied to the last 
few months of historical data after any irregular variations have been removed. The method 
that has the highest accuracy is then used to make the forecast for the next month. This pro-
cess is used for each product or service, and is repeated monthly. Example 4 illustrates this 
kind of comparison.
 Diffusion Models.  When new products or services are introduced, historical data are not 
generally available on which to base forecasts. Instead, predictions are based on rates of prod-
uct adoption and usage spread from other established products, using mathematical diffusion 
models. These models take into account such factors as market potential, attention from mass 
media, and word of mouth. Although the details are beyond the scope of this text, it is impor-
tant to point out that diffusion models are widely used in marketing and to assess the merits of 
investing in new technologies. 
 Techniques for Trend 
 Analysis of trend involves developing an equation that will suitably describe trend (assum-
ing that trend is present in the data). The trend component may be linear, or it may not. Some 
2 See, for example, Bernard T. Smith and Virginia Brice,  Focus Forecasting: Computer Techniques for Inventory 
Control Revised for the Twenty-First Century (Essex Junction, VT: Oliver Wight, 1984).
 Focus Forecasting  Using the 
forecasting method that demon-
strates the best recent success.  
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
S O L U T I O N
Naive
Two-period MA
Exponential Smoothing
Period, t
Demand
Forecast
Error
Forecast
Error
Forecast
Error
1
42
—
—  
2
40
42
2
42
2 
3
43
40
3
41
2
41.8
1.2 
4
40
43
3
41.5
1.5
41.92
1.92
5
41
40
1 
41.5
0.5
41.73
0.73
6
39
41
2 
40.5
1.5
41.66
2.66
7
46
39
7 
40
6
41.39
4.61
8
44
46
2 
42.5
1.5
41.85
2.15
9
45
44
1 
45
0
42.07
2.93
10
38
45
7 
44.5
6.5
42.36
4.36
11
40
38
2 
41.5
1.5
41.92
1.92
MAD
3.11 
2.33
2.50 
MSE
16.25 
11.44
8.73 
MAPE
7.49%
5.64%
5.98%
If lowest MAD is the criterion, the two-period moving average forecast has the greatest accu-
racy; if lowest MSE is the criterion, exponential smoothing works best; and if lowest MAPE 
is the criterion, the two-period moving average method is again best. Of course, with other 
data, or with different values of  for exponential smoothing, and different moving averages, 
the best performers could be different.

92 
Chapter Three Forecasting
commonly encountered nonlinear trend types are illustrated in  Figure 3.5 . A simple plot of the 
data often can reveal the existence and nature of a trend. The discussion here focuses exclu-
sively on  linear trends because these are fairly common. 
 There are two important techniques that can be used to develop forecasts when trend 
is present. One involves use of a trend equation; the other is an extension of exponential 
smoothing. 
 Trend Equation.   A   linear trend equation  has the form
 F
a
bt
t 

 
 (3–8) 
 where
 F  t      Forecast for period  t 
 a     Value of  F  t  at  t     0, which is the y intercept 
 b     Slope of the line 
 t     Specified number of time periods from  t     0 
 For example, consider the trend equation  F  t      45    5 t.  The value of  F  t   when  t     0 is 45, 
and the slope of the line is 5, which means that, on the average, the value of  F  t   will increase 
by five units for each time period. If  t     10, the forecast,  F  t  , is 45    5(10)    95 units. The 
equation can be plotted by finding two points on the line. One can be found by substituting 
 Linear trend equation  
 F  t       a      bt, used to develop 
forecasts when trend is present.  
 FIGURE 3.5 
 Graphs of some nonlinear trends 
Time
y
Time
y
Time
y
Time
y
Parabolic
trend
Life cycle
trend
Exponential
trend
Growth
curve
LO3.11 Prepare a linear trend 
forecast.
0
a
y
t
y
t
y
b =
D
D
D
t
D
Ft = a + bt

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
93
some value of  t  into the equation (e.g.,  t     10) and then solving for  F  t  . The other point is  a 
(i.e.,  F  t   at  t     0). Plotting those two points and drawing a line through them yields a graph of 
the linear trend line. 
 The coefficients of the line,  a and  b, are based on the following two equations:
 
(
)
2
2
b
n ty
t y
n t
t


  

 
 
 (3–9) 
 a
y
b t
n
y
b t
or
  


 
 (3–10) 
 where
 n     Number of periods 
 y     Value of the time series 
 Note that these two equations are identical to those used for computing a linear regression 
line, except that  t  replaces  x  in the equations. Values for the trend equation can be obtained 
easily by using the Excel template for linear trend. 
Cell phone sales for a California-based firm over the last 10 weeks are shown in the following 
table. Plot the data, and visually check to see if a linear trend line would be appropriate. Then 
determine the equation of the trend line, and predict sales for weeks 11 and 12.
Week
Unit Sales
1
700
2
724
3
720
4
728
5
740
6
742
7
758
8
750
9
770
10
775
E X A M P L E  5
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
S O L U T I O N
 a. 
A plot suggests that a linear trend line would be appropriate:
Week
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
3
5
7
9
11
780
Sales
760
740
720
700

94 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 b. 
The solution obtained by using the Excel template for linear trend is shown in Table 3.1.
b  7.51 and a  699.40
  
The trend line is Ft  699.40  7.51t, where t  0 for period 0.
 c. Substituting values of t into this equation, the forecasts for the next two periods (i.e., 
t  11 and t  12) are:
F11  699.40  7.51(11)  782.01
F12  699.40  7.51(12)  789.52
 d. 
For purposes of illustration, the original data, the trend line, and the two projections 
(forecasts) are shown on the following graph:
Week
2
4
6
8
10
12
1
3
5
7
9
11
Sales
Trend line
Data
Forecasts
780
800
760
740
720
700
TABLE 3.1 
Excel solution for Example 5

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
95
 Trend-Adjusted Exponential Smoothing 
 A variation of simple exponential smoothing can be used when a time series exhibits a  linear
trend. It is called   trend-adjusted exponential smoothing   or, sometimes,  double smoothing, 
to differentiate it from simple exponential smoothing, which is appropriate only when data 
vary around an average or have step or gradual changes. If a series exhibits trend, and simple 
smoothing is used on it, the forecasts will all lag the trend: If the data are increasing, each 
forecast will be too low; if decreasing, each forecast will be too high. 
 The trend-adjusted forecast (TAF) is composed of two elements: a smoothed error and a 
trend factor. 
 TAF
1
S
T
t
t
t



 
 (3–11) 
 where
 S  t      Previous forecast plus smoothed error 
 T  t      Current trend estimate 
 and
 
TAF
(
TAF )
(TAF
TAF
)
1
1
1
S
A
T
T
T
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t

 


 





 
 (3–12) 
 where
      Smoothing constant for average 
      Smoothing constant for trend 
 In order to use this method, one must select values of   and   (usually through trial and 
error) and make a starting forecast and an estimate of trend. 
 Trend-adjusted exponential 
smoothing    Variation of expo-
nential smoothing used when 
a time series exhibits a linear 
trend. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO3.12  Prepare a trend-
adjusted exponential smoothing 
forecast.
Using the cell phone data from the previous example (where it was concluded that the data 
exhibited a linear trend), use trend-adjusted exponential smoothing to obtain forecasts for 
periods 6 through 11, with   .40 and   .30.
E X A M P L E  6
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
S O L U T I O N
The initial estimate of trend is based on the net change of 28 for the three changes from period 
1 to period 4, for an average of 9.33. The Excel spreadsheet is shown in Table 3.2. Notice that 
an initial estimate of trend is estimated from the first four values and that the starting fore-
cast (period 5) is developed using the previous (period 4) value of 728 plus the initial trend 
estimate:
Starting forecast
728
9.33
737.33



 Unlike a linear trend line, trend-adjusted smoothing has the ability to adjust to  changes
in trend. Of course, trend projections are much simpler with a trend line than with trend-
adjusted forecasts, so a manager must decide which benefits are most important when choos-
ing between these two techniques for trend. 
 Techniques for Seasonality 
 Seasonal variations   in time-series data are regularly repeating upward or downward move-
ments in series values that can be tied to recurring events.  Seasonality  may refer to regular 
annual variations. Familiar examples of seasonality are weather variations (e.g., sales of win-
ter and summer sports equipment) and vacations or holidays (e.g., airline travel, greeting card 
sales, visitors at tourist and resort centers). The term  seasonal variation  is also applied to 
daily, weekly, monthly, and other regularly recurring patterns in data. For example, rush hour 
 Seasonal variations   Regularly 
repeating movements in series 
values that can be tied to recur-
ring events. 

96 
Chapter Three Forecasting
traffic occurs twice a day—incoming 
in the morning and outgoing in the late 
afternoon. Theaters and restaurants 
often experience weekly demand pat-
terns, with demand higher later in the 
week. Banks may experience daily 
seasonal variations (heavier traffic 
during the noon hour and just before 
closing), weekly variations (heavier 
toward the end of the week), and 
monthly variations (heaviest around 
the beginning of the month because of 
Social Security, payroll, and welfare 
checks being cashed or deposited). 
Mail volume; sales of toys, beer, auto-
mobiles, and turkeys; highway usage; 
hotel registrations; and gardening also 
exhibit seasonal variations.  
 Seasonality in a time series is 
expressed in terms of the amount that 
actual values deviate from the  average 
value of a series. If the series tends to 
vary around an average value, then seasonality is expressed in terms of that average (or a mov-
ing average); if trend is present, seasonality is expressed in terms of the trend value. 
 There are two different models of seasonality: additive and multiplicative. In the  additive 
model, seasonality is expressed as a  quantity  (e.g., 20 units), which is added to or subtracted 
from the series average in order to incorporate seasonality. In the  multiplicative model, sea-
sonality is expressed as a  percentage  of the average (or trend) amount (e.g., 1.10), which is 
then used to multiply the value of a series to incorporate seasonality.  Figure 3.6  illustrates the 
two models for a linear trend line. In practice, businesses use the multiplicative model much 
more widely than the additive model, because it tends to be more representative of actual 
experience, so we shall focus exclusively on the multiplicative model.  
 TABLE 3.2 
 Using the Excel template for trend-adjusted smoothing 
 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
97
 The seasonal percentages in the multiplicative model are referred to as   seasonal relatives or 
 seasonal indexes.  Suppose that the seasonal relative for the quantity of toys sold in May at a store 
is 1.20. This indicates that toy sales for that month are 20 percent above the monthly average. A 
seasonal relative of .90 for July indicates that July sales are 90 percent of the monthly average. 
 Knowledge of seasonal variations is an important factor in retail planning and scheduling. 
Moreover, seasonality can be an important factor in capacity planning for systems that must 
be designed to handle peak loads (e.g., public transportation, electric power plants, highways, 
and bridges). Knowledge of the extent of seasonality in a time series can enable one to  remove 
seasonality from the data (i.e., to seasonally adjust data) in order to discern other patterns 
or the lack of patterns in the series. Thus, one frequently reads or hears about “seasonally 
adjusted unemployment” and “seasonally adjusted personal income.” 
 The next section briefly describes how seasonal relatives are used. 
 Using Seasonal Relatives.     Seasonal relatives are used in two different ways in forecast-
ing. One way is to  deseasonalize  data;  the other way is to  incorporate seasonality  in a forecast. 
 To deseasonalize data is to remove the seasonal component from the data in order to get a 
clearer picture of the nonseasonal (e.g., trend) components. Deseasonalizing data is accom-
plished by  dividing  each data point by its corresponding seasonal relative (e.g., divide Novem-
ber demand by the November relative, divide December demand by the December relative, and 
so on). 
 Incorporating seasonality in a forecast is useful when demand has both trend (or average) 
and seasonal components. Incorporating seasonality can be accomplished in this way:
 1. 
Obtain trend estimates for desired periods using a trend equation. 
 2. 
Add seasonality to the trend estimates by  multiplying (assuming a multiplicative model 
is appropriate) these trend estimates by the corresponding seasonal relative (e.g., mul-
tiply the November trend estimate by the November seasonal relative, multiply the 
December trend estimate by the December seasonal relative, and so on). 
 Example 7 illustrates these two techniques. 
 Seasonal relative  Percentage 
of average or trend. 
 FIGURE 3.6 
 Seasonality: the additive and 
multiplicative models compared 
using a linear trend 
Time
Demand
Multiplicative model
Demand = Trend x Seasonality
Additive model
Demand = Trend + Seasonality
LO3.13 Compute and use 
seasonal relatives.
A coffee shop owner wants to estimate demand for the next two quarters for hot chocolate. 
Sales data consist of trend and seasonality.
 a. 
Quarter relatives are 1.20 for the first quarter, 1.10 for the second quarter, 0.75 for the 
third quarter, and 0.95 for the fourth quarter. Use this information to deseasonalize sales 
for quarters 1 through 8.
 b. 
Using the appropriate values of quarter relatives and the equation Ft  124  7.5t for 
the trend component, estimate demand for periods 9 and 10.
E X A M P L E  7
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

98 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 FIGURE 3.7 
 A centered moving average 
closely tracks the data 
50
40
30
20
5
Period
10
15
20
25
30
0
Demand
Centered
MA 
Data
S O L U T I O N
 a. 
 b. 
The trend values are:
Period 9:   Ft  124  7.5(9)    191.5
Period 10: Ft  124  7.5(10)  199.0
  
Period 9 is a first quarter and period 10 is a second quarter. Multiplying each trend value 
by the appropriate quarter relative results in:
Period 9: 191.5(1.20)    229.8
Period 10: 199.0(1.10)  218.9
 Period 
 Quarter 
 Sales (gal.) 
    
 Quarter 
Relative 
  
 Deseasonalized 
Sales 
 1 
 1 
 158.4 
 	   
 1.20 
  
 132.0 
 2 
 2 
 153.0 
 	   
 1.10 
  
 139.1 
 3 
 3 
 110.0 
 	   
 0.75 
  
 146.7 
 4 
 4 
 146.3 
 	   
 0.95 
  
 154.0 
 5 
 1 
 192.0 
 	   
 1.20 
  
 160.0 
 6 
 2 
 187.0 
 	   
 1.10 
  
 170.0 
 7 
 3 
 132.0 
 	   
 0.75 
  
 176.0 
 8 
 4 
 173.8 
 	   
 0.95 
  
 182.9 
 Computing Seasonal Relatives.  A widely used method for computing seasonal relatives 
involves the use of a   centered moving average  .  This approach effectively accounts for any trend 
(linear or curvilinear) that might be present in the data. For example,  Figure 3.7  illustrates how 
a three-period centered moving average closely tracks the data originally shown in  Figure 3.3 .  
 Manual computation of seasonal relatives using the centered moving average method is a bit 
cumbersome, so the use of software is recommended. Manual computation is illustrated in Solved 
Problem 4 at the end of the chapter. The Excel template (on the Web site) is a simple and conve-
nient way to obtain values of seasonal relatives (indexes). Example 8A illustrates this approach. 
 Centered moving average  A 
moving average positioned at the 
center of the data that were used 
to compute it. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
The manager of a call center recorded the volume of calls received between 9 and 10 a.m. for 
21 days and wants to obtain a seasonal index for each day for that hour.
Day
Volume
Day
Volume
Day
Volume
Tues
67
Tues
60
Tues
64
Wed
75
Wed
73
Wed
76
Thurs
82
Thurs
85
Thurs
87
Fri
98
Fri
99
Fri
96
Sat
90
Sat
86
Sat
88
Sun
36
Sun
40
Sun
44
Mon
55
Mon
52
Mon
50
E X A M P L E  8 A

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
99
S O L U T I O N
Compute Seasonal Indexes
<Back
Number of "seasons" =
Tues
Wed
Thur
Fri
Sat
Sun
Mon
0.8688
1.0460
1.1980
1.3648
1.2383
0.5339
0.7484
0.8690
1.0463
1.1983
1.3652
1.2386
0.5341
0.7486
Season
Average
Index
Standard
Index
Season
Period
MA
Actual
Index
Center
Tues
1
67
Wed
2
75
Thur
3
82
Fri
4
98
1.3638171
Sat
5
90
1.2701613
Sun
6
38
0.5101215
Mon
7
55
0.7746479
Tues
8
60
0.8433735
Wed
9
73
1.034413
Thur
10
85
1.1947791
Fri
11
99
1.4
Sat
12
86
1.2064128
Sun
13
40
0.5577689
Mon
14
62
0.7222222
Tues
15
64
0.8942116
Wed
16
76
1.0576541
Thur
17
87
1.2011834
Fri
18
96
1.3306931
Sat
19
88
Sun
20
44
Mon
21
71.857143
70.857143
70.571429
71
71.142857
70.571429
71.142857
70.714286
71.285714
71.714286
72
71.571429
71.857143
72.428571
72.142857
71.857143
70.857143
70.571429
71
71.142857
70.571429
71.142857
70.714286
71.285714
71.714286
72
71.571429
71.857143
72.428571
72.142857
50
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Tues
Wed
Thur
Fri
Sat
Sun
Mon
Clear
7
For practical purposes, you can round the relatives to two decimal places. Thus, the seasonal 
(standard) index values are:
Day
Index
Tues
0.87
Wed
1.05
Thurs
1.20
Fri
1.37
Sat
1.24
Sun
0.53
Mon
0.75
 Computing Seasonal Relatives Using the Simple Average Method.  The simple 
average (SA) method is an alternative way to compute seasonal relatives. Each seasonal rela-
tive is the average for that season divided by the average of all seasons. This method is illus-
trated in Example 8B, where the seasons are days. Note that there is no need to standardize 
the relatives when using the SA method. 
  The obvious advantage of the SA method compared to the centered MA method is the 
simplicity of computations. When the data have a stationary mean (i.e., variation around an 
average), the SA method works quite well, providing values of relatives that are quite close 
 This example illustrates the steps needed to compute seasonal relatives using the SA method.  
 E X A M P L E  8 B 

100 
Chapter Three Forecasting
to those obtained using the centered MA method, which is generally accepted as accurate. 
Conventional wisdom is that the SA method should not be used when linear trend is present in 
the data. However, it can be used to obtain fairly good values of seasonal relatives as long as 
the ratio of the intercept to the slope is large, or when variations are large relative to the slope, 
as shown below. Also, the larger the ratio, the smaller the error. The general relationship is 
illustrated in the following figure.   
Variations are large relative to the slope of the 
line, so it is okay to use the SA method.
Variations are small relative to the slope of the 
line, so it is not okay to use the SA method.
 S O L U T I O N 
 Step 1:  Compute the 
season averages 
 Step 3:  Compute the 
SA relatives 
 Step 2:  Compute the 
overall average 
 Quarter 
 Year 1 
 Year 2 
 Year 3 
 Quarter 
Total 
 Quarter 
Average 
 Quarter 
Relative 
 1 
 20 
 23 
 17 
 60 
 20 
 20/20    1.00 
 2 
 10 
 12 
 8 
 30 
 10 
 10/20    0.50 
 3 
 25 
 17 
 22 
 66 
 22 
 22/20    1.10 
 4 
 28 
 26 
 30 
 84 
 28 
 28/20     1.40 
 
 
 
 
 
 80 
 4.00 
 Average of quarter averages    80/4    20 
 Techniques for Cycles 
 Cycles are up-and-down movements similar to seasonal variations but of longer duration—say, 
two to six years between peaks. When cycles occur in time-series data, their frequent irregu-
larity makes it difficult or impossible to project them from past data because turning points 
are difficult to identify. A short moving average or a naive approach may be of some value, 
although both will produce forecasts that lag cyclical movements by one or several periods. 
 The most commonly used approach is explanatory: Search for another variable that relates 
to, and  leads,  the variable of interest. For example, the number of housing starts (i.e., permits 
to build houses) in a given month often is an indicator of demand a few months later for 
products and services directly tied to construction of new homes (landscaping; sales of wash-
ers and dryers, carpeting, and furniture; new demands for shopping, transportation, schools). 
Thus, if an organization is able to establish a high correlation with such a  leading variable 
(i.e., changes in the variable precede changes in the variable of interest), it can develop an 
equation that describes the relationship, enabling forecasts to be made. It is important that a 
persistent relationship exists between the two variables. Moreover, the higher the correlation, 
the better the chances that the forecast will be on target. 
 3.10 ASSOCIATIVE FORECASTING TECHNIQUES 
  Associative techniques rely on identification of related variables that can be used to predict 
values of the variable of interest. For example, sales of beef may be related to the price per 
pound charged for beef and the prices of substitutes such as chicken, pork, and lamb; real 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
101
estate prices are usually related to property location and square footage; and crop yields are 
related to soil conditions and the amounts and timing of water and fertilizer applications. 
 The essence of associative techniques is the development of an equation that summarizes 
the effects of   predictor variables  .  The primary method of analysis is known as   regression . A 
brief overview of regression should suffice to place this approach into perspective relative to 
the other forecasting approaches described in this chapter. 
 Simple Linear Regression 
 The simplest and most widely used form of regression involves a linear relationship between 
two variables. A plot of the values might appear like that in  Figure 3.8 . The object in linear 
regression is to obtain an equation of a straight line that minimizes the sum of squared vertical 
deviations of data points from the line (i.e., the  least squares criterion ). This  least squares 
line has the equation 
 y
a
bx
c 

 
 (3–13) 
 where
 y  c      Predicted (dependent) variable 
 x     Predictor (independent) variable 
 b     Slope of the line 
 a     Value of  y  c  when  x     0 (i.e., the height of the line at the  y intercept) 
 ( Note:  It is conventional to represent values of the predicted variable on the  y  axis and values 
of the predictor variable on the  x axis.)  Figure 3.9 is a general graph of a linear regression line. 
 Predictor variables  Variables 
that can be used to predict values 
of the variable of interest. 
 Regression  Technique for 
 fitting a line to a set of points. 
 Least squares line  Minimizes 
the sum of the squared vertical 
deviations around the line. 
 FIGURE 3.8 
 A straight line is fitted to a set of 
sample points 
y
Predictor variable
x
0
Predicted variable
Computed
relationship
 LO3.14  Compute and use 
regression and correlation 
coefficients.
 FIGURE 3.9 
 Equation of a straight line: The 
line represents the average 
(expected) values of variable  y 
given values of variable  x 
y
x
0
a
x
y
x
y
b =
yc = a + bx
The line intersects the y axis where y = a.  The slope of the line = b.
D
D
D
D

102 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 The coefficients  a and  b of the line are based on the following two equations:
 
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
b
n
xy
x
y
n
x
x


 


 
 
 (3–14) 
 
or y
a
y
b x
n
bx
  


 
 (3–15) 
 where
 n     Number of paired observations 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
Healthy Hamburgers has a chain of 12 stores in northern Illinois. Sales figures and profits for 
the stores are given in the following table. Obtain a regression line for the data, and predict 
profit for a store assuming sales of $10 million.
Unit Sales, x 
(in $ millions)
Profits, y 
(in $ millions)
$ 7
$0.15
2
0.10
6
0.13
4
0.15
14
0.25
15
0.27
16
0.24
12
0.20
14
0.27
20
0.44
15
0.34
7
0.17
E X A M P L E  9
S O L U T I O N
First, plot the data and decide if a linear model is reasonable. (That is, do the points seem to 
scatter around a straight line? Figure 3.10 suggests they do.) Next, using the appropriate Excel 
template on the text Web site, obtain the regression equation yc  0.0506  0.0159x (see 
Table 3.3). For sales of x  10 (i.e., 10 million), estimated profit is yc  0.0506  0.0159(10) 
.2099, or $209,900. (Substituting x  0 into the equation to produce a predicted profit of 
$50,600 may appear strange because it seems to suggest that amount of profit will occur with 
no sales. However, the value of x  0 is outside the range of observed values. The regression 
line should be used only for the range of values from which it was developed; the relation-
ship may be nonlinear outside that range. The purpose of the a value is simply to establish the 
height of the line where it crosses the y axis.)
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Sales ($ millions)
Profits ($ ten thousands)
FIGURE 3.10
A linear model seems reasonable

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
103
 One indication of how accurate a prediction might be for a linear regression line is the 
amount of scatter of the data points around the line. If the data points tend to be relatively close 
to the line, predictions using the linear equation will tend to be more accurate than if the data 
points are widely scattered. The scatter can be summarized using the    standard error of esti-
mate  .  It can be computed by finding the vertical difference between each data point and the 
computed value of the regression equation for that value of  x,  squaring each difference, adding 
the squared differences, dividing by  n     2, and then finding the square root of that value.
 
(
)
2
2
S
y
y
n
e
c




 
 (3–16) 
 where
 S  e      Standard error of estimate 
 y      y value of each data point 
 n     Number of data points 
 For the data given in  Table 3.3 , the error column shows the  y      y  c  differences. Squaring 
each error and summing the squares yields .01659. Hence, the standard error of estimate is 
 
.01659
12
2
.0407 million
Se 


 
 One application of regression in forecasting relates to the use of indicators. These are 
uncontrollable variables that tend to lead or precede changes in a variable of interest. For 
example, changes in the Federal Reserve Board’s discount rate may influence certain business 
activities. Similarly, an increase in energy costs can lead to price increases for a wide range of 
products and services. Careful identification and analysis of indicators may yield insight into 
possible future demand in some situations. There are numerous published indexes and Web 
sites from which to choose. 3 These include:
 Net change in inventories on hand and on order. 
 Interest rates for commercial loans. 
 3 See, for example,  The National Bureau of Economic Research, The Survey of Current Business, The Monthly 
Labor Review, and  Business Conditions Digest. 
 Standard error of  estimate  
A measure of the scatter of 
points around a regression line.  
Simple Linear Regression
<Back
Slope =
0.0159
r =
0.9166657
Intercept =
0.0506008
r2 =
0.840276
x  
y
Forecast
Error
7
0.15
2
0.1
6
0.13
4
0.15
14
0.25
15
0.27
16
0.24
12
0.2
14
0.27
20
0.44
15
0.34
7
0.17
x = 
10
Δx = 
1
Forecast: 0.2099031
0.21
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
X
Y
 y
 Forecast
Clear
0.1621124
0.0824612
0.1461822
0.1143217
0.273624
0.2895543
0.3054845
0.2417636
0.273624
0.3692054
0.2895543
0.1621124
–0.0121124
0.0175388
–0.0161822
0.0356783
–0.023624
–0.0195543
–0.0654845
–0.0417636
–0.003624
0.0707946
0.0504457
0.0078876
TABLE 3.3 
Using the Excel template for linear regression

104 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Industrial output. 
 Consumer price index (CPI). 
 The wholesale price index. 
 Stock market prices. 
 Other potential indicators are population shifts, local political climates, and activities of 
other firms (e.g., the opening of a shopping center may result in increased sales for nearby 
businesses). Three conditions are required for an indicator to be valid:
 1. 
The relationship between movements of an indicator and movements of the variable 
should have a logical explanation. 
 2. 
Movements of the indicator must precede movements of the dependent variable by 
enough time so that the forecast isn’t outdated before it can be acted upon. 
 3. 
A fairly high correlation should exist between the two variables. 
 Correlation   measures the strength and direction of relationship between two variables. 
Correlation can range from   1.00 to   1.00. A correlation of   1.00 indicates that changes 
in one variable are always matched by changes in the other; a correlation of   1.00 indicates 
that increases in one variable are matched by decreases in the other; and a correlation close 
to zero indicates little  linear  relationship between two variables. The correlation between two 
variables can be computed using the equation 
 
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
2
2
2
r
n
xy
x
y
n
x
x
n
y
y


 


 

 
 
 (3–17) 
 The square of the correlation coefficient,  r 2 , provides a measure of the percentage of vari-
ability in the values of  y  that is “explained” by the independent variable. The possible values 
of  r 2  range from 0 to 1.00. The closer  r 2  is to 1.00, the greater the percentage of explained 
variation. A high value of  r 2 , say .80 or more, would indicate that the independent variable is 
a good predictor of values of the dependent variable. A low value, say .25 or less, would indi-
cate a poor predictor, and a value between .25 and .80 would indicate a moderate predictor. 
 Comments on the Use of Linear Regression Analysis 
 Use of simple regression analysis implies that certain assumptions have been satisfied. Basi-
cally, these are as follows:
 1. 
Variations around the line are random. If they are random, no patterns such as cycles or 
trends should be apparent when the line and data are plotted. 
 2. 
Deviations around the average value (i.e., the line) should be normally distributed. A 
concentration of values close to the line with a small proportion of larger deviations 
supports the assumption of normality. 
 3. 
Predictions are being made only within the range of observed values. 
 If the assumptions are satisfied, regression analysis can be a powerful tool. To obtain the 
best results, observe the following:
 1. 
Always plot the data to verify that a linear relationship is appropriate. 
 2. 
The data may be time-dependent. Check this by plotting the dependent variable versus 
time; if patterns appear, use analysis of time series instead of regression, or use time as 
an independent variable as part of a  multiple regression analysis. 
 3. 
A small correlation may imply that other variables are important. 
 In addition, note these weaknesses of regression:
 1. 
Simple linear regression applies only to linear relationships with  one independent variable. 
 2. 
One needs a considerable amount of data to establish the relationship—in practice, 20 
or more observations. 
 3. 
All observations are weighted equally. 
 Correlation  A measure of the 
strength and direction of rela-
tionship between two variables. 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
105
Sales of new houses and three-month lagged unemployment are shown in the following table. 
Determine if unemployment levels can be used to predict demand for new houses and, if so, 
derive a predictive equation.
Period ................................
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Units sold ..........................
20
41
17
35
25
31
38
50
15
19
14
Unemployment % 
(three-month lag) .....
7.2
4.0
7.3
5.5
6.8
6.0
5.4
3.6
8.4
7.0
9.0
E X A M P L E  1 0
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
S O L U T I O N
 1. 
Plot the data to see if a linear model seems reasonable. In this case, a linear model seems 
appropriate for the range of the data.
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
Level of unemployment (%), x
Units sold, y
 2. Check the correlation coefficient to confirm that it is not close to zero using the Web site 
template, and then obtain the regression equation:
.966
r  
  
This is a fairly high negative correlation. The regression equation is
71.85
6.91
y
x


  
Note that the equation pertains only to unemployment levels in the range 3.6 to 9.0, 
because sample observations covered only that range.

106 
Chapter Three Forecasting
  Nonlinear and Multiple Regression Analysis 
 Simple linear regression may prove inadequate to handle certain problems because a linear 
model is inappropriate or because more than one predictor variable is involved. When non-
linear relationships are present, you should employ nonlinear regression; models that involve 
more than one predictor require the use of multiple regression analysis. While these analyses 
are beyond the scope of this text, you should be aware that they are often used. Multiple 
regression forecasting substantially increases data requirements. 
 3.11 MONITORING FORECAST ERROR 
 Many forecasts are made at regular intervals (e.g., weekly, monthly, quarterly). Because fore-
cast errors are the rule rather than the exception, there will be a succession of forecast errors. 
Tracking the forecast errors and analyzing them can provide useful insight on whether fore-
casts are performing satisfactorily. 
 There are a variety of possible sources of forecast errors, including the following:
 1. 
The model may be inadequate due to ( a ) the omission of an important variable, ( b ) a 
change or shift in the variable that the model cannot deal with (e.g., sudden appearance 
of a trend or cycle), or ( c ) the appearance of a new variable (e.g., new competitor). 
 2. 
Irregular variations may occur due to severe weather or other natural phenomena, 
 temporary shortages or breakdowns, catastrophes, or similar events. 
 3. 
Random variations. Randomness is the inherent variation that remains in the data after 
all causes of variation have been accounted for. There are always random variations. 
 A forecast is generally deemed to perform adequately when the errors exhibit only ran-
dom variations. Hence, the key to judging when to reexamine the validity of a particular 
forecasting technique is whether forecast errors are random. If they are not random, it is 
necessary to investigate to determine which of the other sources is present and how to cor-
rect the problem. 
 A very useful tool for detecting nonrandomness in errors is a   control chart . Errors 
are plotted on a control chart in the order that they occur, such as the one depicted in 
  Figure 3.11 . The centerline of the chart represents an error of zero. Note the two other lines, 
one above and one below the centerline. They are called the upper and lower control limits 
because they represent the upper and lower ends of the range of acceptable variation for 
the errors.  
 In order for the forecast errors to be judged “in control” (i.e., random), two things are 
necessary. One is that all errors are within the control limits. The other is that no patterns 
(e.g., trends, cycles, noncentered data) are present. Both can be accomplished by inspection. 
 Figure 3.12 illustrates some examples of nonrandom errors. 
 Technically speaking, one could determine if any values exceeded either control limit 
without actually plotting the errors, but the visual detection of patterns generally requires 
plotting the errors, so it is best to construct a control chart and plot the errors on the chart. 
 Control chart  A visual tool 
for monitoring forecast errors. 
 LO3.15 Construct control 
charts and use them to monitor 
forecast errors.
 FIGURE 3.11 
 Conceptual representation of a 
control chart 
Lower control limit
0
+
–
Range of
random
variability
Error
Upper control limit
Normal distribution of forecast errors
Forecast error
for period 8
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Time
 
 
 
 
Period

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
107
 To construct a control chart, first compute the MSE. The square root of MSE is used in 
practice as an estimate of the standard deviation of the distribution of errors. 4 That is, 
 
MSE
s 
 
 (3–18) 
 Control charts are based on the assumption that when errors are random, they will be dis-
tributed according to a normal distribution around a mean of zero. Recall that for a normal 
distribution, approximately 95.5 percent of the values (errors in this case) can be expected to 
fall within limits of 0  
  2 s  (i.e., 0  
  2 standard deviations), and approximately 99.7 percent 
of the values can be expected to fall within  
  3 s  of zero. With that in mind, the following for-
mulas can be used to obtain the upper control limit (UCL) and the lower control limit (LCL): 
UCL: 0
MSE
LCL: 0
MSE
z
z


 
 where
 z     Number of standard deviations from the mean 
 Combining these two formulas, we obtain the following expression for the control limits: 
 Control limits: 0
MSE
z

 
 (3–19) 
4The actual value could be computed as  
(
)
1
.
2
s
e
e
n


 

 
 FIGURE 3.12 
 Examples of nonrandomness 
Error above the
upper control limit
Trend
Cycling
Bias (too many points on one side of the centerline)
Point beyond a control limit
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
 Compute 2 s control limits for forecast errors when the MSE is 9.0. 
 E X A M P L E  1 1 
 S O L U T I O N 
 
MSE
3.0
UCL
0
2(3.0)
6.0
LCL
0
2(3.0)
6.0
s 



 


 
 

108 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Another method is the   tracking signal   .  It relates the cumulative forecast error to the aver-
age absolute error (i.e., MAD). The intent is to detect any   bias  in errors over time (i.e., a 
tendency for a sequence of errors to be positive or negative). The tracking signal is computed 
period by period using the following formula: 
 Tracking signal
(Actual
Forecast )
MAD
t
t
t
t
 

 
 (3–20) 
Values can be positive or negative. A value of zero would be ideal; limits of  
  4 or  
  5 
are often used for a range of acceptable values of the tracking signal. If a value outside the 
acceptable range occurs, that would be taken as a signal that there is bias in the forecast, and 
that corrective action is needed. 
 After an initial value of MAD has been determined, MAD can be updated and smoothed 
(SMAD) using exponential smoothing:
SMAD
MAD
Actual
Forecast
MAD
1
1
t
t
t
t
)
(
−
−
−

 

 
 (3–21) 
Tracking signal  The ratio of 
cumulative forecast error to the 
corresponding value of MAD, 
used to monitor a forecast. 
 Bias  Persistent tendency for 
forecasts to be greater or less 
than the actual values of a time 
series. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Monthly attendance at financial planning seminars for the past 24 months, and forecasts and 
errors for those months, are shown in the following table. Determine if the forecast is working 
using these approaches:
    1. A tracking signal, beginning with month 10, updating MAD with exponential smoothing. 
Use limits of  
  4 and       .2. 
   2. A control chart with 2 s  limits. Use data from the first eight months to develop the control 
chart, and then evaluate the remaining data with the control chart.
 Month 
 A  
(Attendance)  
 F  
(Forecast)  
 A      F  
(Error) 
 | e  | 
 Cumulative 
| e  | 
 1 
 47 
 43 
 4 
 4 
 4 
 2 
 51 
 44 
 7 
 7 
 11 
 3 
 54 
 50 
 4 
 4 
 15 
 4 
 55 
 51 
 4 
 4 
 19 
 5 
 49 
 54 
  5 
 5 
 24 
 6 
 46 
 48 
  2 
 2 
 26 
 7 
 38 
 46 
  8 
 8 
 34 
 8 
 32 
 44 
  12 
 12 
 46 
 9 
 25 
 35 
  10 
 10 
 56 
 10 
 24 
 26 
  2 
 2 
 58 
 11 
 30 
 25 
 5 
 5 
 
 12 
 35 
 32 
 3 
 3 
 
 13 
 44 
 34 
 10 
 10 
 
 14 
 57 
 50 
 7 
 7 
 
 15 
 60 
 51 
 9 
 9 
 
 16 
 55 
 54 
 1 
 1 
 
 17 
 51 
 55 
  4 
 4 
 
 18 
 48 
 51 
  3 
 3 
 
 19 
 42 
 50 
  8 
 8 
 
 20 
 30 
 43 
  13 
 13 
 
 21 
 28 
 38 
  10 
 10 
 
 22 
 25 
 27 
  2 
 2 
 
 23 
 35 
 27 
 8 
 8 
 
 24 
 38 
 32 
   6 
 6 
 
 
 
 
  11 
 
 
 E X A M P L E  1 2 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
109
S O L U T I O N
 1. 
The sum of absolute errors through the 10th month is 58. Hence, the initial MAD is 
58/10  5.8. The subsequent MADs are updated using the formula MADnew  MADold 
(|e| MADold). The results are shown in the following table.
  
The tracking signal for any month is
Cumulative error at that month
Updated MAD at that month
t 
(Month)
| e  |
MADt  MADt  1 
 .2(| e | MADt  1)
Cumulative 
Error
Tracking Signal 
 Cumulative 
Errort  MADt
10
20
20/5.800  3.45
11
5
5.640  5.8  .2(5  5.8)
15
15/5.640  2.66
12
3
5.112  5.640  .2(3  5.64)
12
12/5.112  2.35
13
10
6.090  5.112  .2(10  5.112)
2
2/6.090  0.33
14
7
6.272  6.090  .2(7  6.090)
5
5/6.272          0.80
15
9
6.818  6.272  .2(9  6.272)
14
14/6.818          2.05
16
1
5.654  6.818  .2(1  6.818)
15
15/5.654          2.65
17
4
5.323  5.654  .2(4  5.654)
11
11/5.323          2.07
18
3
4.858  5.323  .2(3  5.323)
8
8/4.858          1.65
19
8
5.486  4.858  .2(8  4.858)
0
0/5.486          0.00
20
13
6.989  5.486  .2(13  5.486)
13
13/6.989  1.86
21
10
7.591  6.989  .2(10  6.989)
23
23/7.591  3.03
22
2
6.473  7.591  .2(2  7.591)
25
25/6.473  3.86
23
8
6.778  6.473  .2(8  6.473)
17
17/6.778  2.51
24
6
6.622  6.778  .2(6  6.778)
11
11/6.622  1.66
  
Because the tracking signal is within 
 4 every month, there is no evidence of a problem.
 2. a.   Make sure that the average error is approximately zero, because a large average would 
suggest a biased forecast.
Average error
errors
11
24
.46
n
 
 
 
  
b.  Compute the standard deviation:
MSE
1
4
7
4
4
( 5)
( 2)
( 8)
( 12)
8
1
6.91
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
s
e
n








 
 
 
 


  
c.  Determine 2s control limits:
0
2s
0
2(6.91)
13.82 to
13.82



 

 d. 
(1)  Check that all errors are within the limits. (They are.)
  
(2)   Plot the data (see the following graph), and check for nonrandom patterns. Note the 
strings of positive and negative errors. This suggests nonrandomness (and that an 
improved forecast is possible). The tracking signal did not reveal this.
  
 
15
10
5
0
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
25
210
215
Month
Error

110 
Chapter Three Forecasting
  Like the tracking signal, a control chart focuses attention on deviations that lie outside pre-
determined limits. With either approach, however, it is desirable to check for possible patterns 
in the errors, even if all errors are within the limits. 
 If nonrandomness is found, corrective action is needed. That will result in less variability 
in forecast errors, and, thus, in narrower control limits. (Revised control limits must be com-
puted using the resulting forecast errors.)  Figure 3.13  illustrates the impact on control limits 
due to decreased error variability. 
 Comment The control chart approach is generally superior to the tracking signal approach. 
A major weakness of the tracking signal approach is its use of cumulative errors: Individual 
errors can be obscured so that large positive and negative values cancel each other. Con-
versely, with control charts, every error is judged individually. Thus, it can be misleading to 
rely on a tracking signal approach to monitor errors. In fact, the historical roots of the tracking 
signal approach date from before the first use of computers in business. At that time, it was 
much more difficult to compute standard deviations than to compute average deviations; for 
that reason, the concept of a tracking signal was developed. Now computers and calculators 
can easily provide standard deviations. Nonetheless, the use of tracking signals has persisted, 
probably because users are unaware of the superiority of the control chart approach. 
 3.12 CHOOSING A FORECASTING TECHNIQUE 
  Many different kinds of forecasting techniques are available, and no single technique works 
best in every situation. When selecting a technique, the manager or analyst must take a num-
ber of factors into consideration. 
 The two most important factors are  cost and  accuracy. How much money is budgeted for 
generating the forecast? What are the possible costs of errors, and what are the benefits that 
might accrue from an accurate forecast? Generally speaking, the higher the accuracy, the 
higher the cost, so it is important to weigh cost–accuracy trade-offs carefully. The best fore-
cast is not necessarily the most accurate or the least costly; rather, it is some combination of 
accuracy and cost deemed best by management. 
 Other factors to consider in selecting a forecasting technique include the availability of 
historical data; the availability of computer software; and the time needed to gather and ana-
lyze data and to prepare the forecast. The forecast horizon is important because some tech-
niques are more suited to long-range forecasts while others work best for the short range. For 
example, moving averages and exponential smoothing are essentially short-range techniques, 
since they produce forecasts for the  next  period. Trend equations can be used to project over 
much longer time periods. When using time-series data,  plotting the data  can be very helpful 
in choosing an appropriate method. Several of the qualitative techniques are well suited to 
 FIGURE 3.13 
 Removal of a pattern usually 
results in less variability, and, 
hence, narrower control limits 
+
0
–
Before
Time
+
0
–
After
Time
 LO3.16 Describe the key 
 factors and trade-offs to 
consider when choosing a 
forecasting technique.
A plot helps you to visualize the process and enables you to check for possible patterns (i.e., 
nonrandomness) within the limits that suggest an improved forecast is possible.5
5The theory and application of control charts and the various methods for detecting patterns in the data are cov-
ered in more detail in Chapter 10, on quality control.

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
111
long-range forecasts because they do not require historical data. The Delphi method and exec-
utive opinion methods are often used for long-range planning. New products and services lack 
historical data, so forecasts for them must be based on subjective estimates. In many cases, 
experience with similar items is relevant.  Table 3.4  provides a guide for selecting a forecasting 
method.  Table 3.5 provides additional perspectives on forecasts in terms of the time horizon.  
 TABLE 3.4 
 A guide to selecting an appropriate forecasting method 
 Forecasting 
Method 
 Amount of 
Historical Data 
 Data Pattern 
 Forecast 
Horizon 
 Preparation 
Time 
 Personnel 
Background 
 Moving average 
 2 to 30 observations 
 Variation around 
an average 
 Short 
 Short 
 Little sophistication 
 Simple exponential 
smoothing 
 5 to 10 observations 
 Variation around 
an average 
 Short 
 Short 
 Little sophistication 
 Trend-adjusted 
 exponential 
smoothing 
 10 to 15 observations 
 Trend 
 Short to medium 
 Short 
 Moderate 
sophistication 
 Trend models 
 10 to 20; for 
 seasonality at 
least 5 per season 
 Trend 
 Short to medium 
 Short 
 Moderate 
sophistication 
 Seasonal 
 Enough to see 
2 peaks and 
troughs 
 Handles cyclical 
and seasonal 
patterns 
 Short to medium 
 Short to moderate 
 Little sophistication 
 Causal regression 
models 
 10 observations per 
independent 
variable 
 Can handle 
complex patterns 
 Short, medium, or 
long 
 Long development 
time, short time 
for implementation 
 Considerable 
sophistication 
 Source: Adapted from J. Holton Wilson and Deborah Allison-Koerber, “Combining Subjective and Objective Forecasts Improves Results,”  Journal of Business Forecasting, Fall 1992, p. 4. 
Copyright © 1992 Institute of Business Forecasting. Used with permission. 
 TABLE 3.5 
 Forecast factors, by range of 
forecast 
 Factor 
 Short 
Range 
 Intermediate 
Range 
 Long 
Range 
 1. Frequency 
 Often 
 Occasional 
 Infrequent 
 2. Level of aggregation 
 Item 
 Product family 
 Total output 
 
 
 
 Type of 
product/service 
 3. Type of model 
 Smoothing 
 Projection 
 Managerial judgment 
 
 Projection 
 Seasonal 
 
 
 Regression 
 Regression 
 
 4. Degree of 
management 
involvement 
 Low 
 Moderate 
 High 
 5. Cost per forecast 
 Low 
 Moderate 
 High 
 In some instances, a manager might use more than one forecasting technique to obtain 
independent forecasts. If the different techniques produced approximately the same predic-
tions, that would give increased confidence in the results; disagreement among the forecasts 
would indicate that additional analysis may be needed. 

112 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 3.13 USING FORECAST INFORMATION 
  A manager can take a  reactive  or a  proactive  approach to a forecast. A reactive approach views 
forecasts as probable future demand, and a manager reacts to meet that demand (e.g., adjusts 
production rates, inventories, the workforce). Conversely, a proactive approach seeks to 
actively influence demand (e.g., by means of advertising, pricing, or product/service changes). 
 Generally speaking, a proactive approach requires either an explanatory model (e.g., 
regression) or a subjective assessment of the influence on demand. A manager might make 
two forecasts: one to predict what will happen under the status quo and a second one based on 
a “what if” approach, if the results of the status quo forecast are unacceptable. 
 3.14 COMPUTER SOFTWARE IN FORECASTING 
  Computers play an important role in preparing forecasts based on quantitative data. Their use 
allows managers to develop and revise forecasts quickly, and without the burden of manual 
computations. There is a wide range of software packages available for forecasting. The Excel 
templates on the text Web site are an example of a spreadsheet approach. There are templates 
for moving averages, exponential smoothing, linear trend equation, trend-adjusted exponen-
tial smoothing, and simple linear regression. Some templates are illustrated in the Solved 
Problems section at the end of the chapter. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 3.15 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Forecasts are the basis for many decisions and an essential input for matching supply and demand. 
Clearly, the more accurate an organization’s forecasts, the better prepared it will be to take advan-
tage of future opportunities and reduce potential risks. A worthwhile strategy can be to work to 
improve short-term forecasts. Better short-term forecasts will not only enhance profits through 
lower inventory levels, fewer shortages, and improved customer service, they also will enhance 
forecasting  credibility  throughout the organization: If short-term forecasts are inaccurate, why 
should other areas of the organization put faith in long-term forecasts? Also, the sense of con-
fidence accurate short-term forecasts would generate would allow allocating more resources to 
strategic and medium- to longer-term planning and less on short-term, tactical activities. 
 Maintaining accurate, up-to-date information on prices, demand, and other variables can 
have a significant impact on forecast accuracy. An organization also can do other things to 
improve forecasts. These do not involve searching for improved techniques but relate to the 
inverse relation of accuracy to the forecast horizon: Forecasts that cover shorter time frames 
tend to be more accurate than longer-term forecasts. Recognizing this, management might 
choose to devote efforts to  shortening the time horizon that forecasts must cover. Essentially, 
this means shortening the  lead time  needed to respond to a forecast. This might involve build-
ing  flexibility  into operations to permit rapid response to changing demands for products and 
services, or to changing volumes in quantities demanded; shortening the lead time required to 
obtain supplies, equipment, and raw materials or the time needed to train or retrain employ-
ees; or shortening the time needed to  develop new products and services. 
 Lean systems are demand driven; goods are produced to fulfill orders rather than to hold in 
inventory until demand arises. Consequently, they are far less dependent on short-term fore-
casts than more traditional systems. 
 In certain situations forecasting can be very difficult when orders have to be placed far in 
advance. This is the case, for example, when demand is sensitive to weather conditions, such 
as the arrival of spring, and there is a narrow window for demand. Orders for products or 
(continued)

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
113
goods to produce. The manufacturing company 
wants to make sure all or much of its finished 
product moves off the store shelves or dealer lots as quickly as pos-
sible. Unsold products represent millions of dollars tied up in inventory. 
 The flip side of this equation is the millions of dollars invested in PPE 
to manufacture the finished products. The company and its supporting 
supply chain must utilize as close to 100 percent of its PPE investments. 
Some manufacturing plants make products in lots of 100 or 1,000. Gen-
erally, it’s cost prohibitive to have production runs of one unit. So how 
do you extract maximum value from your investments and avoid having 
money tied up in unsold inventory? 
 DF and supply chain management (SCM) technologies try to solve 
this problem by generating a production plan to meet forecasted 
demand and extract maximum value from PPE, while reducing the 
amount of capital tied up in inventory. Usually, the demand forecast is 
pretty close to the actual outcomes, but there are times when demand 
forecasts don’t match the outcomes. In addition to unforeseen eco-
nomic events, a new product introduction may be a stellar success or 
an abysmal failure. In the case of a phenomenal success, the manufac-
turing plant may not be able to meet demand for its product. 
 Consider the case of the Chrysler PT Cruiser. It succeeded way 
beyond the demand forecast’s projections. Should it have started with 
manufacturing capacity to fulfill the runaway demand? Absolutely not. 
Given the additional millions of dollars of investment in PPE necessary 
to add that capacity, it would’ve backfired if the PT Cruiser had been a 
flop. The value provided by DF and supporting SCM technologies in this 
instance was the ability to add capacity to meet the amended forecast 
based on actual events. Demand forecasts can and do frequently miss 
their targets. The point to underscore here is that the underlying DF and 
supporting SCM technologies are critical to a company’s ability to react 
and respond in a coordinated manner when market conditions change. 
 The manufacturing company and its supply chain are able to ben-
efit from sharing information about the changed market conditions and 
responding to them in a coordinated manner. Despite best practices 
embedded in DF and SCM technologies to support this manner of col-
laboration, it plays out differently in the real world. 
 Ram  Reddy 
 Disregarding Demand Forecasting 
Technologies during Tough Economic 
Times Can Be a Costly Mistake 
 It’s no secret that the IT sector has felt the brunt of the economic down-
turn. Caught up in the general disillusionment with IT has been demand 
forecasting (DF) technologies. Many companies blame DF technologies 
for supply chain problems such as excess inventory. Pinning the blame 
on and discontinuing DF technologies is the equivalent of throwing out 
the baby with the bathwater. The DF misunderstanding stems from the 
fact that, despite sophisticated mathematical models and underlying 
technologies, the output from these systems is, at best, an educated 
guess about the future. 
 A forecast from these systems is only as good as the assumptions 
and data used to build the forecast. Even the best forecast fails when 
an unexpected event—such as a recession—clobbers the underlying 
assumptions. However, this doesn’t imply that DF technologies aren’t 
delivering the goods. But, unfortunately, many DF and supply chain tech-
nology implementations have recently fallen victim to this mindset. DF is 
part science and part art (or intuition)—having the potential to significantly 
impact a company’s bottom line. In this column, you’ll find an overview of 
how DF is supposed to work and contrast that with how most companies 
actually practice it. I’ll conclude with suggestions on how to avoid common 
mistakes implementing and using this particular class of technologies.  
 The Need for DF Systems 
 DF is crucial to minimizing working capital and associated expenses 
and extracting maximum value from a company’s capital investments 
in property, plant, and equipment (PPE). It takes a manufacturing com-
pany a lot of lead time to assemble and stage the raw materials and 
components to manufacture a given number of products per day. The 
manufacturing company, in turn, generates its sales forecast numbers 
using data from a variety of sources such as distribution channels, fac-
tory outlets, value-added resellers, historical sales data, and general 
macroeconomic data. Manufacturing companies can’t operate without 
a demand forecast because they won’t know the quantities of finished 
 READING 
 Gazing at the Crystal Ball 
ts as quickly as pos
ny
ed
services that relate to this (e.g., garden materials, advertising space) often have to be placed 
many months in advance—far beyond the ability of forecasters to accurately predict weather 
conditions and, hence, the timing of demand. In such cases, there may be pressures from 
salespeople who want low quotas and financial people who don’t want to have to deal with 
the cost of excess inventory to have conservative forecasts. Conversely, operations people 
may want more optimistic forecasts to reduce the risk of being blamed for possible shortages. 
 Sharing forecasts or demand data throughout the supply chain can improve forecast qual-
ity in the supply chain, resulting in lower costs and shorter lead times. For example, both 
Hewlett-Packard and IBM require resellers to include such information in their contracts. 
 The following reading provides additional insights on forecasting and supply chains. 
(continued)
(concluded)

114 
Chapter Three Forecasting
make educated estimates about future sales. These SMEs could range 
from distribution outlet owners to sales and marketing gurus and econo-
mists. Their intuition is typically combined with data (such as historical 
sales figures) to generate the forecast for the next quarter or year. During 
a recession, the SMEs tend to get overly pessimistic. The demand fore-
casts generated from this mindset lead to inventory shortages when the 
economy recovers. Similarly, during an economic expansion, the SMEs 
tend to have an overly rosy picture of the future. This optimism leads to 
inventory gluts when the economy starts to slow down. In both instances, 
blaming and invalidating DF and SCM technologies is counterproductive 
in the long run. 
 It’s very rare that a demand forecast and the actual outcome match 
100 percent. If it’s close enough to avoid lost sales or create an excess 
inventory situation, it’s deemed a success. DF and supporting SCM tech-
nologies are supposed to form a closed loop with actual sales at the cash 
register providing a feedback mechanism. This feedback is especially 
essential during economic upturns or downturns. It provides the neces-
sary information to a company and its supply chain to react in a coordi-
nated and efficient manner. 
 Don’t let the current disillusionment with DF and SCM technologies 
impede the decision-making process within your company. The intelli-
gent enterprise needs these technologies to effectively utilize its capital 
resources and efficiently produce to meet its sales forecasts. 
 Ram Reddy  is the author of  Supply Chains to Virtual Integration 
(McGraw-Hill, 2001). He is the president of Tactica Consulting Group, a 
technology and business strategy consulting company. 
 Questions 
 1. What is DF and why is it important? 
   2. Why might a company executive make bold predictions about future 
demand to Wall Street analysts? 
   3. How might an executive’s comments to Wall Street analysts affect 
demand forecasts, and what are the consequences of doing so?  
 Source: Ram Reddy, “Gazing at the Crystal Ball,”  Intelligent Enterprise, June 13, 
2002. Copyright © 2002 Pention Media, Inc. Used with permission. 
 How It Works in Real Life—
Worst Practices 
 A company prepares its forecast by taking into account data about past sales, 
feedback from distribution channels, qualitative assessments from field sales 
managers, and macroeconomic data. DF and SCM technologies take these 
inputs and add existing capacities within the company and across the supply 
chain to generate a production plan for optimum financial performance. 
 There’s been incredible pressure on executives of publicly traded 
companies to keep up stock prices. This pressure, among other rea-
sons, may cause manufacturing company executives to make bold pro-
jections to external financial analysts (or Wall Street) about future sales 
without using the demand forecast generated from the bottom up. When 
the company realizes this disparity between the initial projection and 
the forecast, the forecast is changed to reflect the projections made by 
the company’s officers, negating its accuracy. 
 The company arbitrarily sets sales targets for various regions to 
meet Wall Street numbers that are totally out of sync with input provided 
by the regional sales managers for the DF process. Even though the 
regional sales managers’ input may have a qualitative element (art), 
they tend to be more accurate, given their proximity to the customers 
in the region. Unfortunately, the arbitrary sales targets make their way 
back to the supply chain, and the result is often excessive inventory 
build-up starting at the distribution channels to the upstream suppliers. 
 Seeing the inventory pile up, the manufacturing company may decide 
to shut down a production line. This action affects upstream suppliers 
who had procured raw materials and components to meet the execu-
tive-mandated production numbers, which may cause them to treat any 
future forecasted numbers with suspicion. Most cost efficiencies that 
could be obtained through planned procurement of raw materials and 
components go out the window. It’s very likely that the companies try to 
blame DF and SCM technologies for failing to provide a responsive and 
efficient supply chain, even though the fault may lie in the company’s 
misuse of the technologies and not the technologies themselves.  
 Guarding against the Extremes 
 Earlier in this column, I said that DF is part art or intuition and part sci-
ence. The art/intuition part comes in when subject-matter experts (SMEs) 
 Forecasts are vital inputs for the design and the operation of the productive systems because they help 
managers to anticipate the future. 
 Forecasting techniques can be classified as qualitative or quantitative. Qualitative techniques rely on 
judgment, experience, and expertise to formulate forecasts; quantitative techniques rely on the use of 
historical data or associations among variables to develop forecasts. Some of the techniques are simple, 
and others are complex. Some work better than others, but no technique works all the time. Moreover, all 
forecasts include a certain degree of inaccuracy, and allowance should be made for this. The techniques 
generally assume that the same underlying causal system that existed in the past will continue to exist in 
the future. 
 The qualitative techniques described in this chapter include consumer surveys, salesforce estimates, 
executive opinions, and manager and staff opinions. Two major quantitative approaches are described: 
analysis of time-series data and associative techniques. The time-series techniques rely strictly on the 
examination of historical data; predictions are made by projecting past movements of a variable into 
 SUMMARY 
(concluded)

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
115
the future without considering specific factors that might influence the variable. Associative techniques 
attempt to explicitly identify influencing factors and to incorporate that information into equations that 
can be used for predictive purposes. 
 All forecasts tend to be inaccurate; therefore, it is important to provide a measure of accuracy. It is 
possible to compute several measures of forecast accuracy that help managers to evaluate the perfor-
mance of a given technique and to choose among alternative forecasting techniques. Control of forecasts 
involves deciding whether a forecast is performing adequately, typically using a control chart. 
 When selecting a forecasting technique, a manager must choose a technique that will serve the 
intended purpose at an acceptable level of cost and accuracy. 
 The various forecasting techniques are summarized in  Table 3.6 .  Table 3.7  lists the formulas used in 
the forecasting techniques and in the methods of measuring their accuracy. Note that the Excel templates 
on the text Web site that accompanies this book are especially useful for tedious calculations. 
 TABLE 3.6 
 Forecasting approaches 
 
 Approaches 
 Brief Description 
 Judgment/opinion: 
 Consumer surveys 
 Questioning consumers on future plans 
 
 Direct-contact composites 
 Joint estimates obtained from salespeople or customer service people 
 
 Executive opinion 
 Finance, marketing, and manufacturing managers join to prepare forecast 
 
 Delphi technique 
 Series of questionnaires answered anonymously by knowledgeable people; succes-
sive  questionnaires are based on information obtained from previous surveys 
 
 Outside opinion 
 Consultants or other outside experts prepare the forecast 
 Statistical: 
 Time series: 
 
 
 Naive 
 Next value in a series will equal the previous value in a comparable period 
 
 Moving averages 
 Forecast is based on an average of recent values 
 
 Exponential smoothing 
 Sophisticated form of weighted moving average 
 
 Associative models: 
 
 
 Simple regression 
 Values of one variable are used to predict values of a dependent variable 
 
 Multiple regression 
 Two or more variables are used to predict values of a dependent variable 
 TABLE 3.7 
 Summary of formulas 
 Technique 
 Formula 
 Definitions 
 MAD 
 
∑e
n
n
MAD 
 
 MAD    Mean absolute deviation 
 e     Error,  A      F 
 n     Number of errors 
 MSE 
∑e
n
n
MSE
1
2


 MSE    Mean squared error 
 n     Number of errors 
    1. Demand forecasts are essential inputs for many business decisions; they help managers decide how 
much supply or capacity will be needed to match expected demand, both within the organization and 
in the supply chain. 
   2. Because of random variations in demand, it is likely that the forecast will not be perfect, so managers 
need to be prepared to deal with forecast errors. 
   3. Other, nonrandom factors might also be present, so it is necessary to monitor forecast errors to check 
for nonrandom patterns in forecast errors. 
 4. It is important to choose a forecasting technique that is cost-effective and one that minimizes forecast 
error. 
 KEY POINTS 

116 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 Technique 
 Formula 
 Definitions 
 MAPE 
 
e
n
t
t
MAPE
Actual
100
n∑
 
 MAPE    Mean absolute percent error 
 n     Number of errors 
 Moving average 
forecast 
 
=
∑
=
−
F
A
n
t
i
n
t
i
1
 
 A     Demand in period  t      i 
 n     Number of periods 
 Weighted average 
  Ft   wt – n (At – n)  . . .  wt    2 (At    2)  wt    1
(At    1)  wt    1 (At    1)  . . .  wt – n (At – n)  
 W  t      Weight for the period  t 
 A  t      Actual value in period  t 
 Exponential smoothing 
forecast 
  Ft  Ft    1  (At    1  Ft    1) 
      Smoothing factor 
 Linear trend forecast 
 Ft  a  bt
  where 
b
n ty
t y
n t
t
a
y
b t
n
y
bt
(
)
or
2
2


  

 
 
 

 
 a      y   intercept 
 b     Slope 
 Trend-adjusted 
forecast 
 TAFt  1  St  Tt 
 where 
 
S
A
T
T
T
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
t
TAF
(
TAF )
(TAF
TAF
)
1
1
1

 


 





 
 t     Current period 
 TAF  t     1      Trend-adjusted forecast for 
next period 
 S      Previous forecast plus 
smoothed error 
 T     Trend component 
 Linear regression 
forecast 
 Yc  a  bx 
 where 
b
n
xy
x
y
n
x
x
a
y
b x
n
y
bx
(
)
(
)(
)
(
)
(
)
or
2
2


 


 
 
 

 
 y  c      Computed value of dependent 
variable 
 x     Predictor (independent) variable 
 b     Slope of the line 
 a     Value of  y  c   when  x     0 
 Standard error of 
estimate 
 
S
y
y
n
e
c
(
)
2
2




 
 S  e      Standard error of estimate 
 y      y  value of each data point 
 n     Number of data points 
 Tracking signal 
 
 ∑e
t
n
TS
MAD  
 
 Control limits 
 
z
z
UCL
0
MSE
LCL
0
MSE




 


MSE
standard deviation
Number of standard deviations;
2 and 3 are typical values
z
 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
117
 associative model, 82 
 bias, 108 
 centered moving average, 98 
 control chart, 106 
 correlation, 104 
 cycle, 84 
 Delphi method, 83 
 error, 80 
 exponential smoothing, 89 
 focus forecasting, 91 
 forecast, 75 
 irregular variation, 84 
 judgmental forecasts, 82 
 least squares line, 101 
 linear trend equation, 92 
 mean absolute deviation 
(MAD), 81 
 mean absolute percent error 
(MAPE), 81 
 mean squared error (MSE), 81 
 moving average, 86 
 naive forecast, 84 
 predictor variables, 101 
 random variations, 84 
 regression, 101 
 seasonal relative, 97 
 seasonal variations, 95 
 seasonality, 84 
 standard error of estimate, 103 
 time series, 84 
 time-series forecasts, 82 
 tracking signal, 108 
 trend, 84 
 trend-adjusted exponential 
smoothing, 95 
 weighted average, 88 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Forecasts based on averages. Given the following data: 
Period
Number of 
Complaints
1
60
2
65
3
55
4
58
5
64
 Prepare a forecast for period 6 using each of these approaches:
 a. The appropriate naive approach. 
 b. A three-period moving average. 
 c. A weighted average using weights of .50 (most recent), .30, and .20. 
 d. Exponential smoothing with a smoothing constant of .40. 
 Problem 1 
 Solution 
 Step by step
    a. Plot the data to see if there is a pattern. Here we have only variations around an average (i.e., no 
trend or cycles). Therefore, the most recent value of the series becomes the next forecast: 64. 
 b. Use the latest values.  MA
55
58
64
3
59
3 



 
 c.  F     .20(55)    .30(58)    .50(64)    60.4 
 d. Start with period 2. Use the data in period 1 as the forecast for period 2, and then use exponential 
smoothing for successive forecasts. 
Period
Number of 
Complaints
Forecast
Calculations
1
60
[The previous value of the series is used 
2
65
60
as the starting forecast.]
3
55
62
60  .40(65  60)  62
4
58
59.2
62  .40(55  62)  59.2
5
64
58.72
59.2  .40(58  59.2)  58.72
6
60.83
58.72  .40(64  58.72)  60.83

118 
Chapter Three Forecasting
You also can obtain the forecasts and a plot using an Excel template, as shown:
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
Using seasonal relatives.  Apple’s Citrus Fruit Farm ships boxed fruit anywhere in the world. Using 
the following information, a manager wants to forecast shipments for the first four months of 
next year. 
Month
Seasonal 
Relative
Month
Seasonal 
Relative
Jan. 
1.2
Jul. 
0.8
Feb. 
1.3
Aug. 
0.6
Mar. 
1.3
Sep. 
0.7
Apr. 
1.1
Oct. 
1.0
May. 
0.8
Nov. 
1.1
Jun. 
0.7
Dec. 
1.4
 The monthly forecast equation being used is:
402
3
F
t
t 

 where
t 0     January of  last  year 
F  t      Forecast of shipments for month  t 
 Problem 2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 
    a. Determine trend amounts for the first four months of  next  year: January,  t     24; February,  t     25; 
etc. Thus,
 
402
3(24)
474
402
3(25)
477
402
3(26)
480
402
3(27)
483
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
F
F
F
F












 
 b. Multiply each monthly trend by the corresponding seasonal relative for that month. 
  
Month
Seasonal 
Relative
Forecast
Jan. 
1.2
474(1.2)  568.8
Feb. 
1.3
477(1.3)  620.1
Mar. 
1.3
480(1.3)  624.0
Apr. 
1.1
483(1.1)  531.3

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
119
Linear trend line.  Plot the data on a graph, and verify visually that a linear trend line is appropriate. 
Develop a linear trend equation for the following data. Then use the equation to predict the next two 
values of the series. 
 Problem 3 
 Solution 
Period
Demand
1
44
2
52
3
50
4
54
5
55
6
55
7
60
8
56
9
62
 A plot of the data indicates that a linear trend line is appropriate: 
 
65
60
55
50
45
2
4
6
8
10
Period
Demand
1
3
5
7
9
11
Trend line
Period, 
t
t 2
Demand, 
y
ty
1
  1
44
  44
2
  4
52
104
3
  9
50
150
 t  45 and  t 2  285
4
 16
54
216
5
 25
55
275
6
 36
55
330
7
 49
60
420
8
 64
56
448
 9
 81
  62
   558
45
285
488
2,545
(
)
9(2,545)
45(488)
9(285)
45(45)
1.75
488
1.75(45)
9
45.47
2
2
b
n ty
t y
n t
t
a
y
b t
n


  

 




  




 
 Thus, the trend equation is  Ft     45.47    1.75 t. The next two forecasts are:
45.47
1.75(10)
62.97
45.47
1.75(11)
64.72
10
11
F
F






 

120 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 You also can use an Excel template to obtain the coefficients and a plot. Simply replace the existing 
data in the template with your data.   
Seasonal relatives.  Obtain estimates of quarter relatives for these data using the centered moving 
average method:
YEAR
1
2
3
4
Quarter:
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
Demand:
14
18
35
46
28
36
60
71
45
54
84
88
58
 Problem 4 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 
 Note that each season has an  even  number of data points. When an even-numbered moving average 
is used (in this case, a four-period moving average), the “centered value” will not correspond to an 
actual data point; the center of 4 is  between  the second and third data points. To correct for this, a  sec-
ond  set of moving averages must be computed using the MA 4  values. The MA 2  values are centered 
between the MA 4  and “line up” with actual data points. For example, the first MA 4  value is 28.25. It 
is centered between 18 and 35 (i.e., between quarter 2 and quarter 3). When the average of the first 
two MA 4 values is taken (i.e., MA 2 ) and centered, it lines up with the 35 and, hence, with quarter 3. 
 So, whenever an even-numbered moving average is used as a centered moving average (e.g., 
MA 4 , MA 12 ), a second moving average, a two-period moving average, is used to achieve correspon-
dence with periods. This procedure is not needed when the number of periods in the centered moving 
average is odd. 
Year
Quarter
Demand
 MA4
 MA2
 Demand/MA2
1 
1
14
2
18
28.25
31.75
36.25
42.50
48.75
53.00
57.50
63.50
67.75
71.00
3
35
30.00
1.17
4
46
34.00
1.35
2 
1
28
39.38
0.71
2
36
45.63
0.79
3
60
50.88
1.18
4
71
55.25
1.29
3 
1
45
60.50
0.74
2
54
65.63
0.82
3
84
69.38
1.21
4
88
4 
1
58

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
121
QUARTER
1
2
3
4
0.71
0.79
1.17
1.35
0.74
0.82
1.18
1.29
1.45
1.61
1.21
2.64
3.56
Average for the quarter:
0.725
0.805
1.187
1.320
 The sum of these relatives is 4.037. Multiplying each by 4.00/4.037 will standardize the relatives, 
making their total equal 4.00. The resulting relatives are quarter 1, .718; quarter 2, .798; quarter 3, 
1.176; quarter 4, 1.308.  
 Problem 5 
Regression line.  A large midwestern retailer has developed a graph that summarizes the effect of 
advertising expenditures on sales volume. Using the graph, determine an equation of the form 
y      a      bx that describes this relationship. 
3
2
1
2
4
6
8
10
x
Advertising ($ thousands)
Sales ($ millions)
 
 Solution 
 The linear equation has the form  y      a      bx,  where  a  is the value of  y  when  x     0 (i.e., where the 
line intersects the  y  axis) and  b  is the slope of the line (the amount by which  y  changes for a one-unit 
change in  x ). 
 Accordingly,  a     1 and  b     (3    1)/(10    0)    .2, so  y      a      bx  becomes  y     1    .2 x. [ Note: 
(3    1) is the change in  y, and (10    0) is the change in  x. ] 
 Problem 6 
Regression analysis.  The owner of a small hardware store has noted a sales pattern for window locks 
that seems to parallel the number of break-ins reported each week in the newspaper. The data are: 
 Sales: 
 46 
 18 
 20 
 22 
 27 
 34 
 14 
 37 
 30 
 Break-ins: 
 9 
 3 
 3 
 5 
 4 
 7 
 2 
 6 
 4 
 a. Plot the data to determine which type of equation, linear or nonlinear, is appropriate. 
 b. Obtain a regression equation for the data. 
 c. Estimate average sales when the number of break-ins is five. 
 Solution 
 a.  
60
40
20
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of break-ins
Sales
 
 The graph supports a linear relationship. 

122 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 b. You can obtain the regression coefficients using the appropriate Excel template. Simply replace 
the existing data for  x  and  y  with your data.  Note:  Be careful to enter the values for the variable 
you want to predict as  y  values. In this problem, the objective is to predict sales, so the sales val-
ues are entered in the  y column. The equation is  y  c      7.129    4.275 x. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 c. For  x     5,  y  c      7.129    4.275(5)    28.50. 
 Problem 7 
 Accuracy of forecasts.  The manager of a large manufacturer of industrial pumps must choose between 
two alternative forecasting techniques. Both techniques have been used to prepare forecasts for a six-
month period. Using MAD as a criterion, which technique has the better performance record?
FORECAST
Month
Demand
Technique 1
Technique 2
1 
492
488
495
2 
470
484
482
3 
485
480
478
4 
493
490
488
5 
498
497
492
6 
492
493
493
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 
Check that each forecast has an average error of approximately zero. (See computations that follow.)
Month
Demand
Technique 1
e
| e |
Technique 2
e
| e |
1 
492
488
4
4
495
3
3
2 
470
484
14
14
482
12
12
3 
485
480
5
5
478
7
7
4 
493
490
3
3
488
5
5
5 
498
497
1
1
492
6
6
6 
492
493
1
  1
493
1
  1
2
28
2
34
MAD
28
6
4.67
MAD
34
6
5.67
1
2
e
n
e
n
 


 


 

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
123
 Technique 1 is superior in this comparison because its MAD is smaller, although six observations 
would generally be too few on which to base a realistic comparison. 
 Problem 8 
Control chart.  Given the demand data that follow, prepare a naive forecast for periods 2 through 10. 
Then determine each forecast error, and use those values to obtain 2 s  control limits. If demand in 
the next two periods turns out to be 125 and 130, can you conclude that the forecasts are in control? 
 Period: 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 Demand: 
 118 
 117 
 120 
 119 
 126 
 122 
 117 
 123 
 121 
 124 
 Solution 
For a naive forecast, each period’s demand becomes the forecast for the next period. Hence, the 
forecasts and errors are:
Period
Demand
Forecast
Error
 Error2
1
118
—
—
—
2
117
118
1
1
3
120
117
3
9
4
119
120
1
1
5
126
119
7
49
6
122
126
4
16
7
117
122
5
25
8
123
117
6
36
9
121
123
2
4
10
124
121
   3
    9
6
150
Error
1
150
9
1
4.33
(
Number of errors)
2
s
n
n







 The control limits are 2(4.33)       8.66. 
 The forecast for period 11 was 124. Demand turned out to be 125, for an error of 125    124      1. 
This is within the limits of    8.66. If the next demand is 130 and the naive forecast is 125 (based on 
the period 11 demand of 125), the error is   5. Again, this is within the limits, so you cannot con-
clude the forecast is not working properly. With more values—at least five or six—you could plot 
the errors to see whether you could detect any patterns suggesting the presence of nonrandomness.  
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What are the main advantages that quantitative techniques for forecasting have over qualitative 
techniques? What limitations do quantitative techniques have? 
 2. What are some of the consequences of poor forecasts? Explain. 
 3. List the specific weaknesses of each of these approaches to developing a forecast:
 a. Consumer surveys. 
 b. Salesforce composite. 
 c. Committee of managers or executives. 
 4. Why are forecasts generally wrong? 
 5. What is the purpose of establishing control limits for forecast errors? 
 6. What factors would you consider in deciding whether to use wide or narrow control limits for 
forecasts? 
 7. Contrast the use of MAD and MSE in evaluating forecasts. 
 8. What advantages as a forecasting tool does exponential smoothing have over moving averages? 
 9. How does the number of periods in a moving average affect the responsiveness of the forecast? 
 10. What factors enter into the choice of a value for the smoothing constant in exponential smoothing? 
 11. How accurate is your local five-day weather forecast? Support your answer with actual data. 
 12. Explain how using a centered moving average with a length equal to the length of a season elimi-
nates seasonality from a time series. 
 13. Contrast the terms  sales and  demand. 

124 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 14. Contrast the reactive and proactive approaches to forecasting. Give several examples of types of 
organizations or situations in which each type is used. 
 15. Explain how flexibility in production systems relates to the forecast horizon and forecast accuracy. 
 16. How is forecasting in the context of a supply chain different from forecasting for just a single 
organization? List possible supply chain benefits and discuss potential difficulties in doing supply 
chain forecasting. 
 17. Which type of forecasting approach, qualitative or quantitative, is better? 
 18. Suppose a software producer is about to release a new version of its popular software. What infor-
mation do you think it would take into account in forecasting initial sales? 
 19. Choose the type of forecasting technique (survey, Delphi, averaging, seasonal, naive, trend, or 
associative) that would be most appropriate for predicting
 a. Demand for Mother’s Day greeting cards. 
 b. Popularity of a new television series. 
 c. Demand for vacations on the moon. 
 d. The impact a price increase of 10 percent would have on sales of orange marmalade. 
 e. Demand for toothpaste in a particular supermarket. 
 1. It has been said that forecasting using exponential smoothing is like driving a car by looking in the 
rear-view mirror. What are the conditions that would have to exist for driving a car that are analo-
gous to the assumptions made when using exponential smoothing? 
 2. What capability would an organization have to have to not need forecasts? 
 3. When a new business is started, or a patent idea needs funding, venture capitalists or investment 
bankers will want to see a business plan that includes forecast information related to a profit and 
loss statement. What type of forecasting information do you suppose would be required? 
 4. Discuss how you would manage a poor forecast. 
 5. Omar has heard from some of his customers that they will probably cut back on order sizes in the 
next quarter. The company he works for has been reducing its sales force due to falling demand and 
he worries that he could be next if his sales begin to fall off. Believing that he may be able to con-
vince his customers not to cut back on orders, he turns in an optimistic forecast of his next quarter 
sales to his manager. What are the pros and cons of doing that? 
 6. Give three examples of unethical conduct involving forecasting and the ethical principle each violates.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. Explain the trade-off between responsiveness and stability in a forecasting system that uses 
 time-series data. 
 2. Who needs to be involved in preparing forecasts? 
 3. How has technology had an impact on forecasting? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. A commercial bakery has recorded sales (in dozens) for three products, as shown below:
 PROBLEMS 
Day
Blueberry 
Muffins
Cinnamon 
Buns
Cupcakes
1
30
18
45
2
34
17
26
3
32
19
27
4
34
19
23
5
35
22
22
6
30
23
48
7
34
23
29
8
36
25
20
9
29
24
14
10
31
26
18
11
35
27
47
12
31
28
26
13
37
29
27
14
34
31
24
15
33
33
22

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
125
 a. Predict orders for the following day for each of the products using an appropriate naive method. 
 Hint: Plot each data set. 
 b. What should the use of  sales data instead of  demand imply? 
 2. National Scan, Inc., sells radio frequency inventory tags. Monthly sales for a seven-month period 
were as follows:
Month
Sales 
(000 units)
Feb. 
19
Mar. 
18
Apr. 
15
May 
20
Jun. 
18
Jul. 
22
Aug. 
20
 a. Plot the monthly data on a sheet of graph paper. 
 b. Forecast September sales volume using each of the following:
 
(1) The naive approach. 
 
(2) A five month moving average. 
 
(3) A weighted average using .60 for August, .30 for July, and .10 for June. 
 
(4)  Exponential smoothing with a smoothing constant equal to  .20, assuming a a March 
 forecast of 19(000). 
 
(5) A linear trend equation. 
 c. Which method seems least appropriate? Why? ( Hint: Refer to your plot from part  a. ) 
 d. What does use of the term  sales rather than  demand presume? 
 3. A dry cleaner uses exponential smoothing to forecast equipment usage at its main plant. August 
usage was forecasted to be 88 percent of capacity; actual usage was 89.6 percent of capacity. A 
smoothing constant of .1 is used. 
 a. Prepare a forecast for September. 
 b. Assuming actual September usage of 92 percent, prepare a forecast for October usage. 
 4. An electrical contractor’s records during the last five weeks indicate the number of job requests: 
Week:
1
2
3
4
5
Requests:
20
22
18
21
22
  
 Predict the number of requests for week 6 using each of these methods:
 a. Naive. 
 b. A four-period moving average. 
 c. Exponential smoothing with       .30. Use 20 for week 2 forecast. 
 5. A cosmetics manufacturer’s marketing department has developed a linear trend equation that can be 
used to predict annual sales of its popular Hand & Foot Cream.
80
15
F
t
t 

 
  
 where
 F  t      Annual sales (000 bottles) 
 t is in years 
 a. Are annual sales increasing or decreasing? By how much? 
 b. Predict annual sales for year 6 using the equation. 
 6. From the following graph, determine the equation of the linear trend line for time-share sales for 
Glib Marketing, Inc. 

126 
Chapter Three Forecasting
  
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Year
Sales (units)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
Annual Sales, Glib Sales, Inc.
 7. Freight car loadings over a 12-year period at a busy port are as follows:
Week
Number
Week
Number
Week
Number
1 
220
  7 
350
13 
460
2 
245
  8 
360
14 
475
3 
280
  9 
400
15 
500
4 
275
10
380
16 
510
5 
300
11 
420
17 
525
6 
310
12 
450
18 
541
 a. Determine a linear trend line for expected freight car loadings. 
 b. Use the trend equation to predict expected loadings for weeks 20 and 21. 
 c. The manager intends to install new equipment when the volume exceeds 800 loadings per week. 
Assuming the current trend continues, the loading volume will reach that level in approximately 
what week? 
 8. Air travel on Mountain Airlines for the past 18 weeks was:
Week
Passengers
Week
Passengers
 1 
405
10 
440
 2 
410
11 
446
 3 
420
12 
451
 4 
415
13 
455
 5 
412
14 
464
 6 
420
15 
466
 7 
424
16 
474
 8 
433
17 
476
 9 
438
18 
482
 a. Explain why an averaging technique would not be appropriate for forecasting. 
 b. Use an appropriate technique to develop a forecast for the expected number of passengers for 
the next three weeks.  
 9.  a.   Obtain the linear trend equation for the following data on new checking accounts at Fair Savings 
Bank and use it to predict expected new checking accounts for periods 16 through 19. 
Period
New 
Accounts
Period
New 
Accounts
Period
New 
Accounts
 1
200
 6 
232
11 
281
 2 
214
 7 
248
12 
275
 3 
211
 8 
250
13 
280
 4 
228
 9 
253
14 
288
 5 
235
10 
267
15 
310
 b. Use trend-adjusted smoothing with       .3 and       .2 to smooth the new account data in part  a. 
What is the forecast for period 16?  

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
127
  10. After plotting demand for four periods, an emergency room manager has concluded that a trend-
adjusted exponential smoothing model is appropriate to predict future demand. The initial estimate of 
trend is based on the net change of 30 for the  three periods from 1 to 4, for an average of   10 units. 
Use       .5 and       .4, and TAF of 250 for period 5. Obtain forecasts for periods 6 through 10.  
Period
Actual
Period
Actual
 1 
210
 6 
265
 2 
224
 7 
272
 3 
229
 8 
285
 4 
240
 9 
294
 5 
255
10 
 11. A manager of a store that sells and installs spas wants to prepare a forecast for January, February, 
and March of next year. Her forecasts are a combination of trend and seasonality. She uses the fol-
lowing equation to estimate the trend component of monthly demand:  Ft     70    5 t, where  t     0 
in June of last year. Seasonal relatives are 1.10 for January, 1.02 for February, and .95 for March. 
What demands should she predict? 
 12. The following equation summarizes the trend portion of quarterly sales of condominiums over a 
long cycle. Sales also exhibit seasonal variations. Using the information given, prepare a forecast 
of sales for each quarter of next year (not this year), and the first quarter of the year following that.
 
40
6.5
2 2
F
t
t
t 


 
 where
 F  t      Unit sales 
 t     0 at the first quarter of last year 
Quarter
Relative
1
1.1
2
1.0
3
 .6
4
1.3
 13. Compute seasonal relatives for this data using the SA method: 
 14. A tourist center is open on weekends (Friday, Saturday, and Sunday). The owner-manager hopes 
to improve scheduling of part-time employees by determining seasonal relatives for each of these 
days. Data on recent traffic at the center have been tabulated and are shown in the following table:
WEEK
1
2
3
4
5
6
Friday
149
154
152
150
159
163
Saturday
250
255
260
268
273
276
Sunday
166
162
171
173
176
183
 a. Develop seasonal relatives for the shop using the centered moving average method. 
 b. Develop seasonal relatives for the shop using the SA method (see Example 8B). 
 c. Explain why the results of the two methods correlate the way they do. 
 15. The manager of a fashionable restaurant open Wednesday through Saturday says that the restau-
rant does about 35 percent of its business on Friday night, 30 percent on Saturday night, and 
20 percent on Thursday night. What seasonal relatives would describe this situation? 
 16. Obtain estimates of daily relatives for the number of customers at a restaurant for the evening 
meal, given the following data. 
 a. Use the centered moving average method. ( Hint: Use a seven-day moving average.) 
 b. Use the SA method. 
Quarter
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
1
2
 3
 7
 4
2
6
10
18
14
3
2
 6
 8
 8
4
5
 9
15
11

128 
Chapter Three Forecasting
Day
Number 
Served
Day
Number 
Served
 1 
80
15 
84
 2 
75
16 
78
 3 
78
17 
83
 4 
95
18 
96
 5 
130
19 
135
 6 
136
20 
140
 7 
40
21 
44
 8 
82
22 
87
 9 
77
23 
82
10 
80
24 
88
11 
94
25 
99
12 
131
26 
144
13 
137
27 
144
14 
42
28 
48
 17. A pharmacist has been monitoring sales of a certain over-the-counter pain reliever. Daily sales 
during the last 15 days were
Day:
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
Number sold:
36
38
42
44
48
49
50
49
52
Day:
10
11
12
13
14
15
Number sold:
48
52
55
54
56
57
 a. Which method would you suggest using to predict future sales—a linear trend equation or 
trend-adjusted exponential smoothing? Why? 
 b. If you learn that on some days the store ran out of the specific pain reliever, would that knowl-
edge cause you any concern? Explain. 
 c. Assume that the data refer to demand rather than sales. Using trend-adjusted smoothing with an 
initial forecast of 50 for day 8, an initial trend estimate of 2, and             .3, develop forecasts 
for days 9 through 16. What is the MSE for the eight forecasts for which there are actual data?  
 18. New car sales for a dealer in Cook County, Illinois, for the past year are shown in the following 
table, along with monthly indexes (seasonal relatives), which are supplied to the dealer by the 
regional distributor.
Month
Units 
Sold
Index
Month
Units 
Sold
Index
Jan. 
640
0.80
Jul. 
765
0.90
Feb. 
648
0.80
Aug. 
805
1.15
Mar. 
630
0.70
Sept. 
840
1.20
Apr. 
761
0.94
Oct. 
828
1.20
May 
735
0.89
Nov. 
840
1.25
Jun. 
850
1.00
Dec. 
800
1.25
 a. Plot the data. Does there seem to be a trend? 
 b. Deseasonalize car sales. 
 c. Plot the deseasonalized data on the same graph as the original data. Comment on the two 
graphs. 
 d. Assuming no proactive approach on the part of management, discuss (no calculations neces-
sary) how you would forecast sales for the first three months of the next year. 
 e. What action might management consider based on your findings in part  b? 
   19. The following table shows a tool and die company’s quarterly sales for the current year. What sales 
would you predict for the first quarter of next year? Quarter relatives are SR 1     1.10, SR 2     .99, 
SR 3     .90, and SR 4     1.01. 
Quarter
 1
 2
 3
 4
Sales
88
99
108
141.4

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
129
 20. An analyst must decide between two different forecasting techniques for weekly sales of roller blades: 
a linear trend equation and the naive approach. The linear trend equation is  F  t      124    2 t, and it was 
developed using data from periods 1 through 10. Based on data for periods 11 through 20 as shown in 
the table, which of these two methods has the greater accuracy if MAD and MSE are used?  
t
Units Sold
11
147
12
148
13
151
14
145
15
155
16
152
17
155
18
157
19
160
20
165
 21. Two different forecasting techniques (F1 and F2) were used to forecast demand for cases of bot-
tled water. Actual demand and the two sets of forecasts are as follows:
PREDICTED 
DEMAND
Period
Demand
F1
F2
1
68
66
66
2
75
68
68
3
70
72
70
4
74
71
72
5
69
72
74
6
72
70
76
7
80
71
78
8
78
74
80
 a. Compute MAD for each set of forecasts. Given your results, which forecast appears to be more 
accurate? Explain. 
 b. Compute the MSE for each set of forecasts. Given your results, which forecast appears to be 
more accurate? 
 c. In practice,  either MAD  or MSE would be employed to compute forecast errors. What factors 
might lead a manager to choose one rather than the other? 
 d. Compute MAPE for each data set. Which forecast appears to be more accurate? 
 22. Two independent methods of forecasting based on judgment and experience have been prepared 
each month for the past 10 months. The forecasts and actual sales are as follows:
Month
Sales
Forecast 1
Forecast 2
 1 
770
771
769
 2 
789
785
787
 3 
794
790
792
 4 
780
784
798
 5 
768
770
774
 6 
772
768
770
 7 
760
761
759
 8 
775
771
775
 9 
786
784
788
10 
790
788
788
 a. Compute the MSE and MAD for each forecast. Does either forecast seem superior? Explain. 
 b. Compute MAPE for each forecast. 
 c. Prepare a naive forecast for periods 2 through 11 using the given sales data. Compute each of 
the following; (1) MSE, (2) MAD, (3) tracking signal at month 10, and (4) 2 s control limits. 
How do the naive results compare with the other two forecasts? 

130 
Chapter Three Forecasting
 23. Long-Life Insurance has developed a linear model that it uses to determine the amount of term life 
insurance a family of four should have, based on the current age of the head of the household. The 
equation is: 
  
850
.1
y
x


 
   where
   
 y     Insurance needed ($000) 
   
 x     Current age of head of household 
 a. Plot the relationship on a graph. 
 b. Use the equation to determine the amount of term life insurance to recommend for a family of 
four if the head of the household is 30 years old.  
 24. Timely Transport provides local delivery service for a number of downtown and suburban busi-
nesses. Delivery charges are based on distance and weight involved for each delivery: 10 cents per 
pound and 15 cents per mile. Also, there is a $10 handling fee per parcel.
 a. Develop an expression that summarizes delivery charges. 
 b. Determine the delivery charge for transporting a 40-pound parcel 26 miles. 
 25. The manager of a seafood restaurant was asked to establish a pricing policy on lobster dinners. 
Experimenting with prices produced the following data:
Average Number 
Sold per Day, y
Price, x
Average Number 
Sold per Day, y
Price, x
200 
$6.00
155 
$8.25
190 
 6.50
156 
 8.50
188 
 6.75
148 
 8.75
180 
 7.00
140 
 9.00
170 
 7.25
133 
 9.25
162 
 7.50
160 
 8.00
 a. Plot the data and a regression line on the same graph. 
 b. Determine the correlation coefficient and interpret it. 
 26. The following data were collected during a study of consumer buying patterns:
Observation
x
y
Observation 
x
y
 1 
15
74
 8 
18
78
 2 
25
80
 9 
14
70
 3 
40
84
10 
15
72
 4 
32
81
11 
22
85
 5 
51
96
12 
24
88
 6 
47
95
13 
33
90
 7 
30
83
 a. Plot the data. 
 b. Obtain a linear regression line for the data. 
 c. What percentage of the variation is explained by the regression line? 
 d. Use the equation determined in part  b to predict the expected value of  y for  x     41. 
 27. Lovely Lawns, Inc., intends to use sales of lawn fertilizer to predict lawn mower sales. The store man-
ager estimates a probable six-week lag between fertilizer sales and mower sales. The pertinent data are:
Period
Fertilizer 
Sales 
(tons)
Number of 
Mowers Sold 
(six-week lag)
Period
Fertilizer 
Sales 
(tons)
Number of 
Mowers Sold 
(six-week lag)
 1
1.6
10
 8 
1.3
 7
 2 
1.3
 8
 9 
1.7
10
 3 
1.8
11
10 
1.2
 6
 4 
2.0
12
11 
1.9
11
 5 
2.2
12
12 
1.4
 8
 6 
1.6
 9
13 
1.7
10
 7 
1.5
 8
14 
1.6
 9

 
Chapter Three Forecasting 
131
 a. Determine the correlation between the two variables. Does it appear that a relationship between 
these variables will yield good predictions? Explain. 
 b. Obtain a linear regression line for the data. 
 c. Predict expected lawn mower sales for the first week in August, given fertilizer sales six weeks 
earlier of 2 tons.  
 28. The manager of a travel agency has been using a seasonally adjusted forecast to predict demand 
for packaged tours. The actual and predicted values are as follows:
Period
Demand
Predicted
 1
129
124
 2
194
200
 3
156
150
 4
 91
 94
 5
 85
 80
 6
132
140
 7
126
128
 8
126
124
 9
 95
100
10
149
150
11
 98
 94
12
 85
 80
13
137
140
14
134
128
 a. Compute MAD for the fifth period, then update it period by period using exponential smooth-
ing with       .3. 
 b. Compute a tracking signal for periods 5 through 14 using the initial and updated MADs. If lim-
its of  
  4 are used, what can you conclude? 
 29. Refer to the data in problem 22.
 a. Compute a tracking signal for the 10th month for each forecast using the cumulative error for 
months 1 to 10. Use action limits of  
  4. Is there bias present? Explain. 
 b. Compute 2 s control limits for each forecast. 
 30. The classified department of a monthly magazine has used a combination of quantitative and quali-
tative methods to forecast sales of advertising space. Results over a 20-month period are as follows:
Month
Error
Month
Error
 1 
8
11 
   1
 2 
2
12 
   6
 3 
   4
13 
   8
 4 
   7
14 
   4
 5 
   9
15 
   1
 6 
   5
16 
2
 7 
   0
17 
4
 8 
3
18 
8
 9 
9
19 
5
10 
4
20 
1
 a. Compute a tracking signal for months 11 through 20. Compute an initial value of MAD for 
month 11, and then update it for each month using exponential smoothing with       .1. What 
can you conclude? Assume limits of  
  4. 
 b. Using the first half of the data, construct a control chart with 2 s limits. What can you conclude? 
 c. Plot the last 10 errors on the control chart. Are the errors random? What is the implication of this? 
 31. A textbook publishing company has compiled data on total annual sales of its business texts for 
the preceding nine years:
Year:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Sales (000):
40.2
44.5
48.0
52.3
55.8
57.1
62.4
69.0
73.7
 a. Using an appropriate model, forecast textbook sales for each of the next five years. 
 b. Prepare a control chart for the forecast errors using the original data. Use 2 s limits. 
 c. Suppose actual sales for the next five years turn out as follows: 

132 
Chapter Three Forecasting
Year:
10
11
12
13
14
Sales (000):
77.2
82.1
87.8
90.6
98.9
 Is the forecast performing adequately? Explain. 
 32. A manager has just received an evaluation from an analyst on two potential forecasting alternatives. 
The analyst is indifferent between the two alternatives, saying that they should be equally effective.
Period:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Data:
37
39
37
39
45
49
47
49
51
54
Alt. 1:
36
38
40
42
46
46
46
48
52
55
Alt. 2:
36
37
38
38
41
52
47
48
52
53
 a. What would cause the analyst to reach this conclusion? 
 b. What information can you add to enhance the analysis? 
 33. A manager uses this equation to predict demand for landscaping services:  F  t      10    5 t. Over the 
past eight periods, demand has been as follows: 
Period, t:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Demand:
15
21
23
30
32
38
42
47
 Is the forecast performing adequately? Explain. 
 34. A manager uses a trend equation plus quarterly relatives to predict demand. Quarter relatives are 
SR 1     .90, SR 2     .95, SR 3     1.05, and SR 4     1.10. The trend equation is:  F  t      10    5 t. Over the 
past nine quarters, demand has been as follows: 
Period, t:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Demand:
14
20
24
31
31
37
43
48
52
 Is the forecast performing adequately? Explain. 
 M&L Manufacturing makes various components for printers and copi-
ers. In addition to supplying these items to a major manufacturer, the 
company distributes these and similar items to office supply stores and 
computer stores as replacement parts for printers and desktop copiers. 
In all, the company makes about 20 different items. The two markets 
(the major manufacturer and the replacement market) require somewhat 
different handling. For example, replacement products must be pack-
aged individually whereas products are shipped in bulk to the major 
manufacturer. 
 The company does not use forecasts for production planning. Instead, 
the operations manager decides which items to produce and the batch 
size, based on orders and the amounts in inventory. The products that 
have the fewest amounts in inventory get the highest priority. Demand is 
uneven, and the company has experienced being overstocked on some 
items and out of others. Being understocked has occasionally created 
tensions with the managers of retail outlets. Another problem is that 
prices of raw materials have been creeping up, although the operations 
manager thinks that this might be a temporary condition. 
 Because of competitive pressures and falling profits, the manager 
has decided to undertake a number of changes. One change is to intro-
duce more formal forecasting procedures in order to improve produc-
tion planning and inventory management. 
 With that in mind, the manager wants to begin forecasting for two 
products. These products are important for several reasons. First, they 
account for a disproportionately large share of the company’s profits. 
Second, the manager believes that one of these products will become 
increasingly important to future growth plans; and third, the other prod-
uct has experienced periodic out-of-stock instances. 
 The manager has compiled data on product 
demand for the two products from order records 
for the previous 14 weeks. These are shown in the following table. 
 Week 
 Product 1 
 Product 2 
  1 
 50 
 40 
  2 
 54 
 38 
  3 
 57 
 41 
  4 
 60 
 46 
  5 
 64 
 42 
  6 
 67 
 41 
  7 
 90 * 
 41 
  8 
 76 
 47 
  9 
 79 
 42 
 10 
 82 
 43 
 11 
 85 
 42 
 12 
 87 
 49 
 13 
 92 
 43 
 14 
 96 
 44 
 *Unusual order due to flooding of customer’s warehouse.  
 Questions 
    1. What are some of the potential benefits of a more formalized 
approach to forecasting? 
   2. Prepare a weekly forecast for the next four weeks for each prod-
uct. Briefly explain why you chose the methods you used. ( Hint: For 
product 2, a simple approach, possibly some sort of naive/intuitive 
approach, would be preferable to a technical approach in view of the 
manager’s disdain of more technical methods.)  
 CASE 
 M&L Manufacturing 

133
 Highline Financial Services provides three categories of service to its 
clients. Managing partner Freddie Mack is getting ready to prepare 
financial and personnel hiring (or layoff) plans for the coming year. He 
is a bit perplexed by the following printout he obtained, which seems to 
show oscillating demand for the three categories of services over the 
past eight quarters: 
SERVICE
Year
Quarter
A
B
C
1
1
60
95
 93
2
45
85
 90
3
100
92
110
4
 75
65
 90
 Examine the demand that this company has experienced for the 
three categories of service it offers over the preceding two years. 
Assuming nothing changes in terms of advertising 
or promotion, and competition doesn’t change, pre-
dict demand for the services the company offers for the next four quar-
ters. Note that there are not enough data to develop seasonal relatives. 
Nonetheless, you should be able to make reasonably good, approximate 
intuitive  estimates of demand. What general observations can you make 
regarding demand? Should Freddie have any concerns? Explain. 
SERVICE
Year
Quarter
A
B
C
2
1
 72
85
102
2
 51
75
 75
3
112
85
110
4
 85
50
100
 CASE 
 Highline Financial Services, Ltd. 
 Acar, Yavuc, and Everette S. Gardner, Jr. “Forecasting 
Method Selection in a Global Supply Chain.”  Inter-
national Journal of Forecasting 28, no. 4 (October–
December 2012), 842–48. 
 Bonomo, Charles. “Forecasting from the Center of the 
Supply Chain.”  Journal of Business  Forecasting 
Methods and Systems 22, no. 1 (Spring 2003), p. 3. 
 Byrne, Robert F. “Forecasting Performance for North 
American Consumer Products.”  Journal of  Business 
Forecasting 31, no. 3 (Fall 2012), p. 12. 
 Hanke, John, and Dean Wichern.  Business Forecasting. 
9 th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2009. 
 Hopp, Wallace J., and Mark I. Spearman.  Factory 
 Physics. 3 rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
 Wilson, J. Holton, Barry Keating, and John Galt Solu-
tions.  Business Forecasting with ForecastX. 6 th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

134
 CHAP TE R 
 4 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 4.1 Introduction,  136 
 What Does Product and Service Design 
Do?  136  
 Key Questions,  136 
 Reasons for Product or Service Design or 
Redesign,  137 
 4.2 Idea Generation,  139 
 4.3 Legal and Ethical Considerations,  141 
 4.4 Human Factors,  142 
 4.5 Cultural Factors,  143 
 4.6 Global Product and Service Design,  143 
 4.7 Environmental Factors: 
Sustainability,  144 
 Cradle-to-Grave Assessment,  144 
 End-of-Life Programs,  144 
 The Three Rs: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle,  144 
 Reduce: Value Analysis,  145 
 Reuse: Remanufacturing,  145 
 Recycle,  146 
 4.8   Other Design Considerations  149 
 Strategies for Product or Service Life 
Stages,  149 
 Degree of Standardization,  151 
 Designing for Mass Customization,  151 
 Reliability,  153 
 Robust Design,  154 
 Degree of Newness,  155 
 Quality Function Deployment,  155 
 The Kano Model,  158 
 4.9    Phases in Product Design and 
Development,  159 
 4.10  Designing for Production,  160 
 Concurrent Engineering,  160 
 Computer-Aided Design,  160 
 Production Requirements,  161 
 Component Commonality,  162 
 4.11  Service Design,  162 
 Overview of Service Design,  163 
 Differences between Service Design and 
Product Design,  163 
 Phases in the Service Design 
Process,  164 
 Service Blueprinting,  164 
 Characteristics of Well-Designed Service 
Systems,  165 
 Challenges of Service Design,  166 
 Guidelines for Successful 
Service Design,  166 
 4.12  Operations Strategy,  167 
Operations Tour: High Acres Landfill, 170
 Chapter Supplement: Reliability,  171 
 Product and 
Service Design 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO4.1 
Explain the  strategic importance of product and service design. 
 LO4.2 
Describe what product and service design does. 
 LO4.3 
Name the key questions of product and service design. 
 LO4.4 
Identify some reasons for design or redesign. 
 LO4.5 
List some of the main sources of design ideas. 
 LO4.6 
Discuss the importance of legal, ethical, and sustainability 
considerations in product and service design. 
 LO4.7 
Explain the purpose and goal of life cycle assessment. 
 LO4.8 
Explain the phrase “the 3 Rs.” 
 LO4.9 
Briefly describe the phases in product design and development. 
 LO4.10 
Discuss several key issues in product or service design. 
 LO4.11 
Discuss the two key issues in service design. 
 LO4.12 
List the characteristics of well-designed service systems. 
 LO4.13 
List some guidelines for successful service design.   
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

135
 The essence of a business organization is the products and services it offers, and every aspect 
of the organization and its supply chain are structured around those products and services. 
Organizations that have well-designed products or services are more likely to realize their 
goals than those with poorly designed products or services. Hence, organizations have a stra-
tegic interest in product and service design. Product or service design should be closely tied to 
an organization’s strategy. It is a major factor in cost, quality, time-to-market, customer satisfaction, and competitive advantage. 
Consequently, marketing, finance, operations, accounting, IT, and HR need to be involved. Demand forecasts and projected 
costs are important, as is the expected impact on the supply chain. It is significant to note that an important cause of operations 
failures can be traced to faulty design. Designs that have not been well thought out, or incorrectly implemented, or instructions 
for assembly or usage that are wrong or unclear, can be the cause of product and service failures, leading to lawsuits, injuries 
and deaths, product recalls, and damaged reputations. 
 The introduction of new products or services, or changes to product or service designs, can have impacts throughout the 
organization and the entire supply chain. Some processes may change very little, while others may have to change consider-
ably in terms of what they do or how and when they do it. New processes may have to be added, and some current ones may 
be eliminated. New suppliers and distributors may need to be found and integrated into the system, and some current suppliers 
and distributors may no longer be an appropriate fit. Moreover, it is necessary to take into account projected impact on demand 
as well as financial, marketing, and distribution implications. Because of the potential for widespread effects, taking a “big 
picture” systems approach early and throughout the design or redesign process is imperative to reduce the chance of missing 
some implications and costs, and to understand the time it will take. Likewise, input from engineering, operations, marketing, 
finance, accounting, and supply chains is crucial. 
 In this chapter you will discover insights into the design process that apply to both product and service design. 
 LO4.1  Explain the strategic 
importance of product and 
service design.

136
 4.1 INTRODUCTION 
  This section discusses what product and service designers do, the reasons for design (or rede-
sign), and key questions that management must address. 
 What Does Product and Service Design Do? 
 The various activities and responsibilities of product and service design include the following 
(functional interactions are shown in parentheses):
 1. 
Translate customer wants and needs into product and service requirements. (marketing, 
operations) 
 2. 
Refine existing products and services. (marketing) 
 3. 
Develop new products and/or services. (marketing, operations) 
 4. 
Formulate quality goals. (marketing, operations) 
 5. 
Formulate cost targets. (accounting, finance, operations) 
 6. 
Construct and test prototypes. (operations, marketing, engineering) 
 7. 
Document specifications. 
 8. 
Translate product and service specifications into  process specifications. (engineering, 
operations) 
 Product and service design involves or affects nearly every functional area of an organiza-
tion. However, marketing and operations have major involvement. 
 Key Questions 
 From a buyer’s standpoint, most purchasing decisions entail two fundamental considerations; 
one is cost and the other is quality or performance. From the organization’s standpoint, the 
key questions are:
 1. 
 Is there demand for it? What is the potential size of the market, and what is the expected 
demand profile (will demand be long term or short term, will it grow slowly or quickly)?  
 2. 
 Can we do it? Do we have the necessary knowledge, skills, equipment, capacity, and 
supply chain capability? For products, this is known as    manufacturability   ; for services, 
this is known as  serviceability . Also, is outsourcing some or all of the work an option? 
 3. 
 What level of quality is appropriate? What do customers expect? What level of quality 
do competitors provide for similar items? How would it fit with our current offerings?  
 4. 
 Does it make sense from an economic standpoint? What are the potential liability 
issues, ethical considerations, sustainability issues, costs, and profits? For nonprofits, is 
the cost within budget?  
 LO4.2 Describe what product 
and service design does.
 LO4.3  Name the key questions 
of product and service design.
 Manufacturability  The 
capability of an organization to 
produce an item at an acceptable 
profit. 
 Serviceability  The capability 
of an organization to provide a 
service at an acceptable cost or 
profit. 
 Some companies, such as Steelcase, Inc., 
have adopted “design thinking” to integrate 
design strategy throughout the company. The idea is to predicate design 
on insights into user wants and needs—not really a new concept, but 
one that is put forth in a way that becomes the focal point of how the 
company makes design decisions. 
 Source: Based on “Sustaining the Dream,”  BusinessWeek, October 15, 2007, 
p. 60. 
 As businesses continue to reduce costs to achieve competitive advan-
tage, design issues are becoming increasingly important aspects of 
business strategy. Because product and service design touches every 
part of a business organization, from operations and supply chains to 
finance, marketing, accounting, and information systems, design deci-
sions have far-reaching implications for the organization and its suc-
cess in the marketplace. Product and service innovation is becoming 
a key avenue in pursuing a competitive edge, and sustainability issues 
are being given increasing importance in business decisions. 
 READING 
 Design as a Business Strategy 
 
is to predicate design
c.,
te

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
137
 Reasons for Product and Service Design or Redesign 
 Product and service design has typically had  strategic  implications for the success and pros-
perity of an organization. Furthermore, it has an impact on future activities. Consequently, 
decisions in this area are some of the most fundamental that managers must make. 
 Organizations become involved in product and service design or redesign for a variety of 
reasons. The main forces that initiate design or redesign are market opportunities and threats. 
The factors that give rise to market opportunities and threats can be one or more  changes: 
 •  Economic (e.g., low demand, excessive warranty claims, the need to reduce costs). 
 •  Social and demographic (e.g., aging baby boomers, population shifts). 
 •  Political, liability, or legal (e.g., government changes, safety issues, new regulations). 
 •  Competitive (e.g., new or changed products or services, new advertising/promotions). 
 •  Cost or availability (e.g., of raw materials, components, labor, water, energy). 
 •  Technological (e.g., in product components, processes). 
 While each of these factors may seem obvious, let’s reflect a bit on technological changes, 
which can create a need for product or service design changes in several different ways. An 
obvious way is new technology that can be used directly in a product or service (e.g., a faster, 
smaller microprocessor that spawns a new generation of personal digital assistants or cell 
phones). Technology also can indirectly affect product and service design: Advances in pro-
cessing technology may require altering an existing design to make it compatible with the 
new processing technology. Still another way that technology can impact product design is 
illustrated by new digital recording technology that allows television viewers to skip com-
mercials when they view a recorded program. This means that advertisers (who support a 
television program) can’t get their message to viewers. To overcome this, some advertisers 
have adopted a strategy of making their products an integral part of a television program, say 
by having their products prominently displayed and/or mentioned by the actors as a way to 
call viewers’ attention to their products without the need for commercials. 
 The following reading suggests another potential benefit of product redesign. 
 LO4.4  Identify some reasons 
for design or redesign.
by redesigning products than by outsourcing 
 production to other countries such as China. In many instances, the 
study shows, redesigning a product and manufacturing it in the United 
States is a better option for saving money. 
 To support this idea, the authors identify two principles of design 
best practices that, they said, many U.S. manufacturing companies 
overlook when making outsourcing decisions:
 • First, it is possible to redesign products to reduce part count and 
cost. As an illustration, the study features an in-depth, quantita-
tive analysis showing how the redesign of an electric drill would 
eliminate the cost advantage of offshore manufacturing and justify a 
decision not to outsource production. 
   • And second, it is necessary to account for all the additional costs 
associated with offshore manufacturing and to apply those addi-
tional costs to the product. The study warns that companies may 
not be accounting for the full costs of outsourcing when they 
 Redesign, not offshoring production to countries such as China, holds 
the greatest promise of cost advantage for U.S. manufacturers, accord-
ing to a new study that attacks longstanding assumptions about product 
costs that have troubled manufacturers for decades, both in the United 
States and worldwide. 
 The study, “Improved Product Design Practices Would Make U.S. 
Manufacturing More Cost Effective: A Case to Consider Before Out-
sourcing to China,” suggests that U.S. companies should do a much 
better job of integrating cost analysis into product design. If rigorous 
cost analysis were to be instituted as a foundation for product design, 
U.S. manufacturers would be able to develop innovative products that 
are more economical to produce in the United States, assert the report’s 
coauthors, Nicholas P. Dewhurst and David G. Meeker. 
 Dewhurst is executive vice president of Boothroyd Dewhurst, a solu-
tion provider specializing in software for design for manufacture and 
assembly (DFMA). Meeker is a DFMA consultant. 
 One of the more provocative conclusions of the study is that it 
can be more advantageous for U.S. manufacturers to lower costs 
 READING 
 Product Redesign, Not Offshoring, Holds Cost Advantage 
for U.S. Manufacturers 
many instances the
(continued)

138 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
now rushing to outsource manufacturing still do not understand that the 
design of the product determines the final cost.” 
 Dewhurst warned that outsourcing should not be the first step in 
lowering product costs. “Considering the competitive nature of the 
global economy and the many hidden risks associated with outsourcing 
ventures, U.S. companies should scour product designs for efficiency 
before resorting to offshore production,” he said. “We hope this study 
encourages the U.S. manufacturing industry to take another look at 
design cost analysis.” 
 Source: “Product Redesign, Not Offshoring, Holds Cost Advantage for U.S. Man-
ufacturers,”  Supply & Demand Chain Executive, September 8, 2004. Copyright 
© 2004 Cygnus Business Media and/or its suppliers, 1233 Janesville Ave., Fort 
Atkinson, WI 53538 U.S.A. All rights reserved. 
consider sending production overseas to countries with very low 
labor rates such as China. The authors identify a number of hidden 
costs, including shipping and logistics, that can add an estimated 
24 percent to labor and material costs at the offshore location.  
 The study seeks to demonstrate that if companies consider the 
potential for design improvement along with a realistic estimate of the 
full costs of outsourcing, it often makes more sense to manufacture 
products in the United States. 
 “We know, from years of consulting with design engineers, that U.S. 
manufacturers have very little visibility into what their products should 
cost to make,” said Dewhurst. “Companies historically do a poor job 
of integrating cost analysis into early product design. Many companies 
(concluded
 The labels are applied automatically, quite a feat, considering their 
complexity, size, and the hollow handle they likely encounter during 
application. MacDonald admits, “Label application was a challenge. We 
had to modify the bottle several times to accommodate the labeling 
machinery available.” 
 Source: “Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints,”  Packaging Digest, October 2002. 
Copyright © 2002 Reed Business Information. Used with permission. 
 Sherwin-Williams’ Dutch Boy Group has put a revolutionary spin on 
wall/house painting with its new square-shaped Twist & Pour ™ paint-
delivery container for the Dirt Fighter interior latex paint line. The four-
piece square container could be the first major change in how house 
paint is packaged in decades. Lightweight but sturdy, the Twist & Pour 
“bucket” is packed with so many conveniences, it’s next to impossible 
to mess up a painting project. 
 Winning Best of Show in an AmeriStar packaging competition spon-
sored by the Institute of Packaging Professionals, the exclusive, all-
plastic paint container stands almost 7½ in. tall and holds 126 oz., a bit 
less than 1 gal. Rust-resistant and moisture-resistant, the plastic bucket 
gives users a new way to mix, brush, and store paint. 
 A hollow handle on one side makes it comfortable to pour and 
[carry]. A convenient, snap-in pour spout neatly pours paint into a tray 
with no dripping but can be removed if desired, to allow a wide brush to 
be dipped into the 5¾-in.-dia. mouth. Capping the container is a large, 
twist-off lid that requires no tools to open or close. Molded with two lugs 
for a snug-finger-tight closing, the threaded cap provides a tight seal to 
extend the shelf life of unused paint. 
 While the lid requires no tools to access, the snap-off carry bail is 
assembled on the container in a “locked-down position” and can be pulled 
up after purchase for toting or hanging on a ladder. Large, nearly 4½-in.-
tall label panels allow glossy front and back labels printed and UV-coated 
to wrap around the can’s rounded corners, for an impressive display. 
 Jim MacDonald, co-designer of the Twist & Pour and a packaging 
engineer at Cleveland-based Sherwin-Williams, tells  Packaging Digest 
that the space-efficient, square shape is easier to ship and for retail-
ers to stack in stores. It can also be nested, courtesy of a recess in the 
bottom that mates with the lid’s top ring. “The new design allows for 
one additional shelf facing on an eight-foot rack or shelf area.” 
 READING 
 Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
139
 4.2 IDEA GENERATION 
  Ideas for new or redesigned products or services can come from a variety of sources, includ-
ing customers, the supply chain, competitors, employees, and research. Customer input can 
come from surveys, focus groups, complaints, and unsolicited suggestions for improvement. 
Input from suppliers, distributors, and employees can be obtained from interviews, direct or 
indirect suggestions, and complaints. 
 One of the strongest motivators for new and improved products or services is competitors’ 
products and services. By studying a competitor’s products or services and how the competi-
tor operates (pricing policies, return policies, warranties, location strategies, etc.), an organi-
zation can glean many ideas. Beyond that, some companies purchase a competitor’s product 
and then carefully dismantle and inspect it, searching for ways to improve their own product. 
This is called   reverse engineering  .  The Ford Motor Company used this tactic in develop-
ing its highly successful Taurus model: It examined competitors’ automobiles, searching for 
best-in-class components (e.g., best hood release, best dashboard display, best door handle). 
Sometimes reverse engineering can enable a company to leapfrog the competition by devel-
oping an even better product. Suppliers are still another source of ideas, and with increased 
emphasis on supply chains and supplier partnerships, suppliers are becoming an important 
source of ideas. 
 Research is another source of ideas for new or improved products or services.   Research 
and development (R&D)   refers to organized efforts that are directed toward increasing 
 scientific knowledge and product or process innovation. Most of the advances in semiconduc-
tors, medicine, communications, and space technology can be attributed to R&D efforts at 
colleges and universities, research foundations, government agencies, and private enterprises. 
 R&D efforts may involve  basic research, applied research, or  development. 
 Basic research has the objective of advancing the state of knowledge about a subject, 
without any near-term expectation of commercial applications. 
 Applied research has the objective of achieving commercial applications. 
 Development  converts the results of applied research into useful commercial applications.    
 Basic research, because it does not lead to near-term commercial applications, is gener-
ally underwritten by the government and large corporations. Conversely, applied research 
and development, because of the potential for commercial applications, appeals to a wide 
spectrum of business organizations. 
 The benefits of successful R&D can be tremendous. Some research leads to patents, with 
the potential of licensing and royalties. However, many discoveries are not patentable, or 
companies don’t wish to divulge details of their ideas so they avoid the patent route. Even 
so, the first organization to bring a new product or service to the market generally stands to 
profit from it before the others can catch up. Early products may be priced higher because a 
temporary monopoly exists until competitors bring their versions out. 
 The costs of R&D can be high. Some companies spend more than $1 million  a day on 
R&D. Large companies in the automotive, computer, communications, and  pharmaceutical 
industries spend even more. For example, IBM spends about $5 billion a year, Hewlett- 
Packard about $4 billion a year, and Toshiba about $3 billion a year. Even so, critics say that 
many U.S. companies spend too little on R&D, a factor often cited in the loss of competitive 
advantage. 
 It is interesting to note that some companies are now shifting from a focus primarily on 
 products to a more balanced approach that explores both product and  process R&D. Also, 
there is increasing recognition that technologies often go through life cycles, the same way 
that many products do. This can impact R&D efforts on two fronts. Sustained economic 
growth requires constant attention to competitive factors over a life cycle, and it also requires 
planning to be able to participate in the next-generation technology. 
 In certain instances, however, research may not be the best approach. The following 
 reading illustrates a research success. 
 LO4.5 List some of the main 
sources of design ideas.
 Reverse engineering  Disman-
tling and inspecting a competi-
tor’s product to discover product 
improvements. 
 Research and development 
(R&D)  Organized efforts to 
increase scientific knowledge or 
product innovation. 

140
 Once the company settled on a cucumber, it had to work out details of 
how to get Hamburger Stackers into commercial production. One chal-
lenge was to grow the cucumbers in fields, rather than in a greenhouse. 
 Randy Spence, Vlasic’s manager of manufacturing services, said the 
jumbo cucumbers grew quicker than anyone expected. 
 “Early on, we expected the bigger ones to grow slower, but that 
hasn’t been the case,” he said. 
 These days, most of the gigantic cucumbers are grown in Florida, 
where they are handpicked because of their size. Depending on the 
weather, they take about 54 days from seed to harvest. 
 Once harvested, they’re shipped to Vlasic’s plant in Sussex County. 
The plant employs about 260 workers year-round and 300 to 400  others 
from April to November. 
 Steven McNulty, director of plant operations at the nearly 30-year-
old Millsboro facility, said the size of the new cucumbers meant they 
couldn’t be handled in the same manner as the smaller versions used to 
make pickle spears and sweet gherkins. 
 That became obvious when Vlasic tried to process its first batch of 
the somewhat fragile, jumbo-sized cucumbers. 
 Officials didn’t end up with the Hamburger Stackers they envisioned. 
Instead, they ended up with a batch of broken big cucumbers. 
 “On the first run, we broke every one,” Spence said. 
 But it taught the company a lot about some of the retooling they’d 
have to do to the plant in Millsboro. 
 Officials at the plant began making months worth of adjustments 
so one of the facility’s four production lines could handle the jumbo 
cucumbers. 
 “We’ve learned a lot,” McNulty said. “And we’re still learning.” 
 Michele  Darnell 
 Many were skeptical of Frank Meczkowski’s plan to develop a pickle so 
big that a single slice could cover a hamburger. 
 After all, whoever saw a pickle that big—except maybe in the  Guin-
ness Book of World Records? 
 Meczkowski and his team of food researchers at Vlasic Foods Inter-
national were convinced the project—given the code name Frisbee—
could fly. 
 For about four years, they labored to cultivate a jumbo cucumber 
with the taste, shape and crunch to be a perfect pickle. 
 Made only at the company’s plant in Millsboro, the monster-sized 
slices seem to have captured the pickle lover’s fancy. They’ve become 
one of Vlasic’s best-selling products since their introduction in super-
markets. And the better-than-anticipated sales have helped to reverse a 
three-year decline in consumption of Vlasic pickles. 
 Hamburger Stackers are about 10 times bigger than traditional 
pickle chips and come in dill and bread-and-butter varieties. 
 “They said it just couldn’t be done.” 
 Making a bigger pickle may not sound like that big of a deal. You just 
grow a bigger cucumber, right? 
 There is more to it than that. The folks at Vlasic soon learned how 
tough it was to deal with gigantic cucumbers as they developed the new 
product and as they retooled the Delaware plant. 
 Meczkowski came up with the idea for the mammoth pickle slices 
soon after Vlasic’s introduction of its Sandwich Stackers—regular-size 
pickles sliced lengthwise so they can be draped on sandwiches. 
 Sandwich Stackers currently account for 20 percent of all Vlasic 
pickle sales. 
 Vlasic is the No. 1 seller of pickles in the United States, with a 32 
percent share of the $800 million retail pickle market, beating out 
brands such as Claussen, Heinz, and Peter Piper’s. 
 To develop Hamburger Stackers, Meczkowski worked with seed 
researchers and others to scour the globe looking for oversized varieties 
of cucumbers. Most weren’t in commercial production. 
 Vlasic’s team grew different varieties in greenhouses, looking for 
one that would get big enough yet still make a good pickle. 
 It had to taste like a regular cucumber, stay crisp when pickled, 
have a small seed cavity and be straight enough so that it could be cut 
mechanically. 
 “We wanted it to really be a cucumber,” said Meczkowski, who has 
worked as a food researcher for 22 years and is based at Vlasic’s head-
quarters in New Jersey. 
 He said Vlasic also had to decide just how big Hamburger Stackers 
should be. At one point, it asked consumers who were participating in 
focus groups to bring in their own homemade burgers so the company 
could determine the perfect size for its new pickles. 
 Eventually, Vlasic officials found what they were looking for—a now-
patented cucumber that grows 3.25 inches in diameter, easily reaches 
12 to 16 inches in length, and weighs about five pounds. 
 It looks like the watermelon’s skinny runt brother. 
 READING 
 Vlasic on a Roll with Huge Pickle Slices 
 The Hamburger Stacker on the burger at left dwarfs a traditional 
pickle slice. Stackers are genetically designed using cucumbers 
that grow to over 3 inches in diameter and weigh 5 pounds. 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
141
 4.3 LEGAL AND ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
  Designers must be careful to take into account a wide array of legal and ethical considerations. 
Generally, they are mandatory. Moreover, if there is a potential to harm the environment, then 
those issues also become important. Most organizations are subject to numerous govern-
ment agencies that regulate them. Among the more familiar federal agencies are the Food and 
Drug Administration, the Occupational Health and Safety Administration, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and various state and local agencies. Bans on cyclamates, red food dye, 
phosphates, and asbestos have sent designers scurrying back to their drawing boards to find 
alternative designs that were acceptable to both government regulators and customers. Simi-
larly, automobile pollution standards and safety features, such as seat belts, air bags, safety 
glass, and energy-absorbing bumpers and frames, have had a substantial impact on automotive 
design. Much attention also has been directed toward toy design to remove sharp edges, small 
pieces that can cause choking, and toxic materials. The government further regulates construc-
tion, requiring the use of lead-free paint, safety glass in entranceways, access to public buildings 
for individuals with disabilities, and standards for insulation, electrical wiring, and plumbing. 
 Product liability can be a strong incentive for design improvements.   Product liability is 
the responsibility of a manufacturer for any injuries or damages caused by a faulty product 
because of poor workmanship or design. Many business firms have faced lawsuits related to 
their products, including Firestone Tire & Rubber, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, 
tobacco companies, and toy manufacturers. Manufacturers also are faced with the implied 
warranties created by state laws under the   Uniform Commercial Code  ,  which says that prod-
ucts carry an implication of  merchantability  and  fitness;  that is, a product must be usable for 
its intended purposes. 
 The suits and potential suits have led to increased legal and insurance costs, expensive 
settlements with injured parties, and costly recalls. Moreover, increasing customer awareness 
of product safety can adversely affect product image and subsequent demand for a product. 
 Thus, it is extremely important to design products that are reasonably free of hazards. 
When hazards do exist, it is necessary to install safety guards or other devices for reduc-
ing accident potential, and to provide adequate warning notices of risks. Consumer groups, 
 LO4.6 Discuss the impor-
tance of legal, ethical, and 
sustainability considerations in 
product and service design.
 Product liability  The respon-
sibility of a manufacturer for any 
injuries or damages caused by a 
faulty product. 
 Uniform Commercial Code  
A product must be suitable for 
its intended purpose.  
 After being packed with pickle slices, the jars of Hamburger Stack-
ers are filled with a combination of water, vinegar, salt, and other flavor-
ings and colorings. They are capped, vacuum-sealed, and pasteurized 
before being labeled and packed for global distribution. 
 Some details of how Hamburger Stackers are made are kept secret. 
McNulty said that is because the company is certain its rivals would 
love to figure out how to make their own Hamburger Stackers. 
 Vlasic is the only pickle-making company with such a product on 
the market. “We think the competition loves the idea,” McNulty said. 
 Apparently, so does the pickle-eating public. 
 About $13 million worth of Hamburger Stackers were sold in the 
first five months after they were introduced. 
 The company is optimistic that the product will continue to grow in 
popularity with U.S. consumers who eat about 3.5 billion hamburgers at 
home annually. 
 Source:  Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, December 13, 1999. 
 Making Hamburger Stackers requires a mix of automation and the 
human touch. The process starts when the big cucumbers arrive by 
truck and are rushed into a cold-storage facility to preserve their flavor. 
 Once cooled, the cucumbers can be loaded onto the production line 
and checked for bad spots and other flaws. 
 They’re washed by machine a couple times and sliced. 
 Then they’re sized. Jiggling along a conveyor belt, slices that are too 
small are weeded out by a worker and a machine. Those that are too big 
also are sorted out. 
 Too big? 
 Yes, the monster-sized cucumbers can get a little too big to fit in 
the jar. 
 The cucumber slices that make the cut are mechanically stacked 
into jars and then topped off by hand. 
 Ella Mae Wilkerson, who has worked at the Vlasic plant in  Millsboro 
for 17 years, said it takes some fast hands to make certain that  outgoing 
jars have enough pickles packed in. 
 “The bigger the jar, the harder it is,” she said as containers of sweet 
gherkins being jarred on another production line zipped by on a con-
veyor belt. 

142 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
business firms, and various government agencies often work together to develop industrywide 
standards that help avoid some of the hazards.   
 Ethical issues often arise in the design of products and services; it is important for  managers 
to be aware of these issues and for designers to adhere to ethical standards. Designers are 
often under pressure to speed up the design process and to cut costs. These pressures often 
require them to make trade-off decisions, many of which involve ethical considerations. One 
example of what can happen is “vaporware,” when a software company doesn’t issue a release 
of software as scheduled as it struggles with production problems or bugs in the software. 
The company faces the dilemma of releasing the software right away or waiting until most of 
the bugs have been removed—knowing that the longer it waits, the more time will be needed 
before it receives revenues and the greater the risk of damage to its reputation. 
 Organizations generally want designers to adhere to guidelines such as the following:
 • Produce designs that are consistent with the goals of the organization. For instance, 
if the company has a goal of high quality, don’t cut corners to save cost, even in areas 
where it won’t be apparent to the customer. 
 • Give customers the value they expect. 
 • Make health and safety a primary concern. At risk are employees who will produce 
goods or deliver services, workers who will transport the products, customers who will 
use the products or receive the services, and the general public, which might be endan-
gered by the products or services. 
 4.4 HUMAN FACTORS 
  Human factor issues often arise in the design of consumer products. Safety and liability are 
two critical issues in many instances, and they must be carefully considered. For example, the 
crashworthiness of vehicles is of much interest to consumers, insurance companies, automo-
bile producers, and the government. 
 Another issue for designers to take into account is adding new features to their products 
or services. Companies in certain businesses may seek a competitive edge by adding new 
features. Although this can have obvious benefits, it can sometimes be “too much of a good 
 The much anticipated Boeing 
787 Dreamliner aircraft 
resumed flights after being 
grounded for more than three 
months for a battery defect. 
Aviation safety depends on 
well-maintained equipment and 
an expert flight crew who can 
handle emergencies as they 
come up. 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
143
thing,” and be a source of customer dissatisfaction. This “creeping featurism” is particularly 
evident in electronic products such as handheld devices that continue to offer new features, 
and more complexity, even while they are shrinking in size. This may result in low consumer 
ratings in terms of “ease of use.” 
 4.5 CULTURAL FACTORS 
  Product designers in companies that operate globally also must take into account any cultural 
differences of different countries or regions related to the product. This can result in different 
designs for different countries or regions, as illustrated by the following reading. 
 Argentina:  McNifica. Hamburger sandwich 
with cheese, tomato, onion and lettuce. 
 Egypt:  McFalafel. Fried patties of ground beans flavored with 
spices. 
 Israel:  Seven of the 80 or so McDonald’s are kosher, meaning they 
follow strict Jewish dietary rules so there are no cheeseburgers, milk-
shakes or sundaes. 
 United Kingdom:  Mega Button Blast. Vanilla ice cream that you eat 
after breaking through a Cadbury chocolate lid. 
 Greece:  Greek Mac. Pita bread sandwich with two beef patties and 
some yogurt sauce. 
 Japan:  Teriyaki Burger. Chicken cutlet patty marinated in teriyaki 
sauce, with sweet mayonnaise and sliced lettuce on a sesame bun. 
 Germany:  Gemuse Mac. A veggie burger with lettuce, tomatoes and 
special “wurzcreme” sauce. 
 Questions 
    1. What effects do cultural differences have on the design of fast food 
offerings in this reading? 
 2. What functions in the organization are impacted by the differences 
in product offerings among different countries?  
 Source: From  The Washington Post, December 2, 2002 © 2002.  The Washing-
ton Post. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright 
Laws of the United States. The printing, copying, redistribution or retransmission 
of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
 John  Kelly 
 Since the first McDonald’s opened in the United States in 1955, the fast 
food restaurant has spread around the world. 
 The company now has locations in 121 countries. In fact, of the 
30,000 McDonald’s restaurants scattered around the globe, there are 
more in foreign countries (17,000) than in the good old United States 
(13,000). 
 The food you can order at many of these Mickey D’s is different from 
what you’ll find at the one down the street. Here’s a sample of some of 
the treats that await you should you pull up to the drive-through window 
in some faraway places: 
 India:  McAloo Tikki Burger. A totally vegetarian sandwich with reg-
ular bun, a crispy, breaded spicy potato and vegetable patty, eggless 
tomato mayonnaise, two slices of tomatoes and shredded onion. 
 France:  Croque McDo. Cheese and ham between two thin pieces of 
toasted bread. 
 Italy: McPink. Two pork patties with a slice of yellow cheese. 
 New Zealand:  Kiwi Burger. A hamburger with a fried egg and a slice 
of pickled beet. 
 Turkey:  Kofte Burger. A spicy meat patty inside a flavored bun, 
enriched with a special yogurt mix and spiced tomato sauce. 
 Philippines:  McSpaghetti. Pasta in a red sauce with frankfurter bits. 
 South Korea:  Bulgogi Burger. Pork patty on a bun with lettuce and 
spicy garlic bulgogi sauce. 
 China: Hong Dou Pie. A dessert pie filled with red bean paste. 
 READING 
 Do You Want Pickled Beets with That? 
beans flavored with
ch 
 4.6 GLOBAL PRODUCT AND SERVICE DESIGN 
  Traditionally, product design has been conducted by members of the design team who 
are located in one facility or a few nearby facilities. However, organizations that operate 
globally are discovering advantages in global product design, which uses the combined 
efforts of a team of designers who work in different countries and even on different conti-
nents. Such  virtual teams  can provide a range of comparative advantages over traditional 
teams such as engaging the best human resources from around the world without the need 
to assemble them all in one place, and operating on a 24-hour basis, thereby decreasing 

144 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
the time-to-market. The use of global teams also allows for customer needs assessment 
to be done in more than one country with local resources, opportunities, and constraints to 
be taken into account. Global product design can provide design outcomes that increase 
the marketability and utility of a product. The diversity of an international team may yield 
different points of view and ideas and information to enrich the design process. However, 
care must be taken in managing the diversity, because if it is mismanaged, that can lead to 
conflicts and miscommunications. 
 Advances in information technology have played a key role in the viability of global prod-
uct design teams by enabling team members to maintain continual contact with each other and 
to instantaneously share designs and progress, and to transmit engineering changes and other 
necessary information. 
 4.7  ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS: 
SUSTAINABILITY 
  Product and service design is a focal point in the quest for sustainability. Key aspects include 
cradle-to-grave assessment, end-of-life programs, reduction of costs and materials used, reuse 
of parts of returned products, and recycling. 
 Cradle-to-Grave Assessment 
 Cradle-to-grave assessment  ,  also known as life cycle analysis, is the assessment of the envi-
ronmental impact of a product or service throughout its useful life, focusing on such factors 
as global warming (the amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere), smog for-
mation, oxygen depletion, and solid waste generation. For products, cradle-to-grave analysis 
takes into account impacts in every phase of a product’s life cycle, from raw material extrac-
tion from the earth, or the growing and harvesting of plant materials, through fabrication 
of parts and assembly operations, or other processes used to create products, as well as the 
use or consumption of the product, and final disposal at the end of a product’s useful life. 
It also considers energy consumption, pollution and waste, and transportation in all phases. 
Although services generally involve less use of materials, cradle-to-grave assessment of ser-
vices is nonetheless important, because services consume energy and involve many of the 
same or similar processes that products involve. 
 The goal of cradle-to-grave assessment is to choose products and services that have the 
least environmental impact while still taking into account economic considerations. The pro-
cedures of cradle-to-grave assessment are part of the ISO 14000 environmental management 
standards, which are discussed in Chapter 9. 
 End-of-Life Programs 
 End-of-life (EOL) programs deal with products that have reached the end of their useful 
lives. The products include both consumer products and business equipment. The purpose 
of these programs is to reduce the dumping of products, particularly electronic equip-
ment, in landfills or third-world countries, as has been the common practice, or incinera-
tion, which converts materials into hazardous air and water emissions and generates toxic 
ash. Although the programs are not limited to electronic equipment, that equipment poses 
problems because the equipment typically contains toxic materials such as lead, cadmium, 
chromium, and other heavy metals. IBM provides a good example of the potential of EOL 
programs. Over the last 15 years, it has collected about 2 billion pounds of product and 
product waste.  
 The Three Rs: Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle 
 Designers often reflect on three particular aspects of potential cost saving and reducing envi-
ronmental impact: reducing the use of materials through value analysis; refurbishing and then 
 Cradle-to-grave assessment   
The assessment of the environ-
mental impact of a product or 
 service throughout its useful life.  
 LO4.7 Explain the purpose and 
goal of life cycle assessment.
 LO4.8 Explain the phrase “the 
3 Rs.”

145
reselling returned goods that are deemed to have additional useful life, which is referred to as 
remanufacturing; and reclaiming parts of unusable products for recycling. 
 Reduce: Value Analysis 
 Value analysis  refers to an examination of the  function of parts and materials in an effort to 
reduce the cost and/or improve the performance of a product. Typical questions that would be 
asked as part of the analysis include: Could a cheaper part or material be used? Is the function 
necessary? Can the function of two or more parts or components be performed by a single 
part for a lower cost? Can a part be simplified? Could product specifications be relaxed, and 
would this result in a lower price? Could standard parts be substituted for nonstandard parts? 
 Table 4.1 provides a checklist of questions that can guide a value analysis. 
 The following reading describes how Kraft Foods is working to reduce water and energy 
use, CO 2 and plant waste, and packaging. 
 Reuse: Remanufacturing 
 An emerging concept in manufacturing is the remanufacturing of products.   Remanufacturing  
refers to refurbishing used products by replacing worn-out or defective components, and 
reselling the products. This can be done by the original manufacturer, or another company. 
Among the products that have remanufactured components are automobiles, printers, copiers, 
cameras, computers, and telephones. 
 There are a number of important reasons for doing this. One is that a remanufactured 
 product can be sold for about 50 percent of the cost of a new product. Another is that the 
 Value analysis  Examination 
of the function of parts and 
materials in an effort to reduce 
cost and/or improve product 
performance.  
 Remanufacturing   
Refurbishing used products by 
replacing worn-out or defective 
components. 
connected to staff and customers, posting ques-
tions on an employee Web site called the Water 
Cooler, tracking consumer sentiment on Facebook and Twitter (BBY-
CEO), attending focus groups, and inviting customers to the company’s 
leadership meetings. 
 TVs account for the majority of items. This is somewhat of a mixed 
blessing. TVs with picture tubes can’t be resold; they have to be taken 
away and disassembled before the materials are melted down for 
reuse. Unlike plastics, which might end up in lawn furniture or other 
products, the innards of TVs aren’t of much value. In many states man-
ufacturers are required by take-back laws to help finance recycling, 
and companies like Samsung and Sony share the costs of disposing 
of old TVs. 
 Even though there may not be a clear economic case for doing so, at 
least for TVs, the take-back program could also be beneficial by encour-
aging innovative design and new business models. Manufacturers that 
know they will be responsible for the end of life of their products will 
design them so that they can be disassembled and recycled easily. 
Computer maker Dell, for instance, reduced the number of screws in its 
computers to make them easier to dismantle. 
 Source: Based on “Best Buy Wants Your Electronic Junk,”  Fortune magazine, 
December 7, 2009. 
 Electronic junk, that is. The giant electronics retailer sees its recycling 
program as a way to get customers into its stores while building a green 
reputation. While old TVs, desktop computers, and other outmoded elec-
tronics come in, out go flat-screen TVs, netbooks, and iPhones. 
 The company decided that being a good corporate citizen makes 
business sense. Best Buy’s commitment to corporate responsibility fits 
nicely with the company’s strategy and business model. To set itself 
apart from its biggest competitors, Walmart and Amazon, the company 
wants to do more than sell consumer electronics. It would like to help 
customers get better use out of technology, whether they are buying, 
installing, fixing, or disposing of their hardware. Since 2009, when Best 
Buy began offering free recycling of electronic equipment, millions of 
pounds of In Store Take Back (ISTB) have found their way to the com-
pany’s 1,044 U.S. stores, making Best Buy America’s biggest collector 
of electronic junk. 
 Best Buy’s interest in the social and environmental impact of elec-
tronic goods that had reached the end of their useful life came at the 
urging of its workers and customers. “Employees wanted to know what 
Best Buy was doing to become more environmentally sustainable.” 
Some customers—enough to matter—said they preferred buying from 
retailers that demonstrated an interest in their community. The com-
pany audits the factories of its suppliers to make sure they don’t exploit 
workers or pollute the environment. It actually severed ties with 26 of 
about 200 factories in 2008. Best Buy CEO, Brian Dunn, strives to stay 
 READING 
 Best Buy Wants Your Junk 
ok and Twitter (BBY
s-
er

146
process requires mostly unskilled and semiskilled workers. And in the global market, Euro-
pean lawmakers are increasingly requiring manufacturers to take back used products, because 
this means fewer products end up in landfills and there is less depletion of natural resources 
such as raw materials and fuel. 
 Designing products so that they can be more easily taken apart has given rise to yet another 
design consideration:  Design for disassembly (DFD)  . 
 Recycle 
 Recycling is sometimes an important consideration for designers.   Recycling  means recover-
ing materials for future use. This applies not only to manufactured parts but also to materials 
 Design for disassembly 
(DFD)  Design so that used prod-
ucts can be easily taken apart.  
 Recycling  Recovering 
 materials for future use. 
   • Oscar Mayer Deli Creations: Using 30 percent 
less paperboard than the previous design 
results in 1.2 million fewer pounds of packaging going to landfills. 
   • Kraft salad dressing: Using 19 percent less plastic per bottle trans-
lates to 3 million pounds fewer annually. Additionally the new design 
allows more bottles to be shipped per truckload, leading to an 
increase in transportation efficiency of 18 percent. 
 The company is also working to help the environment, reduce 
water pollution/soil erosion, and support biodiversity. Considering these 
 successes, Kraft’s recipe for sustainability is one that other companies 
should emulate. 
 The threat of global warming and the desire to protect the environment 
has many companies embracing sustainability initiatives. And they 
are finding that in many instances, there are cost savings in doing so. 
Among them is the Kraft Foods company, whose well-known brands 
include Cool Whip, Philadelphia Cream Cheese, DiGiorno pizza, Oscar 
Mayer, Oreo cookies, and Kraft cheeses and salad dressings. Kraft is 
the world’s second largest food company with 100,000 employees and 
annual revenues of $42 billion. The company is a member of the Dow 
Jones Sustainability Index and the Ethibel Sustainability Index. 
 The company has set some ambitious goals that it wants to 
achieve:
 • Reduce plant energy usage by 25 percent. 
   • Reduce plant energy-related carbon dioxide emissions by 
25 percent. 
 • Reduce plant water consumption by 15 percent. 
 • Reduce plant waste by 15 percent. 
   • Eliminate 150 million pounds of packaging material from the supply 
chain. 
 Some of Kraft’s successes have come from redesigned packag-
ing. The goal is ambitious. It will require more efficient packaging and 
a reduction in the amount of packaging material used. Kraft believes 
that the greatest opportunity to reduce the environmental impact of a 
package is early in the design phase. Their packaging designers world-
wide critically consider the amount of packaging used, how much post-
consumer material can be used, how much energy is used to create 
the packaging materials, how much CO 2  is generated as the materi-
als are created and formed, and how well the package fits the product 
physically. According to Kraft’s press releases, examples and benefits of 
recent packaging redesigns include:
    • DiGiorno and California Pizza Kitchen pizzas: Using slimmer cartons 
that allow shipment of two extra pizza boxes per case and 14 per-
cent more pizzas per pallet. This leads to a savings of approximately 
1.4 million pounds of packaging per year, and the ability to load 
more pizzas on each truck means there are fewer trucks on the road 
and less fuel consumed. 
 READING  
 Kraft Foods’ Recipe for Sustainability 
ng going to landfills
nt
n
 Kraft Natural Cheese new packaging zipper eliminates more than 
one million pounds of packaging per year. 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
147
used during production, such as lubricants and solvents. Reclaimed metal or plastic parts may 
be melted down and used to make different products. 
 Companies recycle for a variety of reasons, including
 1. 
Cost savings. 
 2. 
Environment concerns. 
 3. 
Environmental regulations. 
 An interesting note: Companies that want to do business in the European Union must show 
that a specified proportion of their products are recyclable. 
 The pressure to recycle has given rise to the term    design for recycling (DFR) , referring 
to product design that takes into account the ability to disassemble a used product to recover 
the recyclable parts.      
 Design for recycling (DFR)  
Design that facilitates the recov-
ery of materials and components 
in used products for reuse.  
1. Select an item that has a high annual dollar volume. This can be material, a purchased item, or a service.
2. Identify the function of the item.
3. Obtain answers to these kinds of questions:
 a. Is the item necessary; does it have value; can it be eliminated?
 b. Are there alternative sources for the item?
 c. Can the item be provided internally?
 d. What are the advantages of the present arrangement?
 e. What are the disadvantages of the present arrangement?
 f. Could another material, part, or service be used instead?
 g. Can specifications be less stringent to save cost or time?
 h. Can two or more parts be combined?
 i. Can more/less processing be done on the item to save cost or time?
 j. Do suppliers/providers have suggestions for improvements?
 k. Do employees have suggestions for improvements?
 l. Can packaging be improved or made less costly?
4. Analyze the answers obtained as well as answers to other questions that arise, and make recommendations.
 TABLE 4.1 
 Overview of value analysis 
 “Xerox’s experience with reuse, recycling and 
remanufacturing has not only kept waste out of landfills, but saved the 
company billions of dollars as it did so,” said Patricia Calkins, Xerox 
vice president, Environment, Health and Safety. “If that amount of waste 
were loaded into garbage trucks, it would fill more than 160,000 trucks, 
stretching more than 1,000 miles, from Seattle to the Mexican border. 
We believe sustainability is an integral part of developing products, 
serving customers and posting profits.” 
 Source: Xerox Press Release, November 9, 2007. 
 By recycling yet one more 5-pound toner cartridge from a Xerox multi-
function system, Xerox Corporation announced today it has surpassed a 
major sustainability milestone by diverting billions of pounds of electronic 
waste from landfills around the world through waste-free initiatives that 
create sustainability benefits for the company and its customers. 
 Launched in 1991, long before sustainability was on most com-
panies’ radar screens, Xerox’s environmental program achieved waste 
avoidance in two areas: reuse and recycling in imaging supplies and 
product take-back and recycling and parts reuse. In addition, Xerox 
integrates innovative environmental priorities into manufacturing oper-
ations to add to its recycling efforts. 
 READING 
 Xerox Diverts 2 Billion Pounds of Waste from Landfills 
through Green Initiatives 
andfills but saved the

148
you shop again. (Some stores, like Maria’s Market 
in Recycle City, credit your grocery bill for reusing 
old bags because they don’t have to buy as many new ones.) If you only 
purchase one or two items, you might not need a bag at all. 
 Recycling Igloos 
 In many parts of the country, supermarkets place recycling containers 
near the store to encourage their customers to recycle. (They can be 
any shape really, but Recycle City uses these brightly colored igloos 
because they’re fun.) 
 These igloos are used to collect bottles, cans, and plastic from Maria’s 
Market shoppers. Twice a week, trucks from the local Materials Recovery 
Facility come by to empty the igloos and take the items for recycling.  
 Cardboard Boxes 
 The cardboard boxes used to ship food to Maria’s Market can be put to 
a variety of other uses once the food has been unpacked. The folks at 
the market let Recycle City residents come by and pick up cartons for 
storing things or moving to a new home. Any cartons that aren’t claimed 
by the residents are broken down and put into a pile so they can be 
collected, recycled, and made into other things, like new boxes, paper 
bags, building insulation, animal bedding, or packaging materials.  
 Reduced Packaging 
 When the buyers at Maria’s Market place orders to restock the store, they 
try to order items with very little packaging, or that use ecological packaging 
(ones requiring as little energy and as few resources as possible to produce). 
 Maria’s buyers also try to stock products that come in refillable con-
tainers. Products that don’t harm the environment and come in ecologi-
cally friendly packages are called green products. 
 Packaging that isn’t environmentally friendly includes products that 
are wrapped in several layers of plastic, use plastic foam, or have indi-
vidually wrapped packages inside of a larger wrapped package. 
 Maria’s Market is the main supermarket in Recycle City. Maria tries to 
stock items and provide services in her store that reduce the amount 
of material going into the waste stream and encourage reuse and 
recycling. 
 Maria realized that the first and best thing she should do was to 
reduce the amount of waste her customers had to throw away after 
they bought products at her market. 
 Maria 
 To reduce the amount of waste and its impact on the environment, 
Maria began to stock items in the store that contained fewer harmful 
ingredients and used less packaging. To reduce packaging and wasted 
food, she created a section in the store where shoppers could buy food 
in bulk, measuring out the exact amounts they needed. 
 Maria also set up a program to reuse those things that could be 
reused, such as cardboard boxes that shoppers could use to carry 
their purchases and bring back to the store on their next visit. She 
also gave customers discounts for returning their plastic bags the next 
time they shopped and for bringing their own cloth sacks to carry gro-
ceries home. 
 Finally, Maria made sure that many of the items in the store could be 
easily recycled. She set up well-marked collection containers to make 
it easy for shoppers to participate in the market’s recycling program. 
Maria knows that recycling keeps useful materials from going into land-
fills, helping to preserve the land in and around Recycle City for other 
uses, like parks and schools. 
 Paper or Plastic? 
 Should you ask for a paper or plastic bag at the checkout counter? 
There’s no easy answer. The materials needed to make either bag come 
from our natural resources. 
    • Paper comes from wood, which comes from trees, which grow in 
the earth’s soil. 
 • Plastic is made from petroleum, also known as fossil fuel. Petroleum 
is made by the decomposition (breaking down) of ancient plants and 
animals inside the earth. 
 The trees needed to make paper are considered renewable 
resources. That means more trees can be planted to take the place of 
trees that are cut down to make paper and other products. But, trees 
take many years to replace because they grow slowly. Once paper is 
made, it can be recycled and used to create more paper goods. Making 
it into new paper, however, uses water and energy. 
 Petroleum needed to make plastic is considered a non-renewable 
resource. Like aluminum, tin, and steel, petroleum is not renewable 
because it is the result of geological processes that take millions of 
years to complete. When used up, the earth’s petroleum reserves will be 
gone for a long, long time. While plastic bags are easy to reuse, they’re 
seldom recycled, and lots and lots of them get dumped into landfills.  
 The best solution is to use a cloth bag or knapsack for grocery shop-
ping, or to bring your old plastic or paper bag back to the store when 
 READING 
 Recycle City: Maria’s Market 
new ones ) If you only
et
g
 
(continued)

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
149
 4.8 OTHER DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
  Aside from legal, ethical, environmental, and human considerations designers must also take 
into account product or service life cycles, how much standardization to incorporate, product 
or service reliability, and the range of operating conditions under which a product or service 
must function. These topics are discussed in this section. We begin with life cycles. 
 Strategies for Product or Service Life Stages 
 Most, but not all, products and services go through a series of stages over their useful life, 
sometimes referred to as their life cycle, as shown in  Figure 4.1 . Demand typically varies by 
phase. Different phases call for different strategies. In every phase, forecasts of demand and 
cash flow are key inputs for strategy. 
 When a product or service is introduced, it may be treated as a curiosity item. Many poten-
tial buyers may suspect that all the bugs haven’t been worked out and that the price may drop 
after the introductory period. Strategically, companies must carefully weigh the trade-offs 
in getting all the bugs out versus getting a leap on the competition, as well as getting to the 
market at an advantageous time. For example, introducing new high-tech products or features 
during peak back-to-school buying periods or holiday buying periods can be highly desirable. 
 LO4.9 Briefly describe the 
phases in product design and 
development.
 FIGURE 4.1 
 Products or services often go 
through stages over time 
Time
0
Demand
In
tr
od
uc
tio
n 
Gr
owth
  
M
at
u
ri
t
y
 
D
e
c
li
n
e 
to reduce food waste. For larger needs, they can buy bulk quantities, 
which usually use less packaging material and cost less. 
 When purchasing fresh foods or buying in bulk, shoppers can put 
their purchases into refillable containers they bring to the store or into 
the recyclable or reusable bags Maria provides. 
 Paper Towels and Other Paper Items 
 Many paper products on the shelves today have already been recycled. 
Buying recycled products saves valuable natural resources and helps 
to create a market for those materials. When manufacturers know that 
shoppers want recyclable goods, they will make more of them. 
 In Maria’s Market, the popularity of paper towels and toilet paper 
made from recycled materials ensures that fewer new trees have to be 
cut down to produce new products. 
 Source: Excerpted from  http://www.eps.gov/recyclecity/print/supermarket.htm . 
 Maria’s buyers let the manufacturers who make products for the gro-
cery shelves know that they and their Recycle City customers would rather 
buy products wrapped in environmentally friendly packages than ones that 
aren’t. Using this kind of packaging is good for the manufacturer’s business.  
 Bulk and Fresh Foods 
 Packaging materials make up more than 30 percent of all consumer 
waste. Maria’s Market offers shoppers many fresh foods and bulk foods 
to help reduce the amount of waste from too much packaging. 
 Fresh foods, such as bananas, oranges, and nuts, come in their own 
natural packaging and are excellent sources of nutrition. 
 Bulk items and food purchased in bulk quantities allow Maria’s 
shoppers to decide exactly how much they want to keep on hand. For 
small needs, folks measure out the exact quantity they want, helping 
(concluded

150 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
It is important to have a reasonable forecast of initial demand so an adequate supply of prod-
uct or an adequate service capacity is in place. 
 Over time, design improvements and increasing demand yield higher reliability and lower 
costs, leading the growth in demand. In the growth phase, it is important to obtain accurate 
projections of the demand growth rate and how long that will persist, and then to ensure that 
capacity increases coincide with increasing demand. 
 In the next phase, the product or service reaches maturity, and demand levels off. Few, if 
any, design changes are needed. Generally, costs are low and productivity is high. New uses 
for products or services can extend their life and increase the market size. Examples include 
baking soda, duct tape, and vinegar. The maker of Legos has found a way to grow its market 
as described in the following reading. 
 In the decline phase, decisions must be made on whether to discontinue a product or ser-
vice and replace it with new ones or abandon the market, or to attempt to find new uses or 
new users for the existing product or service. For example, duct tape and baking soda are 
two products that have been employed well beyond their original uses of taping heating and 
cooling ducts and cooking. The advantages of keeping existing products or services can be 
tremendous. The same workers can produce the product or provide the service using much of 
the same equipment, the same supply chain, and perhaps the same distribution channels. Con-
sequently, costs tend to be very low, and additional resource needs and training needs are low. 
 Some products do not exhibit life cycles: wooden pencils; paper clips; nails; knives, forks, 
and spoons; drinking glasses; and similar items. However, most new products do. 
 Some service life cycles are related to the life cycles of products. For example, as older prod-
ucts are phased out, services such as installation and repair of the older products also phase out. 
 Wide variations exist in the amount of time a particular product or service takes to pass 
through a given phase of its life cycle: some pass through various stages in a relatively short 
period; others take considerably longer. Often it is a matter of the basic  need for the item and 
the  rate of technological change.  Some toys, novelty items, and style items have a life cycle of 
less than one year, whereas other, more useful items, such as clothes washers and dryers, may 
last for many years before yielding to technological change. 
 International Design Excellence Award Winners: The Technogym Recline Personal is an recumbent bike that integrates ergonomic 
design, cardiovascular exercise, and entertainment, making it suitable for the home or office. Designed by Dimitriy Sergeev from 
Bauman Moscow State Technical University, the CookPit is a complex kitchen cooker system that was developed for small kitchens, 
eliminating the need for bulky appliances. The various saucepans can be nested as an effective way to save space. It can be used as an 
oven, steamer, slow cooker, and deep fryer.  

151
 Degree of Standardization 
 An important issue that often arises in both product/service design and process design is the 
degree of standardization.   Standardization   refers to the extent to which there is absence of vari-
ety in a product, service, or process. Standardized products are made in large quantities of identi-
cal items; calculators, computers, and 2 percent milk are examples. Standardized service implies 
that every customer or item processed receives essentially the same service. An automatic car 
wash is a good example; each car, regardless of how clean or dirty it is, receives the same ser-
vice. Standardized processes deliver standardized service or produce standardized goods. 
 Standardization carries a number of important benefits as well as certain disadvantages. 
Standardized products are immediately available to customers. Standardized products mean 
interchangeable parts,  which greatly lower the cost of production while increasing productiv-
ity and making replacement or repair relatively easy compared with that of customized parts. 
Design costs are generally lower. For example, automobile producers standardize key com-
ponents of automobiles across product lines; components such as brakes, electrical systems, 
and other “under-the-skin” parts would be the same for all car models. By reducing variety, 
companies save time and money while increasing quality and reliability of their products. 
 Another benefit of standardization is reduced time and cost to train employees and reduced 
time to design jobs. Similarly, scheduling of work, inventory handling, and purchasing and 
accounting activities become much more routine, and quality is more consistent. 
 Lack of standardization can at times lead to serious difficulties and competitive struggles. 
For example, the use by U.S. manufacturers of the English system of measurement, while 
most of the rest of the world’s manufacturers use the metric system, has led to problems in 
selling U.S. goods in foreign countries and in buying foreign machines for use in the United 
States. This may make it more difficult for U.S. firms to compete in the European Union. 
 Standardization also has disadvantages. A major one relates to the reduction in variety. 
This can limit the range of customers to whom a product or service appeals. And that creates a 
risk that a competitor will introduce a better product or greater variety and realize a competi-
tive advantage. Another disadvantage is that a manufacturer may freeze (standardize) a design 
prematurely and, once the design is frozen, find compelling reasons to resist modification. 
 Obviously, designers must consider important issues related to standardization when mak-
ing choices. The major advantages and disadvantages of standardization are summarized in 
 Table 4.2 . 
 Designing for Mass Customization 
 Companies like standardization because it enables them to produce high volumes of relatively 
low-cost products, albeit products with little variety. Customers, on the other hand, typically 
prefer more variety, although they like the low cost. The question for producers is how to 
resolve these issues without (1) losing the benefits of standardization and (2) incurring a host 
of problems that are often linked to variety. These include increasing the resources needed to 
 Standardization  Extent to 
which a product, service, or pro-
cess lacks variety. 
 LO4.10  Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 LO4.10  Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 Question: 
 Can you think of other companies that have used new colors to extend 
or grow the market for their products?  
 Source. “Lego Shrugs Off Toy-Market Blues,” The Wall Street Journal, February 
21, 2013. 
 Lego A/S overcame the recent doldrums in the toy market as well as 
new competition in the building-block segment to continue its market 
success, increasing revenues and achieving a close tie for the No. 2 slot 
in the global toy business. 
 “The Danish toy maker enjoyed sustained success for its popular 
Lego City and Lego Star Wars sets. Its new Lego Friends theme, tar-
geting girls, sold twice as well as initial expectations and helped triple 
sales to girls.” 
 READING 
 Lego A/S in the Pink 
new colors to extend
d
l
d

152 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
achieve design variety; increasing variety in the production process, which would add to the 
skills necessary to produce products, causing a decrease in productivity; creating an addi-
tional inventory burden during and after production, by having to carry replacement parts for 
the increased variety of parts; and adding to the difficulty of diagnosing and repairing product 
failures. The answer, at least for some companies, is   mass customization  ,  a strategy of pro-
ducing standardized goods or services, but incorporating some degree of customization in the 
final product or service. Several tactics make this possible. One is  delayed differentiation, and 
another is  modular design. 
 Delayed differentiation  is a  postponement  tactic: the process of producing, but not 
quite completing, a product or service, postponing completion until customer preferences 
or specifications are known. There are a number of variations of this. In the case of goods, 
almost-finished units might be held in inventory until customer orders are received, at which 
time customized features are incorporated, according to customer requests. For example, 
furniture makers can produce dining room sets, but not apply stain, allowing customers 
a choice of stains. Once the choice is made, the stain can be applied in a relatively short 
time, thus eliminating a long wait for customers, giving the seller a competitive advantage. 
Similarly, various e-mail or Internet services can be delivered to customers as standardized 
packages, which can then be modified according to the customer’s preferences. Hewlett-
Packard printers that are made in the United States but intended for foreign markets are 
mostly completed in domestic assembly plants and then finalized closer to the country of 
use. The result of delayed differentiation is a product or service with customized features 
that can be quickly produced, appealing to the customers’ desire for variety and speed of 
delivery, and yet one that for the most part is standardized, enabling the producer to realize 
the benefits of standardized production. This technique is not new. Manufacturers of men’s 
clothing, for example, produce suits with pants that have legs that are unfinished, allowing 
customers to tailor choices as to the exact length and whether to have cuffs or no cuffs. 
What is new is the extent to which business organizations are finding ways to incorporate 
this concept into a broad range of products and services. 
 Modular design  is a form of standardization. Modules represent groupings of component 
parts into subassemblies, usually to the point where the individual parts lose their separate 
identity. One familiar example of modular design is computers, which have modular parts 
that can be replaced if they become defective. By arranging modules in different configu-
rations, different computer capabilities can be obtained. For mass customization, modular 
design enables producers to quickly assemble products with modules to achieve a custom-
ized configuration for an individual customer, avoiding the long customer wait that would 
occur if individual parts had to be assembled. Dell Computers has successfully used this con-
cept to become a dominant force in the PC industry by offering consumers the opportunity to 
configure modules according to their own specifications. Many other computer manufactur-
ers now use a similar approach. Modular design also is found in the construction industry. 
One firm in Rochester, New York, makes prefabricated motel rooms complete with wiring, 
plumbing, and even room decorations in its factory and then moves the complete rooms by 
rail to the construction site, where they are integrated into the structure.  
 One advantage of modular design of equipment compared with nonmodular design is that 
failures are often easier to diagnose and remedy because there are fewer pieces to investigate. 
 Mass customization  
A strategy of producing basi-
cally standardized goods, but 
incorporating some degree of 
customization. 
 Delayed differentiation  
The process of producing, but 
not quite completing, a product 
or service until customer prefer-
ences are known. 
 Modular design  A form  
of standardization in which 
 component parts are grouped 
into modules that are easily 
replaced or interchanged. 
 Advantages 
 1. Fewer parts to deal with in inventory and in manufacturing. 
 2. Reduced training costs and time. 
 3. More routine purchasing, handling, and inspection procedures. 
 4. Orders fillable from inventory. 
 5. Opportunities for long production runs and automation. 
 6.  Need for fewer parts justifies increased expenditures on perfecting designs 
and improving quality control procedures. 
 Disadvantages 
 1. Designs may be frozen with too many imperfections remaining. 
 2. High cost of design changes increases resistance to improvements. 
 3. Decreased variety results in less consumer appeal. 
 TABLE 4.2 
 Advantages and disadvantages of 
standardization 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
153
Similar advantages are found in ease of repair and replace-
ment; the faulty module is conveniently removed and 
replaced with a good one. The manufacture and assembly of 
modules generally involve simplifications: Fewer parts are 
involved, so purchasing and inventory control become more 
routine, fabrication and assembly operations become more 
standardized, and training costs often are relatively low. 
 The main disadvantages of modular design stem from 
the decrease in variety: The number of possible configura-
tions of modules is much less than the number of possible 
configurations based on individual components. Another 
disadvantage that is sometimes encountered is the inability 
to disassemble a module in order to replace a faulty part; the 
entire module must be scrapped—usually at a higher cost.  
 Reliability 
 Reliability is a measure of the ability of a product, a part, 
a service, or an entire system to perform its intended func-
tion under a prescribed set of conditions. The importance 
of reliability is underscored by its use by prospective buy-
ers in comparing alternatives and by sellers as one deter-
minant of price. Reliability also can have an impact on repeat sales, reflect on the product’s 
image, and, if it is too low, create legal implications. Reliability is also a consideration for 
sustainability; the higher the reliability of a product, the fewer the resources that will be needed 
to maintain it, and the less frequently it will involve the three Rs. 
 The term   failure  is used to describe a situation in which an item does not perform as 
intended. This includes not only instances in which the item does not function at all, but also 
instances in which the item’s performance is substandard or it functions in a way not intended. 
For example, a smoke alarm might fail to respond to the presence of smoke (not operate at all), 
it might sound an alarm that is too faint to provide an adequate warning (substandard perfor-
mance), or it might sound an alarm even though no smoke is present (unintended response). 
 Reliabilities are always specified with respect to certain conditions, called   normal 
 operating conditions  .  These can include load, temperature, and humidity ranges as well as 
operating procedures and maintenance schedules. Failure of users to heed these conditions 
often results in premature failure of parts or complete systems. For example, using a pas-
senger car to tow heavy loads will cause excess wear and tear on the drive train; driving over 
potholes or curbs often results in untimely tire failure; and using a calculator to drive nails 
might have a marked impact on its usefulness for performing mathematical operations. 
 Improving Reliability.  Reliability can be improved in a number of ways, some of which 
are listed in  Table 4.3 . 
 Because overall system reliability is a function of the reliability of individual components, 
improvements in their reliability can increase system reliability. Unfortunately, inadequate 
production or assembly procedures can negate even the best of designs, and this is often a 
source of failures. System reliability can be increased by the use of backup components. Fail-
ures in actual use often can be reduced by upgrading user education and refining maintenance 
recommendations or procedures. Finally, it may be possible to increase the overall reliability 
of the system by simplifying the system (thereby reducing the number of components that 
could cause the system to fail) or altering component relationships (e.g., increasing the reli-
ability of interfaces). 
 A fundamental question concerning improving reliability is: How much reliability is 
needed? Obviously, the reliability needed for a household light bulb isn’t in the same category 
as the reliability needed for an airplane. So the answer to the question depends on the poten-
tial benefits of improvements and on the cost of those improvements. Generally speaking, 
reliability improvements become increasingly costly. Thus, although benefits initially may 
increase at a much faster rate than costs, the opposite eventually becomes true. The optimal 
 LO4.10  Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 Reliability  The ability of a 
product, part, or system to per-
form its intended function under 
a prescribed set of conditions.  
 Failure  Situation in which a 
product, part, or system does not 
perform as intended.  
 Normal operating conditions   
The set of conditions under 
which an item’s reliability is 
specified. 
Employees on the production line at the new Dell Global Operation 
Facility in China. With the capacity to produce up to seven million 
units a year, the site will manufacture electronics for the Chinese 
market as well as markets in Europe and the United States.

154 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
level of reliability is the point where the incremental benefit received equals the incremental 
cost of obtaining it. In the short term, this trade-off is made in the context of relatively fixed 
parameters (e.g., costs). However, in the longer term, efforts to improve reliability and reduce 
costs can lead to higher optimal levels of reliability. 
 Robust Design 
 Some products or services will function as designed only within a narrow range of conditions, 
while others will perform as designed over a much broader range of conditions. The latter 
have   robust design  .  Consider a pair of fine leather boots—obviously not made for trekking 
through mud or snow. Now consider a pair of heavy rubber boots—just the thing for mud or 
snow. The rubber boots have a design that is more  robust than that of the fine leather boots. 
 The more robust a product or service, the less likely it will fail due to a change in the envi-
ronment in which it is used or in which it is performed. Hence, the more designers can build 
robustness into the product or service, the better it should hold up, resulting in a higher level 
of customer satisfaction. 
 A similar argument can be made for robust design as it pertains to the production process. 
Environmental factors can have a negative effect on the quality of a product or service. The 
more resistant a design is to those influences, the less likely is a negative effect. For exam-
ple, many products go through a heating process: food products, ceramics, steel, petroleum 
products, and pharmaceutical products. Furnaces often do not heat uniformly; heat may vary 
either by position in an oven or over an extended period of production. One approach to this 
problem might be to develop a superior oven; another might be to design a system that moves 
the product during heating to achieve uniformity. A robust-design approach would develop a 
product that is unaffected by minor variations in temperature during processing. 
 Taguchi’s Approach.  Japanese engineer Genichi Taguchi’s approach is based on the concept 
of robust design. His premise is that it is often easier to design a product that is insensitive to envi-
ronmental factors, either in manufacturing or in use, than to control the environmental factors. 
 The central feature of Taguchi’s approach—and the feature used most often by U.S. 
 companies—is  parameter design.  This involves determining the specification settings for 
both the product and the process that will result in robust design in terms of manufacturing 
variations, product deterioration, and conditions during use. 
 The Taguchi approach modifies the conventional statistical methods of experimental design. 
Consider this example. Suppose a company will use 12 chemicals in a new product it intends 
to produce. There are two suppliers for these chemicals, but the chemical concentrations vary 
slightly between the two suppliers. Classical design of experiments would require 2 12     4,096 
test runs to determine which combination of chemicals would be optimum. Taguchi’s approach 
would involve only testing a portion of the possible combinations. Relying on experts to iden-
tify the variables that would be most likely to affect important performance, the number of 
combinations would be dramatically reduced, perhaps to, say, 32. Identifying the best com-
bination in the smaller sample might be a near-optimal combination instead of the optimal 
combination. The value of this approach is its ability to achieve major advances in product or 
process design fairly quickly, using a relatively small number of experiments. 
 Critics charge that Taguchi’s methods are inefficient and incorrect, and often lead to non-
optimal solutions. Nonetheless, his methods are widely used and have been credited with 
helping to achieve major improvements in U.S. products and manufacturing processes. 
 Robust design  Design that 
results in products or services 
that can function over a broad 
range of conditions.  
 LO4.10 Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 1. Improve component design. 
 2. Improve production and/or assembly techniques. 
 3. Improve testing. 
 4. Use backups. 
 5. Improve preventive maintenance procedures. 
 6. Improve user education. 
 7. Improve system design. 
 TABLE 4.3 
 Potential ways to improve 
reliability 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
155
 Degree of Newness  
 Product or service design change can range from the modification of an existing product or 
service to an entirely new product or service:
 1. 
Modification of an existing product or service. 
 2. 
Expansion of an existing product line or service offering. 
 3. 
Clone of a competitor’s product or service. 
 4. 
New product or service. 
 The degree of change affects the newness to the organization and the newness to the mar-
ket. For the organization, a low level of newness can mean a fairly quick and easy transition 
to producing the new product, while a high level of newness would likely mean a slower 
and more difficult, and therefore more costly, transition. For the market, a low level of new-
ness would mean little difficulty with market acceptance, but possibly low profit potential. 
Even in instances of low profit potential, organizations might use this strategy to maintain 
market share. A high level of newness, on the other hand, might mean more difficulty with 
acceptance, or it might mean a rapid gain in market share with a high potential for profits. 
Unfortunately, there is no way around these issues. It is important to carefully assess the 
risks and potential benefits of any design change, taking into account clearly identified cus-
tomer wants.  
 Quality Function Deployment 
 Obtaining input from customers is essential to assure that they will want what is offered for 
sale. Although obtaining input can be informal through discussions with customers, there is 
a formal way to document customer wants.    Quality function deployment (QFD)    is a struc-
tured approach for integrating the “voice of the customer” into both the product and service 
development process. The purpose is to ensure that customer requirements are factored into 
every aspect of the process. Listening to and understanding the customer is the central feature 
of QFD. Requirements often take the form of a general statement such as, “It should be easy 
to adjust the cutting height of the lawn mower.” Once the requirements are known, they must 
be translated into technical terms related to the product or service. For example, a statement 
about changing the height of the lawn mower may relate to the mechanism used to accomplish 
that, its position, instructions for use, tightness of the spring that controls the mechanism, or 
materials needed. For manufacturing purposes, these must be related to the materials, dimen-
sions, and equipment used for processing. 
 The structure of QFD is based on a set of matrices. The main matrix relates customer 
requirements (what) and their corresponding technical requirements (how). This matrix is 
illustrated in  Figure 4.2 . The matrix provides a structure for data collection. 
 LO4.10  Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 Quality function deployment 
(QFD)  An approach that 
integrates the “voice of the cus-
tomer” into both product and 
service development. 
 LO4.10  Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 FIGURE 4.2 
 An example of the house of 
quality: the main QFD matrix 
 Source: Ernst and Young Consulting Group, 
 Total Quality (Homewood, IL:  Dow-Jones 
Irwin, 1991), p. 121. Reprinted by 
permission. 
Technical
requirements
Importance
   to customer
Customer
requirements
Relationship
matrix

156 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 Additional features are usually added to the basic matrix to broaden the scope of  analysis. 
Typical additional features include importance weightings and competitive evaluations. 
A correlational matrix is usually constructed for technical requirements; this can reveal con-
flicting technical requirements. With these additional features, the set of matrices has the form 
illustrated in  Figure 4.3 . It is often referred to as the  house of quality  because of its houselike 
appearance. 
 An analysis using this format is shown in  Figure  4.4 . The data relate to a commercial 
printer (customer) and the company that supplies the paper. At first glance, the display appears 
complex. It contains a considerable amount of information for product and process planning. 
Therefore, let’s break it up into separate parts and consider them one at a time. To start, a key 
part is the list of customer requirements on the left side of the figure. Next, note the tech-
nical requirements, listed vertically near the top. The key relationships and their degree of 
importance are shown in the center of the figure. The circle with a dot inside indicates the 
strongest positive relationship; that is, it denotes the most important technical requirements for 
satisfying customer requirements. Now look at the “importance to customer” numbers that are 
shown next to each customer requirement (3 is the most important). Designers will take into 
account the importance values and the strength of correlation in determining where to focus 
the  greatest effort.  
 Next, consider the correlation matrix at the top of the “house.” Of special interest is the 
strong negative correlation between “paper thickness” and “roll roundness.” Designers will 
have to find some way to overcome that or make a trade-off decision. 
 On the right side of the figure is a competitive evaluation comparing the supplier’s per-
formance on the customer requirements with each of the two key competitors (A and B). For 
example, the supplier (X) is worst on the first customer requirement and best on the third 
customer requirement. The line connects the X performances. Ideally, design will cause all of 
the Xs to be in the highest positions. 
 Across the bottom of  Figure 4.4  are importance weightings, target values, and techni-
cal evaluations. The technical evaluations can be interpreted in a manner similar to that of 
the competitive evaluations (note the line connecting the Xs). The target values typically 
contain technical specifications, which we will not discuss. The importance weightings are 
the sums of values assigned to the relationships (see the lower right-hand key for relation-
ship weights). The 3 in the first column is the product of the importance to the customer, 3, 
and the small (Δ) weight, 1. The importance weightings and target evaluations help design-
ers focus on desired results. In this example, the first technical requirement has the lowest 
importance weighting, while the next four technical requirements all have relatively high 
importance weightings. 
 The house of quality approach involves a sequence of “houses,” beginning with design 
characteristics, which leads to specific components, then production processes, and finally, 
 FIGURE 4.3 
 The house of quality 
Customer
requirements
Relationship
matrix
Competitive
assessment
Specifications
or
target values
Design
requirements
Correlation
matrix

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
157
 FIGURE 4.4 
 An example of the house 
of quality  
Technical
requirements
Importance
        to
                     customer
Customer
requirements
Paper will not tear
Consistent finish
No ink bleed
Prints cleanly
3
1
2
3
Paper width
Paper thickness
Roll roundness
Coating thickness
Tensile strength
Paper color
Competitive
evaluation
X = Us
A = Competitor A
B = Competitor B
X
A B
X
A
B
X
A
B
X AB
1
2
3
4
5
(5 is best)
Importance weighting
3
27
36
36
27
9
w mm
t mm
C microns
5 lbs.
1 mm
 total runout
within
approved panel
Target values
5
4
3
2
1
Technical
evaluation
X
A
B
X
A
B
X
A
B
X
A
B
X
A
B
X
A
B
Strong positive
Positive
Negative
Strong negative
Correlations
Strong = 9
Medium = 3
Small = 1
Relationships
 FIGURE 4.5 
 The house of quality sequence 
House 1
House 2
House 3
House 4
Design
characteristics
Customer
requirements
Design
characteristics
Specific
components
Production
processes
Specific
components
Production
processes
Quality
plan
a quality plan. The sequence is illustrated in  Figure 4.5 . Although the details of each house 
are beyond the scope of this text,  Figure 4.5  provides a conceptual understanding of the 
progression involved.  

158 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 The Kano Model 
 The  Kano model  is a theory of product and service design developed by Dr. Noriaki Kano, a 
Japanese professor, who offered a perspective on customer perceptions of quality different from 
the traditional view that “more is better.” Instead, he proposed different categories of quality and 
posited that understanding them would better position designers to assess and address  quality 
needs. His model provides insights into the attributes that are perceived to be important to cus-
tomers. The model employs three definitions of quality: basic, performance, and excitement. 
 Basic quality refers to customer requirements that have only a limited effect on customer 
satisfaction if present, but lead to dissatisfaction if not present. For example, putting a very 
short cord on an electrical appliance will likely result in customer dissatisfaction, but beyond 
a certain length (e.g., 4 feet), adding more cord will not lead to increased levels of customer 
satisfaction. Performance quality refers to customer requirements that generate satisfaction or 
dissatisfaction in proportion to their level of functionality and appeal. For example, increasing 
the tread life of a tire or the amount of time house paint will last will add to customer satisfac-
tion. Excitement quality refers to a feature or attribute that was unexpected by the customer 
and causes excitement (the “wow” factor), such as a voucher for dinner for two at the hotel 
restaurant when checking in.  Figure 4.6A  portrays how the three definitions of quality influ-
ence customer satisfaction or dissatisfaction relative to the degree of implementation. Note 
that features that are perceived by customers as basic quality result in dissatisfaction if they 
are missing or at low levels, but do not result in customer satisfaction if they are present, even 
at high levels. Performance factors can result in satisfaction or dissatisfaction, depending on 
the degree to which they are present. Excitement factors, because they are unexpected, do not 
result in dissatisfaction when they are absent or at low levels, but have the potential for dispro-
portionate levels of satisfaction if they are present. 
 Over time, features that excited become performance features, and performance features 
soon become basic quality features, as illustrated in  Figure 4.6B . The rates at which various 
design elements are migrating is an important input from marketing that will enable design-
ers to continue to satisfy and delight customers and not waste efforts on improving what have 
become basic quality features. 
 The lesson of the Kano model is that design elements that fall into each aspect of quality must 
first be determined. Once basic needs have been met, additional efforts in those areas should not 
be pursued. For performance features, cost–benefit analysis comes into play, and these features 
should be included as long as the benefit exceeds the cost. Excitement features pose somewhat 
of a challenge. Customers are not likely to indicate excitement factors in surveys because they 
don’t know that they want them. However, small increases in such factors produce dispropor-
tional increases in customer satisfaction and generally increase brand loyalty, so it is important 
for companies to strive to identify and include these features when economically feasible. 
 The Kano model can be used in conjunction with QFD as well as in six sigma projects (see 
Chapter 9 for a discussion of six sigma). 
 LO4.10 Discuss several key 
issues in product or service 
design.
 FIGURE 4.6A 
 The Kano model 
Excitement
quality
Satisfied
Dissatisfied
Low
functionality
and appeal
High
functionality
and appeal
Performance
quality
Basic quality

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
159
 4.9  PHASES IN PRODUCT DESIGN 
AND DEVELOPMENT 
 Product design and development generally proceeds in a series of phases (see  Table 4.4 ): 
 Feasibility analysis.  Feasibility analysis entails market analysis (demand), economic 
analysis (development cost and production cost, profit potential), and technical analysis 
(capacity requirements and availability, and the skills needed). Also, it is necessary to 
answer the question, Does it fit with the mission? It requires collaboration among mar-
keting, finance, accounting, engineering, and operations. 
 Product specifications.  This involves detailed descriptions of what is needed to meet 
(or exceed) customer wants, and requires collaboration between legal, marketing, 
and operations. 
 Process specifications.  Once product specifications have been set, attention turns to 
specifications for the process that will be needed to produce the product. Alternatives 
must be weighed in terms of cost, availability of resources, profit potential, and quality. 
This involves collaboration between accounting and operations. 
 Prototype development.  With product and process specifications complete, one 
(or a few) units are made to see if there are any problems with the product or process 
specifications. 
 Design review. At this stage, any necessary changes are made or the project is aban-
doned. Marketing, finance, engineering, design, and operations collaborate to determine 
whether to proceed or abandon. 
 Market test.  A market test is used to determine the extent of consumer acceptance. If 
unsuccessful, the product returns to the design review phase. This phase is handled by 
marketing. 
 Product introduction.  The new product is promoted. This phase is handled by marketing.  
 Follow-up evaluation.  Based on user feedback, changes may be made or forecasts 
refined. This phase is handled by marketing. 
 FIGURE 4.6B 
 As time passes, excitement 
factors become performance 
factors, and performance factors 
become basic factors 
Excitement
quality
Satisfied
Time
Dissatisfied
Low
functionality
and appeal
High
functionality
and appeal
Performance
quality
Basic quality
 TABLE 4.4 
 Phases in the product 
development process 
1. Feasibility analysis
5. Design review
2. Product specifications
6. Market test
3. Process specifications
7. Product introduction
4. Prototype development
8. Follow-up evaluation

160 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 4.10 DESIGNING FOR PRODUCTION 
  In this section, you will learn about design techniques that have greater applicability for 
the design of products than the design of services. Even so, you will see that they do have 
some relevance for service design. The topics include concurrent engineering, computer-
assisted design, designing for assembly and disassembly, and the use of components for 
similar products. 
 Concurrent Engineering 
 To achieve a smoother transition from product design to production, and to decrease product 
development time, many companies are using  simultaneous development,  or concurrent engi-
neering. In its narrowest sense,   concurrent engineering  means bringing design and manu-
facturing engineering people together early in the design phase to simultaneously develop 
the product and the processes for creating the product. More recently, this concept has been 
enlarged to include manufacturing personnel (e.g., materials specialists) and marketing and 
purchasing personnel in loosely integrated, cross-functional teams. In addition, the views of 
suppliers and customers are frequently sought. The purpose, of course, is to achieve product 
designs that reflect customer wants as well as manufacturing capabilities. 
 Traditionally, designers developed a new product without any input from manufacturing, 
and then turned over the design to manufacturing, which would then have to develop a process 
for making the new product. This “over-the-wall” approach created tremendous challenges 
for manufacturing, generating numerous conflicts and greatly increasing the time needed to 
successfully produce a new product. It also contributed to an “us versus them” mentality. 
 For these and similar reasons, the simultaneous development approach has great appeal. 
Among the key advantages of this approach are the following:
 1. 
Manufacturing personnel are able to identify production capabilities and capacities. 
Very often, they have some latitude in design in terms of selecting suitable materials and 
processes. Knowledge of production capabilities can help in the selection process. In 
addition, cost and quality considerations can be greatly influenced by design, and con-
flicts during production can be greatly reduced. 
 2. 
Design or procurement of critical tooling, some of which might have long lead times, 
can occur early in the process. This can result in a major shortening of the product 
development process, which could be a key competitive advantage. 
 3. 
The technical feasibility of a particular design or a portion of a design can be assessed 
early on. Again, this can avoid serious problems during production. 
 4. 
The emphasis can be on  problem resolution instead of  conflict resolution. 
 However, despite the advantages of concurrent engineering, a number of potential difficul-
ties exist in this co-development approach. Two key ones are the following:
 1. 
Long-standing boundaries between design and manufacturing can be difficult to over-
come. Simply bringing a group of people together and thinking that they will be able to 
work together effectively is probably naive. 
 2. 
There must be extra communication and flexibility if the process is to work, and these 
can be difficult to achieve. 
 Hence, managers should plan to devote special attention if this approach is to work. 
 Computer-Aided Design (CAD) 
 Computers are increasingly used for product design.   Computer-aided design (CAD) uses 
computer graphics for product design. The designer can modify an existing design or cre-
ate a new one on a monitor by means of a light pen, a keyboard, a joystick, or a similar 
device. Once the design is entered into the computer, the designer can maneuver it on the 
screen: It can be rotated to provide the designer with different perspectives, it can be split 
 Concurrent engineering  
Bringing engineering design 
and manufacturing personnel 
together early in the design 
phase.  
 Computer-aided design 
(CAD)   Product design using 
computer graphics.  

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
161
apart to give the designer a view of the inside, and a portion of it can be enlarged for 
closer examination. The designer can obtain a printed version of the completed design and 
file it electronically, making it accessible to people in the firm who need this information 
(e.g., marketing, operations). 
 A growing number of products are being designed in this way, including transformers, 
automobile parts, aircraft parts, integrated circuits, and electric motors. 
 A major benefit of CAD is the increased productivity of designers. No longer is it neces-
sary to laboriously prepare mechanical drawings of products or parts and revise them repeat-
edly to correct errors or incorporate revisions. A rough estimate is that CAD increases the 
productivity of designers from 3 to 10 times. A second major benefit of CAD is the creation 
of a database for manufacturing that can supply needed information on product geometry and 
dimensions, tolerances, material specifications, and so on. It should be noted, however, that 
CAD needs this database to function and that this entails a considerable amount of effort. 
 Some CAD systems allow the designer to perform engineering and cost analyses on pro-
posed designs. For instance, the computer can determine the weight and volume of a part and 
do stress analysis as well. When there are a number of alternative designs, the computer can 
quickly go through the possibilities and identify the best one, given the designer’s criteria. 
CAD that includes finite element analysis (FEA) capability can greatly shorten the time to 
market of new products. It enables developers to perform simulations that aid in the design, 
analysis, and commercialization of new products. Designers in industries such as aeronautics, 
biomechanics, and automotives use FEA. 
 Production Requirements 
 As noted earlier in the chapter, designers must take into account  production  capabilities. 
Design needs to clearly understand the capabilities of production (e.g., equipment, skills, 
types of materials, schedules, technologies, special abilities). This helps in choosing designs 
that match capabilities. When opportunities and capabilities do not match, management 
must consider the potential for expanding or changing capabilities to take advantage of those 
opportunities. 
 Forecasts  of future demand can be very useful, supplying information on the timing and 
volume of demand, and information on demands for new products and services. 
 An architect is using an iPad 
CAD (computer-aided design)
application to model a 3D layout 
design of a new house. 

162 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 Manufacturability  is a key concern for manufactured goods: Ease of fabrication and/or 
assembly is important for cost, productivity, and quality. With services, ease of providing the 
service, cost, productivity, and quality are of great concern. 
 The term    design for manufacturing (DFM)    is used to indicate the designing of products 
that are compatible with an organization’s capabilities. A related concept in manufacturing is 
  design for assembly (DFA)    .  A good design must take into account not only how a product 
will be fabricated, but also how it will be assembled. Design for assembly focuses on reducing 
the number of parts in an assembly, as well as on the assembly methods and sequence that 
will be employed. Another, more general term,   manufacturability  ,  is sometimes used when 
referring to the ease with which products can be fabricated and/or assembled. 
 Component Commonality 
 Companies often have multiple products or services to offer customers. Often, these products 
or services have a high degree of similarity of features and components. This is particularly 
true of  product families,  but it is also true of many services. Companies can realize significant 
benefits when a part can be used in multiple products. For example, car manufacturers employ 
this tactic by using internal components such as water pumps, engines, and transmissions 
on several automobile nameplates. In addition to the savings in design time, companies reap 
benefits through standard training for assembly and installation, increased opportunities for 
savings by buying in bulk from suppliers, and commonality of parts for repair, which reduces 
the inventory dealers and auto parts stores must carry. Similar benefits accrue in services. 
For example, in automobile repair, component commonality means less training is needed 
because the variety of jobs is reduced. The same applies to appliance repair, where com-
monality and  substitutability  of parts are typical. Multiple-use forms in financial and medical 
services is another example. Computer software often comprises a number of modules that 
are commonly used for similar applications, thereby saving the time and cost to write the code 
for major portions of the software. Tool manufacturers use a design that allows tool users to 
attach different power tools to a common power source. Similarly, Hewlett-Packard has a uni-
versal power source that can be used with a variety of computer hardware. 
 4.11 SERVICE DESIGN 
  There are many similarities between product and service design. However, there are some 
important differences as well, owing to the nature of services. One major difference is that 
unlike manufacturing, where production and delivery are usually separated in time, services 
are usually created and delivered  simultaneously. 
 Service  refers to an  act,  something that is done to or for a customer (client, patient, etc.). 
It is provided by a   service delivery system , which includes the facilities, processes, and skills 
needed to provide the service. Many services are not pure services, but part of a  product 
 bundle —the combination of goods and services provided to a customer. The service com-
ponent in products is increasing. The ability to create and deliver reliable customer-oriented 
service is often a key competitive differentiator. Successful companies combine customer-
oriented service with their products. 
 System design involves development or refinement of the overall   service package : 1 
 1. 
The physical resources needed. 
 2. 
The accompanying goods that are purchased or consumed by the customer, or provided 
with the service. 
 3. 
Explicit services (the essential/core features of a service, such as tax preparation). 
 4. 
Implicit services (ancillary/extra features, such as friendliness, courtesy). 
 Design for manufacturing 
(DFM)   The designing of prod-
ucts that are compatible with an 
organization’s capabilities. 
 Design for assembly (DFA)  
Design that focuses on reducing 
the number of parts in a product 
and on assembly methods and 
sequence.  
 Manufacturability  The ease 
of fabrication and/or assembly. 
 Service  Something that is done 
to or for a customer. 
 Service delivery system  The 
facilities, processes, and skills 
needed to provide a service.  
 Product bundle  The com-
bination of goods and services 
provided to a customer.  
 Service package  The  physical 
resources needed to perform 
the service, the accompany-
ing goods, and the explicit and 
implicit services included. 
 1 Adapted from James A. Fitzsimmons and Mona J. Fitzsimmons,  Service Management for Competitive Advan-
tage (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994). Copyright © 1994 McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Used with permission. 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
163
 Overview of Service Design 
 Service design begins with the choice of a service strategy, which determines the nature and 
focus of the service, and the target market. This requires an assessment by top management 
of the potential market and profitability (or need, in the case of a nonprofit organization) of a 
particular service, and an assessment of the organization’s ability to provide the service. Once 
decisions on the focus of the service and the target market have been made, the customer 
requirements and expectations of the target market must be determined. 
 Two key issues in service design are the degree of variation in service requirements and the 
degree of customer contact and customer involvement in the delivery system. These have an 
impact on the degree to which service can be standardized or must be customized. The lower 
the degree of customer contact and service requirement variability, the more standardized the 
service can be. Service design with no contact and little or no processing variability is very 
much like product design. Conversely, high variability and high customer contact generally 
mean the service must be highly customized. A related consideration in service design is the 
opportunity for selling: The greater the degree of customer contact, the greater the opportuni-
ties for selling. 
 Differences between Service Design 
and Product Design 
 Service operations managers must contend with issues that may be insignificant or nonexis-
tent for managers in a production setting. These include the following:
 1. 
Products are generally tangible; services are generally intangible. Consequently, service 
design often focuses more on intangible factors (e.g., peace of mind, ambiance) than 
does product design. 
 2. 
In many instances services are created and delivered at the same time (e.g., a haircut, a 
car wash). In such instances there is less latitude in finding and correcting errors  before 
the customer has a chance to discover them. Consequently, training, process design, and 
customer relations are particularly important. 
 3. 
Services cannot be inventoried. This poses restrictions on flexibility and makes capacity 
issues very important. 
 4. 
Services are highly visible to consumers and must be designed with that in mind; this 
adds an extra dimension to process design, one that usually is not present in product 
design. 
 5. 
Some services have low barriers to entry and exit. This places additional pressures on 
service design to be innovative and cost-effective. 
 6. 
Location is often important to service design, with convenience as a major factor. 
Hence, design of services and choice of location are often closely linked.  
 7. 
Service systems range from those with little or no customer contact to those that have a 
very high degree of customer contact. Here are some examples of those different types:
 Insulated technical core; little or no customer contact (e.g., software development). 
 Production line; little or no customer contact (e.g., automatic car wash). 
 Personalized service (e.g., haircut, medical service). 
 Consumer participation (e.g., diet program, dance lessons). 
 Self-service (e.g., supermarket). 
  If there is little or no customer contact, service system design is like product system design.     
 8. 
Demand variability alternately creates waiting lines or idle service resources. 
 When demand variability is a factor, designers may approach service design from one of 
two perspectives. One is a cost and efficiency perspective, and the other is a customer per-
spective. Waiting line analysis (see Chapter 18) can be especially useful in this regard. 
 Basing design objectives on cost and efficiency is essentially a “product design approach” 
to service design. Because customer participation makes both quality and demand variability 
 LO4.11  Discuss the two key 
issues in service design.

164 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
more difficult to manage, designers may opt to limit customer participation in the process 
where possible. Alternatively, designers may use staff flexibility as a means of dealing with 
demand variability. 
 In services, a significant aspect of perceived quality relates to the intangibles that are part 
of the service package. Designers must proceed with caution because attempts to achieve a 
high level of efficiency tend to depersonalize service and to create the risk of negatively alter-
ing the customer’s perception of quality. Such attempts may involve the following:
 1. 
Reducing consumer choices makes service more efficient, but it can be both frustrat-
ing and irritating for the customer. An example would be a cable company that bundles 
channels, rather than allowing customers to pick only the channels they want. 
 2. 
Standardizing or simplifying certain elements of service can reduce the cost of provid-
ing a service, but it risks eliminating features that some customers value, such as per-
sonal attention. 
 3. 
Incorporating flexibility in capacity management by employing part-time or temporary 
staff may involve the use of less-skilled or less-interested people, and service quality 
may suffer. 
 Design objectives based on customer perspective require understanding the customer 
experience, and focusing on how to maintain control over service delivery to achieve cus-
tomer satisfaction. The customer-oriented approach involves determining consumer wants 
and needs in order to understand relationships between service delivery and perceived 
 quality. This enables designers to make enlightened choices in designing the delivery system. 
 Of course, designers must keep in mind that while depersonalizing service delivery for the 
sake of efficiency can negatively impact perceived quality, customers may not want or be will-
ing to pay for highly personalized service either, so trade-offs may have to be made. 
 Phases in the Service Design Process 
  Table 4.5  lists the phases in the service design process. As you can see, they are quite similar 
to the phases of product design, except that the delivery system also must be designed. 
 Service Blueprinting 
 A useful tool for conceptualizing a service delivery system is the   service blueprint , which 
is a method for describing and analyzing a service process. A service blueprint is much like 
an architectural drawing, but instead of showing building dimensions and other construc-
tion features, a service blueprint shows the basic customer and service actions involved in 
a service operation.  Figure 4.7  illustrates a simple service blueprint for a restaurant. At the 
top of the figure are the customer actions, and just below are the related actions of the direct 
contact service people. Next are what are sometimes referred to as “backstage contacts”—in 
this example, the kitchen staff—and below those are the support, or “backroom,” operations. 
In this example support operations include the reservation system, ordering of food and sup-
plies, cashier, and the outsourcing of laundry service.  Figure 4.7  is a simplified illustration; 
typically time estimates for actions and operations would be included. 
 Service blueprint  A method 
used in service design to 
describe and analyze a proposed 
service.  
 1. Conceptualize.
 Idea generation 
 Assessment of customer wants/needs (marketing) 
 Assessment of demand potential (marketing) 
 2. Identify service package components needed (operations and marketing). 
 3. Determine performance specifications (operations and marketing). 
 4. Translate performance specifications into design specifications. 
 5. Translate design specifications into delivery specifications. 
 TABLE 4.5 
 Phases in service design process 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
165
 The major steps in service blueprinting are as follows:
 1. 
Establish boundaries for the service and decide on the level of detail needed. 
 2. 
Identify and determine the sequence of customer and service actions and interactions. A 
flowchart can be a useful tool for this. 
 3. 
Develop time estimates for each phase of the process, as well as time variability. 
 4. 
Identify potential failure points and develop a plan to prevent or minimize them, as well 
as a plan to respond to service errors. 
 Characteristics of Well-Designed Service Systems 
 There are a number of characteristics of well-designed service systems. They can serve as 
guidelines in developing a service system. They include the following:
 1. 
Being consistent with the organization’s mission. 
 2. 
Being user-friendly. 
 3. 
Being robust if variability is a factor. 
 4. 
Being easy to sustain. 
 5. 
Being cost-effective. 
 6. 
Having value that is obvious to customers. 
 7. 
Having effective linkages between back-of-the-house operations (i.e., no contact with 
the customer) and front-of-the-house operations (i.e., direct contact with customers). 
Front operations should focus on customer service, while back operations should focus 
on speed and efficiency. 
 8. 
Having a single, unifying theme, such as convenience or speed. 
 9. 
Having design features and checks that will ensure service that is reliable and of high 
quality. 
 LO4.12  List the characteris-
tics of well-designed service 
systems.
 FIGURE 4.7 
 A simple service blueprint for a restaurant 
Customer
actions
line of
information
Contact
persons
line of visibility
Backstage
contacts
Support
Arrive
Seated
Order
Eat
Pay and
leave
Greeted by
 hostess
Hostess checks
 reservation
Hostess escorts
 customers to
 their table
Greeted by server
Server provides
 menus
Server fills
 water glasses
Server describes
 specials
Server takes orders
Dinners
 are
 served
Server
 occasionally
 checks to
 see if any
 problems
Server
 brings the
 check
Server
 receives
 payment
Busboy
 clears
 table
Kitchen staff
 prepares food
Reservation
 system
Ordering food
Cashier
Laundry
 service
Dishes
 are
 washed
line of internal
interaction

166 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 Challenges of Service Design 
 Variability is a major concern in most aspects of business operations, and it is particularly 
so in the design of service systems. Requirements tend to be variable, both in terms of dif-
ferences in what customers want or need, and in terms of the timing of customer requests. 
Because services generally cannot be stored, there is the additional challenge of balancing 
supply and demand. This is less of a problem for systems in which the timing of services can 
be scheduled (e.g., doctor’s appointment), but not so in others (e.g., emergency room visit). 
 Another challenge is that services can be difficult to describe precisely and are dynamic in 
nature, especially when there is a direct encounter with the customer (e.g., personal services), 
due to the large number of variables. 
 Guidelines for Successful Service Design 
 1. 
Define the service package in detail. A service blueprint may be helpful for this. 
 2. 
Focus on the operation from the customer’s perspective. Consider how customer expec-
tations and perceptions are managed during and after the service. 
 3. 
Consider the image that the service package will present both to customers and to pro-
spective customers. 
 4. 
Recognize that designers’ familiarity with the system may give them a quite different 
perspective than that of the customer, and take steps to overcome this. 
 5. 
Make sure that managers are involved and will support the design once it is 
implemented.  
 6. 
Define quality for both tangibles and intangibles. Intangible standards are more difficult 
to define, but they must be addressed. 
 7. 
Make sure that recruitment, training, and reward policies are consistent with service 
expectations. 
 8. 
Establish procedures to handle both predictable and unpredictable events. 
 9. 
Establish systems to monitor, maintain, and improve service. 
 LO4.13 List some guidelines 
for successful service design.
   6. Input variability tends to be higher in many 
service environments than in manufacturing. 
   7. Service performance can be adversely affected by workers’ emo-
tions, distractions, customers’ attitudes, and other factors, many of 
which are beyond managers’ control. 
 Because of these factors, quality and costs are more difficult to con-
trol, productivity tends to be lower, the risk of customer dissatisfaction 
is greater, and employee motivation is more difficult. 
 Questions 
    1. What managerial challenges do services present that manufacturing 
does not? 
   2. Why does service management present more challenges than 
manufacturing? 
 Services can pose a variety of managerial challenges for  managers—
challenges that in manufacturing are either much less or nonex-
istent. And because services represent an increasing share of the 
economy, this places added importance on understanding and deal-
ing with the challenges of managing services. Here are some of the 
main factors:
    1. Jobs in service environments are often less structured than in man-
ufacturing environments. 
 2. Customer contact is usually much higher in services. 
   3. In many services, worker skill levels are low compared to those of 
manufacturing workers. 
   4. Services are adding many new workers in low-skill, entry-level 
positions.  
 5. Employee turnover is often higher, especially in the low-skill jobs. 
 READING 
 The Challenges of Managing Services 
ed by workers’ emo
nyy 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
167
 SUMMARY 
 Product and service design is a key factor in satisfying the customer. To be successful in product and 
service design, organizations must be continually aware of what customers want, what the competition 
is doing, what government regulations are, and what new technologies are available. 
 The design process involves motivation, ideas for improvement, organizational capabilities, and 
forecasting. In addition to product life cycles, legal, environmental, and ethical considerations influence 
design choices. What degree of standardization designers should incorporate into designs is also an 
important consideration. A key objective for designers is to achieve a product or service design that will 
meet or exceed customer expectations, within cost or budget and taking into account the capabilities of 
operations. Although product design and service design are similar in some respects, a number of key 
differences exist between products and services that influence the way they are designed. 
 Successful design often incorporates many of these basic principles: Determine what customers want 
as a starting point; minimize the number of parts needed to manufacture an item or the number of steps 
to provide a service; simplify assembly or service, standardize as much as possible; and make the design 
robust. Trade-off decisions are common in design, and they involve such things as development time and 
cost, product or service cost, special features/performance, and product or service complexity. 
 Research and development efforts can play a significant role in product and process innovations, 
although these are sometimes so costly that only large companies or governments can afford to under-
write them. 
 Reliability of a product or service is often a key dimension in the eyes of the customer. Measuring 
and improving reliability are important aspects of product and service design, although other areas of 
the organization also have an influence on reliability. 
 Quality function deployment is one approach for getting customer input for product or service design.   
 4.12 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Product and service design is a fertile area for achieving competitive advantage and/or increas-
ing customer satisfaction. Potential sources of such benefits include the following:
 • Packaging products and ancillary services to increase sales. Examples include selling PCs 
at a reduced cost with a two-year Internet access sign-up agreement, offering extended 
warranties on products, offering installation and service, and offering training with com-
puter software. 
 • Using multiple-use platforms. Auto manufacturers use the same platform (basic chassis, 
say) for several nameplates (e.g., Jaguar S type, Lincoln LS, and Ford Thunderbird have 
shared the same platform). There are two basic computer platforms, PC and Mac, with 
many variations of computers using a particular platform. 
 • Implementing tactics that will achieve the benefits of high volume while satisfying cus-
tomer needs for variety, such as mass customization. 
 • Continually monitoring products and services for small improvements rather than the 
“big bang” approach. Often the “little” things can have a positive, long-lasting effect on 
consumer attitudes and buying behavior. 
 • Shortening the time it takes to get new or redesigned goods and services to market. 
 A key competitive advantage of some companies is their ability to bring new products to 
market more quickly than their competitors. Companies using this “first-to-market” approach 
are able to enter markets ahead of their competitors, allowing them to set higher selling prices 
than otherwise due to absence of competition. Such a strategy is also a defense against com-
petition from cheaper “clones” because the competitors always have to play “catch up.” 
 From a design standpoint, reducing the time to market involves
 • Using standardized components to create new but reliable products. 
 • Using technology such as computer-aided design (CAD) equipment to rapidly design new 
or modified products. 
 • Concurrent engineering to shorten engineering time. 

168 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 1. 
A range of factors can cause an organization to design or redesign a product or service, includ-
ing economic, legal, political, social, technological, and competitive pressures. Furthermore, an 
important cause of operations failures can be traced to faulty design. 
 2. 
Every area of a business organization, and its supply chain, is connected to, and influenced by, its 
products and/or services, so the potential impact on each area must be taken into account when 
products or services are redesigned or new products or services are to be designed. 
 3. 
Central issues relate to the actual or expected demand for a product or service, the organization’s 
capabilities, the cost to produce or provide, the desired quality level, and the cost and availability 
of necessary resources. 
 4. 
Among considerations that are generally important are legal, ethical, and environmental. 
 5. 
Although there are some basic differences between product design and service design, there are 
many similarities between the two. 
 KEY POINTS 
 KEY TERMS 
 computer-aided design 
(CAD), 160  
 concurrent engineering, 160 
 cradle-to-grave 
assessment, 144  
 delayed differentiation, 152 
 design for assembly 
(DFA), 162  
 design for disassembly 
(DFD), 146 
 design for manufacturing 
(DFM), 162 
 design for recycling 
(DFR), 147 
 failure, 153 
 manufacturability, 136, 162 
 mass customization, 152 
 modular design, 152 
 normal operating 
conditions, 153 
 product bundle, 162 
 product liability, 141 
 quality function deployment 
(QFD), 155 
 recycling, 146 
 reliability, 153 
 remanufacturing, 145 
 research and development 
(R&D), 139 
 reverse engineering, 139 
 robust design, 154 
 service, 162 
 service blueprint, 164 
 service delivery system, 162 
 service package, 162 
 serviceability, 136 
 standardization, 151 
 Uniform Commercial 
Code, 141  
 value analysis, 145 
 1. What are some of the factors that cause organizations to redesign their products or services? 
 2. Contrast applied research and basic research. 
 3. What is CAD? Describe some of the ways a product designer can use it. 
 4. Name some of the main advantages and disadvantages of standardization. 
 5. What is modular design? What are its main advantages and disadvantages? 
 6. Explain the term  design for manufacturing and briefly explain why it is important. 
 7. What are some of the competitive advantages of concurrent engineering? 
 8. Explain the term  remanufacturing. 
 9.  a.  What is meant by the term  life cycle? 
 b. Why would this be a consideration in product or service design? 
 c. Name three ways that each of these products has found new uses: baking soda, duct tape, and 
vinegar. 
 10. Why is R&D a key factor in productivity improvement? Name some ways R&D contributes to 
productivity improvements. 
 11. What is  mass customization? 
 12. Name two factors that could make service design much different than product design. 
 13. Explain the term  robust design. 
 14. Explain what  quality function deployment is and how it can be useful. 
 15. What is reverse engineering? Do you feel this is unethical? 
 16. What is the purpose of value analysis? 
 17. What is life cycle assessment, and what is its overall goal? 
 18. Explain the term “three Rs” and how the three Rs relate to sustainability. 
 19.  a.   Select an electronic device you are familiar with. What standard feature does it have that was 
once a “wow” feature? What “wow” feature does it have that you think will soon be a standard 
feature on new versions? 
 b. Answer part  a for a service you are familiar with. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 

 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design  
169
 1. Describe some of the trade-offs that are encountered in product and service design. 
 2. Who needs to be involved in the design of products and services? 
 3. How has technology had an impact on product and service design? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. A number of fast-food chains, after their success with offering their customers fresh salads, and in 
an effort to downplay the image of selling unhealthy food, began adding fresh fruit plates to their 
menus. At about the same time, and seemingly in direct conflict with this “healthy” strategy, several 
other fast-food chains began offering fat- and calorie-laden items to their menus. Compare these 
two widely different approaches, and predict the chances of each one’s success. Name some other 
products that are popular, despite known health risks. 
 2. Think of a new or revised product or service that you would like to see on the market. Discuss the 
implications of producing that product or service relative to legal, ethical, environmental, profitabil-
ity, competitive, design, and production issues. 
 3. How were food producers impacted by the U.S. government’s requirement to identify the trans fat 
content on product labels? 
 4. Suppose a company intends to offer a new service to some of its internal customers. Briefly discuss 
how the fact that the customers are internal would change the process of managing the four phases 
of the service life cycle. 
 5. A few days before the end of the term of a two-year NDA (nondisclosure agreement) he signed 
with a startup company related to a possible patent, Frank interviewed with another startup and 
divulged information covered by the agreement. The interview had been scheduled for a week later, 
in which case it wouldn’t have been an issue, but had been moved up when another job applicant 
dropped out and the company had an opening for an earlier interview. Frank reasoned that he had 
met the spirit of the NDA, and a few days early wouldn’t really matter. Besides, as it turned out, 
the company he interviewed with wasn’t interested in that information, although they did hire him. 
What would you have done if you were Frank? 
 6. Give two examples of unethical conduct involving product or service design and the ethical prin-
ciples (see Chapter 1) that are violated. 
 PROBLEMS 
 1. Examine and compare one of the following product sets. Base your comparison on such factors as 
features, costs, convenience, ease of use, and value. 
 a. GPS versus maps. 
 b. Cell phones versus landlines. 
 c. Online shopping versus “bricks and mortar” shopping. 
 d. Standard gasoline automobile engines versus hybrids. 
 e. Online course versus classroom. 
 f. Satellite television versus cable. 
 2. Use the Internet to obtain recent crash-safety ratings for passenger vehicles. Then answer these 
questions:
 a. Which vehicles received the highest ratings? The lowest ratings? 
 b. How important are crash-safety ratings to new car buyers? Does the degree of importance 
depend on the circumstances of the buyer? 
 c. Which types of buyers would you expect to be the most concerned with crash-safety ratings? 
 d. Are there other features of a new car that might sway a buyer from focusing solely on crash 
safety? If so, what might they be? 
 3. Prepare a service blueprint for each of these banking transactions:
 a. Make a savings deposit using a teller. 
 b. Apply for a home equity loan. 
 4. Prepare a service blueprint for each of these post office transactions:
 a. Buy stamps from a machine. 
 b. Buy stamps from a postal clerk. 
 5. List the steps involved in getting gasoline into your car for full service and for self-service. Assume 
that paying cash is the only means of payment. For each list, identify the potential trouble points 
and indicate a likely problem. 
 6. Construct a list of steps for making a cash withdrawal from an automated teller machine (ATM). 
Assume that the process begins at the ATM with your bank card in hand. Then identify the potential 
failure points (i.e., where problems might arise in the process). For each failure point, state one 
potential problem. 

170 
Chapter Four Product and Service Design 
 7.  a.   Refer to  Figure 4.4 . What two technical requirements have the highest impact on the customer 
requirement that the paper not tear? 
 b. The following table presents technical requirements and customer requirements for the output of 
a laser printer. First, decide if any of the technical requirements relate to each customer require-
ment. Decide which technical requirement, if any, has the greatest impact on that customer 
requirement. 
 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 Customer Requirements 
 Type of Paper 
 Internal Paper Feed 
 Print Element 
 Paper doesn’t wrinkle 
 
 
 
 Prints clearly 
 
 
 
 Easy to use 
 
 
 
 8. 
Prepare a table similar to that shown in Problem 7 b for cookies sold in a bakery. List what you 
believe are the three most important customer requirements (not including cost) and the three 
most relevant technical requirements (not including sanitary conditions). Next, indicate by a 
checkmark which customer requirements and which technical requirements are related.   
 The High Acres Landfill is located on a 218-acre site outside Fairport, 
New York. Opened in 1971, it is licensed to handle residential, commer-
cial, and industrial nonhazardous waste. The landfill has 27 employees, 
and it receives approximately 3,000 tons of waste per day. 
 The public often has certain preconceived notions about a landfill, 
chief among them that landfills are dirty and unpleasant. However, a 
visit to the landfill dispelled some of those misconceptions. The entrance 
is nicely landscaped. Most of the site is planted with grass and a few 
trees. Although unpleasant odors can emanate from arriving trucks or 
at the dump site, the remainder of the landfill is relatively free of odors. 
 A major portion of the landfill consists of a large hill within which 
the waste is buried. Initially, the landfill began not as a hill but as a large 
hole in the ground. After a number of years of depositing waste, the 
hole eventually was filled. From that point on, as additional layers were 
added, the landfill began to take the shape of a flattop hill. Each layer 
is a little narrower than the preceding one, giving the hill a slope. The 
sides of the hill are planted with grass. Only the “working face” along 
the top remains unplanted. When the designated capacity is exhausted 
(this may take another 10 years), the landfill will be closed to further 
waste disposal. The site will be converted into a 
public park with hiking trails and picnic and recre-
ation areas, and given to the town. 
 The construction and operation of landfills are subject to numerous 
state and federal regulations. For example, nonpermeable liners must 
be placed on the bottom and sides of the landfill to prevent leakage of 
liquids into the groundwater. (Independent firms monitor groundwater to 
determine if there is any leakage into wells placed around the perimeter 
of the hill.) Mindful of public opinion, every effort is made to minimize 
the amount of time that waste is left exposed. At the end of each day, 
the waste that has been deposited in the landfill is compacted and cov-
ered with six inches of soil. 
 The primary source of income for the landfill is the fees it charges 
users. The landfill also generates income from methane gas, a by-
product of organic waste decomposition, that accumulates within the 
landfill. A collection system is in place to capture and extract the gas 
from the landfill, and it is then sold to the local power company. Also, 
the landfill has a composting operation in which leaves and other yard 
wastes are converted into mulch. 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 High Acres Landfill 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
 Davis, Mark M., and Janelle Heineke.  Managing Ser-
vices: Using Technology to Create Value. New York: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2003. 
 Fitzsimmons, James A., and Mona J. Fitzsimmons. 
Service Management: Operations, Strategy, 
and Information Technology. 7th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Gilmore, James, and B. Joseph Pine II.  Markets of One: 
Creating Customer-Unique Value through Mass 
Customization.  Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 2000. 
 Gorman, Michael E.  Transforming Nature: Ethics, 
Invention, and Design. Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1998. 
 Groover, Mikell P.  Automation, Production Systems, 
and Computer-Aided Manufacturing. 3rd ed. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2008. 
 Lovelock, Christopher H.  Services Marketing: People, 
Technology, Strategy. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2010. 
 Ulrich, Karl T., and Steven D. Eppinger.  Product 
Design and Development. 3rd ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
 Vicente, Kim.  The Human Factor. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2004.       

171
 SUPPLEMENT TO 
C HAPTER 
 4S.1 INTRODUCTION  
 Reliability  is a measure of the ability of a product, service, part, or system to perform its 
intended function under a prescribed set of conditions. In effect, reliability is a  probability. 
 Suppose that an item has a reliability of .90. This means that it has a 90 percent probability 
of functioning as intended. The probability it will fail is 1    .90    .10, or 10 percent. Hence, 
it is expected that, on the average, 1 of every 10 such items will fail or, equivalently, that the 
item will fail, on the average, once in every 10 trials. Similarly, a reliability of .985 implies 15 
failures per 1,000 parts or trials. 
 4S.2 QUANTIFYING RELIABILITY 
  Engineers and designers have a number of techniques at their disposal for assessing reliability. 
A discussion of those techniques is not within the scope of this text. Instead, let us turn to 
the issue of quantifying overall product or system reliability. Probability is used in two ways.
 1. 
The probability that the product or system will function when activated. 
 2. 
The probability that the product or system will function for a given length of time. 
 The first of these focuses on  one point in time  and is often used when a system must 
operate for one time or a relatively few number of times. The second of these focuses on the 
 length of service.  The distinction will become more apparent as each of these approaches is 
described in more detail. 
 Reliability  The ability of a 
product, service, part, or system 
to perform its intended func-
tion under a prescribed set of 
conditions. 
 4 
 SUPPLEMENT OUTLINE 
 4S.1 Introduction,  171 
 4S.2 Quantifying Reliability,  171 
 Finding the Probability of Functioning 
When Activated,  172 
 Finding the Probability of Functioning for a 
Given Length of Time,  173 
 4S.3 Availability,  177 
 Key Terms,  178 
 Solved Problems,  178 
 Discussion and Review Questions,  181 
 Problems,  181 
 Reliability 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this supplement, you 
should be able to: 
 LO4S.1 
Define  reliability. 
 LO4S.2 
Perform simple reliability 
computations. 
 LO4S.3 
Explain the term  availability and 
perform simple calculations. 
 LO4S.1 Define reliability.

172 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
 Finding the Probability of Functioning When Activated 
 The probability that a system or a product will operate as planned is an important concept in 
system and product design. Determining that probability when the product or system consists 
of a number of  independent  components requires the use of the rules of probability for inde-
pendent events.   Independent events  have no relation to the occurrence or nonoccurrence of 
each other. What follows are three examples illustrating the use of probability rules to deter-
mine whether a given system will operate successfully. 
 Rule 1.  If two or more events are independent and  success  is defined as the probability that 
all of the events occur, then the probability of success is equal to the product of the probabili-
ties of the events. 
 Example Suppose a room has two lamps, but to have adequate light both lamps must work 
(success) when turned on. One lamp has a probability of working of .90, and the other has a 
probability of working of .80. The probability that both will work is .90    .80    .72. Note 
that the order of multiplication is unimportant: .80    .90    .72. Also note that if the room had 
three lamps, three probabilities would have been multiplied. 
 This system can be represented by the following diagram: 
.90
.80
Lamp 1
Lamp 2
 Even though the individual components of a system might have high reliabilities, the sys-
tem as a whole can have considerably less reliability because all components that are in series 
(as are the ones in the preceding example) must function. As the number of components in a 
series increases, the system reliability decreases. For example, a system that has eight compo-
nents in a series, each with a reliability of .99, has a reliability of only .99 8     .923. 
 Obviously, many products and systems have a large number of component parts that must 
all operate, and some way to increase overall reliability is needed. One approach is to use 
 redundancy in the design. This involves providing backup parts for some items. 
 Rule 2. If two events are independent and  success  is defined as the probability that  at least 
one  of the events will occur, the probability of success is equal to the probability of either one 
plus 1.00 minus that probability multiplied by the other probability. 
 Example There are two lamps in a room. When turned on, one has a probability of working 
of .90 and the other has a probability of working of .80. Only a single lamp is needed to light 
for success. If one fails to light when turned on, the other lamp is turned on. Hence, one of the 
lamps is a backup in case the other one fails. Either lamp can be treated as the backup; the prob-
ability of success will be the same. The probability of success is .90    (1    .90)    .80    .98. 
If the .80 light is first, the computation would be .80    (1    .80)    .90    .98. 
 This system can be represented by the following diagram: 
.90
Lamp 1
.80
Lamp 2    (backup)
 Rule 3.  If two or more events are involved and success is defined as the probability that at 
least one of them occurs, the probability of success is 1     P (all fail). 
 LO4S.2 Perform simple reli-
ability computations.
 Independent events  Events 
whose occurrence or nonoccur-
rence does not influence each 
other. 
 Redundancy  The use of 
backup components to increase 
reliability. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability 
173
 Example Three lamps have probabilities of .90, .80, and .70 of lighting when turned on. Only 
one lighted lamp is needed for success; hence, two of the lamps are considered to be backups. 
The probability of success is
 






1
[(1
.90)
(1
.80)
(1
.70)]
.994
 This system can be represented by the following diagram: 
.90
Lamp 1
.80
Lamp 2    (backup for Lamp 1)
.70
Lamp 3    (backup for Lamp 2)
 LO4S.2 Perform simple reliability 
computations.
 E X A M P L E 
4 S – 1 
 Determine the reliability of the system shown below.
.98
.90
.95
.90
.92
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 The system can be reduced to a series of three components:
.98
.90  .90(1  .90)
.95  .92(1  .95)
 
The system reliability is, then, the product of these: 



.98
.99
.996
.966
 Finding the Probability of Functioning for a 
Given Length of Time 
 The second way of looking at reliability considers the incorporation of a time dimension: 
Probabilities are determined relative to a specified length of time. This approach is com-
monly used in product warranties, which pertain to a given period of time after purchase of 
a product. 
 A typical profile of product failure rate over time is illustrated in  Figure 4S.1 . Because of 
its shape, it is sometimes referred to as a bathtub curve. Frequently, a number of products fail 
shortly after they are put into service, not because they wear out, but because they are defec-
tive to begin with. The rate of failures decreases rapidly once the truly defective items are 
weeded out. During the second phase, there are fewer failures because most of the defective 
items have been eliminated, and it is too soon to encounter items that fail because they have 
worn out. In some cases, this phase covers a relatively long time. In the third phase, failures 
occur because the products are worn out, and the failure rate increases.  
 Information on the distribution and length of each phase requires the collection of histori-
cal data and analysis of those data. It often turns out that the   mean time between failures 
(MTBF)  in the infant mortality phase can be modeled by a negative exponential distribution, 
such as that depicted in  Figure 4S.2 . Equipment failures as well as product failures may occur 
in this pattern. In such cases, the exponential distribution can be used to determine various 
 Mean time between failures 
(MTBF)  The average length of 
time between failures of a prod-
uct or component.  

174 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
probabilities of interest. The probability that equipment or a product put into service at time 
0 will fail  before some specified time,  T, is equal to the area under the curve between 0 and 
 T.  Reliability is specified as the probability that a product will last  at least until  time  T; reli-
ability is equal to the area under the curve  beyond T.  (Note that the total area under the curve 
in each phase is treated as 100 percent for computational purposes.) Observe that as the speci-
fied length of service increases, the area under the curve to the right of that point (i.e., the 
reliability) decreases. 
Determining values for the area under a curve to the right of a given point,  T,  becomes a 
relatively simple matter using a table of exponential values. An exponential distribution is 
completely described using a single parameter, the distribution mean, which reliability engi-
neers often refer to as the mean time between failures. Using the symbol  T  to represent length 
of service, the probability that failure will  not  occur before time  T  (i.e., the area in the right 
tail) is easily determined:
 


(no failure before
)
/MTBF
P
T
e T
where
 



2.7183
Length of service before failure
MTBF
Mean time between failures
…
e
T
The probability that failure will occur before time  T is:



(failure before
)
1
/MTBF
P
T
e T
 Selected values of  e   T /MTBF are listed in  Table 4S.1 . 
 FIGURE 4S.1 
 Failure rate is a function of time 
Infant 
mortality
Few (random) 
failures
Failures due
to wear-out
Time, T
0
Failure rate
 FIGURE 4S.2 
 An exponential distribution 
T
Time
Reliability = e T/MTBF
1  e T/MTBF
0
f(T )

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability 
175
 TABLE 4S.1 
 Values of  e   T /MTBF 
 T /MTBF 
 e   T /MTBF 
 T /MTBF 
 e   T /MTBF 
 T /MTBF 
 e   T /MTBF 
 0.10 
 .9048 
 2.60 
 .0743 
 5.10 
 .0061 
 0.20 
 .8187 
 2.70 
 .0672 
 5.20 
 .0055 
 0.30 
 .7408 
 2.80 
 .0608 
 5.30 
 .0050 
 0.40 
 .6703 
 2.90 
 .0550 
 5.40 
 .0045 
 0.50 
 .6065 
 3.00 
 .0498 
 5.50 
 .0041 
 0.60 
 .5488 
 3.10 
 .0450 
 5.60 
 .0037 
 0.70 
 .4966 
 3.20 
 .0408 
 5.70 
 .0033 
 0.80 
 .4493 
 3.30 
 .0369 
 5.80 
 .0030 
 0.90 
 .4066 
 3.40 
 .0334 
 5.90 
 .0027 
 1.00 
 .3679 
 3.50 
 .0302 
 6.00 
 .0025 
 1.10 
 .3329 
 3.60 
 .0273 
 6.10 
 .0022 
 1.20 
 .3012 
 3.70 
 .0247 
 6.20 
 .0020 
 1.30 
 .2725 
 3.80 
 .0224 
 6.30 
 .0018 
 1.40 
 .2466 
 3.90 
 .0202 
 6.40 
 .0017 
 1.50 
 .2231 
 4.00 
 .0183 
 6.50 
 .0015 
 1.60 
 .2019 
 4.10 
 .0166 
 6.60 
 .0014 
 1.70 
 .1827 
 4.20 
 .0150 
 6.70 
 .0012 
 1.80 
 .1653 
 4.30 
 .0136 
 6.80 
 .0011 
 1.90 
 .1496 
 4.40 
 .0123 
 6.90 
 .0010 
 2.00 
 .1353 
 4.50 
 .0111 
 7.00 
 .0009 
 2.10 
 .1255 
 4.60 
 .0101 
 
 
 2.20 
 .1108 
 4.70 
 .0091 
 
 
 2.30 
 .1003 
 4.80 
 .0082 
 
 
 2.40 
 .0907 
 4.90 
 .0074 
 
 
 2.50 
 .0821 
 5.00 
 .0067 
 
 
 By means of extensive testing, a manufacturer has determined that its Super Sucker Vacuum 
Cleaner models have an expected life that is exponential with a mean of four years. Find the 
probability that one of these cleaners will have a life that ends
 a. 
After the initial four years of service. 
 b. 
Before four years of service are completed. 
 c. 
Not before six years of service. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E 
4 S – 2 
 MTBF    4 years
 a. 
 T     4 years:
 


/MTBF
4 years
4 years
1.0
T
 From  Table 4S.1 ,  e   1.0     .3679. 
 b. 
The probability of failure before  T     4 years is 1     e   1 , or 1    .3679    .6321. 
 c. 
 T     6 years:
 


/MTBF
6 years
4 years
1.50
T
 From  Table 4S.1 ,  e   1.5     .2231. 
Product failure due to wear-out can sometimes be modeled by a normal distribution. 
Obtaining probabilities involves the use of a table (refer to Appendix Table B). The table 
 S O L U T I O N 

176 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
provides areas under a normal curve from (essentially) the left end of the curve to a specified 
point  z, where  z is a  standardized value computed using the formula 

 Mean wear-out time
Standard deviation of wear-out time
z
T
 Thus, to work with the normal distribution, it is necessary to know the mean of the distri-
bution and its standard deviation. A normal distribution is illustrated in  Figure 4S.3 . Appendix 
Table B contains normal probabilities (i.e., the area that lies to the left of  z ). To obtain a prob-
ability that service life will not exceed some value  T,  compute  z  and refer to the table. To find 
the reliability for time  T, subtract this probability from 100 percent. To obtain the value of  T 
that will provide a given probability, locate the nearest probability under the curve  to the left 
in Appendix Table B. Then use the corresponding  z in the preceding formula and solve for  T. 
 FIGURE 4S.3 
 A normal curve 
Reliability
0
z
z scale
Mean life
Years
T
 The mean life of a certain ball bearing can be modeled using a normal distribution with a 
mean of six years and a standard deviation of one year. Determine each of the following:
 a. 
The probability that a ball bearing will wear out  before seven years of service. 
   b. The probability that a ball bearing will wear out  after  seven years of service (i.e., find its 
reliability).  
 c. 
The service life that will provide a wear-out probability of 10 percent. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Wear-out life mean    6 years. 
 Wear out life standard deviation    1 year. 
 Wear-out life is normally distributed. 
 a. 
Compute  z and use it to obtain the probability directly from Appendix Table B (see 
diagram).  
0
+1.00
z scale
6
Years
7
.8413
7
6
1
1.00
=
−
= +
z
 Thus,  P ( T  < 7)    .8413. 
 E X A M P L E 
4 S – 3 
 S O L U T I O N 

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability 
177
A copier is able to operate for an average of 200 hours between repairs, and the mean 
repair time is two hours. Determine the availability of the copier.
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 LO4S.3 Define the term 
 availability and perform simple 
calculations.
0
+1.00
z scale
6
Years
7
.1587


1.00
.8413
.1587
0
z = 1.28
z scale
6
Years
90%
10%
4.72
 


1.28
6
1
z
T
 b. 
Subtract the probability determined in part  a from 100 percent (see diagram).
     c. Use the normal table and find the value of  z  that corresponds to an area under the curve of 
10 percent (see diagram). 
 Solving for  T, we find  T     4.72 years. 
 4S.3 AVAILABILITY  
 A related measure of importance to customers, and hence to designers, is   availability . It 
measures the fraction of time a piece of equipment is expected to be operational (as opposed 
to being down for repairs). Availability can range from zero (never available) to 1.00 (always 
available). Companies that can offer equipment with a high availability factor have a com-
petitive advantage over companies that offer equipment with lower availability values. Avail-
ability is a function of both the mean time between failures and the mean time to repair. The 
availability factor can be computed using the following formula:


Availability
MTBF
MTBF
MTR
 where
 MTBF    Mean time between failures 
   MTR    Mean time to repair, including waiting time 
 Availability  The fraction of 
time a piece of equipment is 
expected to be available for 
operation. 
 E X A M P L E 
4 S – 4 

178 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
MTBF  200 hours and MTR  2 hours





Availability
MTBF
MTBF
MTR
200
200
2
.99
    Two implications for design are revealed by the availability formula. One is that avail-
ability increases as the mean time between failures increases. The other is that availability 
also increases as the mean repair time decreases. It would seem obvious that designers would 
want to design products that have a long time between failures. However, some design options 
enhance repairability, which can be incorporated into the product. Ink-jet printers, for exam-
ple, are designed with print cartridges that can easily be replaced. 
 KEY TERMS 
 availability, 177 
 independent events, 172 
 mean time between failures 
(MTBF), 173 
 redundancy, 172 
 reliability, 171  
 S O L U T I O N   
 Problem 1 
 A product design engineer must decide if a redundant component is cost-justified in a certain system. 
The system in question has a critical component with a probability of .98 of operating. System failure 
would involve a cost of $20,000. For a cost of $100, a switch could be added that would automati-
cally transfer the system to the backup component in the event of a failure. Should the backup be 
added if the backup probability is also .98? 
 Solution 
 Because no probability is given for the switch, we will assume its probability of operating when needed 
is 100 percent. The expected cost of failure (i.e., without the backup) is $20,000    (1    .98)    $400. 
With the backup, the probability of  not failing would be:


.98
.02(.98)
.9996  
Hence, the probability of failure would be 1    .9996    .0004. The expected cost of failure with the 
backup would be the added cost of the backup component plus the failure cost:


$100
$20,000(.0004)
$108
 Because this is less than the cost without the backup, it appears that adding the backup is definitely 
cost justifiable. 
 Problem 2 
 Due to the extreme cost of interrupting production, a firm has two standby machines available in case 
a particular machine breaks down. The machine in use has a reliability of .94, and the backups have 
reliabilities of .90 and .80. In the event of a failure, either backup can be pressed into service. If one 
fails, the other backup can be used. Compute the system reliability. 
 Solution 



.94,
.90,
and
.80
1
2
3
R
R
R
The system can be depicted in this way:
.94
.90
.80






(1
)
(1
)(1
)
system
1
2
1
3
2
1
R
R
R
R
R
R
R







.94
.90(1
.94)
.80(1
.90)(1
.94)
.9988
(continued)

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
179
 A hospital has three  independent  fire alarm systems, with reliabilities of .95, .97, and .99. In the 
event of a fire, what is the probability that a warning would be given? 
 Problem 3 
 Solution 
A warning would  not  be given if all three alarms failed. The probability that at least one alarm would 
operate is 1     P (none operate):








P
P
(none operate)
(1
.95)(1
.97)(1
.99)
.000015
(warning)
1
.000015
.999985
 Problem 4 
 A weather satellite has an expected life of 10 years from the time it is placed into earth orbit. Deter-
mine its probability of no wear-out before each of the following lengths of service. Assume the 
exponential distribution is appropriate. 
 a. 5 years. 
 b. 12 years. 
 c. 20 years. 
 d. 30 years. 
 
MTBF
10 years
 Solution 
 Compute the ratio  T /MTBF for  T       5,  12,  20, and 30, and obtain the values of  e   T /MTBF from 
 Table 4S.1 . The solutions are summarized in the following table: 
 T 
 MTBF 
 T /MTBF 
 e   T /MTBF 
 a. 5 
 10 
 0.50 
 .6065 
   b. 12 
 10 
 1.20 
 .3012 
   c. 20 
 10 
 2.00 
 .1353 
   d. 30 
 10 
 3.00 
 .0498 
 Problem 5 
 What is the probability that the satellite described in Solved Problem 4 will fail between 5 and 12 
years after being placed into earth orbit? 
 Solution 




(5 years
failure
12 years)
(failure after 5 years)
(failure after 12 years)
P
P
P
Using the probabilities shown in the previous solution, you obtain:
 
P(failure after  years)  .6065
P(failure after 12 years)  .3012
 
.3053
 The corresponding area under the curve is illustrated as follows: 
12
5
Years
0
f(t)
.3053
P(5 < Failure < 12)
(continued)

180 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
 One line of radial tires produced by a large company has a wear-out life that can be modeled using a 
normal distribution with a mean of 25,000 miles and a standard deviation of 2,000 miles. Determine 
each of the following:
    a. The percentage of tires that can be expected to wear out within    2,000 miles of the average (i.e., 
between 23,000 miles and 27,000 miles). 
 b. The percentage of tires that can be expected to fail between 26,000 miles and 29,000 miles. 
 c. For what tire life would you expect 4 percent of the tires to have worn out? 
 Problem 6 
 Solution 
Notes:  (1) Miles are analogous to time and are handled in exactly the same way; (2) the term  percent-
age refers to a probability. 
  a. The phrase “within    2,000 miles of the average” translates to within one standard deviation of 
the mean since the standard deviation equals 2,000 miles. Therefore the range of  z  is  z        1.00, 
to  z         1.00, and the area under the curve between those points is found as the difference 
between  P ( z  < 1.00) and  P ( z  <    1.00), using values obtained from Appendix Table B.
 


 



 

(
1.00)
.8413
(
1.00)
.1587
( 1.00
1.00)
.6826
P z
P z
P
z
0
+1.00
.6826
–1.00
.1587
.8413
 b. Wear-out mean    25,000 miles 
Wear-out standard deviation    2,000 miles
P(26,000 < Wear-out < 29,000)  P(z < z29,000)  P(z < z26,000)
 


 



 

29,000
25,000
2,000
2.00
From Appendix Table B
.9772
26,000
25,000
2,000
.50
From Appendix Table B
.6915
29,000
26,000
z
P
z
P
 The difference is .9772    .6915    .2857, which is the expected percent of tires that will wear out 
between 26,000 miles and 29,000 miles.  
0 +.50
+2.00
.6915
.9772
.2857
 c. Use Appendix Table B.1 to find  z for 4 percent:  z        1.75. 
 Find tire life using        z 	 : 25,000    1.75(2,000)    21,500 miles. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability 
181
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. Define the term  reliability. 
 2. Explain why a product or system might have an overall reliability that is low even though it is com-
prised of components that have fairly high reliabilities. 
 3. What is redundancy and how can it improve product design? 
 PROBLEMS 
 1. Consider the following system: 
.90
.90
 Determine the probability that the system will operate under each of these conditions:
 a. The system as shown. 
 b. Each system component has a backup with a probability of .90 and a switch that is 100 percent 
reliable. 
 c. Backups with .90 probability and a switch that is 99 percent reliable. 
 2. A product is composed of four parts. In order for the product to function properly in a given situa-
tion, each of the parts must function. Two of the parts have a .96 probability of functioning, and two 
have a probability of .99. What is the overall probability that the product will function properly? 
 3. A system consists of three identical components. In order for the system to perform as intended, all 
of the components must perform. Each has the same probability of performance. If the system is 
to have a .92 probability of performing, what is the minimum probability of performing needed by 
each of the individual components? 
 4. A product engineer has developed the following equation for the cost of a system component: 
 C     (10 P ) 2 , where  C is the cost in dollars and  P is the probability that the component will operate 
as expected. The system is composed of two identical components, both of which must operate for 
the system to operate. The engineer can spend $173 for the two components. To the nearest two 
decimal places, what is the largest component probability that can be achieved? 
 5. The guidance system of a ship is controlled by a computer that has three major modules. In order 
for the computer to function properly, all three modules must function. Two of the modules have 
reliabilities of .97, and the other has a reliability of .99. 
 a. What is the reliability of the computer? 
 b. A backup computer identical to the one being used will be installed to improve overall reli-
ability. Assuming the new computer automatically functions if the main one fails, determine the 
resulting reliability. 
 c. If the backup computer must be activated by a switch in the event that the first computer fails, 
and the switch has a reliability of .98, what is the overall reliability of the system? ( Both the 
switch and the backup computer must function in order for the backup to take over.) 
 6. One of the industrial robots designed by a leading producer of servomechanisms has four major 
components. Components’ reliabilities are .98, .95, .94, and .90. All of the components must func-
tion in order for the robot to operate effectively. 
 a. Compute the reliability of the robot. 
 b. Designers want to improve the reliability by adding a backup component. Due to space limita-
tions, only one backup can be added. The backup for any component will have the same reli-
ability as the unit for which it is the backup. Which component should get the backup in order to 
achieve the highest reliability? 
 c. If one backup with a reliability of .92 can be added to any one of the main components, which 
component should get it to obtain the highest overall reliability? 
 7. A production line has three machines A, B, and C, with reliabilities of .99, .96, and .93, respec-
tively. The machines are arranged so that if one breaks down, the others must shut down. Engineers 
are weighing two alternative designs for increasing the line’s reliability. Plan 1 involves adding an 
identical backup  line, and plan 2 involves providing a backup for each  machine. In either case, three 
machines (A, B, and C) would be used with reliabilities equal to the original three. 
 a. Which plan will provide the higher reliability? 
 b. Explain why the two reliabilities are not the same. 
 c. What other factors might enter into the decision of which plan to adopt? 

182 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability
  8. Refer to the previous problem. 
 a. Assume that the single switch used in plan 1 is 98 percent reliable, while reliabilities of the 
machines remain the same. Recalculate the reliability of plan 1. Compare the reliability of this 
plan with the reliability of plan 1 calculated in solving the original problem. How much did the 
reliability of plan 1 decrease as a result of a 98 percent reliable switch? 
 b. Assume that the three switches used in plan 2 are all 98 percent reliable, while reliabilities of 
the machines remain the same. Recalculate the reliability of plan 2. Compare the reliability of 
this plan with the reliability of plan 2 calculated in solving the original problem. How much did 
the reliability of plan 2 decrease?  
  9. A Web server has five major components that must all function in order for it to operate as 
intended. Assuming that each component of the system has the same reliability, what is the 
 minimum reliability each one must have in order for the overall system to have a reliability of .98? 
 10. Repeat Problem 9 under the condition that one of the components will have a backup with a 
 reliability equal to that of any one of the other components. 
  11. Hoping to increase the chances of reaching a performance goal, the director of a research project 
has assigned three separate research teams the same task. The director estimates that the team 
 probabilities are .9, .8, and .7 for successfully completing the task in the allotted time. Assuming that 
the teams work independently, what is the probability that the task will  not be completed in time?  
 12. An electronic chess game has a useful life that is exponential with a mean of 30 months. Deter-
mine each of the following:
 a. The probability that any given unit will operate for at least (1) 39 months, (2) 48 months, 
(3) 60 months. 
 b. The probability that any given unit will fail sooner than (1) 33 months, (2) 15 months, (3) 6 months. 
 c. The length of service time after which the percentage of failed units will approximately equal 
(1) 50 percent, (2) 85 percent, (3) 95 percent, (4) 99 percent.  
 13. A manufacturer of programmable calculators is attempting to determine a reasonable free-service 
period for a model it will introduce shortly. The manager of product testing has indicated that the 
calculators have an expected life of 30 months. Assume product life can be described by an expo-
nential distribution. 
 a. If service contracts are offered for the expected life of the calculator, what percentage of those 
sold would be expected to fail during the service period? 
 b. What service period would result in a failure rate of approximately 10 percent? 
 14. Lucky Lumen light bulbs have an expected life that is exponentially distributed with a mean of 
20,000 hours. Determine the probability that one of these light bulbs will last
 a. At least 24,000 hours. 
 b. No longer than 4,000 hours. 
 c. Between 4,000 hours and 24,000 hours. 
 15. Planetary Communications, Inc., intends to launch a satellite that will enhance reception of 
 television programs in Alaska. According to its designers, the satellite will have an expected life 
of six years. Assume the exponential distribution applies. Determine the probability that it will 
 function for each of the following time periods:
 a. More than 9 years. 
 b. Less than 12 years. 
 c. More than 9 years but less than 12 years. 
 d. At least 21 years. 
 16. An office manager has received a report from a consultant that includes a section on equipment 
replacement. The report indicates that scanners have a service life that is normally distributed 
with a mean of 41 months and a standard deviation of 4 months. On the basis of this information, 
 determine the percentage of scanners that can be expected to fail in the following time periods:
 a. Before 38 months of service. 
 b. Between 40 and 45 months of service. 
 c. Within    2 months of the mean life. 
 17. A major television manufacturer has determined that its 40-inch LED televisions have a mean 
service life that can be modeled by a normal distribution with a mean of six years and a  standard 
deviation of one-half year. 
 a. What probability can you assign to service lives of at least (1) Five years? (2) Six years? 
(3) Seven and one-half years? 

 
Supplement to Chapter Four Reliability 
183
 b. If the manufacturer offers service contracts of four years on these televisions what  percentage 
can be expected to fail from wear-out during the service period?  
 18. Refer to Problem 17. What service period would achieve an expected wear-out rate of
 a. 2 percent? 
 b. 5 percent? 
 19. Determine the availability for each of these cases:
 a. MTBF    40 days, average repair time    3 days. 
 b. MTBF    300 hours, average repair time    6 hours. 
 20. A machine can operate for an average of 10 weeks before it needs to be overhauled, a process 
which takes two days. The machine is operated five days a week. Compute the availability of this 
machine. ( Hint: All times must be in the same units.) 
 21. A manager must decide between two machines. The manager will take into account each 
machine’s operating costs and initial costs, and its breakdown and repair times. Machine A has 
a projected average operating time of 142 hours and a projected average repair time of 7 hours. 
 Projected times for machine B are an average operating time of 65 hours and a repair time of 
2 hours. What are the projected availabilities of each machine? 
 22. A designer estimates that she can ( a ) increase the average time between failures of a part by 
5  percent at a cost of $450, or ( b ) reduce the average repair time by 10 percent at a cost of $200. 
Which option would be more cost-effective? Currently, the average time between failures is 
100 hours and the average repair time is 4 hours. 
 23. Auto batteries have an average life of 2.7 years. Battery life is normally distributed with a mean of 
2.7 years and a standard deviation of .3 year. The batteries are warranted to operate for a minimum 
of 2 years. If a battery fails within the warranty period, it will be replaced with a new battery at no 
charge. The company sells and installs the batteries. Also, the usual $5 installation charge will be 
waived. 
 a. What percentage of batteries would you expect to fail before the warranty period expires? 
 b. A competitor is offering a warranty of 30 months on its premium battery. The manager of 
this company is toying with the idea of using the same battery with a different exterior, 
labeling it as a premium battery, and offering a 30-month warranty on it. How much more 
would the company have to charge on its “premium” battery to offset the additional cost of 
replacing batteries? 
 c. What other factors would you take into consideration besides the price of the battery? 

184
 CHAP TE R 
 5 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 5.1 Introduction,  185 
 5.2 Capacity Decisions Are Strategic,  187 
 5.3 Defining and Measuring Capacity,  188 
 5.4 Determinants of Effective 
Capacity,  189 
 5.5 Strategy Formulation,  191 
 Steps in the Capacity Planning 
Process,  192 
 5.6    Forecasting Capacity 
Requirements,  192 
 Calculating Processing Requirements,  193 
 5.7    Additional Challenges of Planning 
Service Capacity,  194 
 5.8   Do It In-House or Outsource It?  195 
 5.9   Developing Capacity Strategies,  196 
 5.10  Constraint Management,  201 
 5.11  Evaluating Alternatives,  201 
 Cost–Volume Analysis,  202 
 Financial Analysis,  205 
 Decision Theory,  206 
 Waiting-Line Analysis,  206 
 Simulation,  206 
 5.12  Operations Strategy,  207 
 Case: Outsourcing of Hospital 
Services,  215 
 Supplement: Decision Theory,  216 
 Strategic Capacity 
Planning for Products 
and Services 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO5.1 
Name the three key questions in capacity planning. 
 LO5.2 
Explain the importance of capacity planning. 
 LO5.3 
Describe ways of defining and measuring capacity. 
 LO5.4 
Name several determinants of effective capacity. 
 LO5.5 
Discuss factors to consider when deciding whether to operate 
in-house or outsource. 
 LO5.6 
Discuss the major considerations related to developing 
capacity alternatives. 
 LO5.7 
Describe the steps that are used to resolve constraint issues. 
 LO5.8 
Briefly describe approaches that are useful for evaluating 
capacity alternatives.     
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

185
 Capacity planning is a key strategic component in designing the system. It encompasses many 
basic decisions with long-term consequences for the organization. In this chapter, you will 
learn about the importance of capacity decisions, the measurement of capacity, how capacity 
requirements are determined, and the development and evaluation of capacity alternatives. 
Note that decisions made in the product or service design stage have major implications for 
capacity planning. Designs have processing requirements related to volume and degree of 
customization that affect capacity planning. 
 5.1 INTRODUCTION  
  Hospitals that not too long ago had what could be described as “facility oversupply” are 
now experiencing what can be described as a “capacity crisis” in some areas. The way hos-
pitals plan for capacity will be critical to their future success. And the same applies to all 
sorts of organizations, and at all levels of these organizations.   Capacity   refers to an upper 
limit or ceiling on the load that an operating unit can handle. The load might be in terms of 
the number of physical units produced (e.g., bicycles assembled per hour) or the number 
of services performed (e.g., computers upgraded per hour). The operating unit might be a 
plant, department, machine, store, or worker. Capacity needs include equipment, space, and 
employee skills. 
 The goal of strategic capacity planning is to achieve a match between the long-term sup-
ply capabilities of an organization and the predicted level of long-term demand. Organiza-
tions become involved in capacity planning for various reasons. Among the chief reasons are 
changes in demand, changes in technology, changes in the environment, and perceived threats 
or opportunities. A gap between current and desired capacity will result in capacity that is out 
of balance. Overcapacity causes operating costs that are too high, while undercapacity causes 
strained resources and possible loss of customers. 
 Capacity  The upper limit 
or ceiling on the load that an 
 operating unit can handle. 
 
Demand
forecast
Capacity
planning

186
 The key questions in capacity planning are the following:
 1. 
What kind of capacity is needed? 
 2. 
How much is needed to match demand? 
 3. 
When is it needed? 
 The question of what kind of capacity is needed depends on the products and services that 
management intends to produce or provide. Hence, in a very real sense, capacity planning is 
governed by those choices. 
 Forecasts are key inputs used to answer the questions of how much capacity is needed and 
when is it needed. 
 Related questions include:
 1. 
How much will it cost, how will it be funded, and what is the expected return? 
 2. 
What are the potential benefits and risks? These involve the degree of uncertainty 
related to forecasts of the amount of demand and the rate of change in demand, as well 
as costs, profits, and the time to implement capacity changes. The degree of accuracy 
that can be attached to forecasts is an important consideration. The likelihood and 
impact of wrong decisions also need to be assessed. 
 3. 
Are there sustainability issues that need to be addressed? 
 4. 
Should capacity be changed all at once, or through several (or more) small changes? 
 5. 
Can the supply chain handle the necessary changes? Before an organization commits to 
ramping up its input, it is essential to confirm that its  supply chain will be able to handle 
related requirements. 
 Because of uncertainties, some organizations prefer to delay capacity investment until 
demand materializes. However, such strategies often inhibit growth because adding capacity 
takes time and customers won’t usually wait. Conversely, organizations that add capacity in 
anticipation of growth often discover that the new capacity actually attracts growth. Some 
organizations “hedge their bets” by making a series of small changes and then evaluating the 
results before committing to the next change. 
 In some instances, capacity choices are made very infrequently; in others, they are made 
regularly, as part of an ongoing process. Generally, the factors that influence this frequency 
are the stability of demand, the rate of technological change in equipment and product 
design, and competitive factors. Other factors relate to the type of product or service and 
whether style changes are important (e.g., automobiles and clothing). In any case, man-
agement must review product and service choices periodically to ensure that the com-
pany makes capacity changes when they are needed for cost, competitive effectiveness, or 
other reasons.  
 In the airline industry, air travel is way down, 
leaving airline companies awash in capacity. And 
even much of the currently mothballed aircraft are only in storage. 
Companies have eliminated flights to save money and cut prices to the 
bone trying to lure passengers. 
 The auto producers don’t have it quite so bad, but for years they’ve 
been offering their customers incentives and interest-free financing—in 
order to keep their excess plants running. 
 Today, huge gaps between supply and demand have many compa-
nies struggling. Excess capacity abounds in such major industries as 
telecom, airline, and auto manufacturing. The bad news is that some 
companies are losing millions of dollars a year because of this. In the 
telecom industry, the increasing reach of cellular technology and other 
kinds of wireless access is continuing to create more and more sup-
ply, requiring telecom companies to cut prices and offer incentives to 
increase demand. 
 READING 
 Excess Capacity Can Be Bad News! 
are only in storage
n,
d
 LO5.1 Name the three key 
questions in capacity planning

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
187
 5.2 CAPACITY DECISIONS ARE STRATEGIC 
  For a number of reasons, capacity decisions are among the most fundamental of all the design 
decisions that managers must make. In fact, capacity decisions can be  critical  for an organization:
 1. 
Capacity decisions have a real impact on the ability of the organization to meet future 
demands for products and services; capacity essentially limits the rate of output pos-
sible. Having capacity to satisfy demand can often allow a company to take advantage of 
tremendous benefits. When Microsoft introduced its new Xbox in late 2005, there were 
insufficient supplies, resulting in lost sales and unhappy customers. And shortages of flu 
vaccine in some years due to production problems affected capacity, limiting the availabil-
ity of the vaccine.  
 2. 
Capacity decisions affect operating costs. Ideally, capacity and demand requirements 
will be matched, which will tend to minimize operating costs. In practice, this is not 
always achieved because actual demand either differs from expected demand or tends to 
vary (e.g., cyclically). In such cases, a decision might be made to attempt to balance the 
costs of over- and undercapacity. 
   3. Capacity is usually a major determinant of initial cost. Typically, the greater the capacity 
of a productive unit, the greater its cost. This does not necessarily imply a one-for-one 
relationship; larger units tend to cost  proportionately less than smaller units. 
 4. 
Capacity decisions often involve long-term commitment of resources and the fact that, 
once they are implemented, those decisions may be difficult or impossible to modify 
without incurring major costs. 
 5. 
Capacity decisions can affect competitiveness. If a firm has excess capacity, or can 
quickly add capacity, that fact may serve as a barrier to entry by other firms. Then too, 
capacity can affect  delivery speed, which can be a competitive advantage. 
 6. 
Capacity affects the ease of management; having appropriate capacity makes manage-
ment easier than when capacity is mismatched. 
 7. 
Globalization has increased the importance and the complexity of capacity decisions. 
Far-flung supply chains and distant markets add to the uncertainty about capacity needs. 
 8. 
Because capacity decisions often involve substantial financial and other resources, 
it is necessary to plan for them far in advance. For example, it may take years for a 
new power-generating plant to be constructed and become operational. However, this 
increases the risk that the designated amount of capacity will not match actual demand 
when the capacity becomes available. 
 
 LO5.2 Explain the importance 
of capacity planning.

188 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 5.3 DEFINING AND MEASURING CAPACITY 
  Capacity often refers to an upper limit on the  rate  of output. Even though this seems simple 
enough, there are subtle difficulties in actually measuring capacity in certain cases. These 
difficulties arise because of different interpretations of the term  capacity and problems with 
identifying suitable measures for a specific situation. 
 In selecting a measure of capacity, it is important to choose one that does not require 
updating. For example, dollar amounts are often a poor measure of capacity (e.g., capacity of 
$30 million a year) because price changes necessitate updating of that measure. 
 Where only one product or service is involved, the capacity of the productive unit may be 
expressed in terms of that item. However, when multiple products or services are involved, as 
is often the case, using a simple measure of capacity based on units of output can be mislead-
ing. An appliance manufacturer may produce both refrigerators and freezers. If the output 
rates for these two products are different, it would not make sense to simply state capacity 
in units without reference to either refrigerators or freezers. The problem is compounded if 
the firm has other products. One possible solution is to state capacities in terms of each prod-
uct. Thus, the firm may be able to produce 100 refrigerators per day  or  80 freezers per day. 
Sometimes this approach is helpful, sometimes not. For instance, if an organization has many 
different products or services, it may not be practical to list all of the relevant capacities. This 
is especially true if there are frequent changes in the mix of output, because this would neces-
sitate a frequently changing composite index of capacity. The preferred alternative in such 
cases is to use a measure of capacity that refers to  availability of inputs.  Thus, a hospital has a 
certain number of beds, a factory has a certain number of machine hours available, and a bus 
has a certain number of seats and a certain amount of standing room. 
 No single measure of capacity will be appropriate in every situation. Rather, the measure 
of capacity must be tailored to the situation.  Table 5.1  provides some examples of commonly 
used measures of capacity. 
 Up to this point, we have been using a general definition of capacity. Although it is func-
tional, it can be refined into two useful definitions of capacity:
 1. 
 Design capacity : The maximum output rate or service capacity an operation, process, 
or facility is designed for. 
 2. 
 Effective capacity : Design capacity minus allowances such as personal time, and 
maintenance. 
 Design capacity is the maximum rate of output achieved under ideal conditions. Effective 
capacity is always less than design capacity owing to realities of changing product mix, the 
need for periodic maintenance of equipment, lunch breaks, coffee breaks, problems in schedul-
ing and balancing operations, and similar circumstances.  Actual output  cannot exceed effective 
capacity and is often less because of machine breakdowns, absenteeism, shortages of materials, 
and quality problems, as well as factors that are outside the control of the operations managers. 
 Design capacity  The maxi-
mum designed service capacity 
or output rate. 
 Effective capacity  Design 
capacity minus allowances such 
as personal time, equipment 
maintenance, delays due to 
scheduling problems, and 
changing the mix of products. 
 LO5.3 Describe ways of 
 defining and measuring 
capacity.
 TABLE 5.1 
 Measures of capacity 
 Business 
 Inputs 
 Outputs 
 Auto manufacturing 
 Labor hours, machine hours 
 Number of cars per shift 
 Steel mill 
 Furnace size 
 Tons of steel per day 
 Oil refinery 
 Refinery size 
 Gallons of fuel per day 
 Farming 
 Number of acres, number 
of cows 
 Bushels of grain per acre per year, 
gallons of milk per day 
 Restaurant 
 Number of tables, seating capacity 
 Number of meals served per day 
 Theater 
 Number of seats 
 Number of tickets sold per 
performance 
 Retail sales 
 Square feet of floor space 
 Revenue generated per day 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
189
 These different measures of capacity are useful in defining two measures of system effec-
tiveness: efficiency and utilization.  Efficiency  is the ratio of actual output to effective capacity. 
 Capacity utilization is the ratio of actual output to design capacity.
 Efficiency
Actual output
Effective capacity
100%

 
 
 (5–1) 
 Utilization
Actual output
Design capacity
100%

 
 
 (5–2) 
 Both measures are expressed as percentages. 
 It is not unusual for managers to focus exclusively on efficiency, but in many instances this 
emphasis can be misleading. This happens when effective capacity is low compared to design 
capacity. In those cases, high efficiency would seem to indicate effective use of resources 
when it does not. The following example illustrates this point. 
 Given the following information, compute the efficiency and the utilization of the vehicle 
repair department: 
 



Design capacity
50 trucks per day
Effective capacity
40 trucks per day
Actual output
36 trucks per day  
 E X A M P L E  1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
Efficiency
Actual output
Effective capacity
100%
36 trucks per day
40 trucks per day
100%
90%
Utilization
Actual output
Design capacity
100%
36 trucks per day
50 trucks per day
100%
72%

 

 


 

 

  
Compared to the effective capacity of 40 units per day, 36 units per day looks pretty good. 
However, compared to the design capacity of 50 units per day, 36 units per day is much less 
impressive although probably more meaningful. 
 Because effective capacity acts as a lid on actual output, the real key to improving capacity 
utilization is to increase effective capacity by correcting quality problems, maintaining equip-
ment in good operating condition, fully training employees, and fully utilizing bottleneck 
equipment. 
 Hence, increasing utilization depends on being able to increase effective capacity, and this 
requires a knowledge of what is constraining effective capacity. 
 The following section explores some of the main determinants of effective capacity. It is 
important to recognize that the benefits of high utilization are realized only in instances where 
there is demand for the output. When demand is not there, focusing exclusively on utilization 
can be counterproductive, because the excess output not only results in additional variable 
costs but also generates the costs of having to carry the output as inventory. Another disadvan-
tage of high utilization is that operating costs may increase because of increasing waiting time 
due to bottleneck conditions. 
 5.4 DETERMINANTS OF EFFECTIVE CAPACITY 
  Many decisions about system design have an impact on capacity. The same is true for many 
operating decisions. This section briefly describes some of these factors, which are then elab-
orated on elsewhere in the book. The main factors relate to facilities, products or services, 
processes, human considerations, operational factors, the supply chain, and external forces. 

190 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 Facilities.  The design of facilities, including size and provision for expansion, is key. Loca-
tional factors, such as transportation costs, distance to market, labor supply, energy sources, 
and room for expansion, are also important. Likewise, layout of the work area often deter-
mines how smoothly work can be performed, and environmental factors such as heating, 
lighting, and ventilation also play a significant role in determining whether personnel can 
perform effectively or whether they must struggle to overcome poor design characteristics. 
 Product and Service Factors.  Product or service design can have a tremendous influ-
ence on capacity. For example, when items are similar, the ability of the system to produce 
those items is generally much greater than when successive items differ. Thus, a restaurant 
that offers a limited menu can usually prepare and serve meals at a faster rate than a restaurant 
with an extensive menu. Generally speaking, the more uniform the output, the more opportu-
nities there are for standardization of methods and materials, which leads to greater capacity. 
The particular mix of products or services rendered also must be considered since different 
items will have different rates of output. 
LO5.4 Name several determi-
nants of effective capacity.
 In only 48 hours Solectron in San Jose, California, 
can build to order, ship, and install a complex 
computer system. Suppliers hold inventory until 
it is pulled, thereby increasing manufacturing 
flexibility.  
 Making a violin requires precision and skill from an 
artisan. Capacity is highly limited when items are 
specialized and produced one at a time. 
 Process Factors.  The quantity capability of a process is an obvious determinant of capac-
ity. A more subtle determinant is the influence of output  quality.  For instance, if quality of 
output does not meet standards, the rate of output will be slowed by the need for inspection 
and rework activities. Productivity also affects capacity. Process improvements that increase 
quality and productivity can result in increased capacity. Also, if multiple products or multiple 
services are processed in batches, the time to change over equipment settings must be taken 
into account. 
 Human Factors.  The tasks that make up a job, the variety of activities involved, and the 
training, skill, and experience required to perform a job all have an impact on the potential 
and actual output. In addition, employee motivation has a very basic relationship to capacity, 
as do absenteeism and labor turnover. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
191
 Policy Factors.  Management policy can affect capacity by allowing or not allowing capac-
ity options such as overtime or second or third shifts. 
 Operational Factors.  Scheduling problems may occur when an organization has differ-
ences in equipment capabilities among alternative pieces of equipment or differences in job 
requirements. Inventory stocking decisions, late deliveries, purchasing requirements, accept-
ability of purchased materials and parts, and quality inspection and control procedures also 
can have an impact on effective capacity. 
 Inventory shortages of even one component of an assembled item (e.g., computers, refrig-
erators, automobiles) can cause a temporary halt to assembly operations until the compo-
nents become available. This can have a major impact on effective capacity. Thus, insufficient 
capacity in one area can affect overall capacity. 
 Supply Chain Factors.  Supply chain factors must be taken into account in capacity plan-
ning if substantial capacity changes are involved. Key questions include: What impact will the 
changes have on suppliers, warehousing, transportation, and distributors? If capacity will be 
increased, will these elements of the supply chain be able to handle the increase? Conversely, 
if capacity is to be decreased, what impact will the loss of business have on these elements of 
the supply chain? 
 External Factors.  Product standards, especially minimum quality and performance stan-
dards, can restrict management’s options for increasing and using capacity. Thus, pollution 
standards on products and equipment often reduce effective capacity, as does paperwork 
required by government regulatory agencies by engaging employees in nonproductive activi-
ties. A similar effect occurs when a union contract limits the number of hours and type of 
work an employee may do. 
 Table 5.2 summarizes these factors. In addition,  inadequate planning  can be a major limit-
ing determinant of effective capacity. 
 5.5 STRATEGY FORMULATION 
  The three primary strategies are leading, following, and tracking. A leading capacity strategy 
builds capacity in anticipation of future demand increases. If capacity increases involve a long 
lead time, this strategy may be the best option. A following strategy builds capacity when 
demand exceeds current capacity. A tracking strategy is similar to a following strategy, but it 
adds capacity in relatively small increments to keep pace with increasing demand. 
 A. Facilities
   
1. Design 
   
2. Location 
  
3. Layout 
   
4. Environment 
 B. Product/service
  
1. Design 
   
2. Product or service mix 
 C. Process
  
1. Quantity capabilities 
   
2. Quality capabilities 
 D. Human factors
  
1. Job content 
   
2. Job design 
   
3. Training and experience 
   
4. Motivation 
  
5. Compensation 
  
6. Learning rates 
  
7. Absenteeism and labor turnover 
 E. Policy 
 F. Operational
  
1. Scheduling 
  
2. Materials management 
  
3. Quality assurance 
  
4. Maintenance policies 
  
5. Equipment breakdowns 
 G. Supply chain 
 H. External factors
  
1. Product standards 
  
2. Safety regulations 
  
3. Unions 
  
4. Pollution control standards 
 TABLE 5.2 
 Factors that determine 
effective capacity 

192 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 An organization typically bases its capacity strategy on assumptions and predictions about 
long-term demand patterns, technological changes, and the behavior of its competitors. These 
typically involve (1) the growth rate and variability of demand, (2) the costs of building and 
operating facilities of various sizes, (3) the rate and direction of technological innovation, 
(4) the likely behavior of competitors, and (5) availability of capital and other inputs. 
 In some instances a decision may be made to incorporate a   capacity cushion , which is 
an amount of capacity in excess of expected demand when there is some uncertainty about 
demand. Capacity cushion    capacity    expected demand. Typically, the greater the degree 
of demand uncertainty, the greater the amount of cushion used. Organizations that have stan-
dard products or services generally have smaller capacity cushions. Cost and competitive 
priorities are also key factors. 
 Steps in the Capacity Planning Process 
 1. 
Estimate future capacity requirements. 
 2. 
Evaluate existing capacity and facilities and identify gaps. 
 3. 
Identify alternatives for meeting requirements. 
 4. 
Conduct financial analyses of each alternative. 
 5. 
Assess key qualitative issues for each alternative. 
 6. 
Select the alternative to pursue that will be best in the long term. 
 7. 
Implement the selected alternative. 
 8. 
Monitor results. 
 Capacity planning can be difficult at times due to the complex influence of market forces and 
technology. 
 5.6 FORECASTING CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS 
  Capacity planning decisions involve both long-term and short-term considerations. Long-
term considerations relate to overall  level  of capacity, such as facility size; short-term con-
siderations relate to probable  variations in capacity requirements created by such things as 
seasonal, random, and irregular fluctuations in demand. Because the time intervals covered by 
each of these categories can vary significantly from industry to industry, it would be mislead-
ing to put times on the intervals. However, the distinction will serve as a framework within 
which to discuss capacity planning. 
 Long-term  capacity needs require forecasting demand over a time horizon and then con-
verting those forecasts into capacity requirements.  Figure 5.1  illustrates some basic demand 
patterns that might be identified by a forecast. In addition to basic patterns there are more 
complex patterns, such as a combination of cycles and trends. 
 When trends are identified, the fundamental issues are (1) how long the trend might per-
sist, because few things last forever, and (2) the slope of the trend. If cycles are identified, 
interest focuses on (1) the approximate length of the cycles and (2) the amplitude of the cycles 
(i.e., deviation from average). 
 Short-term capacity needs are less concerned with cycles or trends than with seasonal vari-
ations and other variations from average. These deviations are particularly important because 
they can place a severe strain on a system’s ability to satisfy demand at some times and yet 
result in idle capacity at other times. 
 An organization can identify seasonal patterns using standard forecasting techniques. 
Although commonly thought of as annual fluctuations, seasonal variations are also reflected 
in monthly, weekly, and even daily capacity requirements.  Table 5.3  provides some examples 
of items that tend to exhibit seasonal demand patterns. 
 When time intervals are too short to have seasonal variations in demand, the analysis can 
often describe the variations by probability distributions such as a normal, uniform, or Poisson 
 Capacity cushion  Extra 
capacity used to offset demand 
uncertainty. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
193
distribution. For example, we might describe the amount of coffee served during the midday 
meal at a luncheonette by a normal distribution with a certain mean and standard deviation. 
The number of customers who enter a bank branch on Monday mornings might be described 
by a Poisson distribution with a certain mean. It does not follow, however, that  every instance 
of random variability will lend itself to description by a standard statistical distribution. Ser-
vice systems in particular may experience a considerable amount of variability in capacity 
requirements unless requests for service can be scheduled. Manufacturing systems, because 
of their typical isolation from customers and the more uniform nature of production, are likely 
to experience fewer variations. Waiting-line models and simulation models can be useful 
when analyzing service systems. These models are described in Chapter 18. 
 Irregular variations are perhaps the most troublesome: They are difficult or impossible 
to predict. They are created by such diverse forces as major equipment breakdowns, freak 
storms that disrupt normal routines, foreign political turmoil that causes oil shortages, discov-
ery of health hazards (nuclear accidents, unsafe chemical dumping grounds, carcinogens in 
food and drink), and so on. 
 The link between marketing and operations is crucial to realistic determination of capacity 
requirements. Through customer contracts, demographic analyses, and forecasts, marketing 
can supply vital information to operations for ascertaining capacity needs for both the long 
term and the short term. 
 Calculating Processing Requirements 
 A necessary piece of information is the capacity requirements of products that will be pro-
cessed. To get this information, one must have reasonably accurate demand forecasts for each 
product and know the standard processing time per unit for each product, the number of work-
days per year, and the number of shifts that will be used. 
 FIGURE 5.1 
 Common demand patterns 
Time
Time
Time
Time
Volume
Volume
Volume
Volume
0
0
0
0
Growth
Decline
Cyclical
Stable
 TABLE 5.3 
 Examples of seasonal demand 
patterns 
 Period 
 Items 
 Year 
 Beer sales, toy sales, airline traffic, clothing, vacations, tourism, power usage, gasoline 
 consumption, sports and recreation, education 
 Month 
 Welfare and social security checks, bank transactions 
 Week 
 Retail sales, restaurant meals, automobile traffic, automotive rentals, hotel registrations 
 Day 
 Telephone calls, power usage, automobile traffic, public transportation, classroom 
 utilization, retail sales, restaurant meals 

194 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 The task of determining capacity requirements should not be taken lightly. Substantial losses 
can occur when there are misjudgments on capacity needs. One key reason for those misjudg-
ments can be overly optimistic projections of demand and growth. Marketing personnel are gen-
erally optimistic in their outlook, which isn’t necessarily a bad thing. But care must be taken so 
that that optimism doesn’t lead to overcapacity, because the resulting underutilized capacity will 
create an additional cost burden. Another key reason for misjudgments may be focusing exclu-
sively on sales and revenue potential, and not taking into account the  product mix  that will be 
needed to generate those sales and revenues. To avoid that, marketing and operations personnel 
must work closely to determine the optimal product mix needed and the resulting cost and profit. 
 A reasonable approach to determining capacity requirements is to obtain a forecast of future 
demand, translate demand into both the  quantity and the timing  of capacity requirements, and 
then decide what capacity changes (increased, decreased, or no changes) are needed. 
 Long-term capacity alternatives include expansion or contraction of an existing facility, 
opening or closing branch facilities, and relocation of existing operations. At this point, a 
decision must be made on whether to make or buy a good, or provide or buy a service. 
 5.7  ADDITIONAL CHALLENGES OF 
PLANNING SERVICE CAPACITY 
  While the foregoing discussion relates generally to capacity planning for both goods and ser-
vices, it is important to note that capacity planning for services can present special challenges 
due to the nature of services. Three very important factors in planning service capacity are 
(1) there may be a need to be near customers, (2) the inability to store services, and (3) the 
degree of volatility of demand. 
 Convenience for customers is often an important aspect of service. Generally, a service 
must be located near customers. For example, hotel rooms must be where customers want 
to stay; having a vacant room in another city won’t help. Thus, capacity and location are 
closely tied. 
 Capacity also must be matched with the  timing of demand. Unlike goods, services can-
not be produced in one period and stored for use in a later period. Thus, an unsold seat on an 
airplane, train, or bus cannot be stored for use on a later trip. Similarly, inventories of goods 
allow customers to immediately satisfy wants, whereas a customer who wants a service may 
have to wait. This can result in a variety of negatives for an organization that provides the ser-
vice. Thus, speed of delivery, or customer waiting time, becomes a major concern in service 
capacity planning. For example, deciding on the number of police officers and fire trucks to 
 A department works one 8-hour shift, 250 days a year, and has these figures for usage of a 
machine that is currently being considered:
Product
Annual 
Demand
Standard Processing 
Time per Unit (hr)
Processing Time 
Needed (hr)
1
400
5.0
2,000
2
300
8.0
2,400
3
700
2.0
1,400
5,800
 
Units of capacity needed
Processing time needed
Processing time capacity per unit

 
(5–3)
Working one 8-hour shift 250 days a year provides an annual capacity of 8    250    2,000 
hours per year. Consequently, three of these machines would be needed to handle the required 
volume:
 
5,800 hours
2,000 hours/machine
2.90 machines

 
 E X A M P L E  2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
195
have on duty at any given time affects the speed of response and brings into issue the  cost of 
maintaining that capacity. Some of these issues are addressed in the chapter on waiting lines. 
 Demand volatility presents problems for capacity planners. Demand volatility tends to be 
higher for services than for goods, not only in timing of demand, but also in the amount of 
time required to service individual customers. For example, banks tend to experience higher 
volumes of demand on certain days of the week, and the number and nature of transactions 
tend to vary substantially for different individuals. Then, too, a wide range of social, cultural, 
and even weather factors can cause major peaks and valleys in demand. The fact that services 
can’t be stored means service systems cannot turn to inventory to smooth demand require-
ments on the system the way goods-producing systems are able to. Instead, service planners 
have to devise other methods of coping with demand volatility and cyclical demand. For 
example, to cope with peak demand periods, planners might consider hiring extra workers, 
hiring temporary workers, outsourcing some or all of a service, or using pricing and promo-
tion to shift some demand to slower periods. 
 In some instances,  demand management strategies  can be used to offset capacity limita-
tions. Pricing, promotions, discounts, and similar tactics can help to shift some demand away 
from peak periods and into slow periods, allowing organizations to achieve a closer match in 
supply and demand. 
 5.8 DO IT IN-HOUSE OR OUTSOURCE IT? 
  Once capacity requirements have been determined, the organization must decide whether to pro-
duce a good or provide a service itself, or to outsource from another organization. Many organi-
zations buy parts or contract out services, for a variety of reasons. Among those factors are
 1. 
 Available capacity. If an organization has available the equipment, necessary skills, and 
 time, it often makes sense to produce an item or perform a service in-house. The addi-
tional costs would be relatively small compared with those required to buy items or sub-
contract services. On the other hand, outsourcing can increase capacity and flexibility. 
 2. 
 Expertise. If a firm lacks the expertise to do a job satisfactorily, buying might be a rea-
sonable alternative. 
 3. 
 Quality considerations. Firms that specialize can usually offer higher quality than an 
organization can attain itself. Conversely, unique quality requirements or the desire to 
closely monitor quality may cause an organization to perform a job itself. 
 4. 
 The nature of demand. When demand for an item is high and steady, the organization 
is often better off doing the work itself. However, wide fluctuations in demand or small 
orders are usually better handled by specialists who are able to combine orders from 
multiple sources, which results in higher volume and tends to offset individual buyer 
fluctuations.  
 5. 
 Cost. Any cost savings achieved from buying or making must be weighed against the 
preceding factors. Cost savings might come from the item itself or from transportation 
cost savings. If there are fixed costs associated with making an item that cannot be real-
located if the service or product is outsourced, that has to be recognized in the analysis. 
Conversely, outsourcing may help a firm avoid incurring fixed costs. 
 6. 
 Risks. Buying goods or services may entail considerable risks. Loss of direct control 
over operations, knowledge sharing, and the possible need to disclose proprietary infor-
mation are three risks. And liability can be a tremendous risk if the products or services 
of other companies cause harm to customers or the environment, as well as damage to 
an organization’s reputation. Reputation can also be damaged if the public discovers that 
a supplier operates with substandard working conditions. 
 In some cases, a firm might choose to perform part of the work itself and let others handle 
the rest in order to maintain flexibility and to hedge against loss of a subcontractor. If part or 
all of the work will be done in-house, capacity alternatives will need to be developed. 
 LO5.5 Discuss factors to con-
sider when deciding whether to 
operate in-house or outsource.

196 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 Outsourcing brings with it a host of supply chain considerations. These are described in 
Chapter 15. 
 The following reading describes outsourcing that might surprise you. 
magazines abound, with taglines such as “Hours 
versus ours” and “Just heat and serve.” 
 Not exactly like mother used to make, but then mother never had to 
contend with labor costs that run about 30 percent of revenue, or worry 
about keeping up with the competition. 
 Questions 
 1. Explain the meaning of the phrase “Hours versus ours.” 
 2. What advantages are there when restaurants outsource? 
   3. What are some important disadvantages or limitations of outsourc-
ing for restaurants? 
   4. Do you consider restaurant outsourcing to be dishonest? Unethical? 
Explain. 
 5. Does restaurant outsourcing increase capacity? Explain. 
 Ever wonder how some sit-down restaurants are able to offer a huge 
variety of menu items, and how they are able to serve everything on 
that menu quickly? Could they have humongous kitchens and a bat-
tery of chefs scurrying around? Or maybe a few amazing chefs whose 
hands are almost quicker than the eye? Maybe, and maybe not. In 
fact, that great-tasting restaurant entrée or dessert you are served 
might have been prepared in a distant kitchen, where it was partially 
cooked, then flash-frozen or vacuum-packed, and shipped to your 
restaurant, awaiting your order. Then the entrée was finished cook-
ing, perhaps in a microwave oven, and soon it was served to you—
fresh made, so to speak. Surprised? Don’t be. Many restaurants, from 
chains like Fuddruckers and Perkins, to top-quality restaurants, are 
going the outsourcing route. And companies such as Sara Lee, Land 
O’ Lakes, and Stockpot Soup Company of Redwood, Washington, are 
only too happy to oblige them. Advertisements in restaurant trade 
 READING 
 My Compliments to the Chef, er, Buyer 
mother never had to
rss 
 LO5.6 Discuss the major 
considerations related to devel-
oping capacity alternatives.
 5.9 DEVELOPING CAPACITY STRATEGIES 
 There are a number of ways to enhance development of capacity strategies:
 1.  Design flexibility into systems.  The long-term nature of many capacity decisions and 
the risks inherent in long-term forecasts suggest potential benefits from designing flexible 
systems. For example, provision for future expansion in the original design of a structure fre-
quently can be obtained at a small price compared to what it would cost to remodel an existing 
structure that did not have such a provision. Hence, if future expansion of a restaurant seems 
likely, water lines, power hookups, and waste disposal lines can be put in place initially so 
that if expansion becomes a reality, modification to the existing structure can be minimized. 
Similarly, a new golf course may start as a 9-hole operation, but if provision is made for future 
expansion by obtaining options on adjacent land, it may progress to a larger (18-hole) course. 
Other considerations in flexible design involve layout of equipment, location, equipment 
selection, production planning, scheduling, and inventory policies, which will be discussed 
in later chapters. 
 2.  Take stage of life cycle into account.  Capacity requirements are often closely linked 
to the stage of the life cycle that a product or service is in. At the  introduction phase,  it can be 
difficult to determine both the size of the market and the organization’s eventual share of that 
market. Therefore, organizations should be cautious in making large and/or inflexible capac-
ity investments. 
 In the  growth phase,  the overall market may experience rapid growth. However, the real 
issue is the rate at which the  organization’s market share grows, which may be more or less 
than the market rate, depending on the success of the organization’s strategies. Organiza-
tions generally regard growth as a good thing. They want growth in the overall market for 
their products or services, and in their share of the market, because they see this as a way of 
increasing volume, and thus, increasing profits. However, there can also be a downside to this 
because increasing output levels will require increasing capacity, and that means increasing 
investment and increasing complexity. In addition, decision makers should take into account 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
197
possible similar moves by competitors, which would increase the risk of overcapacity in the 
market, and result in higher unit costs of the output. Another strategy would be to compete on 
some nonprice attribute of the product by investing in technology and process improvements 
to make differentiation a competitive advantage. 
 In the  maturity phase,  the size of the market levels off, and organizations tend to have 
stable market shares. Organizations may still be able to increase profitability by reducing 
costs and making full use of capacity. However, some organizations may still try to increase 
profitability by increasing capacity if they believe this stage will be fairly long, or the cost to 
increase capacity is relatively small. 
 In the  decline phase,  an organization is faced with underutilization of capacity due to 
declining demand. Organizations may eliminate the excess capacity by selling it, or by intro-
ducing new products or services. An option that is sometimes used in manufacturing is to 
transfer capacity to a location that has lower labor costs, which allows the organization to 
continue to make a profit on the product for a while longer. 
 3.  Take a “big-picture” (i.e., systems) approach to capacity changes. When develop-
ing capacity alternatives, it is important to consider how parts of the system interrelate. For 
example, when making a decision to increase the number of rooms in a motel, one should 
also take into account probable increased demands for parking, entertainment and food, and 
housekeeping. Also, will suppliers be able to handle the increased volume? 
 Capacity changes inevitably affect an organization’s supply chain. Suppliers may need 
time to adjust to their capacity, so collaborating with supply chain partners on plans for 
capacity increases is essential. That includes not only suppliers, but also distributors and 
transporters. 
 The risk in not taking a big-picture approach is that the system will be unbalanced. Evidence 
of an unbalanced system is the existence of a  bottleneck operation. A  bottleneck  operation is 
an operation in a sequence of operations whose capacity is lower than the capacities of other 
operations in the sequence. As a consequence, the capacity of the bottleneck operation limits 
the system capacity; the capacity of the system is reduced to the capacity of the bottleneck 
operation.  Figure 5.2  illustrates this concept: Four operations generate work that must then be 
processed by a fifth operation. The four different operations each have a capacity of 10 units 
per hour, for a total capacity of 40 units per hour. However, the fifth operation can only pro-
cess 30 units per hour. Consequently, the output of the system will only be 30 units per hour. 
If the other operations operate at capacity, a line of units waiting to be processed by the bottle-
neck operation will build up at the rate of 10 per hour. 
 Here is another example. The following diagram illustrates a three-step process, with 
capacities of each step shown. However, the middle process, because its capacity is lower 
than that of the others, constrains the system to its capacity of 10 units per hour. Hence it is 
a bottleneck. In order to increase the capacity of the entire process, it would be necessary to 
increase the capacity of this bottleneck operation. Note, though, that the potential for increas-
ing the capacity of the process is only 5 units, to 15 units per hour. Beyond that, operation 3’s 
capacity would limit process capacity to 15 units per hour. 
 Bottleneck operation  An 
operation in a sequence of opera-
tions whose capacity is lower 
than that of the other operations.  
 FIGURE 5.2 
 Bottleneck operation 
Operation 1
Operation 2
Bottleneck
operation
30/hr
10/hr
10/hr
10/hr
10/hr
Operation 3
Operation 4

198 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 4.  Prepare to deal with capacity “chunks.”  Capacity increases are often acquired in 
fairly large chunks rather than smooth increments, making it difficult to achieve a match 
between desired capacity and feasible capacity. For instance, the desired capacity of a certain 
operation may be 55 units per hour, but suppose that machines used for this operation are able 
to produce 40 units per hour each. One machine by itself would cause capacity to be 15 units 
per hour short of what is needed, but two machines would result in an excess capacity of 
25 units per hour. The illustration becomes even more extreme if we shift the topic—to open-
hearth furnaces or to the number of airplanes needed to provide a desired level of capacity. 
 5.  Attempt to smooth out capacity requirements. Unevenness in capacity requirements 
also can create certain problems. For instance, during periods of inclement weather, public 
transportation ridership tends to increase substantially relative to periods of pleasant weather. 
Consequently, the system tends to alternate between underutilization and overutilization. 
Increasing the number of buses or subway cars will reduce the burden during periods of heavy 
demand, but this will aggravate the problem of overcapacity at other times and certainly add 
to the cost of operating the system. 
 We can trace the unevenness in demand for products and services to a variety of sources. 
The bus ridership problem is weather related to a certain extent, but demand could be consid-
ered to be partly random (i.e., varying because of chance factors). Still another source of vary-
ing demand is seasonality. Seasonal variations are generally easier to cope with than random 
variations because they are  predictable.  Consequently, management can make allowances 
in planning and scheduling activities and inventories. However, seasonal variations can still 
pose problems because of their uneven demands on the system: At certain times the system 
 
Operation 1
Operation 2
Operation 3
20/hr
10/hr
15/hr
10/hr
 Capacity requirements are affected by seasonal variations. One approach is to identify products that offset each other such as 
demand for water skis and demand for snow skis. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
199
will tend to be overloaded, while at other times it will tend to be underloaded. One possible 
approach to this problem is to identify products or services that have complementary demand 
patterns, that is, patterns that tend to offset each other. For instance, demand for snow skis and 
demand for water skis might complement each other: Demand for water skis is greater in the 
spring and summer months, and demand for snow skis is greater in the fall and winter months. 
The same might apply to heating and air-conditioning equipment. The ideal case is one in 
which products or services with complementary demand patterns involve the use of the same 
resources but at different times, so that overall capacity requirements remain fairly stable and 
inventory levels are minimized.  Figure 5.3 illustrates complementary demand patterns. 
 Variability in demand can pose a problem for managers. Simply adding capacity by 
increasing the size of the operation (e.g., increasing the size of the facility, the workforce, or 
the amount of processing equipment) is not always the best approach, because that reduces 
flexibility and adds to fixed costs. Consequently, managers often choose to respond to higher 
than normal demand in other ways. One way is through the use of overtime work. Another 
way is to subcontract some of the work. A third way is to draw down finished goods invento-
ries during periods of high demand and replenish them during periods of slow demand. These 
options and others are discussed in detail in the chapter on aggregate planning. 
 6.  Identify the optimal operating level.  Production units typically have an ideal or 
optimal level of operation in terms of unit cost of output. At the ideal level, cost per unit is 
the lowest for that production unit. If the output rate is less than the optimal level, increas-
ing the output rate will result in decreasing average unit costs. This is known as   economies 
of scale   . However, if output is increased beyond the optimal level, average unit costs will 
become increasingly larger. This is known as   diseconomies of scale .  Figure 5.4 illustrates 
these concepts. 
 Economies of scale  If the out-
put rate is less than the optimal 
level, increasing the output rate 
results in decreasing average 
unit costs.  
 Diseconomies of scale  If the 
output rate is more than the opti-
mal level, increasing the output 
rate results in increasing average 
unit costs. 
 FIGURE 5.3 
 A and B have complementary 
demand patterns 
Time
Demand
0
A + B
A
B
 FIGURE 5.4 
 Production units have an optimal 
rate of output for minimum cost 
Average cost per unit
0
Rate of output
Minimum
cost       
Optimal
rate

200 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 Reasons for economies of scale include the following:
 a. Fixed costs are spread over more units, reducing the fixed cost per unit. 
 b. Construction costs increase at a decreasing rate with respect to the size of the facility to 
be built. 
 c. Processing costs decrease as output rates increase because operations become more 
standardized, which reduces unit costs. 
 Reasons for diseconomies of scale include the following:
 a. Distribution costs increase due to traffic congestion and shipping from one large 
centralized facility instead of several smaller, decentralized facilities. 
 b. Complexity increases costs; control and communication become more problematic. 
 c. Inflexibility can be an issue. 
 d. Additional levels of bureaucracy exist, slowing decision making and approvals for changes. 
 The explanation for the shape of the cost curve is that at low levels of output, the costs of 
facilities and equipment must be absorbed (paid for) by very few units. Hence, the cost per 
unit is high. As output is increased, there are more units to absorb the “fixed” cost of facilities 
and equipment, so unit costs decrease. However, beyond a certain point, unit costs will start 
to rise. To be sure, the fixed costs are spread over even more units, so that does not account 
for the increase, but other factors now become important: worker fatigue; equipment break-
downs; the loss of flexibility, which leaves less of a margin for error; and, generally, greater 
difficulty in coordinating operations. 
 Both optimal operating rate and the amount of the minimum cost tend to be a func-
tion of the general capacity of the operating unit. For example, as the general capacity of a 
plant increases, the optimal output rate increases and the minimum cost for the optimal rate 
decreases. Thus, larger plants tend to have higher optimal output rates and lower minimum 
costs than smaller plants.  Figure 5.5 illustrates these points. 
 In choosing the capacity of an operating unit, management must take these relationships 
into account along with the availability of financial and other resources and forecasts of 
expected demand. To do this, it is necessary to determine enough points for each size facility 
to be able to make a comparison among different sizes. In some instances, facility sizes are 
givens, whereas in others, facility size is a continuous variable (i.e., any size can be selected). 
In the latter case, an ideal facility size can be selected. Usually, management must make a 
choice from given sizes, and none may have a minimum at the desired rate of output. 
 7.  Choose a strategy if expansion is involved.  Consider whether incremental expansion 
or single step is more appropriate. Factors include competitive pressures, market opportuni-
ties, costs and availability of funds, disruption of operations, and training requirements. Also, 
decide whether to lead or follow competitors. Leading is more risky, but it may have greater 
potential for rewards. 
 FIGURE 5.5 
 Minimum cost and optimal 
operating rate are functions of 
size of a production unit 
Output rate
Average cost per unit
0
Small
plant
Medium
plant
Large
plant

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
201
 5.10 CONSTRAINT MANAGEMENT  
 A  constraint  is something that limits the performance of a process or system in achieving 
its goals. Constraint management is often based on the work of Eli Goldratt ( The Theory of 
Constraints ), and Eli Schragenheim and H. William Dettmer ( Manufacturing at Warp Speed ). 
There are seven categories of constraints:
 Market: Insufficient demand. 
 Resource: Too little of one or more resources (e.g., workers, equipment, and space), as 
illustrated in  Figure 5.2 . 
 Material: Too little of one or more materials. 
 Financial: Insufficient funds. 
 Supplier: Unreliable, long lead time, substandard quality. 
 Knowledge or competency: Needed knowledge or skills missing or incomplete. 
 Policy: Laws or regulations interfere. 
 There may only be a few constraints, or there may be more than a few. Constraint issues 
can be resolved by using the following five steps: 1 
    1. 
Identify the most pressing constraint. If it can easily be overcome, do so, and return to 
Step 1 for the next constraint. Otherwise, proceed to Step 2. 
   2. Change the operation to achieve the maximum benefit, given the constraint. This may be 
a short-term solution. 
   3. 
Make sure other portions of the process are supportive of the constraint (e.g., bottleneck 
operation).  
   4. Explore and evaluate ways to overcome the constraint. This will depend on the type of 
constraint. For example, if demand is too low, advertising or price change may be an 
option. If capacity is the issue, working overtime, purchasing new equipment, and out-
sourcing are possible options. If additional funds are needed, working to improve cash 
flow, borrowing, and issuing stocks or bonds may be options. If suppliers are a problem, 
work with them, find more desirable suppliers, or insource. If knowledge or skills are 
needed, seek training or consultants, or outsource. If laws or regulations are the issue, 
working with lawmakers or regulators may be an option. 
 5. 
Repeat the process until the level of constraints is acceptable. 
 5.11 EVALUATING ALTERNATIVES  
 An organization needs to examine alternatives for future capacity from a number of different 
perspectives. Most obvious are economic considerations: Will an alternative be economically 
feasible? How much will it cost? How soon can we have it? What will operating and mainte-
nance costs be? What will its useful life be? Will it be compatible with present personnel and 
present operations? 
 Less obvious, but nonetheless important, is possible negative public opinion. For instance, 
the decision to build a new power plant is almost sure to stir up reaction, whether the plant is 
coal-fired, hydroelectric, or nuclear. Any option that could disrupt lives and property is bound 
to generate hostile reactions. Construction of new facilities may necessitate moving personnel 
to a new location. Embracing a new technology may mean retraining some people and termi-
nating some jobs. Relocation can cause unfavorable reactions, particularly if a town is about 
to lose a major employer. Conversely, community pressure in a new location may arise if the 
presence of the company is viewed unfavorably (noise, traffic, pollution). 
 1 Adapted from Eli Schragenheim and H. William Dettmer,  Manufacturing at Warp Speed  (Boca Raton: St. Lucie 
Press, 2000).
 Constraint  Something that 
limits the performance of a pro-
cess or system in achieving its 
goals. 
 LO5.7 Describe the steps that 
are used to resolve constraint 
issues.
 LO5.8 Briefly describe 
approaches that are useful 
for evaluating capacity 
alternatives.

202 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 A number of techniques are useful for evaluating capacity alternatives from an economic 
standpoint. Some of the more common are cost–volume analysis, financial analysis, decision 
theory, and waiting-line analysis. Cost–volume analysis is described in this section. Financial 
analysis is mentioned briefly, decision analysis is described in the chapter supplement, and 
waiting-line analysis is described in Chapter 18. 
 Cost–Volume Analysis 
 Cost–volume analysis focuses on relationships between cost, revenue, and volume of output. 
The purpose of cost–volume analysis is to estimate the income of an organization under differ-
ent operating conditions. It is particularly useful as a tool for comparing capacity alternatives. 
 Use of the technique requires identification of all costs related to the production of a given 
product. These costs are then designated as fixed costs or variable costs.  Fixed costs tend 
to remain constant regardless of volume of output. Examples include rental costs, property 
taxes, equipment costs, heating and cooling expenses, and certain administrative costs.  Vari-
able costs  vary directly with volume of output. The major components of variable costs are 
generally materials and labor costs. We will assume that variable cost per unit remains the 
same regardless of volume of output, and that all output can be sold. 
 Table 5.4 summarizes the symbols used in the cost–volume formulas. 
 The total cost associated with a given volume of output is equal to the sum of the fixed cost 
and the variable cost per unit times volume: 
TC
FC
VC


 
 (5–4) 
VC 

Q
v  
 (5–5) 
 where  v     variable cost per unit.  Figure 5.6A  shows the relationship between volume of out-
put and fixed costs, total variable costs, and total (fixed plus variable) costs. 
 Revenue per unit, like variable cost per unit, is assumed to be the same regardless of 
quantity of output. Total revenue will have a linear relationship to output, as illustrated in 
 Figure 5.6B . The total revenue associated with a given quantity of output,  Q, is
TR 

R
Q  
 (5–6) 
 Figure 5.6C describes the relationship between profit—which is the difference between 
total revenue and total (i.e., fixed plus variable) cost—and volume of output. The volume at 
which total cost and total revenue are equal is referred to as the   break-even point (BEP) . 
When volume is less than the break-even point, there is a loss; when volume is greater 
than the break-even point, there is a profit. The greater the deviation from this point, the 
greater the profit or loss.  Figure 5.6D  shows total profit or loss relative to the break-even 
point.   Figure 5.6D  can be obtained from  Figure 5.6C  by drawing a horizontal line through the 
point where the total cost and total revenue lines intersect. Total profit can be computed using 
the formula
 
TR
TC
(FC
)







P
R
Q
v
Q  
 Rearranging terms, we have



P
Q R
v
(
)
FC  
 (5–7) 
 The difference between revenue per unit and variable cost per unit,  R      v,  is known as the 
 contribution margin. 
 The required volume,  Q, needed to generate a specified profit is



Q
P
R
v
FC
 
 (5–8) 
 A special case of this is the volume of output needed for total revenue to equal total cost. 
This is the break-even point, computed using the formula
 Break-even point (BEP)  The 
volume of output at which total 
cost and total revenue are equal. 
 FC    Fixed cost 
 VC    Total variable cost 
 v     Variable cost per unit 
 TC    Total cost 
 TR    Total revenue 
 R     Revenue per unit 
 Q      Quantity or volume of 
output  
 Q BEP     Break-even quantity 
 P     Profit   
 TABLE 5.4 
 Cost–volume symbols 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
203
 


Q
R
v
FC
BEP
 
 (5–9) 
 Different alternatives can be compared by plotting the profit lines for the alternatives, as 
shown in  Figure 5.6E . 
  Figure 5.6E  illustrates the concept of an   indifference point  :  the quantity at which a deci-
sion maker would be indifferent between two competing alternatives. In this illustration, a 
quantity less than the point of indifference would favor choosing alternative B because its 
profit is higher in that range, while a quantity greater than the point of indifference would 
favor choosing alternative A. 
 Indifference point  The 
 quantity that would make two 
alternatives equivalent. 
 FIGURE 5.6 
 Cost–volume relationships 
Q (volume in units)
Amount ($)
0
A. Fixed, variable, and total costs
Q (volume in units)
Amount ($)
0
B. Total revenue increases
     linearly with output
BEP units
Q (volume in units)
Amount ($)
0
C. Profit = TR – TC
Total cost = VC + FC
Total variable cost (VC)
Fixed cost (FC)
Total revenue
Total revenue
Total cost
Profit
Loss
Q (volume in units)
Amount ($)
D. Profit versus loss
BEP
Profit
Loss
0
Amount ($)
Profit from alternative A
Profit from alternative B
Q (volume in units)
Point of indifference
E. Point of indifference
   for two alternatives
0
 The owner of Old-Fashioned Berry Pies, S. Simon, is contemplating adding a new line of 
pies, which will require leasing new equipment for a monthly payment of $6,000. Variable 
costs would be $2 per pie, and pies would retail for $7 each.
 a. 
How many pies must be sold in order to break even? 
 b. 
What would the profit (loss) be if 1,000 pies are made and sold in a month? 
 c. 
How many pies must be sold to realize a profit of $4,000? 
 d. 
If 2,000 can be sold, and a profit target is $5,000, what price should be charged per pie? 
 E X A M P L E  3 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

204 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 S O L U T I O N 
 FC
$6,000,
VC
$2 per pie,
R
$7 per pie



 a. 
 
FC
R
VC
$6,000
$7
$2
1,200 pies/month
BEP
Q





 
 b. 
 For
1,000,
(
)
FC
1,000($7
$2)
$6,000
$1,000







 
Q
P
Q R
v
 
 c. 
 
$4,000; solve for
using Formula 5 8:
$4,000
$6,000
$7
$2
2,000 pies
P
Q
Q





−
 
 d. 







Q R
v
R
R
Profit
(
)
FC
$5,000
2,000(
$2)
$6,000
$7.50
 
   Capacity alternatives may involve  step costs,  which are costs that increase stepwise as 
potential volume increases. For example, a firm may have the option of purchasing one, two, 
or three machines, with each additional machine increasing the fixed cost, although perhaps 
not linearly. (See  Figure 5.7A .) Then fixed costs and potential volume would depend on the 
number of machines purchased. The implication is that  multiple break-even quantities may 
occur, possibly one for each range. Note, however, that the total revenue line might not inter-
sect the fixed-cost line in a particular range, meaning that there would be no break-even point 
in that range. This possibility is illustrated in  Figure  5.7B , where there is no break-even 
point in the first range. In order to decide how many machines to purchase, a manager must 
consider projected annual demand (volume) relative to the multiple break-even points and 
choose the most appropriate number of machines, as Example 4 shows. 
 A manager has the option of purchasing one, two, or three machines. Fixed costs and potential 
volumes are as follows:
Number of 
Machines
Total Annual 
Fixed Costs
Corresponding 
Range of Output
1
$  9,600
0 to 300
2
15,000
301 to 600
3
20,000
601 to 900
 Variable cost is $10 per unit, and revenue is $40 per unit. 
 a. 
Determine the break-even point for each range. 
 b. 
If projected annual demand is between 580 and 660 units, how many machines should 
the manager purchase? 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  4 
 FIGURE 5.7 
 Break-even problem with step 
fixed costs 
Quantity
A. Step fixed costs and variable costs
FC + VC = TC
FC
1 machine
FC + VC = TC
FC
2 machines
FC + VC = TC
FC
3 machines
Quantity
B. Multiple break-even points
1
2
3
BEP3
BEP2
TC
TC
TC
TR
$

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
205
 Cost–volume analysis can be a valuable tool for comparing capacity alternatives if certain 
assumptions are satisfied:
 1. 
One product is involved. 
 2. 
Everything produced can be sold. 
 3. 
The variable cost per unit is the same regardless of the volume. 
 4. 
Fixed costs do not change with volume changes, or they are step changes. 
 5. 
The revenue per unit is the same regardless of volume. 
 6. 
Revenue per unit exceeds variable cost per unit. 
 As with any quantitative tool, it is important to verify that the assumptions on which 
the technique is based are reasonably satisfied for a particular situation. For example, revenue 
per unit or variable cost per unit is not always constant. In addition, fixed costs may not be 
constant over the range of possible output. If demand is subject to random variations, one 
must take that into account in the analysis. Also, cost–volume analysis requires that fixed and 
variable costs can be separated, and this is sometimes exceedingly difficult to accomplish. 
Cost–volume analysis works best with one product or a few products that have the same cost 
characteristics. 
 A notable benefit of cost–volume considerations is the conceptual framework it provides 
for integrating cost, revenue, and profit estimates into capacity decisions. If a proposal looks 
attractive using cost–volume analysis, the next step would be to develop cash flow models to 
see how it fares with the addition of time and more flexible cost functions. 
 Financial Analysis 
 Operations personnel need to have the ability to do  financial analysis. A problem that is univer-
sally encountered by managers is how to allocate scarce funds. A common approach is to use 
financial analysis to rank investment proposals, taking into account the  time value of money.  
 Two important terms in financial analysis are  cash flow and  present value: 
 Cash flow  refers to the difference between the cash received from sales (of goods or 
services) and other sources (e.g., sale of old equipment) and the cash outflow for labor, 
materials, overhead, and taxes. 
 Present value  expresses in current value the sum of all future cash flows of an invest-
ment proposal.    
 The three most commonly used methods of financial analysis are payback, present value, 
and internal rate of return. 
 Cash flow  The difference 
between cash received from 
sales and other sources, and cash 
outflow for labor, material, over-
head, and taxes. 
 Present value  The sum, in 
current value, of all future cash 
flows of an investment proposal. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
Compute the break-even point for each range using the formula  Q BEP     FC/( R      v ). 
  
 For one machine: 
 
$9,600
$40/unit
$10/unit
320 units [not in range, so there
is no BEP]
BEP 


Q
  
 For two machines:  
$15,000
$40/unit
$10/unit
500 units
BEP 


Q
  
 For three machines:  
$20,000
$40/unit
$10/unit
666.67 units
BEP 


Q
 b. 
Comparing the projected range of demand to the two ranges for which a break-even 
point occurs (see  Figure 5.7B ), you can see that the break-even point is 500, which is 
in the range 301 to 600. This means that even if demand is at the low end of the range, 
it would be above the break-even point and thus yield a profit. That is not true of range 
601 to 900. At the top end of projected demand, the volume would still be less than the 
break-even point for that range, so there would be no profit. Hence, the manager should 
choose two machines. 

206 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 Payback is a crude but widely used method that focuses on the length of time it will take 
for an investment to return its original cost. For example, an investment with an original cost 
of $6,000 and a monthly net cash flow of $1,000 has a payback period of six months. Payback 
ignores the  time value of money.  Its use is easier to rationalize for short-term than for long-
term projects. 
 A new machine will cost $2,000, but it will result in savings of $500 per year. What is the 
payback time in years? 
 E X A M P L E  5 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Initial cost  $2,000   Annual savings  $500 
 The payback time is initial cost divided by annual savings. Thus, the payback time is
 
  
  

Initial cost
Annual Saving
$2,000
$500/yr
Payback time
4 years
 
 The  present value (PV)  method summarizes the initial cost of an investment, its estimated 
annual cash flows, and any expected salvage value in a single value called the  equivalent cur-
rent value, taking into account the time value of money (i.e., interest rates). 
 The  internal rate of return (IRR)  summarizes the initial cost, expected annual cash flows, 
and estimated future salvage value of an investment proposal in an  equivalent interest rate. In 
other words, this method identifies the rate of return that equates the estimated future returns 
and the initial cost. 
 These techniques are appropriate when there is a high degree of  certainty  associated with 
estimates of future cash flows. In many instances, however, operations managers and other 
managers must deal with situations better described as risky or uncertain. When conditions of 
risk or uncertainty are present, decision theory is often applied. 
 Decision Theory 
 Decision theory is a helpful tool for financial comparison of alternatives under conditions of 
risk or uncertainty. It is suited to capacity decisions and to a wide range of other decisions 
managers must make. It involves identifying a set of possible future conditions that could 
influence results, listing alternative courses of action, and developing a financial outcome for 
each alternative–future condition combination. Decision theory is described in the supple-
ment to this chapter. 
 Waiting-Line Analysis 
 Analysis of lines is often useful for designing or modifying service systems. Waiting lines 
have a tendency to form in a wide variety of service systems (e.g., airport ticket counters, tele-
phone calls to a cable television company, hospital emergency rooms). The lines are symp-
toms of bottleneck operations. Analysis is useful in helping managers choose a capacity level 
that will be cost-effective through balancing the cost of having customers wait with the cost 
of providing additional capacity. It can aid in the determination of expected costs for various 
levels of service capacity. 
 This topic is described in Chapter 18. 
 Simulation 
 Simulation can be a useful tool in evaluating what-if scenarios. Simulation is described on the 
book’s Web site. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
207
 5.12 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 The strategic implications of capacity decisions can be enormous, impacting all areas of the 
organization. From an operations management standpoint, capacity decisions establish a set 
of conditions within which operations will be required to function. Hence, it is extremely 
important to include input from operations management people in making capacity decisions. 
 Flexibility can be a key issue in capacity decisions, although flexibility is not always an option, 
particularly in capital-intensive industries. However, where possible, flexibility allows an organi-
zation to be agile—that is, responsive to changes in the marketplace. Also, it reduces to a certain 
extent the dependence on long-range forecasts to accurately predict demand. And flexibility makes 
it easier for organizations to take advantage of technological and other innovations. Maintaining 
excess capacity (a capacity cushion) may provide a degree of flexibility, albeit at added cost. 
 Some organizations use a strategy of maintaining a capacity cushion for the purpose of 
blocking entry into the market by new competitors. The excess capacity enables them to pro-
duce at costs lower than what new competitors can. However, such a strategy means higher-
than-necessary unit costs, and it makes it more difficult to cut back if demand slows, or to 
shift to new product or service offerings. 
 Efficiency improvements and utilization improvements can provide capacity increases. 
Such improvements can be achieved by streamlining operations and reducing waste. The 
chapter on lean operations describes ways for achieving those improvements. 
 Bottleneck management can be a way to increase effective capacity, by scheduling non-
bottleneck operations to achieve maximum utilization of bottleneck operations. 
 In cases where capacity expansion will be undertaken, there are two strategies for deter-
mining the timing and degree of capacity expansion. One is the  expand-early  strategy (i.e., 
before demand materializes). The intent might be to achieve economies of scale, to expand 
market share, or to preempt competitors from expanding. The risks of this strategy include an 
oversupply that would drive prices down, and underutilized equipment that would result in 
higher unit costs. 
 The other approach is the  wait-and-see strategy  (i.e., to expand capacity only after demand 
materializes, perhaps incrementally). Its advantages include a lower chance of oversupply due 
to more accurate matching of supply and demand, and higher capacity utilization. The key risks 
are loss of market share and the inability to meet demand if expansion requires a long lead time. 
 In cases where capacity contraction will be undertaken,  capacity disposal strategies 
become important. This can be the result of the need to replace aging equipment with newer 
equipment. It can also be the result of outsourcing and downsizing operations. The cost or 
benefit of asset disposal should be taken into account when contemplating these actions. 
 Capacity refers to a system’s potential for producing goods or delivering services over a specified time 
interval. Capacity decisions are important because capacity is a ceiling on output and a major determi-
nant of operating costs. 
 Three key inputs to capacity planning are the kind of capacity that will be needed, how much will be 
needed, and when it will be needed. Accurate forecasts are critical to the planning process. 
 The capacity planning decision is one of the most important decisions that managers make. The 
capacity decision is strategic and long-term in nature, often involving a significant initial investment 
of capital. Capacity planning is particularly difficult in cases where returns will accrue over a lengthy 
period and risk is a major consideration. 
 A variety of factors can interfere with effective capacity, so effective capacity is usually somewhat 
less than design capacity. These factors include facilities design and layout, human factors, product/
service design, equipment failures, scheduling problems, and quality considerations. 
 Capacity planning involves long-term and short-term considerations. Long-term considerations relate 
to the overall level of capacity; short-term considerations relate to variations in capacity requirements 
due to seasonal, random, and irregular fluctuations in demand. Ideally, capacity will match demand. 
Thus, there is a close link between forecasting and capacity planning, particularly in the long term. In 
the short term, emphasis shifts to describing and coping with variations in demand. 
 SUMMARY 

208 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 1. 
Capacity decisions can be critical to the success of a business organization because capacity is the 
supply side of the supply-demand equation, and too little or too much capacity is costly. 
 2. 
The key issues in capacity planning relate to determining what kind of capacity is needed, how 
much is needed, and when it is needed. 
 3. 
Volatile demand and long lead times to achieve capacity changes can be challenging. 
   4. 
One or more constraints can adversely affect the overall capacity of a system (see, for example, 
 Figure 5.2 ). Capacity increases can only be achieved by loosening those constraints, not by increas-
ing other resources, so it is essential to identify constraining resources and focus efforts on over-
coming them.  
 KEY POINTS 
 bottleneck operation, 197 
 break-even point (BEP), 202 
 capacity, 185 
 capacity cushion, 192 
 cash flow, 205 
 constraint, 201 
 design capacity, 188 
 diseconomies of scale, 199 
 economies of scale, 199 
 effective capacity, 188 
 indifference point, 203 
 present value, 205 
 KEY TERMS 
 Development of capacity alternatives is enhanced by taking a systems approach to planning, by rec-
ognizing that capacity increments are often acquired in chunks, by designing flexible systems, and by 
considering product/service complements as a way of dealing with various patterns of demand. 
 In evaluating capacity alternatives, a manager must consider both quantitative and qualitative 
aspects. Quantitative analysis usually reflects economic factors, and qualitative considerations include 
intangibles such as public opinion and personal preferences of managers. Cost–volume analysis can be 
useful for analyzing alternatives. 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 A firm’s manager must decide whether to make or buy a certain item used in the production of 
vending machines. Making the item would involve annual lease costs of $150,000. Cost and volume 
estimates are as follows:
Make
Buy
Annual fixed cost
$150,000
None
Variable cost/unit
$60
$80
Annual volume (units)
12,000
12,000
 a. Given these numbers, should the firm buy or make this item? 
   b. There is a possibility that volume could change in the future. At what volume would the manager 
be indifferent between making and buying? 
 Problem 1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 
 a. Determine the annual cost of each alternative:
Total cost
Fixed cost
Volume
Variable cost







Make:
Buy:
$150,000
12,000($60)
$870,000
0
12,000($80)
$960,000
 Because the annual cost of making the item is less than the annual cost of buying it, the manager 
would reasonably choose to make the item.  Note:  If the unit cost to buy had been  less than  the  vari-
able cost  to make, there would be no need to even consider fixed costs; it would simply have been 
better to buy. 
   b. To determine the volume at which the two choices would be equivalent, set the two total costs equal 
to each other and solve for volume: TC make     TC buy . Thus, $150,000     Q ($60)    0     Q ($80). 
Solving,  Q     7,500 units. Therefore, at a volume of 7,500 units a year, the manager would be 
indifferent between making and buying. For lower volumes, the choice would be to buy, and for 
higher volumes, the choice would be to make. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
209
 
? 
Units
 
(Indifferent
 
volume)
$
$150,000
0
TCmake
FCmake
TCbuy
 Problem 2 
A small firm produces and sells automotive items in a five-state area. The firm expects to consolidate 
assembly of its battery chargers line at a single location. Currently, operations are in three widely 
scattered locations. The leading candidate for location will have a monthly fixed cost of $42,000 and 
variable costs of $3 per charger. Chargers sell for $7 each. Prepare a table that shows total profits, 
fixed costs, variable costs, and revenues for monthly volumes of 10,000, 12,000, and 15,000 units. 
What is the break-even point?
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Solution 









Q R
v
v
Q
Revenue
$7 per unit
Variable cost
$3 per unit
Fixed cost
$42,000 per month
Profit
(
)
FC
Total cost
FC
Volume
Total 
Revenue
Total 
VC
Fixed 
Cost
Total 
Cost
Total 
Profit
10,000 
$ 70,000
$30,000
$42,000
$72,000
$(2,000)
12,000 
84,000
36,000
42,000
78,000
6,000
15,000 
105,000
45,000
42,000
87,000
18,000
FC
$42,000
$7
$3
10,500 units per month
BEP 




Q
R
v
 Problem 3 
 Refer to Problem 2. Determine profit when volume equals 22,000 units. 
 Solution 
Profit
(
)
FC
($7
$3)
$42,000
$4
$42,000








Q R
v
Q
Q
 For  Q     22,000, profit is
$4(22,000)
$42,000
$46,000


 Problem 4 
A manager must decide which type of equipment to buy, Type A or Type B. Type A equipment costs 
$15,000 each, and Type B costs $11,000 each. The equipment can be operated eight hours a day, 250 
days a year. 
 Either machine can be used to perform two types of chemical analysis, C1 and C2. Annual ser-
vice requirements and processing times are shown in the following table. Which type of equipment 
should be purchased, and how many of that type will be needed? The goal is to minimize total pur-
chase cost. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

210 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
PROCESSING TIME 
PER ANALYSIS (hr)
Analysis Type
Annual Volume
A
B
C1
1,200
1
2
C2
900
3
2
 Solution 
 Total processing time (Annual volume    Processing time per analysis) needed by type of equipment: 
Analysis Type
A
B
C1
1,200
2,400
C2
2,700
1,800
Total
3,900
4,200
 Total processing time available per piece of equipment is 8 hours/day    250 days/year    2,000. 
Hence, one piece can handle 2,000 hours of analysis, two pieces of equipment can handle 
4,000 hours, and so on. 
 Given the total processing requirements, two of Type A would be needed, for a total cost of 
2    $15,000    $30,000, or three of Type B, for a total cost of 3    $11,000    $33,000. Thus, two 
pieces of Type A would have sufficient capacity to handle the load at a lower cost than three of 
Type B. 
 Problem 5 
 Processes are commonly represented in either of two ways. One style uses blocks to represent opera-
tions and the other uses circles. The block style was illustrated on p. 000. A similar style uses circles 
rather than blocks: 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Process can operate in series, as shown in the preceding diagram, or in parallel, 
as shown here:
Question: What is the capacity (attainable output) of this system?
1
Operation
Operation
Operation
2
3
1
10 units/hr
15 units/hr
12 units/hr
11 units/hr
14 units/hr
9 units/hr
?
2
3
4
5
6
7
20 units/hr
 Solution 
 The attainable output of each portion of the system is equal to the output of the slowest operation. 
So the output of the upper portion is 10 units per hour and the output of the lower portion is 9 units 
per hour. Together the two portions can produce 10    9    19 units per hour. Although operation 
#7 can handle 20 units per hour, only 19 units per hour come from the two previous portions of the 
system, so the system output can only be 19 units per hour. 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
211
 1. Contrast design capacity and effective capacity. 
 2. List and briefly explain three factors that may inhibit capacity utilization. 
 3. How do long-term and short-term capacity considerations differ? 
 4. Give an example of a good and a service that exhibit these seasonal demand patterns:
 a. Annual 
 b. Monthly 
 c. Weekly 
 d. Daily 
 5. Give some examples of building flexibility into system design. 
 6. Why is it important to adopt a big-picture approach to capacity planning? 
 7. What is meant by “capacity in chunks,” and why is that a factor in capacity planning? 
 8. What kinds of capacity problems do many elementary and secondary schools periodically experi-
ence? What are some alternatives to deal with those problems? 
 9. How can a systems approach to capacity planning be useful? 
 10. How do capacity decisions influence productivity? 
 11. Why is it important to match process capabilities with product requirements? 
 12. Briefly discuss how uncertainty affects capacity decisions. 
 13. Discuss the importance of capacity planning in deciding on the number of police officers or fire 
trucks to have on duty at a given time. 
 14. Why is capacity planning one of the most critical decisions a manager has to make? 
 15. Why is capacity planning for services more challenging than it is for goods production? 
 16. What are some capacity measures for each of the following?
 a. University 
 b. Hospital 
 c. Computer repair shop 
 d. Farm 
 17. What is the benefit to a business organization of having capacity measures? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What are the major trade-offs in capacity planning? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in capacity planning? 
 3. In what ways does technology have an impact on capacity planning? 
 TAKING STOCK 
  1. A computer repair service has a design capacity of 80 repairs per day. Its effective capacity, how-
ever, is 64 repairs per day, and its actual output is 62 repairs per day. The manager would like to 
increase the number of repairs per day. Which of the following factors would you recommend that 
the manager investigate: quality problems, absenteeism, or scheduling and balancing? Explain 
your reasoning. 
  2. Compared to manufacturing, service requirements tend to be more time dependent, location 
dependent, and volatile. In addition, service quality is often directly observable by customers. Find 
a recent article in a business magazine that describes how a service organization is struggling with 
one or more of these issues and make recommendations on what an organization needs to do to 
overcome these difficulties. 
  3. Identify four potential unethical actions or inactions related to capacity planning, and the ethical 
principle each violates (see Chapter 1). 
  4. Any increase in efficiency also increases utilization. Although the upper limit on efficiency is 
100%, what can be done to achieve still higher levels of utilization?  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 

212 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 1. Determine the utilization and the efficiency for each of these situations:
 a. A loan processing operation that processes an average of 7 loans per day. The operation has a 
design capacity of 10 loans per day and an effective capacity of 8 loans per day. 
 b. A furnace repair team that services an average of four furnaces a day if the design capacity is six 
furnaces a day and the effective capacity is five furnaces a day. 
 c. Would you say that systems that have higher efficiency ratios than other systems will always 
have higher utilization ratios than those other systems? Explain. 
 2. In a job shop, effective capacity is only 50 percent of design capacity, and actual output is 
80  percent of effective output. What design capacity would be needed to achieve an actual output of 
eight jobs per week? 
 3. A producer of pottery is considering the addition of a new plant to absorb the backlog of demand 
that now exists. The primary location being considered will have fixed costs of $9,200 per month 
and variable costs of 70 cents per unit produced. Each item is sold to retailers at a price that 
 averages 90 cents. 
 a. What volume per month is required in order to break even? 
 b. What profit would be realized on a monthly volume of 61,000 units? 87,000 units? 
 c. What volume is needed to obtain a profit of $16,000 per month? 
 d. What volume is needed to provide a revenue of $23,000 per month? 
 e. Plot the total cost and total revenue lines. 
 4. A small firm intends to increase the capacity of a bottleneck operation by adding a new machine. 
Two alternatives, A and B, have been identified, and the associated costs and revenues have been 
estimated. Annual fixed costs would be $40,000 for A and $30,000 for B; variable costs per unit 
would be $10 for A and $11 for B; and revenue per unit would be $15. 
 a. Determine each alternative’s break-even point in units. 
 b. At what volume of output would the two alternatives yield the same profit? 
 c. If expected annual demand is 12,000 units, which alternative would yield the higher profit? 
 5. A producer of felt-tip pens has received a forecast of demand of 30,000 pens for the coming month 
from its marketing department. Fixed costs of $25,000 per month are allocated to the felt-tip opera-
tion, and variable costs are 37 cents per pen. 
 a. Find the break-even quantity if pens sell for $1 each. 
 b. At what price must pens be sold to obtain a monthly profit of $15,000, assuming that estimated 
demand materializes?  
 6. A real estate agent is considering changing her cell phone plan. There are three plans to choose 
from, all of which involve a monthly service charge of $20. Plan A has a cost of $.45 a minute for 
daytime calls and $.20 a minute for evening calls. Plan B has a charge of $.55 a minute for daytime 
calls and $.15 a minute for evening calls. Plan C has a flat rate of $80 with 200 minutes of calls 
allowed per month and a charge of $.40 per minute beyond that, day or evening. 
 a. Determine the total charge under each plan for this case: 120 minutes of day calls and 
40  minutes of evening calls in a month. 
 b. Prepare a graph that shows total monthly cost for each plan versus daytime call minutes. 
 c. If the agent will use the service for daytime calls, over what range of call minutes will each plan 
be optimal? 
 d. Suppose that the agent expects both daytime and evening calls. At what point (i.e., percentage of 
call minutes for daytime calls) would she be indifferent between plans A and B? 
 7. A firm plans to begin production of a new small appliance. The manager must decide whether 
to purchase the motors for the appliance from a vendor at $7 each or to produce them in-house. 
Either of two processes could be used for in-house production; one would have an annual fixed cost 
of $160,000 and a variable cost of $5 per unit, and the other would have an annual fixed cost of 
$190,000 and a variable cost of $4 per unit. Determine the range of annual volume for which each 
of the alternatives would be best. 
 8. A manager is trying to decide whether to purchase a certain part or to have it produced internally. 
Internal production could use either of two processes. One would entail a variable cost of $17 per 
unit and an annual fixed cost of $200,000; the other would entail a variable cost of $14 per unit 
and an annual fixed cost of $240,000. Three vendors are willing to provide the part. Vendor A has 
a price of $20 per unit for any volume up to 30,000 units. Vendor B has a price of $22 per unit for 
demand of 1,000 units or less, and $18 per unit for larger quantities. Vendor C offers a price of 
$21 per unit for the first 1,000 units, and $19 per unit for additional units. 
 PROBLEMS 

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
213
 a. If the manager anticipates an annual volume of 10,000 units, which alternative would be best 
from a cost standpoint? For 20,000 units, which alternative would be best? 
 b. Determine the range for which each alternative is best. Are there any alternatives that are never 
best? Which? 
  9. A company manufactures a product using two machine cells. Each cell has a design capacity 
of 250 units per day and an effective capacity of 230 units per day. At present, actual output 
averages 200 units per cell, but the manager estimates that productivity improvements soon 
will increase output to 225 units per day. Annual demand is currently 50,000 units. It is fore-
casted that within two years, annual demand will triple. How many cells should the company 
plan to produce to satisfy predicted demand under these conditions? Assume 240 workdays 
per year.  
 10. A company must decide which type of machine to buy, and how many units of that type, given the 
following information: 
 Type 
 Cost 
 1 
 $10,000 
 2 
 14,000 
   Product demand and processing times for the equipment are:
 Product 
 Annual 
Demand 
 PROCESSING TIME 
PER UNIT (minutes) 
 1 
 2 
 001 
 12,000 
 4 
 6 
 002 
 10,000 
 9 
 9 
 003 
 18,000 
 5 
 3 
 a. How many machines of each type would be required to handle demand if the machines will 
operate 8 hours a day, 250 days a year, and what annual capacity cushion in processing time 
would result for each? 
 b. With high certainty of annual demand, which type of machine would be chosen if that was an 
important consideration? With low certainty, which type of machine would be chosen? 
 c. If purchasing and operating costs are taken into account, which type of machine would mini-
mize total costs, given your answer for part  a? Operating costs are $6/hr for type 1 and $5/hr 
for type 2. 
 11. A manager must decide which type of machine to buy, A, B, or C. Machine costs are as follows: 
Machine
Cost
A
$40,000
B
$30,000
C
$80,000
   Product forecasts and processing times on the machines are as follows:
PROCCESSING TIME 
PER UNIT (minutes)
Product
Annual 
Demand
A
B
C
1
16,000
3
4
2
2
12,000
4
4
3
3
6,000
5
6
4
4
30,000
2
2
1
 a. Assume that only purchasing costs are being considered. Which machine would have the low-
est total cost, and how many of that machine would be needed? Machines operate 10 hours a 
day, 250 days a year. 
 b. Consider this additional information: The machines differ in terms of hourly operating costs: 
The A machines have an hourly operating cost of $10 each, B machines have an hourly oper-
ating cost of $11 each, and C machines have an hourly operating cost of $12 each. Which 
alternative would be selected, and how many machines, in order to minimize total cost while 
satisfying capacity processing requirements?  

214 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services
 12. A manager must decide how many machines of a certain type to purchase. Each machine can pro-
cess 100 customers per day. One machine will result in a fixed cost of $2,000 per day, while two 
machines will result in a fixed cost of $3,800 per day. Variable costs will be $20 per customer, and 
revenue will be $45 per customer. 
 a. Determine the break-even point for each range. 
 b. If estimated demand is 90 to 120 customers per day, how many machines should be purchased? 
 13. The manager of a car wash must decide whether to have one or two wash lines. One line will mean 
a fixed cost of $6,000 a month, and two lines will mean a fixed cost of $10,500 a month. Each line 
would be able to process 15 cars an hour. Variable costs will be $3 per car, and revenue will be 
$5.95 per car. The manager projects an average demand of between 14 and 18 cars an hour. Would 
you recommend one or two lines? The car wash is open 300 hours a month. 
 14. The following diagram shows a four-step process that begins with Operation 1 and ends with 
Operation 4. The rates shown in each box represent the effective capacity of that operation. 
 a. Determine the capacity of this process. 
 b. Which action would yield the greatest increase in process capacity: (1) increase the capacity 
of Operation 1 by 15 percent; (2) increase the capacity of Operation 2 by 10 percent; or (3) 
increase the capacity of Operation 3 by 10 percent?  
Operation 1
Operation 2
Operation 3
Operation 4
12/hr
15/hr
11/hr
14/hr
 15. Given the following diagram,
 a. What is the capacity of this system? 
 b. If the capacity of one operation could be increased in order to increase the output of the sys-
tem, which operation should it be, and what amount of increase?  
1
17 units/hr
18 units/hr
15 units/hr
16 units/hr
15 units/hr
17 units/hr
20 units/hr
24 units/hr
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 16. Find the capacity of this system: 
1
22 units/hr
17 units/hr
15 units/hr
20 units/hr
18 units/hr
18 units/hr
22 units/hr
17 units/hr
18 units/hr
51 units/hr
54 units/hr
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
 17. The following diagram describes a service process where customers go through through either of 
two parallel three-step processes and then merge into a single line for two final steps. Capacities of 
each step are shown on the diagram. 
 a. What is the current capacity of the entire system? 
 b. If you could increase the capacity of only one operation through process improvement efforts, 
which operation would you select, how much additional capacity would you strive for, and 
what would the resulting capacity of the process be?  

 
Chapter Five Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
215
1
15/hr
5/hr
8/hr
12/hr
34/hr
30/hr
10/hr
20/hr
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 18. A new piece of equipment will cost $12,000 and will result in a reduced operation cost of $1,500 
per year. What will the payback time be in years? 
 19. A new machine will cost $18,000, but result it will in savings of $2,400 per year. What will the 
payback time be in years? 
 20. Remodeling an office will cost $25,000 and will generate savings of $3,000 the first year, $4,000 
the second year, and $5,000 per year thereafter. How long will it take to recoup the initial cost of 
remodeling? 
 Due to financial pressures that many hospitals face, the Deaconess 
Clinic in Billings, Montana, decided to outsource a number of services, 
although in somewhat different ways. 
 First, the hospital outsourced its cafeteria food service. Although the 
food service employees were hired by the outside firm, they still felt a 
sense of ownership of their jobs, and still felt connected to the hospital 
because of the family atmosphere in the kitchen and the cafeteria. 
 When the hospital tried the same thing with housekeeping, employee 
turnover became a problem. An investigation revealed that because the 
housekeeping employees were more isolated in their work, they lost 
what little feeling of being connected to the hospital they had. The prob-
lem was solved by hiring the employees back but using the outsource 
company to manage housekeeping. 
 The hospital also decided to outsource its laundry service. This time 
the hospital approached a rival hospital about joining it in outsourcing 
laundry service. 
 Questions 
    1. In some instances the outsourced service occurs in a different loca-
tion, while in others it takes place inside the organization doing the 
outsourcing, as the food service did in this case. What advantages 
were there in having the outsourced work performed within the hos-
pital? Suppose a different hospital outsourced its food service but 
decided not to have the work performed in-house. What might its 
rationale be? 
 2. In the housekeeping situation, why not just forget about outsourc-
ing, especially since the hospital ended up rehiring its employees 
anyway? 
   3. For laundry service, what might have been the rationale for asking 
another hospital to join it? 
 Source: Based on Norm Friedman, “Is Outsourcing the Solution?”
  www.hpnonline.com/inside/June04/outsourcing.htm . 
 CASE 
 Outsourcing of Hospital Services 
rs in a different loca
 Allspaw, John.  The Art of Capacity Planning: Scaling 
Web Resources. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 
2008. 
 Goldratt, Eliyahu M.  Theory of Constraints. Great 
 Barrington, MA: North River Press, 2000. 
 Gunther, Neil J.  Guerrilla Capacity Planning: A 
 Tactical Approach to Planning for Highly Scalable 
Applications and Services. New York: 
Springer-Verlag, 2007. 
 Jacobs, F. Robert, William Berry, D. Clay Whybark, 
and Thomas Vollman.  Manufacturing Planning and 
Control for Supply Chain Management. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 La Piana, David.  The Nonprofit Strategy Revolution: 
Real Time Strategic Planning in a Rapid Response 
World. St. Paul, MN: Fieldstone Alliance, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

216
 5S.1 INTRODUCTION  
 Decision theory represents a general approach to decision making. It is suitable for a wide 
range of operations management decisions. Among them are capacity planning, product and 
service design, equipment selection, and location planning. Decisions that lend themselves to 
a decision theory approach tend to be characterized by the following elements:
 1. 
A set of possible future conditions that will have a bearing on the results of the decision. 
 2. 
A list of alternatives for the manager to choose from. 
 3. 
A known payoff for each alternative under each possible future condition. 
 To use this approach, a decision maker would employ this process:
 1. 
Identify the possible future conditions (e.g., demand will be low, medium, or high; the 
competitor will or will not introduce a new product). These are called  states of nature. 
 2. 
Develop a list of possible  alternatives, one of which may be to do nothing. 
 3. 
Determine or estimate the  payoff associated with each alternative for every possible 
future condition. 
 SUPPLEMENT TO 
C H AP T E R  5 
 SUPPLEMENT OUTLINE 
 5S.1 Introduction,  216 
 5S.2  The Decision Process and Causes of 
Poor Decisions,  217 
 5S.3 Decision Environments,  218 
 5S.4 Decision Making under Certainty,  218 
 5S.5 Decision Making under Uncertainty,  219 
 5S.6 Decision Making under Risk,  220 
 5S.7 Decision Trees,  221 
 5S.8  Expected Value of Perfect 
Information,  223 
 5S.9 Sensitivity Analysis,  224 
 Decision Theory 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this supplement, you 
should be able to: 
 LO5S.1 
Outline the steps in the decision 
process. 
 LO5S.2 
Name some causes of poor 
decisions. 
 LO5S.3 
Describe and use techniques that 
apply to decision making under 
uncertainty. 
 LO5S.4 
Describe and use the expected-
value approach. 
 LO5S.5 
Construct a decision tree and use 
it to analyze a problem. 
 LO5S.6 
Compute the expected value of 
perfect information. 
 LO5S.7 
Conduct sensitivity analysis on a 
simple decision problem. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
217
 4. 
If possible, estimate the  likelihood of each possible future condition. 
 5. 
Evaluate alternatives according to some  decision criterion (e.g., maximize expected 
profit), and select the best alternative. 
 The information for a decision is often summarized in a   payoff table ,  which shows the 
expected payoffs for each alternative under the various possible states of nature. These tables 
are helpful in choosing among alternatives because they facilitate comparison of alternatives. 
Consider the following payoff table, which illustrates a capacity planning problem. 
 The payoffs are shown in the body of the table. In this instance, the payoffs are in terms 
of present values, which represent equivalent current dollar values of expected future income 
less costs. This is a convenient measure because it places all alternatives on a comparable 
basis. If a small facility is built, the payoff will be the same for all three possible states of 
nature. For a medium facility, low demand will have a present value of $7 million, whereas 
both moderate and high demand will have present values of $12 million. A large facility will 
have a loss of $4 million if demand is low, a present value of $2 million if demand is moder-
ate, and a present value of $16 million if demand is high. 
 The problem for the decision maker is to select one of the alternatives, taking the present 
value into account. 
 Evaluation of the alternatives differs according to the degree of certainty associated with 
the possible future conditions. 
 5S.2  THE DECISION PROCESS AND CAUSES 
OF POOR DECISIONS  
  Despite the best efforts of a manager, a decision occasionally turns out poorly due to unfore-
seeable circumstances. Luckily, such occurrences are not common. Often, failures can be 
traced to a combination of mistakes in the decision process, to  bounded rationality,  or to 
 suboptimization. 
 The decision process consists of these steps:
 1. 
Identify the problem. 
 2. 
Specify objectives and criteria for a solution. 
 3. 
Develop suitable alternatives. 
 4. 
Analyze and compare alternatives. 
 5. 
Select the best alternative. 
 6. 
Implement the solution. 
 7. 
Monitor to see that desired result is achieved. 
 In many cases, managers fail to appreciate the importance of each step in the decision- 
making process. They may skip a step or not devote enough effort to completing it before 
jumping to the next step. Sometimes this happens owing to a manager’s style of making quick 
decisions or a failure to recognize the consequences of a poor decision. The manager’s ego can 
be a factor. This sometimes happens when the manager has experienced a series of  successes—
important decisions that turned out right. Some managers then get the impression that they can 
do no wrong. But they soon run into trouble, which is usually enough to bring them back down 
 Payoff table  Table showing 
the expected payoffs for each 
alternative in every possible state 
of nature. 
 LO5S.2 Name some causes of 
poor decisions.
 
 POSSIBLE FUTURE DEMAND 
 Alternatives 
 Low 
 Moderate 
 High 
 Small facility 
 $10 * 
 $10 
 $10 
 Medium facility 
 7 
 12 
 12 
 Large facility 
 (4) 
 2 
 16 
 *Present value in $ millions. 
 LO5S.1 Outline the steps in 
the decision process.

218 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
to earth. Other managers seem oblivious to negative results and continue the process they 
associate with their previous successes, not recognizing that some of that success may have 
been due more to luck than to any special abilities of their own. A part of the problem may be 
the manager’s unwillingness to admit a mistake. Yet other managers demonstrate an inability 
to make a decision; they stall long past the time when the decision should have been rendered. 
 Of course, not all managers fall into these traps—it seems safe to say that the majority 
do not. Even so, this does not necessarily mean that every decision works out as expected. 
Another factor with which managers must contend is   bounded rationality ,  or the limits 
imposed on decision making by costs, human abilities, time, technology, and the availability 
of information. Because of these limitations, managers cannot always expect to reach deci-
sions that are optimal in the sense of providing the best possible outcome (e.g., highest profit, 
least cost). Instead, they must often resort to achieving a  satisfactory solution. 
 Still another cause of poor decisions is that organizations typically departmentalize deci-
sions. Naturally, there is a great deal of justification for the use of departments in terms of 
overcoming span-of-control problems and human limitations. However,   suboptimization can 
occur. This is a result of different departments’ attempts to reach a solution that is optimum 
for each. Unfortunately, what is optimal for one department may not be optimal for the orga-
nization as a whole. If you are familiar with the theory of constraints (see Chapter 16), subop-
timization and local optima are conceptually the same, with the same negative consequences.   
 5S.3 DECISION ENVIRONMENTS  
 Operations management decision environments are classified according to the degree of cer-
tainty present. There are three basic categories: certainty, risk, and uncertainty. 
 Certainty  means that relevant parameters such as costs, capacity, and demand have 
known values. 
 Risk means that certain parameters have probabilistic outcomes. 
 Uncertainty  means that it is impossible to assess the likelihood of various possible future 
events. 
 Consider these situations:
 1. 
Profit per unit is $5. You have an order for 200 units. How much profit will you make? 
(This is an example of  certainty since unit profits and total demand are known.) 
 2. 
Profit is $5 per unit. Based on previous experience, there is a 50 percent chance of an 
order for 100 units and a 50 percent chance of an order for 200 units. What is expected 
profit? (This is an example of  risk since demand outcomes are probabilistic.) 
 3. 
Profit is $5 per unit. The probabilities of potential demands are unknown. (This is an 
example of  uncertainty. ) 
 The importance of these different decision environments is that they require different anal-
ysis techniques. Some techniques are better suited for one category than for others. 
 5S.4 DECISION MAKING UNDER CERTAINTY 
 When it is known for certain which of the possible future conditions will actually happen, the 
decision is usually relatively straightforward: Simply choose the alternative that has the best 
payoff under that state of nature. Example 5S–1 illustrates this. 
 Bounded rationality  The 
limitations on decision making 
caused by costs, human abilities, 
time, technology, and availability 
of information. 
 Suboptimization  The result 
of different departments each 
attempting to reach a solu-
tion that is optimum for that 
department. 
Certainty Environment in 
which relevant parameters have 
known values.
Risk Environment in which cer-
tain future events have probable 
outcomes.
Uncertainty Environment in 
which it is impossible to assess 
the likelihood of various future 
events.
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 1 
 Determine the best alternative in the payoff table on the previous page for each of the cases: It 
is known with certainty that demand will be ( a ) low, ( b ) moderate, ( c ) high. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
219
 Choose the alternative with the highest payoff. Thus, if we know demand will be low, we 
would elect to build the small facility and realize a payoff of $10 million. If we know demand 
will be moderate, a medium factory would yield the highest payoff ($12 million versus either 
$10 million or $2 million). For high demand, a large facility would provide the highest payoff. 
 Although complete certainty is rare in such situations, this kind of exercise provides some 
perspective on the analysis. Moreover, in some instances, there may be an opportunity to con-
sider allocation of funds to research efforts, which may reduce or remove some of the uncer-
tainty surrounding the states of nature, converting uncertainty to risk or to certainty. 
 5S.5 DECISION MAKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY  
  At the opposite extreme is complete uncertainty: No information is available on how likely 
the various states of nature are. Under those conditions, four possible decision criteria 
are  maximin, maximax, Laplace,  and  minimax regret.  These approaches can be defined as 
follows: 
 Maximin —Determine the worst possible payoff for each alternative, and choose the 
alternative that has the “best worst.” The maximin approach is essentially a pessimistic 
one because it takes into account only the worst possible outcome for each alternative. 
The actual outcome may not be as bad as that, but this approach establishes a “guaranteed 
minimum.” 
 Maximax —Determine the best possible payoff, and choose the alternative with that pay-
off. The maximax approach is an optimistic, “go for it” strategy; it does not take into 
account any payoff other than the best. 
 Laplace —Determine the average payoff for each alternative, and choose the alternative 
with the best average. The Laplace approach treats the states of nature as equally likely. 
 Minimax regret —Determine the worst  regret  for each alternative, and choose the alter-
native with the “best worst.” This approach seeks to minimize the difference between the 
payoff that is realized and the best payoff for each state of nature. 
 The next two examples illustrate these decision criteria. 
 S O L U T I O N 
Maximin Choose the alterna-
tive with the best of the worst 
possible payoffs.
Maximax Choose the alter-
native with the best possible 
payoff.
Laplace Choose the alternative 
with the best average payoff of 
any of the alternatives.
Minimax regret Choose the 
alternative that has the least of 
the worst regrets.
 S O L U T I O N 
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Referring to the payoff table on page 217, determine which alternative would be chosen under 
each of these strategies:
 a. 
Maximin 
 b. 
Maximax 
 c. 
Laplace 
 a. 
Using maximin, the worst payoffs for the alternatives are as follows:
 Small facility: 
$10 million 
 Medium facility: 
  7 million 
 Large facility: 
4 million 
  Hence, since $10 million is the best, choose to build the small facility using the maximin 
strategy. 
 b. 
Using maximax, the best payoffs are as follows:
 Small facility: 
$10 million 
 Medium facility: 
 12 million 
 Large facility: 
 16 million 
  The best overall payoff is the $16 million in the third row. Hence, the maximax criterion 
leads to building a large facility. 
 LO5S.3 Describe and use 
techniques that apply to deci-
sion making under uncertainty.

220 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 Regret (opportunity loss)   
The difference between a given 
payoff and the best payoff for a 
state of nature.  
 c. 
For the Laplace criterion, first find the row totals, and then divide each of those amounts 
by the number of states of nature (three in this case). Thus, we have
 
 Row Total 
(in $ millions) 
 Row Average 
(in $ millions) 
 Small facility 
 $30 
 $10.00 
 Medium facility 
 31 
 10.33 
 Large facility 
 14 
 4.67 
 Because the medium facility has the highest average, it would be chosen under the Laplace 
criterion.     
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 3 
 Determine which alternative would be chosen using a minimax regret approach to the capac-
ity planning program. 
 The first step in this approach is to prepare a table of   regrets (or  opportunity losses ) . To do 
this, subtract every payoff  in each column  from the best payoff in that column. For instance, 
in the first column, the best payoff is 10, so each of the three numbers in that column must be 
subtracted from 10. Going down the column, the regrets will be 10    10    0, 10    7    3, and 
10    (  4)    14. In the second column, the best payoff is 12. Subtracting each payoff from 
12 yields 2, 0, and 10. In the third column, 16 is the best payoff. The regrets are 6, 4, and 0. 
These results are summarized in a regret table:  
 
 REGRETS (IN $ MILLIONS) 
 
 
 Alternatives 
 Low 
 Moderate 
 High 
 Worst 
 Small facility 
 $0 
 $2 
 $6 
 
 $6 
 Medium facility 
 3 
 0 
 4 
 
 4 
 Large facility 
 14 
 10 
 0 
 
 14 
 The second step is to identify the worst regret for each alternative. For the first alternative, 
the worst is 6; for the second, the worst is 4; and for the third, the worst is 14. 
 The best of these worst regrets would be chosen using minimax regret. The lowest regret is 
4, which is for a medium facility. Hence, that alternative would be chosen. 
 Solved Problem 6 at the end of this supplement illustrates decision making under uncer-
tainty when the payoffs represent costs. 
 The main weakness of these approaches (except for Laplace) is that they do not take into 
account  all  of the payoffs. Instead, they focus on the worst or best, and so they lose some 
information. Still, for a given set of circumstances, each has certain merits that can be helpful 
to a decision maker. 
 5S.6 DECISION MAKING UNDER RISK  
  Between the two extremes of certainty and uncertainty lies the case of risk: The probability 
of occurrence for each state of nature is known. (Note that because the states are mutually 
exclusive and collectively exhaustive, these probabilities must add to 1.00.) A widely used 
approach under such circumstances is the  expected monetary value criterion. The expected 
value is computed for each alternative, and the one with the best expected value is selected. 
The expected value is the sum of the payoffs for an alternative where each payoff is  weighted 
by the probability for the relevant state of nature. Thus, the approach is
  Expected monetary value (EMV) criterion   —Determine the expected payoff of each 
alternative, and choose the alternative that has the best expected payoff. 
 Expected monetary value 
(EMV) criterion  The best 
expected value among the 
alternatives. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 LO5S.4 Describe and use the 
expected-value approach.

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
221
 Using the expected monetary value criterion, identify the best alternative for the previous 
payoff table for these probabilities: low    .30, moderate    .50, and high    .20. 
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 4 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Find the expected value of each alternative by multiplying the probability of occurrence for 
each state of nature by the payoff for that state of nature and summing them:
 
EV
.30($10)
EV
.30($7)
EV
.30($
4)
.50($10)
.50($12)
.50($2)
.20($10)
$10
.20($12)
$10.5
.20($16)
$3
small
medium
large


      










 
 Hence, choose the medium facility because it has the highest expected value. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The expected monetary value approach is most appropriate when a decision maker is nei-
ther risk averse nor risk seeking, but is risk neutral. Typically, well-established organizations 
with numerous decisions of this nature tend to use expected value because it provides an indi-
cation of the long-run, average payoff. That is, the expected-value amount (e.g., $10.5 million 
in the last example) is not an actual payoff but an expected or average amount that would be 
approximated if a large number of identical decisions were to be made. Hence, if a decision 
maker applies this criterion to a large number of similar decisions, the expected payoff for the 
total will approximate the sum of the individual expected payoffs.  
 5S.7 DECISION TREES   
  In health care the array of treatment options and medical costs makes tools such as decision 
trees particularly valuable in diagnosing and prescribing treatment plans. For example, if a 
20-year-old and a 50-year-old both are brought into an emergency room complaining of chest 
pains, the attending physician, after asking each some questions on family history, patient his-
tory, general health, and recent events and activities, will use a  decision tree  to sort through 
the options to arrive at the appropriate decision for each patient. 
 Decision trees are tools that have many practical applications, not only in health care but 
also in legal cases and a wide array of management decision making, including credit card 
fraud; loan, credit, and insurance risk analysis; decisions on new product or service develop-
ment; and location analysis. 
 A  decision tree is a schematic representation of the alternatives available to a decision 
maker and their possible consequences. The term gets its name from the treelike appearance 
of the diagram (see  Figure 5S.1 ). Although tree diagrams can be used in place of a payoff 
 FIGURE 5S.1 
 Format of a decision tree 
State of nature 1
State of nature 2
State of nature 1
State of nature 2
Payoff 1
Payoff 2
Payoff 3
Payoff 4
Payoff 5
Payoff 6
2
2
Choose A'1
Choose A'2
1
Choose A1
Choose A2
Initial
decision
Possible
second
decisions
Choose A'3
Choose A'4
Decision point
Chance event
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
Decision tree A schematic 
representation of the available 
alternatives and their possible 
consequences.
 LO5S.5 Construct a decision 
tree and use it to analyze a 
problem.

222 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
table, they are particularly useful for analyzing situations that involve  sequential decisions. 
For instance, a manager may initially decide to build a small facility only to discover that 
demand is much higher than anticipated. In this case, the manager may then be called upon to 
make a subsequent decision on whether to expand or build an additional facility. 
 A decision tree is composed of a number of  nodes  that have  branches  emanating from them 
(see  Figure 5S.1 ). Square nodes denote decision points, and circular nodes denote chance 
events. Read the tree from left to right. Branches leaving square nodes represent alternatives; 
branches leaving circular nodes represent chance events (i.e., the possible states of nature). 
  After the tree has been drawn, it is analyzed from  right to left;  that is, starting with the 
last decision that might be made. For each decision, choose the alternative that will yield the 
greatest return (or the lowest cost). If chance events follow a decision, choose the alternative 
that has the highest expected monetary value (or lowest expected cost). 
Low demand (.4)
High demand (.6) 
$40
Do nothing
Expand
Build small
Build large
Overtime
Do nothing
Reduce prices
Low demand (.4)
High demand (.6) 
$50
$55
($10)
$50
$40
$70
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 5 
 A manager must decide on the size of a video arcade to construct. The manager has narrowed 
the choices to two: large or small. Information has been collected on payoffs, and a decision 
tree has been constructed. Analyze the decision tree and determine which initial alternative 
(build small or build large) should be chosen in order to maximize expected monetary value. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The dollar amounts at the branch ends indicate the estimated payoffs if the sequence of 
chance events and decisions that is traced back to the initial decision occurs. For example, if 
the initial decision is to build a small facility and it turns out that demand is low, the payoff 
will be $40 (thousand). Similarly, if a small facility is built, demand turns out high, and a later 
decision is made to expand, the payoff will be $55 (thousand). The figures in parentheses on 
branches leaving the chance nodes indicate the probabilities of those states of nature. Hence, 
the probability of low demand is .4, and the probability of high demand is .6. Payoffs in 
parentheses indicate losses. 
 Analyze the decisions from right to left: 
    1. 
Determine which alternative would be selected for each possible second decision. For a 
small facility with high demand, there are three choices:  do nothing, work overtime, and 
 expand.  Because  expand  has the highest payoff, you would choose it. Indicate this by 
placing a double slash through each of the other alternatives. Similarly, for a large facility 
with low demand, there are two choices:  do nothing  and  reduce prices.  You would choose 
 reduce prices  because it has the higher expected value, so a double slash is placed on the 
other branch. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
223
   2. 
Determine the product of the chance probabilities and their respective payoffs for the 
remaining branches: 
  
  Build small
  
 
Low demand 
 .4($40)    $16 
  
 
High demand 
 .6($55)    $33 
  
 Build large
  
 
Low demand 
 .4($50)    $20 
  
 
 High demand 
 .6($70)    $42 
 3. 
Determine the expected value of each initial alternative:
  
 Build small 
 $16    $33    $49 
  
 Build large 
 $20    $42    $62 
   
Hence, the choice should be to build the large facility because it has a larger expected 
value than the small facility. 
 5S.8  EXPECTED VALUE OF PERFECT 
INFORMATION  
  In certain situations, it is possible to ascertain which state of nature will actually occur in the 
future. For instance, the choice of location for a restaurant may weigh heavily on whether a 
new highway will be constructed or whether a zoning permit will be issued. A decision maker 
may have probabilities for these states of nature; however, it may be possible to delay a deci-
sion until it is clear which state of nature will occur. This might involve taking an option to 
buy the land. If the state of nature is favorable, the option can be exercised; if it is unfavorable, 
the option can be allowed to expire. The question to consider is whether the cost of the option 
will be less than the expected gain due to delaying the decision (i.e., the expected payoff 
 above  the expected value). The expected gain is the    expected value of perfect information,  
or  EVPI . 
 Other possible ways of obtaining perfect information depend somewhat on the nature of 
the decision being made. Information about consumer preferences might come from market 
research, additional information about a product could come from product testing, or legal 
experts might be called on. 
 There are two ways to determine the EVPI. One is to compute the expected payoff under 
certainty and subtract the expected payoff under risk. That is,  
Expected value of
perfect information
Expected payoff
under certainty
Expected payoff
under risk


 
 (5S–1) 
 Expected value of perfect 
information (EVPI)  The 
difference between the expected 
payoff with perfect information 
and the expected payoff 
under risk.  
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 6 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Using the information from Example 5S–4, determine the expected value of perfect informa-
tion using Formula 5S–1. 
 First, compute the expected payoff under certainty. To do this, identify the best payoff under 
each state of nature. Then combine these by weighting each payoff by the probability of that 
state of nature and adding the amounts. Thus, the best payoff under low demand is $10, the 
best under moderate demand is $12, and the best under high demand is $16. The expected 
payoff under certainty is, then, 
.30($10)
.50($12)
.20($16)
$12.2



 
 LO5S.6 Compute the expected 
value of perfect information.

224 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 The expected payoff under risk, as computed in Example 5S–4, is $10.5. The EVPI is the dif-
ference between these:
EVPI
$12.2
$10.5
$1.7



 
 This figure indicates the upper limit on the amount the decision maker should be willing 
to spend to obtain perfect information in this case. Thus, if the cost equals or exceeds this 
amount, the decision maker would be better off not spending additional money and simply 
going with the alternative that has the highest expected payoff. 
 A second approach is to use the regret table to compute the EVPI. To do this, find the 
expected regret for each alternative. The minimum expected regret is equal to the EVPI. 
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 7 
Determine the expected value of perfect information for the capacity-planning problem using 
the expected regret approach.
 S O L U T I O N 
 Using information from Examples 5S–2, 5S–3, and 5S–4, we can compute the expected regret 
for each alternative. Thus:
 
Small facility
Medium facility
Large facility
.30(0)
.30(3)
.30(14)
.50(2)
.50(0)
.50(10)
.20(6)
2.2
.20(4)
1.7 [minimum]
.20(0)
9.2









 
 The lowest expected regret is 1.7, which is associated with the second alternative. Hence, the 
EVPI is $1.7 million, which agrees with the previous example using the other approach. 
 5S.9 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS   
  Generally speaking, both the payoffs and the probabilities in this kind of a decision problem 
are estimated values. Consequently, it can be useful for the decision maker to have some 
indication of how sensitive the choice of an alternative is to changes in one or more of these 
values. Unfortunately, it is impossible to consider all possible combinations of every variable 
in a typical problem. Nevertheless, there are certain things a decision maker can do to judge 
the sensitivity of probability estimates. 
 Sensitivity analysis  provides a range of probability over which the choice of alternatives 
would remain the same. The approach illustrated here is useful when there are two states of 
nature. It involves constructing a graph and then using algebra to determine a range of prob-
abilities for which a given solution is best. In effect, the graph provides a visual indication 
of the range of probability over which the various alternatives are optimal, and the algebra 
provides exact values of the endpoints of the ranges. Example 5S–8 illustrates the procedure. 
 Sensitivity analysis  Deter-
mining the range of probability 
for which an alternative has the 
best expected payoff. 
 Given the following table, determine the range of probability for state of nature #2, that is, 
 P (2), for which each alternative is optimal under the expected-value approach. 
 
 
 STATE OF 
NATURE 
 
 
 #1 
 #2 
 
 A 
  4 
 12 
 Alternative 
 B 
 16 
  2 
 
 C 
 12 
  8 
 E X A M P L E 
5 S – 8 
 S O L U T I O N 
 First, plot each alternative relative to  P (2). To do this, plot the #1 value on the left side of the 
graph and the #2 value on the right side. For instance, for alternative A, plot 4 on the left side 
of the graph and 12 on the right side. Then connect these two points with a straight line. The 
three alternatives are plotted on the graph as shown on the next page. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 LO5S.7 Conduct sensitivity 
analysis on a simple decision 
problem.

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
225
    The graph shows the range of values of  P (2) over which each alternative is optimal. Thus, 
for low values of  P (2) [and thus high values of  P (1), since  P (1)     P (2)    1.0], alternative B 
will have the highest expected value; for intermediate values of  P (2), alternative C is best; and 
for higher values of  P (2), alternative A is best. 
 To find exact values of the ranges, determine where the upper parts of the lines intersect. 
Note that at the intersections, the two alternatives represented by the lines would be equivalent 
in terms of expected value. Hence, the decision maker would be indifferent between the two 
at that point. To determine the intersections, you must obtain the equation of each line. This 
is relatively simple to do. Because these are straight lines, they have the form  y      a      bx, 
where  a is the  y -intercept value at the left axis,  b is the slope of the line, and  x is  P (2). Slope 
is defined as the change in  y  for a one-unit change in  x.  In this type of problem, the distance 
between the two vertical axes is 1.0. Consequently, the slope of each line is equal to the right-
hand value minus the left-hand value. The slopes and equations are as follows:
 
 #1 
 #2 
 Slope 
 Equation 
 A 
  4 
 12 
 12       4      8 
 4    8 P (2) 
 B 
 16 
 2 
 2   16     14 
 16    14 P (2) 
 C 
 12 
  8 
 8    12        4 
 12    4 P (2) 
 From the graph, we can see that alternative B is best from  P (2) 5 0 to the point where that 
straight line intersects the straight line of alternative C, and that begins the region where C is 
better. To find that point, solve for the value of  P (2) at their intersection. This requires setting 
the two equations equal to each other and solving for  P (2). Thus,
 
P
P
16
14 (2)
12
4 (2)



 
 Rearranging terms yields
 
P
4
10 (2)

 
 Solving yields  P (2)    .40. Thus, alternative B is best from  P (2)    0 up to  P (2)    .40. B 
and C are equivalent at  P (2)    .40. 
 Alternative C is best from that point until its line intersects alternative A’s line. To find that 
intersection, set those two equations equal and solve for  P (2). Thus,
 
P
P
4
8 (2)
12
4 (2)



 
 Rearranging terms results in
 
P
12 (2)
8

 
 Solving yields  P (2)    .67. Thus, alternative C is best from  P (2) > .40 up to  P (2)    .67, 
where A and C are equivalent. For values of  P (2) greater than .67 up to  P (2)    1.0, A is best. 
 Note:  If a problem calls for ranges with respect to  P (1), find the  P (2) ranges as above, and 
then subtract each  P (2) from 1.00 (e.g., .40 becomes .60, and .67 becomes .33). 
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2
#1
Payoff
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
#2
Payoff
B
C
A
P (2)
B best
A best
C best

226 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 Decision making is an integral part of operations management. 
 Decision theory is a general approach to decision making that is useful in many different aspects of 
operations management. Decision theory provides a framework for the analysis of decisions. It includes 
a number of techniques that can be classified according to the degree of uncertainty associated with a 
particular decision problem. Two visual tools useful for analyzing some decision problems are decision 
trees and graphical sensitivity analysis. 
 SUMMARY 
 bounded rationality, 218 
 certainty, 218 
 decision tree, 221 
 expected monetary value 
(EMV) criterion, 220 
 expected value of perfect 
information (EVPI), 223 
 Laplace, 219 
 maximax, 219 
 maximin, 219 
 minimax regret, 219 
 payoff table, 217 
 regret (opportunity 
loss), 220 
 risk, 218 
 sensitivity analysis, 224 
 suboptimization, 218 
 uncertainty, 218 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Assume the payoffs represent profits. Determine the alternative that would be chosen under each of 
these decision criteria:
 a. Maximin. 
 b. Maximax. 
 c. Laplace. 
 Problem 1 
 The following solved problems refer to this payoff table: 
 where A   small, B   medium, and C   large. 
 New 
Bridge 
Built  
 No 
New 
Bridge 
Alternative capacity 
for new store 
 A 
 1 
 14 
 B 
 2 
 10 
 C 
 4 
 6 
 Solution 
 Thus, the alternatives chosen would be C under maximin, A under maximax, and A under Laplace. 
 Problem 2 
 Using graphical sensitivity analysis, determine the probability for no new bridge for which each 
alternative would be optimal. 
 
 New 
Bridge 
 No New 
Bridge 
 Maximin 
(worst)  
 Maximax 
(best) 
 Laplace 
(average)  
 A 
 1 
 14 
 1 
 14 [best] 
 15    2    7.5 [best] 
 B 
 2 
 10 
 2 
 10 
 12    2    6 
 C 
 4 
  6 
 4 [best] 
   6 
 10    2    5 
 Solution 
 Plot a straight line for each alternative. Do this by plotting the payoff for new bridge on the left axis 
and the payoff for no new bridge on the right axis and then connecting the two points. Each line 
represents the expected profit for an alternative for the entire range of probability of no new bridge. 
Because the lines represent expected profit, the line that is highest for a given value of  P  (no new 
bridge) is optimal. Thus, from the graph, you can see that for low values of this probability, alterna-
tive C is best, and for higher values, alternative A is best (B is never the highest line, so it is never 
optimal). 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
227
 Worst 
 A 
 3 [best] 
 B 
 4 
 C 
 8 
 New 
Bridge  
 No New 
Bridge  
 A 
 3 
 0 
 B 
 2 
 4 
 C 
 0 
 8 
 The dividing line between the ranges where C and A are optimal occurs where the two lines inter-
sect. To find that probability, first formulate the equation for each line. To do this, let the intersection 
with the left axis be the  y  intercept; the slope equals the right-side payoff minus the left-side payoff. 
Thus, for C you have 4    (6    4) P,  which is 4    2 P.  For A, 1    (14    1) P,  which is 1    13 P. Setting 
these two equal to each other, you can solve for  P: 
P
P
4
2
1
13



 
 Solving,  P     .27. Therefore, the ranges for  P (no new bridge) are 
A: .27  P  1.00
B: never optimal
C: 0  P  .27 
 Problem 3 
 Using the information in the payoff table, develop a table of regrets, and then 
 a. Determine the alternative that would be chosen under minimax regret. 
   b. Determine the expected value of perfect information using the regret table, assuming that the 
probability of a new bridge being built is .60. 
 Solution 
 To obtain the regrets, subtract all payoffs in each column from the best payoff in the column. The 
regrets are 
    a. Minimax regret involves finding the worst regret for each alternative and then choosing the alter-
native that has the “best” worst. Thus, you would choose A: 
4
2
1
0
1.0
Payoff for
new bridge
14
10
6
0
Payoff for
no new
bridge
A
A best
C best
B
C
.27
P (no new bridge)
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

228 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
   b. Once the regret table has been developed, you can compute the EVPI as the  smallest expected 
regret. Since the probability of a new bridge is given as .60, we can deduce that the probability of 
no new bridge is 1.00    .60    .40. The expected regrets are
 A: .60(3)    .40(0)    1.80 
 B: .60(2)    .40(4)    2.80 
 C: .60(0)    .40(8)    3.20 
 Hence, the EVPI is 1.80. 
 Problem 4 
 Using the probabilities of .60 for a new bridge and .40 for no new bridge, 
    a. Compute the expected value of each alternative in the payoff table, and identify the alternative 
that would be selected under the expected-value approach. 
 b. Construct a decision tree for the problem showing expected values. 
 Solution 
Problem 5 
 a. A: .60(1)    .40(14)    6.20 [best] 
 B: .60(2)    .40(10)    5.20 
C: .60(4)    .40(6)    4.80
 b.    
 Compute the EVPI using the information from the previous problem. 
C
B
A
New bridge (.60)
New bridge (.60)
New bridge (.60)
No new bridge (.40)
No new bridge (.40)
No new bridge (.40)
Expected 
values
.60(1) = .60
$6.20 (best)
$5.20
$4.80
.40(14) = 5.60
.60(2) = 1.20
.40(10) = 4.00
.60(4) = 2.40
.40(6) = 2.40
$1
$14
$2
$ 10
$4
$6
 Solution 
 Using Formula 5S–1, the EVPI is the expected payoff under certainty minus the maximum expected 
value. The expected payoff under certainty involves multiplying the best payoff in each column by 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
229
the column probability and then summing those amounts. The best payoff in the first column is 4, 
and the best in the second is 14. Thus,
Expected payoff under certainty
.60(4)
.40(14)
8.00



 
 Then
 EVPI
8.00
6.20
1.80



 
 (This agrees with the result obtained in Solved Problem 3 b. ) 
 Excel solution: 
   Placing the problem data in the cell positions shown, the expected monetary value (EMV) for each 
alternative is shown in column J. 
 Then, the overall EMV is obtained in column L as the maximum of the values in L5, L6, and L7. 
 The EVPI is obtained using the Opportunity Loss Table as the minimum EOL value in J14, J15, 
and J16. 
 Problem 6 
 Suppose that the values in the payoff table represent  costs instead of profits.
    a. Determine the choice that you would make under each of these strategies: maximin, minimin, and 
Laplace.* 
   b. Develop the regret table, and identify the alternative chosen using minimax regret. Then find the 
EVPI if  P (new bridge)    .60. 
   c. Using sensitivity analysis, determine the range of  P (no new bridge) for which each alternative 
would be optimal. 
 d. If  P (new bridge)    .60 and  P (no new bridge)    .40, find the alternative chosen to minimize 
expected cost. 
 * Minimin is the reverse of maximax; for costs, minimin identifies the lowest (best) cost. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

230 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 Solution 
 
 New 
Bridge 
 No New 
Bridge 
 Maximin 
(worst) 
 Minimin 
(best) 
 Laplace 
(average)  
 A 
 1 
 14 
 14 
 1 [best] 
 15    2    7.5 
 B 
 2 
 10 
 10 
 2 
 12    2    6 
 C 
 4 
 6 
 6 [best] 
 4 
 10    2    5 [best] 
 a.  
   b. Develop the regret table by subtracting the  lowest cost  in each column from each of the values in 
the column. (Note that none of the values is negative.) 
   c. The graph is identical to that shown in Solved Problem 2. However, the lines now represent 
expected  costs,  so the best alternative for a given value of  P (no new bridge) is the  lowest line. 
Hence, for very low values of  P (no new bridge), A is best; for intermediate values, B is best; and 
for high values, C is best. You can set the equations of A and B, and B and C, equal to each other 
in order to determine the values of  P (no new bridge) at their intersections. Thus,
 
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
B: 1
13
2
8 ; solving,
.20
B
C: 2
8
4
2 ; solving,
.33










 Hence, the ranges are 
 A best: 0 #  P  , .20 
 B best: .20 ,  P  , .33 
 C best: .33 ,  P  # 1.00 
4
2
1
0
1.0
Cost with
new bridge
14
10
6
0
Cost with
no new
bridge
A
C best
B
C
.20
P (no new bridge)
.33
B
best
A
best
     d. Expected-value computations are the same whether the values represent costs or profits. Hence, 
the expected payoffs for costs are the same as the expected payoffs for profits that were computed 
in Solved Problem 4. However, now you want the alternative that has the  lowest  expected payoff 
rather than the one with the highest payoff. Consequently, alternative C is the best because its 
expected payoff is the lowest of the three. Alternatively, the best choice (C) could be determined 
using the sensitivity ranges found in part c since .40 lies in the range .33 to 1.0.  
 
 New 
Bridge 
 No New 
Bridge 
 Worst 
 A 
 0 
 8 
 8 
 B 
 1 
 4 
 4 
 C 
 3 
 0 
 3 [best] 
 EVPI   .60(3)   .40(0)   1.80 

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
231
  1. A small building contractor has recently experienced two successive years in which work opportu-
nities exceeded the firm’s capacity. The contractor must now make a decision on capacity for next 
year. Estimated profits under each of the two possible states of nature are as shown in the table 
below. Which alternative should be selected if the decision criterion is
 a. Maximax? 
 b. Maximin? 
 c. Laplace? 
 d. Minimax regret? 
  2. Refer to Problem 1. Suppose after a certain amount of discussion, the contractor is able to subjec-
tively assess the probabilities of low and high demand:  P (low)   .3 and  P (high)   .7.
 a. Determine the expected profit of each alternative. Which alternative is best? Why? 
 b. Analyze the problem using a decision tree. Show the expected profit of each alternative on the tree. 
 c. Compute the expected value of perfect information. How could the contractor use this 
knowledge? 
  3. Refer to Problems 1 and 2. Construct a graph that will enable you to perform sensitivity analy-
sis on the problem. Over what range of  P (high) would the alternative of doing nothing be best? 
Expand? Subcontract? 
  4. A firm that plans to expand its product line must decide whether to build a small or a large facility 
to produce the new products. If it builds a small facility and demand is low, the net present value 
after deducting for building costs will be $400,000. If demand is high, the firm can either maintain 
the small facility or expand it. Expansion would have a net present value of $450,000, and main-
taining the small facility would have a net present value of $50,000. 
 PROBLEMS 
 1. What is the chief role of the operations manager? 
 2. List the steps in the decision-making process. 
 3. Explain the term  bounded rationality. 
 4. Explain the term  suboptimization. 
 5. What are some of the reasons for poor decisions? 
 6. What information is contained in a payoff table? 
 7. What is sensitivity analysis, and how can it be useful to a decision maker? 
 8. Contrast maximax and maximin decision strategies. Under what circumstances is each 
appropriate? 
 9. Under what circumstances is expected monetary value appropriate as a decision criterion? When 
isn’t it appropriate? 
 10. Explain or define each of these terms:
 a. Laplace criterion. 
 b. Minimax regret. 
 c. Expected value. 
 d. Expected value of perfect information. 
 11. What information does a decision maker need in order to perform an expected-value analysis of 
a problem? What options are available to the decision maker if the probabilities of the states of 
nature are unknown? Can you think of a way you might use sensitivity analysis in such a case? 
 12. Suppose a manager is using maximum EMV as a basis for making a capacity decision and, in the 
process, obtains a result in which there is a virtual tie between two of the seven alternatives. How 
is the manager to make a decision? 
 13. Identify three potential unethical actions or inactions related to decision analysis and the ethical 
principle each violates (see Chapter 1).  
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 
 NEXT YEAR’S 
DEMAND 
 Alternative 
 Low 
 High 
 Do nothing 
 $50 * 
 $60 
 Expand 
 20 
 80 
 Subcontract 
 40 
 70 
 *Profit in $ thousands. 

232 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 If a large facility is built and demand is high, the estimated net present value is $800,000. If demand 
turns out to be low, the net present value will be   $10,000. 
 The probability that demand will be high is estimated to be .60, and the probability of low demand 
is estimated to be .40.
 a. Analyze using a tree diagram. 
 b. Compute the EVPI. How could this information be used? 
 c. Determine the range over which each alternative would be best in terms of the value of  P 
(demand low). 
 5. Determine the course of action that has the highest expected payoff for this decision tree. 
Subcontract
Expand
Small demand (.4)
Large demand (.1) 
Small demand (.4)
Medium demand (.5) 
Large demand (.1) 
Medium demand (.5)
Medium demand (.5) 
Large demand (.1) 
Do nothing
* Net present value in millions
Other use #2
Do nothing
Other use #1
Other use #2
Do nothing
Subcontract
Build
Do nothing
Other use #1
Other use #2
Do nothing
Expand
Build
Do nothing
Expand
$1.0*
$1.3
$1.3
$1.5
$1.6
$1.8
$0.7
$1.5
$1.0
$1.6
$1.6
$1.5
$1.7
($0.9)
$1.4
$1.0
$1.0
$1.1
$0.9
$2.4
Build
Other use #1
Small demand (.4)
 6. The lease of Theme Park, Inc., is about to expire. Management must decide whether to renew the 
lease for another 10 years or to relocate near the site of a proposed motel. The town planning board 
is currently debating the merits of granting approval to the motel. A consultant has estimated the 
net present value of Theme Park’s two alternatives under each state of nature as shown on the fol-
lowing page. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
233
 What course of action would you recommend using?
 a. Maximax. 
 b. Maximin. 
 c. Laplace. 
 d. Minimax regret. 
  7. Refer to Problem 6. Suppose that the management of Theme Park, Inc., has decided that there is a 
.35 probability that the motel’s application will be approved.
 a. If management uses maximum expected monetary value as the decision criterion, which alter-
native should it choose? 
 b. Represent this problem in the form of a decision tree. 
 c. If management has been offered the option of a temporary lease while the town planning board 
considers the motel’s application, would you advise management to sign the lease? The lease 
will cost $24,000. 
  8. Construct a graph that can be used for sensitivity analysis for the preceding problem.
 a. How sensitive is the solution to the problem in terms of the probability estimate of .35? 
 b. Suppose that, after consulting with a member of the town planning board, management decides 
that an estimate of approval is approximately .45. How sensitive is the solution to this revised 
estimate? Explain. 
 c. Suppose the management is confident of all the estimated payoffs except for $4 million. If the 
probability of approval is .35, for what range of payoff for renew/reject will the alternative 
selected using the maximum expected value remain the same?  
  9. A firm must decide whether to construct a small, medium, or large stamping plant. A consultant’s 
report indicates a .20 probability that demand will be low and an .80 probability that demand will 
be high. 
 If the firm builds a small facility and demand turns out to be low, the net present value will 
be $42 million. If demand turns out to be high, the firm can either subcontract and realize the net 
present value of $42 million or expand greatly for a net present value of $48 million. 
 The firm could build a medium-size facility as a hedge: If demand turns out to be low, its net 
present value is estimated at $22 million; if demand turns out to be high, the firm could do nothing 
and realize a net present value of $46 million, or it could expand and realize a net present value of 
$50 million. 
 If the firm builds a large facility and demand is low, the net present value will be $20 million, 
whereas high demand will result in a net present value of $72 million.
 a. Analyze this problem using a decision tree. 
 b. What is the maximin alternative? 
 c. Compute the EVPI and interpret it. 
 d. Perform sensitivity analysis on  P (high). 
 10. A manager must decide how many machines of a certain type to buy. The machines will be used 
to manufacture a new gear for which there is increased demand. The manager has narrowed the 
decision to two alternatives: buy one machine or buy two. If only one machine is purchased and 
demand is more than it can handle, a second machine can be purchased at a later time. However, 
the cost per machine would be lower if the two machines were purchased at the same time. 
 The estimated probability of low demand is .30, and the estimated probability of high 
demand is .70. 
 The net present value associated with the purchase of two machines initially is $75,000 if 
demand is low and $130,000 if demand is high. 
 The net present value for one machine and low demand is $90,000. If demand is high, there 
are three options. One option is to do nothing, which would have a net present value of $90,000. A 
second option is to subcontract; that would have a net present value of $110,000. The third option 
is to purchase a second machine. This option would have a net present value of $100,000. 
 How many machines should the manager purchase initially? Use a decision tree to analyze this 
problem. 
 Options 
 Motel 
Approved 
 Motel 
Rejected  
 Renew 
 $ 500,000 
 $4,000,000 
 Relocate 
 5,000,000 
 100,000 

234 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory
 11. Determine the course of action that has the highest EMV for the accompanying tree diagram. 
 
45
(45)
99
40
50
30
1/3
1/3
1/3
40
50
1/2
1/2
.30
.20
.50
.30
.20
.50
60
0
90
40
44
60
1/3
1/3
1/3
Alternative A 
Alternative B 
 12. A logistics provider plans to have a new warehouse built to handle increasing demands for its 
services. Although the company is unsure of how much demand there will be, it must decide now 
on the size (large or small) of the warehouse. Preliminary estimates are that if a small warehouse 
is built and demand is low, the monthly income will be $700,000. If demand is high, it will have 
to either expand the facility or lease additional space. Leasing will result in a monthly income of 
$100,000 while expanding will result in a monthly income of $500,000. 
 If a large warehouse is built and demand is low, monthly income will only be $40,000, while if 
demand is high, monthly income will be $2 million.
 a. Construct a tree diagram for this decision. 
 b. Using your tree diagram, identify the choice that would be made using each of the four 
approaches for decision making under uncertainty. 
 13. The director of social services of a county has learned that the state has mandated additional 
 information requirements. This will place an additional burden on the agency. The director has 
identified three acceptable alternatives to handle the increased workload. One alternative is to 
reassign present staff members, the second is to hire and train two new workers, and the third 
is to redesign current practice so that workers can readily collect the information with little 
 additional effort. An unknown factor is the caseload for the coming year when the new data will 
be collected on a trial basis. The estimated costs for various options and caseloads are shown in 
the following table:
CASELOAD
Moderate
High
Very High
Reassign staff
 $50*
 60
  85
New staff
  60
 60
  60
Redesign collection
  40
 50
  90
*Cost in $ thousands.
 
 Assuming that past experience has shown the probabilities of various caseloads to be unreliable, 
what decision would be appropriate using each of the following criteria?
 a. Maximin.
 b. Maximax.
 c. Minimax regret.
 d. Laplace.

 
Supplement to Chapter Five Decision Theory 
235
 16. A manager has compiled estimated profits for various capacity alternatives but is reluctant to 
assign probabilities to the states of nature. The payoff table is as follows: 
 
 
 Receive 
Contract  
 Not Receive 
Contract 
 
 #1 
 $10 * 
 22 
 Proposal 
 #2 
  8 
  3 
 
 #3 
  5 
  5 
 
 #4 
  0 
  7 
 *Cost in $ thousands. 
 
 
 STATE OF 
NATURE 
 
 
 #1 
 #2 
 
 A 
 $20 * 
 140 
 Alternative 
 B 
 120 
 80 
 
 C 
 100 
 40 
 *Profit in $ thousands. 
 a. Plot the expected-value lines on a graph. 
 b. Is there any alternative that would never be appropriate in terms of maximizing expected 
profit? Explain on the basis of your graph. 
 c. For what range of  P (2) would alternative A be the best choice if the goal is to maximize 
expected profit? 
 d. For what range of  P (1) would alternative A be the best choice if the goal is to maximize 
expected profit? 
 17. Repeat all parts of Problem 16, assuming the values in the payoff table are estimated  costs and the 
goal is to minimize expected costs. 
 18. The research staff of a marketing agency has assembled the following payoff table of estimated 
profits: 
 
 Relative to the probability of not receiving the contract, determine the range of probability for 
which each of the proposals would maximize expected profit. 
 Anderson, David R., Dennis J. Sweeney, Thomas A. 
Williams, Jeffrey D. Camm, and R. Kipp Martin. 
 An Introduction to Management Science, 13th ed. 
Mason, OH: South-Western, 2010. 
 Stevenson, William J., and Ceyhun Ozgur.  Introduction 
to Management Science with Spreadsheets. New 
York: McGraw-Hill Irwin, 2007. 
 Taylor, Bernard W.  Introduction to Management  Science. 
11th ed. Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown, 2013. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
 14. After contemplating the caseload question (see previous problem), the director of social services has 
decided that reasonable caseload probabilities are .10 for moderate, .30 for high, and .60 for very high.
 a. Which alternative will yield the minimum expected cost? 
 b. Construct a decision tree for this problem. Indicate the expected costs for the three decision 
branches. 
 c. Determine the expected value of perfect information using an opportunity loss table. 
STATE OF 
NATURE
#1
#2
A
$120*
20
Alternative
B
60
40
C
10
110
D
90
90
*Payoff in $ thousands.
 a. Determine the range of  P (1) for which each alternative would be best, treating the payoffs as 
profits. 
 b. Answer part  a treating the payoffs as costs. 
 15. Given this payoff table:

236
 CHAP TE R 
 6 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 6.1 Introduction,  237 
 6.2 Process Selection,  238 
 Process Types,  238 
 Operations Tour: Morton Salt,  242 
 Product and Service Profiling,  244 
 Sustainable Production of Goods and 
Services, 244 
 Lean Process Design,  244 
 6.3 Technology,  244 
 Automation,  245 
 6.4 Process Strategy,  249 
 6.5 Strategic Resource Organization: 
Facilities Layout,  250 
 Repetitive Processing: Product 
Layouts,  250  
 Nonrepetitive Processing: Process 
Layouts,  253  
 Fixed-Position Layouts,  254 
 Combination Layouts,  255 
 Cellular Layouts,  256 
 Service Layouts,  258 
 6.6 Designing Product Layouts: Line 
Balancing,  262 
 Some Guidelines for Line Balancing,  266 
 Other Factors,  269 
 Other Approaches,  269 
 6.7 Designing Process Layouts,  271 
 Measures of Effectiveness,  271 
 Information Requirements,  272 
 Minimizing Transportation Costs 
or Distances,  272 
 Closeness Ratings,  273 
 Process Selection 
and Facility Layout 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO6.1 
Explain the strategic importance of process selection and the 
influence it has on the organization and its supply chain. 
 LO6.2 
Name the two main factors that influence process 
selection. 
 LO6.3 
Compare the four basic processing types. 
 LO6.4 
Explain the need for management of technology. 
 LO6.5 
List some reasons for redesign of layouts. 
 LO6.6 
Describe product layouts and their main advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 LO6.7 
Describe process layouts and their main advantages and 
disadvantages. 
 LO6.8 
Solve simple line-balancing problems. 
 LO6.9 
Develop simple process layouts.   
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

237
 Product and service choices, capacity planning, process selection, and layout of facilities are among the most basic decisions 
managers make because they have long-term consequences for business organizations, and they impact a wide range of activi-
ties and capabilities. 
 This chapter is about process selection and facility layout (i.e., the arrangement of the workplace). Processes convert inputs 
into outputs; they are at the core of operations management. But the impact of process selection goes beyond operations man-
agement: It affects the entire organization and its ability to achieve its mission, and it affects the organization’s supply chain. 
So process selection choices very often have strategic significance. Different process types have different capacity ranges, and 
once a process type is functioning, changing it can be difficult, time consuming, and costly. Obviously, long-term forecasts as 
well as an organization’s mission and goals are important in developing a process strategy. 
 Process selection has operational and supply chain implications. Operational implications include equipment and labor 
requirements, operations costs, and both the ability to meet demand and the ability to respond to variations in demand. Supply 
chain implications relate to the volume and variety of inputs and outputs and the degree of flexibility that is required. 
 Technology is often a factor in process selection and layout. Three aspects of technology can be factors: product technology, 
processing technology, and information technology. 
 Process selection and facility layout are closely tied, and for that reason, these two topics are presented in a single chapter. 
The first part of the chapter covers the basic options for processing work. This is followed by a discussion of how processes and 
layout are linked. The remainder of the chapter is devoted to layout design. 
LO6.1 Explain the strategic 
importance of process selec-
tion and the influence it has on 
the organization and its supply 
chain.
 6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Process selection  refers to deciding on the way production of goods or services will be orga-
nized. It has major implications for capacity planning, layout of facilities, equipment, and 
design of work systems. Process selection occurs as a matter of course when new products or 
services are being planned. However, it also occurs periodically due to technological changes 
in products or equipment, as well as competitive pressures.  Figure 6.1  provides an overview 

238 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
of where process selection and capacity planning fit into system design. Forecasts, product 
and service design, and technological considerations all influence capacity planning and pro-
cess selection. Moreover, capacity and process selection are interrelated, and are often done in 
concert. They, in turn, affect facility and equipment choices, layout, and work design. 
 How an organization approaches process selection is determined by the organization’s 
 process strategy. Key aspects include
 • Capital intensity: the mix of equipment and labor that will be used by the organization. 
 • Process flexibility: the degree to which the system can be adjusted to changes in 
 processing requirements due to such factors as changes in product or service design, 
changes in volume processed, and changes in technology. 
 6.2 PROCESS SELECTION 
 Process choice is demand driven. The two key questions in process selection are:
 1. 
How much variety will the process need to be able to handle? 
 2. 
How much volume will the process need to be able to handle? 
 Answers to these questions will serve as a guide to selecting an appropriate process.  Usually, 
volume and variety are  inversely  related; a higher level of one means a lower level of the 
other. However, the need for flexibility of personnel and equipment is  directly  related to the 
level of variety the process will need to handle: the lower the variety, the less the need for 
flexibility, while the higher the variety, the greater the need for flexibility.
There is another aspect of variety that is important. Variety means either having separate 
operations for each product or service, with a steady demand for each, or being willing to 
live with some idle time, or to get equipment ready every time there is the need to change the 
product being produced or the service being provided. 
 Process Types 
 There are five basic process types: job shop, batch, repetitive, continuous, and project. 
 Job Shop.  A job shop usually operates on a relatively small scale. It is used when a low 
volume of high-variety goods or services will be needed. Processing is  intermittent; work 
includes small jobs, each with somewhat different processing requirements. High flexibility 
using general-purpose equipment and skilled workers are important characteristics of a job 
shop. A manufacturing example of a job shop is a tool and die shop that is able to produce 
 FIGURE 6.1 
 Process selection and capacity 
planning influence system design 
Forecasting
Product and
service design
Technological
change
Facilities and
equipment
Layout
Work
design
Capacity
Planning
Process
Selection
Inputs
Outputs
LO6.2 Name the two main 
factors that influence process 
selection.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
239
one-of-a-kind tools. A service example is a veterinarian’s office, which is able to process a 
variety of animals and a variety of injuries and diseases. 
 Batch. Batch processing is used when a moderate volume of goods or services is desired, 
and it can handle a moderate variety in products or services. The equipment need not be as 
flexible as in a job shop, but processing is still intermittent. The skill level of workers doesn’t 
need to be as high as in a job shop because there is less variety in the jobs being processed. 
Examples of batch systems include bakeries, which make bread, cakes, or cookies in batches; 
movie theaters, which show movies to groups (batches) of people; and airlines, which carry 
planeloads (batches) of people from airport to airport. Other examples of products that lend 
themselves to batch production are paint, ice cream, soft drinks, beer, magazines, and books. 
Other examples of services include plays, concerts, music videos, radio and television pro-
grams, and public address announcements. 
 A job shop process: A midwestern hospital medical team 
performs a diagnostic procedure involving a cardiac 
catheterization. 
 A batch process: Menu items are prepared in batches, in the 
kitchen of the Spago Restaurant in the Forum at Caesar’s 
Palace, Las Vegas, Nevada. 
 A repetitive process: Motorcycles on an assembly line with 
parts added in a sequential order. 
 A continuous process: An oil refinery performs a continuous 
process, mixing and separating crude oil into gas, fuel oil, 
chemicals, and many other products. 

240 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Repetitive. When higher volumes of more standardized goods or services are needed, 
repetitive processing is used. The standardized output means only slight flexibility of equip-
ment is needed. Skill of workers is generally low. Examples of this type of system include 
production lines and assembly lines. In fact, this type of process is sometimes referred to as 
 assembly.  Familiar products made by these systems include automobiles, television sets, pen-
cils, and computers. An example of a service system is an automatic carwash. Other examples 
of service include cafeteria lines and ticket collectors at sports events and concerts. Also, 
 mass customization is an option. 
 Continuous.      When a very high volume of nondiscrete, highly standardized output is desired, 
a continuous system is used. These systems have almost no variety in output and, hence, 
no need for equipment flexibility. Workers’ skill requirements can range from low to high, 
depending on the complexity of the system and the expertise workers need. Generally, if equip-
ment is highly specialized, worker skills can be lower. Examples of nondiscrete products made 
in continuous systems include petroleum products, steel, sugar, flour, and salt. Continuous ser-
vices include air monitoring, supplying electricity to homes and businesses, and the Internet. 
 These process types are found in a wide range of manufacturing and service settings. The 
ideal is to have process capabilities match product or service requirements. Failure to do so 
can result in inefficiencies and higher costs than are necessary, perhaps creating a competitive 
disadvantage.  Table 6.1  provides a brief description of each process type along with advan-
tages and disadvantages of each. 
 Figure 6.2  provides an overview of these four process types in the form of a matrix, with 
an example for each process type. Note that job variety, process flexibility, and unit cost are 
highest for a job shop and get progressively lower moving from job shop to continuous pro-
cessing. Conversely, volume of output is lowest for a job shop and gets progressively higher 
moving from job shop to continuous processing. Note, too, that the examples fall along the 
diagonal. The implication is that the diagonal represents the ideal choice of processing sys-
tem for a given set of circumstances. For example, if the goal is to be able to process a small 
volume of jobs that will involve high variety, job shop processing is most appropriate. For less 
variety and a higher volume, a batch system would be most appropriate, and so on. Note that 
combinations far from the diagonal would not even be considered, such as using a job shop 
for high-volume, low-variety jobs, or continuous processing for low-volume, high-variety 
jobs, because that would result in either higher than necessary costs or lost opportunities.  
 Another consideration is that products and services often go through  life cycles  that begin 
with low volume, which increases as products or services become better known. When that 
LO6.3 Compare the four basic 
processing types.
 
 Job Shop 
 Batch 
 Repetitive/
Assembly 
 Continuous 
 Description 
 Customized 
goods or 
services 
 Semi-
standardized 
goods or 
services 
 Standardized 
goods or 
services 
 Highly standardized 
goods or services 
 Advantages 
 Able to handle a 
wide variety 
of work 
 Flexibility; easy 
to add or 
change 
products or 
services 
 Low unit 
cost, high 
volume, 
efficient 
 Very efficient, very 
high volume 
 Disadvantages 
 Slow, high cost 
per unit, 
complex 
planning and 
scheduling 
 Moderate cost 
per unit, 
moderate 
scheduling 
complexity 
 Low flexibility, 
high cost of 
downtime 
 Very rigid, lack of 
variety, costly to 
change, very high 
cost of downtime 
 TABLE 6.1 
 Types of processing 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
241
happens, a manager must know when to shift from one type of process (e.g., job shop) to the 
next (e.g., batch). Of course, some operations remain at a certain level (e.g., magazine pub-
lishing), while others increase (or decrease as markets become saturated) over time. Again, 
it is important for a manager to assess his or her products and services and make a judgment 
on whether to plan for changes in processing over time. 
 All of these process types (job shop, batch, repetitive, and continuous) are typically ongo-
ing operations. However, some situations are not ongoing but instead are of limited duration. 
In such instances, the work is often organized as a  project. 
 Project. A   project  is used for work that is nonroutine, with a unique set of objectives to be 
accomplished in a limited time frame. Examples range from simple to complicated, including 
such things as putting on a play, consulting, making a motion picture, launching a new prod-
uct or service, publishing a book, building a dam, and building a bridge. Equipment flexibility 
and worker skills can range from low to high. 
 The type of process or processes used by an organization influences a great many activities 
of the organization.  Table 6.2 briefly describes some of those influences. 
 Project  A nonrepetitive set 
of activities directed toward a 
unique goal within a limited time 
frame. 
 FIGURE 6.2 
 Volume and variety influence 
process choice 
Repetitive
 assembly line
 automatic car wash
Continuous Flow
  petroleum refining
  water treatment
Low or very
low volume
Moderate
volume
High volume
Very high
volume
Low variety
Very low variety
High variety
Moderate variety
Job Shop
  repair shop
  emergency room
Batch
  commercial bakery
  classroom lecture
 Activity/
Function  
  Job Shop  
  Batch  
  Repetitive  
  Continuous  
  Projects  
 Cost estimation 
 Difficult 
 Somewhat routine 
 Routine 
 Routine 
 Simple to complex 
 Cost per unit 
 High 
 Moderate 
 Low 
 Low 
 Very high 
 Equipment used 
 General purpose 
 General purpose 
 Special purpose 
 Special purpose 
 Varied 
 Fixed costs 
 Low 
 Moderate 
 High 
 Very high 
 Varied 
 Variable costs 
 High 
 Moderate 
 Low 
 Very low 
 High 
 Labor skills 
 High 
 Moderate 
 Low 
 Low to high 
 Low to high 
 Marketing 
 Promote 
capabilities 
 Promote capabilities; semi-
standardized goods 
and services 
 Promote 
standardized 
goods/services 
 Promote 
standardized 
goods/services 
 Promote 
capabilities 
 Scheduling 
 Complex 
 Moderately complex 
 Routine 
 Routine 
 Complex, subject to 
change 
 Work-in-process 
inventory 
 High 
 High 
 Low 
 Low 
 Varied 
 TABLE 6.2 
 Process choice affects numerous activities/functions 

242 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Process type also impacts supply chain requirements. Repetitive and continuous pro-
cesses require steady inputs of high-volume goods and services. Delivery reliability in 
terms of quality and timing is essential. Job shop and batch processing may mean that 
suppliers have to be able to deal with varying order quantities and timing of orders. In 
some instances seasonality is a factor, so suppliers must be able to handle periodic large 
demand. 
 The processes discussed do not always exist in their “pure” forms. It is not unusual to find 
hybrid processes—processes that have elements of other process types embedded in them. 
For instance, companies that operate primarily in a repetitive mode, or a continuous mode, 
will often have repair shops (i.e., job shops) to fix or make new parts for equipment that fails. 
Also, if volume increases for some items, an operation that began, say, in a job shop or as a 
batch mode may evolve into a batch or repetitive operation. This may result in having some 
operations in a job shop or batch mode, and others in a repetitive mode. 
 Introduction 
 Morton Salt is a subsidiary of Morton International, a manufacturer 
of specialty chemicals, air bags, and salt products. The Morton salt- 
processing facility in Silver Springs, New York, between Buffalo and 
Rochester, is one of six similar Morton salt-processing facilities in the 
United States. The Silver Springs plant employs about 200 people, 
ranging from unskilled to skilled. It produces salt products for water 
conditioning, grocery, industrial, and agricultural markets. The grocery 
business consists of 26-oz. round cans of iodized salt. Although the gro-
cery business represents a relatively small portion of the total output 
(approximately 15 percent), it is the most profitable. 
 Salt Production 
 The basic raw material, salt, is obtained by injecting water into salt cav-
erns that are located some 2,400 feet below the surface. There, the 
salt deposits dissolve in the water. The resulting brine is pumped to the 
surface where it is converted into salt crystals. The brine is boiled, and 
much of the liquid evaporates, leaving salt crystals and some residual 
moisture, which is removed in a drying process. This process is run 
continuously for about six weeks at a time. Initially, salt is produced 
at the rate of 45 tons per hour. But the rate of output decreases due to 
scale buildup, so that by the sixth week, output is only 75 percent of the 
initial rate. At that point, the process is halted to perform maintenance 
on the equipment and remove the scale, after which salt production 
resumes. 
 The salt is stored in silos until it is needed for production, or it is 
shipped in bulk to industrial customers. Conveyors move the salt to 
each of the four dedicated production areas, one of which is round can 
production. (See diagram.) The discussion here focuses exclusively on 
round can production. 
 Round Can Production 
 Annual round can production averages roughly 3.8 million cans. Approx-
imately 70 percent of the output is for the Morton label, and the rest is 
for private label. There are two parallel, high-speed 
production lines. The two lines share common pro-
cesses at the beginning of the lines, and then branch out into two identi-
cal lines. Each line is capable of producing 9,600 cans per hour (160 
cans per minute). The equipment is not flexible, so the production rate 
is fixed. The operations are completely standardized; the only variable is 
the brand label that is applied. One line requires 12 production workers, 
while both lines together can be operated by 18 workers because of the 
common processes. Workers on the line perform low-skilled, repetitive 
tasks. 
 The plant produces both the salt and the cans the salt is packaged 
in. The cans are essentially a cylinder with a top and a bottom; they 
are made of cardboard, except for a plastic pour spout in the top. The 
cylinder portion is formed from two sheets of chip board that are glued 
together and then rolled into a continuous tube. The glue not only binds 
the material, it also provides a moisture barrier. The tube is cut in a 
two-step process: it is first cut into long sections, and those sections 
are then cut into can-size pieces. The top and bottom pieces for the 
cans are punched from a continuous strip of cardboard. The separate 
pieces move along conveyor belts to the lines where the components 
are assembled into cans and glued. The cans are then filled with salt 
and the pour spout is added. Finally, the cans are loaded onto pallets 
and placed into inventory, ready to be shipped to distributors. 
 Quality 
 Quality is checked at several points in the production process. Initially, 
the salt is checked for purity when it is obtained from the wells. Iodine 
and an anti-caking compound are added to the salt, and their levels are 
verified using chemical analysis. Crystal size is important. In order to 
achieve the desired size and to remove lumps, the salt is forced through 
a scraping screen, which can cause very fine pieces of metal to mix 
with the salt. However, these pieces are effectively removed by magnets 
that are placed at appropriate points in the process. If, for any reason, 
the salt is judged to be contaminated, it is diverted to a nonfood product. 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Morton Salt 
h
t i t t
id
ti
(continued)

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
243
Water
supply
Wells
Screens
Blocks
Bags
Conveyors
Filters
Dryer
Silos
Elevator
Brine
storage
Pellet
press
Block
press
Bulk
shipping
Package
shipping
Pellets
Cans
Pans
 Checking the quality of the cans is done primarily by visual inspec-
tion, including verifying the assembly operation is correct, checking 
filled cans for correct weight, inspecting cans to see that labels are 
properly aligned, and checking to see that plastic pour spouts are cor-
rectly attached. 
 The equipment on the production line is sensitive to misshapen or 
damaged cans, and frequently jams, causing production delays. This 
greatly reduces the chance of a defective can getting through the pro-
cess, but it reduces productivity, and the salt in the defective cans must 
be scrapped. The cost of quality is fairly high, owing to the amount of 
product that is scrapped, the large number of inspectors, and the exten-
sive laboratory testing that is needed. 
 Production Planning and Inventory 
 The plant can sell all of the salt it produces. The job of the production 
scheduler is to distribute the salt that is stored in the silos to the various 
production areas, taking into account production capacities in each area 
and available inventory levels of those products. A key consideration is 
to make sure there is sufficient storage capacity in the silos to handle 
the incoming salt from brine production. 
 Equipment Maintenance and Repair 
 The equipment is 1950s vintage, and it requires a fair amount of main-
tenance to keep it in good working order. Even so, breakdowns occur as 
parts wear out. The plant has its own tool shop where skilled workers 
repair parts or make new parts because replacement parts are no lon-
ger available for the old equipment. 
 Questions 
 1. Briefly describe salt production, from brine production to finished 
round cans. 
 2. Briefly describe quality assurance efforts in round can production. 
 3. What are some of the possible reasons why the company continues 
to use the old processing equipment instead of buying new, more 
modern equipment? 
 4. Where would you place salt production in the product–process 
spectrum?  
 5. Determine the approximate number of tons of salt produced annu-
ally.  Hints: one ton    2,000 pounds, and one pound    16 ounces. 
 6. What improvements can you suggest for the plant? 

244 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Product and Service Profiling 
 Process selection can involve substantial investment in equipment and have a very specific 
influence on the layout of facilities, which also require heavy investment. Moreover, mis-
matches between operations capabilities and market demand and pricing or cost strategies can 
have a significant negative impact on the ability of the organization to compete or, in govern-
ment agencies, to effectively service clients. Therefore, it is highly desirable to assess the 
degree of correlation between various process choices and market conditions  before making 
process choices in order to achieve an appropriate matching. 
  Product or service profiling    can be used to avoid any inconsistencies by identifying key 
product or service dimensions and then selecting appropriate processes. Key dimensions 
often relate to the range of products or services that will be processed, expected order sizes, 
pricing strategies, expected frequency of schedule changes, and order-winning requirements. 
 Sustainable Production of Goods and Services 
 Business organizations are facing increasing pressure from a variety of sources to operate 
sustainable production processes. According to the Lowell Center for Sustainable Production 
( http://sustainableproduction.org ), “Sustainable Production is the creation of goods and ser-
vices using processes and systems that are: non-polluting; conserving of energy and natural 
resources; economically efficient; safe and healthful for workers, communities, and consum-
ers; and socially and creatively rewarding for all working people.” To achieve this, the Lowell 
Center advocates designing and operating processes in ways that:
 • “wastes and ecologically incompatible byproducts are reduced, eliminated or recycled 
on-site; 
 • chemical substances or physical agents and conditions that present hazards to human 
health or the environment are eliminated; 
 • energy and materials are conserved, and the forms of energy and materials used are 
most appropriate for the desired ends; and 
 • work spaces are designed to minimize or eliminate chemical, ergonomic and physical 
hazard.” 
 To achieve these goals, business organizations must focus on a number of factors that 
include energy use and efficiency, CO 2  (carbon footprint) and toxic emissions, waste genera-
tion, lighting, heating, cooling, ventilation, noise and vibration, and worker health and safety.  
 Lean Process Design 
 Lean process design is guided by general principles that are discussed more fully in a later 
chapter. One principle of particular interest here is waste reduction, which relates to sustain-
ability objectives. Lean design also focuses on variance reduction in workload over the entire 
process to achieve level production and thereby improve process flow. Successful lean design 
results in reduced inventory and floor space; quicker response times and shorter lead times; 
reduced defects, rework, and scrap; and increased productivity. Lean design is often translated 
into practice using cellular layouts, which are discussed later in this chapter. 
 Lean process design has broad applications in seemingly diverse areas such as health care 
delivery systems, manufacturing, construction projects, and process reengineering. 
 6.3 TECHNOLOGY 
     Technology and technological innovation often have a major influence on business processes. 
 Technological innovation  refers to the discovery and development of new or improved prod-
ucts, services, or processes for producing or providing them.   Technology  refers to applica-
tions of scientific discoveries to the development and improvement of goods and services 
and/or the processes that produce or provide them. It can involve such factors as knowledge, 
 Product or service profiling  
Linking key product or  service 
requirements to process 
capabilities.  
 Technology  The application 
of scientific discoveries to the 
development and improvement 
of products and services and 
operations processes.  
 Technological innovation  
The discovery and development 
of new or improved products, 
services, or processes for pro-
ducing or providing them.  
LO6.4 Explain the need for 
management of technology.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
245
materials, methods, and equipment. The term  high technology  refers to the most advanced and 
developed equipment and methods. 
 Process technology and information technology can have a major impact on costs, pro-
ductivity, and competitiveness.  Process technology  includes methods, procedures, and equip-
ment used to produce goods and provide services. This not only involves processes within 
an organization, it also extends to supply chain processes.  Information technology (IT) is 
the  science and use of computers and other electronic equipment to store, process, and send 
information. IT is heavily ingrained in today’s business operations. This includes electronic 
data processing, the use of bar codes and radio frequency tags to identify and track goods, 
devices used to obtain point-of-sale information, data transmission, the Internet, e-commerce, 
e-mail, and more. 
 With radio frequency (RFID) tags, items can be tracked during production and in inven-
tory. For outbound goods, readers at a packing station can verify that the proper items and 
quantities were picked before shipping the goods to a customer or a distribution center. In a 
hospital setting, RFID tags can be used in several ways. One is to facilitate keeping accurate 
track of hospital garments, automating the process by which clean garments are inventoried 
and disbursed. An RFID tag can be worn by each hospital employee. The tag contains a unique 
ID number which is associated with each wearer. When an employee comes to the counter to 
pick up garments, the employee’s tag is scanned and software generates data regarding gar-
ment, type, size, location on racks, and availability for that employee. The garments are then 
picked from the specified racks, their RFID tag is read by a nearby scanner and processed, and 
the database is automatically updated. 
 Technological innovation in processing technology can produce tremendous benefits for 
organizations by increasing quality, lowering costs, increasing productivity, and expanding 
processing capabilities. Among the examples are laser technology used in surgery and laser 
measuring devices, advances in medical diagnostic equipment, high-speed Internet connec-
tions, high-definition television, online banking, information retrieval systems, and high-
speed search engines. Processing technologies often come through acquisition rather than 
through internal efforts of an organization. 
 While process technology can have enormous benefits, it also carries substantial risk 
unless a significant effort is made to fully understand both the downside and the upside of 
a particular technology. It is essential to understand what the technology will and won’t do. 
Also, there are economic considerations (initial cost, space, cash flow, maintenance, consul-
tants), integration considerations (cost, time, resources), and human considerations (training, 
safety, job loss). 
 Automation 
 An increasingly asked question in process design is whether to automate.   Automation is 
machinery that has sensing and control devices that enable it to operate automatically. If a 
company decides to automate, the next question is how much. Automation can range from 
factories that are completely automated to a single automated operation. 
 Automated services are becoming increasingly important. Examples range from automated 
teller machines (ATMs) to automated heating and air conditioning and include automated 
inspection, automated storage and retrieval systems, package sorting, mail processing, e-mail, 
online banking, and E-Z pass. 
 Automation offers a number of advantages over human labor. It has low variability, 
whereas it is difficult for a human to perform a task in exactly the same way, in the same 
amount of time, and on a repetitive basis. In a production setting, variability is detrimental to 
quality and to meeting schedules. Moreover, machines do not get bored or distracted, nor do 
they go out on strike, ask for higher wages, or file labor grievances. Still another advantage of 
automation is reduction of variable costs. In order for automated processing to be an option, 
job-processing requirements must be  standardized (i.e., have very little or no variety). 
 Both manufacturing and service organizations are increasing their use of automation as a 
way to reduce costs, increase productivity, and improve quality and consistency. 
 Automation  Machinery 
that has sensing and control 
devices that enable it to operate 
automatically. 

246 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Automation is frequently touted as a strategy necessary for competitiveness. However, 
automation also has certain disadvantages and limitations compared to human labor. To begin 
with, it can be costly. Technology is expensive; usually it requires high volumes of output 
to offset high costs. In addition, automation is much less flexible than human labor. Once a 
process has been automated, there is substantial reason for not changing it. Moreover, workers 
sometimes fear automation because it might cause them to lose their jobs. That can have an 
adverse effect on morale and productivity. 
 Decision makers must carefully examine the issue of whether to automate or the degree to 
which to automate, so that they clearly understand all the ramifications. Also, much thought 
and careful planning are necessary to successfully  integrate  automation into a production 
system. Otherwise, it can lead to major problems. Automation has important implications not 
only for cost and flexibility, but also for the fit with overall strategic priorities. If the decision 
is made to automate, care must be taken to remove waste from the system prior to automating, 
to avoid building the waste into the automated system.  Table 6.3  has a list of questions for 
organizations that are considering automation. 
 Generally speaking, there are three kinds of automation: fixed, programmable, and flexible.  
Fixed automation  is the least flexible. It uses high-cost, specialized equipment for a fixed 
sequence of operations. Low cost and high volume are its primary advantages; minimal vari-
ety and the high cost of making major changes in either product or process are its primary 
limitations. 
Programmable automation  involves the use of high-cost, general-purpose equipment 
controlled by a computer program that provides both the sequence of operations and specific 
details about each operation. This type of automation has the capability of economically pro-
ducing a fairly wide variety of low-volume products in small batches. Numerically controlled 
(N/C) machines and some robots are applications of programmable automation. 
 1. What level of automation is appropriate? (Some operations are more suited to being automated than 
others, so partial automation can be an option.) 
 2. How would automation affect the flexibility of an operation system? 
 3. How can automation projects be justified? 
 4. How should changes be managed? 
 5. What are the risks of automating? 
 6. What are some of the likely effects of implementing automation on market share, costs, quality, customer 
satisfaction, labor relations, and ongoing operations?  
 TABLE 6.3 
 Automation questions 
 Questions 
    1. As Foxconn cuts jobs as it shifts to greater 
use of automation, jobs will be created in other companies. In what 
types of companies would you expect to see jobs created? 
   2. Many companies outsourced their manufacturing activities to Fox-
conn due to its low labor costs.     Does Foxconn’s shift to automation 
make it likely that some of those companies will reconsider out-
sourcing in favor of shifting to automation? What are some reasons 
for staying with Foxconn, and what are some reasons that favor 
shifting to their own automated processes? 
 Source: Based on “Foxconn halts recruitment as focus shifts to automation,” He 
Wei in Shanghai,  China Daily, February 2, 2013, p. 9. 
 Foxconn operates a network of factories across the Chinese mainland, 
employing 1.2 million people, that makes products for tech companies 
that include Apple, Hewlett Packard, and Dell. The electronics manufac-
turing giant has been on a steady course for a while to replace man-
power with robotic systems. 
 “Foxconn (has) vowed to install up to 1 million robots in its facto-
ries over the next three years, which analysts suggested was in part to 
address long-time scandals such as high suicide rates among employ-
ees and exploitation of workers.” 
 Foreign manufacturers in China are also viewing upgrades as vital to 
their operations in the country. In fact, numerous multinational compa-
nies have recognized the long-term benefits of replacing human labor 
with robots. 
READING
 Foxconn Shifts Its Focus to Automation 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
247
 Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM)  refers to the use of computers in process 
control, ranging from robots to automated quality control.   Numerically controlled (N/C) 
machines    are programmed to follow a set of processing instructions based on mathematical 
relationships that tell the machine the details of the operations to be performed. The instruc-
tions are stored on a device such as magnetic tape or microprocessor. Although N/C machines 
have been used for many years, they are an important part of new approaches to manufactur-
ing. Individual machines often have their own computer; this is referred to as  computerized 
numerical control (CNC).  Or one computer may control a number of N/C machines, which is 
referred to as  direct numerical control (DNC). 
 N/C machines are best used in cases where parts are processed frequently and in small 
batches, where part geometry is complex, close tolerances are required, mistakes are costly, 
and there is the possibility of frequent changes in design. The main limitations of N/C 
machines are the higher skill levels needed to program the machines and their inability to 
detect tool wear and material variation. 
 The use of robots in manufacturing is sometimes an option. Robots can handle a wide vari-
ety of tasks, including welding, assembly, loading and unloading of machines, painting, and 
testing. They relieve humans from heavy or dirty work and often eliminate drudgery tasks. 
 Some uses of robots are fairly simple, others are much more complex. At the lowest level 
are robots that follow a fixed set of instructions. Next are programmable robots, which can 
repeat a set of movements after being led through the sequence. These robots “play back” a 
mechanical sequence much as a video recorder plays back a visual sequence. At the next level 
up are robots that follow instructions from a computer. Below are robots that can recognize 
objects and make certain simple decisions. 
 Flexible automation  evolved from programmable automation. It uses equipment that is 
more customized than that of programmable automation. A key difference between the two is 
that flexible automation requires significantly less changeover time. This permits almost con-
tinuous operation of equipment  and product variety without the need to produce in batches. 
 Computer-aided 
 manufacturing (CAM)  The 
use of computers in process 
control. 
 Numerically controlled 
(N/C) machines  Machines that 
perform operations by  following 
mathematical processing 
instructions. 
 Computer numerical control 
(CNC) refers to a computer that 
reads instructions and drives a 
machine tool. CNC machines 
are controlled directly from 
files created by CAM software 
packages. With increased 
automation of manufacturing 
processes with CNC machining, 
considerable improvements in 
consistency and quality have 
been achieved. CNC automation 
reduces the frequency of errors 
and provides operators with time 
to perform additional tasks. The 
intelligence of CNC controllers 
has dramatically increased job 
shop cell production. Some 
machines might even make 
1,000 parts on a weekend with 
no operator, checking each part 
with lasers and sensors. 

248 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 In practice, flexible automation is used in several different formats. 
 A   flexible manufacturing system (FMS)    is a group of machines that include supervi-
sory computer control, automatic material handling, and robots or other automated processing 
equipment. Reprogrammable controllers enable these systems to produce a variety of  similar 
products. Systems may range from three or four machines to more than a dozen. They are 
designed to handle intermittent processing requirements with some of the benefits of automa-
tion and some of the flexibility of individual, or stand-alone, machines (e.g., N/C machines). 
Flexible manufacturing systems offer reduced labor costs and more consistent quality when 
compared with more traditional manufacturing methods, lower capital investment and higher 
flexibility than “hard” automation, and relatively quick changeover time. Flexible manufac-
turing systems often appeal to managers who hope to achieve both the flexibility of job shop 
processing and the productivity of repetitive processing systems. 
 Although these are important benefits, an FMS also has certain limitations. One is that 
this type of system can handle a relatively narrow range of part variety, so it must be used for 
a family of similar parts, which all require similar machining. Also, an FMS requires longer 
planning and development times than more conventional processing equipment because of its 
increased complexity and cost. Furthermore, companies sometimes prefer a gradual approach 
to automation, and FMS represents a sizable chunk of technology. 
 Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) is a system that uses an integrating com-
puter system to link a broad range of manufacturing activities, including engineering design, 
flexible manufacturing systems, purchasing, order processing, and production planning and 
control. Not all elements are absolutely necessary. For instance, CIM might be as simple as 
linking two or more FMSs by a host computer. More encompassing systems can link sched-
uling, purchasing, inventory control, shop control, and distribution. In effect, a CIM system 
integrates information from other areas of an organization with manufacturing. 
 The overall goal of using CIM is to link various parts of an organization to achieve rapid 
response to customer orders and/or product changes, to allow rapid production, and to reduce 
 indirect labor costs. 
 A shining example of how process choices can lead to competitive advantages can be found 
at Allen-Bradley’s computer-integrated manufacturing process in Milwaukee,  Wisconsin. The 
company converted a portion of its factory to a fully automated “factory within a factory” 
 Flexible manufacturing 
system (FMS)  A group of 
machines designed to handle 
intermittent processing require-
ments and produce a variety of 
similar products. 
 Computer-integrated 
manufacturing (CIM)  A sys-
tem for linking a broad range of 
manufacturing activities through 
an integrating computer system. 
 Tmsuk’s receptionist robot is 
used for medical purposes. These 
robots can guide a hospital 
visitor to a nearby elevator. If 
a human touches the panel on 
the robot’s body or speaks to it, 
the robot can display or print 
directions. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
249
 At the Ford Motor plant in 
Michigan, in the final assembly 
area, flexibility means that the 
build sequence is the same, 
regardless of model, on one or 
more platforms. This allows 
for efficient use of people and 
equipment. 
to assemble contactors and relays for electrical motors. A handful of humans operate the 
factory, although once an order has been entered into the system, the machines do virtually 
all the work, including packaging and shipping, and quality control. Any defective items are 
removed from the line, and replacement parts are automatically ordered and scheduled to 
compensate for the defective items. The humans program the machines, monitor operations, 
and attend to any problems signaled by a system of warning lights. 
 As orders come into the plant, computers determine production requirements and sched-
ules and order the necessary parts. Bar-coded labels that contain processing instructions are 
automatically placed on individual parts. As the parts approach a machine, a sensing device 
reads the bar code and communicates the processing instructions to the machine. The factory 
can produce 600 units an hour. 
 The company has realized substantial competitive advantages from the system. Orders can 
be completed and shipped within 24 hours of entry into the system, indirect labor costs and 
inventory costs have been greatly reduced, and quality is very high. 
 6.4 PROCESS STRATEGY 
  Throughout this book, the importance of  flexibility  as a competitive strategy is stressed. How-
ever, flexibility does not always offer the best choice in processing decisions. Flexible sys-
tems and equipment are often more expensive and not as efficient as less flexible alternatives. 
In certain instances, flexibility is unnecessary because products are in mature stages, requir-
ing few design changes, and there is a steady volume of output. Ordinarily, this type of situa-
tion calls for specialized processing equipment, with no need for flexibility. The implication 
is clear: Flexibility should be adopted with great care; its applications should be matched with 
situations in which a  need for flexibility clearly exists. 
 In practice, decision makers choose flexible systems for either of two reasons: Demand 
variety or uncertainty exists about demand. The second reason can be overcome through 
improved forecasting. 

250 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 6.5 STRATEGIC RESOURCE ORGANIZATION: 
FACILITIES LAYOUT 
 Layout  refers to the configuration of departments, work centers, and equipment, with particu-
lar emphasis on movement of work (customers or materials) through the system. This section 
describes the main types of layout designs and the models used to evaluate design alternatives. 
 As in other areas of system design, layout decisions are important for three basic reasons: 
(1) they require substantial investments of money and effort; (2) they involve long-term com-
mitments, which makes mistakes difficult to overcome; and (3) they have a significant impact 
on the cost and efficiency of operations. 
 The need for layout planning arises both in the process of designing new facilities and 
in redesigning existing facilities. The most common reasons for redesign of layouts include 
inefficient operations (e.g., high cost, bottlenecks), accidents or safety hazards, changes in the 
design of products or services, introduction of new products or services, changes in the vol-
ume of output or mix of outputs, changes in methods or equipment, changes in environmental 
or other legal requirements, and morale problems (e.g., lack of face-to-face contact). 
 Poor layout design can adversely affect system performance. For example, a change in the 
layout at the Minneapolis–St. Paul International Airport solved a problem that had plagued 
travelers. In the former layout, security checkpoints were located in the boarding area. That 
meant that arriving passengers who were simply changing planes had to pass through a secu-
rity checkpoint before being able to board their connecting flight, along with other passen-
gers whose journeys were originating at Minneapolis–St. Paul. This created excessive waiting 
times for both sets of passengers. The new layout relocated the security checkpoints, moving 
them from the boarding area to a position close to the ticket counters. Thus, the need for pas-
sengers who were making connecting flights to pass through security was eliminated, and in 
the process, the waiting time for passengers departing from Minneapolis–St. Paul was con-
siderably reduced. 1 
 The basic objective of layout design is to facilitate a smooth flow of work, material, and 
information through the system. Supporting objectives generally involve the following:
 1. 
To facilitate attainment of product or service quality. 
 2. 
To use workers and space efficiently. 
 3. 
To avoid bottlenecks. 
 4. 
To minimize material handling costs. 
 5. 
To eliminate unnecessary movements of workers or materials. 
 6. 
To minimize production time or customer service time. 
 7. 
To design for safety. 
 The three basic types of layout are product, process, and fixed-position.  Product layouts 
are most conducive to repetitive processing,  process layouts  are used for intermittent process-
ing, and  fixed-position layouts  are used when projects require layouts. The characteristics, 
advantages, and disadvantages of each layout type are described in this section, along with 
hybrid layouts, which are combinations of these pure types. These include cellular layouts 
and flexible manufacturing systems. 
 Repetitive Processing: Product Layouts 
 Product layouts  are used to achieve a smooth and rapid flow of large volumes of goods or 
customers through a system. This is made possible by highly standardized goods or services 
that allow highly standardized, repetitive processing. The work is divided into a series of 
standardized tasks, permitting specialization of equipment and division of labor. The large 
volumes handled by these systems usually make it economical to invest substantial sums 
LO6.5 List some reasons for 
redesign of layouts.
 1 Based on “Airport Checkpoints Moved to Help Speed Travelers on Their Way,”  Minneapolis–St. Paul Star 
 Tribune, January 13, 1995, p. 1B. 
 Product layout  Layout that 
uses standardized processing 
operations to achieve smooth, 
rapid, high-volume flow. 
LO6.6 Describe product lay-
outs and their main advantages 
and disadvantages.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
251
of money in equipment and job design. Because only one or a few very similar items are 
involved, it is feasible to arrange an entire layout to correspond to the technological pro-
cessing requirements of the product or service. For instance, if a portion of a manufacturing 
operation required the sequence of cutting, sanding, and painting, the appropriate pieces of 
equipment would be arranged in that same sequence. And because each item follows the same 
sequence of operations, it is often possible to utilize fixed-path material-handling equipment 
such as conveyors to transport items between operations. The resulting arrangement forms a 
line like the one depicted in  Figure 6.3 . In manufacturing environments, the lines are referred 
to as   production lines or  assembly lines,  depending on the type of activity involved. In 
service processes, the term  line  may or may not be used. It is common to refer to a cafeteria 
line as such but not a car wash, although from a conceptual standpoint the two are nearly 
identical.  Figure 6.4  illustrates the layout of a typical cafeteria serving line. Examples of this 
type of layout are less plentiful in service environments because processing requirements 
usually exhibit too much variability to make standardization feasible. Without high standard-
ization, many of the benefits of repetitive processing are lost. When lines are used, certain 
compromises may be made. For instance, an automatic car wash provides equal treatment to 
all cars—the same amount of soap, water, and scrubbing—even though cars may differ con-
siderably in cleaning needs. 
 Product layouts achieve a high degree of labor and equipment utilization, which tends 
to offset their high equipment costs. Because items move quickly from operation to opera-
tion, the amount of work-in-process is often minimal. Consequently, operations are so closely 
tied to each other that the entire system is highly vulnerable to being shut down because of 
mechanical failure or high absenteeism. Maintenance procedures are geared to this.  Preven-
tive maintenance —periodic inspection and replacement of worn parts or those with high fail-
ure rates—reduces the probability of breakdowns during the operations. Of course, no amount 
of preventive activity can completely eliminate failures, so management must take measures 
to provide quick repair. These include maintaining an inventory of spare parts and having 
repair personnel available to quickly restore equipment to normal operation. These proce-
dures are fairly expensive; because of the specialized nature of equipment, problems become 
more difficult to diagnose and resolve, and spare-part inventories can be extensive. 
 Repetitive processing can be machine paced (e.g., automatic car wash, automobile assem-
bly), worker paced (e.g., fast-food restaurants such as McDonald’s, Burger King), or even 
customer paced (e.g., cafeteria line). 
 The main advantages of product layouts are
 1. 
A high rate of output. 
   2. Low unit cost due to high volume. The high cost of specialized equipment is spread over 
many units. 
 Production line  Standardized 
layout arranged according to a 
fixed sequence of production 
tasks. 
 Assembly line  Standardized 
layout arranged according to 
a fixed sequence of assembly 
tasks. 
 FIGURE 6.3 
 A flow line for production or 
service 
Station
n
Station
3
Station
2
Station
1
Raw materials
or
customer
Finished
item
Materials
and/or labor
Materials
and/or labor
Materials
and/or labor
Materials
and/or labor
Work flow
[Begin]
[End]
 FIGURE 6.4 
 Cafeteria line 
Cashier
Beverage
Bread and
rolls
Potato and
vegetable
Main
course
Salads
Desserts
Tray and
silver

252 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 3. 
Labor specialization, which reduces training costs and time, and results in a wide span 
of supervision. 
 4. 
Low material-handling cost per unit. Material handling is simplified because units 
 follow the same sequence of operations. Material handling is often automated. 
 5. 
A high utilization of labor and equipment. 
 6. 
The establishment of routing and scheduling in the initial design of the system. These 
activities do not require much attention once the system is operating. 
 7. 
Fairly routine accounting, purchasing, and inventory control. 
 The primary disadvantages of product layouts include the following:
 1. 
The intensive division of labor usually creates dull, repetitive jobs that provide little 
opportunity for advancement and may lead to morale problems and to repetitive stress 
injuries. 
 2. 
Poorly skilled workers may exhibit little interest in maintaining equipment or in the 
quality of output. 
   3. The system is fairly inflexible in response to changes in the volume of output or changes 
in product or process design. 
 4. 
The system is highly susceptible to shutdowns caused by equipment breakdowns or 
excessive absenteeism because workstations are highly interdependent. 
 5. 
Preventive maintenance, the capacity for quick repairs, and spare-parts inventories are 
necessary expenses. 
 6. 
Incentive plans tied to individual output are impractical since they would cause 
 variations among outputs of individual workers, which would adversely affect the 
smooth flow of work through the system. 
 U-Shaped Layouts.  Although a straight production line may have intuitive appeal, a 
U-shaped line (see  Figure 6.5 ) has a number of advantages that make it worthy of consid-
eration. One disadvantage of a long, straight line is that it interferes with cross-travel of 
workers and vehicles. A U-shaped line is more compact; it often requires approximately 
half the length of a straight production line. In addition, a U-shaped line permits increased 
communication among workers on the line because workers are clustered, thus facilitating 
Workers assemble “Wizard of Oz” 
pinball machines at Jersey Jack 
Pinball.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
253
teamwork. Flexibility in work assignments is increased because workers can handle not only 
adjacent stations but also stations on opposite sides of the line. Moreover, if materials enter 
the plant at the same point that finished products leave it, a U-shaped line minimizes material 
handling.  
 Of course, not all situations lend themselves to U-shaped layouts: On highly automated 
lines there is less need for teamwork and communication. And entry and exit points may be 
on opposite sides of the building. Also, operations may need to be separated because of noise 
or contamination factors. 
 Nonrepetitive Processing: Process Layouts 
 Process layouts  (functional layouts) are designed to process items or provide services that 
involve a variety of processing requirements. The variety of jobs that are processed requires 
frequent adjustments to equipment. This causes a discontinuous work flow, which is referred 
to as  intermittent processing.  The layouts feature departments or other  functional groupings 
in which similar kinds of activities are performed. A manufacturing example of a process 
layout is the  machine shop,  which has separate departments for milling, grinding, drill-
ing, and so on. Items that require those operations are frequently moved in lots or batches 
to the departments in a sequence that varies from job to job. Consequently, variable-path 
 material-handling equipment (forklift trucks, jeeps, tote boxes) is needed to handle the variety 
of routes and items. The use of  general-purpose equipment provides the  flexibility necessary 
to handle a wide range of processing requirements. Workers who operate the equipment are 
usually skilled or semiskilled.  Figure 6.6  illustrates the departmental arrangement typical of 
a process layout. 
 Process layouts are quite common in service environments. Examples include hospi-
tals, colleges and universities, banks, auto repair shops, airlines, and public libraries. For 
instance, hospitals have departments or other units that specifically handle surgery, mater-
nity, pediatrics, psychiatric, emergency, and geriatric care. And universities have separate 
schools or departments that concentrate on one area of study such as business, engineering, 
science, or math. 
 Because equipment in a process layout is arranged by type rather than by processing 
sequence, the system is much less vulnerable to shutdown caused by mechanical failure or 
absenteeism. In manufacturing systems especially, idle equipment is usually available to 
LO6.7 Describe process lay-
outs and their main advantages 
and disadvantages.
 Process layouts  Layouts that 
can handle varied processing 
requirements.  
 Intermittent processing  
Nonrepetitive processing. 
 FIGURE 6.5 
 A U-shaped production line 
4
3
2
1
7
8
9
10
5
6
In
Out
Workers
 FIGURE 6.6 
 Comparison of process and product layouts 
Workstation 1
Dept. E
Dept. C
Dept. A
Dept. F
Dept. D
Dept. B
Workstation 2
Process Layout
(functional)
Used for Intermittent Processing
Job Shop and Batch Processes
Product Layout
(sequential)
Used for Repetitive Processing
Repetitive and Continuous Processes
Workstation 3

254 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
replace machines that are temporarily out of service. Moreover, because items are often pro-
cessed in lots (batches), there is considerably less interdependence between successive opera-
tions than with a product layout. Maintenance costs tend to be lower because the equipment 
is less specialized than that of product layouts, and the grouping of machinery permits repair 
personnel to become skilled in handling that type of equipment. Machine similarity reduces 
the necessary investment in spare parts. On the negative side, routing and scheduling must 
be done on a continual basis to accommodate the variety of processing demands typically 
imposed on these systems. Material handling is inefficient, and unit handling costs are gen-
erally much higher than in product layouts. In-process inventories can be substantial due to 
batch processing and capacity mismatches. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for such systems 
to have equipment utilization rates under 50 percent because of routing and scheduling com-
plexities related to the variety of processing demands being handled. 
 In sum, process layouts have both advantages and disadvantages. The advantages of 
 process layouts include the following:
 1. 
The systems can handle a variety of processing requirements. 
 2. 
The systems are not particularly vulnerable to equipment failures. 
 3. 
General-purpose equipment is often less costly than the specialized equipment used in 
product layouts and is easier and less costly to maintain. 
 4. 
It is possible to use individual incentive systems. 
 The disadvantages of process layouts include the following:
 1. 
In-process inventory costs can be high if batch processing is used in manufacturing 
systems.  
 2. 
Routing and scheduling pose continual challenges. 
 3. 
Equipment utilization rates are low. 
 4. 
Material handling is slow and inefficient, and more costly per unit than in product 
layouts. 
 5. 
Job complexities often reduce the span of supervision and result in higher supervisory 
costs than with product layouts. 
 6. 
Special attention necessary for each product or customer (e.g., routing, scheduling, 
machine setups) and low volumes result in higher unit costs than with product layouts. 
 7. 
Accounting, inventory control, and purchasing are much more involved than with 
 product layouts. 
 Fixed-Position Layouts 
 In  fixed-position layouts,  the item being worked on remains stationary, and workers, mate-
rials, and equipment are moved about as needed. This is in marked contrast to product and 
process layouts. Almost always, the nature of the product dictates this kind of arrangement: 
Weight, size, bulk, or some other factor makes it undesirable or extremely difficult to move 
the product. Fixed-position layouts are used in large construction projects (buildings, power 
plants, dams), shipbuilding, and production of large aircraft and space mission rockets. In 
those instances, attention is focused on timing of material and equipment deliveries so as not 
to clog up the work site and to avoid having to relocate materials and equipment around the 
work site. Lack of storage space can present significant problems, for example, at construc-
tion sites in crowded urban locations. Because of the many diverse activities carried out on 
large projects and because of the wide range of skills required, special efforts are needed to 
coordinate the activities, and the span of control can be quite narrow. For these reasons, the 
administrative burden is often much higher than it would be under either of the other layout 
types. Material handling may or may not be a factor; in many cases, there is no tangible prod-
uct involved (e.g., designing a computerized inventory system). When goods and materials 
are involved, material handling often resembles process-type, variable-path, general-purpose 
 Fixed-position layout  Layout 
in which the product or project 
remains stationary, and workers, 
materials, and equipment are 
moved as needed. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
255
equipment. Projects might require use of earth-moving equipment and trucks to haul materi-
als to, from, and around the work site, for example. 
 Fixed-position layouts are widely used in farming, firefighting, road building, home 
building, remodeling and repair, and drilling for oil. In each case, compelling reasons bring 
workers, materials, and equipment to the “product’s” location instead of the other way 
around.  
 Combination Layouts 
 The three basic layout types are ideal models, which may be altered to satisfy the needs of 
a particular situation. It is not hard to find layouts that represent some combination of these 
pure types. For instance, supermarket layouts are essentially process layouts, yet we find that 
most use fixed-path material-handling devices such as roller-type conveyors in the stockroom 
and belt-type conveyors at the cash registers. Hospitals also use the basic process arrange-
ment, although frequently patient care involves more of a fixed-position approach, in which 
nurses, doctors, medicines, and special equipment are brought to the patient. By the same 
token, faulty parts made in a product layout may require off-line reworking, which involves 
customized processing. Moreover, conveyors are frequently observed in both farming and 
construction activities. 
 Process layouts and product layouts represent two ends of a continuum from small jobs 
to continuous production. Process layouts are conducive to the production of a wider range 
of products or services than product layouts, which is desirable from a customer standpoint 
where customized products are often in demand. However, process layouts tend to be less 
efficient and have higher unit production costs than product layouts. Some manufacturers 
are moving away from process layouts in an effort to capture some of the benefits of product 
layouts. Ideally, a system is flexible and yet efficient, with low unit production costs. Cellu-
lar manufacturing, group technology, and flexible manufacturing systems represent efforts to 
move toward this ideal. 
The Queen Mary 2 when 
under construction at the 
Chantiers de l’Atlantique 
shipyard in St. Nazaire, 
France. When a large project 
must remain stationary, 
workers and equipment 
come to the site. The QM2 
weighs 150,000 tons, is 
1,132 feet long, and is 
147.6 feet wide. Its capacity 
is 2,620 passengers and 
1,253 officers and crew.

256 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Cellular Layouts 
 Cellular Production.   Cellular production  is a type of layout in which workstations are 
grouped into what is referred to as a  cell.  Groupings are determined by the operations needed 
to perform work for a set of similar items, or  part families,  that require similar processing. 
The cells become, in effect, miniature versions of product layouts. The cells may have no 
conveyorized movement of parts between machines, or they may have a flow line connected 
by a conveyor (automatic transfer). All parts follow the same route, although minor variations 
(e.g., skipping an operation) are possible. In contrast, the functional layout involves multiple 
paths for parts. Moreover, there is little effort or need to identify part families. 
 Cellular manufacturing enables companies to produce a variety of products with as little 
waste as possible. A cell layout provides a smooth flow of work through the process with min-
imal transport or delay. Benefits frequently associated with cellular manufacturing include 
minimal work in process, reduced space requirements and lead times, productivity and quality 
improvement, and increased flexibility. 
  Figure 6.7  provides a comparison between a traditional process layout (6.7A) and a cellu-
lar layout (6.7B). To get a sense of the advantage of the cellular layout, trace the movement of 
an order in the traditional layout (6.7A) that is depicted by the path of the arrow. Begin on the 
 Cellular production   Layout 
in which workstations are 
grouped into a cell that can 
process items that have similar 
processing requirements. 
 FIGURE 6.7 
 Comparison of process and 
cellular layouts 
 Source: Adapted from U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, “Lean Manufacturing and 
the Environment,”  www.epa.gov/innovation/
lean/thinking/cellular.htm . 
Boring
Dept.
Chemical
Treatment
Dept.
Painting
Dept.
Customer
Milling
Dept.
Assembly
Dept.
Parts
Supplier
Deburring
Dept.
Shipping/
Receiving
Warehouse
400 units
released for
production
A. Example of an order processed in a traditional process layout.
Supplier
4 units delivered
for production
Milling
machine
Chemical
treatment
machine
Boring
machine
Assembly
machine
Painting
machine
Customer
Deburring
machine
B. The same example of an order processed in a cellular layout.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
257
bottom left at Shipping/Receiving, then follow the arrow to Warehouse, where a batch of raw 
material is released for production. Follow the path (shown by the arrows) that the batch takes 
as it moves through the system to Shipping/Receiving and then to the Customer. Now turn to 
 Figure 6.7B . Note the simple path the order takes as it moves through the system. 
 Several techniques facilitate effective cellular layout design. Among them are the follow-
ing two:
 Single-minute exchange of die (SMED)  enables an organization to quickly convert a 
machine or process to produce a different (but similar) product type. Thus, a single cell 
can produce a variety of products without the time-consuming equipment changeover 
associated with large batch processes, enabling the organization to quickly respond to 
changes in customer demand. 
 Right-sized equipment  is often smaller than equipment used in traditional process 
 layouts, and mobile, so that it can quickly be reconfigured into a different cellular layout 
in a different location. 
 Table 6.4 lists the benefits of cellular layouts compared to functional layouts. 
 The biggest challenges of implementing cellular manufacturing involve issues of equip-
ment and layout and issues of workers and management. Equipment and layout issues relate 
to design and cost. The costs of work stoppages during implementation can be considerable, 
as can the costs of new or modified equipment and the rearrangement of the layout. The 
costs to implement cellular manufacturing must be weighed against the cost savings that can 
be expected from using cells. Also, the implementation of cell manufacturing often requires 
employee training and the redefinition of jobs. Each of the workers in each cell should ideally 
be able to complete the entire range of tasks required in that cell, and often this means being 
more multiskilled than they were previously. In addition, cells are often expected to be self-
managing, and therefore workers will have to be able to work effectively in teams. Managers 
have to learn to be less involved than with more traditional work methods. 
 Group Technology.  Effective cellular manufacturing must have groups of identified items 
with similar processing characteristics. This strategy for product and process design is known 
as   group technology  and involves identifying items with similarities in either  design char-
acteristics  or  manufacturing characteristics,  and grouping them into  part families. Design 
characteristics include size, shape, and function; manufacturing or processing characteristics 
involve the type and sequence of operations required. In many cases, design and processing 
characteristics are correlated, although this is not always the case. Thus, design families may 
be different from processing families.  Figure 6.8  illustrates a group of parts with similar pro-
cessing characteristics but different design characteristics. 
 Once similar items have been identified, items can be classified according to their fami-
lies; then a system can be developed that facilitates retrieval from a database for purposes of 
design and manufacturing. For instance, a designer can use the system to determine if there 
 Group technology  The group-
ing into part families of items 
with similar design or manufac-
turing characteristics.  
 TABLE 6.4 
 A comparison of functional 
(process) layouts and cellular 
layouts 
 Dimension 
 Functional 
 Cellular 
 Number of moves between departments 
 Many 
 Few 
 Travel distances 
 Longer 
 Shorter 
 Travel paths 
 Variable 
 Fixed 
 Job waiting time 
 Greater 
 Shorter 
 Throughput time 
 Higher 
 Lower 
 Amount of work in process 
 Higher 
 Lower 
 Supervision difficulty 
 Higher 
 Lower 
 Scheduling complexity 
 Higher 
 Lower 
 Equipment utilization 
 Lower 
 Higher 

258 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
is an existing part similar or identical to one that needs to be designed. It may happen that an 
existing part, with some modification, is satisfactory. This greatly enhances the productivity 
of design. Similarly, planning the manufacturing of a new part can include matching it with 
one of the part families in existence, thereby alleviating much of the burden of specific pro-
cessing details. 
 The conversion to group technology and cellular production requires a systematic analysis 
of parts to identify the part families. This is often a major undertaking; it is a time-consuming 
job that involves the analysis of a considerable amount of data. Three primary methods for 
accomplishing this are visual inspection, examination of design and production data, and pro-
duction flow analysis. 
 Visual inspection is the least accurate of the three but also the least costly and the sim-
plest to perform. Examination of design and production data is more accurate but much more 
time-consuming; it is perhaps the most commonly used method of analysis. Production flow 
analysis has a manufacturing perspective and not a design perspective, because it examines 
operations sequences and machine routings to uncover similarities. Moreover, the operation 
sequences and routings are taken as givens; in reality the existing procedures may be far from 
optimal. 
 Conversion to cellular production can involve costly realignment of equipment. Conse-
quently, a manager must weigh the benefits of a switch from a process layout to a cellular one 
against the cost of moving equipment as well as the cost and time needed for grouping parts. 
 Flexible manufacturing systems, discussed earlier, are more fully automated versions of 
cellular manufacturing. 
 Service Layouts 
   As is the case with manufacturing, service layouts can often be categorized as product, 
process, or fixed-position layouts. In a fixed-position service layout (e.g., appliance repair, 
roofing, landscaping, home remodeling, copier service), materials, labor, and equipment are 
brought to the customer’s residence or office. Process layouts are common in services due 
mainly to the high degree of variety in customer processing requirements. Examples include 
hospitals, supermarkets and department stores, vehicle repair centers, and banks. If the service 
is organized sequentially, with all customers or work following the same or similar sequence, 
as it is in a car wash or a cafeteria line, a product layout is used. 
 FIGURE 6.8 
 A group of parts with similar 
manufacturing process 
requirements but different design 
attributes 
 Source: Mikell P. Groover,  Automation, 
Production Systems, and Computer-Aided 
Manufacturing, 3rd ed., © 2007, p. 508. 
Reprinted by permission of Pearson Educa-
tion Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
259
 However, service layout requirements are somewhat different from manufacturing layout 
requirements. The degree of customer contact and the degree of customization are two key 
factors in service layout design. If contact and customization are both high, as in health care 
and personal care, the service environment is a job shop, usually with high labor content and 
flexible equipment, and a layout that supports this. If customization is high but contact low 
(e.g., picture framing, tailoring), the layout can be arranged to facilitate workers and equip-
ment. If contact is high but customization is low (e.g., supermarkets, gas stations), self-service 
is a possibility, in which case layout must take into account ease of obtaining the service as 
well as customer safety. If the degree of contact and the need for customization are low, the 
core service and the customer can be separated, making it easier to achieve a high degree of 
efficiency in operations. Highly standardized services may lend themselves to automation 
(e.g., Web services, online banking, ATM machines). 
 Let’s consider some of these layouts. 
 Warehouse and Storage Layouts.  The design of storage facilities presents a different 
set of factors than the design of factory layouts. Frequency of order is an important consider-
ation; items that are ordered frequently should be placed near the entrance to the facility, and 
those ordered infrequently should be placed toward the rear of the facility. Any correlations 
between items are also significant (i.e., item A is usually ordered with item B), suggesting 
that placing those two items close together would reduce the cost and time of  picking (retriev-
ing) those items. Other considerations include the number and widths of aisles, the height of 
storage racks, rail and/or truck loading and unloading, and the need to periodically make a 
physical count of stored items. 
 Retail Layouts. The objectives that guide design of manufacturing layouts often pertain to 
cost minimization and product flow. However, with retail layouts such as department stores, 
supermarkets, and specialty stores, designers must take into account the presence of custom-
ers and the opportunity to influence sales volume and customer attitudes through carefully 
designed layouts. Traffic patterns and traffic flow are important factors to consider. Some 
large retail chains use standard layouts for all or most of their stores. This has several advan-
tages. Most obvious is the ability to save time and money by using one layout instead of 
custom designing one for each store. Another advantage is to avoid confusing consumers who 
visit more than one store. In the case of service retail outlets, especially small ones such as dry 
cleaners, shoe repair, and auto service centers, layout design is much simpler. 
 Kiosks benefit customers by 
speeding up tedious processes 
and reducing waiting time. At 
McDonald’s, kiosks actually 
increase sales by an average of 
$1 over face-to-face purchases. 
Managers explain this by 
the kiosk’s ability to prompt 
customers for more purchases 
by showing pictures of products 
they might want to buy. 

260 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 READING 
 A Safe Hospital Room of the Future 
 12 Kits for fall prevention  include color-coded nonslip socks, lap 
blanket and wristband. 
    13  Frequently touched surfaces, such as IV poles, bed rails and  faucets, 
are made with  germ-resistant copper alloys,  which are 
naturally antimicrobial. 
 14  Infrared technology  that lights up the sink reminds health care 
providers to wash their hands. 
 15 Beds with  translation technology  help staff speak with all 
patients. 
 16  Real-time vital signs— heart rate, blood pressure—can be 
monitored from computers outside the room.  —B.H.
 Questions 
    1. If you have experienced a hospital room, either as a patient or a 
 visitor, which of these features was present in that room? 
   2. If you have experienced a hospital room, which of these features 
was missing, but would have been desirable additions? 
 Source: “Real Possibilities,”  AARP The Magazine, April/May 2013, p. 54. 
 1  Double-sided linen closets  allow staff to restock supplies 
without disturbing the patient. 
 2  Bar codes  increase safety by matching the right medicine to the 
right patient. 
 3  A two-bin supply system  ensures that providers don’t run out 
of critical supplies. 
 4  A hand-washing station  in every room gives providers a place 
to wash their hands. 
 5  A sliding glass door  doubles as a  whiteboard  for informa-
tion exchanges. 
 6  Hand bars  on all sides of the bathroom help patients navigate 
more safely. 
 7  Bed alarms  alert nurses that a patient may be attempting to get 
out of bed unassisted. 
 8  Disinfecting units use ultra-violet light to kill germs. 
 9  Checklists  give providers a set of proven rules for preventing 
infections. 
 10  Vents  suck the air out of the room of sick patients, filter it and then 
release it from the building. 
 11  “Smart” pumps  deliver fluids, nutrients and medicines to 
patients at precisely controlled rates. 
No one expects a stay in a hospital room to be unsafe or having to endure disruptions in their care, although today, 
there is need for improvement in hospital room safety and patient care. The following are suggestions for an improved 
hospital room of the future.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
261
 Office Layouts.  Office layouts are undergoing transformations as the flow of paperwork is 
replaced with the increasing use of electronic communications. This lessens the need to place 
office workers in a layout that optimizes the physical transfer of information or paperwork. 
Another trend is to create an image of openness; office walls are giving way to low-rise parti-
tions, which also facilitate communication among workers. 
 Restaurant Layouts.  There are many different types of restaurants, ranging from food 
trucks to posh establishments. Many belong to chains, and some of those are franchises. That 
type of restaurant typically adheres to a floor plan established by the company. Independent 
restaurants and bars have their own floor plans. Some have what could be considered very 
good designs, while others do not. Ed Norman of MVP Services Group, Inc., in Dubuque, 
IA, offers this valuable observation: “The single most important element is process workflow. 
Food and non-food products should transition easily through the operation from the receiving 
door to the customer with all phases of storage, pre-preparation, cooking, holding, and ser-
vice, unimpaired or minimized due to good design.” 
 Hospital Layouts.  Key elements of hospital layout design are patient care and safety, with 
easy access to critical resources such as X-ray, CAT scan, and MRI equipment. General lay-
out of the hospital is one aspect of layout, while layout of patient rooms is another. The fol-
lowing reading illustrates a safe hospital room of the future. 
 Automation in Services.  One way to improve productivity and reduce costs in services 
is to remove the customer from the process as much as possible. Automated services is 
one increasingly used alternative. For example, financial services use ATMs, automated 
call answering, online banking, and electronic funds transfers; retail stores use optical 
 scanning to process sales; and the travel industry uses electronic reservation systems. 
Other  examples of automated services include shipping, mail processing, communication, 
and health care services. 
From self check-in at the airport to depositing a check from anywhere, automation speeds up service and reduces the need to stand 
in line.

262 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Automating services means more-standardized services and less need to involve the 
customer directly. However, service standardization brings trade-offs. Generally, costs are 
reduced and productivity increases, but the lack of customization and the inability to deal with 
a real person raise the risk of customer dissatisfaction. 
 6.6 DESIGNING PRODUCT LAYOUTS: 
LINE BALANCING 
     The goal of a product layout is to arrange workers or machines in the sequence that operations 
need to be performed. The sequence is referred to as a production line or an assembly line. 
These lines range from fairly short, with just a few operations, to long lines that have a large 
number of operations. Automobile assembly lines are examples of long lines. At the assembly 
line for Ford Mustangs, a Mustang travels about nine miles from start to finish! 
 Because it is difficult and costly to change a product layout that is inefficient, design is a 
critical issue. Many of the benefits of a product layout relate to the ability to divide required 
work into a series of elemental tasks (e.g., “assemble parts C and D”) that can be performed 
quickly and routinely by low-skilled workers or specialized equipment. The durations of these 
elemental tasks typically range from a few seconds to 15 minutes or more. Most time require-
ments are so brief that it would be impractical to assign only one task to each worker. For one 
thing, most workers would quickly become bored by the limited job scope. For another, the 
number of workers required to complete even a simple product or service would be enormous. 
Instead, tasks are usually grouped into manageable bundles and assigned to workstations 
staffed by one or two operators. 
 The process of deciding how to assign tasks to workstations is referred to as   line  balancing. 
The goal of line balancing is to obtain task groupings that represent approximately equal time 
requirements. This minimizes the idle time along the line and results in a high utilization of 
labor and equipment. Idle time occurs if task times are not equal among workstations; some 
stations are capable of producing at higher rates than others. These “fast” stations will experi-
ence periodic waits for the output from slower stations or else be forced into idleness to avoid 
buildups of work between stations. Unbalanced lines are undesirable in terms of inefficient 
utilization of labor and equipment and because they may create morale problems at the slower 
stations for workers who must work continuously. 
 Lines that are perfectly balanced will have a smooth flow of work as activities along the 
line are synchronized to achieve maximum utilization of labor and equipment. The major 
obstacle to attaining a perfectly balanced line is the difficulty of forming task bundles that 
have the same duration. One cause of this is that it may not be feasible to combine certain 
activities into the same bundle, either because of differences in equipment requirements or 
because the activities are not compatible (e.g., risk of contamination of paint from sanding). 
Another cause of difficulty is that differences among elemental task lengths cannot always 
be overcome by grouping tasks. A third cause of an inability to perfectly balance a line is 
that a required technological sequence may prohibit otherwise desirable task combinations. 
Consider a series of three operations that have durations of two minutes, four minutes, and 
two minutes, as shown in the following diagram. Ideally, the first and third operations could 
be combined at one workstation and have a total time equal to that of the second operation. 
However, it may not be possible to combine the first and third operations. In the case of an 
automatic car wash, scrubbing and drying operations could not realistically be combined at 
the same workstation due to the need to rinse cars between the two operations. 
 Line balancing  The process of 
assigning tasks to workstations 
in such a way that the worksta-
tions have approximately equal 
time requirements.  
LO6.8 Solve simple line-
balancing problems.
Scrubbing
2 minutes
Rinsing
4 minutes
Drying
2 minutes
 Line balancing involves assigning tasks to workstations. Usually, each workstation has 
one worker who handles all of the tasks at that station, although an option is to have several 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
263
workers at a single workstation. For purposes of illustration, however, all of the examples and 
problems in this chapter have workstations with one worker. A manager could decide to use 
anywhere from one to five workstations to handle five tasks. With one workstation, all tasks 
would be done at that station; with five stations, for example, one task would be assigned to 
each station. If two, three, or four workstations are used, some or all of the stations will have 
multiple tasks assigned to them. How does a manager decide how many stations to use? 
 The primary determinant is what the line’s   cycle time  will be. The cycle time is the  maxi-
mum time allowed at each workstation to perform assigned tasks before the work moves on. 
The cycle time also establishes the output rate of a line. For instance, if the cycle time is two 
minutes, units will come off the end of the line at the rate of one every two minutes. Hence, 
the line’s capacity is a function of its cycle time. 
 We can gain some insight into task groupings and cycle time by considering a simple 
example. 
 Suppose that the work required to fabricate a certain product can be divided up into five 
elemental tasks, with the task times and precedence relationships as shown in the following 
diagram:    
 Cycle time  The maximum time 
allowed at each workstation to 
complete its set of tasks on a 
unit. 
0.1 min.
0.7 min.
1.0 min.
0.2 min.
0.5 min.
 The task times govern the range of possible cycle times. The  minimum  cycle time is equal 
to the  longest  task time (1.0 minute), and the  maximum  cycle time is equal to the sum of the 
task times (0.1    0.7    1.0    0.5    0.2    2.5 minutes). The minimum cycle time would 
apply if there were five workstations. The maximum cycle time would apply if all tasks were 
performed at a single workstation. The minimum and maximum cycle times are important 
because they establish the potential range of output for the line, which we can compute using 
the following formula:
 
Output rate
Operating time per day
Cycle time

 
 
(6–1)
 
 Assume that the line will operate for eight hours per day (480 minutes). With a cycle time 
of 1.0 minute, output would be
 
480 minutes per day
1.0 minute per unit
480 units per day

 With a cycle time of 2.5 minutes, the output would be
 
480 minutes per day
2.5 minutes per unit
192 units per day

      Assuming that no parallel activities are to be employed (e.g., two lines), the output selected 
for the line must fall in the range of 192 units per day to 480 units per day. 
 As a general rule, the cycle time is determined by the desired output; that is, a desired out-
put rate is selected, and the cycle time is computed. If the cycle time does not fall between the 
maximum and minimum bounds, the desired output rate must be revised. We can compute the 
cycle time using this equation:
 
Cycle time
Operating time per day
Desired output rate

 
 
(6–2)
 
 For example, suppose that the desired output rate is 480 units. Using Formula 6–2, the 
necessary cycle time is
 
480 minutes per day
480 units per day
1.0 minute per unit


264 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
      The number of workstations that will be needed is a function of both the desired output rate 
and our ability to combine elemental tasks into workstations. We can determine the  theoreti-
cal minimum number of stations necessary to provide a specified rate of output as follows:
 
Cycle time
min
N
t


 
 
(6–3)
 
 where
 
Theoretical minimum number of stations
Sum of task times
min
N
t

 
      Suppose the desired rate of output is the maximum of 480 units per day.  2 (This will require 
a cycle time of 1.0 minute.) The minimum number of stations required to achieve this goal is
 
2.5 minutes per unit
1 minute per unit per station
2.5 stations
min
N


      Because 2.5 stations is not feasible, it is necessary to  round up  (because 2.5 is the mini-
mum) to three stations. Thus, the actual number of stations used will equal or exceed three, 
depending on how successfully the tasks can be grouped into workstations. 
 A very useful tool in line balancing is a   precedence diagram.  Figure 6.9 illustrates a 
simple precedence diagram. It visually portrays the tasks that are to be performed along with 
the  sequential  requirements, that is, the  order  in which tasks must be performed. The diagram 
is read from left to right, so the initial task(s) are on the left and the final task is on the right. 
In terms of precedence requirements, we can see from the diagram, for example, that the only 
requirement to begin task  b  is that task  a  must be finished. However, in order to begin task  d, 
tasks  b  and  c  must  both  be finished. Note that the elemental tasks are the same ones that we 
have been using. 
 Now let’s see how a line is balanced. This involves assigning tasks to workstations. Gener-
ally, no techniques are available that guarantee an optimal set of assignments. Instead, man-
agers employ  heuristic (intuitive) rules,  which provide good and sometimes optimal sets of 
assignments. A number of line-balancing heuristics are in use, two of which are described 
here for purposes of illustration:
 1. 
Assign tasks in order of most following tasks. 
 2. 
Assign tasks in order of greatest positional weight. Positional weight is the sum of each 
task’s time and the times of all following tasks. 
 Precedence diagram  A 
diagram that shows  elemental 
tasks and their precedence 
requirements.  
 2 At first glance, it might seem that the desired output would logically be the maximum possible output. However, 
you will see why that is not always the best alternative. 
 Arrange the tasks shown in  Figure 6.9  into three workstations. Use a cycle time of 1.0 minute. 
Assign tasks in order of the greatest number of followers.   
 E X A M P L E  1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 FIGURE 6.9 
 A simple precedence diagram 
a
c
b
d
e
 0.1 min. 
1.0 min.
0.7 min. 
 0.5 min. 
 0.2 min.

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
265
 S O L U T I O N 
 1. 
Begin with task  a; it has the most following tasks. Assign it to workstation 1. 
 2. 
Next, tasks  b  and  c  each have two following tasks, but only task  c  will fit in the time 
remaining at workstation 1, so assign task  c to workstation 1. 
 3. 
Task  b  now has the most followers, but it will not fit at workstation 1, so assign it to 
workstation 2. 
   4. 
There is no time left at workstation 2, so we move on to workstation 3, assigning task  d 
and then task  e to that workstation. 
 Workstation 
 Time 
Remaining  
  Eligible  
 Assign 
Task 
 Revised 
Time Remaining 
 Station 
Idle Time 
 1 
 1.0 
 a, c 
 a 
 0.9 
 
 
 0.9 
 b, c 
 c 
 0.2 
 
 
 0.2 
 none 
 — 
 
 0.2 
 2 
 1.0 
 b 
 b 
 0.0 
 0.0 
 3 
 1.0 
 d 
 d 
 0.5 
 
 
 0.5 
 e 
 e 
 0.3 
 
 
 0.3 
 — 
 — 
 
 0.3 
 
 
 
 
 
 0.5 
    The initial “time remaining” for each workstation is equal to the cycle time. For a task to be 
eligible, tasks preceding it must have been assigned, and the task’s time must not exceed the 
station’s remaining time. 
 Example 1 is purposely simple; it is designed to illustrate the basic procedure. Later exam-
ples will illustrate tiebreaking, constructing precedence diagrams, and the positional weight 
method. Before considering those examples, let us first consider some measures of effective-
ness that can be used for evaluating a given set of assignments. 
 Two widely used measures of effectiveness are
 1. 
The  percentage of idle time of the line. This is sometimes referred to as the   balance 
delay. It can be computed as follows:
 
Percentage of idle time
Idle time per cycle
Cycle time
100
actual
N



 
 
(6–4)
 
 where
 
Actual number of stations
actual
N

 For the preceding example, the value is
 
Percentage of idle time
.5
3
1.0
100
16.7%




 Balance delay  Percentage of 
idle time of a line.  
0.1 min.
1.0 min.
0.5 min.
0.2 min.
0.7 min.
Workstation 2
Workstation 3
Workstation 1
a
b
c
d
e

266 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
  
 In effect, this is the average idle time divided by the cycle time, multiplied by 100. Note 
that cycle time refers to the actual cycle time that is achieved. When the calculated cycle 
time in Formula 6–2 and the actual bottleneck station time differ, the actual bottleneck 
station time should be used in all idle time, efficiency, and output (throughput) calcula-
tions. The actual bottleneck time dictates the actual pace of the line, whereas the calcu-
lated cycle time is just an upper limit on the amount of time that can be loaded into any 
station. 
 2. 
The  efficiency of the line. This is computed as follows:
Efficiency
100%
Percent idle time


 
 (6–5a) 
  
 Here, Efficiency    100%    16.7%    83.3%. Alternatively, efficiency could be com-
puted using Formula 6–5b:
 
Efficiency
Cycle time
Idle time
Cycle time
100
actual
actual
N
N





 
 
(6–5b)
 
 Now let’s consider the question of whether the selected level of output should equal the 
maximum output possible. The minimum number of workstations needed is a function of 
the desired output rate and, therefore, the cycle time. Thus, a lower rate of output (hence, a 
longer cycle time) may result in a need for fewer stations. Hence, the manager must consider 
whether the potential savings realized by having fewer workstations would be greater than the 
decrease in profit resulting from producing fewer units. 
 The preceding examples serve to illustrate some of the fundamental concepts of line bal-
ancing. They are rather simple; in most real-life situations, the number of branches and tasks 
is often much greater. Consequently, the job of line balancing can be a good deal more com-
plex. In many instances, the number of alternatives for grouping tasks is so great that it is 
virtually impossible to conduct an exhaustive review of all possibilities. For this reason, many 
real-life problems of any magnitude are solved using heuristic approaches. The purpose of a 
heuristic approach is to reduce the number of alternatives that must be considered, but it does 
not guarantee an optimal solution. 
 Some Guidelines for Line Balancing 
 In balancing an assembly line, tasks are assigned  one at a time  to the line, starting at the 
first workstation. At each step, the unassigned tasks are checked to determine which are 
eligible for assignment. Next, the eligible tasks are checked to see which of them will fit 
in the workstation being loaded. A heuristic is used to select one of the tasks that will fit, 
and the task is assigned. This process is repeated until there are no eligible tasks that will 
fit. Then the next workstation can be loaded. This continues until all tasks are assigned. 
The objective is to minimize the idle time for the line subject to technological and output 
constraints. 
 Technological constraints tell us which elemental tasks are  eligible  to be assigned at a 
particular position on the line. Technological constraints can result from the precedence or 
ordering relationships among the tasks. The precedence relationships require that certain 
tasks must be performed before others (and so, must be assigned to workstations before 
others). Thus, in a car wash, the rinsing operation must be performed before the drying 
operation. The drying operation is not eligible for assignment until the rinsing operation has 
been assigned. Technological constraints may also result from two tasks being incompatible 
(e.g., space restrictions or the nature of the operations may prevent their being placed in the 
same work center). For example, sanding and painting operations would not be assigned to 
the same work center because dust particles from the sanding operation could contaminate 
the paint. 
 Output constraints, on the other hand, determine the maximum amount of work that a 
manager can assign to each workstation, and this determines whether an eligible task  will 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
267
fit  at a workstation. The desired output rate determines the cycle time, and the sum of the 
task times assigned to any workstation must not exceed the cycle time. If a task can be 
assigned to a workstation without exceeding the cycle time, then the task will fit. 
 Once it is known which tasks are  eligible  and  will fit,  the manager can select the task to be 
assigned (if there is more than one to choose from). This is where the heuristic rules help us 
decide which task to assign from among those that are eligible and will fit. 
 To clarify the terminology,  following tasks are all tasks that you would encounter by fol-
lowing all paths from the task in question through the precedence diagram.  Preceding tasks 
are all tasks you would encounter by tracing all paths  backward  from the task in question. In 
the precedence diagram below, tasks  b, d, e,  and  f  are followers of task  a. Tasks  a, b,  and  c are 
preceding tasks for  e. 
a
b
c
e
d
f
 The  positional weight  for a task is the sum of the task times for itself and all its following 
tasks. 
 Neither of the heuristics  guarantees  the  best  solution, or even a good solution to the line-
balancing problem, but they do provide guidelines for developing a solution. It may be useful 
to apply several different heuristics to the same problem and pick the best (least idle time) 
solution out of those developed. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Using the information contained in the table shown, do each of the following: 
 1. 
Draw a precedence diagram. 
   2. 
Assuming an eight-hour workday, compute the cycle time needed to obtain an output of 
400 units per day. 
 3. 
Determine the minimum number of workstations required. 
   4. Assign tasks to workstations using this rule: Assign tasks according to greatest number of 
following tasks. In case of a tie, use the tiebreaker of assigning the task with the longest 
processing time first. 
 Task 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 Task Time 
(in minutes)  
 a 
 — 
 0.2 
 b 
 a 
 0.2 
 c 
 — 
 0.8 
 d 
 c 
 0.6 
 e 
 b 
 0.3 
 f 
 d, e 
 1.0 
 g 
 f 
 0.4 
 h 
 g 
 0.3 
 
 
  t     3.8 
 5. 
Compute the resulting percent idle time and efficiency of the system. 

268 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 S O L U T I O N 
    1. Drawing a precedence diagram is a relatively straightforward task. Begin with activities 
with no predecessors. We see from the list that tasks  a  and  c  do not have predecessors. We 
build from here. 
a
c
Step 1:
a
c
b
d
Step 2: Task b follows a, and d follows c.
a
c
b
d
e
Step 3: Task e follows b.
a
c
b
d
e
f
Step 4: Task f  follows e, and d.
a
c
b
d
e
f
g
h
Step 5: Task g follows f, and h follows g.
 2. 
Cycle time
Operating time
Desired output rate
480 minutes per day
400 units per day
1.2 minutes per cycle



 3. 
Cycle time
3.8 minutes per unit
1.2 minutes per cycle per station
3.17 stations (round to 4)
min
N
t




          4. 
Beginning with station 1, make assignments following this procedure: Determine from the 
precedence diagram which tasks are eligible for assignment. Then determine which of the 
eligible tasks will fit the time remaining for the station. Use the tiebreaker if necessary. 
Once a task has been assigned, remove it from consideration. When a station cannot take 
any more assignments, go on to the next station. Continue until all tasks have been assigned. 
 Station 
 Time 
Remaining  
  Eligible  
  Will Fit  
 Assign 
(task time) 
 Revised 
Time 
Remaining  
  Idle  
 1 
 1.2 
 a, c * 
 a, c * 
 a (0.2) 
 1.0 
 
 
 1.0 
 c, b ** 
 c, b ** 
 c (0.8) 
 0.2 
 
 
 0.2 
 b, d 
 b 
 b (0.2) 
 0.0 
 
 
 0 
 e, d 
 None 
 — 
 
 0.0 
 2 
 1.2 
 e, d 
 e, d 
 d (0.6) 
 0.6 
 
 
 0.6 
 e 
 e 
 e (0.3) 
 0.3 
 
 
 0.3 *** 
 f 
 None 
 — 
 
 0.3 
 3 
 1.2 
 f 
 f 
 f (1.0) 
 0.2 
 
 
 0.2 
 g 
 None 
 — 
 
 0.2 
 4 
 1.2 
 g 
 g 
 g (0.4) 
 0.8 
 
 
 0.8 
 h 
 h 
 h (0.3) 
 0.5 
 
 
 0.5 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 0.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.0 min. 
 *Neither  a nor  c has any predecessors, so both are eligible. Task  a was assigned since it has more followers. 
 **Once  a is assigned,  b and  c are now eligible. Both will fit in the time remaining of 1.0 minute. The tie cannot be broken by the 
“most followers” rule, so the longer task is assigned. 
 ***Although  f is eligible, this task will not fit, so station 2 is left with 0.3 minute of idle time per 1.2-minute cycle. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
269
  
 These assignments are shown in the following diagram.  Note:  One should not expect 
that heuristic approaches will always produce optimal solutions; they merely pro-
vide a practical way to deal with complex problems that may not lend themselves 
to optimizing techniques. Moreover, different heuristics often yield different 
answers. 
Station 1
Station 2
Station 3
a
c
d
b
Station 4
g
h
f
e
 5. 
Percent idle time
1.0 min.
4
1.2 min.
100
20.83%.
Efficiency
100%
20.83%
79.17%







 Other Factors 
 The preceding discussion on line balancing presents a relatively straightforward approach to 
approximating a balanced line. In practice, the ability to do this usually involves additional 
considerations, some of which are technical. 
 Technical considerations include skill requirements of different tasks. If skill require-
ments of tasks are quite different, it may not be feasible to place the tasks in the same 
workstation. Similarly, if the tasks themselves are incompatible (e.g., the use of fire and 
flammable liquids), it may not be feasible even to place them in stations that are near 
each other. 
 Developing a workable plan for balancing a line may also require consideration of human 
factors as well as equipment and space limitations. 
 Although it is convenient to treat assembly operations as if they occur at the same rate 
time after time, it is more realistic to assume that whenever humans are involved, task com-
pletion times will be variable. The reasons for the variations are numerous, including fatigue, 
boredom, and failure to concentrate on the task at hand. Absenteeism also can affect line bal-
ance. Minor variability can be dealt with by allowing some slack along the line. However, if 
more variability is inherent in even a few tasks, that will severely impact the ability to achieve 
a balanced line. 
 For these reasons, lines that involve human tasks are more of an ideal than a reality. In 
practice, lines are rarely perfectly balanced. However, this is not entirely bad, because some 
unbalance means that slack exists at points along the line, which can reduce the impact of 
brief stoppages at some workstations. Also, workstations that have slack can be used for new 
workers who may not be “up to speed.” 
 Other Approaches 
 Companies use a number of other approaches to achieve a smooth flow of production. One 
approach is to use  parallel workstations.  These are beneficial for bottleneck operations which 
would otherwise disrupt the flow of product as it moves down the line. The bottlenecks may 
be the result of difficult or very long tasks. Parallel workstations increase the work flow and 
provide flexibility. 

270 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
3 Adapted from Mikell P. Groover,  Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Aided Manufacturing,  2nd ed. 
© 1987. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
          Using parallel stations for the third task would result in a cycle time of 1 minute because 
the output rate at the parallel stations would be equal to that of a single station and allow an 
output rate for the line of 60 units per hour: 
1 min.
30/hr
30/hr
30/hr
Bottleneck
30/hr
1 min.
2 min.
1 min.
1 min.
1 min.
1 min.
2 min.
2 min.
60/hr
30/hr
30/hr
30/hr
30/hr
60/hr
 Another approach to achieving a balanced line is to  cross-train  workers so that they are 
able to perform more than one task. Then, when bottlenecks occur, the workers with tempo-
rarily increased idle time can assist other workers who are temporarily overburdened, thereby 
maintaining an even flow of work along the line. This is sometimes referred to as  dynamic 
line balancing, and it is used most often in lean production systems. 
 Still another approach is to design a line to handle more than one product on the same line. 
This is referred to as a  mixed model line.  Naturally, the products have to be fairly similar, so 
that the tasks involved are pretty much the same for all products. This approach offers great 
flexibility in varying the amount of output of the products. The following reading describes 
one such line. 
flexibility enables its line to easily respond to mar-
ket fluctuations while avoiding the costly change-
overs that its rivals’ more rigid lines require. 
 Source: Based on “Betting on the S,”  The Wall Street Journal, July 11, 
2005, p. B1. 
 The assembly line in Dingolfing, Germany, where BMW assembles its 
7-Series, has built-in flexibility that allows it to easily produce multiple 
models. Rival car producers typically configure their assembly lines to 
produce just a single model at a time. In order for them to produce a 
different model, the line must be shut down so that it can be changed 
over to be able to produce the different model. BMW’s production 
 READING  
 BMW’s Strategy: Flexibility 
r-
e-
 
 Consider this example. 3  A job has four tasks; task times are 1 minute, 1 minute, 2 minutes, 
and 1 minute. The cycle time for the line would be 2 minutes, and the output rate would be 
30 units per hour:
 
60 minutes per hour
2 minutes per unit
30 units per hour


 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
271
 6.7 DESIGNING PROCESS LAYOUTS 
     The main issue in designing process layouts concerns the relative positioning of the depart-
ments involved. As illustrated in  Figure 6.10 , departments must be assigned to locations. The 
problem is to develop a reasonably good layout; some combinations will be more desirable 
than others. For example, some departments may benefit from adjacent locations whereas 
others should be separated. A lab with delicate equipment would not be located near a depart-
ment that had equipment with strong vibrations. Conversely, two departments that share some 
of the same equipment would benefit from being close together. 
 Layouts can also be influenced by external factors such as the location of entrances, load-
ing docks, elevators, windows, and areas of reinforced flooring. Also important are noise 
levels, safety, and the size and locations of restrooms. 
 In some instances (e.g., the layouts of supermarkets, gas stations, and fast-food chains), 
a sufficient number of installations having similar characteristics justify the development of 
standardized layouts. For example, the use of the same basic patterns in McDonald’s fast-food 
locations facilitates construction of new structures and employee training. Food preparation, 
order taking, and customer service follow the same pattern throughout the chain. Installa-
tion and service of equipment are also standardized. This same concept has been success-
fully employed in computer software products such as Microsoft Windows and the Macintosh 
Operating System. Different applications are designed with certain basic features in common, 
so that a user familiar with one application can readily use other applications without having 
to start from scratch with each new application. 
 The majority of layout problems involve single rather than multiple locations, and they 
present unique combinations of factors that do not lend themselves to a standardized approach. 
Consequently, these layouts require customized designs. 
 A major obstacle to finding the most efficient layout of departments is the large num-
ber of possible assignments. For example, there are more than 87 billion different ways that 
14 departments can be assigned to 14 locations if the locations form a single line. Differ-
ent location configurations (e.g., 14 departments in a two-by-seven grid) often reduce the 
number of possibilities, as do special requirements (e.g., the stamping department may have 
to be assigned to a location with reinforced flooring). Still, the remaining number of lay-
out possibilities is quite large. Unfortunately, no algorithms exist to identify the best layout 
arrangement under all circumstances. Often planners must rely on heuristic rules to guide 
trial-and-error efforts for a satisfactory solution to each problem. 
 Measures of Effectiveness 
 One advantage of process layouts is their ability to satisfy a variety of processing require-
ments. Customers or materials in these systems require different operations and different 
sequences of operations, which causes them to follow different paths through the system. 
Material-oriented systems necessitate the use of variable-path material-handling equipment 
to move materials from work center to work center. In customer-oriented systems, people 
must travel or be transported from work center to work center. In both cases, transporta-
tion costs or time can be significant. Because of this factor, one of the major objectives in 
process layout is to minimize transportation cost, distance, or time. This is usually accom-
plished by locating departments with relatively high interdepartmental work flow as close 
together as possible. 
LO6.9 Develop simple process 
layouts.
 FIGURE 6.10 
 Work centers must be assigned 
to locations 
 
Work centers to
Locations 
be assigned
 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
A 
B 
C
D 
E 
F

272 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Other concerns in choosing among alternative layouts include initial costs in setting up 
the layout, expected operating costs, the amount of effective capacity created, and the ease of 
modifying the system. 
 In situations that call for improvement of an existing layout, costs of relocating any work 
center must be weighed against the potential benefits of the move. 
 Information Requirements 
 The design of process layouts requires the following information:
 1. 
A list of departments or work centers to be arranged, their approximate dimensions, and 
the dimensions of the building or buildings that will house the departments. 
 2. 
A projection of future work flows between the various work centers. 
 3. 
The distance between locations and the cost per unit of distance to move loads between 
locations.  
 4. 
The amount of money to be invested in the layout. 
 5. 
A list of any special considerations (e.g., operations that must be close to each other or 
operations that must be separated). 
 6. 
The location of key utilities, access and exit points, loading docks, and so on, in existing 
buildings. 
 The ideal situation is to first develop a layout and then design the physical structure around 
it, thus permitting maximum flexibility in design. This procedure is commonly followed 
when new facilities are constructed. Nonetheless, many layouts must be developed in existing 
structures where floor space, the dimensions of the building, location of entrances and eleva-
tors, and other similar factors must be carefully weighed in designing the layout. Note that 
multilevel structures pose special problems for layout planners. 
 Minimizing Transportation Costs or Distances 
 The most common goals in designing process layouts are minimization of transportation costs 
or distances traveled. In such cases, it can be very helpful to summarize the necessary data 
in  from-to charts  like those illustrated in  Tables 6.5  and  6.6 .  Table 6.5  indicates the distance 
between each of the locations, and  Table 6.6  indicates actual or projected work flow between 
each pair. For instance, the distance chart reveals that a trip from location A to location B will 
involve a distance of 20 meters. (Distances are often measured between department centers.) 
Oddly enough, the length of a trip between locations A and B may differ depending on the 
 direction  of the trip, due to one-way routes, elevators, or other factors. To simplify the discus-
sion, assume a constant distance between any two locations regardless of direction. However, 
it is not realistic to assume that interdepartmental work flows are equal—there is no reason to 
suspect that department 1 will send as much work to department 2 as department 2 sends to 
1. For example, several departments may send goods to packaging, but packaging may send 
only to the shipping department. 
 Transportation costs can also be summarized in from-to charts, but we shall avoid that 
complexity, assuming instead that costs are a direct, linear function of distance. 
 
 
 LOCATION 
 From  To  A 
 B 
 C 
 A 
 
 
 20 
 40 
 B 
 
 
 
 30 
 C 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 6.5 
 Distance between locations 
(meters) 
 TABLE 6.6 
 Interdepartmental work 
flow (loads per day) 
DEPARTMENT
From
To
1
2
3
Dept.
1
30
170
2
100
3

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
273
 E X A M P L E  3 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Assign the three departments shown in  Table 6.6  to locations A, B, and C, which are separated 
by the distances shown in  Table 6.5 , in such a way that transportation cost is minimized. Note 
that  Table 6.6  summarizes the flows in both directions. Use this heuristic: Assign departments 
with the greatest interdepartmental work flow first to locations that are closest to each other. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Ranking departments according to highest work flow and locations according to highest inter-
location distances helps in making assignments.
 Trip 
 Distance 
(meters) 
 Department 
Pair 
 Work 
Flow 
 A–B 
 20 
 1–3 
 170 
 B–C 
 30 
 2–3 
 100 
 A–C 
 40 
 1–2 
 30 
 From these listings, you can see that departments 1 and 3 have the highest interdepartmen-
tal work flow, and that locations A and B are the closest. Thus, it seems reasonable to con-
sider assigning 1 and 3 to locations A and B, although it is not yet obvious which department 
should be assigned to which location. Further inspection of the work flow list reveals that 
2 and 3 have higher work flow than 1 and 2, so 2 and 3 should probably be located more 
closely than 1 and 2. Hence, it would seem reasonable to place 3 between 1 and 2, or at least 
centralize that department with respect to the other two. The resulting assignments might 
appear as illustrated in  Figure 6.11 . 
  If the cost per meter to move any load is $1, you can compute the total daily transporta-
tion cost for this assignment by multiplying each department’s number of loads by the trip 
distance, and summing those quantities:
 Department 
 Number of 
Loads Between  
  Location  
  Distance To:  
  Loads     Distance 
 1 
 2: 30 
 A 
 C: 40 
 30    40    1,200 
 
 3: 170 
 
 B: 20 
 170    20    3,400 
 2 
 3: 100 
 C 
 B: 30 
 100  30  3,000 
 
 
 
 B: 30 
 100    30     3,000 
 
 
 
 
 7,600 
 At $1 per load meter, the cost for this plan is $7,600 per day. Even though it might appear 
that this arrangement yields the lowest transportation cost, you cannot be absolutely positive 
of that without actually computing the total cost for every alternative and comparing it to 
this one. Instead, rely on the choice of reasonable heuristic rules such as those demonstrated 
above to arrive at a satisfactory, if not optimal, solution. 
 Closeness Ratings 
 Although the preceding approach is widely used, it suffers from the limitation of focusing on 
only one objective, and many situations involve multiple criteria. Richard Muther developed 
a more general approach to the problem, which allows for subjective input from analysis or 
managers to indicate the relative importance of each combination of department pairs.  4 That 
1
3
2
30
170
100
A
B
C
 FIGURE 6.11 
 Interdepartmental work flows for 
assigned departments  
 4 Richard Muther and John Wheeler, “Simplified Systematic Layout Planning,”  Factory  120, nos. 8, 9, and 10 
(August, September, October 1962), pp. 68–77, 111–119, 101–113, respectively. 

274 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
information is then summarized in a grid like that shown in  Figure 6.12 . Read the grid in the 
same way as you would read a mileage chart on a road map, except that letters rather than dis-
tances appear at the intersections. The letters represent the importance of closeness for each 
department pair, with A being the most important and X being an undesirable pairing. Thus, 
in the grid it is “absolutely necessary” to locate 1 and 2 close to each other because there is an 
A at the intersection of those departments on the grid. On the other hand, 1 and 4 should not 
be close together because their intersection has an X. In practice, the letters on the grid are 
often accompanied by numbers that indicate the reason for each assignment; they are omitted 
here to simplify the illustration. Muther suggests the following list:
 1. 
They use same equipment or facilities. 
 2. 
They share the same personnel or records. 
 3. 
Required sequence of work flow. 
 4. 
Needed for ease of communication. 
 5. 
Would create unsafe or unpleasant conditions. 
 6. 
Similar work is performed. 
 FIGURE 6.12 
 A Muther grid 
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Department 4
Department 5
Department 6
A
E
X
O
A
X
I
X
A
U
A
A
O
U
A
Code
A
E
I
O
U
X
Degree of closeness
Absolutely necessary
Very important
Important
Ordinary importance
Unimportant
Undesirable
 E X A M P L E  4 
 Assign the six departments in  Figure 6.12  to a 2    3 set of locations using the heuristic rule: 
Assign critical departments first, because they are the most important. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Critical pairs of departments are those with A or X ratings. Prepare a list of those by referring 
to the grid:
 A 
Links 
 X 
Links 
 1–2 
 1–4 
 1–3 
 3–6 
 2–6 
 3–4 
 3–5 
 
 4–6 
 
 5–6 
 
 Next, form a cluster of A links, beginning with the department that appears most frequently in 
the A list (in this case, 6). For instance: 
2
6
4
5

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
275
    Take the remaining A links in order, and add them to this main cluster where possible, rear-
ranging the cluster as necessary. Form separate clusters for departments that do not link with 
the main cluster. In this case, all link with the main cluster. 
1
4
3
6
2
6
4
5
3
1
1
2
6
4
5
3
 Next, graphically portray the X links: 
    Observe that, as it stands, the cluster of A links also satisfies the X separations. It is a fairly 
simple exercise to fit the cluster into a 2    3 arrangement: 
    Note that the lower-level ratings have also been satisfied with this arrangement, even though 
no attempt was made to explicitly consider the E and I ratings. Naturally, not every problem 
will yield the same results, so it may be necessary to do some additional adjusting to see if 
improvements can be made, keeping in mind that the A and X assignments deserve the great-
est consideration. 
 Note that departments are considered close not only when they touch side to side but also 
when they touch corner to corner. 
 The value of this rating approach is that it permits the use of multiple objectives and sub-
jective inputs. Its limitations relate to the use of subjective inputs in general: They are impre-
cise and unreliable. 
 Process selection choices often have strategic implications for organizations. They can affect cost, qual-
ity, productivity, customer satisfaction, and competitive advantage. Process types include job shop, 
batch processing, repetitive processing, continuous processing, and projects. Process type determines 
how work is organized, and it has implications for the entire organization and its supply chain. Process 
type and layout are closely related. Except for projects, process selection is usually a function of the 
volume and variety needed. 
 Layout decisions are an important aspect of the design of operations systems, affecting operating 
costs and efficiency. Layout decisions are often closely related to process selection decisions. 
 Product layouts are geared to high-volume output of standardized items. Workers and equipment are 
arranged according to the technological sequence required by the product or service involved. Emphasis 
in design is on work flow through the system, and specialized processing and handling equipment is 
often used. Product layouts are highly vulnerable to breakdowns. Preventive maintenance is used to 
reduce the occurrence of breakdowns. Software is available for large or complex designs. 
 Process layouts group similar activities into departments or other work centers. These systems can 
handle a wide range of processing requirements and are less susceptible to breakdowns. However, the 
variety of processing requirements necessitates continual routing and scheduling and the use of variable-
path material-handling equipment. The rate of output is generally much lower than that of product layouts. 
 Fixed-position layouts are used when size, fragility, cost, or other factors make it undesirable or 
impractical to move a product through a system. Instead, workers, equipment, and materials are brought 
to the product. 
 SUMMARY 

276 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 1. 
Process choice is demand driven. 
 2. 
Process type and layout are a function of expected demand volume and the degree of customiza-
tion that will be needed. 
 3. 
Each process type and layout type has advantages and limitations that should be clearly under-
stood when making process selection and layout decisions. 
   4. 
Process design is critical in a product-focused system, whereas managing is critical in a process-
focused system.  
 KEY POINTS 
 The main design efforts in product layout development focus on dividing up the work required to 
produce a product or service into a series of tasks that are as nearly equal as possible. The goal is to 
achieve a high degree of utilization of labor and equipment. In process layout, design efforts often focus 
on the relative positioning of departments to minimize transportation costs or to meet other requirements 
concerning the proximity of certain department pairs. 
 The large number of possible alternatives to layout problems prevents an examination of each one. 
Instead, heuristic rules guide discovery of alternatives. The solutions thus obtained are usually satisfac-
tory although not necessarily optimal. Software packages are available to reduce the effort required to 
obtain solutions to layout problems, but these too rely largely on heuristic methods. 
 assembly line, 251 
 automation, 245 
 balance delay, 265 
 cellular production, 256 
 computer-aided manufacturing 
(CAM), 247 
 computer-integrated 
manufacturing (CIM), 248 
 cycle time, 263 
 fixed-position layout, 254 
 flexible manufacturing system 
(FMS), 248 
 group technology, 257 
 intermittent processing, 253 
 line balancing, 262 
 numerically controlled (N/C) 
machines, 247 
 precedence diagram, 264 
 process layout, 253 
 product layout, 250 
 product or service 
 profiling, 244 
 production line, 251 
 project, 241 
 technological innovation, 244 
 technology, 244 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 The tasks shown in the following precedence diagram are to be assigned to workstations with the 
intent of minimizing idle time. Management has designed an output rate of 275 units per day. Assume 
440 minutes are available per day. 
 a. Determine the appropriate cycle time. 
 b. What is the minimum number of stations possible? 
   c. Assign tasks using the “positional weight” rule: Assign tasks with highest following times 
(including a task’s own time) first. Break ties using greatest number of following tasks. 
 d. Compute efficiency.   
 Problem 1 
a
c
e
b
d
f
g
h
i
0.3 minute
0.2 minute
0.1 minute
0.5 minute
0.3 minute
0.4 minute
0.6 minute
0.6 minute
1.2 minutes
 a. Cycle time
Operating time
Desired output
440 minutes per day
275 units per day
1.6 minutes



 Solution 
per unit

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
277
 b. 
Cycle time
4.2
1.6 minutes
2.625 (round to 3)
N
t




          c. Add positional weights (task time plus the sum of all following times) to the diagram. Start at the 
right end and work backward: 
(1.8)
0.3 minute
(1.1)
0.2 minute
(0.9)
0.1 minute
(0.8)
0.5 minute
(0.3)
0.3 minute
(1.5)
0.4 minute
0.6 minute
(3.2)
0.6 minute
(1.4)
1.2 minutes
(2.6)
a
c
e
b
d
f
g
h
i
 Station 
 Time 
Remaining  *  
  Eligible  
  Will Fit  
 Assign 
Task/Time 
 Station 
Idle Time 
 1 
 1.6 
 a, b 
 a, b 
 b/0.6 
 
 
 1.0 
 a, d 
 a 
 a/0.3 
 
 
 0.7 
 c, d 
 c 
 c/0.4 
 
 
 0.3 
 e, d 
 e 
 e/0.2 
 
 
 0.1 
 g, d 
 g 
 g/0.1 
 
 
 0 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 0 
 2 
 1.6 
 d 
 d 
 d/1.2 
 
 
 0.4 
 f 
 none 
 none 
 0.4 
 3 
 1.6 
 f 
 f 
 f/0.6 
 
 
 1.0 
 h 
 h 
 h/0.5 
 
 
 0.5 
 i 
 i 
 i/0.3 
 
 
 0.2 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 0.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 0.6 
 *The initial time for each station is the cycle time computed in part  a. 
 The resulting assignments are shown below. 
Station 1
Station 2
Station 3
Time = 
1.6 minutes
Time = 
1.2 minutes
Time = 
1.4 minutes
a
d
f
g
h
b
i
c
e
 d. Efficiency
100%
Percent idle time
100%
0.6 min.
3
1.6 min.100
87.5%.






 Problem 2 
 Assign nine automobile service departments to bays in a 3    3 grid so that the closeness ratings 
in the following matrix are satisfied. (The unimportant and ordinary-importance ratings have been 
omitted to simplify the example.) The location of department 4 must be in the upper right-hand cor-
ner of the grid to satisfy a town ordinance.   

278 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 Solution 
 Note that department 1 has many A ratings, making it a strong candidate for the center position in the 
grid. We can form a cluster of departments that should be close together: 
 Next, we can identify departmental pairings that should be avoided: 
 These departments should be spaced around the perimeter of the grid. After a bit of trial and error, 
the final grid shown below emerged. Check it against the rating matrix to see if it satisfies the ratings.  
1
9
8
7
6
6
5
4
3
2
6
8
4
3
=
=
=
5
9
2
=
=
9
1
6
5
7
8
2
3
4
 Five departments are to be assigned to locations B–F in the grid. (For technical reasons, department 6 
must be assigned to location A.) Transportation cost is $2 per foot. The objective is to minimize total 
transportation cost. Information on interdepartmental work flows and distances between locations is 
shown in the following tables. Assign departments with the greatest interdepartmental work flow first.       
 Problem 3 
 
 
 DISTANCE BETWEEN LOCATIONS (FEET) 
 From 
 To 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 A 
 
 — 
 50 
 100 
 50 
 80 
 130 
 B 
 
 
 — 
 50 
 90 
 40 
 70 
 C 
 
 
 
 — 
 140 
 60 
 50 
 D 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 50 
 120 
 E 
 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 50 
 F 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 — 
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Department 4
Department 5
Department 6
Department 7
Department 8
Department 9
A
E
X
A
A
X
A
X
A
I
A
A
E
X
X

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
279
 
 
 NUMBER OF TRIPS PER DAY BETWEEN CENTERS 
 From 
 To 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 
 — 
 125 
 62 
 64 
 25 
 50 
 2 
 
 
 — 
 10 
 17 
 26 
 54 
 3 
 
 
 
 — 
 2 
 0 
 20 
 4 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 13 
 2 
 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 5 
 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 — 
 Solution 
 First either rank or arrange the work flows from high to low. Here they have been arranged from high 
to low. 
 Dept. 
 Work Flow 
 Dept. 
 Work Flow 
 1–2 
 125 
 2–4 
 17 
 1–4 
 64 
 4–5 
 13 
 1–3 
 62 
 2–3 
 10 
 2–6 
 54 
 5–6 
 5 
 1–6 
 50 
 3–4 
 2 
 2–5 
 26 
 4–6 
 2 
 1–5 
 25 
 3–5 
 0 
 3–6 
 20 
 
 
 From this, we can see that departments 1 and 2 have the greatest interdepartmental work flow, so they 
should be close, perhaps at B and E. Next, work flows for 1–3 and 1–4 are high. Note, though, that 
the work flow for 3–4 is low, suggesting that they need not be close. Instead, we would place them 
on either side of department 1. Note also that 3–4 is only 2, 3–5 is 0, while 3–6 is 20 and 4–5 is 13. 
Hence, place department 3 at location D, department 4 at location F, and department 5 at location C. 
A
Dept. 6
D
E
F
B
C
A
Dept. 6
D
Dept. 3
E
Dept. 1
F
Dept. 4
B
Dept. 2
C
Dept. 5
 Total cost: 
 Trip 
 b 
Distance 
 c 
Frequency 
 (b    c    $2) 
Cost 
 1–2 
 (B–E)      40 
 125 
 $10,000 
 1–3 
 (D–E)      50 
  62 
 6,200 
 1–4 
 (F–E)       50 
  64 
 6,400 
 1–5 
 (E–C)      60 
  25 
 3,000 
 1–6 
 (A–E)     80 
  50 
 8,000 
 2–3 
 (B–D)     90 
  10 
 1,800 
 2–4 
 (B–F)     70 
  17 
 2,380 
 2–5 
 (B–C)     50 
  26 
 2,600 
 2–6 
 (A–B)     50 
  54 
 5,400 
 3–4 
 (F–D) 120 
  2 
 480 
 3–5 
 (D–C) 140 
  0 
 0 
 3–6 
 (A–D)    50 
  20 
 2,000 
 4–5 
 (C–F)     50 
  13 
 1,300 
 4–6 
 (A–F)  130 
  2 
 520 
 5–6 
 (A–C) 100 
  5 
 1,000 
 
 
 $51,080 

280 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 1. Name three major trade-offs in process selection. 
 2. What trade-offs are involved when deciding how often to rebalance an assembly line? 
 3. Who needs to be involved in process selection? 
 4. Who needs to be involved in layout design? 
 5. In what ways does technology have an impact on process selection? How can technology impact 
layout decisions?  
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. Explain the importance of process selection in system design. 
 2. Briefly describe the five process types, and indicate the kinds of situations in which each would be 
used. 
 3. Briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages of automation. 
 4. Briefly describe computer-assisted approaches to production. 
   5. What is a flexible manufacturing system, and under what set of circumstances is it most appropriate?  
 6. Why is management of technology important? 
 7. Why might the choice of equipment that provides flexibility sometimes be viewed as a 
 management cop-out? 
 8. What are the trade-offs that occur when a process layout is used? What are the trade-offs that 
occur when a product layout is used? 
 9. List some common reasons for redesigning layouts. 
 10. Briefly describe the two main layout types. 
 11. What are the main advantages of a product layout? The main disadvantages? 
 12. What are the main advantages of a process layout? The main disadvantages? 
 13. What is the goal of line balancing? What happens if a line is unbalanced? 
 14. Why are routing and scheduling continual problems in process layouts? 
 15. Compare equipment maintenance strategies in product and process layouts. 
 16. Briefly outline the impact that job sequence has on each of the layout types. 
 17. The City Transportation Planning Committee must decide whether to begin a long-term project to 
build a subway system or to upgrade the present bus service. Suppose you are an expert in fixed-
path and variable-path material-handling equipment, and the committee seeks your counsel on this 
matter. What are the advantages and limitations of the subway and bus systems? 
 18. Identify the fixed-path and variable-path material-handling equipment commonly found in 
supermarkets. 
 19. What are heuristic approaches, and why are they used in designing layouts? 
 20. Why are product layouts atypical in service environments? 
 21. According to a study by the Alliance of American Insurers, it costs more than three times the 
original purchase price in parts and labor to reconstruct a wrecked Chevrolet. Explain the reasons 
for this large discrepancy in terms of the processes used to assemble the original car and those 
required to reconstruct the wrecked car. 
 22. Name some ways that a layout can help or hinder productivity. 
 23. What is cellular manufacturing? What are its main benefits and limitations? 
 24. What is group technology? 
 25. Explain the consequences of task time variability on line balancing. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. Name two unethical behaviors related to process selection and two related to layout, and the ethical 
principles they violate (see Chapter 1). 
 2. Layout decisions affect a wide range of facilities, from factories, supermarkets, offices, department 
stores, and warehouses, to malls, parking lots and garages, and kitchens. Layout is also important in 
the design of some products such as the interiors of automobiles and the arrangement of components 
inside computers and other electronic devices. Select three different items from this list, or other 
similar items, and explain for each what the four or five key considerations for layout design are.  
 3. What are the risks of automating a production process? What are the risks for a service process? 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
281
 4. Consider an assembly line such as the burrito assembly line at Chipotle Mexican Grill. During slow 
times of the day, one server can handle assembly, but during very busy times, having many serv-
ers would be prudent. Explain why either approach wouldn’t work all the time, and the benefit of 
matching the number of servers to the pace of customer arrivals. 
1.4
a
0.5
b
0.7
d
0.6
c
0.5
1.0
g
0.5
h
0.8
e
f
a
d
f
b
c
3
7
4
9
5
5
6
2
4
e
h
i
g
 1. An assembly line with 17 tasks is to be balanced. The longest task is 2.4 minutes, and the total time 
for all tasks is 18 minutes. The line will operate for 450 minutes per day. 
 a. What are the minimum and maximum cycle times? 
 b. What range of output is theoretically possible for the line? 
 c. What is the minimum number of workstations needed if the maximum output rate is to be sought? 
 d. What cycle time will provide an output rate of 125 units per day? 
 e. What output potential will result if the cycle time is (1) 9 minutes? (2) 15 minutes? 
 2. A manager wants to assign tasks to workstations as efficiently as possible and achieve an hourly 
output of 331⁄3 units. Assume the shop works a 60-minute hour. Assign the tasks shown in the 
accompanying precedence diagram (times are in minutes) to workstations using the following rules:
 a. In order of most following tasks. Tiebreaker: greatest positional weight. 
 b. In order of greatest positional weight. Tiebreaker: most following tasks. 
 c. What is the efficiency? 
 PROBLEMS 
 3. A manager wants to assign tasks to workstations as efficiently as possible and achieve an hourly 
output of four units. The department uses a working time of 56 minutes per hour. Assign the tasks 
shown in the accompanying precedence diagram (times are in minutes) to workstations using the 
following rules:
 a. In order of most following tasks. Tiebreaker: greatest positional weight. 
 b. In order of greatest positional weight. Tiebreaker: most following tasks. 
 c. What is the efficiency? 
 4. A producer of inkjet printers is planning to add a new line of printers, and you have been asked to 
balance the process, given the following task times and precedence relationships. Assume that cycle 
time is to be the minimum possible. 
 Task 
 Length 
(minutes)  
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 a 
 0.2 
 — 
 b 
 0.4 
 a 
 c 
 0.3 
 — 
 d 
 1.3 
 b, c 
 e 
 0.1 
 — 
 f 
 0.8 
 e 
 g 
 0.3 
 d, f 
 h 
 1.2 
 g 

282 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
  a. Do each of the following:
 (1) Draw the precedence diagram. 
 (2) Assign tasks to stations in order of most following tasks. Tiebreaker: greatest positional weight. 
 (3) Determine the percentage of idle time. 
 (4)  Compute the rate of output in printers per day that could be expected for this line assuming 
a 420-minute working day. 
  b. Answer these questions:
 (1)  What is the shortest cycle time that will permit use of only two workstations? Is this cycle 
time feasible? Identify the tasks you would assign to each station. 
 (2) Determine the percentage of idle time that would result if two stations were used. 
 (3) What is the daily output under this arrangement? 
 (4) Determine the output rate that would be associated with the maximum cycle time. 
 5. As part of a major plant renovation project, the industrial engineering department has been asked 
to balance a revised assembly operation to achieve an output of 240 units per eight-hour day. Task 
times and precedence relationships are as follows: 
 Task 
 Duration 
(minutes)  
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 a 
 0.2 
 — 
 b 
 0.4 
 a 
 c 
 0.2 
 b 
 d 
 0.4 
 — 
 e 
 1.2 
 d 
 f 
 1.2 
 c 
 g 
 1.0 
 e, f 
 Task 
 Length 
(minutes)  
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 a 
 0.1 
 — 
 b 
 0.2 
 a 
 c 
 0.9 
 b 
 d 
 0.6 
 c 
 e 
 0.1 
 — 
 f 
 0.2 
 d, e 
 g 
 0.4 
 f 
 h 
 0.1 
 g 
 i 
 0.2 
 h 
 j 
 0.7 
 i 
 k 
 0.3 
 j 
 l 
 0.2 
 k 
 Do each of the following:
 a. Draw the precedence diagram. 
 b. Determine the minimum cycle time, the maximum cycle time, and the calculated cycle time. 
 c. Determine the minimum number of stations needed. 
 d. Assign tasks to workstations on the basis of most following tasks. Use shortest processing time 
as a tiebreaker. If ties still exist, assume indifference in choice. 
 e. Compute the percentage of idle time for the assignment in part  d. 
 6. Twelve tasks, with times and precedence requirements as shown in the following table, are to be 
assigned to workstations using a cycle time of 1.5 minutes. Two heuristic rules will be tried: 
  
(1) greatest positional weight, and (2) most following tasks. 
  
 In each case, the tiebreaker will be shortest processing time. 
 a. Draw the precedence diagram for this line. 
 b. Assign tasks to stations under each of the two rules. 
 c. Compute the percentage of idle time for each rule. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
283
  7. For the set of tasks given below, do the following:
 a. Develop the precedence diagram. 
 b. Determine the minimum cycle time and then calculate the cycle time for a desired output of 
500 units in a seven-hour day. Why might a manager use a cycle time of 50 seconds? 
 c. Determine the minimum number of workstations for output of 500 units per day. 
 d. Balance the line using the  greatest positional weight heuristic. Break ties with the  most 
 following tasks heuristic. Use a cycle time of 50 seconds. 
 e. Calculate the percentage idle time for the line. 
 Task 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 Task 
Time 
 a 
 — 
 0.5 
 b 
 a 
 1.4 
 c 
 a 
 1.2 
 d 
 a 
 0.7 
 e 
 b, c 
 0.5 
 f 
 d 
 1.0 
 g 
 e 
 0.4 
 h 
 g 
 0.3 
 i 
 f 
 0.5 
 j 
 e, i 
 0.8 
 k 
 h, j 
 0.9 
 m 
 k 
 0.3 
 Task 
 Task Time 
(seconds)  
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 A 
 45 
 — 
 B 
 11 
 A 
 C 
  9 
 B 
 D 
 50 
 — 
 E 
 26 
 D 
 F 
 11 
 E 
 G 
 12 
 C 
 H 
 10 
 C 
 I 
  9 
 F, G, H 
 J 
 10 
 I 
 
 193 
 
  8. A shop works a 400-minute day. The manager of the shop wants an output of 200 units per day for 
the assembly line that has the elemental tasks shown in the table. Do the following:
 a. Construct the precedence diagram. 
 b. Assign tasks according to the  most following tasks rule. Break ties with the greatest positional 
weight rule. 
 c. Assign tasks according to the  greatest positional weight rule. Break ties with the most follow-
ing tasks rule. 
 d. Compute the balance delay for each rule. Which one yields the better set of assignments in this 
instance?  
  9. Arrange six departments into a 2    3 grid so that these conditions are satisfied: 1 close to 2, 5 
close to 2 and 6, 2 close to 5, and 3 not close to 1 or 2. 
 10. Using the information given in the preceding problem, develop a Muther-type grid using the letters 
A, O, and X. Assume that any pair of combinations not mentioned have an O rating. 
 11. Using the information in the following grid, determine if the department locations shown are 
appropriate. If not, modify the assignments so that the conditions are satisfied.  

284 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 12. Arrange the eight departments shown in the accompanying Muther grid into a 2    4 format.  Note: 
Department 1 must be in the location shown. 
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Department 4
Department 5
Department 6
Department 7
Department 8
X
O
A
E
O
A
O
A
A
X
A
A
A
E
A
A
O
E
I
A
A
X
E
5
4
2
8
6
1
3
7
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Department 4
Department 5
Department 6
Department 7
Department 8
E
A
U
U
X
E
A
E
E
X
A
U
A
A
A
I
O
A
X
A
X
E
X
X
A
U
A
O
1
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Department 4
Department 5
Department 6
Department 7
Department 8
Department 9
X
X
X
X
X
E
A
X
E
A
X
A
X
X
A
I
U
A
A
U
A
X
A
X
X
U
A
E
E
A
A
E
A
U
A
E
 13. Arrange the departments so they satisfy the conditions shown in the following rating grid into a 
3    3 format. Place department 5 in the lower left corner of the 3    3 grid. 

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
285
 14.  a.   Determine the placement of departments for a newly designed facility that will minimize total 
transportation costs using the data in the following tables. Assume that reverse distances are the 
same. The locations are shown in the grid. Use a cost of $1 per trip yard.  
B
E
3
D
H
C
G
F
A
1
 b. Suppose the company has revised its plans for the processes described in part  a to accom-
modate technological process changes. Determine the placement of departments that will now 
minimize total travel cost. Use the distances shown in part  a, but use the following new matrix 
of daily trips between departments. 
Location
A
Location
B
Location
C
Location
D
DISTANCE BETWEEN 
LOCATIONS (yards)
NUMBER OF TRIPS 
PER DAY BETWEEN 
DEPARTMENTS
From
To
A
B
C
D
From
To
1
2
3
4
A
—
40
80
70
1
—
10
20
80
B
—
40
50
2
—
40
90
C
—
60
3
—
55
D
—
4
—
NUMBER OF TRIPS
PER DAY BETWEEN
DEPARTMENTS
From
To
A
B
C
D
1
—
20
20
40
2
—
10
50
3
—
60
4
—
 15. Eight work centers must be arranged in an L-shaped building. The locations of centers 1 and 3 are 
assigned as shown in the accompanying diagram. Assuming transportation costs are $1 per load 
per meter, develop a suitable layout that minimizes transportation costs using the given informa-
tion. Compute the total cost. (Assume the reverse distances are the same.) 
DISTANCE (meters)
From
To
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
—
40
40
60
120
80
100
110
B
—
60
40
60
140
120
130
C
—
45
85
40
70
90
D
—
40
50
40
45
E
—
90
50
40
F
—
40
60
G
—
40
H
—
LOADS PER DAY
From
To
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
—
10
5
90
370
135
125
0
2
—
360
120
40
115
45
120
3
—
350
110
40
20
200
4
—
190
70
50
190
5
—
10
40
10
6
—
50
20
7
—
20
8
—

286 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 16. Develop a process layout that will minimize the total distance traveled by patients at a medical 
clinic, using the following information on projected departmental visits by patients and distance 
between locations. Assume a distance of 35 feet between the reception area and each potential 
location. Use the format shown. 
Reception
B
C
D
E
F
A
 17. Ten labs will be assigned to the circular layout shown. Recalling a similar layout’s congestion in 
the halls, the new lab manager has requested an assignment that will minimize traffic between 
offices. Department 1 must be at location A. Develop a suitable layout using the following 
information. 
DISTANCE BETWEEN LOCATIONS (feet)
From
To
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
—
40
80
100
120
160
B
—
40
60
80
120
C
—
20
40
80
D
—
20
40
E
—
40
F
—
TRIPS BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS (per day)
To
Reception
1
2
3
4
5
6
Reception
—
20
50
210
20
10
130
1
10
—
  0
40
110
80
50
2
40
—
0
50
40
120
3
10
  0
—
10
250
10
4
  0
—
40
90
5
10
—
20
6
30
—
NUMBER OF TRIPS PER DAY BETWEEN DEPARTMENTS
From
To
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
—
40
51
26
23
9
20
12
11
35
2
—
37
16
27
15
18
18
18
36
3
—
18
20
14
50
18
25
36
4
—
35
14
14
22
23
31
5
—
24
14
13
21
25
6
—
17
44
42
25
7
—
14
33
40
8
—
43
35
9
—
47
10
—

 
Chapter Six Process Selection and Facility Layout  
287
 Francis, Richard L., Leon F. McGinnis Jr., and John A. 
White.  Facility Layout and Location: An Analytical 
Approach. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2001. 
 Groover, Mikell P.  Automation, Production Systems, 
and Computer-Aided Manufacturing. 3rd ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007. 
 Pinto, J.  A Short History of Automation Growth. 
 JimPinto.com 
 Stephens, Matthew P., and Fred E. Meyers.  Manufac-
turing Facilities Design & Material Handling.  
5th ed. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 
2013. 
 Zijlstra, Emma, and Mark P. Mobach. ”The Influence of 
Facility Layout on Operations Explored.”  Journal of 
Facilities Management 9 (2011), pp. 127-144. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
J
I
H
G
F
E
D
C
B
Elevators
1A
 18. Rebalance the assembly line in Problem 7. This time, use the  longest operation time heuristic. 
Break ties with the  most following tasks heuristic. What is the percentage idle time for your line? 

288
 CHAP TE R 
 7 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO7.1 
Explain the importance of work design. 
 LO7.2 
Compare and contrast the two basic approaches to job design. 
 LO7.3 
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of specialization. 
 LO7.4 
Describe behavioral approaches to job design. 
 LO7.5 
Discuss the impact of working conditions on job design. 
 LO7.6 
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of time-based 
and output-based pay systems. 
 LO7.7 
Explain the purpose of methods analysis and describe how 
methods studies are performed. 
 LO7.8 
Describe four commonly used techniques for motion study. 
 LO7.9 
Define a standard time. 
 LO7.10 
Describe and compare time study methods and perform 
calculations. 
 LO7.11 
Describe work sampling and perform calculations. 
 LO7.12 
Compare stopwatch time study and work sampling. 
 Work Design and 
Measurement 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 7.1 Introduction,  289 
 7.2 Job Design,  289 
 Specialization,  290 
 Behavioral Approaches to Job Design,  291 
 Motivation,  291 
 Teams,  292 
 Ergonomics,  293 
 7.3 Quality of Work Life,  294 
 Working Conditions,  294 
 Compensation,  296 
 7.4 Methods Analysis,  299 
 7.5 Motion Study,  303 
 7.6 Work Measurement,  305 
 Stopwatch Time Study,  306 
 Standard Elemental Times,  311 
 Predetermined Time Standards,  311 
 Work Sampling,  312 
 7.7 Operations Strategy,  315 
 Case: Making Hotplates,  323 
 Supplement: Learning Curves,  325 

289
 This chapter has four major sections: job design, quality of work life, methods analysis, and work measurement. 
 As you read this chapter, note how decisions in other design areas have an impact on work design. For example,  product 
or service design decisions in large measure determine the kinds of activities workers will be involved with. Similarly,  layout 
decisions often influence work design. Process layouts tend to necessitate broader job content than product layouts. The 
 implication of these interrelationships is that it is essential to adopt a systems approach to design; decisions in one area must 
be related to the overall system. 
 7.1 INTRODUCTION  
  The importance of work design is underscored by an organization’s dependence on 
human efforts (i.e., work) to accomplish its goals. Furthermore, many of the topics 
in this chapter are especially relevant for productivity improvement and continuous 
improvement. 
 7.2 JOB DESIGN  
 Job design  involves specifying the content and methods of jobs. Job designers focus 
on  what  will be done in a job,  who  will do the job,  how  the job will be done, and  where
the job will be done. The objectives of job design include productivity, safety, and 
quality of work life. 
 Current practice in job design contains elements of two basic schools of thought. 
One might be called the  efficiency  school because it emphasizes a systematic, logical 
approach to job design; the other is called the  behavioral school because it emphasizes 
satisfaction of wants and needs. 
 The efficiency approach, a refinement of Frederick Winslow Taylor’s scientific 
management concepts, received considerable emphasis in the past. The behavioral 
LO7.1 Explain the importance 
of work design.
LO7.2 Compare and contrast 
the two basic approaches to 
job design.
 Job design  The act of specify-
ing the contents and methods of 
jobs. 

290 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
approach followed and has continued to make inroads into many aspects of job design. It is 
noteworthy that specialization is a primary issue of disagreement between the efficiency and 
behavioral approaches. 
 Specialization  
 The term   specialization  describes jobs that have a very narrow scope. Examples range from 
assembly lines to medical specialties. College professors often specialize in teaching certain 
courses, some auto mechanics specialize in transmission repair, and some bakers specialize in 
wedding cakes. The main rationale for specialization is the ability to concentrate one’s efforts 
and thereby become proficient at that type of work. 
 Sometimes the amount of knowledge or training required of a specialist and the complex-
ity of the work suggest that individuals who choose such work are very happy with their jobs. 
This seems to be especially true in the “professions” (e.g., doctors, lawyers, professors). At 
the other end of the scale are assembly-line workers, who are also specialists, although much 
less glamorous. The advantage of these highly specialized jobs is that they yield high produc-
tivity and relatively low unit costs, and they are largely responsible for the high standard of 
living that exists today in industrialized nations. 
 Unfortunately, many of the lower-level jobs can be described as monotonous or down-
right boring, and are the source of much of the dissatisfaction among many industrial 
workers. While some workers undoubtedly prefer a job with limited requirements and 
responsibility for making decisions, others are not capable of handling jobs with greater 
scopes. Nonetheless, many workers are frustrated, and this manifests itself in turnover 
and absenteeism. In the automotive industry, for example, absenteeism runs as high as 
20 percent. Workers may also take out their frustrations through disruptive tactics such as 
deliberate slowdowns. 
 The seriousness of these problems caused job designers and others to seek ways of alle-
viating them. Some of those approaches are discussed in the following sections. Before we 
turn to them, note that the advantages and disadvantages of specialization are summarized in 
 Table 7.1 . 
 Specialization  Work that 
 concentrates on some aspect of a 
product or service.  
LO7.3 Discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of 
specialization.
 Correct positioning of 
equipment and tools can help 
reduce fatigue and increase 
employee productivity. 
Here, an ergonomist from 
Humantech Inc., in Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, obtains workstation 
measurements to ensure proper 
height and accessibility for 
employees. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
291
 Behavioral Approaches to Job Design  
 In an effort to make jobs more interesting and meaningful, job designers frequently consider 
job enlargement, job rotation, job enrichment, and increased use of mechanization. 
 Job enlargement means giving a worker a larger portion of the total task. This constitutes 
 horizontal loading —the additional work is on the same level of skill and responsibility as the 
original job. The goal is to make the job more interesting by increasing the variety of skills 
required and by providing the worker with a more recognizable contribution to the overall 
output. For example, a production worker’s job might be expanded so that he or she is respon-
sible for a  sequence of activities instead of only one activity. 
 Job rotation  means having workers periodically exchange jobs. A firm can use this 
approach to avoid having one or a few employees stuck in monotonous jobs. It works best 
when workers can be transferred to more interesting jobs; there is little advantage in hav-
ing workers exchange one boring job for another. Job rotation allows workers to broaden 
their learning experience and enables them to fill in for others in the event of sickness or 
absenteeism. 
 Job enrichment  involves an increase in the level of responsibility for planning and coor-
dination tasks. It is sometimes referred to as  vertical loading.  An example of this is to have 
stock clerks in supermarkets handle reordering of goods, thus increasing their responsibilities. 
The job enrichment approach focuses on the motivating potential of worker satisfaction. 
 Job enlargement and job enrichment are also used in  lean operations  (covered in 
 Chapter 14), where workers are cross-trained to be able to perform a wider variety of tasks 
and given more authority to manage their jobs. 
 The importance of these approaches to job design is that they have the potential to increase 
the motivational power of jobs by increasing worker satisfaction through improvement in the 
 quality of work life. 
 Motivation 
 Motivation is a key factor in many aspects of work life. Not only can it influence quality and 
productivity, it also contributes to the work environment. People work for a variety of reasons 
in addition to compensation. Other reasons include socialization, self-actualization, status, 
the physiological aspects of work, and a sense of purpose and accomplishment. Awareness 
of these factors can help management to develop a motivational framework that encourages 
workers to respond in a positive manner to the goals of the organization. A detailed discussion 
of motivation is beyond the scope of this book, but its importance to work design should be 
obvious. 
 Another factor that influences motivation, productivity, and employee–management 
 relations is  trust.  In an ideal work environment, there is a high level of trust between workers 
LO7.4 Describe behavioral 
approaches to job design.
 Job enlargement  Giving a 
worker a larger portion of the 
total task, by horizontal loading. 
 Job rotation  Workers periodi-
cally exchange jobs.  
 Job enrichment  Increasing 
responsibility for planning and 
coordination tasks, by vertical 
loading. 
 TABLE 7.1 
 Major advantages and 
disadvantages of specialization 
in business 
 Advantages 
 For management:
 1. Simplifies training 
 2. High productivity 
 3. Low wage costs 
 For employees:
 1. Low education and skill requirements 
 2. Minimum responsibilities 
 3. Little mental effort needed 
 Disadvantages 
 For management:
 1. Difficult to motivate quality 
 2. Worker dissatisfaction, possibly resulting in 
absenteeism, high turnover, disruptive tactics, 
poor attention to quality 
 For employees:
 1. Monotonous work 
 2. Limited opportunities for advancement 
 3. Little control over work 
 4. Little opportunity for self-fulfillment 

292 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
and managers. When managers trust employees, there is a greater tendency to give employees 
added responsibilities. When employees trust management, they are more likely to respond 
positively. Conversely, when they do not trust management, they are more likely to respond in 
less desirable ways. 
 Teams 
 The efforts of business organizations to become more productive, competitive, and customer-
oriented have caused them to rethink how work is accomplished. Significant changes in the 
structure of some work environments have been the increasing use of teams and the way 
workers are paid, particularly in lean production systems. 
  In the past, nonroutine job assignments, such as dealing with customer complaints or 
improving a process, were typically given to one individual or to several individuals who 
reported to the same manager. More recently, nonroutine assignments are being given to 
teams who develop and implement solutions to problems. 
 There are a number of different forms of teams. One is a short-term team formed to col-
laborate on a topic such as quality improvement, product or service design, or solving a prob-
lem. Team members may be drawn from the same functional area or from several functional 
areas, depending on the scope of the problem. Other teams are more long term. One form of 
long-term team that is increasingly being used, especially in lean production settings, is the 
 self-directed team. 
 Self-directed teams,  sometimes referred to as  self-managed teams,  are designed to 
achieve a higher level of teamwork and employee involvement. Although such teams are 
not given absolute authority to make all decisions, they are typically empowered to make 
changes in the work processes under their control. The underlying concept is that the work-
ers, who are close to the process and have the best knowledge of it, are better suited than 
management to make the most effective changes to improve the process. Moreover, because 
they have a vested interest and personal involvement in the changes, they tend to work 
harder to ensure that the desired results are achieved than they would if management had 
implemented the changes. For these teams to function properly, team members must be 
trained in quality, process improvement, and teamwork. Self-directed teams have a number 
of benefits. One is that fewer managers are necessary; very often one manager can handle 
 Self-directed teams  Groups 
empowered to make certain 
changes in their work processes.  
At the Michigan International 
Speedway pit stop, the Toyota 
team changes four tires, fills 
the gas tank, and does a 
maintenance check in under 
15 seconds. This is done 
4-6 times during a 400-mile 
NASCAR race.
 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
293
several teams. Also, self-directed teams can provide improved responsiveness to problems, 
they have a personal stake in making the process work, and they require less time to imple-
ment improvements. 
 Generally, the benefits of teams include higher quality, higher productivity, and greater 
worker satisfaction. Moreover, higher levels of employee satisfaction can lead to less turn-
over and absenteeism, resulting in lower costs to train new workers and less need to fill in for 
absent employees. This does not mean that organizations will have no difficulties in applying 
the team concept. Managers, particularly middle managers, often feel threatened as teams 
assume more of the traditional functions of managers. 
 Moreover, among the leading problems of teams are conflicts between team members, 
which can have a detrimental impact on the effectiveness of a team. 
 Expert Robert Bacal has a list of requirements for successful team building: 1  
 1. 
Clearly stated and commonly held vision and goals. 
 2. 
Talent and skills required to meet goals. 
 3. 
Clear understanding of team members’ roles and functions. 
 4. 
Efficient and shared understanding of procedures and norms. 
 5. 
Effective and skilled interpersonal relations. 
 6. 
A system of reinforcement and celebration. 
 7. 
Clear understanding of the team’s relationship to the greater organization. 
 Ergonomics 
 Ergonomics  (or human factors) is the scientific discipline concerned with the understand-
ing of interactions among humans and other elements of a system, and the profession that 
applies theory, principles, data and methods to design in order to optimize human well-being 
and overall system performance. “Ergonomists contribute to the design and evaluation of 
tasks, jobs, products, environments and systems in order to make them compatible with the 
needs, abilities and limitations of people.”  2   In the work environment, ergonomics also helps to 
increase productivity by reducing worker discomfort and fatigue. 
 The International Ergonomics Association organizes ergonomics into three domains: 
physical (e.g., repetitive movements, layout, health, and safety); cognitive (mental workload, 
decision making, human–computer interaction, and work stress); and organizational (e.g., 
communication, teamwork, work design, and telework). 3  
 Many examples of ergonomics applications can be found in operations management. In the 
early 1900s, Frederick Winslow Taylor, known as the father of scientific management, found 
that the amount of coal that workers could shovel could be increased substantially by reduc-
ing the size and weight of the shovels. Frank and Lillian Gilbreth expanded Taylor’s work, 
developing a set of motion study principles intended to improve worker efficiency and reduce 
injury and fatigue. Over the years since then, technological changes have broadened the scope 
of ergonomics, as hand–eye coordination and decision making became more important in 
the workplace. More recently, the increasing level of human–computer interfacing has again 
broadened the scope of the field of ergonomics, not only in job design, but also in electronics 
product design. 
 Poor posture can lead to fatigue, low productivity, and injuries to the back, neck, and 
arm.   Good posture can help avoid or minimize these problems.  Figure 7.1  illustrates good 
posture when using a computer. 
 Ergonomics  Incorporation of 
human factors in the design of 
the workplace.  
 1 Robert Bacal, “The Six Deadly Sins of Team-Building,”  www.performance-appraisals.org . 
 2 The International Ergonomics Association ( www.iea.cc ). 
 3 Ibid. 
4Ibid.

294 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 7.3 QUALITY OF WORK LIFE 
  People work for a variety of reasons. Generally people work to earn a living. Also they may 
be seeking self-realization, status, physical and mental stimulation, and socialization. Quality 
of work life affects not only workers’ overall sense of well-being and contentment, but also 
worker productivity. Quality of work life has several key aspects. Getting along well with 
coworkers and having good managers can contribute greatly to the quality of work life. Lead-
ership style is particularly important. Also important are working conditions and compensa-
tion, which are addressed here. 
 Working Conditions  
 Working conditions are an important aspect of job design. Physical factors such as tempera-
ture, humidity, ventilation, illumination, and noise can have a significant impact on worker 
performance in terms of productivity, quality of output, and accidents. In many instances, 
government regulations apply. 
 Temperature and Humidity.  Although human beings can function under a fairly wide 
range of temperatures and humidity, work performance tends to be adversely affected if tem-
peratures or humidities are outside a very narrow  comfort band.  That comfort band depends 
on how strenuous the work is; the more strenuous the work, the lower the comfort range. 
 Ventilation. Unpleasant and noxious odors can be distracting and dangerous to workers. 
Moreover, unless smoke and dust are periodically removed, the air can quickly become stale 
and annoying. 
 Illumination. The amount of illumination required depends largely on the type of work 
being performed; the more detailed the work, the higher the level of illumination needed for 
adequate performance. Other important considerations are the amount of glare and contrast. 
LO7.5 Discuss the impact 
of working conditions on job 
design.
 FIGURE 7.1 
 Components of a comfortable 
workstation 
 Source:  Copyright 2007 Bennett, Coleman & 
Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Viewing Distance
Arms &
Wrist Angle
Mouse
Monitor
Height
Monitor
Angle
Document
Holder
Seat back
Angle
Seat
Height
Keyboard
Height

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
295
From a safety standpoint, good lighting in halls, stairways, and other dangerous points is 
important. However, because illumination is expensive, high illumination in all areas is not 
generally desirable. 
 Noise and Vibrations.  Noise is unwanted sound. It is caused by both equipment and 
humans. Noise can be annoying or distracting, leading to errors and accidents. It also can 
damage or impair hearing if it is loud enough.  Figure 7.2  illustrates loudness levels of some 
typical sounds. 
 Vibrations can be a factor in job design even without a noise component, so merely elimi-
nating sound may not be sufficient in every case. Vibrations can come from tools, machines, 
vehicles, human activity, air-conditioning systems, pumps, and other sources. Corrective 
measures include padding, stabilizers, shock absorbers, cushioning, and rubber mountings. 
 Work Time and Work Breaks.  Reasonable (and sometimes flexible) work hours can provide 
a sense of freedom and control over one’s work. This is useful in situations where the emphasis 
is on completing work on a timely basis and meeting performance objectives rather than being 
“on duty” for a given time interval, as is the case for most retail and manufacturing operations. 
 Work breaks are also important. Long work intervals tend to generate boredom and fatigue. 
Productivity and quality can both deteriorate. Similarly, periodic vacation breaks can give 
workers something to look forward to, a change of pace, and a chance to recharge themselves.  
 Occupational Health Care.  Good worker health contributes to productivity, minimizes 
health care costs, and enhances workers’ sense of well-being. Many organizations have exer-
cise and healthy-eating programs designed to improve or maintain employees’ fitness and 
general health. 
 Safety. Worker safety is one of the most basic issues in job design. This area needs constant 
attention from management, employees, and designers. Workers cannot be effectively moti-
vated if they feel they are in physical danger. 
 From an employer standpoint, accidents are undesirable because they are expensive (insur-
ance and compensation); they usually involve damage to equipment and/or products; they 
require hiring, training, and makeup work; and they generally interrupt work. From a worker 
standpoint, accidents mean physical suffering, mental anguish, potential loss of earnings, and 
disruption of the work routine. 
 The two basic causes of accidents are worker  carelessness  and accident  hazards.  Under the 
heading of carelessness come unsafe acts. Examples include failing to use protective equip-
ment, overriding safety controls (e.g., taping control buttons down), disregarding safety pro-
cedures, using tools and equipment improperly, and failing to use reasonable caution in danger 
zones. Unsafe conditions include unprotected pulleys, chains, material-handling equipment, 
machinery, and so on. Also, poorly lit walkways, stairs, and loading docks constitute haz-
ards. Toxic wastes, gases and vapors, and radiation hazards must be contained. Protection 
against hazards involves use of proper lighting, clearly marked danger zones, use of protective 
equipment (hardhats, goggles, earmuffs, gloves, heavy shoes and clothing), safety devices 
 FIGURE 7.2 
 Decibel values of typical 
sounds(db) 
 Source:  From Benjamin W. Niebel, 
 Motion and Time Study, 8th ed. Copyright 
© Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission 
of McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., p. 248. 
Threshold
of hearing 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
150
160
Very
quiet
Quiet
Intrusive
Very annoying
Painfully
loud
Whisper
Common
sounds
Bedroom
Air
conditioning
unit
Train
Large
propeller
aircraft
Jet
aircraft
Grinder

296 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
(machine guards, dual control switches that require an operator to use both hands), emergency 
equipment (emergency showers, fire extinguishers, fire escapes), and thorough instruction in 
safety procedures and use of regular and emergency equipment. Housekeeping (clean floors, 
open aisles, waste removal) is another important safety factor. 
 An effective program of safety and accident control requires the cooperation of both work-
ers and management. Workers must be trained in proper procedures and attitudes, and they 
can contribute to a reduction in hazards by pointing out hazards to management. Management 
must enforce safety procedures and the use of safety equipment. If supervisors allow work-
ers to ignore safety procedures or look the other way when they see violations, workers will 
be less likely to take proper precautions. Some firms use contests that compare departmental 
safety records. However, accidents cannot be completely eliminated, and a freak accident may 
seriously affect worker morale and might even contribute to additional accidents. Posters can 
be effective, particularly if they communicate in specific terms how to avoid accidents. For 
example, the admonition “Be careful” is not nearly as effective as “Wear hardhats,” “Walk, 
don’t run,” or “Hold on to rail.” 
 The enactment of the Occupational Safety and Health Act in 1970, and the creation of 
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration   (OSHA),  emphasized the importance 
of safety considerations in systems design. The law was intended to ensure that workers 
in all organizations have healthy and safe working conditions. It provides specific safety 
regulations with inspectors to see that they are adhered to. Inspections are carried out both at 
random and to investigate complaints of unsafe conditions. OSHA officials are empowered 
to issue warnings, to impose fines, and even to invoke court-ordered shutdowns for unsafe 
conditions. 
 OSHA must be regarded as a major influence on operations management decisions in all 
areas relating to worker safety. OSHA has promoted the welfare and safety of workers in 
its role as a catalyst, spurring companies to make changes that they knew were needed but 
“hadn’t gotten around to making.” 
 Ethical Issues.  Ethical issues affect operations through work methods, working conditions 
and employee safety, accurate record keeping, unbiased performance appraisals, fair compen-
sation, and opportunities for advancement. 
 Compensation 
 Compensation is a significant issue for the design of work systems. It is important for orga-
nizations to develop suitable compensation plans for their employees. If wages are too low, 
organizations may find it difficult to attract and hold competent workers and managers. If 
wages are too high, the increased costs may result in lower profits, or may force the orga-
nization to increase its prices, which might adversely affect demand for the organization’s 
products or services. 
 Organizations use a variety of approaches to compensate employees, including  time-based 
systems, output-based systems,  and  knowledge-based systems.  Time-based systems, also 
known as  hourly  and  measured daywork  systems, compensate employees for the time the 
employee has worked during a pay period. Salaried workers also represent a form of time-
based compensation.   Output-based (incentive) systems  compensate employees accord-
ing to the amount of output they produce during a pay period, thereby tying pay directly to 
performance. 
 Time-based systems are more widely used than incentive systems, particularly for office, 
administrative, and managerial employees, but also for blue-collar workers. One reason for 
this is that computation of wages is straightforward and managers can readily estimate labor 
costs for a given employee level. Employees often prefer time-based systems because the pay 
is steady and they know how much compensation they will receive for each pay period. In 
addition, employees may resent the pressures of an output-based system. 
 Another reason for using time-based systems is that many jobs do not lend themselves to 
the use of incentives. In some cases, it may be difficult or impossible to measure output. For 
example, jobs that require creative or mental work cannot be easily measured on an output 
 OSHA  Occupational Safety 
andHealth Administration, 
 created by the Occupational 
Safety and Health Act of 1970.  
 Time-based system  Com-
pensation based on time an 
employee has worked during a 
pay period. 
 Output-based (incentive) 
system  Compensation based on 
amount of output an employee 
produced during a pay period.  

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
297
basis. Other jobs may include irregular activities or have so many different forms of output 
that measuring output and determining pay are fairly complex. In the case of assembly lines, 
the use of  individual  incentives could disrupt the even flow of work; however,  group incen-
tives are sometimes used successfully in such cases. Finally,  quality  considerations may be 
as important as  quantity  considerations. In health care, for example, emphasis is generally 
placed on both the quality of patient care and the number of patients processed. 
 On the other hand, situations exist where incentives are desirable. Incentives reward work-
ers for their output, presumably causing some workers to produce more than they might under 
a time-based system. The advantage is that certain (fixed) costs do not vary with increases in 
output, so the overall cost per unit decreases if output increases. Workers may prefer incen-
tive systems because they see a relationship between their efforts and their pay: An incentive 
system presents an opportunity for them to earn more money. 
 On the negative side, incentive systems involve a considerable amount of paperwork, com-
putation of wages is more difficult than under time-based systems, output has to be measured 
and standards set, cost-of-living increases are difficult to incorporate into incentive plans, and 
contingency arrangements for unavoidable delays have to be developed. 
  Table 7.2  lists the main advantages and disadvantages of time-based and output-based plans.  
 In order to obtain maximum benefit from an incentive plan, the plan should be accurate, 
easy to understand and apply, fair, and consistent. In addition, there should be an obvious 
relationship between effort and reward, and no limit on earnings. 
 Incentive systems may focus on the output of each individual or a group. 
 Individual Incentive Plans.   Individual incentive plans take a variety of forms. The sim-
plest plan is  straight piecework.  Under this plan, a worker’s pay is a direct linear function 
of his or her output. In the past, piecework plans were fairly popular. Now minimum wage 
legislation makes them somewhat impractical. Even so, many of the plans currently in use 
represent variations of the straight piecework plan. They typically incorporate a base rate that 
serves as a floor: Workers are guaranteed that amount as a minimum, regardless of output. 
The base rate is tied to an output standard; a worker who produces less than the standard will 
be paid at the base rate. This protects workers from pay loss due to delays, breakdowns, and 
similar problems. In most cases, incentives are paid for output above standard, and the pay is 
referred to as a  bonus. 
 People work for a variety 
of reasons besides 
compensation. The work 
environment at Google makes 
it an appealing place to work. 
Google provides employees 
with a number of perks, 
including massage rooms, a 
music room, cafeteria, arcade 
games, and other benefits. 
The office in Dublin is the 
technology hub in Europe. 

298 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
which is then divided among eligible employees. 
Division is typically prorated according to the base 
salary of each participant. Profit sharing is generally done on an annual 
basis. At some firms profit sharing may be directly contributed as pre-
tax dollars into a retirement program, such as a 401K program. 
 Profit plans work best at more established firms with relatively 
steady earnings. The criteria for the profit plan must be carefully defined 
in advance. 
 Profit Plans Don’t Always Work 
 The advantages of a profit-sharing plan include: It pulls people together 
since everyone is on the same plan; it gets people to focus on profit-
ability; and its cost to the company goes up and down in sync with 
pre-tax earnings. 
 The disadvantages include: It echoes the base salary; it does not 
take into consideration performance during the year; it is focused on a 
single objective. 
 For smaller companies with erratic earnings, profit-sharing plans 
can frustrate and irritate employees by creating expectations that are 
not fulfilled each year. I switched away from a profit-based incentive 
plan because I found that a small payout level, following a year of weak 
profitability, made a low morale situation even worse. 
 “The right incentive plan properly implemented can drive your business 
ahead like a rocket ship. But if expectations increase faster than actual 
payouts—watch out for trouble!” 
 Incentive Plans Pull Companies Together! 
 Years ago the only employees offered incentive pay were sales per-
sonnel, piece workers, and top executives. Today most large corpora-
tions, and many smaller firms, offer an incentive package to all of their 
employees. 
 Some kind of incentive pay is an important part of any compen-
sation plan. Incentive pay shows appreciation and creates a sense of 
participation in the company’s well-being that straight salary dollars, 
no matter how large, don’t convey. A well-designed incentive-pay plan 
can also help pull people together, help point them in the direction you 
want them to go, and give that extra push that every company needs in 
today’s competitive environment. 
 Profit-Sharing Plans Are Common 
 Profit-sharing plans are probably the most widespread incentive-pay 
programs at larger corporations. They are generally company-wide and 
made available at least to all full-time employees. Usually the company 
will contribute a small percentage of its pre-tax profitability to a pool, 
 READING  
 Choosing Incentive Plans 
lly done on an annual
s.
se 
(continued)
 Management 
 Worker 
TIME-BASED 
Advantages 
 1. Stable labor costs 
 1. Stable pay 
 2. Easy to administer
3. Simple to compute pay 
 2. Less pressure to produce than 
under output system 
 4. Stable output 
Disadvantages 
 1. No incentive for workers to increase 
output 
 1. Extra efforts not rewarded 
OUTPUT-BASED 
Advantages 
 1. Lower cost per unit 
 1. Pay related to efforts 
 2. Greater output 
 2. Opportunity to earn more 
Disadvantages 
 1. Wage computation more difficult 
 1. Pay fluctuates 
 2. Need to measure output
3. Quality may suffer
4. Difficult to incorporate wage 
increases
5. Increased problems with scheduling 
 2. Workers may be penalized because 
of factors beyond their control 
(e.g., machine breakdown) 
 TABLE 7.2 
 Comparison of time-based and 
output-based pay systems 
LO7.6 Compare the advan-
tages and disadvantages of 
time-based and output-based 
pay systems.
 Group Incentive Plans.  A variety of group incentive plans, which stress sharing of pro-
ductivity gains with employees, are in use. Some focus exclusively on output, while others 
reward employees for output and for reductions in material and other costs. 
 One form of group incentive is the  team approach,  which many companies are now using 
for problem solving and continuous improvement. The emphasis is on  team,  not  individual,
performance. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
299
 Knowledge-Based Pay Systems.  As companies shift toward lean production, a number 
of changes have had a direct impact on the work environment. One is that many of the buffers 
that previously existed are gone. Another is that fewer managers are present. Still another is 
increased emphasis on quality, productivity, and flexibility. Consequently, workers who can 
perform a variety of tasks are particularly valuable. Organizations are increasingly recogniz-
ing this, and they are setting up pay systems to reward workers who undergo training that 
increases their skill levels. This is sometimes referred to as   knowledge-based pay.  It is a 
portion of a worker’s pay that is based on the knowledge and skill that the worker possesses. 
Knowledge-based pay has three dimensions:  Horizontal skills  reflect the variety of tasks the 
worker is capable of performing;  vertical skills  reflect managerial tasks the worker is capable 
of; and  depth skills reflect quality and productivity results. 
 Management Compensation.  Many organizations that traditionally rewarded managers 
and senior executives on the basis of  output  are now seriously reconsidering that approach. 
With the new emphasis on customer service and quality, reward systems are being restruc-
tured to reflect new dimensions of performance. In addition, executive pay in many com-
panies is being more closely tied to the success of the company or division that executive is 
responsible for. Even so, there have been news reports of companies increasing the compensa-
tion of top executives even as workers were being laid off and the company was losing large 
amounts of money! 
 Recent Trends.  Many organizations are moving toward compensation systems that empha-
size flexibility and performance objectives, with variable pay based on performance. Some 
are using profit-sharing plans, or bonuses based on achieving profit or cost goals. And the 
increasing cost of employee health benefits is causing organizations to rethink their overall 
compensation packages. Some are placing more emphasis on quality of work life. An ideal 
compensation package is one that balances motivation, profitability, and retention of good 
employees. 
 7.4 METHODS ANALYSIS  
 One of the techniques used by self-directed teams and work analysts is   methods analysis, 
which focuses on how a job is done. Job design often begins with an analysis of the overall 
operation. It then moves from general to specific details of the job, concentrating on arrange-
ment of the workplace and movements of materials and/or workers. Methods analysis can be 
a good source of productivity improvements. 
 The need for methods analysis can come from a number of different sources:
   Changes in tools and equipment, changes in product design or introduction of new prod-
ucts, changes in materials or procedures, government regulations or contractual agreements, 
and incidents such as accidents and quality problems. 
 Knowledge-based pay  A pay 
system used by organizations 
to reward workers who undergo 
training that increases their 
skills. 
LO7.7 Explain the purpose of 
methods analysis and describe 
how methods studies are 
performed.
 Methods analysis  Analyzing 
how a job is done. 
significant one-time payout if an employee has an extraordinary accom-
plishment that may not be repeated in future years. 
 The disadvantages include: The payout is subjective, and employees 
may feel that they deserve a higher pay-out; it can be divisive when, 
all too often, a top performer tells other people what a big bonus they 
got; employees may focus more on “looking good” than on working to 
increase corporate profits. 
 Source: Bob Adams, “Streetwise Business Tips,”  www.businesstown.com . 
 Incentive Programs Award Achievers 
 Last year we switched to an individual bonus incentive program, where 
the annual payout is determined by a subjective evaluation of each per-
son’s performance. 
 The advantages are: Unlike a profit-sharing plan, we can dramati-
cally differentiate the payout given to a star performer versus a weaker 
one; we can differentiate between an individual’s performance and 
the company’s performance; and there is complete flexibility for a 

300 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Methods analysis is done for both existing jobs and new jobs. For a new job it is needed 
to establish a method. For an existing job the procedure usually is to have the analyst observe 
the job as it is currently being performed and then devise improvements. For a new job, the 
analyst must rely on a job description and an ability to visualize the operation. 
 The basic procedure in methods analysis is as follows:
 1. 
Identify the operation to be studied, and gather all pertinent facts about tools, equip-
ment, materials, and so on. 
 2. 
For existing jobs, discuss the job with the operator and supervisor to get their input. 
 3. 
Study and document the present method of an existing job using process charts. For new 
jobs, develop charts based on information about the activities involved. 
 4. 
Analyze the job. 
 5. 
Propose new methods. 
 6. 
Install the new methods. 
 7. 
Follow up implementation to assure that improvements have been achieved.  
 Selecting an Operation to Study.  Sometimes a foreman or supervisor will request that 
a certain operation be studied. At other times, methods analysis will be part of an overall pro-
gram to increase productivity and reduce costs. Some general guidelines for selecting a job to 
study are to consider jobs that
 1. 
Have a high labor content. 
 2. 
Are done frequently. 
 3. 
Are unsafe, tiring, unpleasant, and/or noisy. 
 4. 
Are designated as problems (e.g., quality problems, processing bottlenecks). 
 Documenting the Current Method.  Use charts, graphs, and verbal descriptions of the 
way the job is now being performed. This will provide a good understanding of the job and 
serve as a basis of comparison against which revisions can be judged. 
 
 The most common ergonomic risk factors are awkward postures, excessive force for lifting, pushing, pulling, and gripping, and 
repetition involving the same group of muscles. On the left, the worker was using a pistol grip driver in a vertical application which was 
placing her into a poor shoulder posture. She was experiencing increasing pain in her right shoulder. On the right, by modifying the 
tools being used, the worker is now into a good shoulder posture. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
301
 Analyzing the Job and Proposing New Methods.  Job analysis requires careful 
thought about the what, why, when, where, and who of the job. Often, simply going through 
these questions will clarify the review process by encouraging the analyst to take a devil’s 
advocate attitude toward both present and proposed methods. 
 Analyzing and improving methods is facilitated by the use of various charts such as  flow 
process charts and  worker-machine charts. 
 Flow process charts  are used to review and critically examine the overall sequence of an 
operation by focusing on the movements of the operator or the flow of materials. These charts 
are helpful in identifying nonproductive parts of the process (e.g., delays, temporary stor-
ages, distances traveled).  Figure 7.3 describes the symbols used in constructing a flow process 
chart, and  Figure 7.4 illustrates a flow process chart.  
 The uses for flow process charts include studying the flow of material through a depart-
ment, studying the sequence that documents or forms take, analyzing movement and care of 
surgical patients, studying layout of department and grocery stores, and handling mail. 
 Flow process chart  Chart 
used to examine the overall 
sequence of an operation by 
focusing on movements of the 
operator or flow of materials.  
 FIGURE 7.3 
 Process chart symbols 
 Source:  Adapted from Benjamin W. Niebel, 
 Motion and Time Study, 8th ed. Copyright © 
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission of 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., p. 35. 
1
2 3 4 5
7
6
Operation
A large circle indi-
cates an operation
such as
Transportation
An arrow indicates
a transportation,
such as
Storage
A triangle indicates
a storage,
such as
Delay
A large capital D
indicates a delay,
such as
Inspection
A square indicates
an inspection,
such as
Drive nail
Move material by cart 
Mix
Computer/word 
processing
Move material by
conveyor 
Move material by
carrying (messenger)
Raw material in
bulk storage 
Finished stock
stacked on pallets 
Protective filing
of documents 
Wait for elevator 
Material in truck
or on floor at bench
waiting to be processed 
Papers waiting
to be filed 
Read steam gauge
on boiler
Examine printed form
for information
Examine material for
quality or quantity
Rules and Regulations
1. Obey all rules and
    respect supervisor.
2. Work hard at all times
3. No loafing on the job
    unless approved by
    your supervisor.
4. Follow all previous
    rules if possible.
HOT
WARM
COLD
DANGER

302 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Experienced analysts usually develop a checklist of questions they ask themselves to gen-
erate ideas for improvements. The following are some representative questions:
 1. 
Why is there a delay or storage at this point? 
 2. 
How can travel distances be shortened or avoided? 
 3. 
Can materials handling be reduced? 
 4. 
Would a rearrangement of the workplace result in greater efficiency? 
 5. 
Can similar activities be grouped? 
 6. 
Would the use of additional or improved equipment be helpful? 
 7. 
Does the worker have any ideas for improvements? 
 A  worker-machine chart  is helpful in visualizing the portions of a work cycle during 
which an operator and equipment are busy or idle. The analyst can easily see when the 
operator and machine are working independently and when their work overlaps or is inter-
dependent. One use of this type of chart is to determine how many machines or how much 
equipment the operator can manage.  Figure 7.5  presents an example of a worker-machine 
chart, where the “worker” is actually a customer weighing a purchase in the bulk-foods 
section of a supermarket. Among other things, the chart highlights worker and machine 
utilization.    
 Installing the Improved Method.  Successful implementation of proposed method 
changes requires convincing management of the desirability of the new method and obtaining 
the cooperation of workers. If workers have been consulted throughout the process and have 
made suggestions that are incorporated in the proposed changes, this part of the task will be 
considerably easier than if the analyst has assumed sole responsibility for the development of 
the proposal. 
 If the proposed method constitutes a major change from the way the job has been per-
formed in the past, workers may have to undergo a certain amount of retraining, and full 
implementation may take some time to achieve. 
 The Follow-Up.  In order to ensure that changes have been made and that the proposed 
method is functioning as expected, the analyst should review the operation after a reasonable 
period and consult again with the operator. 
 Worker-machine chart  Chart 
used to determine portions of 
a work cycle during which an 
operator and equipment are busy 
or idle. 
 FIGURE 7.4 
 Format of a flow process chart 
 Source:  Elias M. Awad,  Systems Analysis 
and Design, 4th ed. Copyright © 1985 by 
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission of 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., p. 113. 
Requisition made out by department head
Put in “pick-up” basket
To accounting department
Account and signature verified
Amount approved by treasurer
Amount counted by cashier
Amount recorded by bookkeeper
Petty cash sealed in envelope
Petty cash carried to department
Petty cash checked against requisition
Receipt signed
Petty cash stored in safety box
Details of method
Requisition of petty cash
ANALYST
D. Kolb
PAGE
1 of 2
Operation
Movement
Inspection
Delay
Storage
FLOW PROCESS CHART
Job  _______________________

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
303
 7.5 MOTION STUDY  
 Motion study  is the systematic study of the human motions used to perform an operation. 
The purpose is to eliminate unnecessary motions and to identify the best sequence of motions 
for maximum efficiency. Hence, motion study can be an important avenue for productivity 
improvements. Present practice evolved from the work of Frank Gilbreth, who originated the 
concepts in the bricklaying trade in the early 20th century. Through the use of motion study 
techniques, Gilbreth is generally credited with increasing the average number of bricks laid 
per hour by a factor of 3, even though he was not a bricklayer by trade. When you stop to 
realize that bricklaying had been carried on for centuries, Gilbreth’s accomplishment is even 
more remarkable. 
 There are a number of different techniques that motion study analysts can use to develop 
efficient procedures. The most-used techniques are the following:
 1. 
Motion study principles. 
 2. 
Analysis of therbligs. 
 3. 
Micromotion study. 
 4. 
Charts. 
 Gilbreth’s work laid the foundation for the development of   motion study principles, 
which are guidelines for designing motion-efficient work procedures. The guidelines are 
divided into three categories: principles for use of the body, principles for arrangement of 
the workplace, and principles for the design of tools and equipment.  Table 7.3  lists some 
examples of the principles. 
 In developing work methods that are motion efficient, the analyst tries to
 1. 
Eliminate unnecessary motions. 
 2. 
Combine activities. 
 3. 
Reduce fatigue. 
 4. 
Improve the arrangement of the workplace. 
 5. 
Improve the design of tools and equipment. 
LO7.8 Describe four com-
monly used techniques for 
motion study.
 Motion study  Systematic 
study of the human motions used 
to perform an operation. 
 Motion study principles  
Guidelines for designing motion-
efficient work procedures. 
 FIGURE 7.5 
 Worker-machine chart 
1
2
3
4
5
Step
Product:   Bulk Food
Process:    Weigh/price
Operator:   Customer
Charted by:   R.G.
Customer
Time
(seconds)
Machine
Customer places
on scale
Enters product code
Obtains price sticker
and removes bag
Places price sticker
on bag
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Calculates and displays
total price. Dispenses
price sticker.
Summary
Customer
Time
(seconds)     %
Machine
Time
(seconds)     %
Work
Idle
7
1
87.5
12.5
1
7
12.5
87.5

304 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Therbligs  are basic elemental motions. The term  therblig  is Gilbreth spelled back-
ward (except for the  th ). The approach is to break jobs down into basic elements and base 
improvements on an analysis of these basic elements by eliminating, combining, or rear-
ranging them. 
 Although a complete description of therbligs is outside the scope of this text, a list of some 
common ones will illustrate the nature of these basic elemental motions:
 Search implies hunting for an item with the hands and/or the eyes. 
 Select means to choose from a group of objects. 
 Grasp means to take hold of an object. 
 Hold refers to retention of an object after it has been grasped. 
 Transport load means movement of an object after hold. 
 Release load means to deposit the object. 
Some other therbligs are  inspect, position, plan, rest, and  delay. 
 Describing a job using therbligs often takes a substantial amount of work. However, for 
short, repetitive jobs, therbligs analysis may be justified. 
 Frank Gilbreth and his wife, Lillian, an industrial psychologist, were also responsible for 
introducing motion pictures for studying motions, called   micromotion study.  This approach 
is applied not only in industry but also in many other areas of human endeavor, such as sports 
and health care. Use of the camera and slow-motion replay enables analysts to study motions 
that would otherwise be too rapid to see. In addition, the resulting films provide a permanent 
record that can be referred to, not only for training workers and analysts but also for settling 
job disputes involving work methods. 
 The cost of micromotion study limits its use to repetitive activities, where even minor 
improvements can yield substantial savings owing to the number of times an operation is 
repeated, or where other considerations justify its use (e.g., surgical procedures). 
 Motion study analysts often use charts as tools for analyzing and recording motion stud-
ies. Activity charts and process charts such as those described earlier can be quite helpful. In 
addition, analysts may use a  simo chart  (see  Figure 7.6 ) to study simultaneous motions of the 
hands. These charts are invaluable in studying operations such as data entry, sewing, surgical 
and dental procedures, and certain assembly operations. 
 Therbligs  Basic elemental 
motions that make up a job. 
 Micromotion study  Use of 
motion pictures and slow motion 
to study motions that otherwise 
would be too rapid to analyze. 
 A. The use of the human body. Examples: 
 1.   Both hands should begin and end their basic divisions of accomplishment simultaneously and should 
not be idle at the same instant, except during rest periods. 
 2.  The motions made by the hands should be made symmetrically. 
 3.   Continuous curved motions are preferable to straight-line motions involving sudden and sharp changes 
in direction. 
 B. The arrangement and conditions of the workplace. Examples: 
 1.   Fixed locations for all tools and material should be located to permit the best sequence and to 
 eliminate or reduce the therbligs’ search and select. 
  2.   Gravity bins and drop delivery should reduce reach and move times; wherever possible, ejectors should 
remove finished parts automatically. 
 C. The design of tools and equipment. Examples: 
 1.   All levers, handles, wheels, and other control devices should be readily accessible to the operator and 
designed to give the best possible mechanical advantage and to utilize the strongest available muscle 
group. 
 2.  Parts should be held in position by fixtures. 
 
 TABLE 7.3 
 Motion study principles 
 Source:  Adapted from Benjamin W. Niebel, 
 Motion and Time Study, 8th ed. Copyright © 
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission of 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., pp. 206–207.

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
305
 FIGURE 7.6 
 A simultaneous motion chart 
 Source: From Benjamin W. Niebel,  Motion 
and Time Study, 8th ed. Copyright © 1988 
Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission of 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., p. 229. 
OPERATOR: Ken Reisch
DATE: May 21,
OPERATION: Assembly
PART: Lace Finger
METHOD: Proposed
CHART BY: Joseph Riley
SIMO CHART
TIME
SCALE
(winks)
4548
ELEMENT
TIME
LEFT-HAND DESCRIPTION
12
SYMBOL
RE
1 2 3 4 5 5 4 3 2 1
MOTION
CLASS
SYMBOL
TIME
SCALE
(winks)
ELEMENT
TIME
RIGHT-HAND DESCRIPTION
SUMMARY
SYM.
RE
G
M
P
U
I
RL
TOTALS
%
TIME
LEFT-HAND SUMMARY
Reach
Grasp
Move
Position
Use
Idle
Release
%
TIME
RIGHT-HAND SUMMARY
Reach
Grasp
Move
Position
Use
Idle
Release
8.56
7.49
12.16
30.47
39.33
1.03
.96
100.0
249
218
354
887
1145
30
28
2911
245
221
413
1124
876
0
32
2911
8.4
7.6
14.2
38.6
30.1
0.0
1.1
100.0
4560
4579
4610
4685
4700
4715
7541
7559
19
31
75
15
15
12
18
Reach for finger
Grasp finger
Move finger
Position and release finger
Reach for clamp
Grasp clamp
Grasp assembly
Move and release assembly
G
M
P
RL
RE
G
G
M
RL
4548
4560
4579
4610
4685
4700
4715
7541
7559
12
19
31
75
15
15
12
18
RE
G
M
P
RL
RE
G
G
M
RL
Reach for finger
Grasp finger
Move finger
Position and release finger
Reach for clamp
Grasp clamp
Grasp assembly
Move and release assembly
 7.6 WORK MEASUREMENT  
 Job design determines the  content  of a job, and methods analysis determines  how  a job is to 
be performed.   Work measurement  is concerned with determining the  length of time  it should 
take to complete the job. Job times are vital inputs for capacity planning, workforce planning, 
estimating labor costs, scheduling, budgeting, and designing incentive systems. Moreover, 
from the workers’ standpoint, time standards reflect the amount of time it should take to do a 
given job working under typical conditions. The standards include expected activity time plus 
allowances for probable delays. 
LO7.9 Define a standard time.
 Work measurement  Deter-
mining how long it should take 
to do a job. 

306 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 A  standard time  is the amount of time it should take a qualified worker to complete a 
specified task, working at a sustainable rate, using given methods, tools and equipment, raw 
material inputs, and workplace arrangement. Whenever a time standard is developed for a 
job, it is essential to provide a complete description of the parameters of the job because the 
actual time to do the job is sensitive to all of these factors; changes in any one of the factors 
can materially affect time requirements. For instance, changes in product design or changes 
in job performance brought about by a methods study should trigger a new time study to 
update the standard time. As a practical matter, though, minor changes are occasionally 
made that do not justify the expense of restudying the job. Consequently, the standards 
for many jobs may be slightly inaccurate. Periodic time studies may be used to update the 
standards. 
 Organizations develop time standards in a number of different ways. Although some small 
manufacturers and service organizations rely on subjective estimates of job times, the most 
commonly used methods of work measurement are (1) stopwatch time study, (2) historical 
times, (3) predetermined data, and (4) work sampling. The following pages describe each of 
these techniques in some detail. 
 Stopwatch Time Study  
 Stopwatch time study was first introduced over a hundred years ago by Frederick Win-
slow Taylor to set times for manufacturing and construction activities. It was met with 
much resistance from workers, who felt they were being taken advantage of. Nonetheless, 
over time, this measurement tool gained acceptance, and it is now a common practice to 
conduct time studies on a wide range of activities in distribution and warehousing, janito-
rial services, waste management, call centers, hospitals, data processing, retail operations, 
sales, and service and repair operations. It is especially appropriate for short, repetitive 
tasks. 
 Stopwatch time study  is used to develop a time standard based on observations of 
one worker taken over a number of cycles. That is then applied to the work of all others 
in the organization who perform the same task. The basic steps in a time study are the 
following:
 1. 
Define the task to be studied, and inform the worker who will be studied. 
 2. 
Determine the number of cycles to observe. 
 3. 
Time the job, and rate the worker’s performance. 
 4. 
Compute the standard time. 
 The analyst who studies the job should be thoroughly familiar with it since it is not unusual 
for workers to attempt to include extra motions during the study in hope of gaining a standard 
that allows more time per piece (i.e., the worker will be able to work at a slower pace and 
still meet the standard). Furthermore, the analyst will need to check that the job is being per-
formed efficiently before setting the time standard. 
 In most instances, an analyst will break all but very short jobs down into basic ele-
mental motions (e.g., reach, grasp) and obtain times for each element. There are several 
reasons for this: One is that some elements are not performed in every cycle, and the 
breakdown enables the analyst to get a better perspective on them. Another is that the 
worker’s proficiency may not be the same for all elements of the job. A third reason is to 
build a file of elemental times that can be used to set times for other jobs. This use will be 
described later. 
 Workers sometimes feel uneasy about being studied and fear changes that might result. 
The analyst should make an attempt to discuss these things with the worker prior to studying 
an operation to allay such fears and to enlist the cooperation of the worker. 
 The number of cycles that must be timed is a function of three things: (1) the variability 
of observed times, (2) the desired accuracy, and (3) the desired level of confidence for the 
estimated job time. Very often the desired accuracy is expressed as a percentage of the mean 
of the observed times. For example, the goal of a time study may be to achieve an estimate 
 Standard time  The time it 
should take a fully trained and 
qualified worker to complete 
a specific task, working at an 
efficient, yet sustainable pace, 
using specific methods, tools and 
equipment, raw materials, and 
workplace arrangement. 
LO7.10 Describe and compare 
time study methods and 
perform calculations.
 Stopwatch time study  
Development of a time standard 
based on observations of one 
worker taken over a number of 
cycles. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
307
that is within 10 percent of the actual mean. The sample size needed to achieve that goal can 
be determined using this formula:
 
 
2
n
zs
ax
= ⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠ 
Use this formula when desired accuracy is a percent.
 
 (7–1) 
where
 z     Number of normal standard deviations needed for desired confidence 
 s     Sample standard deviation 
 a     Desired accuracy percentage 
 x     Sample mean 
Typical values of  z used in this computation are: 4  
Of course, the value of  z  for any desired confidence can be obtained from the normal table in 
Appendix B, Table A. 
 An alternate formula used when the desired accuracy,  e,  is stated as an  amount  (e.g., within 
one minute of the true mean) instead of a percentage is 
 
2
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
n
zs
e
 
Use this formula when desired accuracy is a time.
 
 (7–2) 
where
 e     Maximum acceptable amount of time error 
 To make a preliminary estimate of sample size, it is typical to take a small number of 
observations (i.e., 10 to 20) and compute values of    x  and  s  to use in the formula for  n. Toward 
the end of the study, the analyst may want to recompute  n  using revised estimates of    x  and  s 
based on the increased data available. 
 Note:  These formulas may or may not be used in practice, depending on the person doing 
the time study. Often, an experienced analyst will rely on his or her judgment in deciding on 
the number of cycles to time. 
 
 Desired
Confidence 
(%) 
 z Value 
 90 
 1.65 
 95 
 1.96 
 95.5 
 2.00 
 98 
 2.33 
 99 
 2.58 
 4 Theoretically, a  t rather than a  z value should be used because the population standard deviation is unknown. 
However, the use of  z  is simpler and provides reasonable results when the number of observations is 30 or more, as it 
generally is. In practice,  z is used almost exclusively. 
E X A M P L E  1
 A time study analyst wants to estimate the time required to perform a certain job. A prelimi-
nary study yielded a mean of 6.4 minutes and a standard deviation of 2.1 minutes. The desired 
confidence is 95 percent. How many observations will he need (including those already taken) 
if the desired maximum error is
 a. 
  10 percent of the sample mean? 
 b. 
One-half minute? 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

308 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Development of a time standard involves computation of three times: the  observed  time 
(OT), the  normal  time (NT), and the  standard time (ST). 
 Observed Time. The observed time is simply the average of the recorded times. Thus, 
 OT  x
n
i  
 (7–3) 
where
 OT    Observed time 
 ∑ x  i      Sum of recorded times 
 n     Number of observations 
 Note: If a job element does not occur each cycle, its average time should be determined sepa-
rately and that amount should be included in the observed time, OT. 
 Normal Time.  The normal time is the observed time adjusted for worker performance. It is 
computed by multiplying the observed time by a  performance rating. That is, 
 NT
OT
PR


 
 (7–4) 
where
 NT    Normal time 
 PR    Performance rating 
This assumes that a single performance rating has been made for the entire job. If ratings are 
made on an element-by-element basis, the normal time is obtained by multiplying each ele-
ment’s average time by its performance rating and summing those values: 
 NT
(
PR )
 

x j
j  
 (7–5) 
where
 
Average

x j
 time for element  j 
 PR  j      Performance rating for element  j 
 The reason for including this adjustment factor is that the worker being observed may 
be working at a rate different from a “normal” rate, either to deliberately slow the pace or 
because his or her natural abilities differ from the norm. For this reason, the observer assigns 
a performance rating, to adjust the observed times to an “average” pace. A normal rating is 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
 s     2.1 minutes    z     5 1.96
  
 x    6.4 minutes    a     10%
 
 
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
1.96(2.1)
.10(6.4)
41.36
2
2
n
zs
ax
 ; round up to 42 observations
 
 b. 
 e     .5 minute 
1.96 2.1
.5
67.77
2
2
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
n
zs
e
; round up to 68 observations
 
  
Note: When the value of  n is noninteger, round up. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
309
1.00. A performance rating of .9 indicates a pace that is 90 percent of normal, whereas a rating 
of 1.05 indicates a pace that is slightly faster than normal. For long jobs, each element may be 
rated; for short jobs, a single rating may be made for an entire cycle. Machine segments of a 
job are typically given a rating of 1.00.  
 When assessing performance, the analyst must compare the observed performance to his 
or her concept of normal. Obviously, there is room for debate about what constitutes nor-
mal performance, and performance ratings are sometimes the source of considerable conflict 
between labor and management. Although no one has been able to suggest a way around these 
subjective evaluations, sufficient training and periodic  recalibration  of analysts using training 
films can provide a high degree of consistency in the ratings of different analysts. To avoid 
any bias, a second analyst may be called in to also do performance ratings. In fact, union 
shops may require this. 
 Standard Time.  The normal time does not take into account such factors as personal delays 
(worker fatigue, getting a drink of water or going to the restroom), unavoidable delays (machine 
adjustments and repairs, talking to a supervisor, waiting for materials), or breaks. The standard 
time for a job is the normal time multiplied by an  allowance factor for these delays. 
 The standard time is 
 ST
NT
AF


 
 (7–6) 
where
 ST    Standard time 
 AF    Allowance factor 
 Allowances can be based on either job time or time worked (e.g., a workday). If allowances 
are based on the  job time, the allowance factor is computed using the following formula: 
 AF
1
,
where
Allowance percentage based on job time
job 


A
A
 
 (7–7) 
This is used when different jobs have different allowances. If allowances are based on a per-
centage of the time worked (i.e., the  workday ), the appropriate formula is 
 AF
1
1
,
where
Allowance percentage based on workday
day 


A
A
 
 (7–8) 
This is used when jobs are the same or similar and have the same allowance factors. 
 Compute the allowance factor for these two cases:  
 a. 
The allowance is 20 percent of  job time. 
 b. 
The allowance is 20 percent of  work time. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  2 
 S O L U T I O N 
  
A    .20
 a. 
AF    1     A     1.20, or 120% 
 b. 
 AF
1
1
1
1
.20
1.25,





A
 or 125% 
  Table 7.4  illustrates some typical allowances. In practice, allowances may be based on the 
judgment of the time study analyst, work sampling (described later in the chapter), or negotia-
tions between labor and management. 
 Example 3 illustrates the time study process from observed times to the standard time. 

310 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 
 Percent  
 Percent 
 A. Constant allowances: 
 
 
 4. Bad light: 
 
 
1. Personal allowance  .............................................. 
 5 
 
   a. Slightly below recommended  ............................. 
 0 
 
2. Basic fatigue allowances  ...................................... 
 4 
 
   b. Well below  ......................................................... 
 2 
 B. Variable allowances: 
 
 
   c. Very inadequate  ................................................. 
 5 
 
1. Standing allowance  .............................................. 
 2 
 
5. Atmospheric conditions 
 
 
2. Abnormal position allowance: 
 
 
   (heat and humidity)—variable  ................................ 
 0–10 
 
   a. Slightly awkward  ............................................. 
 0 
 
6. Close attention: 
 
 
   b. Awkward (bending)  .......................................... 
 2 
 
   a. Fairly fine work  .................................................. 
 0 
 
   c. Very awkward (lying, stretching)  ...................... 
 7 
 
   b. Fine or exacting  ................................................. 
 2 
 
3. Use of force or muscular energy 
 
 
   c. Very fine or very exacting  ................................... 
 5 
 
   (lifting, pulling, or pushing): 
 
 
7. Noise level: 
 
 
   Weight lifted (in pounds): 
 
 
   a. Continuous  ........................................................ 
 0 
 
 
 5  .................................................................... 
 0 
 
   b. Intermittent—loud  ............................................. 
 2 
 
 
10  .................................................................... 
 1 
 
   c. Intermittent—very loud ...................................... 
 5 
 
 
15  .................................................................... 
 2 
 
   d. High-pitched—loud  ........................................... 
 5 
 
 
20  .................................................................... 
 3 
 
8. Mental strain: 
 
 
 
25  .................................................................... 
 4 
 
   a. Fairly complex process  ...................................... 
 1 
 
 
30  .................................................................... 
 5 
 
    b. Complex or wide span of attention  ..................... 
 4 
 
 
35  .................................................................... 
 7 
 
   c. Very complex  ..................................................... 
 8 
 
 
40  .................................................................... 
 9 
 
9. Monotony: 
 
 
 
45  .................................................................... 
 11 
 
   a. Low  ................................................................... 
 0 
 
 
50  .................................................................... 
 13 
 
   b. Medium  ............................................................. 
 1 
 
 
60  .................................................................... 
 17 
 
   c. High  ................................................................... 
 4 
 
 
70  .................................................................... 
 22 
   10. Tediousness: 
 
 
 
 
    a. Rather tedious  ................................................... 
 0 
 
 
 
   b. Tedious  .............................................................. 
 2 
 
 
 
   c. Very tedious  ....................................................... 
 5 
 Source: From Benjamin W. Niebel,  Motion and Time Study, 8th ed. Copyright © by Richard D. Irwin, Inc. Used by permission of McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., p. 416. 
 TABLE 7.4   Typical allowance percentages for working conditions 
 A time study of an assembly operation yielded the following observed times for one ele-
ment of the job, for which the analyst gave a performance rating of 1.13. Using an allowance 
of 20 percent of  job time, determine the appropriate standard time for this operation.  
 
 i  
Observation 
 Time,  x  
(minutes)  
 i  
Observation 
 Time,  x 
(minutes)  
 1 
 1.12 
 6 
 1.18 
 2 
 1.15 
 7 
 1.14 
 3 
 1.16 
 8 
 1.14 
 4 
 1.12 
 9 
 1.19 
 5 
 1.15 
 
 Total  10.35 
 n  9  PR  1.13  A  .20 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  3 
 S O L U T I O N 
 1. 
 OT
10.35
9
1.15 minutes.
 


xi
n
 
 2. 
NT    OT    PR    1.15(1.13)    1.30 minutes. 
 3. 
ST    NT    (1     A )    1.30(1.20)    1.56 minutes. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
311
 Note:  If an abnormally short time has been recorded, it typically would be assumed to be 
the result of observational error and thus discarded. If one of the observations in Example 3 
had been .10, it would have been discarded. However, if an abnormally  long  time has been 
recorded, the analyst would want to investigate that observation to determine whether some 
irregularly occurring aspect of the task (e.g., retrieving a dropped tool or part) exists, which 
should legitimately be factored into the job time. 
 Despite the obvious benefits that can be derived from work measurement using time study, 
some limitations also must be mentioned. One limitation is the fact that only those jobs that 
can be observed can be studied. This precludes most managerial and creative jobs, because 
these involve mental as well as physical aspects. Also, the cost of the study rules out its use 
for irregular operations and infrequently occurring jobs. Finally, it disrupts the normal work 
routine, and workers resent it in many cases.  
 Standard Elemental Times 
 Standard elemental times  are derived from a firm’s own historical time study data. Over the 
years, a time study department can accumulate a file of elemental times that are common to 
many jobs. After a while, many elemental times can be simply retrieved from the file, elimi-
nating the need for analysts to go through a complete time study to obtain them. 
 The procedure for using standard elemental times consists of the following steps:
 1. 
Analyze the job to identify the standard elements. 
 2. 
Check the file for elements that have historical times, and record them. Use time study 
to obtain others, if necessary. 
 3. 
Modify the file times if necessary (explained below). 
 4. 
Sum the elemental times to obtain the normal time, and factor in allowances to obtain 
the standard time. 
 In some cases, the file times may not pertain exactly to a specific task. For instance, stan-
dard elemental times might be on file for “move the tool 3 centimeters” and “move the tool 
9 centimeters,” when the task in question involves a move of 6 centimeters. However, it is 
often possible to interpolate between values on file to obtain the desired time estimate. 
 One obvious advantage of this approach is the potential savings in cost and effort 
 created by not having to conduct a complete time study for each job. A second advantage 
is that there is less disruption of work, again because the analyst does not have to time 
the worker. A third advantage is that performance ratings do not have to be done; they are 
generally  averaged  in the file times. The main disadvantage of this approach is that times 
may not exist for enough standard elements to make it worthwhile, and the file times may 
be biased or inaccurate. 
 The method described in the following section is a variation of this approach, which helps 
avoid some of these problems. 
 Predetermined Time Standards 
 Predetermined time standards  involve the use of published data on standard elemental 
times. A commonly used system is  methods-time measurement  (MTM), which was devel-
oped by the Methods Engineering Council. The MTM tables are based on extensive research 
of basic elemental motions and times. To use this approach, the analyst must divide the job 
into its basic elements (reach, move, turn, disengage), measure the distances involved (if 
applicable), rate the difficulty of the element, and then refer to the appropriate table of data 
to obtain the time for that element. The standard time for the job is obtained by adding the 
times for all of the basic elements. One minute of work may cover quite a few basic elements; 
a typical job may involve several hundred or more of these basic elements. The analyst needs 
a considerable amount of skill to adequately describe the operation and develop realistic time 
estimates.  Analysts generally take training or certification courses to develop the necessary 
skills to do this kind of work. 
 Standard elemental 
times  Time standards derived 
from a firm’s historical time 
data. 
 Predetermined time 
 standards  Published data based 
on extensive research to deter-
mine standard elemental times.  

312 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Among the advantages of predetermined time standards are the following:
 1. 
They are based on large numbers of workers under controlled conditions. 
 2. 
The analyst is not required to rate performance in developing the standard. 
 3. 
There is no disruption of the operation. 
 4. 
Standards can be established even before a job is done. 
 Although proponents of predetermined standards claim that the approach provides much 
better accuracy than stopwatch studies, not everyone agrees with that claim. Some argue that 
many activity times are too specific to a given operation to be generalized from published 
data. Others argue that different analysts perceive elemental activity breakdowns in different 
ways, and that this adversely affects the development of times and produces varying time esti-
mates among analysts. Still others claim that analysts differ on the degree of difficulty they 
assign a given task and thereby obtain different time standards. 
 Work Sampling  
 Work sampling  is a technique for estimating the proportion of time that a worker or machine 
spends on various activities and the idle time. 
 Unlike time study, work sampling does not require timing an activity, nor does it even 
involve continuous observation of the activity. Instead, an observer makes brief observations 
of a worker or machine at random intervals and simply notes the nature of the activity. For 
example, a machine may be busy or idle; a secretary may be typing, filing, talking on the 
telephone, and so on; and a carpenter may be carrying supplies, taking measurements, cutting 
wood, and so on. The resulting data are  counts  of the number of times each category of activ-
ity or nonactivity was observed. 
 Although work sampling is occasionally used to set time standards, its two primary uses 
are in (1) ratio-delay studies, which concern the percentage of a worker’s time that involves 
unavoidable delays or the proportion of time a machine is idle, and (2) analysis of nonrepeti-
tive jobs. In a ratio-delay study, a hospital administrator, for example, might want to estimate 
the percentage of time that a certain piece of X-ray equipment is not in use. In a nonrepetitive 
job, such as secretarial work or maintenance, it can be important to establish the percentage of 
time an employee spends doing various tasks. 
 Nonrepetitive jobs typically involve a broader range of skills than repetitive jobs, and 
workers in these jobs are often paid on the basis of the highest skill involved. There-
fore, it is important to determine the proportion of time spent on the high-skill level. For 
example, a secretary may do word processing, file, answer the telephone, and do other 
routine office work. If the secretary spends a high percentage of time filing instead of 
doing word processing, the compensation will be lower than for a secretary who spends 
a high percentage of time doing word processing. Work sampling can be used to verify 
those percentages and can therefore be an important tool in developing the job description. 
In addition, work sampling can be part of a program for validation of job content that is 
needed for “bona fide occupational qualifications”—that is, advertised jobs requiring the 
skills that are specified. 
 Work sampling estimates include some degree of error. Hence, it is important to treat work 
sampling estimates as  approximations  of the actual proportion of time devoted to a given 
activity. The goal of work sampling is to obtain an estimate that provides a specified con-
fidence of not differing from the true value by more than a specified error. For example, a 
hospital administrator might request an estimate of X-ray idle time that will provide a 95 
percent confidence of being within 4 percent of the actual percentage. Hence, work sampling 
is designed to produce a value,    ˆp , which estimates the true proportion,  p,  within some allow-
able error,    : ˆ
.

e p
e   The variability associated with sample estimates of  p  tends to be approxi-
mately normal for large sample sizes. The amount of maximum probable error is a function of 
both the sample size and the desired level of confidence. 
 Work sampling  Technique for 
estimating the proportion of time 
that a worker or machine spends 
on various activities and the idle 
time. 
LO7.11 Describe work sam-
pling and perform calculations.

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
313
 For large samples, the maximum error percent  e  can be computed using the following formula:
 
ˆ(1
ˆ)


e
z
p
p
n
 
 (7–9) 
where
 z     Number of standard deviations needed to achieve desired confidence 
 ˆp    Sample proportion (the number of occurrences divided by the sample size) 
 n     Sample size 
In most instances, management will specify the desired confidence level and amount of allow-
able error, and the analyst will be required to determine a sample size sufficient to obtain 
these results. The appropriate value for  n  can be determined by solving Formula 7–9 for  n, 
which yields
 
ˆ(1
ˆ)
2

n
z
e
p
p
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟
 
 (7–10) 
 E X A M P L E  4 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 The manager of a small supermarket chain wants to estimate the proportion of time stock 
clerks spend making price changes on previously marked merchandise. The manager wants 
a 98 percent confidence that the resulting estimate will be within 5 percent of the true value. 
What sample size should she use?
 =
=
.05
2.33 (see p. 307)
ˆ is unknown
e
z
p
  S O L U T I O N 
 When no sample estimate of  p is available, a preliminary estimate of sample size can be 
obtained using  ˆ
.50.

p
 After 20 or so observations, a new estimate of  ˆp can be obtained 
from those observations and a revised value of  n  computed using the new    ˆ.p   It would be 
prudent to recompute the value of  n  at two or three points during the study to obtain a better 
indication of the necessary sample size. Thus, the initial estimate of  n is
 
2.33
.05
.50 1
.50
542.89,or 543
2
n
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
=
 
observations
 Suppose that, in the first 20 observations, stock clerks were found to be changing prices twice, 
making  ˆ
2/20
.10.


p
 The revised estimate of  n at that point would be
 
2.33
.05
.10 1
.10
195.44, or 196
2
n
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
=
 observations
Suppose a second check is made after a total of 100 observations, and    ˆ
.11

p
  at this point 
(including the initial 20 observations). Recomputing  n yields 
 
2.33
.05
.11 .89
212.60, or 213
2
n
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
 observations
 Note: As before, if the resulting value of  n is noninteger, round  up. 
 Perhaps the manager might make one more check to settle on a final value for  n.  If the 
computed value of  n  is less than the number of observations already taken, sampling would 
be terminated at that point. 
 Determining the sample size is only one part of work sampling. The overall procedure 
consists of the following steps:
 1. 
Clearly identify the worker(s) or machine(s) to be studied. 
   2. 
Notify the workers and supervisors of the purpose of the study to avoid arousing suspicions.  

314 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 3. 
Compute an initial estimate of sample size using a preliminary estimate of  p, if available 
(e.g., from analyst experience or past data). Otherwise, use  ˆ
.50.

p
 
 4. 
Develop a random observation schedule. 
 5. 
Begin taking observations. Recompute the required sample size several times during the 
study. 
 6. 
Determine the estimated proportion of time spent on the specified activity. 
 Careful problem definition can prevent mistakes such as observing the wrong worker or 
wrong activity. It is also important to obtain random observations to get valid results. 
 Observations must be spread out over a period of time so that a true indication of variabil-
ity is obtained. If observations are bunched too closely in time, the behaviors observed during 
that time may not genuinely reflect typical performance. 
 Determination of a random observation schedule involves the use of a   random number table  
(see  Table 7.5 ), which consists of  unordered sequences  of numbers (i.e., random). Use of these 
tables enables the analyst to incorporate randomness into the observation schedule. Numbers 
obtained from the table can be used to identify observation times for a study. Any size number 
(i.e., any number of digits read as one number) can be obtained from the table. The digits are in 
groups of four for convenience only. The basic idea is to obtain numbers from the table and to 
convert each one so that it corresponds to an observation time. There are a number of ways to 
accomplish this. In the approach used here, we will obtain three sets of numbers from the table 
for each observation: the first set will correspond to the  day,  the second to the  hour,  and the third 
to the  minute  when the observation is to be made. The number of digits necessary for any set will 
relate to the number of days in the study, the number of hours per day, and minutes per hour. For 
instance, if the study covers 47 days, a two-digit number will be needed; if the activity is per-
formed for eight hours per day, a one-digit number will be needed for hours. Of course, since each 
hour has 60 minutes, a two-digit number will be needed for minutes. Thus, we need a two-digit 
number for the day, a one-digit number for the hour, and a two-digit number for minutes. A study 
requiring observations over a seven-day period in an office that works nine hours per day needs 
one-digit numbers for days, one-digit numbers for hours, and two-digit numbers for minutes.  
 Suppose that three observations will be made in the last case (i.e., seven days, nine hours, 
60 minutes). We might begin by determining the days on which observations will be made, 
then the hours, and finally the minutes. Let’s begin with the first row in the random number 
table and read across: The first number is 6, which indicates day 6. The second number is 9. 
Since it exceeds the number of days in the study, it is simply ignored. The third number is 1, 
indicating day 1, and the next is 2, indicating day 2. Hence, observations will be made on days 
6, 1, and 2. Next we determine the hours. Suppose we read the second row of column 1, again 
obtaining one-digit numbers. We find
 Random number table  
Table consisting of unordered 
sequences of numbers, used to 
determine random observation 
schedules. 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 6912 
 7264 
 2801 
 8901 
 4627 
 8387 
 2 
 3491 
 1192 
 0575 
 7547 
 2093 
 4617 
 3 
 4715 
 2486 
 2776 
 2664 
 3856 
 0064 
 4 
 1632 
 1546 
 1950 
 1844 
 1123 
 1908 
 5 
 8510 
 7209 
 0938 
 2376 
 0120 
 4237 
 6 
 3950 
 1328 
 7343 
 6083 
 2108 
 2044 
 7 
 7871 
 7752 
 0521 
 8511 
 3956 
 3957 
 8 
 2716 
 1396 
 7354 
 0249 
 7728 
 8818 
 9 
 2935 
 8259 
 9912 
 3761 
 4028 
 9207 
 10 
 8533 
 9957 
 9585 
 1039 
 2159 
 2438 
 11 
 0508 
 1640 
 2768 
 4666 
 9530 
 3352 
 12 
 2951 
 0131 
 4359 
 3095 
 4421 
 3018 
 TABLE 7.5 
 Portion of a random number table 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
315
 3 (
3rd hour),4 (
4th hour),9 (
9th hour)



 
Moving to the next row and reading two-digit numbers, we find 
 47 (
47th minute),15 (
15th minute),24 (
24th minute)



 
 Combining these results yields the following: 
 This means that on day 6 of the study an observation is to be made during the 47th minute of 
the 3rd hour; on day 1, during the 15th minute of the 4th hour; and on day 2, during the 24th 
minute of the 9th hour. For simplicity, these times can be put in chronological order by day. 
Thus, 
 A complete schedule of observations might appear as follows, after all numbers have been 
arranged in chronological order, assuming 10 observations per day for two days: 
 The general procedure for using a random number table is to read the numbers in some 
sequence (across rows, down or up columns), discarding any that lack correspondence. It is 
important to vary the starting point from one study to the next to avoid taking observations at 
the same times, because workers will quickly learn the times that observations are made, and 
the random feature will be lost. One way to choose a starting point is to use the serial number 
on a dollar bill to select a starting point. 
 In sum, the procedure for identifying random times at which to make work sampling 
observations involves the following steps:
 1. 
Determine the number of days in the study and the number of hours per day. This will 
indicate the required number of digits for days and hours. 
 2. 
Obtain the necessary number of sets for  days, ignoring any sets that exceed the number 
of days. 
 3. 
Repeat step 2 for  hours. 
 Day 
 Hour 
 Minute 
 6 
 3 
 47 
 1 
 4 
 15 
 2 
 9 
 24 
 Day 
 Hour 
 Minute 
 1 
 4 
 15 
 2 
 9 
 24 
 6 
 3 
 47 
 
 DAY 1 
 Observation 
 Time 
  Busy(√) 
  Idle (√) 
 1 
 8:15 
 
 
 2 
 9:24 
 
 
 3 
 9:02 
 
 
 4 
 9:31 
 
 
 5 
 9:48 
 
 
 6 
 10:05 
 
 
 7 
 10:20 
 
 
 8 
 11:02 
 
 
 9 
 1:13 
 
 
 10 
 3:55 
 
 
 
 DAY 2 
 Observation 
 Time 
  Busy (√) 
  Idle (√) 
 1 
 8:04 
 
 
 2 
 9:15 
 
 
 3 
 9:24 
 
 
 4 
 9:35 
 
 
 5 
 10:12 
 
 
 6 
 10:27 
 
 
 7 
 10:38 
 
 
 8 
 10:58 
 
 
 9 
 11:50 
 
 
 10 
 1:14 
 
 

316 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 4. 
Repeat step 2 for  minutes. 
 5. 
Link the days, hours, and minutes in the order they were obtained. 
 6. 
Place the observation times in chronological order. 
  Table 7.6  presents a comparison of work sampling and time study. It suggests that a work 
sampling approach to determining job times is less formal and less detailed, and best suited 
to nonrepetitive jobs. 
       
 TABLE 7.6 
 Work sampling compared with 
stopwatch time study 
LO7.12 Compare stopwatch 
time study and work sampling.
 Advantages 
 1. Observations are spread out over a period of time, making results less susceptible to short-term 
fluctuations. 
 2. There is little or no disruption of work. 
 3. Workers are less resentful. 
 4. Studies are less costly and less time-consuming, and the skill requirements of the analyst are much less. 
 5. Studies can be interrupted without affecting the results. 
 6. Many different studies can be conducted simultaneously. 
 7. No timing device is required. 
 8. It is well suited for nonrepetitive tasks. 
 Disadvantages 
 1. There is much less detail on the elements of a job. 
 2. Workers may alter their work patterns when they spot the observer, thereby invalidating the results. 
 3. In many cases, there is no record of the method used by the worker. 
 4. Observers may fail to adhere to a random schedule of observations. 
 5. It is not well suited for short, repetitive tasks. 
 6.  Much time may be required to move from one workplace to another and back to satisfy the randomness 
requirement. 
 7.7 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 It is important for management to make design of work systems a key element of its opera-
tions strategy. Despite the major advances in computers and operations technology, people 
are still the heart of a business; they can make or break it, regardless of the technology used. 
Technology is important, of course, but technology alone is not enough. 
 The topics described in this chapter all have an impact on productivity. Although they lack 
the glamour of high tech, they are essential to the fundamentals of work design. 
 Workers can be a valuable source of insight and creativity because they actually perform 
the jobs and are closest to the problems that arise. All too often, managers overlook contribu-
tions and potential contributions of employees, sometimes from ignorance and sometimes 
from a false sense of pride. Union–management differences are also a factor. More and more, 
though, companies are attempting to develop a spirit of cooperation between employees and 
managers. 
 In the same vein, an increasing number of companies are focusing attention on improving 
the quality of work life and instilling pride and respect among workers. Many organizations 
are reaping surprising gains through worker  empowerment, giving workers more say over 
their jobs. 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
317
 The design of work systems involves quality of work life considerations as well as job design, methods 
analysis, and work measurement. 
 Quality of work life includes relationships with managers and co-workers, working conditions, and 
compensation. Job design is concerned with job content and work methods. In the past, job design 
tended to emphasize efficiency. More recently, emphasis has expanded to include behavioral consid-
erations and worker satisfaction. Current concerns about productivity have thrust job design into the 
limelight. However, the jobs usually associated with high productivity are often the same jobs that are 
the greatest source of worker dissatisfaction, creating somewhat of a paradox for job designers. 
 Analysts often use methods analysis and motion study techniques to develop the “efficiency” aspects 
of jobs, but these do not directly address behavioral aspects. Nonetheless, they are an important part of 
job design. Working conditions are also a notable aspect of job design, not only because of the behav-
ioral and efficiency factors but also because of concern for the health and safety of workers. 
 Work measurement is concerned with specifying the length of time needed to complete a job. Such 
information is vital for personnel planning, cost estimating, budgeting, scheduling, and worker compen-
sation. Commonly used approaches include stopwatch time study and predetermined times. A related 
technique is work sampling, which can also be used to obtain data on activity times. More commonly, 
work sampling is used to estimate the proportion of time a worker spends on a certain aspect of the job. 
 Table 7.7 provides a summary of the formulas used in time studies and work sampling. 
 Organizations can choose from a variety of compensation plans. It is important to do so carefully, for 
compensation is key to both the worker and the organization, and, once adopted, it is usually difficult to 
substantially change a compensation plan. 
 SUMMARY 
 TABLE 7.7 
 Summary of formulas 
 Time Study 
 
 Work Sampling 
 
 A. Sample size 
 
 A. Maximum error 
 
 
n
zs
ax
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
 
 (7–1) 
 
e
z
p
p
n
ˆ(1
ˆ )


 
 (7–9) 
 [Use for % accuracy.] 
 B. Sample size 
 
n
z
e
p
p
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
ˆ(1
ˆ )
2

 
 
n
zs
e
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
2
 
 (7–2) 
 (7–10) 
 Symbols: 
  a   Allowable error as percentage of average time 
 A   Allowance percentage 
 AF   Allowance factor 
 e   Maximum acceptable amount of time error 
 n   Number of observations needed 
 NT   Normal time 
 OT    Observed, or average, time 
  ˆp   Sample proportion 
 PR   Performance rating 
 s   Standard deviation of observed times 
 ST   Standard time 
 x    Sample mean 
 x  i    Time for  i th observation ( i     1, 2, 3, . . .,  n ) 
 z    Number of standard deviations needed to 
achieve desired confidence 
 [Use for time accuracy.] 
 B. Observed time 
 
x
n
i
OT  
 
 (7–3) 
 
 
 C. Normal time 
 
 NT    OT    PR 
 (7–4) 
  
j
j
NT
(x
PR )
 

 
 (7–5) 
 D. Standard time 
 ST    NT    AF 
 (7–6) 
 E.  Allowance factor 
 
 AF job     1     A 
 (7–7) 
  
A
AF
1
1
day 

 
 (7–8) 
 1. 
Work design focuses on the core of operations. 
 2. 
Job design determines job content; methods analysis and motion study determine how a job is to 
be performed; and work measurement determines the time it should take to do a job. 
 3. 
The information provided by job design, methods analysis, motion study, and time standards is 
extremely valuable for process and productivity improvement. 
 4. 
Quality of work life can be a major factor in maintaining a productive workforce. 
 KEY POINTS 

318 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 ergonomics, 293 
 flow process chart, 301 
 job design, 289 
 job enlargement, 291 
 job enrichment, 291 
 job rotation, 291 
 knowledge-based pay, 299 
 methods analysis, 299 
 micromotion study, 304 
 motion study, 303 
 motion study principles, 303 
 OSHA, 296 
 output-based (incentive) 
system, 296 
 predetermined time 
 standards, 311 
 random number table, 314 
 self-directed teams, 292 
 specialization, 290 
 standard elemental times, 311 
 standard time, 306 
 stopwatch time study, 306 
 therbligs, 304 
 time-based system, 296 
 work measurement, 305 
 work sampling, 312 
 worker-machine chart, 302 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 A time study analyst timed an assembly operation for 30 cycles, and then computed the average 
time per cycle, which was 18.75 minutes. The analyst assigned a performance rating of .96, and 
decided that an appropriate allowance was 15 percent. Assume the allowance factor is based on the 
 workday.  Determine the following: the observed time (OT), the normal time (NT), and the standard 
time (ST). 
OT
Average time
18.75 minutes
NT
OT
Performance rating
18.75 minutes
.96
18 minutes
AF
1
1
1
1
.15
1.176
ST
NT
AF
18
1.176
21.17 minutes

















A
 A time study analyst wants to estimate the number of observations that will be needed to achieve 
a specified maximum error, with a confidence of 95.5 percent. A preliminary study yielded a mean 
of 5.2 minutes and a standard deviation of 1.1 minutes. Determine the total number of observations 
needed for these two cases: 
 a. A maximum error of    6 percent of the sample mean. 
 b. A maximum error of .40 minute. 
 a.  x    5.2 minutes 
 z    2.00 for 95.5, from p. 307
   s     1.1 minutes 
 a    .06
 
2.00 1.1
.06 5.2
49.72; round to 50 observations
2
2
(
)
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
n
zs
ax
 
 b.  e    .40
2.00 1.1
.40
30.25; round to 31 observations
2
2
(
)
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=
n
zs
e
 Work sampling.  An analyst has been asked to prepare an estimate of the proportion of time that a tur-
ret lathe operator spends adjusting the machine, with a 90 percent confidence level. Based on previ-
ous experience, the analyst believes the proportion will be approximately 30 percent. 
    a. If the analyst uses a sample size of 400 observations, what is the maximum possible error that will 
be associated with the estimate? 
 b. What sample size would the analyst need in order to have the maximum error be no more than 
   5 percent? 
 Solution 
 Problem 3 
 Problem 1 
 Problem 2 
 Solution 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
319
 ˆ
.30
1.65 for 90 percent confidence from p. 307
p
z


 a.  
ˆ(1
ˆ)
1.65 .3(.7)
400
.038




e
z
p
p
n
 
 b.  
ˆ(1
ˆ)
1.65
.05
.3 .7
228.69, or 229
2
2
( )( )
= ⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟
= ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
=

n
z
e
p
p
 
 Compute the standard deviation of this data: 3 2 4 1 
 Step 1: Find the mean of the data. 
 Step 2: Subtract the mean from each data point. These differences should sum to 0. 
 Step 3: Square each difference and sum the squares. 
 Step 4: Divide the sum of the squared differences by  n     1. 
Step 5: Compute the square root.
 Solution 
 Problem 4 
 Solution 
Data
Step 1
Compute
Mean
Step 2
Compute
Differences
Step 3
Square
Differences
Step 4
Divide Sum
by n  1
Step 5
Compute
Square root
3
3
3  2.5  
0.5
  0.52 0.25
2
2
2  2.5  0.5
0.52 0.25
4
4
4  2.5  
1.5
  1.52 2.25
1
1
1  2.5  1.5
1.52 2.25
10/4  2.5
 
0.0
 
 5.00
5/(4  1)  1.66667

1.66667
1.291
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 1. What is job design, and why is it important? 
 2. What are some of the main advantages and disadvantages of specialization from a management 
perspective? From a worker’s perspective? 
 3.  a.  Contrast the meanings of the terms  job enlargement and  job enrichment. 
  b.  What is the purpose of approaches such as job enlargement and job enrichment? 
 4.  a.  What is ergonomics and why is it important in job design? 
  b.  Explain how it can relate to quality of work life. 
 5. Explain the term  knowledge-based pay system. 
 6. What are self-directed work teams? What are some potential benefits of using these teams? 
 7. Some Japanese firms have a policy of rotating their managers among different managerial jobs. 
In contrast, American managers are more likely to specialize in a certain area (e.g., finance or 
operations). Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each of these approaches. Which do you 
prefer? Why?  
 8. What are motion study principles? How are they classified? 
 9. Name some reasons why methods analyses are needed. How is methods analysis linked to pro-
ductivity improvements? 
 10. How are devices such as flow process charts and worker-machine charts useful? 
 11. What is a time standard? What factors must be taken into account when developing standards? 
 12. What are the main uses of time study information? 
 13. Could performance rating be avoided by studying a group of workers and averaging their times? 
Explain briefly. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 

320 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 14. If an average worker could be identified, what advantage would there be in using that person for a 
time study? What are some reasons why an average worker might not be studied? 
 15. What are the main limitations of time study? 
 16. Comment on the following: “At any given instant, the standard times for many jobs will not be 
strictly correct.”
 a. Why is this so? 
 b. Does this mean that those standards are useless? Explain. 
 17. Why do workers sometimes resent time studies? 
 18. What are the key advantages and disadvantages of:
 a. Time-based pay plans? 
 b. Incentive plans? 
 19. What is work sampling? How does it differ from time study? 
 1. What are the trade-offs in the following?
 a. Using self-directed teams instead of a more conventional approach with occasional use 
of teams. 
 b. Deciding how often to update standard times due to minor changes in work methods. 
 c. Choosing between time study and work sampling for work measurement. 
 2. Who uses the results of work measurement in an organization, and how do they use them? 
 3. In what ways does technology have an impact on job design? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. Healthy Hots, a fast-food restaurant that offers heart-healthy food, is experiencing several difficul-
ties with operations. Although customers like the idea of heart-healthy foods, and surveys indicate 
that customers find the food to be tasty and appealing, business has fallen off in recent weeks. At 
this point, the restaurant is not making a profit. Customers have complained about slow service, and 
employee turnover is high. 
  
  Explain briefly how techniques described in this chapter could be used to improve operations. 
Be specific about which techniques could be used, how they could be used, and why you think 
those techniques would be helpful. 
 2. Identify an unethical behavior for each of the five major topics in this chapter, and indicate which 
ethical principle (see Chapter 1) each violates.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. An analyst has timed a metal-cutting operation for 50 cycles. The average time per cycle was 
10.40 minutes, and the standard deviation was 1.20 minutes for a worker with a performance rat-
ing of 125 percent. Assume an allowance of 16 percent of job time. Find the standard time for 
this operation.  
 2. A job was timed for 60 cycles and had an average of 1.2 minutes per piece. The performance rating 
was 95 percent, and workday allowances are 10 percent. Determine each of the following:
 a. Observed time. 
 b. Normal time. 
 c. Standard time. 
 3. A time study was conducted on a job that contains four elements. The observed times and perfor-
mance ratings for six cycles are shown in the following table. 
 PROBLEMS 
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS (minutes per cycle) 
 Element 
 Performance 
Rating 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 90% 
 0.44 
 0.50 
 0.43 
 0.45 
 0.48 
 0.46 
 2 
 85 
 1.50 
 1.54 
 1.47 
 1.51 
 1.49 
 1.52 
 3 
 110 
 0.84 
 0.89 
 0.77 
 0.83 
 0.85 
 0.80 
 4 
 100 
 1.10 
 1.14 
 1.08 
 1.20 
 1.16 
 1.26 

 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement 
321
 a. Determine the average cycle time for each element. 
 b. Find the normal time for each element. 
 c. Assuming an allowance factor of 15 percent of job time, compute the standard time for this job. 
 4. Given these observed times (in minutes) for four elements of a job, determine the observed time 
(OT) for each element.  Note: The second element only occurs every other cycle. 
 5. Given these observed times (in minutes) for five elements of a job, determine the observed time 
(OT) for each element. Note: Some of the elements occur only periodically. 
 6. Using  Table 7.4 (on p. 310), develop an allowance percentage for a job element that requires the 
worker to lift a weight of 10 pounds while (1) standing in a slightly awkward position, (2) in light 
that is slightly below recommended standards, and (3) with intermittent loud noises occurring. The 
monotony for this element is high. Include a personal allowance of 5 percent and a basic fatigue 
allowance of 4 percent of job time. 
 7. A worker-machine operation was found to involve 3.3 minutes of machine time per cycle in the 
course of 40 cycles of stopwatch study. The worker’s time averaged 1.9 minutes per cycle, and 
the worker was given a rating of 120 percent (machine rating is 100 percent). Midway through the 
study, the worker took a 10-minute rest break. Assuming an allowance factor of 12 percent of work 
time, determine the standard time for this job. 
 8. A recently negotiated union contract allows workers in a shipping department 24 minutes for rest, 
10 minutes for personal time, and 14 minutes for delays for each four hours worked. A time study 
analyst observed a job that is performed continuously and found an average time of 6.0 minutes per 
cycle for a worker she rated at 95 percent. What standard time is applicable for that operation? 
 9. The following data were obtained by observing a three-step job of a financial manager’s assistant. 
 a. Using the data and an allowance of 10 percent of job time, determine a standard time for the 
operation. 
 b. Determine the number of observations that would be required to estimate the mean time for the 
first element within 4 percent of the true value with a confidence of 98 percent. 
 c. How many observations would be needed to estimate the mean time for element C to within 
0.10 minutes of its actual value with a confidence of 90 percent? 
 
 CYCLE 
 Element 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 4.1 
 4.0 
 4.2 
 4.1 
 4.1 
 4.1 
 2 
 — 
 1.5 
 — 
 1.6 
 — 
 1.4 
 3 
 3.2 
 3.2 
 3.3 
 3.2 
 3.3 
 3.3 
 4 
 2.7 
 2.8 
 2.7 
 2.8 
 2.8 
 2.8 
 
 CYCLE 
 Element 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 2.1 
 2.0 
 2.2 
 2.1 
 2.1 
 — 
 2 
 — 
 1.1 
 — 
 1.0 
 — 
 1.2 
 3 
 3.4 
 3.5 
 3.3 
 3.5 
 3.4 
 3.3 
 4 
 4.0 
 — 
 — 
 4.2 
 — 
 — 
 5 
 1.4 
 1.4 
 1.5 
 1.5 
 1.5 
 1.4 
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS (minutes per cycle) 
 Element 
 Performance 
 Rating 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 A 
 90% 
 1.40 
 1.42 
 1.39 
 1.38 
 1.41 
 B 
 120 
 2.10 
 2.05 
 2.00 
 1.85 
 1.80 
 C 
 110 
 1.60 
 1.40 
 1.50 
 1.45 
 1.55 

322 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
  10. The data in the table below represent time study observations for a woodworking operation.
 a.  Based on the observations, determine the standard time for the operation, assuming an allow-
ance of 15 percent of job time. 
 b.  How many observations would be needed to estimate the mean time for element 2 within 
1  percent of its true value with a 95.5 percent confidence? 
 c.  How many observations would be needed to estimate the mean time for element 2 within 
.01 minute of its true value with a 95.5 percent confidence? 
 11. How many observations should a time study analyst plan for in an operation that has a standard 
deviation of 1.5 minutes per piece if the goal is to estimate the mean time per piece to within .4 
minute with a confidence of 95.5 percent? 
 12. How many work cycles should be timed to estimate the average cycle time to within 2 percent of 
the sample mean with a confidence of 99 percent if a pilot study yielded these times (minutes): 
5.2, 5.5, 5.8, 5.3, 5.5, and 5.1? The standard deviation is .253 minutes per cycle. 
 13. In an initial survey designed to estimate the percentage of time air-express cargo loaders are idle, 
an analyst found that loaders were idle in 6 of the 50 observations.
 a.  What is the estimated percentage of idle time? 
 b.  Based on the initial results, approximately how many observations would you require to esti-
mate the actual percentage of idle time to within 5 percent with a confidence of 95 percent?  
 14. An analyst made the following observations about whether customer service representatives were 
busy (B) or idle (I): 
 a. What is the percentage of idle time? 
 b.  Given these results, how many observations would be needed to estimate the actual percentage 
of idle time to within 6 percent with a confidence of 90 percent?  
 15. A job in an insurance office involves telephone conversations with policyholders. The office man-
ager estimates that about half of the employee’s time is spent on the telephone. How many observa-
tions are needed in a work sampling study to estimate that time percentage to within 6 percent and 
have a confidence of 98 percent? 
 16. A hospital administrator thinks that the X-ray equipment is only in use about 20 percent of the time. 
What number of observations in a work sampling study would be needed to estimate the true per-
centage of time to within 5 percent with a confidence of 98 percent? 
 17. Design a schedule of work sampling observations in which eight observations are made during one 
eight-hour day (use 0:00 to 7:59). Using Table 7.5, read the  last digit  going down column 4 for 
hours (e.g., 1 7 4 4 6 . . .), and read across row 3 from left to right in sets of two for minutes (e.g., 
47 15 24 86 . . .). Arrange the times chronologically. 
 18. The manager of a large office intends to conduct a work sampling of the time the staff spends on 
the telephone. The observations will be taken over a period of 50 workdays. The office is open five 
days a week for eight hours a day (use 0:00 to 7:59). Although the study will consist of 200 random 
observations, in this problem you will be asked to determine times for 11 observations. Use random 
numbers from Table 7.5.
 
 
 OBSERVATIONS (minutes per cycle) 
 Element 
 Performance 
Rating 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 1 
 110% 
 1.20 
 1.17 
 1.16 
 1.22 
 1.24 
 1.15 
 2 
 115 
 0.83 
 0.87 
 0.78 
 0.82 
 0.85 
 1.32 * 
 3 
 105 
 0.58 
 0.53 
 0.52 
 0.59 
 0.60 
 0.54 
 *Unusual delay, disregard time. 
 Observation 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 20 
 Busy or idle 
 B 
 B 
 I 
 B 
 I 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 I 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 I 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 B 
 I 

 CASE  
 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
323
 a.  Determine times for 11 observations. For days, read sets of two-digit numbers going across 
row 4 from left to right (e.g., 16 32 15 46 . . .), and do the same in row 5. 
 b.  For hours, read one-digit numbers going  down, using the first digit of column 1 
(e.g., 6 4 3 1 . . .). 
 c.  For minutes, read two-digit numbers going  up column 4 using the first two digits (e.g., 30 46 
10 . . .), and then repeat for the second two digits going  up column 4 (e.g., 95 66 39 . . .). 
 d.  Arrange the combinations chronologically by day, hour, and minute. 
 e.  Assume March 1 is a Monday and that there are no holidays in March, April, or May. 
Convert your observation days to dates in March, April, and May. 
19. A work sampling study is to be conducted on rush-hour traffic (4:00 p.m. to 6:59) five days per 
week. The study will encompass 40 days. Determine the day, hour, and minute for 10 observations 
using the following procedure and Table 7.5:
 a.  Read two-digit numbers going  down the first two digits of column 5 (e.g., 46 20 38 . . .), and 
then down the second two digits of that column (e.g., 27 93 56 . . .) for days. 
 b.  For hours, read one-digit numbers going from left to right across row 1 and then across row 2. 
(Read only 4s, 5s, and 6s.) 
 c.  For minutes, read two-digit numbers going  down column 6, first using the  last two digits (e.g., 
87 17 64 . . .), and, after exhausting those numbers, repeat using the first two digits of that col-
umn (e.g., 83 46 00 19 . . .).  
Arrange your times chronologically by day, then hour, and then minute.  
 Edgar F.  Huse 
 A group of 10 workers were responsible for assembling hotplates 
(instruments for heating solutions to a given temperature) for hospital 
and medical laboratory use. A number of different models of hotplates 
were being manufactured. Some had a vibrating device so that the solu-
tion could be mixed while being heated. Others heated only test tubes. 
Still others could heat solutions in a variety of different containers. 
 With the appropriate small tools, each worker assembled part of a 
hotplate. The partially  completed  hotplate was placed on a moving belt, 
to be carried from one assembly station to the next. When the hotplate 
was completed, an inspector would check it over to ensure that it was 
working properly. Then the last worker would place it in a specially pre-
pared cardboard box for shipping. 
 The assembly line had been carefully balanced by industrial engi-
neers, who had used a time and motion study to break the job down into 
subassembly tasks, each requiring about three minutes to accomplish. 
The amount of time calculated for each subassembly had also been 
“balanced” so that the task performed by each worker was supposed to 
take almost exactly the same amount of time. The workers were paid a 
straight hourly rate. 
 However, there were some problems. Morale seemed to be low, and 
the inspector was finding a relatively high percentage of badly assem-
bled hotplates. Controllable rejects—those “caused” by the operator 
rather than by faulty materials—were running about 23 percent. 
 After discussing the situation, management decided to try some-
thing new. The workers were called together and asked if they would 
like to build the hotplates individually. The workers decided they would 
like to try this approach, provided they could go back to the old program 
if the new one did not work well. After several days 
of training, each worker began to assemble the 
entire hotplate. 
 The change was made at about the middle of the year. Productivity 
climbed quickly. By the end of the year, it had leveled off at about 84 
percent higher than during the first half of the year, although no other 
changes had been made in the department or its personnel. Control-
lable rejects had dropped from 23 percent to 1 percent during the same 
period. Absenteeism had dropped from 8 percent to less than 1 percent. 
The workers had responded positively to the change, and their morale 
was higher. As one person put it, “Now, it is  my  hotplate.” Eventually, the 
reject rate dropped so low that all routine final inspection was done by 
the assembly workers themselves. The full-time inspector was trans-
ferred to another job in the organization. 
 Questions 
    1. What changes in the work situation might account for the increase 
in productivity and the decrease in controllable rejects?  
   2. What might account for the drop in absenteeism and the increase in 
morale?  
   3. What were the major changes in the situation? Which changes 
were under the control of the manager? Which were controlled by 
workers?  
   4. What might happen if the workers went back to the old assembly 
line method? 
 Source: From Edgar Huse,  The Modern Manager, 1E. © South-Western, a part 
of Cengage Learning, Inc. Reproduced by permission.  www.Cengage.com/
permissions . 
 Making Hotplates 

324 
Chapter Seven Work Design and Measurement
 Aft, Larry. “New Tools for the Tried and True.”  Indus-
trial Engineer (March 2013), pp. 44–49. 
 Bridger, R. S.  Introduction to Ergonomics. 3rd ed. New 
York: CRC Press, 2008. 
 Cascio, Wayne.  Managing Human Resources: Produc-
tivity, Quality of Work Life. Profits. 7th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2006. 
 Freivalds, Andris, and Benjamin Neibel.  Neibel’s Meth-
ods, Standards, and Work Design. 13th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2013. 
 Groover, Mikell P.  Work Systems: The Methods, Mea-
surement, and Management of Work. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2007. 
 Meyers, Fred E. and J. R. Stewart.  Motion and Time 
Study for Lean Manufacturing. 3rd ed. Upper Sad-
dle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002. 
 Mundel, Marvin E., and David L. Danner.  Motion and 
Time Study: Improving Productivity. 7th ed. Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1994. 
 Salvendy, Gavriel.  Handbook of Human Factors and 
Ergonomics. 4th ed. New York: Wiley, 2012. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

325
 Learning is usually occurring when humans are involved; this is a basic consideration in the 
design of work systems. It is important to be able to predict how learning will affect task times 
and costs. This supplement addresses those issues. 
 7S.1 THE CONCEPT OF LEARNING CURVES  
  Human performance of activities typically shows improvement when the activities are 
done on a repetitive basis: The time required to perform a task decreases with increasing 
 repetitions.  Learning  curves  summarize this phenomenon. The degree of improvement and 
the number of tasks needed to realize the major portion of the improvement is a function 
of the task being done. If the task is short and somewhat routine, only a modest amount of 
improvement is likely to occur, and it generally occurs during the first few repetitions. If 
the task is fairly complex and has a longer duration, improvements will occur over a longer 
interval (i.e., a larger number of repetitions). Therefore, learning factors have little relevance 
for planning or scheduling routine activities, but they do have relevance for new or complex 
repetitive activities. 
  Figure 7S.1  illustrates the basic relationship between increasing repetitions and a decreas-
ing time per repetition. It should be noted that the curve will never touch the horizontal axis; 
that is, the time per unit will never be zero. 
 LO7S.1 Explain the concept of 
a learning curve.
 SUPPLEMENT TO 
C HAPTER 
 7 
 SUPPLEMENT OUTLINE 
 7S.1 The Concept of Learning Curves,  325  
 7S.2 Applications of Learning Curves,  329 
 7S.3 Operations Strategy,  331 
 7S.4 Cautions and Criticisms,  331 
 Case: Product Recall,  335 
 Learning Curves 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this supplement, 
you should be able to: 
 LO7S.1 
Explain the concept of a learning 
curve. 
 LO7S.2 
Make time estimates based on 
learning curves. 
 LO7S.3 
List and briefly describe some of 
the main applications of learning 
curves. 
 LO7S.4 
Outline some of the cautions and 
criticisms of learning curves. 
 LO7S.5 
Estimate learning rates from data 
on job times. 

326 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
 The general relationship is alternatively referred to as an experience curve, a progress 
function, or an improvement function. Experts agree that the learning effect is the result 
of other factors in addition to actual worker learning. Some of the improvement can be 
traced to preproduction factors, such as selection of tooling and equipment, product 
design, methods analysis, and, in general, the amount of effort expended prior to the 
start of the work. Other contributing factors may involve changes after production has 
begun, such as changes in methods, tooling, and design. In addition, management input 
can be an important factor through improvements in planning, scheduling, motivation, 
and control. 
 Changes that are made once production is under way can cause a temporary  increase 
in time per unit until workers adjust to the change, even though they eventually lead to an 
increased output rate. If a number of changes are made during production, the learning curve 
would be more realistically described by a series of scallops instead of a smooth curve, as 
illustrated in  Figure 7S.2 . Nonetheless, it is convenient to work with a smooth curve, which 
can be interpreted as the  average effect. 
 From an organizational standpoint, what makes the learning effect more than an inter-
esting curiosity is its  predictability,  which becomes readily apparent if the relationship 
is plotted on a log-log scale (see  Figure 7S.3 ). The straight line that results 
reflects a  constant learning percentage, which is the basis of learning curve 
estimates: Empirical evidence shows that every  doubling  of repetitions 
results in a  constant percentage  decrease in the time per repetition. This 
applies both to the  average  and to the  unit  time. Typical decreases range 
from 10 percent to 20 percent. By convention, learning curves are referred 
to in terms of the  complements  of their improvement rates. For example, an 
80 percent learning curve denotes a 20 percent decrease in unit (or average) 
time with each doubling of repetitions, and a 90 percent curve denotes a 10 
percent improvement rate. Note that a 100 percent curve would imply no 
improvement at all.  
 Example 7S–1 illustrates an important point and also raises an interesting 
question. The point is that the time reduction  per unit  becomes less and less as 
the number of repetitions increases. For example, the second unit required two 
hours less time than the first, and the improvement from the 8th to the 16th unit 
was only slightly more than one hour. The question raised is: How are times 
computed for values such as three, five, six, seven, and other units that don’t fall 
into this pattern?  
 FIGURE 7S.1   The learning effect: Time per repetition 
decreases as the number of repetitions 
increases 
Number of repetitions
Time per repetition
0
 FIGURE 7S.2   Improvements may create a scallop effect in 
the curve 
Time
Time per unit
0
Improvements
Average
 FIGURE 7S.3   On a log-log graph, learning 
curves are straight lines 
Number of repetitions
Time per repetition
1
100
80
60
50
40
30
20
10
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
3
4 5 6
8 10
20
30 40
100
60
90%
80%
80

 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves 
327
 There are two ways to obtain the times. One is to use a formula; the other is to use a table 
of values. 
 First consider the formula approach. The formula is based on the existence of a linear 
relationship between the time per unit and the number of units when these two variables are 
expressed in logarithms. 
 The unit time (i.e., the number of direct labor hours required) for the  n th unit can be com-
puted using the following formula:
 
1


T
T
n
n
b  
 (7S–1) 
where
 T  n      Time for  n th unit 
 T 1     Time for first unit 
 b        ln (Learning percentage)     ln 2; ln stands for the natural logarithm 
 To use the formula, you need to know the time for the first unit and the learning percent-
age. For example, for an 80 percent curve with  T 1     10 hours, the time for the third unit 
would be computed as
 
10(3
)
7.02
3
ln .8/ ln 2


T
 
 Note: log can be used instead of ln. 
 The second approach is to use a “learning factor” obtained from a table such as  Table 7S.1 .  
 The table shows two things for some selected learning percentages. One is a unit value for 
the number of repetitions (unit number). This enables us to easily determine how long any unit 
will take to produce. The other is a cumulative value, which enables us to compute the total 
number of hours needed to complete any given number of repetitions. The computation for both 
is a relatively simple operation: Multiply the table value by the time required for the first unit. 
 To find the time for an individual unit (e.g., the 10th unit), use the formula
 
Unit time factor
1


T
T
n
 
 (7S–2) 
 Thus, for an 85 percent curve, with  T 1       4 hours, the time for the 10th unit would be 
4    .583    2.33 hours. To find the time for all units up to a specified unit (e.g., the first 10 
units), use the following formula:
 
Total time factor
1



T
T
n
 
 (7S–3) 
 Thus, for an 85 percent curve, with  T 1   4 hours, the total time for all 10 units (including the 
time for unit 1) would be 4   7.116   28.464 hours.  
 Use of  Table 7S.1  requires a time for the first unit. If for some reason the completion time 
of the first unit is not available, or if the manager believes the completion time for some later 
unit is more reliable, the table can be used to obtain an estimate of the initial time. 
 An activity is known to have an 80 percent learning curve. It has taken a worker 10 hours to 
produce the first unit. Determine expected completion times for these units: the 2nd, 4th, 8th, 
and 16th (note successive doubling of units).  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 EXAMPLE 7S–1 
 S O L U T I O N 
  Each time the cumulative output doubles, the time per unit for that amount should be approxi-
mately equal to the previous time multiplied by the learning percentage (80 percent in this case). 
Thus:
 Unit 
 Unit Time (hours) 
 1 
     10 
 2 
 .8(10)    8 
 4 
 .8(8)    6.4 
 8 
 .8(6.4)    5.12 
 16 
 .8(5.12)    4.096 
 LO7S.2 Make time 
estimates based on 
learning curves. 

328 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
 TABLE 7S.1 
 Learning curve coefficients 
 
 70% 
 75% 
 80% 
 85% 
 90% 
 Unit 
Number 
 Unit 
Time 
 Total 
Time 
 Unit 
Time 
 Total 
Time 
 Unit 
Time 
 Total 
Time 
 Unit 
Time 
 Total 
Time 
 Unit 
Time 
 Total 
Time 
 1 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 2 
 .700 
 1.700 
 .750 
 1.750 
 .800 
 1.800 
 .850 
 1.850 
 .900 
 1.900 
 3 
 .568 
 2.268 
 .634 
 2.384 
 .702 
 2.502 
 .773 
 2.623 
 .846 
 2.746 
 4 
 .490 
 2.758 
 .562 
 2.946 
 .640 
 3.142 
 .723 
 3.345 
 .810 
 3.556 
 5 
 .437 
 3.195 
 .513 
 3.459 
 .596 
 3.738 
 .686 
 4.031 
 .783 
 4.339 
 6 
 .398 
 3.593 
 .475 
 3.934 
 .561 
 4.299 
 .657 
 4.688 
 .762 
 5.101 
 7 
 .367 
 3.960 
 .446 
 4.380 
 .534 
 4.834 
 .634 
 5.322 
 .744 
 5.845 
 8 
 .343 
 4.303 
 .422 
 4.802 
 .512 
 5.346 
 .614 
 5.936 
 .729 
 6.574 
 9 
 .323 
 4.626 
 .402 
 5.204 
 .493 
 5.839 
 .597 
 6.533 
 .716 
 7.290 
 10 
 .306 
 4.932 
 .385 
 5.589 
 .477 
 6.315 
 .583 
 7.116 
 .705 
 7.994 
 11 
 .291 
 5.223 
 .370 
 5.958 
 .462 
 6.777 
 .570 
 7.686 
 .695 
 8.689 
 12 
 .278 
 5.501 
 .357 
 6.315 
 .449 
 7.227 
 .558 
 8.244 
 .685 
 9.374 
 13 
 .267 
 5.769 
 .345 
 6.660 
 .438 
 7.665 
 .548 
 8.792 
 .677 
 10.052 
 14 
 .257 
 6.026 
 .334 
 6.994 
 .428 
 8.092 
 .539 
 9.331 
 .670 
 10.721 
 15 
 .248 
 6.274 
 .325 
 7.319 
 .418 
 8.511 
 .530 
 9.861 
 .663 
 11.384 
 16 
 .240 
 6.514 
 .316 
 7.635 
 .410 
 8.920 
 .522 
 10.383 
 .656 
 12.040 
 17 
 .233 
 6.747 
 .309 
 7.944 
 .402 
 9.322 
 .515 
 10.898 
 .650 
 12.690 
 18 
 .226 
 6.973 
 .301 
 8.245 
 .394 
 9.716 
 .508 
 11.405 
 .644 
 13.334 
 19 
 .220 
 7.192 
 .295 
 8.540 
 .388 
 10.104 
 .501 
 11.907 
 .639 
 13.974 
 20 
 .214 
 7.407 
 .288 
 8.828 
 .381 
 10.485 
 .495 
 12.402 
 .634 
 14.608 
 21 
 .209 
 7.615 
 .283 
 9.111 
 .375 
 10.860 
 .490 
 12.892 
 .630 
 15.237 
 22 
 .204 
 7.819 
 .277 
 9.388 
 .370 
 11.230 
 .484 
 13.376 
 .625 
 15.862 
 23 
 .199 
 8.018 
 .272 
 9.660 
 .364 
 11.594 
 .479 
 13.856 
 .621 
 16.483 
 24 
 .195 
 8.213 
 .267 
 9.928 
 .359 
 11.954 
 .475 
 14.331 
 .617 
 17.100 
 25 
 .191 
 8.404 
 .263 
 10.191 
 .355 
 12.309 
 .470 
 14.801 
 .613 
 17.713 
 26 
 .187 
 8.591 
 .259 
 10.449 
 .350 
 12.659 
 .466 
 15.267 
 .609 
 18.323 
 27 
 .183 
 8.774 
 .255 
 10.704 
 .346 
 13.005 
 .462 
 15.728 
 .606 
 18.929 
 28 
 .180 
 8.954 
 .251 
 10.955 
 .342 
 13.347 
 .458 
 16.186 
 .603 
 19.531 
 29 
 .177 
 9.131 
 .247 
 11.202 
 .338 
 13.685 
 .454 
 16.640 
 .599 
 20.131 
 30 
 .174 
 9.305 
 .244 
 11.446 
 .335 
 14.020 
 .450 
 17.091 
 .596 
 20.727 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Using  Table 7S.1 with  n     20 and an 80 percent learning percentage, you find these factors: 
Unit time    5.381; Total time    10.485.
 a. 
Expected time for 20th jet: 400(.381)    152.4 labor days. 
 b. 
Expected total time for all 20: 400(10.485)    4,194 labor days. 
 c. 
Average time for 20: 4,194    20    209.7 labor days. 
 Production Airplanes is negotiating a contract for the production of 20 small jet aircraft. 
The initial jet required the equivalent of 400 days of direct labor. The learning percentage is 
80 percent. Estimate the expected number of days of direct labor for
 a. 
The 20th jet. 
 b. 
All 20 jets. 
 c. 
The average time for 20 jets. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 EXAMPLE 7S–2 
LO7S.2 Make time 
estimates based on 
learning curves.

 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves 
329
   7S.2 APPLICATIONS OF LEARNING CURVES 
 Learning curve theory has found useful applications in a number of areas, including
 1. 
Manpower planning and scheduling. 
 2. 
Negotiated purchasing. 
 3. 
Pricing new products. 
 4. 
Budgeting, purchasing, and inventory planning. 
 5. 
Capacity planning. 
 Knowledge of output projections in learning situations can help managers make better 
decisions about how many workers they will need than they could determine from decisions 
based on initial output rates. Of course, managers obviously recognize that improvement 
will occur; what the learning curve contributes is a method for quantifying expected future 
improvements. 
 Negotiated purchasing often involves contracting for specialized items that may have 
a high degree of complexity. Examples include aircraft, computers, and special-purpose 
equipment. The direct labor cost per unit of such items can be expected to decrease as the 
size of the order increases. Hence, negotiators first settle on the number of units and then 
negotiate price on that basis. The government requires learning curve data on contracts 
that involve large, complex items. For contracts that are terminated before delivery of 
all units, suppliers can use learning curve data to argue for an increase in the unit price 
for the smaller number of units. Conversely, the government can use that information to 
negotiate a lower price per unit on follow-on orders on the basis of projected additional 
learning gains. 
 Managers must establish prices for their new products and services, often on the basis 
of production of a few units. Generalizing from the cost of the first few units would result 
in a much higher price than can be expected after a greater number of units have been 
produced. Actually, the manager needs to use the learning curve to avoid underpricing as 
well as overpricing. The manager may project initial costs by using the learning progres-
sion known to represent an organization’s past experience, or else do a regression analysis 
of the initial results. 
 The learning curve projections help managers to plan costs and labor, purchasing, and 
inventory needs. For example, initial cost per unit will be high and output will be fairly low, 
so purchasing and inventory decisions can reflect this. As productivity increases, purchasing 
and/or inventory actions must allow for increased usage of raw materials and purchased parts 
to keep pace with output. Because of learning effects, the usage rate will increase over time. 
Hence, failure to refer to a learning curve would lead to substantial  overestimates  of labor 
needs and  underestimates of the rate of material usage. 
 The learning principles can sometimes be used to evaluate new workers during training 
periods. This is accomplished by measuring each worker’s performance, graphing the results, 
and comparing them to an expected rate of learning. The comparison reveals which workers 
are underqualified, qualified, and overqualified for a given type of work (see  Figure 7S.4 ). 
 LO7S.3 List and briefly 
describe some of the main 
applications of learning curves.
 The manager in Example 7S–2 believes that some unusual problems were encountered in 
producing the first jet and would like to revise that estimate based on a completion time of 
276 days for the third jet.
 
  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 EXAMPLE 7S–3 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The unit value for  n     3 and an 80 percent curve is .702 ( Table 7S.1 ). Divide the actual time for 
unit 3 by the table value to obtain the revised estimate for unit 1’s time: 276 days    .702    393.2 
labor days.  
LO7S.2 Make time 
estimates based on 
learning curves.

330 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
 FIGURE 7S.4 
 Worker learning curves can help 
guide personnel job placement 
Training time
Time per cycle
0
One week
A (underqualified)
B (qualified)
C (overqualified)
Standard time
 Use learning curve theory to predict the number of repetitions (units) that will be needed for 
a trainee to achieve a unit time of 6 minutes if the trainee took 10 minutes to do the first unit 
and a learning curve of 90 percent is operative.
 a. 
Use the learning table. 
 b. 
Use the log formula. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 EXAMPLE 7S–4 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
The table approach can be used for the learning percentages that are listed across the top 
of the table, such as the 90 percent curve in this example. The table approach is based 
on Formula 7S–2:
 
Unit table factor
1


T
T
n
 
  
Setting  T  n   equal to the specified time of 6 minutes and solving for the unit table factor yields
 


6 min
10 min
Unit table factor
 
  
Solving,
 



Unit table factor
6 min
10 min
.600
 From  Table 7S.1 , under 90% in the Unit Time column, we find .599 at 29 units. Hence, 
approximately 29 units will be required to achieve the specified time. 
 b. 
Using the log formula,
 (1) Compute the ratio of specified time to first unit time: 6 min    10 min    .600. 
   (2) Compute the ratio of ln learning percentage to ln 2: ln .90      ln  2      0.1053605   
  0.6931472    0.1520. 
 (3) Find  n  such that   
.600:
.600
28.809.
.1520
.1520




n
    Round to 29. Hence, 29 units 
(repetitions) will be needed to achieve a time of 6 minutes. 
 The learning percentage can be estimated from data on repetition times. The procedure for 
doing this is illustrated in Solved Problem 2. 
Moreover, measuring a worker’s progress can help predict whether the worker will make a 
quota within a required period of time. 
 Boeing uses learning curves to estimate weight reduction in new aircraft designs. Weight is 
a major factor in winning contracts because it is directly related to fuel economy. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves 
331
   7S.4 CAUTIONS AND CRITICISMS 
       Managers using learning curves should be aware of their limitations and pitfalls. This section 
briefly outlines some of the major cautions and criticisms of learning curves. 
 1. 
Learning rates may differ from organization to organization and by type of work. 
Therefore, it is best to base learning rates on empirical studies rather than assumed rates 
where possible. 
 2. 
Projections based on learning curves should be regarded as  approximations of actual 
times and treated accordingly. 
 3. 
Because time estimates are based on the time for the first unit, considerable care should 
be taken to ensure that the time is valid. It may be desirable to revise the base time as 
later times become available. Since it is often necessary to estimate the time for the 
first unit prior to production, this caution is very important. 
 4. It is possible that at some point the curve might level off or even tip upward, 
especially near the end of a job. The potential for savings at that point is so slight 
that most jobs do not command the attention or interest to sustain improvements. 
Then, too, some of the better workers or other resources may be shifted into new 
jobs that are starting up.  
 5. 
Some of the improvements may be more apparent than real: Improvements in times 
may be due in part to  increases in  indirect labor costs such as supervision, maintenance, 
and material handling personnel. 
 6. 
In mass production situations, learning curves may be of initial use in predicting how 
long it will take before the process stabilizes. For the most part, however, the concept 
does  not apply to mass production because the decrease in time per unit is imperceptible 
for all practical purposes (see  Figure 7S.5 ). 
 FIGURE 7S.5 
 Learning curves are useful 
for production startup, but not 
usually for mass production 
Mass production
Time per unit
0
. . .
Startup
Volume (units)
 LO7S.4 Outline some of the 
cautions and criticisms of 
learning curves.
 7S.3 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Learning curves often have strategic implications for market entry, when an organization 
hopes to rapidly gain market share. The use of time-based strategies can contribute to this. 
An increase in market share creates additional volume, enabling operations to quickly move 
down the learning curve, thereby decreasing costs and, in the process, gaining a competitive 
advantage. In some instances, the volumes are sufficiently large that operations will shift from 
batch mode to repetitive operation, which can lead to further cost reductions. 
 Learning curve projections can be useful for capacity planning. Having realistic time esti-
mates based on learning curve theory, managers can translate that information into actual 
capacity needs, and plan on that basis. 

332 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
 7. 
Users of learning curves sometimes fail to include carryover effects; previous 
 experience with similar activities can reduce activity times, although it should be noted 
that the  learning  rate remains the same. 
 8. 
Shorter product life cycles, flexible manufacturing, and cross-functional workers 
can affect the ways in which learning curves may be applied. 
 1. If the learning phenomenon applies to all human activity, why isn’t the effect noticeable in mass 
production or high-volume assembly work? 
 2. Under what circumstances might a manager prefer a learning rate of approximately 100 percent 
(i.e., no “learning”)? 
 3. What would a learning percentage of 120 percent imply? 
 4. Explain how an increase in indirect labor cost can contribute to a decrease in direct labor cost 
per unit. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 An assembly operation has a 90 percent learning curve. The line has just begun work on a new item; 
the initial unit required 28 hours. Estimate the time that will be needed to complete:
 a. The first five units. 
 b. Units 20 through 25. 
 Use the total time factor in the 90 percent column of  Table 7S.1 . 
 Problem 1 
 Solution 
 a. Table value: 4.339. 
 Estimated time for five units: 28(4.339)   121.49 hours. 
 b. The total time for units 20 through 25 can be determined by subtraction:
 
 H ours 
 Total time for 25 units: 
 28(17.713)    495.96 
 –Total time for 19 units:   
 28(13.974)     391.27 
 Total time for units 20 through 25 
 104.69 
 Problem 2 
 A manager wants to determine an appropriate learning rate for a new type of work his firm will 
undertake. He has obtained completion times for the initial six repetitions of a job of this type. What 
learning rate is appropriate?
 Unit 
 Completion Time (hours) 
 1 
 15.9 
 2 
 12.0 
 3 
 10.1 
 4 
 9.1 
 5 
 8.4 
 6 
 7.5 
 Solution 
 According to theory, the time per unit decreases at a constant rate each time the output  doubles
(e.g., unit 1 to 2, 2 to 4, and 3 to 6). The ratios of these observed times will give us an approximate 
rate. Thus,
Unit 2
Unit 1
12.0
15.9
.755
Unit 4
Unit 2
9.1
12.0
.758
Unit 6
Unit 3
7.5
10.1
.743






 Not surprisingly, there is some variability; the rate is usually a smoothed approximation. Even so, the 
ratios are fairly close—a rate of 75 percent seems reasonable in this case.  
 LO7S.5  Estimate learning 
rates from data on jobs times.

 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves 
333
 PROBLEMS 
 1. An aircraft company has an order to refurbish the interiors of 18 jet aircraft. The work has a learn-
ing curve percentage of 80. On the basis of experience with similar jobs, the industrial engineering 
department estimates that the first plane will require 300 hours to refurbish. Estimate the amount of 
time needed to complete:
 a. The fifth plane. 
 b. The first five planes. 
 c. All 18 planes. 
 2. Estimate the time it will take to complete the fourth unit of a 12-unit job involving a large 
assembly if the initial unit required approximately 80 hours for each of these learning 
percentages:
 a. 72 percent 
 b. 87 percent 
 c. 95 percent 
 3. A contractor intends to bid on a job installing 30 airport security systems. Because this will be 
a new line of work for the contractor, he believes there will be a learning effect for the job. 
After reviewing time records from a similar type of activity, the contractor is convinced that an 
85 percent curve is appropriate. He estimates that the first job will take his crew eight days to 
install. How many days should the contractor budget for
 a. The first 10 installations? 
 b. The second 10 installations? 
 c. The final 10 installations? 
 4. A job is known to have a learning percentage equal to 82. If the first unit had a completion time of 
20 hours, estimate the times that will be needed to complete the third and fourth units. 
 5. A manager wants to determine an appropriate learning percentage for processing insurance claims 
for storm damage. Toward that end, times have been recorded for completion of each of the first six 
repetitions: 
 a. Determine the approximate learning percentage. 
 b. Using your answer from part  a, estimate the average completion time per repetition assuming a 
total of 30 repetitions are planned. 
 6. Students in an operations management class have been assigned four similar homework problems. 
One student noted that it took her 50 minutes to complete the first problem. Assume that the four 
problems are similar and that a 70 percent learning curve is appropriate. How much time can this 
student plan to spend solving the remaining problems? 
 7. A subcontractor is responsible for outfitting six satellites that will be used for solar research. Four 
of the six have been completed in a total of 600 hours. If the crew has a 75 percent learning curve, 
how long should it take them to finish the last two units? 
 8. The fifth unit of a 25-unit job took 14.5 hours to complete. If a 90 percent learning curve is appropriate:
 a. How long should it take to complete the last unit? 
 b. How long should it take to complete the 10th unit? 
 c. Estimate the average time per unit for the 25 units. 
 9. The labor cost to produce a certain item is $8.50 per hour. Job setup costs $50 and material costs 
are $20 per unit. The item can be purchased for $88.50 per unit. The learning rate is 90 percent. 
Overhead is charged at a rate of 50 percent of labor, materials, and setup costs.
 Repetition 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Time (minutes) 
 46 
 39 
 35 
 33 
 32 
 30 
  5. List the kinds of factors that create the learning effect. 
  6. Explain how changes in a process, once it is under way, can cause scallops in a learning curve. 
  7. Name some areas in which learning curves are useful. 
  8. What factors might cause a learning curve to tip up toward the end of a job? 
  9. “Users of learning curves sometimes fail to include carryover effects; previous experience with 
similar activities can reduce initial activity times, although it should be noted that the  learning rate  
remains the same.” What is the implication of this item from the list of cautions and criticisms?  
 10. Identify an unethical action that involves the learning rate and the ethical principle it violates. 

334 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
 Request no. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Time (min.) 
 55.0 
 41.0 
 35.2 
 31.0 
 28.7 
 26.1 
 24.8 
 23.5 
 
a. Determine the unit cost for 20 units, given that the first unit took 5 hours to complete. 
 
b.  What is the minimum production quantity necessary to make production cost less than 
purchase cost?  
 10. A firm has a training program for a certain operation. The progress of trainees is carefully 
monitored. An established standard requires a trainee to be able to complete the sixth 
repetition of the operation in six hours or less. Those who are unable to do this are assigned 
to other jobs. 
   
 Currently, three trainees have each completed two repetitions. Trainee A had times of 
9 hours for the first and 8 hours for the second repetition; trainee B had times of 10 hours 
and 8 hours for the first and second repetitions; and trainee C had times of 12 hours and 
9 hours. 
   
 Which trainee(s) do you think will make the standard? Explain your reasoning. 
 11. The first unit of a job took 40 hours to complete. The work has a learning percentage of 88. The 
manager wants time estimates for units 2, 3, 4, and 5. Develop those time estimates. 
 12. A manager wants to estimate the remaining time that will be needed to complete a five-unit job. 
The initial unit of the job required 12 hours, and the work has a learning percentage of 77. 
Estimate the total time remaining to complete the job. 
    13.  Kara is supposed to have a learning percentage of 82. Times for the first four units were 30.5, 28.4, 
27.2, and 27.0 minutes. Does a learning percentage of 82 seem reasonable? Justify your answer 
using appropriate calculations. 
 14. The fifth unit of a 10-unit job took five hours to complete. The sixth unit has been worked on for 
two hours, but is not yet finished. Estimate the  additional amount of time needed to finish the 
10-unit job if the work has a 75 percent learning rate. 
 15. Estimate the number of repetitions each of the workers listed in the following table will require to 
reach a time of 7 hours per unit. Time is in hours. 
  16. Estimate the number of repetitions that new service worker Irene will require to achieve “standard” 
if the standard is 18 minutes per repetition. She took 30 minutes to do the initial repetition and 
25 minutes to do the next repetition.  
 17. Estimate the number of repetitions each of the workers listed in the following table will require to 
achieve a standard time of 25 minutes per repetition. Time is in minutes. 
 18. A research analyst performs database searches for a variety of clients. According to her log, a new 
search requires approximately 55 minutes. Repeated requests on the same or similar topic take less 
and less time, as her log shows: 
   How many more searches will it take until the search time gets down to 19 minutes? 
 19. A job has an 85 percent learning curve. Estimate the time that will be needed to complete the fifth 
unit of the job. The time for the first unit is unknown. However, units 2 through 4 took a total of 
28.14 hours to complete.  
 Trainee 
  T  1  
  T  2  
 Art 
 11 
 9.9 
 Sherry 
 10.5 
 8.4 
 Dave 
 12 
 10.2 
 Trainee 
  T  1  
  T  2  
 Beverly 
 36 
 31 
 Max 
 40 
 36 
 Antonio 
 37 
 30 

 
Supplement to Chapter Seven Learning Curves
335
 An automobile manufacturer is conducting a product recall after it was 
discovered that a possible defect in the steering mechanism could 
cause loss of control in certain cars. The recall covers a span of three 
model years. The company sent out letters to car owners promising to 
repair the defect at no cost at any dealership. 
 The company’s policy is to pay the dealer a fixed amount for each 
repair. The repair is somewhat complicated, and the company expected 
learning to be a factor. In order to set a reasonable rate for repairs, com-
pany engineers conducted a number of repairs themselves. It was then 
decided that a rate of $88 per repair would be appropriate, based on a 
flat hourly rate of $22 per hour and a 90 percent learning rate. 
 Shortly after dealers began making repairs, the company received 
word that several dealers were encountering resistance from workers 
who felt the flat rate was much too low and who were threatening to 
refuse to work on those jobs. One of the dealers collected data on job 
times and sent that information to the company: 
Three mechanics each completed two repairs. 
Average time for the first unit was 9.6 hours, and average time for the 
second unit was 7.2 hours. The dealer has suggested a rate of $110 
per repair. 
 You have been asked to investigate the situation and to prepare a 
report. 
 Questions 
 1. Prepare a list of questions that you will need to have answered in 
order to analyze this situation. 
   2. Prepare a list of observations regarding the information provided in 
the case. 
   3. What preliminary thoughts do you have on solutions/partial solutions 
to the points you have raised? 
 CASE 
 Product Recall 
 Jaber, Mohamad Y. (ed.)  Learning Curves: Theory, 
Models, and Applications. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, 2011. 
 Teplitz, Charles J.  The Learning Curve Deskbook. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1991. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

336
 CHAP TE R 
 8 
 Location Planning 
and Analysis 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO8.1 
Identify some of the main reasons organizations need to make 
location decisions. 
 LO8.2 
Explain why location decisions are important. 
 LO8.3 
Discuss the options that are available for location decisions. 
 LO8.4 
Discuss key considerations related to global location decisions. 
 LO8.5 
Outline the decision process for making location decisions.
 LO8.6 
Describe some of the key factors that guide service and retail 
location decisions. 
 LO8.7 
Use the techniques presented to evaluate location 
alternatives.  
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 8.1 The Need for Location Decisions,  337 
 8.2 The Nature of Location Decisions,  338 
 Strategic Importance of Location 
Decisions,  338  
 Objectives of Location Decisions,  339 
 Supply Chain Considerations,  339 
 Location Options,  339 
 8.3 Global Locations,  340 
 Facilitating Factors,  340 
 Benefits,  340 
 Disadvantages,  341 
 Risks,  341 
 Managing Global Operations,  342 
Automation, 342 
 8.4 General Procedure for Making Location 
Decisions,  342 
 8.5 Identifying a Country, Region, 
Community, and Site,  343 
 Identifying a Country,  345 
 Identifying a Region,  346 
 Identifying a Community,  347 
 Identifying a Site,  348 
 Multiple Plant Manufacturing 
Strategies,  349 
 Geographic Information Systems,  350 
 8.6 Service and Retail Locations,  351 
 8.7 Evaluating Location Alternatives,  353 
 Locational Cost-Profit-Volume 
Analysis,  353 
 The Transportation Model,  354 
 Factor Rating,  355 
 The Center of Gravity Method,  356 
 Case: Hello, Walmart?  364 

337
 When a well-known real estate broker was asked what the three most important determinants of the value of a property are, he 
said, “That’s easy. Location, location, and location.” 
 In the residential real estate market, location is an important factor. Although the style of house, number of bedrooms and 
bathrooms, level of maintenance, and modernity of the kitchen undoubtedly enter into the picture, some locations are just more 
desirable than others. 
 In many respects, the choice of location for a business organization is every bit as important as it is for a house, although for 
different reasons. 
 Location decisions represent a key part of the strategic planning process of virtually every organization. And, although it 
might appear that location decisions are one-time problems pertaining to new organizations, existing organizations often have 
a bigger stake in these kinds of decisions than new organizations. 
 This chapter examines location analysis. It begins with a brief overview of the reasons firms must make location decisions, 
the nature of these decisions, and a general procedure for developing and evaluating location alternatives. 
LO8.1 Identify some of the 
main reasons organizations 
need to make location 
decisions.
 8.1 THE NEED FOR LOCATION DECISIONS 
      Existing organizations may need to make location decisions for a variety of reasons. Firms such 
as banks, fast-food chains, supermarkets, and retail stores view locations as part of marketing 
strategy, and they look for locations that will help them to expand their markets. Basically, the 
location decisions in those cases reflect the  addition  of new locations to an existing system. 
 A similar situation occurs when an organization experiences a growth in demand for its 
products or services that cannot be satisfied by expansion at an existing location. The addition 
of a new location to complement an existing system is often a realistic alternative. 
 Some firms face location decisions through depletion of basic inputs. For example, fishing 
and logging operations are often forced to relocate due to the temporary exhaustion of fish or 
forests at a given location. Mining and petroleum operations face the same sort of situation, 
although usually with a longer time horizon. 

338 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 An aerial view of an oil 
plant along the Kill Van Kull, 
Bayonne, New Jersey. Sea 
transportation was a key 
consideration in its location. 
The Kill Van Kull has been one 
of the most important channels 
in commerce throughout the 
region, providing a passage 
for marine traffic between 
Manhattan and the industrial 
towns of New Jersey. It currently 
provides the principal access for 
oceangoing container ships to 
Port Newark–Elizabeth Marine 
Terminal, the busiest port 
facility in the eastern United 
States and the principal marine 
terminal for New York Harbor. 
 For other firms, a shift in markets causes them to consider relocation, or the costs of doing 
business at a particular location reach a point where other locations begin to look more attractive.  
 8.2 THE NATURE OF LOCATION DECISIONS 
 Location decisions for many types of businesses are made infrequently, but they tend to have 
a significant impact on the organization. In this section we look at the importance of location 
decisions, the usual objectives managers have when making location choices, and some of the 
options that are available to them. 
 Strategic Importance of Location Decisions 
 Location decisions are closely tied to an organization’s strategies. For example, a strategy of 
being a low-cost producer might result in locating where labor or material costs are low, or 
locating near markets or raw materials to reduce transportation costs. A strategy of increasing 
profits by increasing market share might result in locating in high-traffic areas, and a strategy 
that emphasizes convenience for the customer might result in having many locations where 
customers can transact their business or make purchases (e.g., branch banks, ATMs, service 
stations, fast-food outlets). 
 Location choices can impact capacity and flexibility. Certain locations may be subject to 
space constraints that limit future expansion options. Moreover, local restrictions may restrict 
the types of products or services that can be offered, thus limiting future options for new 
products or services. 
 Location decisions are strategically important for other reasons as well. One is that they 
entail a long-term commitment, which makes mistakes difficult to overcome. Another is that 
location decisions often have an impact on investment requirements, operating costs and 
revenues, and operations. A poor choice of location might result in excessive transportation 
costs, a shortage of qualified labor, loss of competitive advantage, inadequate supplies of raw 
materials, or some similar condition that is detrimental to operations. For services, a poor 
location could result in lack of customers and/or high operating costs. For both manufactur-
ing and services, location decisions can have a significant impact on competitive advantage. 
And another reason for the importance of location decisions is their strategic importance to 
supply chains.  
LO8.2 Explain why location 
decisions are important.

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
339
 Objectives of Location Decisions 
 As a general rule, profit-oriented organizations base their decisions on profit potential, whereas 
nonprofit organizations strive to achieve a balance between cost and the level of customer ser-
vice they provide. It would seem to follow that all organizations attempt to identify the “best” 
location available. However, this is not necessarily the case. 
  In many instances, no single location may be significantly better than the others. There 
may be numerous acceptable locations from which to choose, as shown by the wide variety 
of locations where successful organizations can be found. Furthermore, the number of pos-
sible locations that would have to be examined to find the best location may be too large to 
make an exhaustive search practical. Consequently, most organizations do not set out with the 
intention of identifying the  one best location; rather, they hope to find a number of  acceptable 
locations from which to choose. 
 Location criteria can depend on where a business is in the  supply chain.  For instance, at the 
retail end of a chain, site selection tends to focus more on accessibility, consumer demograph-
ics (population density, age distribution, average buyer income), traffic patterns, and local 
customs. Businesses at the beginning of a supply chain, if they are involved in supplying raw 
materials, are often located near the source of the raw materials. Businesses in the middle of 
the chain may locate near suppliers or near their markets, depending on a variety of circum-
stances. For example, businesses involved in storing and distributing goods often choose a 
central location to minimize distribution costs. 
 Web-based retail businesses are much less dependent on location decisions; they can exist 
just about anywhere. 
 Supply Chain Considerations 
 Supply chain management must address supply chain configuration. This includes determin-
ing the number and location of suppliers, production facilities, warehouses, and distribution 
centers. The location of these facilities can involve a long-term commitment of resources, so 
known risks and benefits should be considered carefully. A related issue is whether to have 
centralized or decentralized distribution. Centralized distribution generally yields scale econ-
omies as well as tighter control than decentralized distribution, but it sometimes incurs higher 
transportation costs. Decentralized distribution tends to be more responsive to local needs. 
 The importance of these decisions is underscored by the fact that they reflect the basic 
strategy for accessing customer markets, and the decisions will have a significant impact on 
costs, revenues, and responsiveness. 
 The quantitative techniques described in this chapter can be helpful in evaluating alter-
native supply chain configurations. Also, Chapter 15, Supply Chain Management, provides 
additional insights. 
 Location Options 
 Managers of existing companies generally consider four options in location planning. 
 Expand an existing facility.  This option can be attractive if there is adequate room for 
expansion, especially if the location has desirable features that are not readily available 
elsewhere. Expansion costs are often less than those of other alternatives. 
 Add new locations while retaining existing ones.  This is done in many retail opera-
tions. In such cases, it is essential to take into account what the impact will be on the total 
system. Opening a new store in a shopping mall may simply draw customers who already 
patronize an existing store in the same chain, rather than expand the market. On the other 
hand, adding locations can be a defensive strategy designed to maintain a market share or 
to prevent competitors from entering a market. 
 Shut down at one location and move to another.  An organization must weigh the costs 
of a move and the resulting benefits against the costs and benefits of remaining in an exist-
ing location. A shift in markets, exhaustion of raw materials, and the cost of operations 
often cause firms to consider this option seriously.  

340 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 Do nothing.  If a detailed analysis of potential locations fails to uncover benefits that 
make one of the previous three alternatives attractive, a firm may decide to maintain the 
status quo, at least for the time being. 
 8.3 GLOBAL LOCATIONS 
 Globalization has opened new markets, and it has meant increasing dispersion of manufactur-
ing and service operations around the world. In addition, many companies are outsourcing 
operations to other companies in foreign locations. In the past, companies tended to operate 
from a “home base” that was located in a single country. Now, companies are finding strategic 
and tactical reasons to globalize their operations. As they do, some companies are profiting 
from their efforts, while others are finding the going tough, and all must contend with issues 
involved in managing global operations. 
 In this section, we examine some of the reasons for globalization, the benefits, disadvan-
tages, risks, and issues related to managing global operations. 
 Facilitating Factors 
 There are a number of factors that have made globalization attractive and feasible for business 
organizations. Two key factors are trade agreements and technological advances. 
 Trade Agreements.  Barriers to international trade such as tariffs and quotas have been 
reduced or eliminated with trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agree-
ment (NAFTA), the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), and the U.S.–China 
Trade Relations Act. Also, the European Union has dropped many trade barriers, and the 
World Trade Organization is helping to facilitate free trade. 
 Technology. Technological advances in communication and information sharing have been 
very helpful. These include faxing capability, e-mail, cell phones, teleconferencing, and the 
Internet.   
 Benefits 
 Companies are discovering a wide range of benefits in globalizing their operations. Here is a 
list of some of the benefits, although it is important to recognize that not all benefits apply to 
every situation:
 Markets.  Companies often seek opportunities for expanding markets for their goods and 
services, as well as better serving existing customers by being more attuned to local 
needs and having a quicker response time when problems occur. 
 Cost savings.  Among the areas for potential cost saving are transportation costs, labor 
costs, raw material costs, and taxes. High production costs in Germany have contributed 
to a number of German companies locating some of their production facilities in lower-
cost countries. Among them are industrial products giant Siemens, AG (a semiconductor 
plant in Britain), drug makers Bayer, AG (a plant in Texas), and Hoechst, AG (a plant 
in China), and automakers Mercedes (plants in Spain, France, and Alabama) and BMW 
(a plant in Spartanburg, South Carolina). 
 Legal and regulatory.  There may be more favorable liability and labor laws, and less-
restrictive environmental and other regulations. 
 Financial.  Companies can avoid the impact of currency changes that can occur when 
goods are produced in one country and sold in other countries. Also, a variety of incen-
tives may be offered by national, regional, or local governments to attract businesses 
that will create jobs and boost the local economy. For example, state incentives, and 
workforce and land availability and cost, helped convince Nissan to build a huge assem-
bly plant in Canton, Mississippi, and Mercedes to build an assembly plant in Vance, 
LO8.3 Discuss the options 
that are available for location 
decisions.

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
341
 A worker inspects cans of 
Coca-Cola on the production 
line at a plant in the Middle 
East. Coke production overseas 
expands markets and serves 
local customers. 
Alabama. An added benefit came when suppliers for these plants also set up facilities in 
the region. 
 Other.  Globalization may provide new sources of ideas for products and services, new 
perspectives on operations, and solutions to problems. 
 Disadvantages 
    There are a number of disadvantages of having global operations. These can include the 
following:
 Transportation costs.  High transportation costs can occur due to poor infrastructure or 
having to ship over great distances, and the resulting costs can offset savings in labor and 
materials costs. 
 Security costs.  Increased security risks and theft can increase costs. Also, security at 
international borders can slow shipments to other countries. 
 Unskilled labor.  Low labor skills may negatively impact quality and productivity, and 
the work ethic may differ from that in the home country. Additional employee training 
may be required. 
 Import restrictions.  Some countries place restrictions on the importation of manufac-
tured goods, so having local suppliers avoids those issues. 
 Criticisms.  Critics may argue that cost savings are being generated through unfair prac-
tices such as using sweatshops, in which employees are paid low wages and made to 
work in poor conditions; using child labor; and operating in countries that have less strin-
gent environmental requirements. 
 Productivity. Low labor productivity may offset low labor costs or other advantages. 
 Risks 
 Political.  Political instability and political unrest can create risks for personnel safety and 
the safety of assets. Moreover, a government might decide to nationalize facilities, taking 
them over. 
LO8.4 Discuss key consider-
ations related to global location 
decisions.

342 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 Terrorism.  Terrorism continues to be a threat in many parts of the world, putting person-
nel and assets at risk and decreasing the willingness of domestic personnel to travel to or 
work in certain areas. 
 Economic.  Economic instability might create inflation or deflation, either of which can 
negatively impact profitability. 
 Legal.  Laws and regulations may change, reducing or eliminating what may have been 
key benefits. 
 Ethical.  Corruption and bribery, common in some countries, may be illegal in a company’s 
home country (e.g., illegal in the United States). This poses a number of issues. One is how 
to maintain operations without resorting to bribery. Another is how to prevent employees 
from doing this, especially when they may be of local origin and used to transacting business 
in this way.  
 Cultural.  Cultural differences may be more real than apparent. Walmart discovered that 
fact when it opened stores in Japan. Although Walmart has thrived in many countries on 
its reputation for low-cost items, Japanese consumers associated low cost with low qual-
ity, so Walmart had to rethink its strategy for the Japanese market. 
 Quality. Lax quality controls can lead to recalls and liability issues. 
 Managing Global Operations 
 Although global operations offer many benefits, these operations often create new issues for 
management to deal with. For example, language and cultural differences increase the risk 
of miscommunication and may also interfere with developing trust that is important in busi-
ness relationships. Management styles may be quite different, so tactics that work well in one 
country may not work in another. Increased travel distances and related travel times and costs 
may result in a decreased tendency for face-to-face meetings and management site visits. 
Also, coordination of far-flung operations can be more difficult. Managers may have to deal 
with corruption and bribery as well as differences in work ethic. The level of technology may 
be lower, and the resistance to technological change may be higher than expected, making 
the integration of new technologies more difficult. Domestic personnel may resist relocating, 
even temporarily. 
 Automation 
 Automation is having a major influence on the decision of where to produce goods, particu-
larly if the main markets are domestic. Low labor costs in foreign locations have long been 
cited as a key reason for using foreign locations for production. However, rising labor costs in 
some developing countries and poor safety records, the benefits of short transportation times 
with domestic locations, and advances in automation are causing many companies to take a 
new look at the question of where production should be done. 
 8.4 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR MAKING 
LOCATION DECISIONS 
      The way an organization approaches location decisions often depends on its size and the 
nature or scope of its operations. New or small organizations tend to adopt a rather infor-
mal approach to location decisions. New firms typically locate in a certain area simply 
because the owner lives there. Similarly, managers of small firms often want to keep oper-
ations in their backyard, so they tend to focus almost exclusively on local alternatives. 
Large established companies, particularly those that already operate in more than one 
location, tend to take a more formal approach. Moreover, they usually consider a wider 
range of geographic locations. The discussion here pertains mainly to a formal approach 
to location decisions. 
LO8.5 Outline the decision 
process for making location 
decisions.

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
343
 Cargo trucks carry containers 
in and out of the Port of 
Singapore. The terminal is 
the world’s second busiest 
(now surpassed by the Port 
of Shanghai), handling about 
one-fifth of the world’s total 
container transshipments. It 
connects with 200 shipping lines 
with connections to 600 ports 
in 123 countries. This includes 
daily sailings to every major 
port in the world. 
 The general procedure for making location decisions usually consists of the following steps:
 1. 
Decide on the criteria to use for evaluating location alternatives, such as increased revenues, 
decreased cost, or community service.  
 2. Identify important factors, such as location of markets or raw materials. The factors 
will differ depending on the type of facility. For example, retail, manufacturing, 
distribution, healthcare, and transportation all have differing factors that guide their 
location decisions.  
 3. 
Develop location alternatives:
 
 a. Identify a country or countries for location. 
 
 b. Identify the general region for a location. 
 
 c. Identify a small number of community alternatives. 
  d. Identify site alternatives among the community alternatives. 
 4. 
Evaluate the alternatives and make a selection. 
 Step 1 is simply a matter of managerial preference. Steps 2 through 4 are discussed on the 
following pages. 
 8.5 IDENTIFYING A COUNTRY, REGION, 
COMMUNITY, AND SITE 
 Many factors influence location decisions. However, it often happens that one or a few 
factors are so important that they dominate the decision. For example, in manufacturing, the 
potentially dominating factors usually include availability of an abundant energy and water 
supply and proximity to raw materials. Thus, nuclear reactors require large amounts of water 
for cooling, heavy industries such as steel and aluminum production need large amounts of 
electricity, and so on. Transportation costs can be a major factor. In service organizations, 
possible dominating factors are market related and include traffic patterns, convenience, and 
competitors’ locations, as well as proximity to the market. For example, car rental agencies 
locate near airports and midcity, where their customers are. Note, too, that many of the factors 
discussed pertain to supply chain facilities as well as operations facilities. 

344 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
anticipated. “Most of the savings we had hoped for 
never materialized,” says LeRoy Pingho, a senior 
executive who oversaw the relocation. 
 Moving Expenses 
 When the move was announced, many rank-and-file workers were 
enthusiastic. MCI’s relocation policy paid for every expense imagin-
able. Costing an average of $100,000 per employee, it included up to 
six months of temporary housing and living expenses, private-school 
tuition for workers’ children and a full month’s pay for miscellaneous 
expenses. And there were exceptional housing bargains. “In Alexan-
dria, [Va.,] we had a tiny place on a 50-by-112-foot lot,” says Jerome 
Sabolik, a senior software engineer. “For the same money, we got a 
3,000-square-foot house on 2 ½ acres.” Thousands of workers—far 
more than Mr. Liebhaber expected—took advantage of the offer, under-
cutting his plans to recruit lower-cost employees in Colorado. 
 But there was far less enthusiasm among senior managers. James 
Zucco, Mr. Ditchfield’s successor and the head of Systems Engineering, 
stayed behind and eventually left to join AT&T Corp. Also staying put 
was Gary Wiesenborn, the division’s No. 2 executive, who later moved to 
Bell Atlantic Corp. Mr. Pingho, who oversaw the division’s financial plan-
ning and budgeting, declined to move and quit in 1993. 
 There was also significant fallout among the division’s minority pop-
ulation. Although MCI declines to provide specific numbers, it confirms 
there was a reduction. According to former employees who had access 
to Equal Employment Opportunity Commission data, there were roughly 
1,300 African-Americans on Systems Engineering’s staff and a com-
bined 700 Asians and Hispanics before the relocation. Since the reloca-
tion, minority representation has been cut almost in half, to about 600 
blacks and a combined 500 Asians and Hispanics. “It was a disaster for 
diversity,” Mr. Ditchfield says. 
 But MCI officials say that despite the reduction, its Colorado division 
is still more ethnically diverse than other local companies. 
 Questions 
 1. What were the most severe fallouts from the move to Colorado? 
   2. Given the warnings from senior executives about the move, what 
additional information should have been sought before making the 
final decision on whether to move?  
 Source: Alex Markels, “Innovative MCI Unit Finds Culture Shock in Colorado 
Springs,”  The Wall Street Journal © 1996 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. Used 
with permission. 
 Alex  Markels 
 Convinced this town’s spectacular setting would inspire his workers, 
Richard Liebhaber figured “build it, and they will come.” 
 In 1991, the chief technology officer of MCI Communications Corp. 
decided to relocate MCI’s brain trust—the 4,000-employee Systems 
Engineering division that created numerous breakthrough products—
from MCI’s Washington, D.C., headquarters to Colorado Springs. An avid 
skier, he believed the mountains, low crime rate, healthy climate, and 
rock-bottom real-estate prices would be “a magnet for the best and 
brightest” computer software engineers. 
 He rejected warnings from at least half a dozen senior execu-
tives that Colorado Springs’ isolated and politically conservative set-
ting would actually repel the eclectic, ethnically diverse engineers MCI 
hoped to attract. Mr. Liebhaber argued that new hires would jump at 
the chance to live in ski country, while veterans would stay longer, 
reducing MCI’s more than 15% annual turnover rate in Washington. The 
move, he contended, would also save money by cutting MCI’s facilities, 
labor, and recruiting costs. Besides, four other high-tech companies—
including Digital Equipment Corp. and Apple Computer Inc.—had 
recently moved there. “One of the things that gave me more comfort 
was the fact that these other guys had selected Colorado Springs,” 
Mr. Liebhaber says. 
 He was mistaken. 
 While many rank-and-file MCI employees, buoyed by generous relo-
cation packages, made the move, numerous key executives and engi-
neers, and hundreds of the division’s 51% minority population, said no, 
or fled Colorado Springs soon after relocating. 
 Living in “Wonder Bread” 
 “It was like living in a loaf of Wonder Bread,” says James Finucane, who 
is of Japanese descent and whose wife is from Argentina. A veteran 
senior engineer, Mr. Finucane was considered MCI’s top engineer until 
he took a job with a competitor back east in 1994. “There’s no culture, 
no diversity, no research university, no vitality or resiliency to the job 
market.” 
 The move isolated MCI’s engineers from top management and from 
marketing colleagues at headquarters, undermining the spontaneous 
collaborations that had generated some of the company’s most inno-
vative products. Meanwhile, the professionals Mr. Liebhaber hoped to 
recruit from outside proved difficult and expensive to woo, pushing the 
move’s total cost to about $200 million—far more than MCI officials 
 READING 
 Innovative MCI Unit Finds Culture Shock in Colorado Springs 
or
or
r 
r 
 Once an organization has determined the most important factors, it will try to narrow the 
search for suitable alternatives to one geographic region. Then a small number of community-
site alternatives are identified and subjected to detailed analysis. Human factors can be very 
important, as the following reading reveals. These might include the “culture shock” that is 
often experienced when employees are transferred to an environment that differs significantly 
from the current location—for instance, a move from a large city to a rural area, or from a 
rural area to a large city, or a move to an area that has a dramatically different climate. 

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
345
 Identifying a Country 
 Each country carries its own set of potential benefits and risks, and decision makers need to be 
absolutely clear on what those benefits and risks are as well as their likelihood of occurrence 
so that they can make an informed judgment on whether locating in that country is desirable. 
Some important issues have been noted in the previous section on global operations.  Table 8.1  
provides a listing of factors to consider. 
 In a report by the Council on Competitiveness and Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu that surveyed 
400 global CEOs on their views on manufacturing competitiveness, the top three factors in 
determining where to locate manufacturing facilities were talent, labor costs, and energy 
costs. 1   And, in fact, many companies have outsourced some of their operations to foreign 
suppliers to take advantage of relatively low wage rates. Some U.S. manufacturing companies 
set up foreign subsidiaries to not only take advantage of low labor rates but also to avoid or 
delay paying taxes on their profits. With foreign-based subsidiaries, manufacturing compa-
nies can ship their products to the United States and pay low tariffs. Furthermore, they can 
avoid taxes altogether by recording the profits overseas and not returning the earnings to the 
United States. They can do this through  transfer pricing rules  that allow U.S. companies to 
establish a price for transfer into the United States that keeps most of the profit in the foreign 
subsidiary. Those earnings are not subject to U.S. taxes unless or until they are returned as 
dividends to the U.S. parent corporation. 
 It is important to take all factors into account when contemplating the advantage of low 
labor costs. Other costs may negate that advantage. For example, low wage rates may also be 
accompanied by low  labor productivity,  resulting in a net cost per unit that is actually higher 
than what could be achieved domestically. Another consideration is transportation costs, 
which are generally higher for longer distances. Again, that could offset some or all of the low 
wage benefit. Then, too, longer transport time results in increased supply chain inventory and 
reduced agility. 
 1 Newsweek,  July 19, 2010, p. 15. 
 Government 
 a. Policies on foreign ownership of production facilities 
  
  Local content requirements 
  
  Import restrictions 
  
  Currency restrictions 
  
  Environmental regulations 
  
  Local product standards 
  
  Liability laws 
  
 b. Stability issues 
 Cultural differences 
 Living circumstances for foreign workers and their dependents
 Ways of doing business
 Religious holidays/traditions 
 Customer preferences 
 Possible “buy locally” sentiment 
 Labor 
 Level of training and education of workers
 Wage rates
 Labor productivity
 Work ethic
 Possible regulations limiting number of foreign employees
 Language differences 
 Resources 
 Availability and quality of raw materials, energy, transportation infrastructure 
 Financial 
 Financial incentives, tax rates, inflation rates, interest rates 
 Technological 
 Rate of technological change, rate of innovations 
 Market 
 Market potential, competition 
 Safety 
 Crime, terrorism threat 
 TABLE 8.1 
 Factors relating to foreign 
locations 

346 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 Another factor to consider is the  currency and exchange rate risk  that occurs when produc-
ing in one country and buying or selling in another country. Companies must transact business 
in the currency of the country they are involved in. However, because the value of a country’s 
currency fluctuates, exchange rates fluctuate, affecting the cost of supplies and the profits of 
sales in other countries when converting back to the country the company is located in. 
 Companies can obtain information about countries of interest from a variety of sources. 
Here are two useful Web sites:
 CIA — https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html 
 World Bank — http://www.doingbusiness.org/ExploreEconomies/?economyid  2 
 Identifying a Region 
 The primary regional factors involve raw materials, markets, and labor considerations. 
 Location of Raw Materials.  Firms locate near or at the source of raw materials for three 
primary reasons: necessity, perishability, and transportation costs. Mining operations, farm-
ing, forestry, and fishing fall under  necessity.  Obviously, such operations must locate close 
to the raw materials. Firms involved in canning or freezing of fresh fruits and vegetables, 
processing of dairy products, baking, and so on, must consider  perishability  when consider-
ing location.  Transportation costs  are important in industries where processing eliminates 
much of the bulk connected with a raw material, making it much less expensive to transport 
the product or material after processing. Examples include aluminum reduction, cheese mak-
ing, and paper production. Where inputs come from different locations, some firms choose 
to locate near the geographic center of the sources. For instance, steel producers use large 
quantities of both coal and iron ore, and many are located somewhere between the Appala-
chian coal fields and iron ore mines. Transportation costs are often the reason that vendors 
locate near their major customers. Moreover, regional warehouses are used by supermarkets 
and other retail operations to supply multiple outlets. Often the choice of new locations and 
additional warehouses reflects the locations of existing warehouses or retail outlets. 
 Location of Markets.  Profit-oriented firms frequently locate near the markets they intend 
to serve as part of their competitive strategy, whereas nonprofit organizations choose loca-
tions relative to the needs of the users of their services. Other factors include distribution costs 
or the perishability of a finished product. 
 Competitive pressures for retail operations can be extremely vital factors. In some cases, 
a market served by a particular location may be too small to justify two or more competitors 
(e.g., one hamburger franchise per block), so that a search for potential locations tends to 
concentrate on locations without competitors. The opposite also might be true; it could be 
desirable to locate near competitors. Large department stores often locate near each other, and 
small stores like to locate in shopping centers that have large department stores as anchors. 
The large stores attract large numbers of shoppers who become potential customers in the 
smaller stores or in the other large stores. 
 Some firms must locate close to their markets because of the perishability of their prod-
ucts. Examples include bakeries, flower shops, and fresh seafood stores. For other types of 
firms, distribution costs are the main factor in closeness to market. For example, sand and 
gravel dealers usually serve a limited area because of the high distribution costs associated 
with their products. Still other firms require close customer contact, so they too tend to locate 
within the area they expect to serve. Typical examples are tailor shops, home remodelers, 
home repair services, cabinetmakers, rug cleaners, and lawn and garden services. 
 Locations of many government services are near the markets they are designed to serve. 
Hence, post offices are typically scattered throughout large metropolitan areas. Police and 
emergency health care locations are frequently selected on the basis of client needs. For 
instance, police patrols often concentrate on high crime areas, and emergency health care 
facilities are usually found in central locations to provide ready access from all directions. 

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
347
 Many foreign manufacturing companies have located manufacturing operations in the 
United States, because it is a major market for their products. Chief among them are auto-
mobile manufacturers, most notably Japanese, but other nations are also represented. Another 
possible reason that Japanese producers decided to locate in the United States was to offset 
possible negative consumer sentiment related to job losses of U.S. workers. Thousands of 
U.S. auto workers are now employed in U.S. manufacturing plants of Japanese and other 
foreign companies. 
 Labor Factors.  Primary labor considerations are the cost and availability of labor, wage 
rates in an area, labor productivity and attitudes toward work, and whether unions are a seri-
ous potential problem. 
 Labor costs are very important for labor-intensive organizations. The shift of the textile 
industry from the New England states to southern states was due partly to labor costs. 
 Skills of potential employees may be a factor, although some companies prefer to train new 
employees rather than rely solely on previous experience. Increasing specialization in many 
industries makes this possibility even more likely than in the past. Although most companies 
concentrate on the supply of blue-collar workers, some firms are more interested in scientific 
and technical people as potential employees, and they look for areas with high concentrations 
of those types of workers. 
 Worker attitudes toward turnover, absenteeism, and similar factors may differ among 
potential locations—workers in large urban centers may exhibit different attitudes than work-
ers in small towns or rural areas. Furthermore, worker attitudes in different parts of the coun-
try or in different countries may be markedly different. 
 Some companies offer their current employees jobs if they move to a new location. How-
ever, in many instances, employees are reluctant to move, especially when it means leaving 
families and friends. Furthermore, in families with two wage earners, relocation would require 
that one wage earner give up a job and then attempt to find another job in the new location. 
 Other Factors.  Climate and taxes sometimes play a role in location decisions. For exam-
ple, a string of unusually severe winters in northern states may cause some firms to seriously 
consider moving to a milder climate, especially if delayed deliveries and work disruptions 
caused by inability of employees to get to work have been frequent. Similarly, the business 
and personal income taxes in some states reduce their attractiveness to companies seeking 
new locations. Many companies have been attracted to some Sun Belt states by ample sup-
plies of low-cost energy or labor, the climate, and tax considerations. Also, tax and monetary 
incentives are major factors in attracting or keeping professional sports franchises. 
 Identifying a Community 
 Many communities actively try to attract new businesses, offering financial and other incen-
tives, because they are viewed as potential sources of future tax revenues and new job opportu-
nities. However, communities do not, as a rule, want firms that will create pollution problems 
or otherwise lessen the quality of life in the community. Local groups may actively seek to 
exclude certain companies on such grounds, and a company may have to go to great lengths to 
convince local officials that it will be a “responsible citizen.” Furthermore, some organizations 
discover that even though overall community attitude is favorable, there may still be consider-
able opposition to specific sites from nearby residents who object to possible increased levels 
of noise, traffic, or pollution. Examples of this include community resistance to airport expan-
sion, changes in zoning, construction of nuclear facilities, and highway construction. 
 From a company standpoint, a number of factors determine the desirability of a community 
as a place for its workers and managers to live. They include facilities for education, shop-
ping, recreation, transportation, religious worship, and entertainment; the quality of police, 
fire, and medical services; local attitudes toward the company; and the size of the community. 
Community size can be particularly important if a firm will be a major employer in the com-
munity; a future decision to terminate or reduce operations in that location could have a seri-
ous impact on the economy of a small community. 

348 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 Other community-related factors are the cost and availability of utilities, environmental 
regulations, taxes (state and local, direct and indirect), and often a laundry list of enticements 
offered by state or local governments that can include bond issues, tax abatements, low-cost 
loans, grants, and worker training. 
 Another trend is just-in-time manufacturing techniques (see Chapter 14), which encourage 
suppliers to locate near their customers to reduce supplier lead times. For this reason, some 
U.S. firms are reconsidering decisions to locate offshore. Moreover, in light manufacturing 
(e.g., electronics), low-cost labor is becoming less important than nearness to markets; users 
of electronics components want suppliers that are close to their manufacturing facilities. One 
offshoot of this is the possibility that the future will see a trend toward smaller factories 
located close to markets. In some industries, small, automated   microfactories  with narrow 
product focuses will be located near major markets to reduce response time.   
 It is likely that advances in information technology will enhance the ability of manufactur-
ing firms to gather, track, and distribute information that links purchasing, marketing, and 
distribution with design, engineering, and manufacturing. This will reduce the need for these 
functions to be located close together, thereby permitting a strategy of locating production 
facilities near major markets. 
 Ethical Issues.  Ethical issues can arise during location searches, so it is important for com-
panies and governments to have policies in place before that happens, and to keep ethical 
aspects of decisions in mind while negotiating favorable treat-
ment. For example, governments may offer a variety of incen-
tives to companies to locate in their area, usually to obtain 
promised benefits from the companies. Companies should be 
careful to not promise more (e.g., jobs, longevity) or less (e.g., 
noise, traffic) than they can reasonably expect to deliver. Sim-
ilarly, government negotiators should strive for an agreement 
that will ultimately benefit taxpayers, and use extreme caution 
in negotiating long-term arrangements that risk leaving tax-
payers “holding the bag.” Also at issue are behind-the-scenes 
payments or favors to make a decision that would otherwise 
not be rated as highly. 
 Identifying a Site 
 The primary considerations related to sites are land, transpor-
tation, and zoning or other restrictions. 
 Evaluation of potential sites may require consulting with 
engineers or architects, especially in the case of heavy manu-
facturing or the erection of large buildings or facilities with 
special requirements. Soil conditions, load factors, and drain-
age rates can be critical and often necessitate certain kinds of 
expertise in evaluation. 
 Because of the long-term commitment usually required, 
land costs may be secondary to other site-related factors, 
such as room for future expansion, current utility and sewer 
 capacities—and any limitations on these that could hinder 
future growth—and sufficient parking space for employees 
and customers. In addition, for many firms access roads for 
trucks or rail spurs are important. 
 Industrial parks may be worthy alternatives for firms involved 
in light manufacturing or assembly, warehouse operations, and 
customer service facilities. Typically, the land is already devel-
oped—power, water, and sewer hookups have been attended 
to, and zoning restrictions do not require special attention. On 
the negative side, industrial parks may place restrictions on the 
kinds of activities that a company can conduct, which can limit 
 Microfactory  Small factory 
with a narrow product focus, 
located near major markets. 
 Apple establishes its stores in key locations with above-average 
household income and plenty of retail traffic. This store is 
located on Michigan Avenue in Chicago.  

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
349
options for future development of a firm’s products and services as well as the processes it may 
consider. Sometimes stringent regulations governing the size, shape, and architectural features 
of buildings limit managerial choice in these matters. Also, there may not be an adequate allow-
ance for possible future expansion. 
 For firms with executives who travel frequently, the size and proximity of the airport or 
train station as well as travel connections can be important, although schedules and connec-
tions are subject to change. 
 Table 8.2 provides a summary of the factors that affect location decisions. 
 Multiple Plant Manufacturing Strategies 
 When companies have multiple manufacturing facilities, they can organize operations in sev-
eral ways. One is to assign different product lines to different plants. Another is to assign dif-
ferent market areas to different plants. And a third is to assign different processes to different 
plants. Each strategy carries certain cost and managerial implications, as well as competitive 
advantages. 
 Product Plant Strategy.  With this strategy, entire products or product lines are pro-
duced in separate plants, and each plant usually supplies the entire domestic market. This 
is essentially a decentralized approach, with each plant focusing on a narrow set of require-
ments that entails specialization of labor, materials, and equipment along product lines. 
Specialization often results in economies of scale and, compared with multipurpose plants, 
lower operating costs. Plant locations may be widely scattered or clustered relatively close 
to one another.  
 Market Area Plant Strategy.  With this strategy, plants are designed to serve a particular 
geographic segment of a market (e.g., the West Coast, the Northeast). Individual plants pro-
duce most if not all of a company’s products and supply a limited geographical area. Although 
operating costs tend to be higher than those of product plants, significant savings on shipping 
costs for comparable products can be made. This arrangement is particularly desirable when 
 Level 
 Factors 
 Considerations 
 Regional 
 Location of raw materials or supplies 
 Proximity, modes and costs of transportation, 
quantity available 
 
 Location of markets 
 Proximity, distribution costs, target market, trade 
practices/restrictions 
 
 Labor 
 Availability (general and for specific skills), age 
distribution of workforce, work attitudes, 
union or nonunion, productivity, wage scales, 
unemployment compensation laws 
 Community 
 Quality of life 
 Schools, churches, shopping, housing, transpor-
tation, entertainment, recreation, cost of living 
 
 Services 
 Medical, fire, and police 
 
 Attitudes 
 Pro/con 
 
 Taxes 
 State/local, direct and indirect 
 
 Environmental regulations 
 State/local 
 
 Utilities 
 Cost and availability 
 
 Development support 
 Bond issues, tax abatement, low-cost loans, 
grants 
 Site 
 Land 
 Cost, degree of development required, soil char-
acteristics and drainage, room for expansion, 
parking 
 
 Transportation 
 Type (access roads, rail spurs, air freight) 
 
 Environmental/legal 
 Zoning restrictions 
 TABLE 8.2 
 Factors affecting location 
decisions 

350 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
shipping costs are high due to volume, weight, or other factors. Such arrangements have the 
added benefit of rapid delivery and response to local needs. This approach requires central-
ized coordination of decisions to add or delete plants, or to expand or downsize current plants 
due to changing market conditions. 
 Process Plant Strategy.  With this strategy, different plants concentrate on different 
aspects of a process. Automobile manufacturers often use this approach, with different plants 
for engines, transmissions, body stamping, and even radiators. This approach is best suited to 
products that have numerous components; separating the production of components results in 
less confusion than if all production were carried out at the same location. 
 When an organization uses process plants, coordination of production throughout the 
system becomes a major issue and requires a highly informed, centralized administration 
to achieve effective operation. A key benefit is that individual plants are highly specialized 
and generate volumes that yield economies of scale. However, this approach usually involves 
additional shipping costs. 
 General-Purpose Plant Strategy.  With this strategy, plants are flexible and capable of 
handling a range of products. This allows for quick response to product or market changes, 
although it can be less productive than a more focused approach. 
 Multiple plants have an additional benefit: the increase in learning opportunities that 
occurs when similar operations are being done in different plants. Similar problems tend to 
arise, and solutions to those problems as well as improvements in general in products and 
processes made at one plant can be shared with other plants. 
 Geographic Information Systems 
 A  geographic information system (GIS)  is a computer-based tool for collecting, storing, 
retrieving, and displaying demographic data on maps. A GIS relies on an integrated system 
of computer hardware, software, data, and trained personnel to make available a wide range 
of geographically referenced information. Internet mapping programs used to obtain travel 
directions are an example of a GIS. 
 Many countries have an abundance of GIS data that can be accessed. For location analysis, 
a GIS makes it relatively easy to obtain detailed information on factors such as population 
density, age, incomes, ethnicity, traffic patterns, competitor locations, educational institu-
tions, shopping centers, crime statistics, transportation resources, utilities, recreational facili-
ties, maps and images, and a wealth of other information associated with a given location. 
Local governments use a GIS to organize, analyze, plan, and communicate information about 
community resources. And job seekers can use GISes for their searches. 
 Here are some of the ways businesses use geographic information systems:
 •  Logistics companies use GIS data to plan fleet activities such as routes and schedules 
based on the locations of their customers. 
 •  Publishers of magazines and newspapers use a GIS to analyze circulation and attract 
advertisers. 
 •  Real estate companies rely heavily on a GIS to make maps available online to prospec-
tive home and business buyers. 
 •  Banks use a GIS to help decide where to locate branch banks and to understand the 
composition and needs of different market segments. 
 •  Insurance companies use a GIS to determine premiums based on population distribution, 
crime figures, and likelihood of natural disasters such as flooding in various locations, and 
to manage risk.  
 •  Retailers are able to link information about sales, customers, and demographics to 
geographic locations in planning locations. They also use a GIS to develop marketing 
strategies and for customer mapping, site selection, sales projections, promotions, and 
other store portfolio management applications.  
 Geographic information 
system (GIS)  A computer-
based tool for collecting, storing, 
retrieving, and displaying demo-
graphic data on maps.  

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
351
 •  Utility companies  use a GIS to balance supply and demand, and identify problem areas.  
 •  Emergency services use a GIS to allocate resources to locations to provide adequate 
coverage where they are needed. 
 8.6 SERVICE AND RETAIL LOCATIONS 
 Service and retail are typically governed by somewhat different considerations than manufac-
turing organizations in making location decisions. For one thing, nearness to raw materials is 
usually not a factor, nor is concern about processing requirements. Customer access is some-
times a prime consideration, as it is with banks and supermarkets, but not a consideration 
in others, such as call centers, catalog sales, and online services. Manufacturers tend to be 
cost-focused, concerned with labor, energy, and material costs and availability, as well as dis-
tribution costs. Service and retail businesses tend to be profit or revenue focused, concerned 
with demographics such as age, income, and education, population/drawing area, competi-
tion, traffic volume/patterns, and customer access/parking. 
 Retail sales and services are usually found near the center of the markets they serve. Exam-
ples include fast-food restaurants, service stations, dry cleaners, and supermarkets. Quite 
often their products and those of their competitors are so similar that they rely on convenience 
to attract customers. Hence, these businesses seek locations with high population densities or 
high traffic. The competition/convenience factor is also important in locating banks, hotels 
and motels, auto repair shops, drugstores, newspaper kiosks, and shopping centers. Similarly, 
doctors, dentists, lawyers, barbers, and beauticians typically serve clients who reside within 
a limited area. 
 Retail and service organizations typically place traffic volume and convenience high on 
the list of important factors. Specific types of retail or service businesses may pay more 
attention to certain factors due to the nature of their business or their customers. If a busi-
ness is unique, and has its own drawing power, nearness to competitors may not be a factor. 
However, retail businesses generally prefer locations that are near other retailers because of 
the higher traffic volumes and convenience to customers. For example, automobile dealer-
ships often tend to locate near each other, and restaurants and specialty stores often locate 
in and around malls. When businesses locate near similar businesses it is referred to as 
 clustering.  
 Medical services are often located near hospitals for the convenience of patients. Doctors’ 
offices may be located near hospitals, or grouped in other, centralized areas with other doc-
tors’ offices. Available public transportation is often a consideration. 
 Good transportation and/or parking facilities can be vital to retail establishments. Down-
town areas have a competitive disadvantage in attracting shoppers compared to malls because 
malls offer ample free parking and nearness to residential areas. 
 Customer safety and security can be key factors, particularly in urban settings, for all types 
of services that involve customers coming to the service location (as opposed, say, to in-home 
services such as home repair and rug cleaning). 
 Many retail firms have multiple outlets (locations). Among the questions that should be 
considered in such cases are the following:
 1. 
How can sales, market share, and profit be optimized for the entire set of locations? 
Solutions might include some combination of upgrading facilities, expanding some 
sites, adding new outlets, and closing or changing the locations of some outlets. 
 2. 
What are the potential sales to be realized from each potential solution? 
 3. 
Where should outlets be located to maximize market share, sales, and profits without 
negatively impacting other outlets? This can be a key cause of friction between the 
operator of a franchise store and the franchising company. 
 4. 
What probable effects would there be on market share, sales, and profits if a competitor 
located nearby? 
LO8.6 Describe some of the 
key factors that guide service 
and retail decisions.
 Clustering  Similar types of 
businesses locate near each 
other. 

352 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 Table 8.3 briefly compares service/retail site selection criteria with manufacturing criteria. 
 Getting Better All The Time 
 “There’s no question that technology now allows franchisors and fran-
chisees to identify the strongest markets,” says David Powell, vice pres-
ident of sales and marketing for geoVue. “There was a time when you 
didn’t have much choice but to rely on the local real estate agent on the 
ground.” No more. 
 Optimal use of these tools, says Powell, requires a collaborative 
effort between his company and its franchise clients, which include 
Dunkin’ Brands and Del Taco. “Most franchises know the habits and 
characteristics of their customers, and that’s critical information for 
identifying top locations.” 
 As the technology continues to evolve, it has moved from basic 
site selection to a more detailed market analysis that integrates ever 
more information from formerly separate databases. “It’s much more 
complex and offers a clearer insight,” says Powell. For example, geoVue 
provides a “market ranking and potential analysis” that essentially tells 
users which markets would be best to pursue based on their set of 
criteria. The firm’s “market optimization” tool sheds light on how best to 
carve out territories, helping to eliminate encroachment and cannibal-
ization. And its “site screening” tool helps evaluate locations based on 
demographic and competitive data. 
 The end result, says Powell, is that franchises are opening up more 
sites more quickly—and they are higher quality locations. 
 Based on their “perfect store” profile, franchisors can also use 
geoVue and similar tools to evaluate performance at existing units, 
says Powell. “They can help you decide where you might need to close 
a store because of changing demographics or other factors revealed 
through site analysis,” he says. 
 Questions 
    1. In what ways have tech tools improved the process of site selection?  
   2. Describe how those same tools can lead to store closings or store 
relocations. 
 Kerry  Pipes ,  Franchising.com 
 There was a time when franchise site selection was as simple (not to 
mention as rudimentary and often random) as pushing pins in a map 
on a wall. Maybe they turned out to be good sites, maybe they didn’t. 
But as technology continues to evolve and the tools are recalibrated to 
further refine the site selection process, the art is becoming a science. 
 Today, companies like SRC, geoVue, and ESRI offer state-of-the-art 
tools, analysis, and the most current market data to franchise clients 
everywhere. SRC offers a product called DemographicsNow, which can 
be customized for any franchise client. Arby’s, Yum! Brands, Chipotle 
Mexican Grill, and California Kitchen are just a few of their franchise 
clients. 
 Integrating Disparate Data 
 Dean Stoecker, SRC’s CEO and president, says the company’s web-
based application helps customers locate strong prospective locations 
by providing in-depth market research data from 19 different databases 
analyzing traffic volumes, concentration of other retail businesses, and 
even the franchises’ own proprietary data. Simply plug in the site char-
acteristics criteria (based on responses to a series of questions) and a 
proposed location, and push a button. It’s all crunched and compiled 
in maps, reports, and models, depending on how you want the data 
reported. 
 “ DemographicsNow.com  offers franchisees a complete and accu-
rate resource for property data and the ability to quickly visualize and 
analyze retail locations and competitor sites,” says Stoecker. Ultimately, 
the tool allows franchisees to create more insightful development plans 
and be better equipped to make strategic decisions on new locations. 
 Although he doesn’t rule out the need to visit potential sites in per-
son, Stoecker says today’s technology not only shows how a proposed 
site shapes up on paper, but also allows franchisees to view aerial pho-
tographs of proposed sites and surrounding areas. “Technology can 
now provide an analysis that’s both faster and scalable, yet provide 
answers in ways everybody can understand,” says Stoecker. 
 Manufacturing/Distribution 
 Service/Retail 
Cost focus 
Revenue focus 
 Transportation modes/costs 
 Demographics: age, income, education 
 Energy availability/costs 
 Population/drawing area 
 Labor cost/availability/skills 
 Competition 
 Building/leasing costs 
 Traffic volume/patterns 
 Customer access/parking 
 TABLE 8.3 
 A comparison of service/retail 
considerations and manufacturing 
considerations 
 READING 
 Site Selection Grows Up: Improved Tech Tools 
Make the Process Faster, Better 

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
353
 8.7 EVALUATING LOCATION ALTERNATIVES  
 There are a number of techniques that are helpful in evaluating location alternatives: loca-
tional cost-profit-volume analysis, factor rating, and the center of gravity method. 
 Locational Cost-Profit-Volume Analysis 
 The economic comparison of location alternatives is facilitated by the use of cost-profit-vol-
ume analysis. The analysis can be done numerically or graphically. The graphical approach 
will be demonstrated here because it enhances understanding of the concept and indicates the 
ranges over which one of the alternatives is superior to the others. 
 The procedure for   locational cost-profit-volume analysis involves these steps:
 1. 
Determine the fixed and variable costs associated with each location alternative. 
 2. 
Plot the total-cost lines for all location alternatives on the same graph. 
 3. 
Determine which location will have the lowest total cost for the expected level of 
output. Alternatively, determine which location will have the highest profit. 
 This method assumes the following:
 1. 
Fixed costs are constant for the range of probable output. 
 2. 
Variable costs are linear for the range of probable output. 
 3. 
The required level of output can be closely estimated. 
 4. 
Only one product is involved. 
 For a cost analysis, compute the total cost for each location:
 Total cost
FC



v
Q  
 (8–1) 
where
 FC    Fixed cost 
 v     Variable cost per unit 
 Q     Quantity or volume of output 
 Locational cost-profit-
volume analysis  Technique 
for evaluating location choices in 
economic terms. 
 E X A M P L E  1 
 Stop Fixed and variable costs for four potential plant locations are shown below:   
 Location 
 Fixed Cost per Year 
 Variable Cost per Unit 
 A 
 $250,000 
 $11 
 B 
   100,000 
   30 
 C 
   150,000 
   20 
 D 
   200,000 
   35 
 a. 
Plot the total-cost lines for these locations on a single graph. 
   b. 
Identify the range of output for which each alternative is superior (i.e., has the lowest 
total cost). 
 c. 
If expected output at the selected location is to be 8,000 units per year, which location 
would provide the lowest total cost? 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
To plot the total-cost lines, select an output that is approximately equal to the expected out-
put level (e.g., 10,000 units per year). Compute the total cost for each location at that level:
 
 Fixed Cost 
  
 Variable Cost 
  
 Total Cost 
 A 
 $250,000 
  
 $11(10,000) 
  
 $360,000 
 B 
   100,000 
  
   30(10,000) 
  
   400,000 
 C 
   150,000 
  
   20(10,000) 
  
   350,000 
 D 
   200,000 
  
   35(10,000) 
  
   550,000 
LO8.6 Use the techniques 
presented to evaluate location 
alternatives.

354 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
Plot each location’s fixed cost (at Output    0) and the total cost at 10,000 units; and connect 
the two points with a straight line. (See the accompanying graph.) 
 
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
2
6
8
10
12
14
4
16
B superior
C superior
A superior
Total annual cost ($000)
0
Annual output (000 units)
D
B
C
A
 
 b. 
The  approximate  ranges for which the various alternatives will yield the lowest costs are 
shown on the graph. Note that location D is never superior. The  exact  ranges can be deter-
mined by findying the output level at which lines B and C and lines C and A cross. To 
do this, set their total cost equations equal and solve for Q, the break-even output level. 
Thus, for B and C:
 
(B)
$100,000
$30
(C)
$150,000
$20



Q
Q  
  
Solving, you find  Q     5,000 units per year. 
  
For C and A:
 
(C)
$150,000
$20
(A)
$250,000
$11



Q
Q  
  
Solving,  Q     11,111 units per year. 
 c. 
From the graph, you can see that for 8,000 units per year, location C provides the lowest 
total cost.     
 For a profit analysis, compute the total profit for each location:
 Total profit
(
)
FC



Q R
v
 
 (8–2) 
where
 R     Revenue per unit 
 Solved Problem 2 at the end of the chapter illustrates profit analysis. 
 Where the expected level of output is close to the middle of the range over which one alter-
native is superior, the choice is readily apparent. If the expected level of output is very close to 
the edge of a range, it means that the two alternatives will yield comparable annual costs, so 
management would be indifferent in choosing between the two  in terms of total cost. However, 
it is important to recognize that, in most situations, other factors besides cost must also be con-
sidered. Later in this section, a general scheme for including a broad range of factors is described. 
First, let’s look at another kind of cost often considered in location decisions: transportation costs. 
 The Transportation Model 
 Transportation costs sometimes play an important role in location decisions. These can 
stem from the movement of either raw materials or finished goods. If a facility will be the 
sole source or destination of shipments, the company can include the transportation costs 

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
355
in a locational cost–volume analysis by incorporating the transportation cost per unit being 
shipped into the variable cost per unit. (If raw materials are involved, the transportation cost 
must be converted into cost per unit of  output in order to correspond to other variable costs.) 
 When a problem involves shipment of goods from multiple sending points to multiple receiv-
ing points, and a new location (sending or receiving point) is to be added to the system, the com-
pany should undertake a separate analysis of transportation. In such instances the  transportation 
model  of linear programming is very helpful. It is a special-purpose algorithm used to determine 
the minimum transportation cost that would result if a potential new location were to be added 
to an existing system. It also can be used if a  number  of new facilities are to be added or if an 
entire new system is being developed. The model is used to analyze each of the configurations 
considered, and it reveals the minimum costs each would provide. This information can then be 
included in the evaluation of location alternatives. Solved Problem 1 illustrates how the results of 
a transportation analysis can be combined with the results of a locational cost–volume analysis. 
 The Web site for this book contains a module that provides complete coverage of the trans-
portation model, including methods such as northwest corner, steppingstone, and Vogel’s 
aproximation method. 
 Factor Rating 
 Factor rating is a technique that can be applied to a wide range of decisions ranging from 
personal (buying a car, deciding where to live) to professional (choosing a career, choosing 
among job offers). Here it is used for location analysis. 
 A typical location decision involves both qualitative and quantitative inputs, which tend to 
vary from situation to situation depending on the needs of each organization.   Factor rating is 
a general approach that is useful for evaluating a given alternative and comparing alternatives. 
The value of factor rating is that it provides a rational basis for evaluation and facilitates com-
parison among alternatives by establishing a  composite  value for each alternative that sum-
marizes all related factors. Factor rating enables decision makers to incorporate their personal 
opinions and quantitative information in the decision process. 
 The following procedure is used to develop a factor rating:
 1. 
Determine which factors are relevant (e.g., location of market, water supply, parking 
facilities, revenue potential). 
 2. 
Assign a weight to each factor that indicates its relative importance compared with all 
other factors. 
 3. 
Decide on a common scale for all factors (e.g., 1 to 100), and set a minimum acceptable 
score if necessary. 
 4. 
Score each location alternative. 
 5. 
Multiply the factor weight by the score for each factor, and sum the results for each 
location alternative. 
 6. 
Choose the alternative that has the highest composite score, unless it fails to meet the 
minimum acceptable score. 
 This procedure is illustrated in Example 2. 
 Factor rating  General 
approach to evaluating locations 
that includes quantitative and 
qualitative inputs. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 A photo-processing company intends to open a new branch store. The following table con-
tains information on two potential locations. Which is the better alternative?  
 
 
 Scores  (Out of 100) 
 Weighted Scores 
 Factor 
 Weight 
 Alt. 1 
 Alt. 2 
 Alternative 1 
 Alternative 2 
 Proximity to existing store 
 .10 
 100 
 60 
 .10(100)    10.0 
 .10(60)      6.0 
 Traffic volume 
 .05 
    80 
 80 
  .05(80)      4.0 
 .05(80)      4.0 
 Rental costs 
 .40 
    70 
 90 
 .40(70)    28.0 
 .40(90)    36.0 
 Size 
 .10 
    86 
 92 
 .10(86)       8.6 
 .10(92)      9.2 
 Layout 
 .20 
    40 
 70 
 .20(40)      8.0 
 .20(70)    14.0 
 Operating costs 
 .15 
    80 
 90 
 .15(80)     12.0 
 .15(90)     13.5 
 
 
 
 
 70.6 
 82.7 

356 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 S O L U T I O N 
 Alternative 2 is better because it has the higher composite score. 
 In some cases, managers may prefer to establish minimum  thresholds  for composite scores. 
If an alternative fails to meet that minimum, they can reject it without further consideration. 
If none of the alternatives meets the minimum, this means that either additional alternatives 
must be identified and evaluated or the minimum threshold must be reevaluated. 
 The Center of Gravity Method 
 The  center of gravity method  is a method to determine the location of a facility that will min-
imize shipping costs or travel time to various destinations. For example, community planners 
use the method to determine the location of fire and public safety centers, schools, community 
centers, and such, taking into consideration locations of hospitals, senior living centers, popu-
lation density, highways, airports, and retail businesses. The goal for police and firefighters is 
often to minimize travel time to answer emergency calls. The center of gravity method is also 
used for location planning for distribution centers, where the goal is typically to minimize 
distribution costs. The method treats distribution cost as a linear function of the distance and 
the quantity shipped. The quantity to be shipped to each destination is assumed to be fixed 
(i.e., will not change over time). An acceptable variation is that quantities are allowed to 
change, as long as their relative amounts remain the same (e.g., seasonal variations). 
 The method includes the use of a map that shows the locations of destinations. The map 
must be accurate and drawn to scale. A coordinate system is overlaid on the map to determine 
relative locations. The location of the (0,0) point of the coordinate system, and its scale, is 
unimportant. Once the coordinate system is in place, you can determine the coordinates of 
each destination. (See  Figure 8.1 , parts A and B.) 
 If the quantities to be shipped to every location are  equal,  you can obtain the coordinates 
of the center of gravity (i.e., the location of the distribution center) by finding the average of 
the  x coordinates and the average of the  y coordinates (see  Figure 8.1 ). These averages can be 
easily determined using the following formulas:
 
x
x
n
y
y
n
i
i
 
 
 
 (8–3) 
where
 x  i       x coordinate of destination  i 
 y  i       y coordinate of destination  i 
 n     Number of destinations 
 When the number of units to be shipped is not the same for all destinations (usually the 
case), a  weighted average  must be used to determine the center of gravity, with the weights 
 Center of gravity 
method  Method for locating 
a distribution center that mini-
mizes distribution cost. 
 FIGURE 8.1   Center of gravity method 
6
4
2
4
6
2
8
0
10
y
x 
D2
D3
D4
D1
(3, 5)
(5, 4)
(8, 5)
(2, 2)
x
y
Center
of gravity
6
4
2
4
6
2
8
0
10
y
x
D2
D3
D4
D1
(3, 5)
(5, 4)
(8, 5)
(2, 2)
Coordinates
of D3
D2
D3
D4
D1
N
S
W
E
Destination 2
Map
N
S
W
E
N
S
W
E
A. Map showing destinations
B. Add a coordinate system
C. Center of gravity

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
357
being the  quantities  to be shipped. In some cases, the number of trips can be more important 
than quantities, so that metric would be used instead of quantities. 
 The appropriate formulas are
 
 

 

x
x Q
Q
y
y Q
Q
i
i
i
i
i
i
 
 (8–4) 
where
 Q  i      Quantity to be shipped to destination  i 
 x  i       x coordinate of destination  i 
 y  i       y coordinate of destination  i 
Hence, the center of gravity is at (4.5,4), which places it just west of destination D3 (see 
 Figure 8.1C ). 
 E X A M P L E  3 
 Determine the coordinates of the center of gravity for the problem depicted in  Figure 8.1C . 
Assume that the shipments from the center of gravity to each of the four destinations will be 
equal quantities. 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The coordinates of the destinations can be obtained from  Figure 8.1B :
 Destination 
 x 
 y 
 D1 
 2, 
 2 
 D2 
 3, 
 5 
 D3 
 5, 
 4 
 D4 
 8, 
 5 
 
 18 
 16 
 
18
4
16
4
4.5
4
 

 



x
x
n
y
y
n
i
i
 
 
 E X A M P L E  4 
 Suppose that the shipments for the problem depicted in  Figure 8.1A  are not all equal, but 
instead are the following:
 Destination 
 x 
 y 
 Weekly  Quantity 
 D1 
 2, 
 2 
 800 
 D2 
 3, 
 5 
 900 
 D3 
 5, 
 4 
 200 
 D4 
 8, 
 5 
 100 
 
 
 
  2,000 
 Determine the center of gravity. 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
 Because the quantities to be shipped differ among destinations, you must use the weighted 
average formulas.
 
2(800)
3(900)
5(200)
8(100)
2,000
6,100
2,000
3.05 [round to 3]
2(800)
5(900)
4(200)
5(100)
2,000
7,400
2,000
3.7
x
x Q
Q
y
y Q
Q
i
i
i
i
i
i














∑
∑
∑
∑
 
Hence, the coordinates of the center of gravity are approximately (3,3.7). This would place it 
south of destination D2, which has coordinates of (3,5). (See  Figure 8.2 .)   
 S O L U T I O N 

358 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 FIGURE 8.2  Center of gravity for Example 4 
6
4
2
4
6
2
8
0
10
y
x 
D2
D3
D4
D1
(3,5)
(5,4)
(8,5)
(2,2)
(3,3.7)
N
S
W
E
 FIGURE 8.3  Solution for Example 4 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
00
2
4
6
Destinations
Center of Gravity
8
10
 See  Figure 8.3  for a graph of the solution to Example 4. The problem can also be solved 
using the appropriate Excel template that is available on the text Web site. 
 KEY POINTS 
 1. 
Location decisions are strategic; they can have a significant impact on the success or failure of a 
business. 
 2. 
Very often, location decisions are long term and involve substantial cost, so it is important to 
devote an appropriate amount of effort to selecting a location. 
 3. 
Decision makers must not let the attractiveness of a few factors cloud the decision-making pro-
cess. There are many factors to take into account when selecting a location. It is essential to 
identify the key factors and their relative importance, and then to use that information to evaluate 
location alternatives. 
 4. 
It is important to also factor in the impact that location choices will have on the supply chain. 
 SUMMARY 
 Location decisions confront both new and existing organizations. Growth, market shifts, depletion of 
raw materials, and the introduction of new products and services are among the reasons organizations 
are concerned with location decisions. The importance of these decisions is underscored by the long-
term commitment they typically involve and by their potential impact on the operating system. 
 The primary location options available to existing organizations are to expand an existing location, 
move to a new location, maintain existing facilities while adding another facility in a new location, or 
do nothing. 
 In practice, the major influences on location decisions are location of raw materials, labor supply, 
market considerations, community-related factors, site-related factors, and climate. Foreign locations 
may be attractive in terms of labor costs, abundance of raw materials, or as potential markets for a 
firm’s products or services. Problems organizations sometimes encounter in foreign countries include 
language differences, cultural differences, bias, and political instability. 
 A common approach to narrowing the range of location alternatives is to first identify a country or 
region that seems to satisfy overall needs and then identify a number of community-site alternatives for 
more in-depth analysis. A variety of methods are used to evaluate location alternatives. Those described 
in the chapter include locational cost-profit-volume analysis, factor rating, and the center of gravity 
method. The transportation model was mentioned briefly; the chapter supplement contains a more com-
plete description of that subject. 
 There are numerous commercial software packages available for location analysis. In addition to 
the models described, many packages employ linear programming or mixed integer programming algo-
rithms. In addition, some software packages use heuristic approaches to obtain reasonable solutions to 
location problems.  

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
359
 KEY TERMS 
 center of gravity 
method, 356 
 clustering, 351 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Problem 1 
 Cost analysis.  A farm implements dealer is seeking a fourth warehouse location to comple-
ment three existing warehouses. There are three potential locations: Charlotte, NC; Atlanta, GA; 
and Columbia, SC. Charlotte would involve a fixed cost of $4,000 per month and a variable cost 
of $4 per unit; Atlanta would involve a fixed cost of $3,500 per month and a variable cost of 
$5 per unit; and Columbia would involve a fixed cost of $5,000 per month and a variable cost of 
$6 per unit. Use of the Charlotte location would increase system transportation costs by $19,000 per 
month, Atlanta by $22,000 per month, and Columbia by $18,000 per month. Which location would 
result in the lowest total cost to handle 800 units per month? 
 Given: Volume    800 units per month 
 Solution 
 
 FC  
per Month 
 Variable 
 Cost per Unit,  v 
 Transportation Cost 
per Month 
 Charlotte 
 $4,000 
 $4 
 $19,000 
 Atlanta 
 3,500 
 5 
 22,000 
 Columbia 
 5,000 
 6 
 18,000 
 Monthly total cost    FC    VC    Transportation cost 
 Charlotte: $4,000    $4 per unit    800 units    $19,000    $26,200 
 Atlanta: 
 3,500     5 per unit    800 units     22,000    29,500 
 Columbia:  5,000     6 per unit    800 units     18,000    27,800 
 Hence, Charlotte would have the lowest total cost for this monthly volume. 
 Problem 2 
Profit analysis.   A manufacturer of staplers is about to lose its lease, so it must move to another 
location. Two sites are currently under consideration. Fixed costs would be $8,000 per month at 
site A and $9,400 per month at site B. Variable costs are expected to be $5 per unit at site A and 
$4 per unit at site B. Monthly demand has been steady at 8,800 units for the last several years 
and is not expected to deviate from that amount in the foreseeable future. Assume staplers sell for 
$6 per unit. Determine which location would yield the higher profit under these conditions. 
Profit
(
)
FC



Q R
v
 Solution 
 Site 
 Revenue 
 FC 
 v 
 Monthly 
Profit  
 A 
 $52,800 
 $8,000 
 $44,000 
 $ 800 
 B 
 $52,800 
 $9,400 
 $35,200 
 $8,200 
 Hence, site B is expected to yield the higher monthly profit. 
 factor rating, 355 
 geographic information 
system (GIS), 350 
 locational cost-profit-volume 
analysis, 353 
 microfactory, 348 
 Factor rating.   Determine which location has the higher factor rating given the following information:    
 Problem 3 
 
 Solution 
 
 Location Scores 
 Factor 
 Weight 
 A 
 B 
 Labor cost 
 5 
 20 
 40 
 Material cost 
 3 
 10 
 30 
 Transportation costs 
 2 
 50 
 10 

360 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 1. In what ways can the location decision have an impact on the production system? 
 2. Respond to this statement: “The importance of the location decision is often vastly overrated; the 
fact that virtually every type of business is located in every section of the country means there 
should be no problem in finding a suitable location.” 
 3. What community factors influence location decisions? 
 4. How are manufacturing and nonmanufacturing location decisions similar? Different? 
 5. What are the potential benefits of locating in foreign countries? Potential drawbacks? 
 6. What is factor rating, and how does it work? 
 7. Outline the general approach for developing location alternatives. 
 8. What are the basic assumptions in locational cost-profit-volume analysis? 
 9. Discuss recent trends in location and possible future strategies. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What trade-offs are involved in deciding to have a single large, centrally located facility instead of 
several smaller, dispersed facilities? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in facility location decisions? 
 3. Name several ways that technology has had an impact on location decisions. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 Combining the weights with the location scores, we can see that location B has the higher score: 
 
 
 
 Location Scores 
 Weighted Scores 
 Factor 
 Weight 
 A 
 B 
 A 
 B 
 Labor cost 
 5 
 20 
 40 
 5(20)    100 
 5(40)    200 
 Material cost 
 3 
 10 
 30 
 3(10)     30 
 3(30)     90 
 Transportation costs 
 2 
 50 
 10 
 2(50)     100 
 2(10)     20 
 
 
 
 
 230 
 310 
 Note that Location A has very low labor costs compared to Location B, but that is more than 
offset by its relatively high transportation costs compared to those of Location B. 
 Problem 4 
 Center of gravity. Determine the center of gravity location for these destinations: 
 Destination 
 x,y 
Coordinates  
 Weekly 
Quantity  
 D1 
 3,5 
 20 
 D2 
 6,8 
 10 
 D3 
 2,7 
 15 
 D4 
 4,5 
 15 
 
 60 
 If the weekly quantities had all been equal, we could have used the two equations in Formula 8–3 
to find the center of gravity. Because the weekly quantities are not all equal, we must use the equa-
tions in Formula 8–4.
3(20)
6(10)
2(15)
4(15)
60
210
60
3.5
5(20)
8(10)
7(15)
5(15)
60
360
60
6.0
x
xQ
Q
y
yQ
Q
= Σ
Σ
=
+
+
+
=
=
= Σ
Σ
=
+
+
+
=
=
 
 
 Hence, the center of gravity has the coordinates  x     3.5 and  y     6. 
 Solution 
SOLVED PROBLEMS

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
361
 1. A company is considering the relocation of its manufacturing plant and administrative offices from 
a small city in the Midwest to a similar-sized city in the South. Approximately 20 percent of the 
residents of the city are employed by the company, and many others are employed in businesses 
such as banks, personal services, restaurants, shopping centers, and supermarkets that would suffer 
a decline in business if the company decides to relocate. Does the company have a social respon-
sibility to factor into its decision the impact that its move would have on the city? Explain your 
reasoning. 
 2. The owner of a fast-food franchise has exclusive rights to operate in a medium-sized metropolitan 
area. The owner currently has a single outlet open, which has proved to be very popular, and there 
are often waiting lines of customers. The owner is therefore considering opening one or more out-
lets in the area. What are the key factors that the owner should investigate before making a final 
decision? What trade-offs would there be in opening one additional site versus opening several 
additional sites? 
 3. Corruption and bribery are common in some countries. Would you avoid locating in such a country, 
or locate there and deal with it? If the latter, how would you deal with it? 
 4. Give three examples of unethical behavior involving location selection, and indicate which ethical 
principle is violated (see Chapter 1). 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. A newly formed firm must decide on a plant location. There are two alternatives under consideration: 
locate near the major raw materials or locate near the major customers. Locating near the raw materi-
als will result in lower fixed and variable costs than locating near the market, but the owners believe 
there would be a loss in sales volume because customers tend to favor local suppliers. Revenue per 
unit will be $185 in either case. Using the following information, determine which location would 
produce the greater profit. 
 2. The owner of Genuine Subs, Inc., hopes to expand the present operation by adding one new outlet. 
She has studied three locations. Each would have the same labor and materials costs (food, serving 
containers, napkins, etc.) of $1.76 per sandwich. Sandwiches sell for $2.65 each in all locations. Rent 
and equipment costs would be $5,000 per month for location A, $5,500 per month for location B, and 
$5,800 per month for location C.
 a. Determine the volume necessary at each location to realize a monthly profit of $10,000. 
 b. If expected sales at A, B, and C are 21,000 per month, 22,000 per month, and 23,000 per month, 
respectively, which location would yield the greatest profits? 
 3. A small producer of machine tools wants to move to a larger building, and has identified two alterna-
tives. Location A has annual fixed costs of $800,000 and variable costs of $14,000 per unit; location 
B has annual fixed costs of $920,000 and variable costs of $13,000 per unit. The finished items sell 
for $17,000 each.
 a. At what volume of output would the two locations have the same total cost? 
 b. For what range of output would location A be superior? For what range would B be superior? 
 4. A company that produces pleasure boats has decided to expand one of its lines. Current facilities are 
insufficient to handle the increased workload, so the company is considering three alternatives, A 
(new location), B (subcontract), and C (expand existing facilities). 
 Alternative A would involve substantial fixed costs but relatively low variable costs: fixed 
costs would be $250,000 per year, and variable costs would be $500 per boat. Subcontracting would 
involve a cost per boat of $2,500, and expansion would require an annual fixed cost of $50,000 and 
a variable cost of $1,000 per boat.
 a. Find the range of output for each alternative that would yield the lowest total cost. 
 b. Which alternative would yield the lowest total cost for an expected annual volume of 150 
boats?  
 c. What other factors might be considered in choosing between expansion and subcontracting? 
 PROBLEMS 
 
 
 Omaha 
 Kansas City 
 Annual fixed costs ($ millions) 
 $1.2 
 $1.4 
 Variable cost per unit 
 $36 
 $47 
 Expected annual demand (units) 
 8,000 
 12,000 

362 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
 
 Factor 
 Weight 
 East #1 
 East #2 
 West 
 Initial cost 
 8 
 100 
 150 
 140 
 Traffic 
 10 
 40 
 40 
 30 
 Maintenance 
 6 
 20 
 25 
 18 
 Dock space 
 6 
 25 
 10 
 12 
 Neighborhood 
 4 
 12 
 8 
 15 
  5.  Rework Problem 4b using this additional information: Expansion would result in an increase of 
$70,000 per year in transportation costs, subcontracting would result in an increase of $25,000 per 
year, and adding a new location would result in an increase of $4,000 per year. 
  6.  A firm that has recently experienced enormous growth is seeking to lease a small plant in Memphis, 
TN; Biloxi, MS; or Birmingham, AL. Prepare an economic analysis of the three locations given the 
following information: Annual costs for building, equipment, and administration would be $40,000 
for Memphis, $60,000 for Biloxi, and $100,000 for Birmingham. Labor and materials are expected 
to be $8 per unit in Memphis, $4 per unit in Biloxi, and $5 per unit in Birmingham. The Memphis 
location would increase system transportation costs by $50,000 per year, the Biloxi location by 
$60,000 per year, and the Birmingham location by $25,000 per year. Expected annual volume is 
10,000 units. 
  7.  A retired auto mechanic hopes to open a rustproofing shop. Customers would be local new-car 
dealers. Two locations are being considered, one in the center of the city and one on the outskirts. 
The central city location would involve fixed monthly costs of $7,000 and labor, materials, and 
transportation costs of $30 per car. The outside location would have fixed monthly costs of $4,700 
and labor, materials, and transportation costs of $40 per car. Dealer price at either location will be 
$90 per car.
 a. Which location will yield the greatest profit if monthly demand is (1) 200 cars? (2) 300 cars? 
 b. At what volume of output will the two sites yield the same monthly profit? 
  8.  For each of the four types of organizations shown, rate the importance of each factor in terms of 
making location decisions using  L     low importance, M    moderate importance, and H    high 
importance. 
 
 
 
 Location Score 
 Factor 
(100 points each) 
 Weight 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Convenience 
 .15 
 80 
 70 
 60 
 Parking facilities 
 .20 
 72 
 76 
 92 
 Display area 
 .18 
 88 
 90 
 90 
 Shopper traffic 
 .27 
 94 
 86 
 80 
 Operating costs 
 .10 
 98 
 90 
 82 
 Neighborhood 
 .10 
 96 
 85 
 75 
 
 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 Factor 
 Local 
Bank 
 Steel 
Mill 
 Food 
Warehouse 
 Public 
School 
 Convenience for customers 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Attractiveness of building 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Nearness to raw materials 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Large amounts of power 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Pollution controls 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Labor cost and availability 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Transportation costs 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 Construction costs 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
 _____ 
  9.  Using the following factor ratings, determine which location alternative (A, B, or C) should be 
chosen on the basis of maximum composite score.  
  10. Determine which location has the highest composite score:  

 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis 
363
    11.  A manager has received an analysis of several cities being considered for a new office complex. 
The data (10 points maximum) are as follows: 
 a.  If the manager weights the factors equally, how would the locations stack up in terms of their 
composite factor rating scores? 
 b.  If business services and construction costs are given weights that are double the weights of the 
other factors, how would the locations stack up?  
 
 Location 
 ( x,y ) 
 A 
 3,7 
 B 
 8,2 
 C 
 4,6 
 D 
 4,1 
 E 
 6,4 
 
 Location 
 ( x,y ) 
 Weekly
Quantity  
 A 
 5,7 
 15 
 B 
 6,9 
 20 
 C 
 3,9 
 25 
 D 
 9,4 
 30 
 
 
 Location Score 
 Factor 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Business services 
 9 
 5 
 5 
 Community services 
 7 
 6 
 7 
 Real estate cost 
 3 
 8 
 7 
 Construction costs 
 5 
 6 
 5 
 Cost of living 
 4 
 7 
 8 
 Taxes 
 5 
 5 
 4 
 Transportation 
 6 
 7 
 8 
  12. A toy manufacturer produces toys in five locations throughout the country. Raw materials (primar-
ily barrels of powdered plastic) will be shipped from a new, centralized warehouse whose location 
is to be determined. The monthly quantities to be shipped to each location are the same. A coor-
dinate system has been established, and the coordinates of each location have been determined as 
shown. Determine the coordinates of the centralized warehouse.  
    13.  A clothing manufacturer produces women’s clothes at four locations in Mexico. Relative locations 
have been determined, as shown in the table below. The location of a central shipping point for bolts 
of cloth must now be determined. Weekly quantities to be shipped to each location are also shown 
in the table. Determine the coordinates of the location that will minimize distribution costs. 
    14.  A company that handles hazardous waste wants to minimize the shipping cost for shipments to a 
disposal center from five receiving stations it operates. Given the locations of the receiving stations 
and the volumes to be shipped daily, determine the location of the disposal center. 
 
 Location of 
Processing 
Station, ( x,y ) 
 Volume, 
Tons per Day 
 10,5 
 26 
 4,1 
 9 
 4,7 
 25 
 2,6 
 30 
 8,7 
 40 

364 
Chapter Eight Location Planning and Analysis
  15. An analysis of sites for a distribution center has led to two possible sites (L1 and L2 on the map). 
The sites are comparable on every key factor. The one remaining factor is the center of gravity. Use 
the center of gravity method to select the better site. Monthly shipments will be the quantities listed 
in the table. 
 Destination 
 Quantity 
 D1 
 900 
 D2 
 300 
 D3 
 700 
 D4 
 600 
 D5 
 1200 
 Walmart is one of the largest corporations in the world, and it has 
obviously enjoyed tremendous success. But while many welcome 
its location in their communities, others do not. Some complain 
that its presence has too many negative effects on a community, 
ranging from traffic congestion to anti-union sentiment to unfair 
competition. 
 Suppose Walmart has announced plans to seek approval from the 
planning commission of a small town to build a new store. Develop a 
list of the main arguments, pro and con, that could be presented at a 
public hearing on the matter by members of each 
of these groups:
 1. Owners of small businesses located nearby. 
 2. Town residents, and residents of nearby towns. 
 How might a Walmart representative respond to the negative criti-
cisms that might be brought up, and what other benefits could the 
representative offer the planning board to bolster Walmart’s case for 
gaining the board’s approval? 
 CASE 
 Hello, Walmart? 
 Ballou, Ronald H.  Business Logistics Management. 5th 
ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004. 
 De Meirleir, Marcel.  Location, Location, Location: A 
Plant Location and Site Selection Guide. London: 
Routledge, 2008. 
 Grimshaw, David J.  Bringing Geographical Informa-
tion Systems into Business. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 2000. 
 Mentzer, John T. “Seven Keys to Facility Location.” 
 Supply Chain Management Review 12, no.
5, May 2008, p. 25. 
 Pick, James B.  Geo-Business: GIS in the Digital Orga-
nization. New York: Wiley, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
D1
D2
D4
D5
L2
L1
D3

This page intentionally left blank

366
 CHAP TE R 
 9 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 Management 
of Quality 
 9.1 Introduction,  367 
 9.2 The Evolution of Quality Management,  368 
 9.3 The Foundations of Modern Quality 
Management: The Gurus,  369 
 9.4 Insights on Quality Management,  372 
 Defining Quality: The Dimensions 
of Quality,  372 
 Assessing Service Quality,  374 
 The Determinants of Quality,  375 
 Responsibility for Quality,  376 
 Benefits of Good Quality,  377 
 The Consequences of Poor Quality,  377 
 The Costs of Quality,  378 
 Ethics and Quality Management,  380 
 9.5 Quality Awards,  380 
 The Baldrige Award,  381 
 The European Quality Award,  381 
 The Deming Prize,  381 
 9.6 Quality Certification,  381 
 ISO 9000, 14000, and 24700,  381 
 9.7 Quality and the Supply Chain,  383 
 9.8 Total Quality Management,  384 
 Obstacles to Implementing TQM,  386 
 Criticisms of TQM,  387 
 9.9  Problem Solving, and Process 
Improvement,  388 
 The Plan-Do-Study-Act Cycle,  388 
 Six Sigma,  390 
 9.10 Quality Tools,  392 
 Illustrations of the Use of Graphical 
Tools,  397  
 Methods for Generating Ideas,  398 
 9.11 Operations Strategy,  400 
 Cases: Chick-n-Gravy Dinner Line,  405 
 Tip Top Markets,  406 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO9.1 
Discuss the philosophies of quality gurus. 
 LO9.2 
Define the term  quality as it relates to products and as 
it relates to services. 
 LO9.3 
Identify the determinants of quality. 
 LO9.4 
Explain why quality is important and the consequences 
of poor quality. 
 LO9.5 
Describe and give examples of the costs associated with quality. 
 LO9.6 
Discuss the importance of ethics in managing quality. 
 LO9.7 
Compare the quality awards. 
 LO9.8 
Discuss quality certification and its importance. 
 LO9.9 
Describe TQM. 
 LO9.10 
Give an overview of problem solving. 
 LO9.11 
Give an overview of process improvement. 
 LO9.12 
Describe the six sigma methodology. 
 LO9.13 
Describe and use various quality tools.    

367
 This chapter is the first of two chapters on quality. In this chapter you will learn about the evolution of quality management, 
definitions of quality, the costs of quality and the consequences of poor quality, some quality awards and quality certification, 
total quality management, and quality tools. 
 The importance of quality cannot be overstated; two key elements of every purchasing decision are price and quality. Con-
sequently, having a focus on quality and quality improvement should be a part of every business organization, whether the 
organization’s business is making cars, selling electronic goods, providing financial services, providing medical  services, or 
baking cookies. 
 9.1 INTRODUCTION 
 Broadly defined,  quality  refers to the ability of a product or service to consistently meet or 
exceed customer requirements or expectations. However, different customers will have differ-
ent requirements, so a working definition of quality is customer-dependent. 
 For a decade or so, quality was an important focal point in business. But after a while, 
the emphasis on quality began to fade, and quality took a backseat to other concerns. How-
ever, there has been an upsurge recently in the need for attention to quality. Much of this 
has been driven by recent experience with costs and adverse publicity associated with wide-
ranging recalls that have included automobiles, ground meat, toys, produce, dog food, and 
pharmaceuticals. 
 Quality  The ability of a product 
or service to consistently meet or 
exceed customer expectations. 

368 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 9.2 THE EVOLUTION OF QUALITY 
MANAGEMENT 
  Prior to the Industrial Revolution, skilled craftsmen performed all stages of production. Pride 
of workmanship and reputation often provided the motivation to see that a job was done right. 
Lengthy guild apprenticeships caused this attitude to carry over to new workers. Moreover, 
one person or a small group of people were responsible for an entire product. 
 A division of labor accompanied the Industrial Revolution; each worker was then respon-
sible for only a small portion of each product. Pride of workmanship became less meaningful 
because workers could no longer identify readily with the final product. The responsibility for 
quality shifted to the foremen. Inspection was either nonexistent or haphazard, although in 
some instances 100 percent inspection was used. 
 Frederick Winslow Taylor, the “Father of Scientific Management,” gave new emphasis 
to quality by including product inspection and gauging in his list of fundamental areas of 
manufacturing management. G. S. Radford improved Taylor’s methods. Two of his most 
significant contributions were the notions of involving quality considerations early in the 
seems to be taking hold across all levels of 
the enterprise. 
 Quality Goes Upstream 
 Talk to the manufacturing community about quality’s place in today’s 
environment and a clear pattern emerges—companies are finally 
grasping the “shared responsibility” aspect of Deming’s teachings. If 
quality is truly everyone’s responsibility, then the idea goes beyond the 
shop floor and into the front office, the service department and every-
where else that provides value to customers and shareholders. 
 Ron Atkinson, chairman of the American Society for Quality (ASQ), 
has been watching this trend unfold. He describes the path that the 
idea of quality management in manufacturing has taken over the 
years. 
 “When I started in manufacturing 35 years ago, there was a police-
man installed at the end of the line who looked at the parts and said, 
‘That one is OK, that can be shipped and that one can’t.’ Gradually, it 
got to, ‘Let’s find better ways to do the checking,’ and then to, ‘Let’s 
find a way to predict what the parts are going to look like when they hit 
the end of the line,’ so we started doing defect prevention. Now where 
we’re at is that quality is expanding to cover everything, including out-
side of the actual manufacturing process, to ‘how do we improve the 
quality of our HR services and support services? How do we improve 
the quality of the decisions that are made?” 
 According to Atkinson, concepts crucial to establishing a top-
quality manufacturing line have been driven upstream, and expanded 
to become part of an overall continuous improvement strategy. “Qual-
ity has become a systems approach, rather than focusing on one part 
at a time and whether it’s dimensionally correct. Quality is continuous 
improvement.” 
 Source: Excerpted from Brad Kenney,  Industry Week, April 1, 2008. 
 Quality is more than just a statistical analysis tool for manufacturing 
lines. When done right, quality should encompass the entire enterprise. 
 Some 50 years after the advent of the total quality management 
(TQM) movement championed by W. Edwards Deming, manufactur-
ers of all different sizes and stripes are still being dogged by high-
profile manufacturing quality defects. The list is long, and getting 
longer every week, and crosses every manufacturing vertical. At 
least a token “quality program” is de rigueur for U.S. manufactur-
ers, but many are still at lip-service level agreement with the means 
required to reach the necessary ends. However, talk is cheap—
recalls are not. 
 From tainted beef to spinach, from lead-painted toys to poisoned pet 
food and blood thinners to exploding laptop batteries and malfunction-
ing medical devices, the costs in scrapped product, consumer lawsuits 
and lost brand equity from defects and recalls are huge. Persistent, 
expensive and well-publicized recalls are striking companies with even 
the most stellar quality reputations. Toyota, the progenitor of a legend-
ary quality-focused production system, has suffered a rash of defects 
that have caused the company to drop in  Consumer Reports’ Annual 
Car Reliability Survey ratings—an important market barometer for its 
consumers. 
 On a perhaps less dangerous but equally costly front, Microsoft’s 
X-box 360 video gaming platform suffered a high-profile manufactur-
ing defect that at one point had up to one-third of all units suffering 
from a “fatal error” (device owners called it “the red ring of death”) that 
led at least indirectly to markedly weaker competitive positioning in the 
crucial holiday selling season, as well as a warranty extension that is 
estimated at more than $6 billion in unplanned accruals. 
 Many of these manufacturing problems are coming from global 
supply chains, which is a failure as much of management as it is the 
defective products themselves. However bleak the situation may seem, 
all is not lost. Indeed, the responsibility for quality manufacturing finally 
 READING 
 Whatever Happened to Quality? 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
369
product design stage and making connections among high quality, increased productivity, 
and lower costs. 
 In 1924, Bell Telephone Laboratories introduced statistical control charts that could be 
used to monitor production. Around 1930, H. F. Dodge and H. G. Romig, also of Bell Labs, 
introduced tables for sampling. Nevertheless, statistical quality control procedures were 
not widely used until World War II, when the U.S. government began to require vendors to 
use them. 
 World War II caused a dramatic increase in emphasis on quality control. The U.S. Army 
refined sampling techniques for dealing with large shipments of arms from many suppliers. 
By the end of the 1940s, the U.S. Army, Bell Labs, and major universities were training engi-
neers in other industries in the use of statistical sampling techniques. About the same time, 
professional quality organizations were emerging throughout the country. One of these orga-
nizations was the American Society for Quality Control (ASQC, now known as ASQ). Over 
the years, the society has promoted quality with its publications, seminars and conferences, 
and training programs. 
 During the 1950s, the quality movement evolved into quality assurance. In the mid-1950s, 
total quality control efforts enlarged the realm of quality efforts from its primary focus on 
manufacturing to include product design and incoming raw materials. One important feature 
of this work was greater involvement of upper management in quality. 
 During the 1960s, the concept of “zero defects” gained favor. This approach focused on 
employee motivation and awareness, and the expectation of perfection from each employee. 
It evolved from the success of the Martin Company in producing a “perfect” missile for the 
U.S. Army. 
 In the 1970s, quality assurance methods gained increasing emphasis in services including 
government operations, health care, banking, and the travel industry. 
 Something else happened in the 1970s that had a global impact on quality. An embargo 
on oil sales instituted by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) caused 
an increase in energy costs, and automobile buyers became more interested in fuel-efficient, 
lower-cost vehicles. Japanese auto producers, who had been improving their products, were 
poised to take advantage of these changes, and they captured an increased share of the auto-
mobile market. The quality of their automobiles enhanced the reputation of Japanese produc-
ers, opening the door for a wide array of Japanese-produced goods. 
 American producers, alarmed by their loss of market share, spent much of the late 1970s 
and the 1980s trying to improve the quality of their goods while lowering their costs. 
 The evolution of quality took a dramatic shift from quality assurance to a strategic approach 
to quality in the late 1970s. Up until that time, the main emphasis had been on finding and 
correcting defective products before they reached the market. It was still a reactive approach. 
The strategic approach is proactive, focusing on preventing mistakes from occurring in the 
first place. The idea is to design quality into products, rather than to find and correct defects 
after the fact. This approach has now expanded to include processes and services. Quality 
and profits are more closely linked. This approach also places greater emphasis on customer 
satisfaction, and it involves all levels of management as well as workers in a continuing effort 
to increase quality. 
 9.3 THE FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN QUALITY 
MANAGEMENT: THE GURUS 
     A core of quality pioneers shaped current thinking and practice. This section describes some 
of their key contributions to the field. 
 Walter Shewhart.  Walter Shewhart was a genuine pioneer in the field of quality con-
trol, and he became known as the “father of statistical quality control.” He developed con-
trol charts for analyzing the output of processes to determine when corrective action was 
LO9.1 Discuss the philoso-
phies of quality gurus.

370 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
necessary. Shewhart had a strong influence on the 
thinking of two other gurus, W. Edwards Deming 
and Joseph Juran. 
 W. Edwards Deming.  Deming, a statistics 
professor at New York University in the 1940s, 
went to Japan after World War II to assist the Jap-
anese in improving quality and productivity. The 
Union of Japanese Scientists, who had invited 
Deming, were so impressed that in 1951, after 
a series of lectures presented by Deming, they 
established the   Deming Prize , which is awarded 
annually to firms that distinguish themselves with 
quality management programs. 
 Although the Japanese revered Deming, he was 
largely unknown to business leaders in the United 
States. In fact, he worked with the Japanese for 
almost 30 years before he gained recognition in his 
own country. Before his death in 1993, U.S. com-
panies turned their attention to Deming, embraced 
his philosophy, and requested his assistance in set-
ting up quality improvement programs. 
 Deming compiled a famous list of 14 points he 
believed were the prescription needed to achieve quality in an organization (see  Table 9.1 ). 
His message was that the cause of inefficiency and poor quality is the  system,  not the employ-
ees. Deming felt that it was  management’s responsibility  to correct the system to achieve the 
desired results. In addition to the 14 points, Deming stressed the need to reduce variation in 
output (deviation from a standard), which can be accomplished by distinguishing between 
 special causes of variation (i.e., correctable) and  common causes of variation (i.e., random). 
 Deming’s concept of profound knowledge incorporates the beliefs and values about learn-
ing that guided Japan’s rise to a world economic power. 
 Joseph M. Juran.  Juran, like Deming, taught Japanese manufacturers how to improve the 
quality of their goods, and he, too, can be regarded as a major force in Japan’s success in quality. 
 Juran viewed quality as fitness-for-use. He also believed that roughly 80 percent of qual-
ity defects are management controllable; thus, management has the responsibility to correct 
 Deming Prize  Prize estab-
lished by the Japanese and 
awarded annually to firms that 
distinguish themselves with 
quality management programs. 
 1. Create constancy of purpose toward improvement of product and service. 
 2. Reduce levels of delays, mistakes, defective materials, and defective workmanship. 
 3. Cease dependence on mass inspection. ( Prevent defects rather than  detect defects.) 
 4. Eliminate suppliers that cannot qualify with statistical evidence of quality. 
 5. Find problems. It is management’s job to work continually on system improvement. 
 6. Institute modern methods of training on the job. 
 7. Emphasize quality instead of volume alone. Management must prepare to take immediate action 
on reports from foremen concerning barriers such as inherent defects, machines not maintained, 
poor tools, and fuzzy operational definitions. 
 8. Drive out fear, so that everyone may work effectively for the company. 
 9. Break down barriers between departments. People in research, design, sales, and production must 
work as a team. 
 10. Eliminate goals and slogans asking for new levels of productivity without providing methods. 
 11. Eliminate work standards that prescribe numerical quotas. 
 12. Remove barriers that stand between the hourly worker and his right to pride of workmanship. 
 13. Institute a vigorous program of education and retraining. 
 14. Create a structure in top management that will push every day on the above 13 points. 
 Source: Adapted from W. Edwards Deming,  Out of the Crisis, pp. 23 and 24. Copyright © 2000 MIT Press. Used with permission. 
 TABLE 9.1 
 Deming’s 14 points 
 W. Edwards Deming. 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
371
this deficiency. He described quality management in terms of a  trilogy  consisting of quality 
planning, quality control, and quality improvement. According to Juran, quality planning is 
necessary to establish processes that are  capable  of meeting quality standards; quality control 
is necessary in order to know when corrective action is needed; and quality improvement will 
help to find better ways of doing things. A key element of Juran’s philosophy is the commit-
ment of management to continual improvement. 
 Juran is credited as one of the first to measure the cost of quality, and he demonstrated the 
potential for increased profits that would result if the costs of poor quality could be reduced. 
 Armand Feigenbaum.  Feigenbaum was instrumental in advancing the “cost of noncon-
formance” approach as a reason for management to commit to quality. He recognized that 
quality was not simply a collection of tools and techniques, but a “total field.” According to 
Feigenbaum, it is the customer who defines quality. 
 Philip B. Crosby. Crosby developed the concept of  zero defects and popularized the phrase 
“Do it right the first time.” He stressed prevention, and he argued against the idea that “there 
will always be some level of defectives.” The quality-is-free concept presented in his book, 
 Quality Is Free,  is that the costs of poor quality are much greater than traditionally defined. 
According to Crosby, these costs are so great that rather than viewing quality efforts as costs, 
organizations should view them as a way to reduce costs, because the improvements gener-
ated by quality efforts will more than pay for themselves. 
 Crosby believes that any level of defects is too high and that achieving quality can be rela-
tively easy, as explained in his book  Quality Without Tears: The Art of Hassle-Free Management. 
 Kaoru Ishikawa.  The late Japanese expert on quality was strongly influenced by both Deming 
and Juran, although he made significant contributions of his own to quality management. Among 
his key contributions were the development of the cause-and-effect diagram (also known as a 
fishbone diagram) for problem solving and the implementation of quality circles, which involve 
workers in quality improvement. He was the first quality expert to call attention to the  internal 
customer —the next person in the process, the next operation, within the organization.  
 Genichi Taguchi.  Taguchi is best known for the Taguchi loss function, which involves a 
formula for determining the cost of poor quality. The idea is that the deviation of a part from a 
standard causes a loss, and the combined effect of deviations of all parts from their standards 
can be large, even though each individual deviation is small. An important part of his philoso-
phy is the cost to society of poor quality. 
 Taiichi Ohno and Shigeo Shingo.  Taiichi Ohno and Shigeo Shingo both developed the 
philosophy and methods of  kaizen,  a Japanese term for continuous improvement (defined 
more fully later in this chapter), at Toyota. Continuous improvement is one of the hallmarks 
of successful quality management. 
  Table 9.2  provides a summary of the important contributions of the gurus to modern quality 
management.  
 Contributor 
 Key Contributions 
 Shewhart 
 Control charts; variance reduction 
 Deming 
 14 points; special versus common causes of variation 
 Juran 
 Quality is fitness-for-use; quality trilogy 
 Feigenbaum 
 Quality is a total field; the customer defines quality 
 Crosby 
 Quality is free; zero defects 
 Ishikawa 
 Cause-and-effect diagrams; quality circles 
 Taguchi 
 Taguchi loss function 
 Ohno and Shingo 
 Continuous improvement 
 TABLE 9.2 
 A summary of key contributors to 
quality management 

372 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 9.4 INSIGHTS ON QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
  Successful management of quality requires that managers have insights on various aspects 
of quality. These include defining quality in operational terms, understanding the costs and 
benefits of quality, recognizing the consequences of poor quality, and recognizing the need 
for ethical behavior. We begin with defining quality. 
 Defining Quality: The Dimensions of Quality 
    One way to think about quality is the degree to which performance of a product or service 
meets or exceeds customer expectations. The difference between these two, that is Perfor-
mance – Expectations, is of great interest. If these two measures are equal, the difference is 
zero, and expectations have been met. If the difference is negative, expectations have not been 
met, whereas if the difference is positive, performance has exceeded customer expectations. 
 Customer expectations can be broken down into a number of categories, or  dimensions, 
that customers use to judge the quality of a product or service. Understanding these helps 
organizations in their efforts to meet or exceed customer expectations. The dimensions used 
for goods are somewhat different from those used for services. 
 Product Quality. Product quality is often judged on nine dimensions of quality: 1 
 Performance —main characteristics of the product. 
 Aesthetics —appearance, feel, smell, taste. 
 Special features —extra characteristics. 
 Conformance —how well a product corresponds to design specifications. 
 Reliability —dependable performance. 
 Durability —ability to perform over time. 
 Perceived quality —indirect evaluation of quality (e.g., reputation). 
 Serviceability —handling of complaints or repairs. 
 Consistency —quality doesn’t vary. 
 These dimensions are further described by the examples presented in  Table 9.3 . When 
referring to a product, a customer sometimes judges the first four dimensions by its  fitness 
for use. 
 Notice that price is  not a dimension of quality. 
 1 Adapted from David Garvin, “Competing on the Eight Dimensions of Quality,”  Harvard Business Review 65, 
no. 6 (1987). Copyright © 1987 by the Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation; all rights reserved. 
LO9.2 Define the term  quality  
as it relates to products and as 
it relates to services.
 Dimension 
 Examples 
 1. Performance 
 Everything works: fit and finish, ride, handling, acceleration 
 2. Aesthetics 
 Exterior and interior design 
 3. Features 
 Convenience: placement of gauges 
 
 High tech: GPS system 
 
 Safety: anti-skid, airbags 
 4. Conformance 
 Car matches manufacturer’s specifications 
 5. Reliability 
 Infrequent need for repairs 
 6. Durability 
 Useful life in miles, resistance to rust 
 7. Perceived quality 
 Top-rated 
 8. Serviceability 
 Ease of repair 
 9. Consistency 
 Quality doesn’t vary from car to car 
 TABLE 9.3 
 Examples of product quality 
dimensions for a car 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
373
 Service Quality.  The dimensions of product quality don’t adequately describe service qual-
ity. Instead, service quality is often described using the following dimensions: 2 
 Convenience —the availability and accessibility of the service. 
 Reliability —the ability to perform a service dependably, consistently, and accurately. 
 Responsiveness —the willingness of service providers to help customers in unusual situ-
ations and to deal with problems. 
 Time —the speed with which service is delivered. 
 Assurance —the knowledge exhibited by personnel who come into contact with a cus-
tomer and their ability to convey trust and confidence. 
 Courtesy —the way customers are treated by employees who come into contact with 
them. 
 Tangibles —the physical appearance of facilities, equipment, personnel, and communica-
tion materials. 
 Consistency —The ability to provide the same level of good quality repeatedly. 
 Expectations —Meet (or exceed) customer expectations. 
  Table 9.4  illustrates how the dimensions of service quality might apply to having an automo-
bile repaired. 
 The dimensions of both product and service quality establish a  conceptual  framework for 
thinking about quality, but even they are too abstract to be applied operationally for purposes 
of product or service design, or actually producing a product or delivering a service. They must 
be stated in terms of specific,  measurable  characteristics. For example, when buying a car, a 
customer would naturally be interested in the car’s performance. But what does that mean? In 
more specific terms, it might refer to a car’s estimated miles per gallon, how quickly it can go 
from 0 to 60 miles per hour, or its stopping distance when traveling at 60 mph. Each of these 
can be stated in measurable terms (e.g., estimated miles per gallon: city    25, highway    30). 
Similar measurable characteristics can often be identified for each of the other product dimen-
sions, as well as for the service dimensions. This is the sort of detailed information that is 
needed to both design and produce high-quality goods and services. 
 Information on customer wants in service can sometimes be difficult to pin down, creating 
challenges for designing and managing service quality. For example, customers may use words 
such as  friendly,  considerate,  and  professional  to describe what they expect from service provid-
ers. These and similar descriptors are often difficult to translate into exact service specifications. 
Moreover in many instances, customer wants are often industry specific. Thus, the expectations 
would be quite different for health care versus dry cleaning. Furthermore, customer complaints 
may be due in part to unrelated factors (e.g., customer’s mood or general health, the weather). 
 2 Adapted from Valerie A. Zeithhaml, A. Parasuraman, and Leonard L. Berry,  Delivering Quality Service and 
Balancing Customer Expectations  (New York: The Free Press, 1990); and J. R. Evans and W. M. Lindsey,  The Man-
agement and Control of Quality, 3rd ed. (St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1996). 
 Dimension 
 Examples 
 1. Convenience 
 Was the service center conveniently located? 
 2. Reliability 
 Was the problem fixed and will the “fix” last? 
 3. Responsiveness 
 Were customer service personnel willing and able to answer questions? 
 4. Time 
 How long did the customer have to wait? 
 5. Assurance 
 Did the customer service personnel seem knowledgeable about the repair? 
 6. Courtesy 
 Were customer service personnel and the cashier friendly and courteous? 
 7. Tangibles 
 Were the facilities clean? Were personnel neat? 
 8. Consistency 
 Was the service quality good, and was it consistent with previous visits? 
 9. Expectations 
 Were customer expectations met? 
 TABLE 9.4 
 Examples of service quality 
dimensions for having a car 
repaired 

374 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 Other challenges with service quality include the reality that customer expectations often 
change over time and that different customers tend to have different expectations, so what one 
customer might view as good service quality, another customer might not be satisfied with 
at all. Couple these with the fact that each contact with a customer is a “moment of truth” in 
which service quality is instantly judged, and you begin to understand some of the challenges 
of achieving a consistently high perception of service quality. 
 If customers participate in a service system (i.e., self-service), there can be increased 
potential for a negative perception of quality. Consequently, adequate care must be taken 
to make the necessary customer acts simple and safe, especially since customers cannot be 
trained. So error prevention must be designed into the system. 
 It should also be noted that in most instances, some quality dimensions of a product or 
service will be more important than others, so it is important to identify customer priorities, 
especially when it is likely that trade-off decisions will be made at various points in design 
and production. Quality function deployment (described in Chapter 4) is a tool that can be 
helpful for that purpose. 
 Assessing Service Quality 
 A widely used tool for assessing service quality is SERVQUAL,  3   an instrument designed to 
obtain feedback on an organization’s ability to provide quality service to customers. It focuses 
on five of the above-mentioned service dimensions that influence customers’ perceptions of 
service quality: tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, and empathy. The results of 
this service quality audit help management identify service strengths and weaknesses. Of par-
ticular interest are any  gaps  or discrepancies in service quality. There may be discrepancies 
between:
 1. 
actual customer expectations and management perceptions of those expectations. 
 2. 
management perceptions of customer expectations and service-quality specifications. 
 3. 
service quality and service actually delivered. 
 4. 
service actually delivered and what is communicated about the service to customers. 
 5. 
customers’ expectations of the service provider and their perceptions of provider 
delivery. 
 If gaps are found, they can be related to tangibles or other service quality dimensions to 
address the discrepancies. 
3 Valarie A. Zeithaml, A. Parasuraman, and Leonard L. Berry,  Delivering Quality Service: Balancing Customer 
Perceptions and Expectations (New York: The Free Press, 1990), p. 26. 
 Consumers often associate quiet operation as a sign of product qual-
ity, and they are willing to pay extra to get it. Such is the case with 
clothes washers, dishwashers, air conditioners, shredders, and auto-
mobiles. In the case of automobiles, designers know that buyers asso-
ciate a quiet ride with quality, so doors, hood, windshield and exhaust 
systems have extra soundproofing and sealing to keep noise out. They 
also know that buyers value safety, and that buyers associate safety 
with how solid a car door sounds when it is closed, so designers have 
given extra attention to those sorts of details. A sign of the growing 
 READING 
 The Sounds of Quality 
importance of sound in the auto industry is that 
J.D. Power & Associates measures “pleasantness 
of sound” for doors, signals, and engine accel-
eration in its Initial Quality Study. 
 Likewise, cell phone manufacturers are giving careful attention to 
ring tones and other sounds emitted by their products, as are manufac-
turers of other electronic gadgets. 
 Source: Based on David Kiley, “Fine-Tuning a Brand’s Signature Sound,” 
BusinessWeek, August 13, 2007. 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
375
Customers shopping for 
appliances at an Abt Electronics 
store in Glenview, Illinois. Abt 
is an independent, family-owned 
retailer known for quality 
products and great customer 
service.
 The Determinants of Quality 
  The degree to which a product or a service successfully satisfies its intended purpose has 
four primary determinants:
 1. 
Design. 
 2. 
How well the product or service conforms to the design. 
 3. 
Ease of use. 
 4. 
Service after delivery. 
 The design phase is the starting point for the level of quality eventually achieved. Design 
involves decisions about the specific characteristics of a product or service such as size, shape, 
and location.   Quality of design  refers to the intention of designers to include or exclude cer-
tain features in a product or service. For example, many different models of automobiles are 
on the market today. They differ in size, appearance, roominess, fuel economy, comfort, and 
materials used. These differences reflect choices made by designers that determine the qual-
ity of design. Design decisions must take into account customer wants, production or service 
capabilities, safety and liability (both during production and after delivery), costs, and other 
similar considerations. 
 Designers may determine customer wants from information provided by marketing, per-
haps through the use of consumer surveys or other market research. Marketing may organize 
focus groups of consumers to express their views on a product or service (what they like and 
don’t like, and what they would like to have). 
 Designers must work closely with representatives of operations to ascertain that designs 
can be produced; that is, that production or service has the equipment, capacity, and skills 
necessary to produce or provide a particular design. 
 A poor design can result in difficulties in production or service. For example, materials 
might be difficult to obtain, specifications difficult to meet, or procedures difficult to follow. 
Moreover, if a design is inadequate or inappropriate for the circumstances, the best workman-
ship in the world may not be enough to achieve the desired quality. Also, we cannot expect 
a worker to achieve good results if the given tools or procedures are inadequate. Similarly, a 
superior design usually cannot offset poor workmanship. 
 Quality of conformance  refers to the degree to which goods and services conform to 
(i.e.,  achieve ) the intent of the designers. This is affected by factors such as the capability of 
LO9.3 Identify the determi-
nants of quality.
 Quality of design  Intention of 
designers to include or exclude 
features in a product or service.  
 Quality of conformance  The 
degree to which goods or ser-
vices conform to the intent of the 
designers. 

376 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
equipment used; the skills, training, and motivation of workers; the extent to which the design 
lends itself to production; the monitoring process to assess conformance; and the taking of cor-
rective action (e.g., through problem solving) when necessary. One important key to quality is 
reducing the variability in process outputs (i.e., reducing the degree to which individual items 
or individual service acts vary from one another). This will be discussed in detail in Chapter 10.   
 The determination of quality does not stop once the product or service has been sold or 
delivered.  Ease of use  and user instructions are important. They increase the chances, but do 
not guarantee, that a product will be used for its intended purposes and in such a way that it 
will continue to function properly and safely. (When faced with liability litigation, companies 
often argue that injuries and damages occurred because the user misused the product.) Much 
of the same reasoning can be applied to services. Customers, patients, clients, or other users 
must be clearly informed on what they should or should not do; otherwise, there is the dan-
ger that they will take some action that will adversely affect quality. Some examples include 
the doctor who fails to specify that a medication should be taken  before  meals and  not with 
orange juice and the attorney who neglects to inform a client of a deadline for filing a claim. 
 Much consumer education takes the form of printed instructions and labeling. Thus, man-
ufacturers must ensure that directions for unpacking, assembling, using, maintaining, and 
adjusting the product—and what to do if something goes wrong (e.g., flush eyes with water, 
call a physician, induce vomiting, do not induce vomiting, disconnect set immediately)—are 
 clearly visible and  easily understood. 
 For a variety of reasons, products do not always perform as expected, and services do not 
always yield the desired results. Whatever the reason, it is important from a quality standpoint 
to remedy the situation—through recall and repair of the product, adjustment, replacement or 
buyback, or reevaluation of a service—and do whatever is necessary to bring the product or 
service up to standard. 
 Responsibility for Quality 
 It is true that all members of an organization have some responsibility for quality, but certain 
parts of the organization are key areas of responsibility:
 Top management.  Top management has the ultimate responsibility for quality. While 
establishing strategies for quality, top management must institute programs to improve 
quality; guide, direct, and motivate managers and workers; and set an example by being 
involved in quality initiatives. Examples include taking training in quality, issuing peri-
odic reports on quality, and attending meetings on quality. 
 Design.  Quality products and services begin with design. This includes not only features 
of the product or service; it also includes attention to the  processes  that will be required 
to produce the products and/or the services that will be required to deliver the service to 
customers. 
 Procurement.  The procurement department has responsibility for obtaining goods and 
services that will not detract from the quality of the organization’s goods and services. 
 Production/operations.  Production/operations has responsibility to ensure that pro-
cesses yield products and services that conform to design specifications. Monitoring pro-
cesses and finding and correcting root causes of problems are important aspects of this 
responsibility. 
 Quality assurance.  Quality assurance is responsible for gathering and analyzing data on 
problems and working with operations to solve problems. 
 Packaging and shipping.  This department must ensure that goods are not damaged in 
transit, that packages are clearly labeled, that instructions are included, that all parts are 
included, and that shipping occurs in a timely manner. 
 Marketing and sales.  This department has the responsibility to determine customer 
needs and to communicate them to appropriate areas of the organization. In addition, it 
has the responsibility to report any problems with products or services. 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
377
 Customer service. Customer service is often the first department to learn of problems. 
It has the responsibility to communicate that information to appropriate departments, 
deal in a reasonable manner with customers, work to resolve problems, and follow up to 
confirm that the situation has been effectively remedied. 
 Poor quality increases certain  costs  incurred by the organization. The following section 
provides further detail on costs associated with quality. 
 Benefits of Good Quality 
 Business organizations with good or excellent quality typically benefit in a variety of ways: 
an enhanced reputation for quality, the ability to command premium prices, an increased mar-
ket share, greater customer loyalty, lower liability costs, and fewer production or service 
problems—which yields higher productivity, fewer complaints from customers, lower pro-
duction costs, and higher profits. Annual studies by the National Institute of Standards indi-
cate that winners of the Baldrige quality award, described later in the chapter, outperform the 
S&P 500 Index by a significant amount. 4 
 The Consequences of Poor Quality 
     It is important for management to recognize the different ways in which the quality of a firm’s 
products or services can affect the organization and to take these into account in developing 
and maintaining a quality assurance program. Some of the major areas affected by quality are
 1. 
Loss of business. 
 2. 
Liability. 
 3. 
Productivity. 
 4. 
Costs. 
 Poor designs or defective products or services can result in  loss of business.  Failure to 
devote adequate attention to quality can damage a profit-oriented organization’s reputation 
and lead to a decreased share of the market, or it can lead to increased criticism and/or con-
trols for a government agency or nonprofit organization. 
 In the retail sector, managers might not be fully aware of poor product or service quality 
because customers do not always report their dissatisfaction. Even so, dissatisfied customers 
do tend to voice their dissatisfaction to friends and relatives, which can have negative implica-
tions for customer perceptions and future business. 
 Organizations must pay special attention to their potential  liability due to damages or inju-
ries resulting from either faulty design or poor workmanship. This applies to both products 
and services. Thus, a poorly designed steering arm on a car might cause the driver to lose 
control of the car, but so could improper assembly of the steering arm. However, the net result 
is the same. Similarly, a tree surgeon might be called to cable a tree limb. If the limb later 
falls and causes damage to a neighbor’s car, the accident might be traced to a poorly designed 
procedure for cabling or to improper workmanship. Liability for poor quality has been well 
established in the courts. An organization’s liability costs can often be substantial, especially 
if large numbers of items are involved, as in the automobile industry, or if potentially wide-
spread injury or damage is involved (e.g., an accident at a nuclear power plant). Express 
written warranties as well as implied warranties generally guarantee the product as safe when 
used as intended. The courts have tended to extend this to  foreseeable  uses, even if these uses 
were not intended by the producer. In the health care field, medical malpractice claims and 
insurance costs are contributing to skyrocketing costs and have become a major issue nation-
wide. It’s been estimated that medical mistakes result in about 98,000 deaths annually in the 
United States. Surprisingly, this number has remained fairly steady for more than a few years. 
If medical errors were classified as a disease, they would rank about sixth on the list of major 
causes of death. 
 4 “‘Baldrige Index’ Outperforms S&P 500 by Almost 5 to 1,” press release, available at  www.quality.nist.gov . 
LO9.4 Explain why quality 
is important and the conse-
quences of poor quality.

378 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
Productivity  and quality are often closely related. Poor quality can adversely affect produc-
tivity during the manufacturing process if parts are defective and have to be reworked or if an 
assembler has to try a number of parts before finding one that fits properly. Also, poor quality 
in tools and equipment can lead to injuries and defective output, which must be reworked or 
scrapped, thereby reducing the amount of usable output for a given amount of input. Simi-
larly, poor service can mean having to redo the service and reduce service productivity. 
 Cost to remedy a problem is a major consideration in quality management. The earlier a 
problem is identified in the process, the cheaper the cost to fix it. The cost to fix a problem at 
the customer end has been estimated at about five times the cost to fix a problem at the design 
or production stages. 
 The Costs of Quality 
    Any serious attempt to deal with quality issues must take into account the costs associated with 
quality. Those costs can be classified into three categories: appraisal, prevention, and failure. 
 Appraisal costs   relate to inspection, testing, and other activities intended to uncover defec-
tive products or services, or to assure that there are none. They include the cost of inspectors, 
testing, test equipment, labs, quality audits, and field testing. 
 Appraisal costs  Costs of activ-
ities designed to ensure quality 
or uncover defects. 
 A Team with Teeth 
 Hyundai’s focus on quality comes straight from 
the top. Since 1999, Chairman Chung has boosted the quality team to 
865 workers from 100, and virtually all employees have had to attend 
special seminars on improving Hyundai’s cars. Chung presides over 
twice-monthly quality meetings in a special conference room and an 
adjacent workshop, with vehicle lifts and high-intensity spotlights for 
comparing Hyundais head-to-head with rivals. And this team has teeth: 
In the past year, the introduction of three new models was delayed by 
months as engineers scrambled to boost quality in response to prob-
lems found by the team. 
 The focus is on the details. In 1998, for instance, customers reported 
faulty warning lights and difficulty starting engines. So Chung set up a 
$30 million computer center where 71 engineers simulate harsh con-
ditions to test electronics and pinpoint defects. The result: In Power’s 
2004 initial quality survey, Hyundai had only 9.6 problems in these 
areas per 100 vehicles, vs. an industry average of 13.8. Three years 
ago Hyundai had 23.4 problems, vs. the industry’s 17.9. “This is not a 
shotgun approach,” says Robert Cosmai, president of the company’s 
U.S. affiliate, Hyundai Motor America. 
 The big test comes next year when Hyundai is due to begin building 
redesigned Santa Fes and Sonatas in Alabama. One encouraging sign: 
DaimlerChrysler and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. plan to use a Hyundai-
designed four-cylinder engine in their own small and midsize cars. 
“This is a vote of confidence for Hyundai’s engine quality,” says Ahn 
Soo Woong, an auto analyst at Han-wha Securities Co. Now it’s up to 
consumers to decide whether Hyundai really makes the grade. 
 Source: “Hyundai: Kissing Clunkers Goodbye,”  BusinessWeek, May 17, 2004. 
Copyright © 2004 The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Used with permission. 
 Moon  Ihlwan , with Larry Armstrong and Michael Eidam 
 When Hyundai Motor Co. Chairman Chung Mong Koo said his company 
could increase the quality of its cars to “Toyota levels” five years ago, 
few took him seriously. After all, Hyundai was the butt of talk-show 
jokes and a target of industry disdain for tinny cars that were about as 
reliable as a go-kart. So when J. D. Power & Associates Inc. on April 28 
said the Korean carmaker had virtually caught up with Toyota in terms 
of quality, jaws dropped from Detroit to Tokyo. “We still have a long way 
to go,” says Suh Byung Kee, the senior executive vice-president head-
ing Hyundai’s quality-control team. “But we have completed the first 
phase of our task.” 
 The second phase could well be tougher. The eye-opening survey 
measured initial quality—the number of complaints customers had in 
the first 90 days of ownership. Hyundai owners reported just 102 prob-
lems per 100 cars sold—earning a tie with Honda as the second-best 
carmaker on the list and falling just below Toyota’s tally of 101. And 
its Sonata sedan was the top-ranked car in the “entry mid-sized” cat-
egory. On longer-term measures, though, Hyundai remains a laggard: 
In Power’s July, 2003, Vehicle Dependability Study, Hyundai tallied 342 
problems per 100 vehicles after three years of ownership, vs. an indus-
try average of 273. Hyundai execs counter that it will take time before 
the recent improvement shows up in the longer-term statistics. 
 There’s reason to agree with Hyundai’s optimism. First wooed by 
the company’s generous warranty—10 years for the drive train and 
five years for everything else—U.S. consumers are starting to believe 
that Hyundai is a changed brand. Last year they bought 400,000 of its 
cars. . . . Jeff Ball, a pharmacist from Laurence Harbor, N.J., has four of 
them: He and his wife share a Santa Fe SUV and a Sonata sedan (“I call 
it my Jaguar without the cat,” he says), and he has bought smaller mod-
els for his sons. Sales like that are helping Hyundai’s bottom line. . . . 
 READING 
 Hyundai: Kissing Clunkers Goodbye 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
379
 Prevention costs  relate to attempts to prevent defects from occurring. They include costs 
such as planning and administration systems, working with vendors, training, quality control 
procedures, and extra attention in both the design and production phases to decrease the prob-
ability of defective workmanship. 
 Failure costs  are incurred by defective parts or products or by faulty services.   Internal 
failures  are those discovered during the production process;   external failures  are those 
discovered after delivery to the customer. Internal failures occur for a variety of reasons, 
including defective material from vendors, incorrect machine settings, faulty equipment, 
incorrect methods, incorrect processing, carelessness, and faulty or improper material 
handling procedures. The costs of internal failures include lost production time, scrap and 
rework, investigation costs, possible equipment damage, and possible employee injury. 
Rework costs involve the salaries of workers and the additional resources needed to per-
form the rework (e.g., equipment, energy, raw materials). Beyond those costs are items such 
as inspection of reworked parts, disruption of schedules, the added costs of parts and mate-
rials in inventory waiting for reworked parts, and the paperwork needed to keep track of the 
items until they can be reintegrated into the process. External failures are defective products 
or poor service that go undetected by the producer. Resulting costs include warranty work, 
handling of complaints, replacements, liability/litigation, payments to customers or dis-
counts used to offset the inferior quality, loss of customer goodwill, and opportunity costs 
related to lost sales. 
 External failure costs are typically much greater than internal failure costs on a per-unit 
basis.  Table 9.5 summarizes quality costs. 
 Internal and external failure costs represent costs related to poor quality, whereas appraisal 
and prevention costs represent investments for achieving good quality. 
 An important issue in quality management is the value received from expenditures on 
prevention. There are two schools of thought on this. One is that prevention costs will be 
outweighed by savings in appraisal and failure costs. This is espoused by such people as 
Crosby and Juran, discussed in further detail later in this chapter. They believe that as the 
costs of defect prevention are increased, the costs of appraisal and failure decrease by 
much more. What this means, if true, is that the net result is lower total costs, and, thus, 
as Crosby suggests, quality is free. On the other hand, some managers believe that by 
attempting to go beyond a certain point, such expenditures on quality reduce the funds 
available for other objectives such as reducing product development times and upgrading 
technology. The   return on quality   (ROQ) approach focuses on the economics of quality 
efforts. In this approach, quality improvement projects are viewed as investments, and, 
as such, they are evaluated like any other investment, using metrics related to return on 
investment (ROI).  
 Prevention costs  Costs of pre-
venting defects from occurring. 
 Failure costs  Costs caused by 
defective parts or products or by 
faulty services. 
 Internal failures  Failures 
 discovered during production. 
 External failures  Failures 
discovered after delivery to the 
customer. 
 Return on quality  An 
approach that evaluates the 
financial return of investments in 
quality. 
 Category 
 Description 
 Examples 
 Appraisal costs 
 Costs related to measuring, 
evaluating, and auditing 
materials, parts, products, and 
services to assess conformance 
with quality standards 
 Inspection equipment, testing, labs, 
inspectors, and the interruption of 
production to take samples 
 Prevention costs 
 Costs related to reducing the 
potential for quality problems 
 Quality improvement programs, 
training, monitoring, data collection 
and analysis, and design costs 
 Internal failure costs 
 Costs related to defective products 
or services before they are 
delivered to customers 
 Rework costs, problem solving, 
material and product losses, scrap, 
and downtime 
 External failure costs 
 Costs related to delivering 
substandard products or services 
to customers 
 Returned goods, reworking costs, 
warranty costs, loss of goodwill, 
liability claims, and penalties 
 TABLE 9.5 
 Summary of quality costs 
LO9.5 Describe and give 
examples of the costs asso-
ciated with quality.

380 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 Ethics and Quality Management 
    All members of an organization have an obligation to perform their duties in an ethical man-
ner. Ethical behavior comes into play in many situations that involve quality. One major cate-
gory is substandard work, including defective products and substandard service, poor designs, 
shoddy workmanship, and substandard parts and raw materials. Having knowledge of this and 
failing to correct and  report it  in a timely manner is unethical and can have a number of nega-
tive consequences. These can include increased costs for organizations in terms of decreased 
productivity, an increase in the accident rate among employees, inconveniences and injuries 
to customers, and increased liability costs. 
 A related issue is how an organization chooses to deal with information about quality 
problems in products that are already in service. For example, automakers and tire makers 
in recent years have been accused of withholding information about actual or potential qual-
ity problems; they failed to issue product recalls, or failed to divulge information, choosing 
instead to handle any complaints that arose on an individual basis. 
 9.5 QUALITY AWARDS 
  Quality awards have been established to generate improvement in quality. The Malcolm Bald-
rige Award, the European Quality Award, and the Deming Prize are well-known awards given 
annually to recognize firms that have integrated quality management into their operations. 
LO9.6 Discuss the importance 
of ethics in managing quality.
to a year of backlog that needed to be fixed and 
repaired,” he relates. “Now we are talking in terms 
of hours of rework in front of us.” 
 However positive and dramatic this change, Coburn and his man-
agement team also realized that it wouldn’t help much if the scrap and 
rework inventory piles kept growing, he says, which is where he says 
the less-tangible “employee engagement” part of the equation comes in. 
 The first aspect is enabling them to do their jobs. “We’re continu-
ing to empower our workers to get real-time data at their fingertips so 
they’re making good decisions without two-week-old data, or without 
estimating or just evading what they think the problem is,” he says. 
Rather than having his workers hanging their heads, Crown Audio’s 
management team is now in the enviable situation of having different 
lines and shifts brag about their first-pass yields to each other. 
 Sustaining this motivated, engaged workforce is itself a team effort, 
says Coburn, who says that he has learned over the course of Crown 
Audio’s continuing quality initiative that solidly designed manufactur-
ing processes backed up by an engaged and empowered workforce is 
the essential combination to move any company forward. Quality truly 
is everyone’s responsibility, and everyone appreciates a job well done. 
 “There is nothing more frustrating than working hard and then 
knowing that what you did, did not work out or did not come through.” 
Coburn stresses this point in no uncertain terms. “Morale is everything 
in quality,” he says. “People want to do a good job, and we have to 
enable that.” 
 Source: Excerpted from Brad Kenney, Industry Week, April 1, 2008. 
 Larry Coburn, vice president of operations at high-tech audio equipment 
manufacturer Crown Audio, has seen the need for strong management 
and employee commitment in his company’s recent quality improve-
ments. The market in his industry was driving the development of more 
complex products that need to be produced more cheaply, and these 
twin trends put so much pressure on his manufacturing operations that 
things were breaking down. Their first-pass yields had gotten so bad 
that their rework inventory had piled up, and even became a major line 
item on the balance sheet. 
 “We had areas that were designated for rework that were so large 
that they were getting on our inventory control list because they were 
major entities in terms of dollars in inventory,” he recounts. In fact, 
the problem was large enough to conceal what Coburn and his team 
call ‘hidden factories’—millions of dollars of untapped production and 
sales potential existing within their production line. “We started analyz-
ing these hidden factories and we actually identified $4 million of cost 
related to poor quality,” Coburn says. 
 To stem the tide of red ink, Crown Audio embarked on a drastic 
plant-floor triage process that involved stopping production entirely, so 
as not to generate any more rework. They then analyzed and tested 
the defective inventory, broke the components up into groups based 
on the common problems they exhibited, and used those groupings to 
analyze potential process improvements and defect reduction strategies 
before plugging them back through the process. Once they finished, 
they not only had saleable inventory to get out the door, but also had a 
pretty good handle on the parts of their process that needed changing, 
says Coburn. “When we started, we had months and sometimes close 
 READING 
 Rework and Morale 
d
ms
 
 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
381
 The Baldrige Award 
    Named after the late Malcolm Baldrige, an industrialist and former secretary of commerce, 
the annual   Baldrige Award  is administered by the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology. The purpose of the award competition is to stimulate efforts to improve quality, to 
recognize quality achievements, and to publicize successful programs. 
 When the award was first presented in 1988, the award categories were manufacturing 
and small business. A few years later a service category was added, and then categories for 
education and health care were added a few years after that. The earliest winners included 
Motorola, Globe Metallurgical, Xerox Corporation, and Milliken & Company. Since then, 
many companies have been added to the list. For a complete listing of current and former win-
ners, go to  www.quality.nist.gov/Award_Recipients.htm . 
 Applicants are evaluated in seven main areas: leadership, information and analysis, stra-
tegic planning, human resource management, customer and market focus, process manage-
ment, and business results. 
 Examiners check the extent to which top management incorporates quality values in 
daily management; whether products or services are at least as good as those of competitors; 
whether employees receive training in quality techniques; if the business works with suppliers 
to improve quality; and if customers are satisfied. Even organizations that don’t win benefit 
from applying for the award: All applicants receive a written summary of the strengths and 
weaknesses of their quality management and suggestions for improvement. 
 Most states have quality award programs based on the Baldrige criteria. These award pro-
grams can serve as an entry point for organizations that want to eventually apply for the 
national award. 
 For more information, visit  www.quality.nist.gov . 
 The European Quality Award 
 The  European Quality Award  is Europe’s most prestigious award for organizational excel-
lence. The European Quality Award sits at the top of regional and national quality awards, and 
applicants have often won one or more of those awards prior to applying for the European 
Quality Award. 
 The Deming Prize 
 The Deming Prize, named in honor of the late W. Edwards Deming, is Japan’s highly coveted 
award recognizing successful quality efforts. It is given annually to any company that meets 
the award’s standards. Although typically given to Japanese firms, in 1989, Florida Power and 
Light became the first U.S. company to win the award. 
 The major focus of the judging is on statistical quality control, making it much narrower in 
scope than the Baldrige Award, which focuses more on customer satisfaction. Companies that 
win the Deming Prize tend to have quality programs that are detailed and well-communicated 
throughout the company. Their quality improvement programs also reflect the involvement of 
senior management and employees, customer satisfaction, and training. 
 9.6 QUALITY CERTIFICATION 
 Many firms that do business internationally recognize the importance of quality certification. 
 ISO 9000, 14000, and 24700 
 The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) promotes worldwide standards for 
the improvement of quality, productivity, and operating efficiency through a series of stan-
dards and guidelines. Used by industrial and business organizations, regulatory agencies, gov-
ernments, and trade organizations, the standards have important economic and social bene 
fits. Not only are they tremendously important for designers, manufacturers, suppliers, ser-
vice providers, and customers, but the standards make a tremendous contribution to society 
 Baldrige Award  Annual award 
given by the U.S. government to 
recognize quality achievements 
of U.S. companies.  
 
LO9.7 Compare the quality 
awards.
 European Quality 
Award  European award for 
organizational excellence. 
LO9.8 Discuss quality certifi-
cation and its importance.

382 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
in general: They increase the levels of quality and reliability, productivity, and safety, while 
making products and services affordable. The standards help facilitate international trade. 
They provide governments with a basis for health, safety, and environmental legislation. And 
they aid in transferring technology to developing countries. 
 Two of the most well-known of these are ISO 9000 and ISO 14000.   ISO 9000 pertains 
to quality management. It concerns what an organization does to ensure that its products or 
services conform to its customers’ requirements.   ISO 14000  concerns what an organization 
does to minimize harmful effects to the environment caused by its operations. Both ISO 9000 
and ISO 14000 relate to an organization’s  processes  rather than its products and services, and 
both stress continual improvement. Moreover, the standards are meant to be generic; no mat-
ter what the organization’s business, if it wants to establish a quality management system or 
an environmental management system, the system must have the essential elements contained 
in ISO 9000 or in ISO 14000. The ISO 9000 standards are critical for companies doing busi-
ness internationally, particularly in Europe. They must go through a process that involves 
documenting quality procedures and on-site assessment. The process often takes 12 to 18 
months. With certification comes  registration in an ISO directory that companies seeking sup-
pliers can refer to for a list of certified companies. They are generally given preference over 
unregistered companies. More than 40,000 companies are registered worldwide; three-fourths 
of them are located in Europe. 
 A key requirement for registration is that a company review, refine, and map functions 
such as process control, inspection, purchasing, training, packaging, and delivery. Similar to 
the Baldrige Award, the review process involves considerable self-appraisal, resulting in prob-
lem identification and improvement. Unlike the Baldrige Award, registered companies face an 
ongoing series of audits, and they must be reregistered every three years. 
 In addition to the obvious benefits of certification for companies that want to deal with the 
European Union, the ISO 9000 certification and registration process is particularly helpful for 
companies that do not currently have a quality management system; it provides guidelines for 
establishing the system and making it effective. 
 Eight quality management principles form the basis of the latest version of ISO 9000:
 1. 
A customer focus. 
 2. 
Leadership. 
 3. 
Involvement of people. 
 4. 
A process approach. 
 5. 
A system approach to management. 
 6. 
Continual improvement. 
 7. 
Use of a factual approach to decision making. 
 8. 
Mutually beneficial supplier relationships. 
 The standards for ISO 14000 certification bear upon three major areas:
 Management systems —systems development and integration of environmental respon-
sibilities into business planning. 
 Operations —consumption of natural resources and energy. 
 Environmental systems —measuring, assessing, and managing emissions, effluents, and 
other waste streams. 
 ISO 24700  pertains to the quality and performance of office equipment that contains 
reused components. ISO/IEC 24700 specifies product characteristics for use in an original 
equipment manufacturer’s or authorized third-party’s declaration of conformity to demon-
strate that a marketed product that contains reused components performs equivalent to new, 
meeting equivalent-to-new component specifications and performance criteria, and continues 
to meet all the safety and environmental criteria required by responsibly built products. It is 
relevant to marketed products whose manufacturing and recovery processes result in the reuse 
of components. 
 ISO 9000  A set of international 
standards on quality manage-
ment and quality assurance, criti-
cal to international business. 
 ISO 14000  A set of interna-
tional standards for assessing 
a company’s environmental 
performance.  
 ISO 24700  A set of interna-
tional standards that pertains to 
the quality and performance of 
office equipment that contains 
reused components.  

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
383
 If you’d like to learn more about ISO standards, visit the International Organization for 
Standardization Web site at  www.ISO.org/ISO/en/ISOonline.frontpage  or the American Soci-
ety for Quality Web site at  www.asq.org . 
 9.7 QUALITY AND THE SUPPLY CHAIN 
  Business leaders are increasingly recognizing the importance of their supply chains in achiev-
ing their quality goals. Achievement requires measuring customer perceptions of quality, 
identifying problem areas, and correcting those problems. 
 When dealing with supplier quality in global supply chains, companies are finding a wide 
range in the degree of sophistication concerning quality assurance. Although developed coun-
tries often have a fair level of sophistication, little or no awareness of modern quality practices 
may be found in some less-developed countries. This poses important liability issues for com-
panies that outsource to those areas. 
 An interesting situation is outsourcing in the pharmaceutical industry. Offshore suppliers 
offer low prices that domestic producers can’t match. However, the cost advantage of off-
shore producers is not based solely on lower labor costs; a significant “advantage” is the fact 
that domestic producers undergo strict and costly government quality regulations and unan-
nounced inspections that offshore producers are not subject to. While this lowers the costs to 
importers, it also increases their liability risks. 
 Increasingly, the emphasis in supply chain quality management is on reducing outsourcing 
risk as well as product or service variation and overhead. Risk comes from the use of sub-
standard materials or work methods, which can lead to inferior product quality and potential 
product liability. Tighter control of vendors and worker training can reduce these risks. Varia-
tion results from processes that are not in control; it can be reduced through statistical quality 
 The acting chair of the 
Consumer Product Safety 
Commission spoke at a press 
conference on a recall of 
Mattel Inc. toys manufactured 
in China. Mattel recalled 18.6 
million products around the 
world because they contained 
magnets that could fall out and 
be swallowed by children. 

384 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
control. Overhead can be reduced by assigning quality assurance responsibility to vendors, 
while customers operate in a quality audit mode, with some monitoring of vendor quality 
efforts. 
 Supply chain quality management can benefit from a collaborative relationship with sup-
pliers that includes helping suppliers with quality assurance efforts as well as information 
sharing on quality-related matters. Ideally, improving supply chain quality can become part of 
an organization’s continuous improvement efforts. 
 The following reading offers some guidelines for improving quality and reducing out-
sourcing risk.    
 9.8 TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
     A primary role of management is to lead an organization in its daily operation and to maintain 
it as a viable entity into the future. Quality has become an important factor in both of these 
objectives. 
 Although ostensibly always an objective of business, customer satisfaction,  in customer 
terms,  became a specific goal in the late 1980s. Providing high quality was recognized as a 
key element for success. Most large corporations taking that path have documented their suc-
cess. First, they survived the strong overseas competition that had set the high quality levels 
and now have regained some of their former markets. Smaller companies are also adopting 
similar goals. 
 Management plays a critical role in TQM. The approach is reflected in an  operating phi-
losophy. For example, among the 14 Toyota Way Principles is: 
Principle 1.  Base your management decisions on a long-term philosophy, even at the expense of 
short-term financial goals. . . . Generate value for the customer, society, and the economy; it is 
your starting point. Evaluate every function in the company in terms of its ability to achieve this.  5
5 From Jeffrey K. Liker,  The Toyota Way (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004). 
    6.  Be cautious of buying from companies that 
do not have franchised relationships with 
distribution partners to avoid a greater 
potential risk of counterfeit product.  
  7. Beware of unusually low pricing. 
  8.  Look for International Organization for Standardization (ISO) or 
other equivalent, globally recognized certifications in a supply 
chain partner’s operations. 
 9. Establish relationships with third-party organizations. 
 10.  Translate quality into measurable and clearly defined targets with 
supply chain partners and ensure these metrics are communicated 
regularly with employees. 
 As the  Supply Chain Digest  notes, to do this right will involve greater 
costs, reducing the relative price advantage of offshore strategies to a 
degree, and certainly requiring companies to build a substantial infra-
structure to develop and maintain these monitoring programs. 
 Source: Excerpted from “Improving Quality and Reducing Risk in Offshoring,”  Supply 
Chain Digest, August 7, 2007. Copyright © 2007 SCDigest. Used with permission. 
 William E. Mitchell, chairman, president and CEO of Arrow Elec-
tronics, offered 10 guidelines on how to reduce product quality 
and related risks in an offshore supply chain. The guidelines were 
nominally targeted at electronics suppliers, but offer a good starting 
point for many companies looking to reduce risk and potential quality 
problems. 
     1.  Source from reputable, well-established companies with tight 
internal controls. 
    2.  Conduct comprehensive background checks, including checking 
trade references and past business history, of supply chain part-
ners before conducting business with them. 
    3.  Implement site inspections of supply chain partners and find out 
what systems have been put in place to track quality. 
    4.  Conduct ongoing performance reviews of supply chain partners 
and engage in ongoing communications with them to benchmark 
against preset goals and define improvement plans. 
    5.  Only source from companies that are willing to provide a guarantee 
for products in writing. 
 READING 
 Improving Quality and Reducing Risk in Offshoring 
LO9.9 Describe TQM.

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
385
 The term    total quality management (TQM)    refers to a quest for quality in an organiza-
tion. There are three key philosophies in this approach. One is a never-ending push to improve, 
which is referred to as  continuous improvement;  the second is the  involvement of everyone 
in the organization; and the third is a goal of  customer satisfaction,  which means meeting 
or exceeding customer expectations. TQM expands the traditional view of quality—looking 
only at the quality of the final product or services—to  looking at the quality of every aspect of 
the process that produces the product or service. TQM systems are intended to prevent poor 
quality from occurring. 
 We can describe the TQM approach as follows:
 1. 
Find out what customers want. This might involve the use of surveys, focus groups, 
interviews, or some other technique that integrates the customer’s voice in the decision-
making process. Be sure to include the  internal customer (the next person in the pro-
cess) as well as the  external customer (the final customer).
 Total quality management 
(TQM)  A philosophy that 
involves everyone in an orga-
nization in a continual effort to 
improve quality and achieve cus-
tomer satisfaction. 
 Sign on the wall of a company cafeteria: 
 Sometimes they can be cranky, and it may sometimes seem like they expect too much, 
but they do provide our paychecks and our benefits, such as sick leave, maternity leave, 
health insurance, and three weeks of paid vacation time each year. And what about all 
the new equipment we’ve been getting lately? They pay for that, too. And a lot more. So 
the next time you see them, give them a great big smile to show how much you appreci-
ate them—our  customers! 
 2. 
Design a product or service that will meet (or exceed) what customers want. Make it 
easy to use and easy to produce. 
 3. 
Design processes that facilitate doing the job right the first time. Determine where mis-
takes are likely to occur and try to prevent them. When mistakes do occur, find out why so 
that they are less likely to occur again. Strive to make the process “mistake-proof.” This 
is sometimes referred to as a   fail-safing : Elements are incorporated in product or service 
design that make it virtually impossible for an employee (or sometimes a customer) to do 
something incorrectly. The Japanese term for this is  pokayoke. Examples include parts that 
fit together one way only and appliance plugs that can be inserted into a wall outlet the 
correct way only. Another term that is sometimes used is  foolproofing, but use of this term 
may be taken to imply that employees (or customers) are fools—not a wise choice! 
 4. 
Keep track of results, and use them to guide improvement in the system. Never stop try-
ing to improve. 
 5. 
Extend these concepts throughout the supply chain. 
 6. 
Top management must be involved and committed. Otherwise, TQM will just be 
another fad that fails and fades away. 
 Many companies have successfully implemented TQM programs. Successful TQM pro-
grams are built through the dedication and combined efforts of everyone in the organization.   
 The preceding description provides a good idea of what TQM is all about, but it doesn’t 
tell the whole story. A number of other elements of TQM are important:
 1. 
 Continuous improvement. The  philosophy that seeks to improve all factors related to 
the process of converting inputs into outputs on an ongoing basis is called   continuous 
improvement . It covers equipment, methods, materials, and people. Under continuous 
improvement, the old adage “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” gets transformed into “Just 
because it isn’t broke doesn’t mean it can’t be improved.” 
 
   The concept of continuous improvement was not new, but it did not receive much 
 interest in the United States for a while, even though it originated here. However, many 
Japanese companies used it for years, and it became a cornerstone of the Japanese approach 
to production. The Japanese use the term  kaizen to refer to continuous improvement. 
The successes of Japanese companies caused other companies to reexamine many of their 
approaches. This resulted in a strong interest in the continuous improvement approach. 
 Fail-safing  Incorporating 
design elements that prevent 
incorrect procedures.  
 Continuous improvement  
Philosophy that seeks to make 
never-ending improvements to 
the process of converting inputs 
into outputs.  
 Kaizen  Japanese term for con-
tinuous improvement. 

386 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 2.  Competitive benchmarking.  This involves identifying other 
organizations that are the best at something and studying how they 
do it to learn how to improve your operation. The company need 
not be in the same line of business. For example, Xerox used the 
mail-order company L.L. Bean to benchmark order filling.  
 3.  Employee empowerment. Giving workers the responsibility for 
improvements and the authority to make changes to accomplish 
them provides strong motivation for employees. This puts deci-
sion making into the hands of those who are closest to the job 
and have considerable insight into problems and solutions. 
 4.  Team approach. The use of teams for problem solving and to 
achieve consensus takes advantage of group synergy, gets people 
involved, and promotes a spirit of cooperation and shared values 
among employees. 
 5.  Decisions based on facts rather than opinions. Management 
gathers and analyzes data as a basis for decision making. 
 6.  Knowledge of tools. Employees and managers are trained in the 
use of quality tools. 
 7.  Supplier quality.  Suppliers must be included in quality assurance 
and quality improvement efforts so that their processes are capa-
ble of delivering quality parts and materials in a timely manner.  
 8.  Champion. A TQM champion’s job is to promote the value and 
importance of TQM principles throughout the company. 
 9.  Quality at the source.  Quality at the source  refers to the philoso-
phy of making each worker responsible for the quality of his or her 
work. The idea is to “Do it right the first time.” Workers are expected 
to provide goods or services that meet specifications and to find and 
correct mistakes that occur. In effect, each worker becomes a quality 
inspector for his or her work. When the work is passed on to the 
next operation in the process (the internal customer) or, if that step 
is the last in the process, to the ultimate customer, the worker is 
“certifying” that it meets quality standards. 
 This accomplishes a number of things: (a) it places direct 
responsibility for quality on the person(s) who directly affect 
it; (b) it removes the adversarial relationship that often exists between quality control 
inspectors and production workers; and (c) it motivates workers by giving them control 
over their work as well as pride in it. 
 10.  Suppliers are partners in the process, and long-term relationships are encouraged. This 
gives suppliers a vital stake in providing quality goods and services. Suppliers, too, are 
expected to provide quality at the source, thereby reducing or eliminating the need to 
inspect deliveries from suppliers. 
 It would be incorrect to think of TQM as merely a collection of techniques. Rather, TQM 
reflects a whole new attitude toward quality. It is about the  culture of an organization. To truly 
reap the benefits of TQM, the organization must change its culture. 
  Table 9.6  illustrates the differences between cultures of a TQM organization and a more 
traditional organization.  
 Obstacles to Implementing TQM 
 Companies have had varying success in implementing TQM. Some have been quite successful, 
but others have struggled. Part of the difficulty may be with the process by which it is implemented 
rather than with the principles of TQM. Among the factors cited in the literature are the following:
 1. Lack of a companywide definition of quality: Efforts aren’t coordinated; people are work-
ing at cross-purposes, addressing different issues, and using different measures of success. 
 Quality at the source  The 
philosophy of making each 
worker responsible for the qual-
ity of his or her work. 
 The iPod Shuffle stops playing music when the earphone 
jack is unplugged. When the earphones are plugged 
back in, the music resumes right where it left off. This 
keeps the battery from running down and is an example 
of mistake proofing. 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
387
  2. Lack of a strategic plan for change: Without such a plan the chance of success is less-
ened and the need to address strategic implications of change is ignored. 
  3. Lack of a customer focus: Without a customer focus, there is a risk of customer 
dissatisfaction. 
  4. Poor intraorganizational communication: The left hand doesn’t know what the right 
hand is doing; frustration, waste, and confusion ensue. 
  5. Lack of employee empowerment: Not empowering employees gives the impression of 
not trusting employees to fix problems, adds red tape, and delays solutions. 
  6. View of quality as a “quick fix”: Quality needs to be a long-term, continuing effort. 
  7. Emphasis on short-term financial results: “Duct-tape” solutions often treat symptoms; 
spend a little now—a lot more later. 
 8. Inordinate presence of internal politics and “turf” issues: These can sap the energy of an 
organization and derail the best of ideas. 
  9. Lack of strong motivation: Managers need to make sure employees are motivated. 
 10. Lack of time to devote to quality initiatives: Don’t add more work without adding addi-
tional resources. 
 11. Lack of leadership: 6 Managers need to be leaders. 
 This list of potential problems can serve as a guideline for organizations contemplating 
implementing TQM or as a checklist for those having trouble implementing it. 
 Criticisms of TQM 
 TQM programs are touted as a way for companies to improve their competitiveness, which is 
a very worthwhile objective. Nonetheless, TQM programs are not without criticism. The fol-
lowing are some of the major criticisms:
 1. 
Overzealous advocates may pursue TQM programs blindly, focusing attention on qual-
ity even though other priorities may be more important (e.g., responding quickly to a 
competitor’s advances). 
 2. 
Programs may not be linked to the strategies of the organization in a meaningful way. 
 3. 
Quality-related decisions may not be tied to market performance. For instance, customer 
satisfaction may be emphasized to the extent that its cost far exceeds any direct or indi-
rect benefit of doing so. 
 6 Excerpt from Gary Salegna and Farzaneh Fazel, “Obstacles to Implementing Quality,”  Quality Progress,  July 2000, 
p. 53. Copyright © 2000 American Society for Quality. Reprinted with permission from  Quality Progress magazine. 
 Aspect 
 Traditional 
 TQM 
 Overall mission 
 Maximize return on investment 
 Meet or exceed customer expectations 
 Objectives 
 Emphasis on short term 
 Balance of long term and short term 
 Management 
 Not always open; sometimes inconsistent 
objectives 
 Open; encourages employee input; 
consistent objectives 
 Role of manager 
 Issue orders; enforce 
 Coach; remove barriers; build trust 
 Customer 
requirements 
 Not highest priority; may be unclear 
 Highest priority; important to identify 
and understand 
 Problems 
 Assign blame; punish 
 Identify and resolve 
 Problem solving 
 Not systematic; individuals 
 Systematic; teams 
 Improvement 
 Erratic 
 Continuous 
 Suppliers 
 Adversarial 
 Partners 
 Jobs 
 Narrow, specialized; much individual effort  Broad, more general; much team effort 
 Focus 
 Product oriented 
 Process oriented 
 TABLE 9.6 
 Comparing the cultures of TQM 
and traditional organizations 

388 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 4. 
Failure to carefully plan a program before embarking on it can lead to false starts, 
employee confusion, and meaningless results. 
 5. 
Organizations sometimes pursue continuous improvement (i.e.,  incremental improve-
ment) when  dramatic improvement is needed. 
 6. 
Quality efforts may not be tied to results. 
 Note that there is nothing inherently wrong with TQM; the problem is how some individuals 
or organizations misuse it. Let’s turn our attention to problem solving and process improvement.  
 9.9 PROBLEM SOLVING AND PROCESS 
IMPROVEMENT 
     Problem solving is one of the basic procedures of TQM. In order to be successful, problem-
solving efforts should follow a standard approach.  Table 9.7  describes the basic steps in the 
TQM problem-solving process. 
 An important aspect of problem solving in the TQM approach is  eliminating  the cause so 
that the problem does not recur. This is why users of the TQM approach often like to think of 
problems as “opportunities for improvement.” 
 The Plan-Do-Study-Act Cycle 
 The  plan-do-study-act (PDSA) cycle  ,  also referred to as either the Shewhart cycle or the 
Deming wheel, is the conceptual basis for problem-solving activities. The cycle is illustrated 
in  Figure 9.1 . Representing the process with a circle underscores its continuing nature. 
 There are four basic steps in the cycle:
 Plan.  Begin by studying the current process. Document that process. Then collect data 
on the process or problem. Next, analyze the data and develop a plan for improvement. 
Specify measures for evaluating the plan. 
 Do.  Implement the plan, on a small scale if possible. Document any changes made during 
this phase. Collect data systematically for evaluation. 
 Study.  Evaluate the data collection during the  do  phase. Check how closely the results 
match the original goals of the  plan phase. 
 Act.  If the results are successful,  standardize  the new method and communicate the new 
method to all people associated with the process. Implement training for the new method. 
If the results are unsuccessful, revise the plan and repeat the process or cease this project.    
 Employing this sequence of steps provides a systematic approach to continuous improvement. 
LO9.10 Give an overview of 
problem solving.
 Plan-do-study-act (PDSA) 
cycle  A framework for prob-
lem solving and improvement 
activities. 
 Step 1 
 Define the problem and establish an improvement goal. 
 Give problem definition careful consideration; don’t rush through this step because this will serve 
as the focal point of problem-solving efforts. 
 Step 2 
 Develop performance measures and collect data. 
 The solution must be based on  facts. Possible tools include check sheet, scatter diagram, histo-
gram, run chart, and control chart. 
 Step 3 
 Analyze the problem. 
 Possible tools include Pareto chart, cause-and-effect diagram. 
 Step 4 
 Generate potential solutions. 
 Methods include brainstorming, interviewing, and surveying. 
 Step 5 
 Choose a solution. 
 Identify the criteria for choosing a solution. (Refer to the goal established in Step 1.) Apply criteria 
to potential solutions and select the best one. 
 Step 6 
 Implement the solution. 
 Keep everyone informed. 
 Step 7 
 Monitor the solution to see if it accomplishes the goal. 
 If not, modify the solution, or return to Step 1. Possible tools include control chart and run chart. 
 TABLE 9.7 
 Basic steps in problem solving 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
389
 Process improvement  is a  systematic  approach to improving a process. It involves docu-
mentation, measurement, and analysis for the purpose of improving the functioning of a process. 
Typical goals of process improvement include increasing customer satisfaction, achieving higher 
quality, reducing waste, reducing cost, increasing productivity, and reducing processing time. 
 Table 9.8 provides an overview of process improvement. 
 Process improvement  A sys-
tematic approach to improving a 
process. 
 
 A.  Map the process 
 
1. Collect information about the process; identify each step in the process. For each step, determine:
 
  The inputs and outputs. 
 
  The people involved. 
 
  The decisions that are made. 
 
  Document such measures as time, cost, space used, waste, employee morale and any employee 
turnover, accidents and/or safety hazards, working conditions, revenues and/or profits, quality, and 
customer satisfaction, as appropriate. 
 
2.  Prepare a flowchart that  accurately depicts the process. Make sure that key activities and decisions 
are represented. 
 
 B.  Analyze the process 
 
1. Ask these questions about the process:
 
  Is the flow logical? 
 
  Are any steps or activities missing? 
 
  Are there any duplications? 
 
2. Ask these questions about each step:
 
  Could it be eliminated? 
 
  Does the step add value? 
 
  Does any waste occur at this step? 
 
  Could the time be shortened? 
 
  Could the cost to perform the step be reduced? 
 
  Could two (or more) steps be combined? 
 
 C. Redesign the process
 
 Using the results of the analysis, redesign the process. Document the improvements; potential measures 
include reductions in time, cost, space, waste, employee turnover, accidents, safety hazards, and increases/
improvements in employee morale, working conditions, revenues/profits, quality, and customer satisfaction.  
LO9.11 Give an overview of 
process improvement.
 TABLE 9.8 
 Overview of process improvement 
 FIGURE 9.1 
 A. The PDSA cycle 
B. The PDSA cycle applied to problem solving 
Recognize
problem
Management
Commitment
Form quality
improvement
teams
Continuous
improvement
Define
problem
Ensure
permanence
Develop
performance
measures
Analyze
problem
Implement
solution
Evaluate
solution
Determine
possible
causes
PLAN
STUDY
ACT
DO
Plan
Study
Act
Do
 Source: Figure from Donna Summers,  Quality, 2nd ed., p. 67. Copyright © 2000 Prentice Hall, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Pearson 
Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

390 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 Six Sigma 
 The term  six sigma  has several meanings. Statistically, six sigma means having no more than 
3.4 defects per million opportunities in any process, product, or service. Conceptually, the 
term is much broader, referring to a program designed to reduce the occurrence of defects 
to achieve lower costs and improved customer satisfaction. It is based on the application of 
certain tools and techniques to selected projects to achieve strategic business results. In the 
business world, six-sigma programs have become a key way to improve quality, save time, 
cut costs, and improve customer satisfaction. Six-sigma programs can be employed in design, 
production, service, inventory management, and delivery. It is important for six-sigma proj-
ects to be aligned with organization strategy. 
 Motorola pioneered the concept of a six-sigma program in the 1980s and actually trade-
marked the term. Today, six sigma concepts are widely used by businesses, governments, 
consultants, and even the military as a business performance methodology. 
 There are management and technical components of six-sigma programs. The manage-
ment component involves providing strong leadership, defining performance metrics, select-
ing projects likely to achieve business results, and selecting and training appropriate people. 
The technical component involves improving process performance, reducing variation, uti-
lizing statistical methods, and designing a structured improvement strategy, which involves 
definition, measurement, analysis, improvement, and control. 
 For six sigma to succeed in any organization, buy-in at the top is essential. Top management 
must formulate and communicate the company’s overall objectives and lead the program for 
a successful deployment. Other key players in six-sigma programs are program champions, 
“master black belts,” “black belts,” and “green belts.” Champions identify and rank potential 
projects, help select and evaluate candidates, manage program resources, and serve as advocates 
for the program. Master black belts have extensive training in statistics and use of quality tools. 
They are teachers and mentors of black belts. Black belts are project team leaders responsible 
for implementing process improvement projects. They have typically completed four weeks of 
six-sigma training and have demonstrated mastery of the subject matter through an exam and 
successful completion of one or more projects. Green belts are members of project teams. 
 Black belts play a pivotal role in the success of six-sigma programs. They influence 
change, facilitate teamwork, provide leadership in applying tools and techniques, and convey 
knowledge and skills to green belts. Black belt candidates generally have a proven strength in 
either a technical discipline such as engineering or a business discipline. Candidates also must 
have strong “people skills” and be able to facilitate change. And they must be proficient in 
applying continuous improvement and statistical methods and tools. A black belt must under-
stand the technical aspects of process improvement as well as the expected business results 
(time, money, quality improvement). 
 Six sigma is based on these guiding principles:
 1. 
Reduction of variation is an important goal. 
 2. 
The methodology is data driven; it requires valid measurements. 
 3. 
Outputs are determined by inputs; focus on modifying and/or controlling inputs to 
improve outputs. 
 4. 
Only a critical few inputs have a significant impact on outputs (the Pareto effect); con-
centrate on those. 
 DMAIC  (define-measure-analyze-improve-control) is a formalized problem-solving process 
of six sigma. It is composed of five steps that can be applied to any process to improve its 
effectiveness. The steps are:
 1. 
Define: Set the context and objectives for improvement. 
 2. 
Measure: Determine the baseline performance and capability of the process. 
   3. 
Analyze: Use data and tools to understand the cause-and-effect relationships of the process.  
 4. 
Improve: Develop the modifications that lead to a validated improvement in the process. 
 5. 
Control: Establish plans and procedures to ensure that improvements are sustained. 
 Six sigma  A business process 
for improving quality, reducing 
costs, and increasing customer 
satisfaction.  
LO9.12 Describe the six sigma 
methodology.

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
391
be there to tackle the projects that present big-
ger change management challenges. 
 More Tools Are Needed 
 According to the Six Sigma practitioners completing the survey, the 
path to better Six Sigma project results requires equipping practitioners 
with an expanded set of tools to both tackle more complex projects and 
improve Belt productivity by getting more non-Belt involvement. This 
finding is not likely to be a revelation to many of the early pioneers who 
paved the way to the popularity of Six Sigma. Companies like Motorola, 
Allied Signal (now merged with Honeywell), and GE, along with other 
big players, such as DuPont and 3M (among others), have already taken 
steps to strengthen their Six Sigma Deployments by enhancing the 
skills of Belts and expanding the tool kit. 
 At the same time, the survey results indicate there is more work 
to do in advancing Six Sigma into a robust and sustainable method for 
transformational change. The top priority appears to be the expansion 
of the Six Sigma practitioner’s tool kit to break free of the “Catch 22” 
syndrome. In fact, the integration of  Lean principles  by numerous Six 
Sigma users is a big step in the right direction. However, in addition to 
Lean tools there also appears to be a growing recognition that more 
tools are needed to deal with the  change management  aspects of Six 
Sigma. Ninety percent of the survey respondents rated the need for a 
structured tool set for engaging “non-Belts” in projects, particularly 
those with significant behavior change requirements. 
 The preceding finding is linked to the second most important reason 
practitioners stated as the cause for Six Sigma projects falling short 
(i.e., lack of buy-in, cooperation, or ownership by frontline employees 
and managers). The relationship between these two findings correlates 
with the anecdotal evidence from more experienced Six Sigma organi-
zations about the keys to accelerating results and reducing project cycle 
times. As they move down the experience curve and tackle larger and 
more complex change projects, the most successful Six Sigma organi-
zations have expanded their tool sets and integrated other improvement 
disciplines such as Lean seamlessly into deployments. 
 The Keys to a Better Night’s Sleep 
 Six Sigma practitioners can break free of the “Catch 22” syndrome by 
designing their deployments to deliver consistent results and sustain 
consistent executive support. The keys are:
    1. Expand the tool set early in deployment with methods to get more 
non-Belt participation and faster results. The key to avoiding confu-
sion or overload is to integrate Lean, Innovation, and other improve-
ment methods into the DMAIC framework. 
   2. Engage senior leaders to go beyond the rubber-stamping of project 
selections to actually designing the project plan with the Belts. The 
benefits are a more realistic appraisal of project requirements and 
deeper understanding of where and how to apply other tool sets to 
drive bigger and faster results. 
Bill Kowalski 
 It may be the most widely acclaimed performance improvement system 
across the business world, yet Six Sigma is not immune to a paradox 
common to most large-scale change efforts: 
You can’t expect to sustain top executive support without pro-
ducing consistent bottom-line results  . . .  yet consistent results 
aren’t likely without sustained top executive support.  
 This conundrum is a key finding from a recent survey of more than 
240 Six Sigma practitioners across industries and around the globe. 
Sponsored by Leap Technologies, the survey was conducted anony-
mously over the web through  iSixSigma.com , the leading Six Sigma 
information portal. 
 The survey gauged perceptions of Six Sigma practitioners on two 
primary issues:
 1. What causes Six Sigma projects to fail to produce desired results? 
 2. What would most help to improve Six Sigma project results? 
 We know these are issues keeping practitioners up at night because 
these same people are under increasingly heavy pressure to produce 
and sustain bottom-line results from their projects. 
 The “Catch 22” for Six Sigma Practitioners 
 The most often cited reason for Six Sigma project failure was “lack of 
sustained executive sponsorship and commitment.” It is clearly evident 
that there is no substitute for top leadership support to achieve sus-
tained Six Sigma success. In close second ranking was “lack of buy-in, 
cooperation and ownership by frontline managers and employees for 
implementing and sustaining results on Six Sigma project solutions.” 
These top two barriers to success create a classic “Catch 22” for Six 
Sigma practitioners. On the one hand, executive commitment is critical 
to the funding and mandate Six Sigma practitioners need to challenge 
the status quo. 
 On the other hand, sustaining executive support is nearly impossible 
without consistent delivery of results. Yet this payoff can’t be sustained 
without active support by those most impacted by Six Sigma solutions 
. . .  frontline managers and employees! 
 Six Sigma is, with its dedicated Belt infrastructure and standardized 
 DMAIC methodology, a more sophisticated and effective approach than 
past quality improvement methods. But, if there is a chink to be found 
in Six Sigma’s armor, it is the issue of non-Belt participation and owner-
ship. This problem, however, rarely surfaces in the first 12 to 18 months 
of a  Six Sigma Deployment.  In fact, we’ve observed that, initially, many 
Six Sigma Deployment Leaders experience a false sense of security 
about results. Why? Because most of the projects taken on by newly 
trained Black and Green Belts rarely require high levels of frontline sup-
port and, for the most part, don’t challenge top management’s ingrained 
cultural biases. 
 At the same time, it’s also not uncommon for organizations adopting 
Six Sigma to “hit the wall” once “low touch” projects are completed. Top 
management’s appetite for results has been whetted, but the founda-
tional support in terms of skills, experience and commitment may not 
 READING 
 What Keeps Six Sigma Practitioners Up at Night? 
(continued )

392 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 9.10 QUALITY TOOLS 
   There are a number of tools that an organization can use for problem solving and process 
improvement. This section describes eight of these tools. The tools aid in data collection and 
interpretation, and provide the basis for decision making. 
 The first seven tools are often referred to as the  seven basic quality tools.  Figure 9.2 pro-
vides a quick overview of the seven tools. 
 Flowcharts. A   flowchart  is a visual representation of a process. As a problem-solving tool, 
a flowchart can help investigators in identifying possible points in a process where problems 
occur.  Figure 9.3  illustrates a flowchart for catalog telephone orders in which potential failure 
points are highlighted. 
 The diamond shapes in the flowchart represent decision points in the process, and the rect-
angular shapes represent procedures. The arrows show the direction of “flow” of the steps in 
the process. 
 To construct a simple flowchart, begin by listing the steps in a process. Then classify each 
step as either a procedure or a decision (or check) point. Try to not make the flowchart too 
detailed or it may be overwhelming, but be careful not to omit any key steps. 
 Check Sheets.  A   check sheet  is a simple tool frequently used for problem identification. 
Check sheets provide a format that enables users to record and organize data in a way that 
facilitates collection and analysis. This format might be one of simple checkmarks. Check 
sheets are designed on the basis of what the users are attempting to learn by collecting data. 
 Many different formats can be used for a check sheet, and there are many different types of 
sheets. One frequently used form of check sheet deals with type of defect, another with loca-
tion of defects. These are illustrated in  Figures 9.4 and  9.5 . 
  Figure 9.4  shows tallies that denote the type of defect and the time of day each occurred. 
Problems with missing labels tend to occur early in the day and smeared print tends to occur 
late in the day, whereas off-center labels are found throughout the day. Identifying types of 
defects and when they occur can help in pinpointing causes of the defects. 
  Figure 9.5  makes it easy to see where defects on the product—in this case, a glove—are 
occurring. Defects seem to be occurring on the tips of the thumb and first finger, in the finger 
valleys (especially between the thumb and first finger), and in the center of the gloves. Again, 
this may help determine why the defects occur and lead to a solution. 
 Histograms. A   histogram  can be useful in getting a sense of the distribution of observed 
values. Among other things, one can see if the distribution is symmetrical, what the range of 
values is, and if there are any unusual values.  Figure 9.6  illustrates a histogram. Note the two 
peaks. This suggests the possibility of  two  distributions with different centers. Possible causes 
might be two workers or two suppliers with different quality. 
 Pareto Analysis.   Pareto analysis  is a technique for focusing attention on the most impor-
tant problem areas. The Pareto concept, named after the 19th-century Italian economist Vil-
fredo Pareto, is that a relatively few factors generally account for a large percentage of the 
LO9.13 Describe and use 
various quality tools.
 Flowchart  A diagram of the 
steps in a process.  
 Check sheet  A tool for record-
ing and organizing data to iden-
tify a problem. 
 Histogram  A chart of an 
empirical frequency distribution. 
 Pareto analysis  Technique 
for classifying problem areas 
according to degree of impor-
tance, and focusing on the most 
important. 
 About the Author 
 Bill Kowalski is a Senior Partner with Leap Technologies, the leading 
provider of Change Acceleration Tools for Six Sigma Deployment. For 
more articles and information on accelerating organization change, visit 
Leap Technologies on the Web at  www.actionworkout.com . 
 Source: Bill Kowalski, “What Keeps Six Sigma Practitioners Up at Night?” 
 Copyright © Leap Technologies, Inc., 2003. Used with permission. 
   3. Engage non-Belt managers and employees early on projects where 
there is existing motivation for change. 
 Taking actions such as these will provide a steadier stream of 
results, sustained executive support, and a better night’s sleep for Six 
Sigma practitioners! 
(concluded )

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
393
 FIGURE 9.2 
 The seven basic quality tools 
Defect
A
B
C
1
2
Day
3
4
Check sheet
Flowchart
Scatter diagram
Variable B
Histogram
Frequency
Frequency
Control chart
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
Cause-and-effect diagram
Materials
Equipment
People
Methods
Problem
Pareto chart
Variable A
A
B
C
D
E
C
B
D
A
E
A tool for organizing and collecting 
data;  a tally of problems or other events 
by category
A graph that shows the degree and
direction of relationship between two
variables
A chart that shows an empirical
frequency distribution
A diagram that arranges categories from
highest to lowest frequency of occurrence
A statistical chart of time-ordered values of
a sample statistic (e.g., sample means)
A diagram used to organize a search for
the cause(s) of a problem; also known as
a fishbone diagram
A diagram of the steps in a process

394 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 FIGURE 9.3 
 Flowchart of catalog call 
Available?
Customer
places call
Specify desired
item(s)
Begin
End
Confirm order
Specify delivery
instructions
Indicate method
of payment
Call
back?
Lost sale
Alternate
selection?
Lost sale
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Possible
lost sale
Possible
lost sale
Possible wrong
instructions
Busy
signal?
 FIGURE 9.4 
 An example of a check sheet 
Day
Time
Missing
label
Off-
center
Smeared
print
Loose or
folded
Other
M
8–9
9–10
10–11
11–12
1–2
2–3
3–4
Type of Defect
Total
Total
(Torn)
6
3
5
3
1
6
8
5
14
10
2
1
32
 FIGURE 9.5 
 A special-purpose check sheet 
= Location of a defect

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
395
total cases (e.g., complaints, defects, problems). The idea is to classify the cases according to 
degree of importance and focus on resolving the most important, leaving the less important. 
Often referred to as the 80–20 rule, the Pareto concept states that approximately 80 percent of 
the problems come from 20 percent of the items. For instance, 80 percent of machine break-
downs come from 20 percent of the machines, and 80 percent of the product defects come 
from 20 percent of the causes of defects. 
 Often, it is useful to prepare a chart that shows the number of occurrences by category, 
arranged in order of frequency.  Figure 9.7  illustrates such a chart corresponding to the check 
sheet shown in  Figure 9.4 . The dominance of the problem with off-center labels becomes 
apparent. Presumably, the manager and employees would focus on trying to resolve this prob-
lem. Once they accomplished that, they could address the remaining defects in similar fash-
ion; “smeared print” would be the next major category to be resolved, and so on. Additional 
check sheets would be used to collect data to verify that the defects in these categories have 
been eliminated or greatly reduced. Hence, in later Pareto diagrams, categories such as “off-
center” may still appear but would be much less prominent. 
 Scatter Diagrams.  A   scatter diagram  can be useful in deciding if there is a correla-
tion between the values of two variables. A correlation may point to a cause of a problem. 
  Figure 9.8  shows an example of a scatter diagram. In this particular diagram, there is a  posi-
tive (upward-sloping) relationship between the humidity and the number of errors per hour. 
High values of humidity correspond to high numbers of errors, and vice versa. On the other 
hand, a  negative  (downward-sloping) relationship would mean that when values of one vari-
able are low, values of the other variable are high, and vice versa. 
 The higher the correlation between the two variables, the less scatter in the points; the 
points will tend to line up. Conversely, if there were little or no relationship between two 
 Scatter diagram  A graph that 
shows the degree and direction 
of relationship between two 
variables. 
 FIGURE 9.6 
 A histogram 
Repair time (minutes)
Frequency
 FIGURE 9.7 
 A Pareto diagram based on data 
in Figure  9.4 
15
Loose
Other
Missing
label
Smeared
print
Off-
center
44%
75%
91%
97%
100%
Number of defects
5
10

396 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
variables, the points would be completely scattered. In  Figure 9.8 , the correlation between 
humidity and errors seems strong because the points appear to scatter along an imaginary line.  
 Control Charts.  A   control chart  can be used to monitor a process to see if the process 
output is random. It can help detect the presence of  correctable  causes of variation.  Figure 9.9  
illustrates a control chart. Control charts also can indicate when a problem occurred and give 
insight into what caused the problem. Control charts are described in detail in Chapter 10. 
 Cause-and-Effect Diagrams.  A   cause-and-effect diagram  offers a structured approach to 
the search for the possible cause(s) of a problem. It is also known as a  fishbone diagram because 
of its shape, or an  Ishikawa diagram,  after the Japanese professor who developed the approach 
to aid workers overwhelmed by the number of possible sources of problems when problem solv-
ing. This tool helps to organize problem-solving efforts by identifying  categories  of factors that 
might be causing problems. Often this tool is used after brainstorming sessions to organize the 
ideas generated.  Figure 9.10 illustrates one form of a cause-and-effect diagram.  
 Some errors are more likely causes than others, depending on the nature of the errors. If the 
cause is still not obvious at this point, additional investigation into the  root cause  may be nec-
essary, involving a more in-depth analysis. Often, more detailed information can be obtained 
 Control chart  A statistical 
chart of time-ordered values of a 
sample statistic. 
 Cause-and-effect diagram  A 
diagram used to search for the 
cause(s) of a problem; also 
called  fishbone diagram. 
 FIGURE 9.9 
 A control chart 
Time
Upper control limit
Lower control limit
 FIGURE 9.10 
 One format of a cause-and-effect 
diagram  
Effect
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
cause
People
Equipment
Methods
Materials
 FIGURE 9.8 
 A scatter diagram 
Number of errors per hour
Humidity

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
397
by asking  who, what, where, when, why,  and  how  questions about factors that appear to be the 
most likely sources of problems. 
 Run Charts.  A   run chart  can be used to track the values of a variable over time. This can 
aid in identifying trends or other patterns that may be occurring.  Figure 9.11  provides an 
example of a run chart showing a decreasing trend in accident frequency over time. Important 
advantages of run charts are ease of construction and ease of interpretation. 
 Illustrations of the Use of Graphical Tools 
 This section presents some illustrations of the use of graphical tools in process or product 
improvement.  Figure 9.12  begins with a check sheet that can be used to develop a Pareto chart 
of the types of errors found. That leads to a more focused analysis of the most frequently 
occurring type of error using a cause-and-effect diagram. Additional cause-and-effect dia-
grams, such as errors by location, might also be used. 
 Run chart  Tool for tracking 
results over a period of time. 
 FIGURE 9.12   Employing graphical tools in problem solving 
Location
C
1
2
3
4
Type of Error
B
D
A
E
4
3
1
2
A
B
C
D
E
Check sheet: Type of error by location
Pareto diagram: A errors by location
Pareto chart: Type of error
Cause-and-effect diagram: A errors
A
 FIGURE 9.11   A run chart shows performance over time 
2
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
1
Average number of 
accidents per week

398 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
  Figure 9.13  shows how Pareto charts measure the amount of improvement achieved in a 
before-and-after scenario of errors. 
  Figure 9.14  illustrates how control charts track two phases of improvement in a process 
that was initially out of control. 
 Methods for Generating Ideas 
 Some additional tools that are useful for problem solving and/or for process improvement are 
brainstorming, quality circles, and benchmarking. 
 Brainstorming.  Brainstorming  is a technique in which a group of people share thoughts 
and ideas on problems in a relaxed atmosphere that encourages unrestrained collective think-
ing. The goal is to generate a free flow of ideas on identifying problems, and finding causes, 
solutions, and ways to implement solutions. In successful brainstorming, criticism is absent, 
no single member is allowed to dominate sessions, and all ideas are welcomed. Structured 
brainstorming is an approach to assure that everyone participates. 
 Quality Circles.  One way companies have tapped employees for ideas concerning quality 
improvement is through   quality circles  .  The circles comprise a number of workers who get 
together periodically to discuss ways of improving products and processes. Not only are quality 
circles a valuable source of worker input, they also can motivate workers, if handled properly, 
by demonstrating management interest in worker ideas. Quality circles are usually less struc-
tured and more informal than teams involved in continuous improvement, but in some orga-
nizations quality circles have evolved into continuous improvement teams. Perhaps a major 
distinction between quality circles and teams is the amount of authority given to the teams. 
 Brainstorming  Technique for 
generating a free flow of ideas in 
a group of people. 
 Quality circles  Groups of 
workers who meet to discuss 
ways of improving products or 
processes.  
 FIGURE 9.13 
 Comparison of before and after 
using Pareto charts 
100%
Before
100%
After
Improvement
 FIGURE 9.14 
 Using a control chart to track 
improvements 
Additional improvements
made to the process
UCL
LCL
UCL   Upper Control Limit
LCL   Lower Control Limit
UCL
LCL
UCL
LCL
Process centered
and stable
Process not centered
and not stable
May 3
May 15

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
399
Typically, quality circles have had very little authority to implement any but minor changes; 
continuous improvement teams are sometimes given a great deal of authority. Consequently, 
continuous improvement teams have the added motivation generated by  empowerment.  
 Benchmarking.   Benchmarking is an approach that can inject new energy into improvement 
efforts. Summarized in  Table 9.9 , benchmarking is the process of measuring an organization’s 
performance on a key customer requirement against the best in the industry, or against the best 
in any industry. Its purpose is to establish a standard against which performance is judged, 
and to identify a model for learning how to improve. A benchmark demonstrates the degree to 
which customers of other organizations are satisfied. Once a benchmark has been identified, 
the goal is to meet or exceed that standard through improvements in appropriate processes.  
 The benchmarking process usually involves these steps:
 1. 
Identify a critical process that needs improvement (e.g., order entry, distribution, service 
after sale). 
 2. 
Identify an organization that excels in the process, preferably the best. 
 3. 
Contact the benchmark organization, visit it, and study the benchmark activity. 
 4. 
Analyze the data. 
 5. 
Improve the critical process at your own organization. 
 Selecting an industry leader provides insight into what competitors are doing; but competi-
tors may be reluctant to share this information. Several organizations are responding to this 
difficulty by conducting benchmarking studies and providing that information to other orga-
nizations without revealing the sources of the data. 
 Selecting organizations that are world leaders in different industries is another alterna-
tive. For example, the Xerox Corporation uses many benchmarks: For employee involvement, 
Procter & Gamble; for quality process, Florida Power and Light and Toyota; for high-volume 
production, Canon; for billing collection, American Express; for research and development, 
AT&T and Hewlett-Packard; for distribution, L.L. Bean and Hershey Foods; and for daily 
scheduling, Cummins Engine.                                      
 Benchmarking  Process of 
measuring performance against 
the best in the same or another 
industry. 
 1. What organizations do it the best? 
 2. How do they do it? 
 3. How do we do it now? 
 4. How can we change to match or exceed the best? 
 TABLE 9.9 
 The benchmarking approach 
 Hewlett-Packard, a world leader 
in research and development, 
created the TouchSmart PC. 
Joint research with universities, 
customers, and partners meets 
the scientific and business 
objectives of HP. This model is a 
benchmark for other companies. 

400 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
   10.  Indication of last update date Yes, 17%; 
no, 83% 
 11. A privacy policy Yes, 53%; no, 47% 
 12. Presence of a search engine Yes, 59%; no, 41% 
 13. Translation to multiple languages Yes, 11%; no, 89% 
 The corporations are doing well on most factors, but they need 
improvement on the last five. 
 The list is a handy reference other organizations can use to bench-
mark their existing home pages to see where improvements are needed 
or to develop effective home pages. 
 Question   Give one reason for the importance of each factor. 
 Source: Based on Nabil Tamimi, Murli Rajan, and Rose Sebastianelli, “Bench-
marking the Home Pages of ‘Fortune 500’ Companies.” Reprinted with permis-
sion from  Quality Progress © 2000 American Society for Quality. No further 
distribution allowed without permission. 
 More and more people are using the Internet. And when these people 
want information about a company’s products or services, they often go 
to the company’s Web site. In a study of the home pages of Fortune 500 
companies, 13 factors were deemed critical to quality. Those factors, 
and the survey results, are shown below:
    1.  Use of meta tags (e.g., keywords used by search engines) Yes, 
70%; no, 30% 
  2.  Meaningful home page title Yes, 97%; no, 3% 
  3.  Unique domain name Yes, 91%; no, 9% 
  4. Search engine site registration 97% (average) 
  5. Server reliability 99% (average) 
    6.  Average speed of loading (seconds) 28k, 19.3; 56k, 10.9; T1, 2.6 sec.  
  7. Average number of bad links .40 
  8. Average number of spelling errors .16 
  9. Visibility of contact information Yes, 74%; no, 26% 
 READING 
 Benchmarking Corporate Web Sites of Fortune 500 Companies 
 9.11 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 All customers are concerned with the quality of goods or services they receive. For this reason 
alone, business organizations have a vital, strategic interest in achieving and maintaining high 
quality standards. Moreover, there is a positive link between quality and productivity, giving 
an additional incentive for achieving high quality and being able to present that image to cur-
rent and potential customers. 
 The best business organizations view quality as a never-ending journey. That is, they strive 
for continual improvement with the attitude that no matter how good quality is, it can always 
be improved, and there are benefits for doing so. 
 In order for total quality management to be successful, it is essential that a majority of 
those in an organization buy in to the idea. Otherwise, there is a risk that a significant portion 
of the benefits of the approach will not be realized. Therefore, it is important to give this suf-
ficient attention, and to confirm that concordance exists before plunging ahead. A key aspect 
of this is a top-down approach: Top management needs to be visibly involved and needs to 
be supportive, both financially and emotionally. Also important is education of managers and 
workers in the concepts, tools, and procedures of quality. Again, if education is incomplete, 
there is the risk that TQM will not produce the desired benefits. 
 And here’s a note of caution: Although customer retention rates can have a dramatic impact 
on profitability, customer satisfaction does not always guarantee customer loyalty. Conse-
quently, organizations may need to develop a retention strategy to deal with this possibility. 
 It is not enough for an organization to incorporate quality into its operations; the entire sup-
ply chain has to be involved. Problems such as defects in purchased parts, long lead times, and 
late or missed deliveries of goods or services all negatively impact an organization’s ability 
to satisfy its customers. So it is essential to incorporate quality throughout the supply chain. 
 This chapter presents philosophies and tools that can be used to achieve high quality and continually 
improve quality. Quality is the culmination of efforts of the entire organization and its supply chain. 
It begins with careful assessment of what the customers want, then translating this information into 
technical specifications to which goods or services must conform. The specifications guide product and 
service design, process design, production of goods and delivery of services, and service after the sale 
or delivery. 
 SUMMARY 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
401
 The consequences of poor quality include loss of market share, liability claims, a decrease in produc-
tivity, and an increase in costs. Quality costs include costs related to prevention, appraisal, and failure. 
Determinants of quality are design, conformance to design, ease of use, and service after delivery. 
 Modern quality management is directed at preventing mistakes rather than finding them after they 
occur and reducing process output variation. Currently, the business community shows widespread 
interest in improving quality and competitiveness. 
 The chapter includes a description of the key contributors to quality management, and it outlines the 
ISO 9000, ISO 14000, and ISO 24700 international quality standards. 
 Three awards of distinction, the Baldrige Award, the European Quality Award, and the Deming Prize, 
are given annually to organizations that have shown great achievement in quality management. 
 Total quality management is a never-ending pursuit of quality that involves everyone in an organiza-
tion. The driving force is customer satisfaction; a key philosophy is continuous improvement. Train-
ing of managers and workers in quality concepts, tools, and procedures is an important aspect of the 
approach. Teams are an integral part of TQM. 
 Two major aspects of the TQM approach are problem solving and process improvement. Six-sigma 
programs are a form of TQM. They emphasize the use of statistical and management science tools on 
selected projects to achieve business results. 
 1. 
Price and quality are the two primary considerations in every buying transaction, so quality is 
extremely important. 
 2. 
Quality gurus have made important contributions to the way business organizations view quality 
and achieve quality. 
 3. 
Quality certification and quality awards are important because they can provide some degree of 
assurance to customers about quality. 
 4. 
Many simple-to-use tools are available for problem solving and process improvement. 
 KEY POINTS 
 appraisal costs, 378 
 Baldrige Award, 381 
 benchmarking, 399 
 brainstorming, 398 
 cause-and-effect (fishbone) 
diagram, 396 
 check sheet, 392 
 continuous improvement, 385 
 control chart, 396 
 Deming Prize, 370 
 European Quality Award, 381 
 external failures, 379 
 fail-safing, 385 
 failure costs, 379 
 flowchart, 392 
 histogram, 392 
 internal failures, 379 
 ISO 9000, 382 
 ISO 14000, 382 
 ISO 24700, 382 
kaizen, 385 
 Pareto analysis, 392 
 plan-do-study-act (PDSA) 
cycle, 388 
 prevention costs, 379 
 process improvement, 389 
 quality, 367 
 quality at the source, 386 
 quality circles, 398 
 quality of conformance, 375 
 quality of design, 375 
 return on quality, 379 
 run chart, 397 
 scatter diagram, 395 
 six sigma, 390 
 total quality management 
(TQM), 385 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEM 
  The county sheriff’s department handed out the following tickets on a summer weekend. Make a 
check sheet and a Pareto diagram for the types of infractions. 
 Problem 
 Ticket Number 
 Infraction 
 1 
 Excessive speed 
 2 
 Expired inspection 
 3 
 Improper turn 
 4 
 Excessive speed 
 5 
 Parking violation 
 6 
 Parking violation 
 7 
 Excessive speed 

402 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
2
4
6
8
10
Parking
violation
Excessive
speed
Improper
turn
Expired
inspection
 Check sheet (list the types of infractions, tally, summarize frequencies): 
 Pareto diagram (arrange infractions from highest frequency to lowest): 
 Infraction 
 Tally 
 Frequency 
 Excessive speed 
 //// 
 5 
 Expired inspection 
 // 
 2 
 Improper turn 
 /// 
 3 
 Parking violation 
 //// //// 
 10 
  1. List and briefly explain
 
a. The dimensions of service quality. 
 
b. The determinants of quality. 
  2. Define the terms  quality of design and  quality of conformance. 
  3. What are some possible consequences of poor quality? 
  4. Use the dimensions of quality to describe typical characteristics of these products and services:
 
a. A television set. 
 
b. A restaurant meal (product). 
 
c. A restaurant meal (service). 
 
d. Painting a house. 
 
e. Surgery and postsurgery care. 
  5. Many product reviews are available on the Internet. Two examples are reviews on electronics 
products such as DVD players and high-definition televisions. There are often both positive and 
negative reviews.
 
a. Do such reviews (positive and negative) influence your purchasing decisions? Why or why not? 
 
b. Why do you suppose consumers take the time and effort to write such reviews? 
 
c.  There is often a feedback button asking if you found the review helpful. Do you usually 
respond? Why or why not? 
  6. Describe the quality–ethics connection. 
    7. Select one of the quality gurus and briefly describe his major contributions to quality management.  
 8.  a. What is ISO 9000, and why is it important for global businesses to have ISO 9000 certification?  
 b. Compare the Baldrige Award and ISO certification. If an organization were going to seek both, 
which one should it seek first? Why? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 Ticket Number 
 Infraction 
 8 
 Parking violation 
 9 
 Improper turn 
 10 
 Parking violation 
 11 
 Expired inspection 
 12 
 Parking violation 
 13 
 Improper turn 
 14 
 Parking violation 
 15 
 Excessive speed 
 16 
 Parking violation 
 17 
 Parking violation 
 18 
 Parking violation 
 19 
 Excessive speed 
 20 
 Parking violation 
 Solution 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
403
 1. What trade-offs are involved in deciding on whether to offer a product or service guarantee? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in setting priorities for quality improvement? 
 3. Name several ways that technology has had an impact on quality. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 9. Briefly explain how a company can achieve lower production costs and increase productivity by 
improving the quality of its products or services. 
 10. What are the key elements of the TQM approach? What is the driving force behind TQM? 
 11. Briefly describe each of the seven quality tools. 
 12. Briefly define or explain each of these tools:
 
a. Brainstorming. 
 
b. Benchmarking. 
 
c. Run charts. 
 13. Explain the plan-do-study-act cycle. 
 14. List the steps of problem solving. 
 15. Select four tools and describe how they could be used in problem solving. 
 16. List the steps of process improvement. 
 17. Select four tools and describe how they could be used for process improvement. 
 1. A computer repair shop had received a number of complaints on the length of time it took to make 
repairs. The manager responded by increasing the repair staff by 10 percent. Complaints on repair 
time quickly decreased, but then complaints on the cost of repairs suddenly increased. Oddly 
enough, when repair costs were analyzed, the manager found that the average cost of repair had 
actually decreased relative to what it was before the increase in staff. What are some possible expla-
nations for the complaints, and what actions might the manager contemplate? 
 2. As a manager, how would you deal with the possibility that customer satisfaction does not always 
lead to customer retention? 
 3. What quality-related trade-offs might there be between having a single large, centralized produce-
processing facility and having many small, decentralized produce-processing facilities? 
 4. Give three examples of what would be considered unethical behavior involving management of 
quality, and state which ethical principle (see Chapter 1) is violated.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 Ticket No. 
 Work 
 Ticket No. 
 Work 
 Ticket No. 
 Work 
 1 
 Tires 
 11 
 Brakes 
 21 
 Lube & oil 
 2 
 Lube & oil 
 12 
 Lube & oil 
 22 
 Brakes 
 3 
 Tires 
 13 
 Battery 
 23 
 Transmission 
 4 
 Battery 
 14 
 Lube & oil 
 24 
 Brakes 
 5 
 Lube & oil 
 15 
 Lube & oil 
 25 
 Lube & oil 
 6 
 Lube & oil 
 16 
 Tires 
 26 
 Battery 
 7 
 Lube & oil 
 17 
 Lube & oil 
 27 
 Lube & oil 
 8 
 Brakes 
 18 
 Brakes 
 28 
 Battery 
 9 
 Lube & oil 
 19 
 Tires 
 29 
 Brakes 
 10 
 Tires 
 20 
 Brakes 
 30 
 Tires 
 1. Make a check sheet and then a Pareto diagram for the following car repair shop data: 
 2. An air-conditioning repair department manager has compiled data on the primary reason for 41 
service calls for the previous week, as shown in the table. Using the data, make a check sheet for 
the problem types for each customer type, and then construct a Pareto diagram for each type of 
customer. 
 PROBLEMS 

404 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 3. Prepare a run chart similar to  Figure 9.11 for the occurrences of defective computer monitors based 
on the following data, which an analyst obtained from the process for making the monitors. Work-
ers are given a 15-minute break at 10:15 a.m. and 3:15 p.m., and a lunch break at noon. What can 
you conclude? 
 4. Prepare a run diagram for this emergency call data. Use five-minute intervals (i.e., count the calls received 
in each five-minute interval. Use intervals of 0–4, 5–9, etc.).  Note: Two or more calls may occur in the 
same minute; there were three operators on duty this night. What can you conclude from the run chart?  
 Call 
 Time 
 Call 
 Time 
 Call 
 Time 
 Call 
 Time 
 1 
 1:03 
 12 
 1:36 
 23 
 1:56 
 34 
 2:08 
 2 
 1:06 
 13 
 1:39 
 24 
 2:00 
 35 
 2:11 
 3 
 1:09 
 14 
 1:42 
 25 
 2:00 
 36 
 2:12 
 4 
 1:11 
 15 
 1:43 
 26 
 2:01 
 37 
 2:12 
 5 
 1:12 
 16 
 1:44 
 27 
 2:02 
 38 
 2:13 
 6 
 1:17 
 17 
 1:47 
 28 
 2:03 
 39 
 2:14 
 7 
 1:21 
 18 
 1:48 
 29 
 2:03 
 40 
 2:14 
 8 
 1:27 
 19 
 1:50 
 30 
 2:04 
 41 
 2:16 
 9 
 1:28 
 20 
 1:52 
 31 
 2:06 
 42 
 2:19 
 10 
 1:29 
 21 
 1:53 
 32 
 2:07 
 
 
 11 
 1:31 
 22 
 1:56 
 33 
 2:08 
 
 
 Job 
Number  
 Problem/ 
Customer Type 
 Job 
Number  
 Problem/ 
Customer Type 
 Job 
Number  
 Problem/ 
Customer Type 
 301 
 F/R 
 315 
 F/C 
 329 
 O/C 
 302 
 O/R 
 316 
 O/C 
 330 
 N/R 
 303 
 N/C 
 317 
 W/C 
 331 
 N/R 
 304 
 N/R 
 318 
 N/R 
 332 
 W/R 
 305 
 W/C 
 319 
 O/C 
 333 
 O/R 
 306 
 N/R 
 320 
 F/R 
 334 
 O/C 
 307 
 F/R 
 321 
 F/R 
 335 
 N/R 
 308 
 N/C 
 322 
 O/R 
 336 
 W/R 
 309 
 W/R 
 323 
 F/R 
 337 
 O/C 
 310 
 N/R 
 324 
 N/C 
 338 
 O/R 
 311 
 N/R 
 325 
 F/R 
 339 
 F/R 
 312 
 F/C 
 326 
 O/R 
 340 
 N/R 
 313 
 N/R 
 327 
 W/C 
 341 
 O/C 
 314 
 W/C 
 328 
 O/C 
 
 
 Interval 
Start Time 
 Number of 
Defects  
 Interval 
Start Time 
 Number of 
Defects  
 Interval 
Start Time 
 Number of 
Defects 
 8:00 
 1 
 10:45 
 0 
 2:15 
 0 
 8:15 
 0 
 11:00 
 0 
 2:30 
 2 
 8:30 
 0 
 11:15 
 0 
 2:45 
 2 
 8:45 
 1 
 11:30 
 1 
 3:00 
 3 
 9:00 
 0 
 11:45 
 3 
 3:30 
 0 
 9:15 
 1 
 1:00 
 1 
 3:45 
 1 
 9:30 
 1 
 1:15 
 0 
 4:00 
 0 
 9:45 
 2 
 1:30 
 0 
 4:15 
 0 
 10:00 
 3 
 1:45 
 1 
 4:30 
 1 
 10:30 
 1 
 2:00 
 1 
 4:45 
 3 
 Key Problem type: 
  N    Noisy 
 F    Equipment failure 
  W    Runs warm 
  O    Odor 
 Customer type: 
 C    Commercial customer 
 R    Residential customer 

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
405
 5. Suppose that a table lamp fails to light when turned on. Prepare a simple cause-and-effect diagram 
to analyze possible causes. 
  6. Prepare a cause-and-effect diagram to analyze the possible causes of late delivery of parts ordered 
from a supplier. 
  7. Prepare a cause-and-effect diagram to analyze why a machine has produced a large run of defec-
tive parts. 
  8. Prepare a scatter diagram for each of these data sets and then express in words the apparent rela-
tionship between the two variables. Put the first variable on the horizontal axis and the second 
variable on the vertical axis.
 
 a.  
 
 b. 
  9. Prepare a flowchart that describes going to the library to study for an exam. Your flowchart should 
include these items: finding a place at the library to study; checking to see if you have your book, 
paper, highlighter, and so forth; traveling to the library; and the possibility of moving to another 
location if the place you chose to study starts to get crowded. 
 10. College students trying to register for a course sometimes find that the course has been closed, or 
the section they want has been closed. Prepare a cause-and-effect diagram for this problem. 
 11. The county sheriff’s department responded to an unusually large number of vehicular accidents 
along a quarter-mile stretch of highway in recent months. Prepare a cause-and-effect diagram for 
this problem. 
 12. Suppose you are going to have a prescription filled at a local pharmacy. Referring to the dimen-
sions of service quality for each dimension, give an example of how you would judge the quality 
of the service. 
 Temperature (  F) 
 65 
 63 
 72 
 66 
 82 
 58 
 75 
 86 
 77 
 65 
 79 
 Error rate 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 3 
 3 
 1 
 5 
 2 
 1 
 3 
 Age 
 24 
 30 
 22 
 25 
 33 
 27 
 36 
 58 
 37 
 47 
 54 
 28 
 42 
 55 
 Absenteeism rate 
 6 
 5 
 7 
 6 
 4 
 5 
 4 
 1 
 3 
 2 
 2 
 5 
 3 
 1 
 The operations manager of a firm that produces frozen dinners had 
received numerous complaints from supermarkets about the firm’s 
Chick-n-Gravy dinners. The manager then asked her assistant, Ann, to 
investigate the matter and to report her recommendations. 
 Ann’s first task was to determine what problems were generating 
the complaints. The majority of complaints centered on five defects: 
underfilled packages, a missing label, spills/mixed items, unacceptable 
taste, and improperly sealed packages. 
 Next, she took samples of dinners from the two 
production lines and examined each sample, mak-
ing note of any defects that she found. A summary of those results is 
shown in the table. 
 The data resulted from inspecting approximately 800 frozen din-
ners. What should Ann recommend to the manager? 
 CASE  
 DEFECT OBSERVED 
 Date 
 Time 
 Line 
 Underfilled 
 Missing 
Label 
 Spill/
Mixed 
 Unacceptable 
Taste 
 Improperly 
Sealed 
 5/12 
 0900 
 1 
 
 ✓✓ 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 5/12 
 1330 
 2 
 
 
 ✓✓ 
  
 ✓✓ 
 5/13 
 1000 
 2 
 
 
 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓✓ 
 5/13 
 1345 
 1 
 ✓✓ 
  
 ✓✓ 
 
 
 5/13 
 1530 
 2 
 
 ✓✓ 
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 ✓ 
 5/14 
 0830 
 1 
 
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 5/14 
 1100 
 2 
 ✓ 
  
 ✓ 
  
 ✓✓ 
 5/14 
 1400 
 1 
 
 
 ✓ 
  
 ✓ 
 5/15 
 1030 
 1 
 
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 ✓✓✓✓✓ 
  
 Chick-n-Gravy Dinner Line 
(continued )

406 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 DEFECT OBSERVED 
 Date 
 Time 
 Line 
 Underfilled 
 Missing 
Label 
 Spill/
Mixed 
 Unacceptable 
Taste 
 Improperly 
Sealed 
 5/15 
 1145 
 2 
 
 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓ 
  
 5/15 
 1500 
 1 
 ✓ 
  
 ✓ 
 
 
 5/16 
 0845 
 2 
 
 
 
 ✓✓ 
 ✓✓ 
 5/16 
 1030 
 1 
 
 ✓✓✓ 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓✓ 
  
 5/16 
 1400 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 5/16 
 1545 
 2 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓✓✓ 
 ✓ 
 ✓ 
 ✓✓ 
(concluded )
 Tip Top Markets is a regional chain of supermarkets located in the 
southeastern United States. Karen Martin, manager of one of the stores, 
was disturbed by the large number of complaints from customers at her 
store, particularly on Tuesdays, so she obtained complaint records from 
the store’s customer service desk for the last nine Tuesdays. 
 Assume you have been asked to help analyze the data and to 
make recommendations for improvement. Analyze the data using 
a check sheet, a Pareto diagram, and run charts. Then construct a 
cause-and-effect diagram for the leading category 
on your Pareto diagram. 
 On July 15, changes were implemented to reduce out-of-stock com-
plaints, improve store maintenance, and reduce checkout lines/pricing 
problems. Do the results of the last two weeks reflect improvement? 
 Based on your analysis, prepare a list of recommendations that will 
address customer complaints. 
 CASE  
 Tip Top Markets 
  June 1  
 out of orange yogurt 
 produce not fresh 
 bread stale 
 lemon yogurt past sell date 
 checkout lines too long 
 couldn’t find rice 
 overcharged 
 milk past sell date 
 double charged 
 stock clerk rude 
 meat smelled strange 
 cashier not friendly 
 charged for item not purchased 
 out of maple walnut ice cream 
 couldn’t find the sponges 
 something green in meat 
 meat tasted strange 
 didn’t like music 
 store too cold 
 checkout lines too slow 
 light out in parking lot 
 
 June 8 
 fish smelled funny 
 undercharged 
 out of diet bread 
 out of roses 
 dented can 
 meat spoiled 
 out of hamburger rolls 
 overcharged on two items 
 fish not fresh 
 store too warm 
 cashier not helpful 
 out of ice 
 meat tasted bad 
 telephone out of order 
 ATM ate card 
 overcharged 
 slippery floor 
 rolls stale 
 music too loud 
 bread past sale date 
  June 15 
 wanted smaller size 
 overcharged on special 
 too cold in store 
 couldn’t find aspirin 
 out of Wheaties 
 undercharged 
 out of Minute Rice 
 checkout lines too long 
 cashier rude 
 out of diet cola 
 fish tasted fishy 
 meat smelled bad 
 ice cream thawed 
 overcharged on eggs 
 double charged on hard rolls 
 bread not fresh 
 long wait at checkout 
 didn’t like music 
 wrong price on item 
 lost wallet 
 overcharged 
 overcharged on bread 
 fish didn’t smell right 
 
 June 22 
 milk past sales date 
 couldn’t find oatmeal 
 store too warm 
 out of Bounty paper towels 
 foreign object in meat 
 overcharged on orange juice 
 store too cold 
 lines too long at checkout 
 eggs cracked 
 couldn’t find shoelaces 
 couldn’t find lard 
 out of Smucker’s strawberry jam 
 out of 42 oz. Tide 
 out of Frosty Flakes cereal 
 fish really bad 
 out of Thomas’ English Muffins 
 windows dirty 
(continued )

 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality 
407
 July 20 
 out of cucumbers 
 out of Tip Top toilet paper 
 checkout lines too slow 
 out of red peppers 
 found keys in parking lot 
 out of Tip Top napkins 
 lost keys 
 out of apricots 
 wrong price on sale item 
 telephone out of order 
 overcharged on corn 
 out of cocktail sauce 
 wrong price on baby food 
 water on floor 
 out of 18 oz. Tide 
 out of onions 
 out of Tip Top tissues 
 out of squash 
 checkout lines too long 
 out of iceberg lettuce 
 out of romaine lettuce 
 out of Tip Top paper towels 
 July 13 
 wrong price on spaghetti 
 undercharged 
 water on floor 
 out of brown rice 
 store looked messy 
 out of mushrooms 
 store too warm 
 overcharged 
 checkout lines too long 
 checkout wait too long 
 cashier not friendly 
 shopping cart broken 
 out of Cheese Doodles 
 couldn’t find aspirin 
 triple charged 
 out of Tip Top lunch bags 
 out of Saran Wrap 
 out of Tip Top straws 
 out of Dove Bars 
 
 July 6 
 out of straws 
 store too warm 
 out of bird food 
 price not as advertised 
 overcharged on butter 
 need to open more checkouts 
 out of masking tape 
 shopping carts hard to steer 
 stockboy was not helpful 
 debris in aisles 
 lost child 
 out of Drano 
 meat looked bad 
 out of Chinese cabbage 
 overcharged on butter 
 store too warm 
 out of Swiss chard 
 floors dirty and sticky 
 too many people in store 
 out of Diamond chopped walnuts 
 out of bubble bath 
 
 out of Dial soap 
 
 June 29 
 checkout line too long 
 restroom not clean 
 out of Dove soap 
 couldn’t find sponges 
 out of Bisquick 
 checkout lines slow 
 eggs cracked 
 out of 18 oz. Tide 
 store not clean 
 out of Campbell’s turkey soup 
 store too cold 
 out of pepperoni sticks 
 cashier too slow 
 checkout lines too long 
 out of skim milk 
 meat not fresh 
 charged wrong price 
 overcharged on melon 
 July 27 
 out of bananas 
 wanted to know who won the lottery 
 reported accident in parking lot 
 store too warm 
 wrong price on cranapple juice 
 oatmeal spilled in bulk section 
 out of carrots 
 telephone out of order 
 out of fresh figs 
 out of Tip Top tissues 
 out of Tip Top napkins 
 water on floor 
 out of Tip Top straws 
 out of Tip Top paper towels 
 windows dirty 
 out of Tip Top toilet paper 
 out of iceberg lettuce 
 spaghetti sauce on floor 
 dislike store decorations 
 out of Tip Top lunch bags 
 out of Peter Pan crunchy peanut 
butter 
 out of vanilla soy milk 
 
(concluded )

408 
Chapter Nine Management of Quality
 Besterfield, Dale H., Carol Besterfield-Micha, Glen 
Besterfield, and Mary Besterfield-Sacre.  Total Qual-
ity Management. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2011. 
 Brassard, Michael, and Diane Ritter.  The Memory 
Jogger II: A Pocket Guide of Tools for Continuous 
Improvement and Effective Planning. Methuen, 
MA: Goal/QPC, 1994. 
 Butman, John.  Juran: A Lifetime of Influence. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997. 
 El-Haik, Basem, and David M. Roy.  Service Design for 
Six Sigma: A Roadmap for Excellence. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2005. 
 Garvin, David A.  Managing Quality. New York: Free 
Press, 1988. 
 Goetsch, David L., and Stanley B. Davis.  Quality Man-
agement for Organizational Excellence: Introduc-
tion to Total Quality Management. 6th ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010. 
 Gygi, Craig, Neil DeCarlo, and Bruce Williams.  Six 
Sigma for Dummies. 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley and Sons, 2012. 
 Scherkenbach, W. W.  The Deming Route to Quality and 
Productivity: Roadmaps and Roadblocks. Rockville, 
MD: Mercury Press/Fairchild Publications, 1990. 
 Snee, Ronald D., and Roger W. Hoerl.  Six Sigma beyond 
the Factory Floor: Deployment Strategies for Finan-
cial Services, Health Care, and the Rest of the Real 
Economy. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/
Prentice Hall, 2005. 
 Stevenson, William J. “Supercharging Your Pareto 
Analysis.”  Quality Progress. October 2000, 
pp. 51–55. 
 Summers, Donna.  Quality. 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010. 
 Trusko, Brett, Carolyn Pexton, Jim Harrington, and 
Praveen Gupta.  Improving Healthcare Quality and 
Cost with Six Sigma. FT Press, 2007. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

This page intentionally left blank

410
 CHAP TE R 
 10 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO10.1 
Explain the need for quality control. 
 LO10.2 
Discuss the basic issues of inspection. 
 LO10.3 
List and briefly explain the elements of the control process. 
 LO10.4 
Explain how control charts are used to monitor a process and 
the concepts that underlie their use. 
 LO10.5 
Use and interpret control charts. 
 LO10.6 
Perform run tests to check for nonrandomness in process output. 
 LO10.7 
Assess process capability. 
 Quality Control 
 10.1 Introduction, 411 
 10.2 Inspection,  412 
 How Much to Inspect and How Often,  413  
 Where to Inspect in the Process,  414 
 Centralized versus On-Site Inspection,  416  
 10.3 Statistical Process Control,  417 
 Process Variability,  417 
 Sampling and Sampling Distributions,  418  
 The Control Process,  419 
 Control Charts: The Voice of the 
Process,  420 
 Control Charts for Variables,  422 
 Control Charts for Attributes,  427 
 Managerial Considerations Concerning 
Control Charts,  430 
 Run Tests,  431 
 Using Control Charts and Run Tests 
Together,  435 
 What Happens When a Process Exhibits 
Possible Nonrandom Variation?,  435 
 10.4 Process Capability,  435 
 Capability Analysis,  436 
 C  p  ,  437 
 C  pk  ,  439 
 Improving Process Capability,  439 
 Taguchi Loss Function,  440 
 Limitations of Capability 
Indexes,  440 
 10.5 Operations Strategy,  440 
 Cases: Toys, Inc.,  453 
 Tiger Tools,  454 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

411
 This chapter covers quality control. The purpose of quality control is to assure that pro-
cesses are performing in an acceptable manner. Companies accomplish this by monitoring 
process output using statistical techniques.   Quality control   is a process that measures 
output relative to a standard and takes corrective action when output does not meet stan-
dards. If the results are acceptable, no further action is required; unacceptable results call 
for corrective action. 
 Every process generates output that exhibits random variability. That is natural and cannot 
be corrected. However, if there are nonrandom variations in process output, that can be cor-
rected. Quality control tools are used to decide when corrective action is needed. 
 10.1 INTRODUCTION 
 Quality assurance that relies primarily on inspection of lots (batches) of previously produced 
items is referred to as  acceptance sampling.  It is described in the chapter supplement. Quality 
control efforts that occur during production are referred to as  statistical process control, and 
these we examine in the following sections. 
 The best companies emphasize  designing quality into the process,  thereby greatly reducing 
the need for inspection or control efforts. As you might expect, different business organiza-
tions are in different stages of this evolutionary process: Some rely heavily on inspection. 
However, inspection alone is generally not sufficient to achieve a reasonable level of quality. 
Many occupy a middle ground that involves some inspection and a great deal of process con-
trol.  Figure 10.1 illustrates these phases of quality assurance. 
 Quality control   A process 
that evaluates output relative to 
a standard and takes corrective 
action when output doesn’t meet 
standards. 
LO10.1 Explain the need for 
quality control.

412 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 10.2 INSPECTION 
 Inspection  is an appraisal activity that compares goods or services to a standard. Inspection 
is a vital but often unappreciated aspect of quality control. Although for well-designed pro-
cesses little inspection is necessary, inspection cannot be completely eliminated. And with 
increased outsourcing of products and services, inspection has taken on a new level of sig-
nificance. In lean organizations, inspection is less of an issue than it is for other organizations 
because lean organizations place extra emphasis on quality in the design of both products 
and processes. Moreover, in lean operations, workers have responsibility for quality (quality 
at the source). However, many organizations do not operate in a lean mode, so inspection is 
important for them. This is particularly true of service operations, where quality continues to 
be a challenge for management. 
 Inspection can occur at three points: before production, during production, and after pro-
duction. The logic of checking conformance before production is to make sure that inputs 
are acceptable. The logic of checking conformance during production is to make sure that 
the conversion of inputs into outputs is proceeding in an acceptable manner. The logic of 
checking conformance of output is to make a final verification of conformance before passing 
goods on to customers. 
 Inspection before and after production often involves  acceptance sampling procedures; 
monitoring during the production process is referred to as  process control.  Figure 10.2 gives 
an overview of where these two procedures are applied in the production proces. 
 To determine whether a process is functioning as intended or to verify that a batch or lot 
of raw materials or final products does not contain more than a specified percentage of defec-
tive goods, it is necessary to physically examine at least some of the items in question. The 
purpose of inspection is to provide information on the degree to which items conform to a 
standard. The basic issues are
 1. 
How much to inspect and how often.  
 2. 
At what points in the process inspection should occur. 
 3. 
Whether to inspect in a centralized or on-site location. 
 4. 
Whether to inspect attributes (i.e.,  count the number of times something occurs) or vari-
ables (i.e.,  measure the value of a characteristic). 
 Consider, for example, inspection at an intermediate step in the manufacture of personal 
computers. Because inspection costs are often significant, questions naturally arise on whether 
one needs to inspect every computer or whether a small sample of computers will suffice. 
Moreover, although inspections could be made at numerous points in the production process, 
it is not generally cost-effective to make inspections at every point. Hence, the question comes 
up of which points should be designated for inspections. Once these points have been identi-
fied, a manager must decide whether to remove the computers from the line and take them to 
 Inspection   Appraisal of goods 
or services.  
LO10.2 Discuss the basic 
issues of inspection.
 FIGURE 10.1 
 Approaches to quality assurance 
Continuous
improvement
Process
control
Inspection
alone
Inspection
The least progressive
The most progressive
Inspection and
corrective
action during
production
Quality built
into the
process
 FIGURE 10.2 
 Acceptance sampling and 
process control 
Outputs
Transformation
Inputs
Acceptance
sampling
Process
control
Acceptance
sampling

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
413
a lab, where specialized equipment might be available to perform certain tests, or to test them 
where they are being made. We will examine these points in the following sections. 
 How Much to Inspect and How Often 
 The amount of inspection can range from no inspection whatsoever to inspection of each item 
numerous times. Low-cost, high-volume items such as paper clips, roofing nails, and wooden 
pencils often require little inspection because (1) the cost associated with passing defective 
items is quite low and (2) the processes that produce these items are usually highly reliable, 
so defects are rare. Conversely, high-cost, low-volume items that have large costs associated 
with passing defective products often require more intensive inspections. Thus, critical com-
ponents of a manned-flight space vehicle are closely scrutinized because of the risk to human 
safety and the high cost of mission failure. In high-volume systems,  automated  inspection is 
one option that may be employed. 
 The majority of quality control applications lie somewhere between the two extremes. 
Most require some inspection, but it is neither possible nor economically feasible to critically 
examine every part of a product or every aspect of a service for control purposes. The cost of 
inspection, resulting interruptions of a process or delays caused by inspection, and the man-
ner of testing typically outweigh the benefits of 100 percent inspection. Note that for manual 
inspection, even 100 percent inspection does not guarantee that all defects will be found and 
removed. Inspection is a process, and hence, subject to variation. Boredom and fatigue are 
factors that cause inspection mistakes. Moreover, when destructive testing is involved (items 
are destroyed by testing), that must be taken into account. However, the cost of letting unde-
tected defects slip through is sufficiently high that inspection cannot be completely ignored. 
The amount of inspection needed is governed by the costs of inspection and the expected 
costs of passing defective items. As illustrated in  Figure 10.3 , if inspection activities increase, 
inspection costs increase, but the costs of undetected defects decrease. The traditional goal 
was to minimize the sum of these two costs. In other words, it may not pay to attempt to catch 
every defect, particularly if the cost of inspection exceeds the penalties associated with letting 
some defects get through. Current thinking is that every reduction in defective output reduces 
costs, although not primarily by inspection. 
 As a rule, operations with a high proportion of human involvement necessitate more 
inspection effort than mechanical operations, which tend to be more reliable. 
 A Toyota technician prepares to 
remove the accelerator assembly 
in a recalled Toyota Avalon. 

414 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 The frequency of inspection depends largely on the rate at which a process may go out 
of control or on the number of lots being inspected. A stable process will require only infre-
quent checks, whereas an unstable one or one that has recently given trouble will require 
more frequent checks. Likewise, many small lots will require more samples than a few large 
lots because it is important to obtain sample data from each lot. For high-volume, repetitive 
operations, computerized automatic inspections at critical points in a process are cost 
effective. 
 Where to Inspect in the Process 
 Many operations have numerous possible inspection points. Because each inspection adds 
to the cost of the product or service, it is important to restrict inspection efforts to the points 
where they can do the most good. In manufacturing, some of the typical inspection points are
 1. 
 Raw materials and purchased parts. There is little sense in paying for goods that 
do not meet quality standards and in expending time and effort on material that is bad 
to begin with. Supplier certification programs can reduce or eliminate the need for 
inspection.  
 2. 
 Finished products. Customer satisfaction and the firm’s image are at stake here, and 
repairing or replacing products in the field is usually much more costly than doing it at 
the factory. Likewise, the seller is usually responsible for shipping costs on returns, and 
payments for goods or service may be held up pending delivery of satisfactory goods or 
remedial service. Well-designed processes, products and services, quality at the source, 
and process monitoring can reduce or eliminate the need for inspection. 
 3. 
 Before a costly operation. The point is to not waste costly labor or machine time on 
items that are already defective. 
 4. 
 Before an irreversible process. In many cases, items can be reworked up to a certain 
point; beyond that point they cannot. For example, pottery can be reworked prior to fir-
ing. After that, defective pottery must be discarded or sold as seconds at a lower price. 
 5. 
 Before a covering process. Painting, plating, and assemblies often mask defects. 
 Inspection can be used as part of an effort to improve process yield. One measure of pro-
cess yield is the ratio of output of good product to the total output. Inspection at key points 
can help guide process improvement efforts to reduce the scrap rate and improve the overall 
process yield, and reduce or eliminate the need for inspection. 
 In the service sector, inspection points are incoming purchased materials and supplies, per-
sonnel, service interfaces (e.g., service counter), and outgoing completed work (e.g., repaired 
appliances).  Table 10.1 illustrates a number of examples. 
 FIGURE 10.3 
 Traditional view: The amount of 
inspection is optimal when the 
sum of the costs of inspection 
and passing defectives is 
minimized 
Total cost
Cost of inspection
Cost of passing
defectives
Optimal
Amount of inspection
0
Cost

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
415
 Type of Business 
 Inspection Points 
 Characteristics 
 Fast food 
 Cashier 
 Counter area 
 Eating area 
 Building and grounds 
 Kitchen 
 Parking lot 
 Accuracy 
 Appearance, productivity 
 Cleanliness, no loitering 
 Appearance, safety hazards 
 Cleanliness, purity of food, food storage, health 
regulations 
 Safety, good lighting 
 Hotel/motel 
 Accounting/billing 
 Building and grounds 
 Main desk 
 Maid service 
 Personnel 
 Reservations/occupancy 
 Restaurants 
 Room service 
 Supplies 
 Accuracy, timeliness 
 Appearance and safety 
 Appearance, waiting times, accuracy of bills 
 Completeness, productivity 
 Appearance, manners, productivity 
 Over/underbooking, percent occupancy 
 Kitchen, menus, meals, bills 
 Waiting time, quality of food 
 Ordering, receiving, inventories 
 Supermarket 
 Cashiers 
 Deliveries 
 Produce 
 Aisles and stockrooms 
 Inventory control 
 Shelf stock 
 Shelf displays 
 Checkouts 
 Shopping carts 
 Parking lot 
 Personnel 
 Accuracy, courtesy, productivity 
 Quality, quantity 
 Freshness, ample stock 
 Uncluttered layout 
 Stock-outs 
 Ample supply, rotation of perishables 
 Appearance 
 Waiting time 
 Good working condition, ample supply, 
theft/vandalism 
 Safety, good lighting 
 Appearance, productivity 
 Doctor’s office 
 Waiting room 
 Examination room 
 Doctor 
 Doctor’s assistant 
 Patient records 
 Billing 
 Other 
 Appearance, comfortable 
 Clean, temperature controlled 
 Neat, friendly, concerned, skillful, knowledgeable 
 Neat, friendly, concerned, skillful 
 Accurate, up-to-date 
 Accurate 
 Waiting time minimal, adequate time with doctor 
 TABLE 10.1 
 Examples of inspection points in 
service organizations 
forward, the outer layer of chips shearing away 
like the face of a glacier. 
 The raw material is far easier to handle. An 
entire semi-trailer of sturdy North Dakota “chipping” potatoes can be 
emptied in a matter of minutes, by backing the trailer onto a hydraulic 
lift, tilting it 45 degrees and letting the potatoes—grown for their thin 
skins and low moisture—tumble out. 
 About a dozen semi-trailers’ worth of potatoes arrive every day. The 
potatoes are immediately separated into big and small sizes for a pur-
pose both reasonable and extraordinary: Big potatoes make big chips 
that go into large bags; small potatoes make small chips for lunch-size 
bags. 
 Neil  Steinberg 
 A potato chip is a delicate thing. Fragile. A pound of pressure will crush 
it. So when you’re moving 250 tons of chips through your plant, as they 
do every day at Jays Foods, you need to have a system. 
 “You don’t buy potato crumbs, you buy potato chips,” said Tom 
Howe, CEO and co-owner of the Chicago company, at 99th and Cottage 
Grove. Jays makes 125 different types and brands of chips and sev-
eral hundred varieties of popcorn, puffs, twists, pretzels and assorted 
bagged munchies. 
 Jays combats the tendency of potato chips to crush into flinders 
with a variety of conveyor belts, radial filling chutes and gently vibrating 
slides, where masses of chips, a yard deep, are gradually massaged 
 READING 
 In the Chips at Jays 
(continued )

416 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
balloon.” Japp and his father, now 93 and honorary chairman of the 
board, sold the company to Borden in 1986. “They almost ruined it,” 
Howe said, citing a slump in product quality and neglect of the Jays 
distribution system. “They lost the connection with the consumer.” 
 By 1994, Jays was on the rocks and the Japps, allied with Howe, 
bought the company back. “Not too many people have a second chance 
in life,” said Japp, whose children are in the company. 
 Getting the chips in the bags is another challenge: You can’t just fill 
up bags and seal them; the chips would be smashed. Rather, a con-
veyor pours chips—gently—onto the central hub of a large, wheel-
like device, where the chips scatter into 15 buckets that are, basically, 
scales. A computer monitors the weight of each bucket and opens up 
the exact combination that, in this case, will fill a 14-ounce bag. The 
bags are packed into boxes that read: “HANDLE LIKE EGGS.” 
 While not exactly perishable, potato chips do have a shelf life of 
about eight weeks, only one day of which is spent at the plant. 
 “Potatoes that are in this morning will be in our branches tomorrow 
morning, ready to hit the streets,” Howe said. Jays is still a regional 
brand, sold in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Wisconsin and Missouri. But 
business has grown 50 percent in the past two years. 
 “We connect to people’s lifestyle,” Howe said. “People treat them-
selves with Jays. We’re in the fun food business.” 
 Questions 
    1. What characteristics of potato chips concern Jays in terms of quality?  
   2. Do you feel that Jays is overdoing it with its concern for quality? 
Explain. 
 Source: Neil Steinberg, “In the Chips,”  Chicago Sun-Times, December 26, 1997. 
Copyright © 2003 Chicago Sun-Times. Reprinted with special permission from 
the Chicago Sun-Times, Inc. 
 “Nobody wants to open a small bag and find three big potato chips 
in it,” Howe said. 
 Computers keep track of everything, shunting potatoes to 15,000-
pound holding bins. Each bin feeds into a pipe containing a turning 
screw—a version of the ancient Archimedes screw used to pump water—
that moves the potatoes from the bin to conveyor belts, to where they are 
washed and skinned—the skin scrubbed off by metal bristle brushes. 
 No machine can detect if a potato is rotten inside. So a pair of human 
inspectors reach into the passing brown parade and give the potatoes a 
quick squeeze. Occasionally, they snatch one and slice it open, usually 
revealing black areas of rot, a skill they attribute to experience. 
 “I  know, ” said Alicia Jimenez, asked to explain what about a potato 
tips her off to slice it open and find rot. 
 The naked potatoes are sent into high-speed chippers—spinning 
brass rings, each with eight blades inside, straight blades for straight 
chips, ripple blades for ripple chips. 
 The blades cut the potatoes, but the potatoes take their revenge. 
Every three hours the blades are dulled and the line must be stopped 
so the old rings can be replaced by new rings with sharpened blades. 
 The sheer quantity of slicing spews big foamy banks of starch from 
either side of the chipper, which calls to mind a washing machine gone 
berserk. 
 Potato chips account for about 55 percent of Jays’ business. 
 The raw chips spend three minutes cooking in hot corn oil, which 
is constantly circulated and filtered. Then they are salted, and flavor-
ings—barbecue, for instance, or sour cream and onion—are added. 
 After the chips are fried, there is another quality check, in which workers 
pluck burned and deformed chips out of the masses passing by. The chips 
are conveyed on a link grid, wide enough to let broken chips fall through. 
 The chips also are laser-inspected, rushing, in a single layer, over a 
complex device called an Opti-Sort Scanner. Chips with dark spots or holes 
are detected by a laser, which instructs one of 82 small tubes to fire a 
puff of air that knocks the substandard chip off the line, into a discard bin. 
 The discards—about 3 percent of production—are gathered up and 
used: Starch is drawn out and sold to cornstarch makers; the rest goes 
to hog feed. Just as the stockyards were said to use every part of the 
pig but the squeal, at Jays every part of the potato is used but the rich, 
earthy smell. 
 Jays even tried to sell burnt chips to the public once, about 20 
years ago. “Consumers kept telling us they liked the brown chips,” said 
Len Japp Jr., recalling the “Brownies” variety. “It went over like a lead 
 Centralized versus On-Site Inspection 
 Some situations require that inspections be performed  on site.  For example, inspecting the 
hull of a ship for cracks requires inspectors to visit the ship. At other times, specialized tests 
can best be performed in a lab (e.g., performing medical tests, analyzing food samples, testing 
metals for hardness, running viscosity tests on lubricants). 
 The central issue in the decision concerning on-site or lab inspections is whether the advan-
tages of specialized lab tests are worth the time and interruption needed to obtain the results. 
Reasons favoring on-site inspection include quicker decisions and avoidance of introduction 
(concluded )

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
417
of extraneous factors (e.g., damage or other alteration of samples during transportation to 
the lab). On the other hand, specialized equipment and a more favorable test environment 
(less noise and confusion, lack of vibrations, absence of dust, and no workers “helping” with 
inspections) offer strong arguments for using a lab. 
 Some companies rely on self-inspections by operators if errors can be traced back to spe-
cific operators. This places responsibility for errors at their source ( quality at the source ). 
 10.3 STATISTICAL PROCESS CONTROL 
  Quality control is concerned with the   quality of conformance  of a process: Does the output 
of a process conform to the intent of design? Variations in characteristics of process output 
provide the rationale for process control.    Statistical process control (SPC)    is used to evalu-
ate process output to decide if a process is “in control” or if corrective action is needed. 
 Process Variability 
 All processes generate output that exhibits some degree of variability. The issue is whether 
the output variations are within an acceptable range. The issue is addressed by answering two 
basic questions about the process variations:
 1. 
Are the variations random? If nonrandom variations are present, the process is consid-
ered to be unstable. Corrective action will need to be taken to improve the process by 
eliminating the causes of nonrandomness to achieve a stable process. 
 2. 
Given a stable process, is the inherent variability of process output within a range that 
conforms to performance criteria? This involves assessment of a process’s capability to 
meet standards. If a process is not capable, this situation will need to be addressed. 
 The natural or inherent process variations in process output are referred to as  chance or 
 random variations.  Such variations are due to the combined influences of countless minor 
factors, each one so unimportant that even if it could be eliminated, the impact on process vari-
ations would be negligible. In Deming’s terms, this is referred to as  common variability. The 
amount of inherent variability differs from process to process. For instance, older machines 
 Quality of conformance   A 
product or service conforms to 
specifications. 
 Statistical process control 
(SPC)   Statistical evaluation of 
the output of a process.  
 Random variation   Natural 
variation in the output of a pro-
cess, created by countless minor 
factors. 
 A Mattel technician in China 
does a pulling test with a Dora 
the Explorer doll in the name 
of product safety. Mattel has 
10 labs in six countries and 
has set up strict requirements 
for vendors because of safety 
recalls. 

418 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
generally exhibit a higher degree of natural variability than newer machines, partly because 
of worn parts and partly because new machines may incorporate design improvements that 
lessen the variability in their output. 
 A second kind of variability in process output is called   assignable variation,  or  non-
random variation.  In Deming’s terms, this is referred to as  special variation.  Unlike natural 
variation, the main sources of assignable variation can usually be identified (assigned to a 
specific cause) and eliminated. Tool wear, equipment that needs adjustment, defective materi-
als, human factors (carelessness, fatigue, noise and other distractions, failure to follow correct 
procedures, and so on) and problems with measuring devices are typical sources of assignable 
variation. 
 Sampling and Sampling Distributions 
 In statistical process control, periodic samples of process output are taken and sample sta-
tistics, such as sample means or the number of occurrences of a certain type of outcome, are 
determined. The sample statistics can be used to judge randomness of process variations. The 
sample statistics exhibit variation, just as processes do. The variability of sample statistics 
can be described by its  sampling distribution,  a theoretical distribution that describes the 
 random  variability of sample statistics. The most frequently used distribution is the normal 
distribution, for a variety of revasons. 
  Figure 10.4A  illustrates a sampling distribution and a process distribution (i.e., the dis-
tribution of process variations). Note three important things in  Figure 10.4 : (1) both distri-
butions have the same mean; (2) the variability of the sampling distribution is less than the 
variability of the process; and (3) the sampling distribution is normal. This is true even if the 
process distribution is not normal.   
 In the case of sample means, the   central limit theorem  states that as the sample size 
increases, the distribution of sample averages approaches a normal distribution regardless of 
the shape of the sampled population. This tends to be the case even for fairly small sample 
sizes. For other sample statistics, the normal distribution serves as a reasonable approxima-
tion to the shape of the actual sampling distribution. 
  Figure 10.4B  illustrates what happens to the shape of the sampling distribution relative 
to the sample size. The larger the sample size, the narrower the sampling distribution. This 
means that the likelihood that a sample statistic is close to the true value in the population is 
higher for large samples than for small samples. 
 A sampling distribution serves as the theoretical basis for distinguishing between random 
and nonrandom values of a sampling statistic. Very simply, limits are selected within which 
 Assignable variation   In 
process output, a variation 
whose cause can be identified. 
A nonrandom variation. 
 Sampling distribution   A 
theoretical distribution of sample 
statistics. 
 Central limit theorem   The 
distribution of sample averages 
tends to be normal regardless 
of the shape of the process 
distribution. 
 FIGURE 10.4A   The sampling distribution of means is normal, 
and it has less variability than the process 
distribution, which might not be normal 
Process and 
sampling distribution mean
Distribution of 
process output
Distribution of probable 
sample statistics (e.g., 
means) that could come 
from the process
 FIGURE 10.4B 
 The larger the sample size, the narrower 
the sampling distribution 
n = 100
n = 60
n = 40
n = 20
Sampling distribution
means

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
419
most values of a sample statistic should fall if its variations are random. The limits are stated 
in terms of number of standard deviations from the distribution mean. Typical limits are    2 
standard deviations or    3 standard deviations.  Figure 10.5  illustrates these possible limits 
and the probability that a sample statistic would fall within those limits if only random varia-
tions are present. Conversely, if the value of a sample statistic falls outside those limits, there 
is only a small probability (1    99.74    .0026 for    3 limits, and 1    95.44    .0456 for    2 
limits) that the value reflects randomness. Instead, such a value would suggest nonrandomness.    
 The Control Process 
    Sampling and corrective action are only a part of the control process. Effective control 
requires the following steps:
 Define.  The first step is to define in sufficient detail what is to be controlled. It is not 
enough, for example, to simply refer to a painted surface. The paint can have a number 
of important characteristics such as its thickness, hardness, and resistance to fading or 
chipping. Different characteristics may require different approaches for control purposes.  
LO10.3 List and briefly explain 
the elements of the control 
process.
 FIGURE 10.5 
 Percentage of values within given 
ranges in a normal distribution 
Mean
95.44%
99.74%
–3s
–2s
+2s
+3s
s = Standard 
     deviation
 Food and beverage companies 
use Omron Electronics’ fiber 
optic sensors to monitor 
processes and to perform quality 
inspections such as checking 
beverage content and caps. 

420 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Measure.  Only those characteristics that can be counted or measured are candidates for 
control. Thus, it is important to consider how measurement will be accomplished. 
 Compare. There must be a standard of comparison that can be used to evaluate the mea-
surements. This will relate to the level of quality being sought. 
 Evaluate.  Management must establish a definition of  out of control.  Even a process that 
is functioning as it should will not yield output that conforms exactly to a standard, sim-
ply because of the natural (i.e., random) variations inherent in all processes, manual or 
mechanical—a certain amount of variation is inevitable. The main task of quality con-
trol is to distinguish random from  nonrandom  variability, because nonrandom variability 
means that a process is out of control. 
 Correct. When a process is judged to be out of control, corrective action must be taken. 
This involves uncovering the cause of nonrandom variability (e.g., worn equipment, 
incorrect methods, failure to follow specified procedures) and correcting it. 
 Monitor results.  To ensure that corrective action is effective, the output of a process 
must be monitored for a sufficient period of time to verify that the problem has been 
eliminated.    
 In sum, control is achieved by checking a portion of the goods or services, comparing the 
results to a predetermined standard, evaluating departures from the standard, taking corrective 
action when necessary, and following up to ensure that problems have been corrected. 
 Control Charts: The Voice of the Process 
    An important tool in statistical process control is the control chart, which was developed by 
Walter Shewhart. A   control chart  is a  time-ordered  plot of sample statistics. It is used to 
distinguish between random variability and nonrandom variability. It has upper and lower 
limits, called  control limits,  that define the range of acceptable (i.e., random) variation for the 
sample statistic. A control chart is illustrated in  Figure 10.6 . The purpose of a control chart is 
to monitor process output to see if it is random. A necessary (but not sufficient) condition for a 
process to be deemed “in control,” or stable, is for all the data points to fall between the upper 
and lower control limits. Conversely, a data point that falls outside of either limit would be 
taken as evidence that the process output may be nonrandom and, therefore, not “in control.” 
If that happens, the process would be halted to find and correct the cause of the nonrandom 
variation. The essence of statistical process control is to assure that the output of a process is 
random so that  future output will be random. 
 The basis for the control chart is the sampling distribution, which essentially describes ran-
dom variability. There is, however, one minor difficulty relating to the use of a normal sam-
pling distribution. The theoretical distribution extends in either direction to  infinity. Therefore, 
 any  value is theoretically possible, even one that is a considerable distance from the mean of 
the distribution. However, as a practical matter, we know that, say, 99.7 percent of the values 
will be within    3 standard deviations of the mean of the distribution. Therefore, we could 
decide to set the limit, so to speak, at values that represent    3 standard deviations from the 
LO10.4 Explain how control 
charts are used to monitor a 
process and the concepts that 
underlie their use.
 Control chart   A time-ordered 
plot of sample statistics, used to 
distinguish between random and 
nonrandom variability. 
 FIGURE 10.6 
 Example of a control chart 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
UCL
Mean
LCL
Normal
variation
due to chance
Sample number
Abnormal variation
due to assignable
sources
Abnormal variation
due to assignable
sources
Out of
control

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
421
mean, and conclude that any value that was farther away than these limits was a nonrandom 
variation. 
 In effect, these limits are   control limits:  the dividing lines between what will be desig-
nated as random deviations from the mean of the distribution and what will be designated as 
nonrandom deviations from the mean of the distribution.  Figure 10.7  illustrates how control 
limits are based on the sampling distribution. 
 Control charts have two limits that separate random variation and nonrandom variation. 
The larger value is the  upper control limit  (UCL), and the smaller value is the  lower control 
limit  (LCL). A sample statistic that falls between these two limits suggests (but does not 
prove) randomness, while a value outside or on either limit suggests (but does not prove) 
nonrandomness. 
 It is important to recognize that because any limits will leave some area in the  tails  of the 
distribution, there is a small probability that a value will fall outside the limits  even though 
only random variations are present.  For example, if    2 sigma (standard deviation) limits are 
used, they would include 95.5 percent of the values. Consequently, the complement of that 
number (100 percent    95.5 percent    4.5 percent) would not be included. That percent-
age (or  probability ) is sometimes referred to as the probability of a   Type I error,  where the 
“error” is concluding that nonrandomness is present when only randomness is present. It is 
also referred to as an  alpha  risk, where alpha () is the sum of the probabilities in the two tails. 
 Figure 10.8 illustrates this concept. 
 Using wider limits (e.g.,    3 sigma limits) reduces the probability of a Type I error because 
it decreases the area in the tails. However, wider limits make it more difficult to detect non-
random variations  if  they are present. For example, the mean of the process might shift (an 
assignable cause of variation) enough to be detected by two-sigma limits, but not enough to 
be readily apparent using three-sigma limits. That could lead to a second kind of error, known 
as a   Type II error,  which is concluding that a process is in control when it is really out of 
control (i.e., concluding nonrandom variations are not present, when they are). In theory, the 
costs of making each error should be balanced by their probabilities. However, in practice, 
two-sigma limits and three-sigma limits are commonly used without specifically referring to 
the probability of a Type II error. 
 Table 10.2 illustrates how Type I and Type II errors occur. 
 Each sample is represented by a single value (e.g., the sample mean) on a control chart. 
Moreover, each value is compared to the extremes of the sampling distribution (the control 
 Control limits   The divid-
ing lines between random and 
nonrandom deviations from the 
mean of the distribution. 
 Type I error   Concluding a 
process is not in control when it 
actually is.  
 Type II error   Concluding a 
process is in control when it is 
not. 
 FIGURE 10.7 
 Control limits are based on the 
sampling distribution 
Mean
Process
distribution
(x, sx)
Sampling
distribution
(x, sx
LCL
UCL
)
 FIGURE 10.8 
 The probability of a Type I error 
a/2
Mean
a/2
LCL
UCL
a = Probability of a Type I error

422 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
limits) to judge if it is within the acceptable (random) range.  Figure 10.9  illustrates this 
concept.  
 There are four commonly used control charts. Two are used for   variables, and two are 
used for   attributes.  Attribute data are  counted  (e.g., the number of defective parts in a sample, 
the number of calls per day); variables data are  measured,  usually on a continuous scale (e.g., 
amount of time needed to complete a task, length or width of a part). 
 The two control charts for variables data are described in the next section, and the two 
control charts for attribute data are described in the section following that. 
 Control Charts for Variables 
 Mean and range charts are used to monitor variables. Control charts for means monitor the 
 central tendency of a process, and range charts monitor the  dispersion of a process. 
 Mean Charts.   A  mean control chart,  sometimes referred to as an   x (“ x  bar”) chart, is 
based on a normal distribution. It can be constructed in one of two ways. The choice depends 
on what information is available. Although the value of the standard deviation of a process, , 
is often unknown, if a reasonable estimate is available, one can compute control limits using 
these formulas:
 Upper control limit (UCL):
Lower control limit (LCL):
x
z
x
z
x
x

 

 
 
 (10–1) 
 where
 
/ n
x


=
 
 
Standard deviation of distribution of sample means
x


 
      Estimate of the process standard deviation 
 n     Sample size 
 z     The number of standard deviations that control limits are based on 
 
= Averageof samplemeans
x
 
 The following example illustrates the use of these formulas. 
 Variables   Generate data that 
are  measured. 
 Attributes   Generate data that 
are  counted. 
 Mean control chart   Control 
chart used to monitor the central 
tendency of a process.  
 FIGURE 10.9 
 Each observation is compared 
to the selected limits of the 
sampling distribution 
UCL
LCL
1
2
3
4
Sample number
 
 
 And the conclusion is that it is: 
 
 
 In Control 
 Out of Control 
 If a process is actually: 
 In control 
 No error 
 Type I error (producer’s risk) 
 
 Out of control 
 Type II error (consumer’s risk) 
 No error 
 TABLE 10.2 
 Type I and Type II errors 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
423
  A quality inspector took five samples, each with four observations ( n     4), of the length of 
time for glue to dry. The analyst computed the mean of each sample and then computed the 
grand mean. All values are in minutes. Use this information to obtain three-sigma (i.e.,  z     3) 
control limits for means of future times. It is known from previous experience that the stan-
dard deviation of the process is .02 minute.
 
 
 SAMPLE 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 
 1 
 12.11 
 12.15 
 12.09 
 12.12 
 12.09 
 Observation 
 2 
 12.10 
 12.12 
 12.09 
 12.10 
 12.14 
 
 3 
 12.11 
 12.10 
 12.11 
 12.08 
 12.13 
 
 4 
 12.08 
 12.11 
 12.15 
 12.10 
 12.12 
 
 X  
 12.10 
 12.12 
 12.11 
 12.10 
 12.12 
   
12.10
12.12
12.11
12.10
12.12
5
12.11
x 





 
 Using Formula 10–1, with  z     3,  n     4 observations per sample, and       .02, we find
 
UCL:
12.11
3 .02
4
12.14
LCL:
12.11
3 .02
4
12.08




⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
 
 Note:  If one applied these control limits to the means, one would judge the process to be  in 
control  because all of the sample means have values that fall within the control limits. The 
fact that some of the  individual measurements fall outside of the control limits (e.g., the first 
observation in Sample 2 and the last observation in Sample 3) is irrelevant. You can see why 
by referring to  Figure 10.7 :  Individual  values are represented by the process distribution, a 
large portion of which lies outside of the control limits for  means.
This and similar problems can also be solved using the Excel templates that are available 
on the book’s Web site. The solution for Example 1 using Excel is shown here. 
E X A M P L E  1
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e  
S O L U T I O N
Mean Control Chart (s known)
Basic
Clear
<Back
n =
z =
Average of sample means
Process standard deviation
Sample size
Calculations:
Average
Sample
Mean
Mean
12.11
12.1
12.12
12.11
12.1
12.12
1
2
3
4
5
6
UCL =
LCL =
12.11
0.02
4
3
0.1
12.14
12.08
Mean Control Chart (s known)
s =
Dz =
12.16
12.15
12.14
12.13
12.12
12.11
12.10
12.09
12.08
12.07
12.06
5
10
15
20
0
 Note: To display more data on the above graph, right click on the x-axis, select Format 
Axis, and set Maximum to higher value. The size of the graph may also be increased. 

424 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
LCL = 12.08
1
2
3
4
5
UCL = 12.14
Sample number
Mean
12.08
12.09
12.10
12.11
12.12
12.13
12.14
12.15
 If an observation on a control chart is on or outside of either control limit, the process is 
stopped to investigate the cause of that value, such as operator error, machine out of adjust-
ment, or similar assignable cause of variation. If no source of error is found, the value could 
simply be due to chance, and the process will be restarted. However, the output should then be 
monitored to see if additional values occur that are beyond the control limits, in which case a 
more thorough investigation would be needed to uncover the source of the problem so that it 
could be corrected. 
 If the standard deviation of the process is unknown, another approach is to use the 
sample  range  as a measure of process variability. The appropriate formulas for control 
limits are
 UCL
LCL
2
2
x
A R
x
A R


=
=
 
 (10–2) 
 where
  
A factor from Table 10.3
R
Average of sample ranges
2
A
=
=
 
LO10.5 Use and interpret 
control charts.
  x
12.11,
.046,
R


 and  A 2     .73 for  n     4 (from  Table 10.3 ). Using Formula 10–2, 
we can compute the upper and lower limits for a mean control chart:
 
UCL
12.11
.73(.046)
12.14 minutes
LCL
12.11
.73(.046)
12.08 minutes


=
=
=
=
 
 Except for rounding, these results are the same as those computed in Example 1. Usually 
that will be the case, but not always. 
 Range Charts.   Range control charts ( R -charts) are used to monitor process dispersion; 
they are sensitive to changes in process dispersion. Although the underlying sampling distri-
bution is not normal, the concepts for the use of range charts are much the same as those for 
S O L U T I O N
 Range control chart   Control 
chart used to monitor process 
dispersion. 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e  
  Refer to the data given in Example 1. In order to use Formula 10–2, we need to compute 
the grand mean for the data and the average sample range. In Example 1, the grand mean is 
12.11. The range for each sample is the difference between the largest and smallest  sample 
values. For the first sample, the largest value is 12.11 and the smallest value is 12.08. 
The range is the difference between these two values, which is 12.11    12.08    .03. For 
 Sample 2, the range is 12.15    12.10    0.05. The other ranges can be computed in similar 
fashion. The average range is:
  
(.03
.05
.06
.04
.05)/5
.046.
R 





 
E X A M P L E  2

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
425
the use of mean charts. Control limits for range charts are found using the average sample 
range in conjunction with these formulas:
 
UCL
R
LCL
R
4
3
D
D
=
=
 
 (10–3) 
 where values of  D 3 and  D 4 are obtained from  Table 10.3 . 1   
  Using the average range found in Example 2 and Formula 10–3, we can compute the control 
limits for a range chart.    
 From  Table 10.3 , for  n     4,  D 4     2.28 and  D 3     0. Thus,
 
UCL
2.28(.046)
.105 minutes
LCL
0(.046)
0 minutes
=
=
=
=
 
 Note that the five sample ranges shown in Example 2 are within these control limits. 
E X A M P L E  3
 1 If the process standard deviation is known, control limits for a range chart can be calculated using values from 
 Table 10.3 :
 




D
A
n
D
A
n
LCL
3
, UCL
3
3
2
4
2
 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
S O L U T I O N
 Number of 
Observations in 
Sample, 
 n 
 
 FACTORS FOR R CHARTS 
 Factor for 
 
x
  Chart, 
   A   2  
 Lower Control 
Limit, 
  D   3  
 Upper Control 
Limit, 
   D   4  
 2 
 1.88 
 0 
 3.27 
 3 
 1.02 
 0 
 2.57 
 4 
 0.73 
 0 
 2.28 
 5 
 0.58 
 0 
 2.11 
 6 
 0.48 
 0 
 2.00 
 7 
 0.42 
 0.08 
 1.92 
 8 
 0.37 
 0.14 
 1.86 
 9 
 0.34 
 0.18 
 1.82 
 10 
 0.31 
 0.22 
 1.78 
 11 
 0.29 
 0.26 
 1.74 
 12 
 0.27 
 0.28 
 1.72 
 13 
 0.25 
 0.31 
 1.69 
 14 
 0.24 
 0.33 
 1.67 
 15 
 0.22 
 0.35 
 1.65 
 16 
 0.21 
 0.36 
 1.64 
 17 
 0.20 
 0.38 
 1.62 
 18 
 0.19 
 0.39 
 1.61 
 19 
 0.19 
 0.40 
 1.60 
 20 
 0.18 
 0.41 
 1.59 
 Source: Adapted from Eugene Grant and Richard Leavenworth,  Statistical Quality Control, 5th ed. Copyright © 1980 McGraw-Hill Companies, 
Inc. Used with permission. 
 TABLE 10.3 
Factors for three-sigma control 
limits for X  and  R charts

426 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Using Mean and Range Charts.   Mean control charts and range control charts provide 
different perspectives on a process. As we have seen, mean charts are sensitive to shifts in the 
process mean, whereas range charts are sensitive to changes in process dispersion. Because of 
this difference in perspective, both types of charts might be used to monitor the same process. 
The logic of using both is readily apparent in  Figure 10.10 . In  Figure 10.10A , the mean chart 
picks up the shift in the process mean, but because the dispersion is not changing, the range 
 FIGURE 10.10 
 Mean and range charts used 
together complement each other 
(x -chart does not initially
reveal the increase)
(R -chart reveals increase)
UCL
LCL
(x -chart reveals shift)
UCL
LCL
UCL
LCL
UCL
LCL
(Processing mean is
shifting upward)
(R -chart does not reveal shift)
R -chart
x -chart
R -chart
x -chart
Sampling
distribution
Sampling
distribution
A.
B.
(Process variability is increasing)
 
 Food inspectors inspect cooked 
hamburger meat for food safety 
at McDonald’s. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
427
chart fails to indicate a problem. Conversely, in  Figure 10.10B , a change in process dispersion 
is less apt to be detected by the mean chart than by the range chart. Thus, use of both charts 
provides more complete information than either chart alone. Even so, a single chart may suf-
fice in some cases. For example, a process may be more susceptible to changes in the process 
mean than to changes in dispersion, so it might be unnecessary to monitor dispersion. Because 
of the time and cost of constructing control charts, gathering the necessary data, and evaluating 
the results, only those aspects of a process that tend to cause problems should be monitored.  
 Once control charts have been set up, they can serve as a basis for deciding when to inter-
rupt a process and search for assignable causes of variation. To determine initial control lim-
its, one can use the following procedure:
 1. 
Obtain 20 to 25 samples. Compute the appropriate sample statistic(s) for each sample 
(e.g., mean). 
 2. 
Establish preliminary control limits using the formulas. 
 3. 
Determine if any points fall outside the control limits. 
 4. 
Plot the data on the control chart and check for patterns. 
 5. 
If no out-of-control signals are found, assume that the process is in control. If any out-
of-control signals are found, investigate and correct causes of variation. Then resume 
the process and collect another set of observations upon which control limits can be 
based. 
 Control Charts for Attributes 
 Control charts for attributes are used when the process characteristic is  counted  rather than 
measured. For example, the number of defective items in a sample is counted, whereas the 
length of each item is measured. There are two types of attribute control charts, one for the 
fraction of defective items in a sample (a  p -chart) and one for the number of defects per unit 
(a  c -chart). A  p-chart is appropriate when the data consist of two categories of items. For 
instance, if glass bottles are inspected for chipping and cracking, both the good bottles and 
the defective ones can be counted. However, one can count the number of accidents that occur 
during a given period of time but  not  the number of accidents that did not occur. Similarly, 
one can count the number of scratches on a polished surface, the number of bacteria pres-
ent in a water sample, and the number of crimes committed during the month of August, 
but one cannot count the number of nonoccurrences. In such cases, a  c-chart  is appropriate. 
See  Table 10.4 . 
 p -Chart.  A  p-chart   is used to monitor the proportion of defective items generated by a pro-
cess. The theoretical basis for a  p -chart is the binomial distribution, although for large sample 
sizes, the normal distribution provides a good approximation to it. Conceptually, a  p -chart is 
constructed and used in much the same way as a mean chart. 
 The centerline on a  p -chart is the average fraction defective in the population,  p. The stan-
dard deviation of the sampling distribution when  p is known is
 
(1
)
p
p
n
p



 
 Control limits are computed using the formulas
 
UCL
LCL
p
z
p
z
p
p
p
p

 

   
 (10–4) 
 If  p  is unknown, which is generally the case, it can be estimated from samples. That estimate,   p , 
replaces  p in the preceding formulas, and  ˆ p
  replaces    p  , as illustrated in Example 4. 
 Note:  Because the formula is an approximation, it sometimes happens that the computed 
LCL is negative. In those instances, zero is used as the lower limit. 
 p - chart   Control chart for 
attributes, used to monitor the 
proportion of defective items in 
a process.  

428 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
  An inspector counted the number of defective monthly billing statements of a telephone com-
pany in each of 20 samples. Using the following information, construct a control chart that 
will describe 99.74 percent of the chance variation in the process when the process is in con-
trol. Each sample contained 100 statements.
 Sample 
 Number of 
Defectives  
 Sample 
 Number of 
Defectives  
 Sample 
 Number of 
Defectives  
 Sample 
 Number of 
Defectives  
 1 
 7 
 6 
 11 
 11 
 8 
 16 
 10 
 2 
 10 
 7 
 10 
 12 
 12 
 17 
 8 
 3 
 12 
 8 
 18 
 13 
 9 
 18 
 12 
 4 
 4 
 9 
 13 
 14 
 10 
 19 
 10 
 5 
 9 
 10 
 10 
 15 
 16 
 20 
 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 220 
 To find  z,  divide .9974 by 2 to obtain .4987, and using that value, refer to Appendix B, Table 
A to find  z     3.00.
 
Total number of defectives
Total number of observations
220
20(100)
.11
ˆ
(1
)
.11(1
.11)
100
.0313
p
p
p
n
p



=
=
=
=
=
=
 
 Control limits are
 
UCL
( ˆ )
.11
3.00(.0313)
.2039
LCL
( ˆ )
.11
3.00(.0313)
.0161
p
z
p
z
p
p
p
p






=
=
=
=
=
=
 
 Plotting the control limits and the sample fraction defective, you can see that the last value is 
above the upper control limit. The process would be stopped at that point to find and correct 
the possible cause. Then new data would be collected to establish new control limits. If no 
cause is found, this could be due to chance. The new limits would remain, but future output 
would be monitored to assure the process remains in control. 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e 
E X A M P L E  4
S O L U T I O N
 The following tips should help you select the type of control chart, a  p - chart or a  c - chart, that is appropriate 
for a particular application: 
 Use a  p  - chart: 
 
Use a  c - chart: 
 1. When observations can be placed into one 
of  two categories. Examples include items 
(observations) that can be classified as
 
a. Good or bad. 
 
b. Pass or fail. 
 
c. Operate or don’t operate. 
 2. When the data consist of multiple samples 
of  n observations each (e.g., 15 samples of 
 n     20 observations each). 
 
When only the number of occurrences per unit of 
measure can be counted; nonoccurrences cannot 
be counted. Examples of occurrences and units of 
measure include
 
 a. Scratches, chips, dents, or errors per item. 
 
 b. Cracks or faults per unit of distance (e.g., meters, 
miles). 
 
 c. Breaks or tears, per unit of area (e.g., square yard, 
square meter). 
 
 d. Bacteria or pollutants per unit of volume 
(e.g., gallon, cubic foot, cubic yard). 
 
 e. Calls, complaints, failures, equipment 
breakdowns, or crimes per unit of time 
(e.g., hour, day, month, year).    
 TABLE 10.4 
 p - chart or  c - chart? 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
429
 c - Chart.  When the goal is to control the number of  occurrences  (e.g., defects)  per unit, a 
 c - chart   is used. Units might be automobiles, hotel rooms, typed pages, or rolls of carpet. The 
underlying sampling distribution is the Poisson distribution. Use of the Poisson distribution 
assumes that defects occur over some  continuous  region and that the probability of more than 
one defect at any particular point is negligible. The mean number of defects per unit is  c and 
the standard deviation is   
.c     For practical reasons, the normal approximation to the Poisson 
is used. The control limits are
 
UCL
LCL
c
z c
c
z c
c
c


=
=
 
 (10–5) 
  If the value of  c  is unknown, as is generally the case, the sample estimate,   ,
c     is used in place 
of  c, using  
Number of defects
Number of samples.
c 

 
 c - chart   Control chart for 
attributes, used to monitor the 
number of defects per unit.  
 
LCL = .0161
.24
.22
.20
.18
.16
.14
.12
.10
.08
.06
.04
.02
.00
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
UCL = .2039
Sample number
Fraction defective
Out of control
  Rolls of coiled wire are monitored using a  c  - chart. Eighteen rolls have been exam-
ined, and the number of defects per roll has been recorded in the following table. Is 
the  process in control? Plot the values on a control chart using three standard deviation 
control limits.
E X A M P L E  5
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e 

430 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 
Sample 
 Number of 
Defects 
 
Sample 
 Number of 
Defects 
 
Sample 
 Number of 
Defects 
 1 
 3 
 7 
 4 
 13 
 2 
 2 
 2 
 8 
 1 
 14 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 9 
 2 
 15 
 2 
 4 
 5 
 10 
 1 
 16 
 1 
 5 
 1 
 11 
 3 
 17 
 3 
 6 
 2 
 12 
 4 
 18 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 45 
LCL = 0
c = 2.5
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
UCL = 7.24
Sample number
Defects per unit
 S O L U T I O N 
 
45/18
2.5
Average number of defects per coil
c 


 
 UCL
3
2.5
3 2.5
7.24
LCL
3
2.5
3 2.5
2.24
0
c
c
c
c
c
c





=
=
=
=
=
=
→
 
   When the computed lower control limit is negative, the effective lower limit is zero. In 
such cases, if a control chart point is zero, it should not be deemed to be out of control. The 
calculation sometimes produces a negative lower limit due to the use of the normal distribu-
tion to approximate the Poisson distribution: The normal is symmetrical, whereas the Poisson 
is not symmetrical when  c is close to zero. 
 Note that if an observation falls below the lower control limit on a  p - chart or a  c - chart, the 
cause should be investigated, just as it would be for a mean or range chart, even though such 
a point would imply that the process is exhibiting better than expected quality. It may turn out 
to be the result of an undesirable overuse of resources. On the other hand, it may lead to a 
discovery that can improve the quality of the process. 
 Managerial Considerations Concerning Control Charts 
 Using control charts adds to the cost and time needed to obtain output. Ideally a process is 
so good that the desired level of quality could be achieved without the use of any control 
charts. The best organizations strive to reach this level, but many are not yet there, so they 
employ control charts at various points in their processes. In those organizations, managers 
must make a number of important decisions about the use of control charts:
 1. 
At what points in the process to use control charts. 
 2. 
What size samples to take. 
 3. 
What type of control chart to use (i.e., variables or attribute). 
 4. 
How often should samples be taken. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
431
 The decision about where to use control charts should focus on those aspects of the process 
that (1) have a tendency to go out of control and (2) are critical to the successful operation of 
the product or service (i.e., variables that affect product or service characteristics). 
 Sample size is important for two reasons. One is that cost and time are functions of sample 
size; the greater the sample size, the greater the cost to inspect those items (and the greater the 
lost product if destructive testing is involved) and the longer the process must be held up while 
waiting for the results of sampling. The second reason is that smaller samples are more likely to 
reveal a change in the process than larger samples because a change is more likely to take place 
 within  the large sample, but  between  small samples. Consequently, a sample statistic such as 
the sample mean in the large sample could combine both “before-change” and “after-change” 
observations, whereas in two smaller samples, the first could contain “before” observations and 
the second “after” observations, making detection of the change more likely. 
 In some instances, a manager can choose between using a control chart for variables (a mean 
chart) and a control chart for attributes (a  p  - chart). If the manager is monitoring the diameter of 
a drive shaft, either the diameter could be measured and a mean chart used for control, or the 
shafts could be inspected using a  go, no-go gauge —which simply indicates whether a particular 
shaft is within specification without giving its exact dimensions—and a  p - chart could be used. 
Measuring is more costly and time-consuming per unit than the yes-no inspection using a go, 
no-go gauge, but because measuring supplies more information than merely counting items as 
good or bad, one needs a much smaller sample size for a mean chart than a  p - chart. Hence, a 
manager must weigh the time and cost of sampling against the information provided. 
 Sampling frequency can be a function of the stability of a process and the cost to sample. 
 Run Tests 
 Control charts test for points that are too extreme to be considered random (e.g., points that 
are outside of the control limits). However, even if all points are within the control limits, the 
data may still not reflect a random process. In fact, any sort of pattern in the data would sug-
gest a nonrandom process.  Figure 10.11 illustrates some patterns that might be present. 
 FIGURE 10.11 
 Some examples of nonrandom 
patterns in control chart plots 
UCL
UCL
UCL
UCL
LCL
LCL
LCL
LCL
Trend
Sustained
upward or
downward
movement
Cycles
A wave
pattern
Bias
Too many
observations
on one side 
of the center
line
Too much
dispersion
The values
are too
spread out

432 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Analysts often supplement control charts with a   run test, which checks for patterns in a 
sequence of observations. This enables an analyst to do a better job of detecting abnormalities 
in a process and provides insights into correcting a process that is out of control. A variety of 
run tests are available; this section describes two that are widely used. 
 When a process is stable or in statistical control, the output it generates will exhibit random 
variability over a period of time. The presence of patterns, such as trends, cycles, or bias in 
the output indicates that assignable, or nonrandom, causes of variation exist. Hence, a pro-
cess that produces output with such patterns is not in a state of statistical control. This is true 
even though all points on a control chart may be within the control limits. For this reason, it 
is usually prudent to subject control chart data to run tests to determine whether patterns can 
be detected. 
 A  run  is defined as a sequence of observations with a certain characteristic, followed by 
one or more observations with a different characteristic. The characteristic can be anything 
that is observable. For example, in the series A A A B, there are two runs: a run of three As 
followed by a run of one B. Underlining each run helps in counting them. In the series  A A 
 B B B  A, the underlining indicates three runs. 
 Two useful run tests involve examination of the number of runs  up and down  and runs 
above and below the  median. 2   In order to count these runs, the data are transformed into a 
series of Us and Ds (for  up  and  down ) and into a series of As and Bs (for  above  and  below the 
median). Consider the following sequence, which has a median of 36.5. The first two values 
are below the median, the next two are above it, the next to last is below, and the last is above. 
Thus, there are four runs:
    In terms of up and down, there are three runs in the same data. The second value is up from 
the first value, the third is up from the second, the fourth is down from the third, and so on: 
 (The first value does not receive either a U or a D because nothing precedes it.) 
 If a plot is available, the runs can be easily counted directly from the plot, as illustrated in 
 Figures 10.12 and  10.13 . 
 Run test   A test for patterns in a 
sequence.  
LO10.6 Perform run tests to 
check for nonrandomness in 
process output.
 Run   Sequence of observations 
with a certain characteristic.  
 25 
 29 
 42 
 40 
 35 
 38 
 B 
 B 
 A 
 A 
 B 
 A 
 25 
 29 
 42 
 40 
 35 
 38 
 — 
 U 
 U 
 D 
 D 
 U 
 FIGURE 10.13 
 Counting up/down runs 
 
 
U 
U 
D 
U 
D 
U 
D 
U 
U 
D
U
U
U
U
U
U
D
D
D
D
(8 runs)
 FIGURE 10.12 
 Counting above/below median 
runs 
 
(7 runs)
 B 
A 
A 
B 
A 
B 
B 
B 
A A 
B
 2 The median and mean are approximately equal for control charts. The use of the median depends on its ease of 
determination; use the mean instead of the median if it is given. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
433
   To determine whether any patterns are present in control chart data, one must transform 
the data into both As and Bs and Us and Ds, and then count the number of runs in each case. 
These numbers must then be compared with the number of runs that would be expected in a 
completely random series. For both the median and the up/down run tests, the expected num-
ber of runs is a function of the number of observations in the series. The formulas are
 
 ( )
2
1
med
E r
N


 
 (10–6a) 
 
 ( )
2
1
3
/
E r
N
u d 

 
 (10–7a) 
 where  N  is the number of observations or data points, and  E ( r ) is the expected number of runs. 
 The actual number of runs in any given set of observations will vary from the expected 
number, due to chance and any patterns that might be present. Chance variability is measured 
by the standard deviation of runs. The formulas are
 
 
1
4
med
N



 
 (10–6b) 
 
 
16
29
90
/
N
u d



 
 (10–7b) 
 Distinguishing chance variability from patterns requires use of the sampling distributions 
for median runs and up/down runs. Both distributions are approximately normal. Thus, for 
example, 95.5 percent of the time a random process will produce an observed number of runs 
within two standard deviations of the expected number. If the observed number of runs falls in 
that range, there are probably no nonrandom patterns; for observed numbers of runs beyond 
such limits, we begin to suspect that patterns are present. Too few or too many runs can be an 
indication of nonrandomness. 
 In practice, it is often easiest to compute the number of standard deviations,  z,  by which 
an observed number of runs differs from the expected number. This  z  value would then be 
compared to the value    2 ( z for 95.5 percent) or some other desired value (e.g.,    1.96 for 95 
percent,    2.33 for 98 percent). A test  z  that exceeds the desired limits indicates patterns are 
present. (See  Figure 10.14 .) The computation of  z takes the form 
 
Observed number of runs
Expected number of runs
Standard deviation of number of runs
test
z


 
 For the median and up/down tests, one can find  z using these formulas:
 
 
Median:
[(
/2)
1]
(
1)/4
z
r
N
N




 
 
(10–8)
 
 
 Up and down:
[(2
1)/3]
(16
29)/90
z
r
N
N




 
 (10–9) 
 FIGURE 10.14 
 A sampling distribution for runs 
is used to distinguish chance 
variation from patterns 
Acceptable number
of runs
z = –2
z = 0
z = +2
Too few runs
Too many runs

434 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 where
 N     Total number of observations 
 r     Observed number of runs of either As and Bs or Us and Ds, depending on which test 
is involved. 
 It is desirable to apply both run tests to any given set of observations because each test is 
different in terms of the types of patterns it can detect. Sometimes both tests will pick up a 
certain pattern, but sometimes only one will detect nonrandomness. If either does, the impli-
cation is that some sort of nonrandomness is present in the data. 
 Twenty sample means have been taken from a process. The means are shown in the following 
table. Use median and up/down run tests with  z     2 to determine if assignable causes of varia-
tion are present. Assume the median is 11.0.
 
 E X A M P L E  6 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e    
 S O L U T I O N 
 The means are marked according to above/below the median and up/down. The solid lines 
represent the runs.
 Sample 
 A/B 
 Mean 
 U/D 
 Sample 
 A/B 
 Mean 
 U/D 
 1 
 B 
 10.0 
 — 
 11 
 | B 
 10.7 
 | D 
 2 
 B 
 10.4 
 | U 
 12 
 | A 
 11.3 
 | U 
 3 
 B 
 10.2 
 | D 
 13 
 | B 
 10.8 
 | D 
 4 
 | A 
 11.5 
 | U 
 14 
 A 
 11.8 
 | U 
 5 
 | B 
 10.8 
 | D 
 15 
 A 
 11.2 
 | D 
 6 
 A 
 11.6 
 | U 
 16 
 A 
 11.6 
 | U 
 7 
 A 
 11.1 
 | D 
 17 
 A 
 11.2 
 D 
 8 
 A 
 11.2 
 | U 
 18 
 B 
 10.6 
 D 
 9 
 B 
 10.6 
 | D 
 19 
 B 
 10.7 
 U 
 10 
 B 
 10.9 
 | U 
 20 
 | A 
 11.9 
 U 
 
 
 A/B: 10 runs 
 U/D: 17 runs 
 
 
 The expected number of runs for each test is
 
( )
2
1
20
2
1
11
( )
2
1
3
2(20)
1
3
13
med
/
E r
N
E r
N
u d




=
=
=
=
=
=
 
 
 The standard deviations are
 
1
4
20
1
4
2.18
16
29
90
16(20)
29
90
1.80
med
/
N
N
u d






=
=
=
=
=
=
 
 
 The  z test values are
 
10
11
2.18
.46
17
13
1.80
2.22
med
/
z
zu d




=
=
=
=
 
 
 Although the median test does not reveal any pattern, because its  z test  value is within the range 
   2, the up/down test does; its value exceeds   2. Consequently, nonrandom variations are 
probably present in the data and, hence, the process is not in control. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
435
   Using Control Charts and Run Tests Together 
 Although for instructional purposes most of the examples, solved problems, and problems 
focus on either control charts or run tests, ideally both control charts and run tests should 
be used to analyze process output, along with a plot of the data. The procedure involves the 
 following three steps:
 1. 
Compute control limits for the process output.
 
 a. Determine which type of control chart is appropriate (see  Figure 10.18 ). 
 
 b.  Compute control limits using the appropriate formulas. If no probability is given, use 
a value of  z     2.00 to compute the control limits. 
  c.  If any sample statistics fall outside of the control limits, the process is not in control. 
If all values are within the control limits, proceed to Step 2. 
 2. 
Conduct median and up/down run tests. Use  z        2.00 for comparing the test scores. 
If either or both test scores are not within  z        2.00, the output is probably not ran-
dom. If both test scores are within  z        2.00, proceed to Step 3. 
 3. 
 Note: If you are at this point, there is no indication so far that the process output is non-
random. Plot the sample data and visually check for patterns (e.g., cycling). If you see 
a pattern, the output is probably not random. Otherwise, conclude the output is random 
and that the process is in control. 
 What Happens When a Process Exhibits Possible 
Nonrandom Variation? 
 Nonrandom variation is indicated when a point is observed that is outside the control lim-
its, or a run test produces a large  z  - value (e.g., greater than    1.96). Managers should have 
response plans in place to investigate the cause. It may be a false alarm (i.e., a Type I error), 
or it may be a real indication of the presence of an assignable cause of variation. If it appears 
to be a false alarm, resume the process but monitor it for a while to confirm this. If an assign-
able cause can be found, it needs to be addressed. If it is a good result (e.g., an observation 
below the lower control limit of a  p - chart, a  c - chart, or a range chart would indicate unusu-
ally good quality), it may be possible to change the process to achieve similar results on an 
ongoing basis. The more typical case is that there is a problem that needs to be corrected. 
Operators can be trained to handle simple problems, while teams may be needed to handle 
more complex problems. Problem solving often requires the use of various tools, described in 
Chapter 9, to find the root cause of the problem. Once the cause has been found, changes can 
be made to reduce the chance of recurrence. 
 10.4 PROCESS CAPABILITY 
  Once the stability of a process has been established (i.e., no nonrandom variations are pres-
ent), it is necessary to determine if the process is capable of producing output that is within an 
acceptable range. The variability of a process becomes the focal point of the analysis. 
 Three commonly used terms refer to the variability of process output. Each term relates 
to a slightly different aspect of that variability, so it is important to differentiate these terms.
 Specifications  or  tolerances  are established by engineering design or customer require-
ments. They indicate a range of values in which individual units of output must fall in 
order to be acceptable. 
 Specifications   A range of 
acceptable values established by 
engineering design or customer 
requirements. 
 If ties occur in either test (e.g., a value equals the median or two values in a row are the 
same), assign A/B or U/D in such a manner that that  z test  is as large as possible. If  z test  still does 
not exceed    2 (   1.96, etc.), you can be reasonably confident that a conclusion of random-
ness is justified. 

436 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Control limits  are statistical limits that reflect the extent to which  sample statistics such 
as means and ranges can vary due to randomness alone. 
 Process variability  reflects the natural or inherent (i.e., random) variability in a process. 
It is measured in terms of the process standard deviation. 
 Control limits and process variability are directly related: Control limits are based on sampling 
variability, and sampling variability is a function of process variability. On the other hand, there 
is  no  direct link between specifications and either control limits or process variability. They are 
specified in terms of the output of a product or service, not in terms of the  process  by which the 
output is generated. Hence, in a given instance, the output of a process may or may not conform 
to specifications, even though the process may be statistically in control. That is why it is also 
necessary to take into account the  capability of a process. The term   process capability  refers to 
the inherent variability of process output  relative to  the variation allowed by the design specifica-
tions. The following section describes capability analysis.  
 Capability Analysis 
 Capability analysis is performed on a process that is in control (i.e., the process exhibits only 
random variation) for the purpose of determining if the range of variation is within design 
specifications that would make the output acceptable for its intended use. If it is within the 
specifications, the process is said to be “capable.” If it is not, the manager must decide how to 
correct the situation. 
 Consider the three cases illustrated in  Figure 10.15 . In the first case, process capability and 
output specifications are well matched, so that nearly all of the process output can be expected 
to meet the specifications. In the second case, the process variability is much less than what 
is called for, so that virtually 100 percent of the output should be well within tolerance. In the 
third case, however, the specifications are tighter than what the process is capable of, so that 
even when the process is functioning as it should, a sizable percentage of the output will fail 
to meet the specifications. In other words, the process could be in control and still generate 
unacceptable output. Thus, we cannot automatically assume that a process that is in control 
will provide desired output. Instead, we must specifically check whether a process is  capable 
of meeting specifications and not simply set up a control chart to monitor it. A process should 
be both in control and within specifications  before  production begins—in essence, “Set the 
toaster correctly at the start. Don’t burn the toast and then scrape it!” 
 Process variability   Natural or 
inherent variability in a process.  
 Process capability   The 
inherent variability of 
process output relative to 
the variation allowed by the 
design specification. 
 To maximize production of a 
machine run in a paper mill, 
the machine’s alignment must 
be correct. If not, performance 
and quality will be affected, 
which could result in machine 
downtime and expensive 
repairs. The on-board processor 
calculates the position of the 
paper in relationship to the 
machine datum. Two points 
are then measured on the roller. 
With the simple press of a 
button the operator is provided 
with any deviations on a 
display panel. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
437
 In instances such as case C in  Figure 10.15 , a manager might consider a range of possible 
solutions: (1) redesign the process so that it can achieve the desired output, (2) use an alterna-
tive process that can achieve the desired output, (3) retain the current process but attempt to 
eliminate unacceptable output u-sing 100 percent inspection, and (4) examine the specifica-
tions to see whether they are necessary or could be relaxed without adversely affecting cus-
tomer satisfaction. 
 Obviously, process variability is the key factor in process capability. It is measured in 
terms of the process standard deviation. To determine whether the process is capable, com-
pare    3 standard deviations (i.e., 6 standard deviations) of the process to the specifications 
for the process. For example, suppose the ideal length of time to perform a service is 10 min-
utes, and an acceptable range of variation around this time is    1 minute. If the process has 
a standard deviation of .5 minute, it would not be capable because    3 standard deviations 
would be    1.5 minutes, exceeding the specification of    1 minute. 
 FIGURE 10.15 
 Process capability and specifications may or may not match 
Lower
specification
Upper
specification
Lower
specification
Upper
specification
Lower
specification
Upper
specification
A. Process variability seems
     to just match specifications
B. Process variability
    well within specifications
C. Process variability
     exceeds specifications
 A manager has the option of using any one of three machines for a job. The processes and 
their standard deviations are listed below. Determine which machines are capable if the speci-
fications are 10.00 mm and 10.80 mm. 
 Process 
 Standard Deviation (mm) 
 A 
 .13 
 B 
 .08 
 C 
 .16 
 E X A M P L E  7 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e    
 S O L U T I O N 
 Determine the extent of process variability (the process width) of each process (i.e., six standard 
deviations) and compare that value to the specification  difference of .80 mm.
 Process 
 Standard Deviation (mm) 
 Process Width 
 A 
 .13 
 .78 
 B 
 .08 
 .48 
 C 
 .16 
 .96 
   C  p  
    To assess the capability of a machine or process, a   capability index  can be computed using 
the following formula:
 
Process capability index,
Specification width
Process width
Upper specification
Lower specification
6
of the process
Cp

 
=
=
 
 
 (10–10) 
 For a process to be deemed to be capable, it must have a capability index of at least 1.00. 
However, an index of 1.00 would mean that the process is just barely capable. The current 
trend is to aim for an index of at least 1.33. An index of 1.33 allows some leeway. Consider 
driving a car into a garage that has a door opening that is 1 inch wider than the car versus driv-
ing into a garage where the door opening is 20 inches wider than the car, and you’ll understand 
 capability index   Used to 
assess the ability of a process 
to meet specifications. 
LO10.7 Assess process 
capability.

438 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
why this book and many companies use 1.33 as the standard for judging process capability 
instead of 1.00. So use 1.33 as the standard to achieve in judging process capability. 
 An index of 1.00 implies about 2700 parts per million (ppm) can be expected to not be 
within the specifications, while an index of 1.33 implies only about 30 ppm won’t be within 
specs. Moreover, the greater the capability index, the greater the probability that the output of 
a process will fall within design specifications. 
 FIGURE 10.16 
 Three-sigma versus six-sigma capability 
Lower
specification
Upper
specification
Three-sigma
capability
3
2
1
mean
1
2
3
Lower
specification
Upper
specification
Six-sigma
capability
6
3
mean
6
3
 Compute the process capability index for each process in Example 7. 
 E X A M P L E  8 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The specification width in Example 7 is .80 mm. Hence, to determine the capability index for 
each process, divide .80 by the process width (i.e., six standard deviations) of each machine. 
The results are shown in the following table:
 Process 
 Standard Deviation (mm) 
 Process Capability 
  C   P  
 A 
 .13 
 .78 
 .80/.78    1.03 
 B 
 .08 
 .48 
 .80/.48    1.67 
 C 
 .16 
 .96 
 .80/.96    0.83 
 We can see that only process B is capable because its index is not less than 1.33. (See  Figure 
10.15 for a visual portrayal of these results.) 
 For processes that are not capable, several options might be considered, such as perform-
ing 100 percent inspection to weed out unacceptable items, improving the process to reduce 
variability, switching to a capable process, outsourcing, etc. 
 The Motorola Corporation is well known for its use of the term  six sigma, which refers to 
its goal of achieving a process variability so small that the design specifications represent six 
standard deviations above  and  below the process mean. That means a process capability index 
equal to 2.00, resulting in an extremely small probability of getting any output not within the 
design specifications. This is illustrated in  Figure 10.16 . 
 To get an idea of how a capability index of 2.00 compares to an index of, say, 1.00 in terms 
of defective items, consider that if the U.S. Postal Service had a capability index of 1.00 for 
delivery errors of first-class mail, this would translate into about 10,000 misdelivered pieces 
per day; if the capability index was 2.00, that number would drop to about 1,000 pieces a day. 
 Care must be taken when interpreting the  C  p   index, because its computation does not 
involve the process mean. Unless the target value (i.e., process mean) is  centered between 
the upper and lower specifications, the  C  p   index can be misleading. For example, suppose the 
specifications are 10 and 11, and the standard deviation of the process is equal to .10. The  C  p  
would seem to be very favorable:
 
11
10
6(.10)
1.67


 
 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
439
 However, suppose that the process mean is 12, with a standard deviation of .10;    3 stan-
dard deviations would be 11.70 to 12.30, so it is very unlikely that  any  of the output would be 
within the specifications of 10 to 11! 
 There are situations in which the target value is not centered between the specifications, 
either intentionally or unavoidably. In such instances, a more appropriate measure of process 
capability is the  C  pk  index, because it does take the process mean into account. 
 C  pk  
 If a process is not centered, a slightly different measure is used to compute its capabil-
ity. This index is represented by the symbol  C  pk  . It is computed by finding the difference 
between each of the specification limits and the mean, identifying the smaller difference, 
and dividing that difference by three standard deviations of the process. Thus,  C  pk   is equal 
to the  smaller of
 
 
Upper specification
Process mean
3


 
 (10–11) 
 and
 
Process mean
Lower specification
3


 
 
 
 A process has a mean of 9.20 grams and a standard deviation of .30 gram. The lower speci-
fication limit is 7.50 grams and the upper specification limit is 10.50 grams. Compute  C  pk  . 
 E X A M P L E  9 
 S O L U T I O N 
 1. Compute the index for the lower specification:
 
Process mean
Lower specification
3
9.20
7.50
3(.30)
1.70
.90
1.89






 
 
 2. Compute the index for the upper specification:
 Upper specification
Process mean
3
10.50
9.20
3(.30)
1.30
.90
1.44






 
 
 The  smaller of the two indexes is 1.44, so this is the  C  pk  . Because the  C  pk  is more than 1.33, 
the process is capable. 
 You might be wondering why a process wouldn’t be centered as a matter of course. One 
reason is that only a range of acceptable values, not a target value, may be specified. A more 
compelling reason is that the cost of nonconformance is greater for one specification limit 
than it is for nonconformance for the other specification limit. In that case, it would make 
sense to have the target value be closer to the spec that has the lower cost of nonconformance. 
This would result in a noncentered process. 
 Improving Process Capability 
 Improving process capability requires changing the process target value and/or reducing the 
process variability that is inherent in a process. This might involve simplifying, standardiz-
ing, making the process mistake-proof, upgrading equipment, or automating. See  Table 10.5  
for examples.  
 Improved process capability means less need for inspection, lower warranty costs, fewer 
complaints about service, and higher productivity. For process control purposes, it means nar-
rower control limits. 

440 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Taguchi Loss Function 
 Gnocchi Taguchi, a Japanese quality expert, holds a nontraditional view of what constitutes 
poor quality, and hence the cost of poor quality. The traditional view is that as long as output is 
within specifications, there is no cost. Taguchi believes that any deviation from the target value 
represents poor quality, and that the farther away from target a deviation is, the greater the cost. 
 Figure 10.17  illustrates the two views. The implication for Taguchi is that reducing the variation 
inherent in a process (i.e., increasing its capability ratio) will result in lowering the cost of poor 
quality, and consequently, the loss to society.  
 Limitations of Capability Indexes 
 There are several risks of using a capability index:
 1. 
The process may not be stable, in which case a capability index is meaningless. 
 2. 
The process output may not be normally distributed, in which case inferences about the 
fraction of output that isn’t acceptable will be incorrect. 
 3. 
The process is not centered but the  C  p  index is used, giving a misleading result. 
 FIGURE 10.17 
 Taguchi and traditional views of 
the cost of poor quality 
Lower
spec
Upper
spec
Target
0
Cost
Traditional
cost function
Taguchi
cost function
 10.5 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Quality is a major consideration for virtually all customers, so achieving and maintaining qual-
ity standards is of strategic importance to all business organizations. Quality assurance and 
product and service design are two vital links in the process. Organizations should continually 
seek to increase the capability of the processes they use, so that they can move from a position 
of using inspection or extensive use of control charts to achieve desired levels of quality to one 
where quality is built into products and processes, so that little or no effort is needed to assure 
quality. Processes that exhibit evidence of nonrandomness, or processes that are deemed to not 
be capable, should be viewed as opportunities for continuous process improvement. 
 Method 
 Examples 
 Simplify 
 Eliminate steps, reduce the number of parts, use modular design 
 Standardize 
 Use standard parts, standard procedures 
 Make mistake-proof 
 Design parts that can only be assembled the correct way; have simple checks to 
verify a procedure has been performed correctly 
 Upgrade equipment 
 Replace worn-out equipment; take advantage of technological improvements 
 Automate 
 Substitute automated processing for manual processing 
 TABLE 10.5
Process capability improvement 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
441
 It’s estimated that more than 7,000 hospital 
patients die each year because of drug errors, 
and many others suffer ill effects from being 
given the wrong drug or the wrong dosage. Some hospitals are using 
bar codes attached to patients’ wristbands that allow hospital personnel 
who administer drugs to patients to electronically check to make sure 
the drug and dosage are appropriate. Before administering a drug, the 
doctor or nurse scans the bar code attached to the patient to see what 
drug is needed and when, and then the drug’s bar code is scanned to 
verify that the medication is correct. 
 But bar codes are not foolproof, as a recent study of hospitals 
showed. Nurses may develop a workaround that involves using photo 
copies of a group of patients’ bar codes which are then used to obtain 
drugs for the entire group. The nurse would then have a tray that may 
contain drugs of different dosages intended for different patients. At that 
point, the bar code protection has been circumvented. 
 Questions 
 1. Why are bar codes being used in hospitals? 
   2. What action would you suggest to avoid the problem of workarounds?    
 Source: Based on “Bar Codes Might Cut Drug Errors,”  Rochester Democrat and 
Chronicle, March 14, 2003, p. 9A; and “Bar Codes Are Not Foolproof in Hospitals, 
says Study,”  Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, July 3, 2008, p. 3A. 
 READING  
 Bar Codes Might Cut Drug Errors in Hospitals 
 This chapter describes inspection and statistical process control. Inspection means examining the output 
of a process to determine whether it is acceptable. Key issues in inspection include where to inspect in 
the process, how often to inspect, and whether to inspect on-site or in a laboratory. 
 Statistical process control focuses on detecting departures from randomness in a process. Two basic tools 
of process control are control charts and run tests.  Figure 10.18  gives an overview of quality control. The gen-
eral theory of control charts is discussed, and four types of control charts—two for variables and two for attri-
butes—and two types of run tests are described in the chapter. The chapter ends with a discussion of process 
capability. Process capability studies are used to determine if the output of a process will satisfy specifica-
tions. They can provide valuable information for managers in terms of reducing costs and avoiding problems 
created by generating output that is not within specifications.  Table 10.6 provides a summary of formulas.  
 SUMMARY 
    1. All processes exhibit random variation. Quality control’s purpose is to identify a process that also 
exhibits nonrandom (correctable) variation on the basis of sample statistics (e.g., sample means) 
obtained from the process. 
   2. Control charts and run tests can be used to detect nonrandom variation in sample statistics. It is also 
advisable to plot the data to visually check for patterns. 
   3. If a process does not exhibit nonrandom variation, its capability to produce output that meets speci-
fications can be assessed. 
 KEY POINTS 
 assignable variation, 418 
 attributes, 422 
 capability index, 437 
c - chart, 429 
 central limit theorem, 418 
 control chart, 420 
 control limits, 421 
 inspection, 412 
 mean control chart, 422 
 p - chart, 427 
 process capability, 436 
 process variability, 436 
 quality control, 411 
 quality of conformance, 417 
 random variation, 417 
 range control chart, 424 
 run, 432 
 run test, 432 
 sampling distribution, 418 
 specifications, 435 
 statistical process control (SPC), 417 
 Type I error, 421 
 Type II error, 421 
 variables, 422 
 KEY TERMS 

442 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 FIGURE 10.18 
 Overview of quality control 
Appraisal
Inspection
Run tests
Control charts
Median test
Up/down test
Quality control
Prevention
Statistical process control
Measurement Data:
  x-chart for means
R-chart for ranges
Count Data:
  p-chart for fraction defective
c-chart for number of defects
 TABLE 10.6
Summary of formulas 
 CONTROL CHARTS 
 Name 
 Usage 
 Control Limits 
 Mean, x-bar charg 
 Measurement data. Use for average. 
 



x
z
n
x
A R
or
2
 
 n     sample size 
 Range, R chart 
 Measurement data. Use for range or 
dispersion. 
 
D R
D R
UCL
, LCL
4
3


 
 Fraction defective, p chart 
 Count data. Use when both the “good” and 
“bad” can be counted. 
 
p
z
p
p
n
(1
)


 
 n     sample size 
 Number of defects, c chart 
 Count data. Use when only the 
“occurrences” can be counted. 
 c
z c

 
 RUN TESTS 
 
 NUMBER OF RUNS 
 
 Name 
 Observed 
 Expected 
 Standard Deviation 
 Z 
 Median 
 r 
 
N
2
1

 
 
N
1
4

 
 
r
N
N
[( /2)
1]
(
1)/4



 
 Up/down 
 r 
 
N
2
1
3

 
 
N
16
29
90

 
 
r
N
N
[(2
1)/3]
(16
29)/90



 
 N     number of observations 
(continued )

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
443
 PROCESS CAPABILITY 
 Name 
 Symbol 
 Formula 
 Capability index for a centered 
process 
 C  p  
 
Specification width
6
of process

 
 Capability index for a noncentered 
process 
 C  pk  
  
Smaller of
Mean
Lower specification
3
Upper specification
Mean
3
−
−
⎧
⎨
⎪⎪
⎩
⎪
⎪


  
TABLE 10.6
(concluded )
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Process distribution and sampling distribution.  An industrial process that makes 3-foot sections  
 of plastic pipe produces pipe with an average inside diameter of 1 inch and a standard deviation 
of .05 inch.
    a. If you randomly select one piece of pipe, what is the probability that its inside diameter will 
exceed 1.02 inches, assuming the population is normal? 
   b. If you select a random sample of 25 pieces of pipe, what is the probability that the sample mean 
will exceed 1.02 inches?  
 Problem 1 
 Solution 
  
1.00,
.05
	 
 
 
 a.  
1.02
1.00
.05
.40
z
x

 	




 
 Using Appendix B, Table A,  P ( z  > .4)    .5000    .1554    .3446 
m = 1.00
1.02
.3446
Population
distribution
 b.  
/
1.02
1.00
.05/ 25
2.00
z
x
n

 	




  Using Appendix B, Table A,  P ( z  > 2.00)    .5000    .4772    .0228 
m = 1.00
1.02
Sampling
distribution
of means
.0228

444 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Control charts for means and ranges. Processing times for new accounts at a bank are shown in the 
following table. Five samples of four observations each have been taken. Use the sample data in 
conjunction with  Table 10.3  to construct upper and lower control limits for both a mean chart and a 
range chart. Do the results suggest that the process is in control? 
 Sample 1 
 Sample 2 
 Sample 3 
 Sample 4 
 Sample 5 
 10.2 
 10.3 
 9.7 
 9.9 
 9.8 
 
 9.9 
 9.8 
 9.9 
 10.3 
 10.2 
 
 9.8 
 9.9 
 9.9 
 10.1 
 10.3 
 
 10.1 
 10.4 
 10.1 
 10.5 
 9.7 
 Totals 
 40.0 
 40.4 
 39.6 
 40.8 
 40.0 
 Solution 
 a. Determine the mean and range of each sample.
, Range
Largest
Smallest
x
x
n
 


 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 1 
 40.0/4    10.0 
 10.2    9.8    .4 
 2 
 40.4/4    10.1 
 10.4    9.8    .6 
 3 
 39.6/4    9.9 
 10.1    9.7    .4 
 4 
 40.8/4    10.2 
 10.5    9.9    .6 
 5 
 40.0/4    10.0 
 10.3    9.7    .6 
 b. Compute the average mean and average range:
10.0
10.1
9.9
10.2
10.0
5
50.2
5
10.04
.4
.6
.4
.6
.6
5
2.6
5
.52
x
R














 c. Obtain factors  A 2 ,  D 4 , and  D 3 from  Table 10.3 for  n     4:  A 2     .73,  D 4     2.28,  D 3     0. 
 d. Compute upper and lower limits:
 UCL
10.04
.73(.52)
10.42
2
x
A R
x 




 
 
LCL
2
10.04
.73(.52)
9.66
UCL
4
2.28(.52)
1.19
LCL
3
0(.52)
0
x
x
A R
R
D R
R
D R











   e. Verify that points are within limits. (If they were not, the process would be investigated to correct 
assignable causes of variation.) 
 The smallest sample mean is 9.9, and the largest is 10.2. Both are well within the control limits. 
Similarly, the largest sample range is .6, which is also within the control limits. Hence, the results 
suggest that the process is in control. Note, however, that for illustrative purposes, the number of 
samples is deliberately small; 20 or more samples would give a clearer indication of control limits 
and whether the process is in control.  
Type I error (alpha risk).  After several investigations of points outside control limits revealed noth-
ing, a manager began to wonder about the probability of a Type I error for the control limits used 
( z     1.90).
 a. Determine the alpha risk (i.e.,  P (Type I error)) for this value of  z. 
 b. What  z would provide an alpha risk of about 2 percent? 
 Problem 3 
 Problem 2 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
445
    a. Using Appendix B, Table A, find that the area under the curve between  z     0 and  z       1.90 is 
.4713. Therefore, the area (probability) of values  within    1.90 to 1.90 is   2 (.4713)    .9426, 
and the area  beyond these values is 1    .9426    .0574. Hence, the alpha risk is 5.74 percent. 
   b. The alpha risk (Type I error probability) is always specified as an  area  in the tail(s) of a distribu-
tion. With control charts, you use two-sided control limits. Consequently, half of the risk lies in 
each tail. Hence, the area in the right tail is 1 percent, or .0100. This means that .4900 should be 
the area under the curve between  z     0 and the value of  z  you are looking for. The closest value 
is .4901 for  z     2.33. Thus, control limits based on  z        2.33 provide an alpha risk of about 
2 percent. 
 Solution 
 Problem 4 
p - chart and  c - chart. Using the appropriate control chart, determine two-sigma control limits for 
each case:
 a.  An inspector found an average of 3.9 scratches in the exterior paint of each of the automo-
biles being prepared for shipment to dealers. 
 b.  Before shipping lawn mowers to dealers, an inspector attempts to start each mower and notes 
any that do not start on the first try. The lot size is 100 mowers, and an average of 4 did not 
start (4 percent).  
 Solution 
 The choice between these two types of control charts relates to whether  two types of results can 
be counted ( p - chart) or whether  only occurrences can be counted ( c - chart).
 a.  The inspector can only count the scratches that occurred, not the ones that did not occur. 
Consequently, a  c - chart is appropriate. The sample average is 3.9 scratches per car. Two-
sigma control limits are found using the formulas
 UCL
LCL
c
z c
c
z c


=
=
 
 
 where  c    3.9 and  z     2. Thus,
 UCL
3.9
2 3.9
7.85 scratches
LCL
3.9
2 3.9
.05, so the lower limit is 0 scratches



=
=
=
=
 
 
 ( Note: Round to zero only if the computed lower limit is negative.) 
 b.  The inspector can count both the lawn mowers that started and those that did not start. Con-
sequently, a  p - chart is appropriate. Two-sigma control limits can be computed using the 
following:
 
UCL
(1
)
LCL
(1
)
p
z
p
p
n
p
z
p
p
n




=
=
 
 
 where
 
.04
100
2
p
n
z
=
=
=
 
 
 
 Thus,
 
UCL
.04
2 .04(96)
100
.079
LCL
.04
2 .04(.96)
100
.001


=
=
=
=
 
 

446 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Run tests. The number of defective items per sample for 11 samples is shown below. Determine 
if nonrandom patterns are present in the sequence. 
 Problem 5 
 Sample 
 A/B 
 Number of Defectives 
 U/D 
 1 
 | A 
 22 
 — 
 2 
 B 
 17 
 | D 
 3 
 B 
 19 
 U 
 4 
 | A 
 25 
 U 
 5 
 B 
 18 
 | D 
 6 
 B 
 20 
 U 
 7 
 tie 
 21 
 U 
 8 
 | B 
 17 
 | D 
 9 
 A 
 23 
 | U 
 10 
 A 
 23 
 tie 
 11 
 A 
 24 
 | U 
B 
B 
A
U 
U 
D
B 
B
ie
U 
U
D
A 
A 
A 
 SAMPLE 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 Number of defectives 
 22 
 17 
 19 
 25 
 18 
 20 
 21 
 17 
 23 
 23 
 24 
 Since the median isn’t given, it must be estimated from the sample data. To do this, array the 
data from low to high; the median is the middle value. (In this case, there is an odd number of 
values. For an even number of values, average the middle two to obtain the median.) Thus, 
 Solution 
 17 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 20 
 21 
 22 
 23 
 23 
 24 
 25 
 
 
 (5 below) 
 
 
 ä  
 
 
 
 (5 above) 
 
 
 
 
 
 median 
 
 
 
 
 The median is 21. 
 Next, code the observations using A/B and U/D: 
 Note that each test has tied values. How these are resolved can affect the number of observed runs. 
Suppose that you adhere to this rule: Assign letter (A or B, U or D) so that the resulting difference 
between the observed and expected number of runs is as large as possible. To accomplish this, it is 
necessary to initially ignore ties and count the runs to see whether there are too many or too few. 
Then return to the ties and make the assignments. The rationale for this rule is that it is a conservative 
method for retaining data; if you conclude that the data are random using this approach, you can be 
reasonably confident that the method has not “created” randomness. With this in mind, assign a B to 
sample 7 since the expected number of runs is
( )
/2
1
11/2
1
6.5
med
E r
N





 and the difference between the resulting number of runs, 5, and 6.5 is greater than between 6.5 and 7 
(which occurs if A is used instead of B). Similarly, in the up/down test, a U for sample 10 produces 
six runs, whereas a D produces eight runs. Since the expected number of runs is
( )
(2
1)
3
(22
1)
3
7
u/d
E r
N







 it makes no difference which one is used: both yield a difference of 1. For the sake of illustration, a 
D is assigned. 
 The computations for the two tests are summarized below. Each test has a  z  - value that is within the 
range of    2.00. Because neither test reveals nonrandomness, you may conclude that the data are random.    
 
 Runs Observed 
 Expected 
   r  
 z 
 Conclude 
 Median 
 5 
 6.5 
 1.58 
  .95 
 Random 
 Up/down 
 8 
 7.0 
 1.28 
 .78 
 Random 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
447
 1. List the steps in the control process. 
 2. What are the key concepts that underlie the construction and interpretation of control charts? 
 3. What is the purpose of a control chart? 
 4. Why is order of observation important in process control? 
 5. Briefly explain the purpose of each of these control charts:
  a.  x - bar 
  b. Range 
  c.  p - chart 
  d.  c - chart 
 6. What is a run? How are run charts useful in process control? 
 7. If all observations are within control limits, does that guarantee that the process is random? 
Explain. 
 8. Why is it usually desirable to use both a median run test and an up/down run test on the same 
data? 
 9. If both run tests are used, and neither reveals nonrandomness, does that prove that the process is 
random? Explain. 
 10. Define and contrast control limits, specifications, and process variability. 
 11. A customer has recently tightened the specs for a part your company supplies. The specs are now 
much tighter than the machine being used for the job is capable of. Briefly identify alternatives 
you might consider to resolve this problem. (See  Figure 10.15C. ) 
 12. A new order has come into your department. The capability of the process used for 
this type of work will enable virtually all of the output to be well within the specs. 
(See  Figure 10.15B .)
  a. What benefits might be derived from this situation? 
  b. What alternatives might be considered by the manager? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 Process capability. Determine which of these three processes are capable: 
 Problem 6 
 Process 
 Mean 
 Standard 
Deviation  
 Lower 
Spec 
 Upper 
Spec 
 1 
 7.5 
 .10 
 7.0 
 8.0 
 2 
 4.6 
 .12 
 4.3 
 4.9 
 3 
 6.0 
 .14 
 5.5 
 6.7 
 Notice that the means of the first two processes are exactly in the center of their upper and lower 
specs. Hence, the  C  p   index (Formula 10–10) is appropriate. However, the third process is not cen-
tered, so  C  pk  (Formula 10–11) is appropriate.
For Processes 1 and 2:
Upper spec
Lower spec
6
Cp 


 In order to be capable,  C  p  must be at least 1.33.
Process 1:
8.0
7.0
6(.10)
1.67 (capable)
Process 2:
4.9
4.3
6(.12)
.83 (not capable)
C
C
p
p






 For Process 3,  C  pk  must be at least 1.33. It is the lesser of these two:
Upper spec
Mean
3
6.7
6.0
3(.14)
1.67
Mean
Lower spec
3
6.0
5.5
3(.14)
1.19 (not capable)










 Solution 

448 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 13. Answer these questions about inspection:
  a. What level of inspection is optimal? 
  b. What factors guide the decision of how much to inspect? 
  c.  What are the main considerations in choosing between centralized inspection and on-site 
inspection? 
  d. What points are potential candidates for inspection? 
 14. What two basic assumptions must be satisfied in order to use a process capability index? 
 15. How important is it for managers to maintain and promote ethical behavior in dealing with quality 
issues? Does your answer depend on the product or service involved? 
 16. Classify each of the following as either a Type I error or a Type II error:
  a. Putting an innocent person in jail. 
  b. Releasing a guilty person from jail. 
  c. Eating (or not eating) a cookie that fell on the floor. 
  d. Not seeing a doctor as soon as possible after ingesting poison. 
 1. What trade-offs are involved in each of these decisions?
 a. Deciding whether to use two-sigma or three-sigma control limits. 
 b. Choosing between a large sample size and a smaller sample size. 
 c. Trying to increase the capability of a process that is barely capable. 
 2. Who needs to be involved in setting quality standards? 
 3. Name several ways that technology has had an impact on quality control. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. Analysis of the output of a process has suggested that the variability is nonrandom on several occa-
sions recently. However, each time an investigation has not revealed any assignable causes. What 
are some of the possible explanations for not finding any causes? What should the manager do? 
 2. Many organizations use the same process capability standard for all their products or services 
(e.g., 1.33), but some companies use multiple standards: different standards for different products 
or services (e.g., 1.00, 1.20, 1.33, and 1.40). What reasons might there be for using a single 
measure, and what reasons might there be for using multiple standards? 
 3. Give two examples of unethical behavior for each of these areas: inspection, process control, 
process capability. For each, name the relevant ethical principle (see Chapter 1). 
 4. In repetitive operations it is often possible to automatically check for quality and then reject parts 
that are unacceptable. In those situations, does that mean that control charts aren’t needed? Explain.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. Specifications for a part for a DVD player state that the part should weigh between 24 and 25 
ounces. The process that produces the parts has a mean of 24.5 ounces and a standard deviation 
of .2 ounce. The distribution of output is normal.
 a. What percentage of parts will not meet the weight specs? 
 b. Within what values will 95.44 percent of sample means of this process fall, if samples of  n     16 
are taken and the process is in control (random)?  
 2. An automatic filling machine is used to fill 1-liter bottles of cola. The machine’s output is approxi-
mately normal with a mean of 1.0 liter and a standard deviation of .01 liter. Output is monitored 
using means of samples of 25 observations.
 a. Determine upper and lower control limits that will include roughly 97 percent of the sample 
means when the process is in control. 
 b. Given these sample means: 1.005, 1.001, .998, 1.002, .995, and .999, is the process in control? 
 3. The time to replace vehicle wiper blades at a service center was monitored using a mean and a range 
chart. Six samples of  n     20 observations were obtained and the sample means and ranges computed: 
 PROBLEMS 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 1 
 3.06 
 .42 
 4 
 3.13 
 .46 
 2 
 3.15 
 .50 
 5 
 3.06 
 .46 
 3 
 3.11 
 .41 
 6 
 3.09 
 .45 
 a. Using the factors in  Table 10.3 , determine upper and lower limits for mean and range charts. 
 b. Is the process in control? 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
449
 DAY 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 Number of complaints 
 4 
 10 
 14 
 8 
 9 
 6 
 5 
 12 
 13 
 7 
 6 
 4 
 2 
 10 
 
 OBSERVATION 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 Number of defects 
 2 
 3 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 3 
 2 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 3 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 4. Computer upgrade times (in minutes) are being evaluated. Samples of five observations each have 
been taken, and the results are as listed. Using factors from  Table 10.3 , determine upper and lower 
control limits for mean and range charts, and decide if the process is in control.  
 SAMPLE 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 79.2 
 80.5 
 79.6 
 78.9 
 80.5 
 79.7 
 78.8 
 78.7 
 79.6 
 79.4 
 79.6 
 80.6 
 80.0 
 81.0 
 80.4 
 79.7 
 80.4 
 80.5 
 78.4 
 80.4 
 80.3 
 79.4 
 80.8 
 80.0 
 81.0 
 80.1 
 80.8 
 80.6 
 78.8 
 81.1 
 5. Using samples of 200 credit card statements, an auditor found the following: 
 
 SAMPLE 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 Number of retests 
 1 
 2 
 2 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 2 
 7 
 3 
 2 
 1 
 7. The postmaster of a small western town receives a certain number of complaints each day about mail 
delivery. Determine three-sigma control limits using the following data. Is the process in control?  
 
 SAMPLE 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 Number of errors 
 5 
 3 
 5 
 7 
 4 
 6 
 8 
 4 
 5 
 9 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 6 
 7 
 8. Given the following data for the number of defects per spool of cable, using three-sigma limits, is 
the process in control? 
 9. After a number of complaints about its directory assistance, a telephone company examined sam-
ples of calls to determine the frequency of wrong numbers given to callers. Each sample consisted 
of 100 calls. Determine 95 percent limits. Is the process stable (i.e., in control)? Explain.  
 Sample 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Number with errors 
 4 
 2 
 5 
 9 
 a. Determine the fraction defective in each sample. 
 b. If the true fraction defective for this process is unknown, what is your estimate of it? 
 c. What is your estimate of the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of 
fractions defective for samples of this size? 
 d. What control limits would give an alpha risk of .03 for this process? 
 e. What alpha risk would control limits of .047 and .003 provide? 
 f. Using control limits of .047 and .003, is the process in control? 
 g. Suppose that the long-term fraction defective of the process is known to be 2 percent. What are 
the values of the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution? 
 h. Construct a control chart for the process, assuming a fraction defective of 2 percent, using 
two-sigma control limits. Is the process in control? 
 6. A medical facility does MRIs for sports injuries. Occasionally a test yields inconclusive results and 
must be repeated. Using the following sample data and  n     200, determine the upper and lower 
control limits for the fraction of retests using two-sigma limits. Is the process in control?  

450 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 1 
 3.86 
 11 
 3.88 
 21 
 3.84 
 31 
 3.88 
 2 
 3.90 
 12 
 3.86 
 22 
 3.82 
 32 
 3.76 
 3 
 3.83 
 13 
 3.88 
 23 
 3.89 
 33 
 3.83 
 4 
 3.81 
 14 
 3.81 
 24 
 3.86 
 34 
 3.77 
 5 
 3.84 
 15 
 3.83 
 25 
 3.88 
 35 
 3.86 
 6 
 3.83 
 16 
 3.86 
 26 
 3.90 
 36 
 3.80 
 7 
 3.87 
 17 
 3.82 
 27 
 3.81 
 37 
 3.84 
 8 
 3.88 
 18 
 3.86 
 28 
 3.86 
 38 
 3.79 
 9 
 3.84 
 19 
 3.84 
 29 
 3.98 
 39 
 3.85 
 10 
 3.80 
 20 
 3.87 
 30 
 3.96 
 
 10. Specifications for a metal shaft are much wider than the machine used to make the shafts is capable 
of. Consequently, the decision has been made to allow the cutting tool to wear a certain amount before 
replacement. The tool wears at the rate of .004 centimeter per piece. The process has a natural varia-
tion,   , of .02 centimeter and is normally distributed. Specifications are 15.0 to 15.2 centimeters. A 
three-sigma cushion is set at each end to minimize the risk of output outside of the specifications. How 
many shafts can the process turn out before tool replacement becomes necessary? (See diagram.)  
 11. Specifications for the computer upgrades in Problem 4 are 78 minutes and 81 minutes. Based on 
the data given in the problem, are the specifications being met? Estimate the percentage of process 
output that can be expected to fall within the specifications. 
15.0
15.2
Starting
process
mean
0
Ending
process
mean
Upper
specification
Number of shafts
Lower
specification
Wear rate = .004/p
3s
3s
 
UCL
A.
LCL
UCL
B.
LCL
 12. The time needed for checking in at a hotel is to be investigated. Historically, the process has had a 
standard deviation equal to .146. The means of 39 samples of  n     14 are 
   a. Construct an  -chart
x
 for this process with three-sigma limits. Is the process in control? 
   b. Analyze the data using a median run test and an up/down run test. What can you conclude? 
 13. For each of the accompanying control charts, analyze the data using both median and up/down run 
tests with  z        1.96 limits. Are nonrandom variations present? Assume the centerline is the long-
term median. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
451
 Day 
 Amount 
 Day 
 Amount 
 Day 
 Amount 
 Day 
 Amount 
 1 
 $27.69 
 16 
 $29.65 
 31 
 $40.54 
 46 
 25.16 
 2 
 28.13 
 17 
 31.08 
 32 
 36.31 
 47 
 26.11 
 3 
 33.02 
 18 
 33.03 
 33 
 27.14 
 48 
 29.84 
 4 
 30.31 
 19 
 29.10 
 34 
 30.38 
 49 
 31.75 
 5 
 31.59 
 20 
 25.19 
 35 
 31.96 
 50 
 29.14 
 6 
 33.64 
 21 
 28.60 
 36 
 32.03 
 51 
 37.78 
 7 
 34.73 
 22 
 20.02 
 37 
 34.40 
 52 
 34.16 
 8 
 35.09 
 23 
 26.67 
 38 
 25.67 
 53 
 38.28 
 9 
 33.39 
 24 
 36.40 
 39 
 35.80 
 54 
 29.49 
 10 
 32.51 
 25 
 32.07 
 40 
 32.23 
 55 
 30.81 
 11 
 27.98 
 26 
 44.10 
 41 
 26.76 
 56 
 30.60 
 12 
 31.25 
 27 
 41.44 
 42 
 30.51 
 57 
 34.46 
 13 
 33.98 
 28 
 29.62 
 43 
 29.35 
 58 
 35.10 
 14 
 25.56 
 29 
 30.12 
 44 
 24.09 
 59 
 31.76 
 15 
 24.46 
 30 
 26.39 
 45 
 22.45 
 60 
 34.90 
 14. Analyze the data in the problems listed below using median and up/down run tests with  z        2.
  a.  Given the following run test results of process output, what do the results of the run tests sug-
gest about the process?  
 Test 
 z - score 
 Median 
 +1.37 
 Up/Down 
 +1.05 
  b.  Twenty means were plotted on a control chart. An analyst counted 14 runs above/below the 
median, and 8 up/down runs. What do the results suggest about the process? 
  c. Problem 8. 
  d. Problem 7. 
 15. Use both types of run tests to analyze the daily expense voucher listed. Assume a median of $31. 
 16. A company has just negotiated a contract to produce a part for another firm. In the process of man-
ufacturing the part, the inside diameter of successive parts becomes smaller and smaller as the cut-
ting tool wears. However, the specs are so wide relative to machine capabilities that it is possible 
to set the diameter initially at a large value and let the process run for a while before replacing the 
cutting tool. 
     The inside diameter decreases at an average rate of .001 cm per part, and the process has a 
standard deviation of .05 cm. The variability is approximately normal. Assuming a three-sigma 
buffer at each end, how frequently must the tool be replaced if the process specs are 3 cm and 
3.5 cm?  
3
3.5
process
mean
0
process
mean
Upper
specification
Number of shafts
Lower
specification
3s
3s

452 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Process 
 Standard Deviation (in.) 
 Job Specification (   in.) 
 001 
 .02 
 .05 
 002 
 .04 
 .07 
 003 
 .10 
 .18 
 004 
 .05 
 .15 
 005 
 .01 
 .04 
 SAMPLE 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 4.5 
 4.6 
 4.5 
 4.7 
 4.2 
 4.5 
 4.6 
 4.6 
 4.2 
 4.4 
 4.4 
 4.8 
 4.3 
 4.7 
 4.4 
 4.5 
 4.3 
 4.3 
 4.6 
 4.9 
  a. Determine the mean of each sample. 
  b. If the process parameters are unknown, estimate its mean and standard deviation. 
  c. Estimate the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution. 
  d. What would three-sigma control limits for the process be? What alpha risk would they 
provide?  
  e. What alpha risk would control limits of 4.14 and 4.86 provide? 
  f.  Using limits of 4.14 and 4.86, are any sample means beyond the control limits? If so, which 
one(s)? 
  g.  Construct control charts for means and ranges using  Table 10.3 . Are any samples beyond the 
control limits? If so, which one(s)? 
  h. Explain why the control limits are different for means in parts  d and  g. 
  i.  If the process has a known mean of 4.4 and a known standard deviation of .18, what would 
three-sigma control limits be for a mean chart? Are any sample means beyond the control 
limits? If so, which one(s)?  
 21. A process that produces computer chips has a mean of .04 defective chip and a standard deviation 
of .003 chip. The allowable variation is from .03 to .05 defective.
  a. Compute the capability index for the process. 
  b. Is the process capable? 
 22. Given the following list of processes, the standard deviation for each, and specifications for a job 
that may be processed on that machine, determine which machines are capable of performing the 
given jobs. 
 17. (Refer to Solved Problem 2.) Suppose the process specs are 9.65 and 10.35 minutes. Based on 
the data given, does it appear that the specs are being met? If not, what should one look for?  
 18. A production process consists of a three-step operation. The scrap rate is 10 percent for the first 
step and 6 percent for the other two steps.
  a.  If the desired daily output is 450 units, how many units must be started to allow for loss due to 
scrap? 
  b.  If the scrap rate for each step could be cut in half, how many units would this save in terms of 
the scrap allowance? 
  c.  If the scrap represents a cost of $10 per unit, how much is it costing the company per day for 
the original scrap rate?  
 19. (Refer to the data in Example 5.) Two additional observations have been taken. The first resulted in 
three defects, and the second had four defects. Using the set of 20 observations, perform run tests 
on the data. What can you conclude about the data? 
 20. A teller at a drive-up window at a bank had the following service times (in minutes) for 20 randomly 
selected customers: 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
453
 UCL
LCL
 Observation 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 No. of errors 
 1 
 0 
 3 
 2 
 0 
 1 
 3 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 2 
 3 
 Machine 
 Cost per Unit ($) 
 Standard Deviation (mm) 
 A 
 20 
 .059 
 B 
 12 
 .060 
 C 
 11 
 .063 
 D 
 10 
 .061 
 Process 
 Mean 
 Standard Deviation 
 Lower Spec 
 Upper Spec 
 H 
 15.0 
 0.32 
 14.1 
 16.0 
 K 
 33.0 
 1.00 
 30.0 
 36.5 
 T 
 18.5 
 0.40 
 16.5 
 20.1 
 23. Suppose your manager presents you with the following information about machines that could be 
used for a job, and wants your recommendation on which one to choose. The specification width is 
.48 mm. In this instance, you can narrow the set of choices, but you probably wouldn’t make a rec-
ommendation without an additional piece of information. Explain the logic of the last statement.  
 25. An appliance manufacturer wants to contract with a repair shop to handle authorized repairs in 
Indianapolis. The company has set an acceptable range of repair time of 50 minutes to 90 minutes. 
Two firms have submitted bids for the work. In test trials, one firm had a mean repair time of 
74 minutes with a standard deviation of 4.0 minutes and the other firm had a mean repair time 
of 72 minutes with a standard deviation of 5.1 minutes. Which firm would you choose? Why? 
 26. As part of an insurance company’s training program, participants learn how to conduct an analy-
sis of clients’ insurability. The goal is to have participants achieve a time in the range of 30 to 
45 minutes. Test results for three participants were: Armand, a mean of 38 minutes and a standard 
deviation of 3 minutes; Jerry, a mean of 37 minutes and a standard deviation of 2.5 minutes; and 
Melissa, a mean of 37.5 minutes and a standard deviation of 1.8 minutes.
  a. Which of the participants would you judge to be capable? Explain. 
  b. Can the value of the  C  pk  exceed the value of  C  p  for a given participant? Explain. 
 27. The Good Chocolate Company makes a variety of chocolate candies, including a 12-ounce choco-
late bar (340 grams) and a box of six 1-ounce chocolate bars (170 grams).
  a.  Specifications for the 12-ounce bar are 330 grams to 350 grams. What is the largest standard 
deviation (in grams) that the machine that fills the bar molds can have and still be considered 
capable if the average fill is 340 grams? 
  b.  The machine that fills the bar molds for the 6-ounce bars has a standard deviation of .80 gram. 
The filling machine is set to deliver an average of 1.01 ounces per bar. Specifications for the 
six-bar box are 160 to 180 grams. Is the process capable?  Hint: The  variance for the box is 
equal to six times the bar  variance. 
  c.  What is the  lowest setting in ounces for the filling machine that will provide capability in terms 
of the six-bar box?  
 28. The following is a control chart for the average number of minor errors in 22 service reports. What 
can you conclude from these data? Explain how you reached your conclusion.  
 29. Use the three-step process described on p. 435 to decide if the following observations represent a 
process that is in control.  
 24. Each of the processes listed is noncentered with respect to the specifications for that process. 
Compute the appropriate capability index for each, and decide if the process is capable.  

454 
Chapter Ten Quality Control
 Tiger Tools, a division of Drillmore Industries, was about to launch a new 
product. Production Manager Michelle York asked her assistant, Jim 
Peterson, to check the capability of the oven used in the process. Jim 
obtained 18 random samples of 20 pieces each. The results of those 
samples are shown in the following table. After he analyzed the data, 
he concluded that the process was not capable based on a specification 
width of 1.44 cm. 
 Michelle was quite disappointed when she heard this. She had 
hoped that with the introduction of the new product her operation could 
run close to full capacity and regain some of its lost luster. The com-
pany had a freeze on capital expenditures of more than $10,000, and 
a replacement oven would cost many times that amount. Jim Peterson 
worked with the oven crew to see if perhaps different settings could 
produce the desired results, but they were unable to achieve any mean-
ingful improvements. 
that he would take 27 samples of five observations 
each. The results are shown in the following table. 
 CASE 
 Tiger Tools 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 1 
 45.01 
 .85 
 2 
 44.99 
 .89 
 3 
 45.02 
 .86 
 4 
 45.00 
 .91 
 5 
 45.04 
 .87 
 6 
 44.98 
 .90 
 7 
 44.91 
 .86 
 8 
 45.04 
 .89 
 9 
 45.00 
 .85 
 Still not ready to concede, Michelle contacted one of her former pro-
fessors and explained the problem. The professor suggested obtaining 
another set of samples, this time using a smaller sample size and tak-
ing more samples. Michelle then conferred with Jim and they agreed 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 1 
 44.96 
 .42 
 2 
 44.98 
 .39 
 3 
 44.96 
 .41 
 4 
 44.97 
 .37 
 5 
 45.02 
 .39 
 6 
 45.03 
 .40 
 7 
 45.04 
 .39 
 8 
 45.02 
 .42 
 9 
 45.08 
 .38 
 10 
 45.12 
 .40 
 11 
 45.07 
 .41 
 12 
 45.02 
 .38 
 13 
 45.01 
 .41 
 14 
 44.98 
 .40 
 Questions 
 Consider the following questions, and then write a brief report to 
Michelle summarizing your findings.
 1. How did Jim conclude that the process was not capable based on 
his first set of samples? ( Hint:  Estimate the process standard devia-
tion,   , using  

A R
n
3
.
2

 ) 
   2. Does the second set of samples show anything that the first set 
didn’t? Explain what and why. 
   3. Assuming the problem can be found and corrected, what impact do 
you think this would have on the capability of the process? Compute 
the potential process capability using the second data set. 
   4. If small samples can reveal something that large samples might not, 
why not just take small samples in every situation? 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 15 
 45.00 
 .39 
 16 
 44.95 
 .41 
 17 
 44.94 
 .43 
 18 
 44.94 
 .40 
 19 
 44.87 
 .38 
 20 
 44.95 
 .41 
 21 
 44.93 
 .39 
 22 
 44.96 
 .41 
 23 
 44.99 
 .40 
 24 
 45.00 
 .44 
 25 
 45.03 
 .42 
 26 
 45.04 
 .38 
 27 
 45.03 
 .40 
 Sample 
 Mean 
 Range 
 10 
 44.97 
 .91 
 11 
 45.11 
 .84 
 12 
 44.96 
 .87 
 13 
 45.00 
 .86 
 14 
 44.92 
 .89 
 15 
 45.06 
 .87 
 16 
 44.94 
 .86 
 17 
 45.00 
 .85 
 18 
 45.03 
 .88 
 Toys, Inc., is a 20-year-old company engaged in the manufacture and 
sale of toys and board games. The company has built a reputation on 
quality and innovation. Although the company is one of the leaders in 
its field, sales have leveled off in recent years. For the most recent six-
month period, sales actually declined compared with the same period 
last year. The production manager, Ed Murphy, attributed the lack of 
sales growth to “the economy.” He was prompted to undertake a num-
ber of belt-tightening moves that included cuts in production costs and 
layoffs in the design and product development departments. Although 
profits are still flat, he believes that within the next six months, the 
results of his decisions will be reflected in increased profits. 
 The vice president of sales, Joe Martin, has been concerned with cus-
tomer complaints about the company’s Realistic line of working-model 
factories, farms, and service stations. The moving parts on certain models 
have become disengaged and fail to operate or operate erratically. His 
assistant, Keith McNally, has proposed a trade-in 
program by which customers could replace mal-
functioning models with new ones. McNally believes that this will dem-
onstrate goodwill and appease dissatisfied customers. He also proposes 
rebuilding the trade-ins and selling them at discounted prices in the com-
pany’s retail outlet store. He doesn’t think that this will take away from 
sales of new models. Under McNally’s program, no new staff would be 
needed. Regular workers would perform needed repairs during periods of 
seasonal slowdowns, thus keeping production level. 
 When Steve Bukowski, a production assistant, heard Keith’s pro-
posal, he said that a better option would be to increase inspection of fin-
ished models before they were shipped. “With 100 percent inspection, 
we can weed out any defective models and avoid the problem entirely.” 
 Take the role of a consultant who has been called in for advice by 
the company president, Marybeth Corbella. What do you recommend? 
 CASE 
 Toys, Inc. 

 
Chapter Ten Quality Control 
455
 Besterfield, Dale H.  Quality Control. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009. 
 Mitra, Amitava.  Fundamentals of Quality Control and 
Improvement. 3rd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2008. 
 Montgomery, Douglas C.  Introduction to Statistical 
Quality Control. 6th ed. New York: John Wiley and 
Sons, 2009. 
 Quality Management Journal. ASQ. asq.org
Quality Progress.  www.qualityprogress.com 
 Summers, Donna.  Quality. 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

456
 CHAP TE R 
 11 
 Aggregate 
Planning and 
Master Scheduling 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO11.1 
Explain what aggregate planning is and how it is useful. 
 LO11.2 
Identify the variables decision makers have to work with in 
aggregate planning. 
 LO11.3 
Describe some of the strategies that can be used for meeting 
uneven demand. 
 LO11.4 
Describe some of the graphical and quantitative techniques 
planners use. 
 LO11.5 
Prepare aggregate plans and compute their costs. 
 LO11.6 
Discuss aggregate planning in services. 
 LO11.7 
Disaggregate an aggregate plan. 
 LO11.8 
Describe the master scheduling process and explain its importance. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 11.1 Introduction,  458 
 Intermediate Planning in Perspective,  458  
 The Concept of Aggregation,  459 
 Dealing with Variations,  460 
 An Overview of Aggregate Planning,  460 
 Aggregate Planning and the Supply 
Chain,  461 
 Demand and Supply Options,  461 
 11.2 Basic Strategies for Meeting Uneven 
Demand,  465 
 Choosing a Strategy,  467 
 11.3 Techniques for Aggregate Planning,  468 
 Trial-and-Error Techniques Using Graphs 
and Spreadsheets,  468 
 Mathematical Techniques,  472 
 11.4 Aggregate Planning in Services,  475 
 11.5 Disaggregating the Aggregate Plan,  477  
 11.6 Master Scheduling,  477 
 The Master Scheduler,  478 
 11.7 The Master Scheduling Process,  478 
 Time Fences,  479 
 Inputs,  480 
 Outputs,  480 
 Case: Eight Glasses a Day (EGAD),  492 

457
 Aggregate planning   is intermediate-range capacity planning that typically covers a time hori-
zon of 2 to 12 months, although in some companies it may extend to as much as 18 months. It 
is particularly useful for organizations that experience seasonal or other fluctuations in demand 
or capacity. The goal of aggregate planning is to achieve a production plan that will effectively 
utilize the organization’s resources to match expected demand. Planners must make decisions 
on output rates, employment levels and changes, inventory levels and changes, back orders, 
and subcontracting in or out. They do this for products that are grouped (i.e., aggregated) into 
categories rather than for individual products. For instance, a company that makes lawn mow-
ers might have multiple models of push mowers, self-propelled mowers, and riding mowers. 
The company would aggregate along those three lines. For example,  
 Aggregate planning  
Intermediate-range capacity 
planning, usually covering 2 to 
12 months. 
 Category 
 Models 
 Push 
 2 
 Self-propelled 
 6 
 Riding 
 3 
LO11.1 Explain what 
aggregate planning is and 
how it is useful.
 Seasonal variations in demand are quite common in many industries and public services, 
such as air-conditioning, fuel, public utilities, police and fire protection, and travel. And 
these are just a few examples of industries and public services that have to deal with uneven 
demands. Generally speaking, organizations cannot predict exactly the quantity and timing of 
demands for specific products or services months in advance under these conditions. Even so, 
they typically must assess their capacity needs (e.g., labor, inventories) and costs months in 
advance in order to be able to handle demand. 
 Some organizations use the term “sales and operations planning” instead of aggregate plan-
ning for intermediate-range planning. Similarly,    sales and operations planning    is defined 
as making intermediate-range decisions to balance supply and demand, integrating financial 
and operations planning. Because the plan affects functions throughout the organization, it is 
 Sales and operations 
planning  Intermediate-range 
decisions to balance supply and 
demand, integrating financial 
and operations planning. 

458 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
typically prepared with inputs from sales (demand forecasts), finance (financial constraints), 
and operations (capacity constraints). Note that the sales and operations plan is important 
planning information that will have impacts throughout the supply chain, and it should be 
shared with supply chain partners, who might also have valuable inputs.  
 11.1 INTRODUCTION 
 Intermediate Planning in Perspective 
 Organizations make capacity decisions on three levels: long term, intermediate term, and short 
term. Long-term decisions relate to product and service selection (i.e., determining which 
products or services to offer), facility size and location, equipment decisions, and layout of 
facilities. These long-term decisions essentially establish the capacity constraints within which 
intermediate planning must function. Intermediate decisions, as noted above, relate to general 
levels of employment, output, and inventories, which in turn establish boundaries within which 
short-range capacity decisions must be made. Thus, short-term decisions essentially consist of 
deciding the best way to achieve desired results within the constraints resulting from long-
term and intermediate-term decisions. Short-term decisions involve scheduling jobs, workers 
and equipment, and the like. The three levels of capacity decisions are depicted in  Table 11.1 . 
Long-term capacity decisions were covered in Chapter 5, and scheduling and related matters 
are covered in Chapter 16. This chapter covers intermediate capacity decisions.  
 
Short-Range Plans
Detailed plans:
   Production lot size
   Order quantities
   Machine loading
   Job assignments
   Job sequencing
   Work schedules
Intermediate Plans
   (This chapter)
General levels of:
   Employment
   Output
   Finished-goods
     inventories
   Subcontracting
   Back orders
13
16
16
Long-Range Plans
Long-term capacity
Location
Layout
Product design
Work system design
5
8
6
4
7
 
 TABLE 11.1 
 Overview of planning levels 
(chapter numbers are shown) 
 Even though Toyota and Lexus 
cars have a variety of makes 
and models, they often share 
the same chassis and the same 
parts. How does this add to the 
company’s efficiencies as a top 
automaker?   

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
459
 FIGURE 11.1 
 Planning sequence 
Corporate
strategies
and policies
Economic,
competitive,
and political
conditions
Aggregate
demand
forecasts
Business plan
Aggregate plan
Master schedule
Establishes operations
and capacity strategies
Establishes
operations capacity
Establishes schedules
for specific products
 Many business organizations develop a  business plan  that encompasses both long-term and 
intermediate-term planning. The business plan establishes guidelines for the organization, tak-
ing into account the organization’s strategies and policies; forecasts of demand for the organiza-
tion’s products or services; and economic, competitive, and political conditions. A key objective 
in business planning is to coordinate the intermediate plans of various organization functions, 
such as marketing, operations, and finance. In manufacturing companies, coordination also 
includes engineering and materials management. Consequently, all of these functional areas 
must work together to formulate the aggregate plan. Aggregate planning decisions are strate-
gic decisions that define the framework within which operating decisions will be made. They 
are the starting point for scheduling and production control systems. They provide input for 
financial plans; they involve forecasting input and demand management, and they may require 
changes in employment levels. And if the organization is involved in  time-based competition, 
it will be important to incorporate some flexibility in the aggregate plan to be able to handle 
changing requirements promptly. As noted, the plans must fit into the framework established by 
the organization’s long-term goals and strategies, and the limitations established by long-term 
facility and capital budget decisions. The aggregate plan will guide the more detailed planning 
that eventually leads to a  master schedule.   Figure 11.1  illustrates the planning sequence.  
 Aggregate planning also can serve as an important input to other strategic decisions; for 
example, management may decide to add capacity when aggregate planning alternatives for 
temporarily increasing capacity, such as working overtime and subcontracting, are too costly. 
 The Concept of Aggregation 
 Aggregate planning is essentially a “big-picture” approach to planning. Planners usually try 
to avoid focusing on individual products or services—unless the organization has only one 
major product or service. Instead, they focus on a group of similar products or services, or 
sometimes an entire product or service line. For example, planners in a company producing 
television sets would not concern themselves with 40-inch sets versus 46-inch or 55-inch sets. 
Instead, planners would lump all models together and deal with them as though they were a 
single product, hence the term  aggregate  planning. Thus, when fast-food companies such as 
McDonald’s, Burger King, or Wendy’s plan employment and output levels, they don’t try to 
determine how demand will be broken down into the various menu options they offer; they 
focus on overall demand and the overall capacity they want to provide. 
 Now consider how aggregate planning might work in a large department store. Space allo-
cation is often an aggregate decision. That is, a manager might decide to allocate 20 percent of 

460 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
the available space in the clothing department to women’s sportswear, 30 percent to juniors, 
and so on, without regard for what brand names will be offered or how much of juniors will be 
jeans. The aggregate measure might be square feet of space or racks of clothing. 
 For purposes of aggregate planning, it is often convenient to think of capacity in terms 
of labor hours or machine hours per period, or output rates (barrels per period, units per 
period), without worrying about how much of a particular item will actually be involved. This 
approach frees planners to make general decisions about the use of resources without having 
to get into the complexities of individual product or service requirements. Product group-
ings make the problem of obtaining an acceptable unit of aggregation easier because product 
groupings may lend themselves to the same aggregate measures. 
 Why do organizations need to do aggregate planning? The answer is twofold. One part is 
related to  planning:  It takes time to implement plans. For instance, if plans call for hiring (and 
training) new workers, that will take time. The second part is strategic:  Aggregation  is impor-
tant because it is not possible to predict with any degree of accuracy the timing and volume 
of demand for individual items. So if an organization were to “lock in” on individual items, it 
would lose the flexibility to respond to the market. 
 Generally speaking, aggregate planning is connected to the budgeting process. Most orga-
nizations plan their financial requirements annually on a department-by-department basis. 
 Finally, aggregate planning is important because it can help synchronize flow throughout 
the supply chain; it affects costs, equipment utilization, employment levels, and customer 
satisfaction. 
 A key issue in aggregate planning is how to handle variations. 
 Dealing with Variations 
 As in other areas of business management, variations in either supply or demand can occur. 
Minor variations are usually not a problem, but large variations generally have a major impact 
on the ability to match supply and demand, so they must be dealt with. Most organizations 
use rolling 3-, 6-, 9-, and 12-month forecasts—forecasts that are updated periodically—rather 
than relying on a once-a-year forecast. This allows planners to take into account any changes 
in either expected demand or expected supply and to develop revised plans. 
 Some businesses tend to exhibit a fair degree of stability, whereas in others, variations 
are more the norm. In those instances, a number of strategies are used to counter variations. 
One is to maintain a certain amount of excess capacity to handle increases in demand. This 
strategy makes sense when the opportunity cost of lost revenue greatly exceeds the cost of 
maintaining excess capacity. Another strategy is to maintain a degree of flexibility in dealing 
with changes. That might involve hiring temporary workers and/or working overtime when 
needed. Organizations that experience seasonal demands typically use this approach. Some 
of the design strategies mentioned in Chapter 4, such as delayed differentiation and modular 
design, may also be options. Still another strategy is to wait as long as possible before commit-
ting to a certain level of supply capability. This might involve scheduling products or services 
with known demands first, which allows some time to pass, shortening the time horizon, and 
perhaps enabling demands for the remaining products or services to become less uncertain.  
 An Overview of Aggregate Planning 
 Aggregate planning begins with a forecast of aggregate demand for the intermediate range. 
This is followed by a general plan to meet demand requirements by setting output, employ-
ment, and finished-goods inventory levels or service capacities. Managers might consider a 
number of plans, each of which must be examined in light of feasibility and cost. If a plan 
is reasonably good but has minor difficulties, it may be reworked. Conversely, a poor plan 
should be discarded and alternative plans considered until an acceptable one is uncovered. 
An aggregate production plan is essentially the output of aggregate planning. 
 Aggregate plans are updated periodically, often monthly, to take into account updated fore-
casts and other changes. This results in a  rolling planning horizon  (i.e., the aggregate plan 
always covers the next 12 to 18 months). 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
461
 Demand and Supply.  Aggregate planners are concerned with the  quantity  and the  tim-
ing  of expected demand. If total expected demand for the planning period is much different 
from available capacity over that same period, the major approach of planners will be to try 
to achieve a balance by altering capacity, demand, or both. On the other hand, even if capac-
ity and demand are approximately equal for the planning horizon as a whole, planners may 
still be faced with the problem of dealing with uneven demand  within  the planning interval. 
In some periods, expected demand may exceed projected capacity, in others expected demand 
may be less than projected capacity, and in some periods the two may be equal. The task 
of aggregate planners is to achieve rough equality of demand and capacity over the entire 
planning horizon. Moreover, planners are usually concerned with minimizing the cost of the 
aggregate plan, although cost is not the only consideration. 
 Inputs to Aggregate Planning.  Effective aggregate planning requires good  information. 
First, the available resources over the planning period must be known. Then, a forecast of 
expected demand must be available. Finally, planners must take into account any policies 
regarding changes in employment levels (e.g., some organizations view layoffs as extremely 
undesirable, so they would use that only as a last resort). 
 Table 11.2 lists the major inputs to aggregate planning. 
 Companies in the travel industry and some other industries often experience duplicate 
orders from customers who make multiple reservations but only intend to keep at most one of 
them. This makes capacity planning all the more difficult. 
 Aggregate Planning and the Supply Chain 
 It is essential to take supply chain capabilities into account when doing aggregate planning, 
to assure that there are no quantity or timing issues that need to be resolved. While this is 
particularly true if new or changed goods or services are involved, it is also true even when 
no changes are planned. Supply chain partners should be consulted during the planning stage 
so that any issues or advice they may have can be taken into account, and they should be 
informed when plans have been finalized. 
 Demand and Supply Options 
    Aggregate planning strategies can pertain to demand, capacity, or both. Demand strategies 
are intended to alter demand so that it matches capacity. Capacity strategies involve altering 
capacity so that it matches demand.  Mixed strategies involve both of these approaches. 
 TABLE 11.2 
 Aggregate planning inputs and 
outputs 
 Inputs 
 Outputs 
 Resources 
 Total cost of a plan 
 Workforce/production rates 
 Projected levels of 
 Facilities and equipment 
 Inventory 
 Demand forecast 
 Output 
 Policies on workforce changes 
 Employment 
 Subcontracting 
 Subcontracting 
 Overtime 
 Backordering 
 Inventory levels/changes 
 
 Back orders 
 
 Costs 
 
 Inventory carrying cost 
 
 Back orders 
 
 Hiring/firing 
 
 Overtime 
 
 Inventory changes 
 
 Subcontracting 
 

462 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 Demand Options.  Demand options include pricing, promotions, using back orders (delay-
ing order filling), and creating new demand. 
 1.  Pricing.  Pricing differentials are commonly used to shift demand from peak periods to 
off-peak periods. Some hotels, for example, offer lower rates for weekend stays, and 
some airlines offer lower fares for night travel. Movie theaters may offer reduced rates 
for matinees, and some restaurants offer “early bird specials” in an attempt to shift 
some of the heavier dinner demand to an earlier time that traditionally has less traffic. 
Some restaurants also offer smaller portions at reduced rates, and most have smaller 
portions and prices for children. To the extent that pricing is effective, demand will be 
shifted so that it corresponds more closely to capacity, albeit for an  opportunity cost that 
represents the lost profit stemming from capacity insufficient to meet demand during 
certain periods. 
   An important factor to consider is the  degree of price elasticity for the product or ser-
vice: The more the elasticity, the more effective pricing will be in influencing demand 
patterns.  
 2.  Promotion.  Advertising and other forms of promotion, such as displays and direct mar-
keting, can sometimes be very effective in shifting demand so that it conforms more 
closely to capacity. Obviously, timing of these efforts and knowledge of response rates 
and response patterns will be needed to achieve the desired results. Unlike pricing pol-
icy, there is much less control over the timing 
of demand, so there is the risk that promotion 
can worsen the condition it was intended to 
improve, by bringing in demand at the wrong 
time, further stressing capacity. 
 3.  Back orders.  An organization can shift demand 
fulfillment to other periods by allowing back 
orders. That is, orders are taken in one period 
and deliveries promised for a later period. The 
success of this approach depends on how will-
ing customers are to wait for delivery. More-
over, the costs associated with back orders 
can be difficult to pin down since they would 
include lost sales, annoyed or disappointed cus-
tomers, and perhaps additional paperwork.  
 Yet it is important to account for double 
orders. Otherwise, by counting duplicate 
orders as true demand, you overestimate the 
demand rate, and by counting the cancellations of duplicate orders as 
lost sales, you overestimate customers’ sensitivity to delay, and then 
you wind up with excess capacity. 
 “The optimal level of capacity increases with customers’ sensitivity 
to delay, so estimating customers’ sensitivity to delay is a very impor-
tant part of the puzzle.” 
 Duplicate orders can make capacity planning very difficult. The 
key is to carefully estimate both the rate of duplicate ordering and the 
degree of order cancellation that can be attributed to duplicate ordering. 
 Source: Based on Mor Armony and Erica L. Plambeck, “The Impact of Duplicate 
Orders on Demand Estimation and Capacity Investment,” GSB Research 
Paper #1740, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, June 2002. 
 We’ve all heard about someone who booked seats on two airlines, or 
reserved two hotel rooms, usually because travel plans weren’t firmed 
up, but the person didn’t want to miss out on the trip. Later, the person 
canceled one set of reservations. This sort of duplicate ordering isn’t just 
limited to the travel industry. The trouble is, companies base their capac-
ity planning on demand estimates, and when there are numerous dupli-
cate orders, it is easy to overestimate demand and end up with excess 
capacity. In some instances, this has led companies to expand at a time 
when demand was actually leveling off or even decreasing! The problem 
is further compounded if companies conclude that canceled orders reflect 
customers’ reluctance to wait, and respond by  adding  capacity when, in 
fact, order cancellation may actually reflect duplicate ordering. 
 Some semiconductor companies downplay data on bookings because 
it is too difficult to distinguish between duplicate orders and actual 
demand. 
 READING 
 Duplicate Orders Can Lead to Excess Capacity 
LO11.2 Identify the variables 
decision makers have to work 
with in aggregate planning.
 ZIGGY (c)2000 ZIGGY AND 
FRIENDS, INC. Reprinted with 
permission of UNIVERSAL 
UCLICK. All rights reserved. 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
463
 4.  New demand.  Many organizations are faced with the problem of having to provide 
products or services for peak demand in situations where demand is very uneven. For 
instance, demand for bus transportation tends to be more intense during the morning 
and late afternoon rush hours but much lighter at other times. Creating new demand 
for buses at other times (e.g., trips by schools, clubs, and senior citizen groups) would 
make use of the excess capacity during those slack times. Similarly, many fast-food 
restaurants are open for breakfast to use their capacities more fully, and some land-
scaping firms in northern climates use their equipment during the winter months for 
snow removal. Manufacturing firms that experience seasonal demands for certain 
products (e.g., snowblowers) are sometimes able to develop a demand for a comple-
mentary product (e.g., lawn mowers, garden equipment) that makes use of the same 
production processes. They thereby achieve a more consistent use of labor, equipment, 
and facilities. Another option may be “insourcing” work from another organization.    
 Supply Options.  Supply options include hiring/laying off workers, overtime/slack time, 
part-time or temporary workers, inventories, and subcontractors. 
 1.  Hire and lay off workers. The extent to which operations are labor intensive deter-
mines the impact that changes in the workforce level will have on capacity. The resource 
requirements of each worker also can be a factor. For instance, if a supermarket usually 
has 10 of 14 checkout lines operating, an additional four checkout workers could be 
added. Hence, the ability to add workers is constrained at some point by other resources 
needed to support the workers. Conversely, there may be a lower limit on the number of 
workers needed to maintain a viable operation (e.g., a skeleton crew). 
    Union contracts may restrict the amount of hiring and laying off a company can do. 
Moreover, because laying off can present serious problems for workers, some firms 
have policies that either prohibit or limit downward adjustments to a workforce. On the 
other hand, hiring presumes an available supply of workers. This may change from time 
to time and, at times of low supply, have an impact on the ability of an organization to 
pursue this approach. 
    Another consideration is the skill level of workers. Highly skilled workers are gen-
erally more difficult to find than lower-skilled workers, and recruiting them involves 
greater costs. So the usefulness of this option may be limited by the need for highly 
skilled workers. 
    The use of hiring and laying off entails certain costs. Hiring costs include recruit-
ment, screening, and training to bring new workers “up to speed.” And quality may 
suffer. Some savings may occur if workers who have recently been laid off are rehired. 
Layoff costs include severance pay, the cost of realigning the remaining workforce, 
potential bad feelings toward the firm on the part of workers who have been laid off, and 
some loss of morale for workers who are retained (i.e., in spite of company assurances, 
some workers will believe that in time they too will be laid off). 
    An increasing number of organizations view workers as assets rather than as variable 
costs, and would not consider this approach. Instead, they might use slack time for other 
purposes.  
 2.  Overtime/slack time.  Use of overtime or slack time is a less severe method for chang-
ing capacity than hiring and laying off workers, and it can be used across the board or 
selectively as needed. It also can be implemented more quickly than hiring and laying 
off and allows the firm to maintain a steady base of employees. The use of overtime can 
be especially attractive in dealing with seasonal demand peaks by reducing the need to 
hire and train people who will have to be laid off during the off-season. Overtime also 
permits the company to maintain a skilled workforce and employees to increase earn-
ings, and companies may save money because fringe and other benefits are generally 
fixed. Moreover, in situations with crews, it is often necessary to use a full crew rather 
than to hire one or two additional people. Thus, having the entire crew work overtime 
would be preferable to hiring extra people. 

464 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
    It should be noted that some union contracts allow workers to refuse overtime. In 
those cases, it may be difficult to muster a full crew to work overtime or to get an entire 
production line into operation after regular hours. Although workers often like the addi-
tional income overtime can generate, they may not appreciate having to work on short 
notice or the fluctuations in income that result. Still other considerations relate to the 
fact that overtime often results in lower productivity, poorer quality, more accidents, 
and increased payroll costs, whereas idle time results in less efficient use of machines 
and other fixed assets. 
    The use of slack when demand is less than capacity can be an important consider-
ation. Some organizations use this time for training. It also can give workers time for 
problem solving and process improvement, while retraining skilled workers. 
 3.  Part-time workers.  In certain instances, the use of part-time workers is a viable 
option—much depends on the nature of the work, training and skills needed, and union 
agreements. Seasonal work requiring low-to-moderate job skills lends itself to part-time 
workers, who generally cost less than regular workers in hourly wages and fringe ben-
efits. However, unions may regard such workers unfavorably because they typically do 
not pay union dues and may lessen the power of unions. Department stores, restaurants, 
and supermarkets make use of part-time workers. So do parks and recreation depart-
ments, resorts, travel agencies, hotels, and other service organizations with seasonal 
demands. In order to be successful, these organizations must be able to hire part-time 
employees when they are needed. 
    Some companies use contract workers, also called  independent contractors,  to fill 
certain needs. Although they are not regular employees, often they work alongside reg-
ular workers. In addition to having different pay scales and no benefits, they can be 
added or subtracted from the workforce with greater ease than regular workers, giving 
companies great flexibility in adjusting the size of the workforce. 
 4.  Inventories.  The use of finished-goods inventories allows firms to produce goods in 
one period and sell or ship them in another period, although this involves holding or 
carrying those goods as inventory until they are needed. The cost includes not only 
storage costs and the cost of money tied up that could be invested elsewhere, but also 
the cost of insurance, obsolescence, deterioration, spoilage, breakage, and so on. In 
essence, inventories can be built up during periods when production capacity exceeds 
demand and drawn down in periods when demand exceeds production capacity. 
 Amazon is very aggressive about 
managing its inventory levels. 
This may mean that rarely 
ordered items are not kept in 
inventory and may require time 
to source from a supplier. It also 
means that Amazon tries to move 
inventory out to customers as 
quickly as possible. 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
465
    This method is more amenable to manufacturing than to service industries since man-
ufactured goods can be stored whereas services generally cannot. However, an analo-
gous approach used by services is to make efforts to streamline services (e.g., standard 
forms) or otherwise do a portion of the service during slack periods (e.g., organize the 
workplace). In spite of these possibilities, services tend not to make much use of inven-
tories to alter capacity requirements. 
 5.  Subcontracting.  Subcontracting enables planners to acquire temporary capacity, 
although it affords less control over the output and may lead to higher costs and quality 
problems. The question of whether to make or buy (i.e., in manufacturing) or to perform 
a service or hire someone else to do the work generally depends on factors such as 
available capacity, relative expertise, quality considerations, cost, and the amount and 
stability of demand. 
    Conversely, in periods of excess capacity, an organization may subcontract  in,  that is, 
conduct work for another organization. As an alternative to subcontracting, an organiza-
tion might consider  outsourcing:  contracting with another organization to supply some 
portion of the goods or services on a regular basis. 
 11.2 BASIC STRATEGIES FOR MEETING 
UNEVEN DEMAND 
     As you see, managers have a wide range of decision options they can consider for achieving a 
balance of demand and capacity in aggregate planning. Since the options that are most suited 
to influencing demand fall more in the realm of marketing than in operations (with the excep-
tion of backlogging), we shall concentrate on the capacity options, which are in the realm of 
operations but include the use of back orders. 
 Aggregate planners might adopt a number of strategies. Some of the more prominent ones 
are the following:
 1. 
Maintain a level workforce (level capacity). 
 2. 
Maintain a steady output rate (level capacity). 
 3. 
Match demand period by period (chase demand). 
 4. 
Use a combination of decision variables. 
 While other strategies might be considered, these will suffice to give you a sense of how 
aggregate planning operates in a vast number of organizations. The first three strategies are 
“pure” strategies because each has a single focal point; the last strategy is “mixed” because 
it lacks the single focus. Under a   level capacity strategy   ,  variations in demand are met by 
using some combination of inventories, overtime, part-time workers, subcontracting, and 
back orders while maintaining a steady rate of output. Matching capacity to demand implies 
a   chase demand strategy;  the planned output for any period would be equal to expected 
demand for that period. 
 Many organizations regard a level workforce as very appealing. Since workforce changes 
through hiring and laying off can have a major impact on the lives and morale of employees 
and can be disruptive for managers, organizations often prefer to handle uneven demand in 
other ways. Moreover, changes in workforce size can be very costly, and there is always the 
risk that there will not be a sufficient pool of workers with the appropriate skills when needed. 
Aside from these considerations, such changes can involve a significant amount of paper-
work. Unions tend to favor a level workforce because the freedom to hire and lay off workers 
diminishes union strengths. 
 To maintain a constant level of output and still satisfy varying demand, an organization 
must resort to some combination of subcontracting, backlogging, and use of inventories to 
absorb fluctuations. Subcontracting requires an investment in evaluating sources of supply 
as well as possible increased costs, less control over output, and perhaps quality consider-
ations. Backlogs can lead to lost sales, increased record keeping, and lower levels of customer 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 Level capacity strategy  
Maintaining a steady rate of 
regular-time output while meet-
ing variations in demand by a 
combination of options. 
 Chase demand strategy  
Matching capacity to demand; 
the planned output for a period 
is set at the expected demand 
for that period. 
LO11.3 Describe some of the 
strategies that can be used for 
meeting uneven demand.

466 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
service. Allowing inventories to absorb fluctuations can entail substantial costs by having 
money tied up in inventories, having to maintain relatively large storage facilities, and incur-
ring other costs related to inventories. Furthermore, inventories are not usually an alternative 
for service-oriented organizations. However, there are certain advantages, such as minimum 
costs of recruitment and training, minimum overtime and idle-time costs, fewer morale prob-
lems, and stable use of equipment and facilities. 
 A chase demand strategy presupposes a great deal of ability and willingness on the part 
of managers to be flexible in adjusting to demand. A major advantage of this approach 
is that inventories can be kept relatively low, which can yield substantial savings for an 
organization. A major disadvantage is the lack of stability in operations—the atmosphere is 
one of dancing to demand’s tune. Also, when forecast and reality differ, morale can suffer, 
since it quickly becomes obvious to workers and managers that efforts have been wasted. 
 Figure 11.2  provides a comparison of the two strategies, using a varying demand pattern 
 FIGURE 11.2 
 A varying demand pattern and a comparison of a chase demand strategy versus a level strategy 
Output
level
Level output strategy
Time
Demand
Demand
and
output
Demand
Demand and
output are
equal; inventory
is constant
Demand exceeds
output; inventory
is reduced; a
stockout may occur
Chase demand strategy
(output matches demand)
Normal
capacity
Time
Output is above
normal; capacity is
temporarily increased
to match demand
Output is below
normal; output is
temporarily decreased
to match demand
Normal
capacity
Time
Demand exceeds
normal capacity
Demand equals
normal capacity
Demand is less
than normal capacity
Demand is less
than output; 
inventory builds up; 
any back orders are filled
Inventory
Forecasted
demand
Forecasted
demand
Output and 
forecasted demand
Forecasted
demand
 A. A possible uneven demand pattern 
 B. Two strategies 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
467
to highlight the differences in the two approaches. The same demand pattern is used for 
each approach. In the upper portion of the figure the pattern is shown. Notice that there are 
three situations: (1) demand and capacity are equal; (2) demand is less than capacity; and 
(3) demand exceeds capacity.  
 The middle portion of the figure illustrates what happens with a chase approach. When 
normal capacity would exceed demand, capacity is cut back to match demand. Then, when 
demand exceeds normal capacity, the chase approach is to temporarily increase capacity to 
match demand. 
 The bottom portion of the figure illustrates the level-output strategy. When demand is less 
than capacity, output continues at normal capacity, and the excess output is put into inventory 
in anticipation of the time when demand exceeds capacity. When demand exceeds capacity, 
inventory is used to offset the shortfall in output. 
 Organizations may opt for a strategy that involves some combination of the pure strate-
gies. This allows managers greater flexibility in dealing with uneven demand and perhaps in 
experimenting with a wide variety of approaches. However, the absence of a clear focus may 
lead to an erratic approach and confusion on the part of employees. 
 Choosing a Strategy 
 Whatever strategy an organization is considering, three important factors are  company pol-
icy,  flexibility,  and  costs.  Company policy may set constraints on the available options or 
the extent to which they can be used. For instance, company policy may discourage lay-
offs except under extreme conditions. Subcontracting may not be a viable alternative due 
to the desire to maintain secrecy about some aspect of the manufacturing of the product 
(e.g., a secret formula or blending process). Union agreements often impose restrictions. 
For example, a union contract may specify both minimum and maximum numbers of hours 
part-time workers can be used. The degree of flexibility needed to use the chase approach 
may not be present for companies designed for high, steady output, such as refineries and 
auto assembly plants. 
 As a rule, aggregate planners seek to match supply and demand within the constraints 
imposed on them by policies or agreements and at minimum cost. They usually evaluate alter-
natives in terms of their overall costs.  Table 11.3  compares reactive strategies. In the next sec-
tion, a number of techniques for aggregate planning are described and presented with some 
examples of cost evaluation of alternative plans. 
 Chase approach 
 Capacities (workforce levels, output rates, etc.) are adjusted to match demand requirements over the 
planning horizon. A chase strategy works best when inventory carrying costs are high and costs of 
changing capacity are low. 
 Advantages: 
 Investment in inventory is low. 
 Labor utilization is kept high. 
 Disadvantage: 
 The cost of adjusting output rates and/or workforce levels. 
 Level approach 
 Capacities (workforce levels, output rates, etc.) are kept constant over the planning horizon. A level strategy 
works best when inventory carrying costs and backlog costs are relatively low. 
 Advantage: 
 Stable output rates and workforce levels. 
 Disadvantages: 
 Greater inventory costs. 
 Increased overtime and idle time. 
 Resource utilizations that vary over time. 
 TABLE 11.3 
 Comparison of reactive strategies 

468 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 11.3 TECHNIQUES FOR AGGREGATE 
PLANNING 
Numerous techniques are available to help with the task of aggregate planning. Generally, 
they fall into one of two categories: Informal trial-and-error techniques and mathematical 
techniques. In practice, informal techniques are more frequently used. However, a consider-
able amount of research has been devoted to mathematical techniques, and even though they 
are not as widely used, they often serve as a basis for comparing the effectiveness of alterna-
tive techniques for aggregate planning. Thus, it will be instructive to briefly examine them as 
well as the informal techniques. 
 A general procedure for aggregate planning consists of the following steps:
 1. 
Determine demand for each period. 
 2. 
Determine capacities (regular time, overtime, subcontracting) for each period. 
 3. 
Identify company or departmental policies that are pertinent (e.g., maintain a safety 
stock of 5 percent of demand, maintain a reasonably stable workforce). 
 4. 
Determine unit costs for regular time, overtime, subcontracting, holding inventories, 
back orders, layoffs, and other relevant costs. 
 5. 
Develop alternative plans and compute the cost for each. 
 6. 
If satisfactory plans emerge, select the one that best satisfies objectives. Otherwise, 
return to step 5. 
 It can be helpful to use a worksheet or spreadsheet, such as the one illustrated in  Table 11.4 , 
to summarize demand, capacity, and cost for each plan. In addition, graphs can be used to 
guide the development of alternatives. 
 Trial-and-Error Techniques Using Graphs 
and Spreadsheets 
 Trial-and-error approaches consist of developing simple tables or graphs that enable planners 
to visually compare projected demand requirements with existing capacity. Alternatives are 
usually evaluated in terms of their overall costs. The chief disadvantage of such techniques is 
that they do not necessarily result in the optimal aggregate plan. 
 Two examples illustrate the development and comparison of aggregate plans. In the first 
example, regular output is held steady, with inventory absorbing demand variations. In the 
second example, a lower rate of regular output is used, supplemented by the use of overtime. 
In both examples, some backlogs are allowed to build up. 
 These examples and other examples and problems in this chapter are based on the follow-
ing assumptions:
 1. 
The regular output capacity is the same in all periods. No allowance is made for holi-
days, different numbers of workdays in different months, and so on. This assumption 
simplifies computations. 
 2. 
Cost (back order, inventory, subcontracting, etc.) is a linear function composed of unit 
cost and number of units. This often has a reasonable approximation to reality, although 
there may be only narrow ranges over which this is true. Cost is sometimes more of a 
step function. 
 3. 
Plans are feasible; that is, sufficient inventory capacity exists to accommodate a plan, 
subcontractors with appropriate quality and capacity are standing by, and changes in 
output can be made as needed. 
 4. 
All costs associated with a decision option can be represented by a lump sum or by unit 
costs that are independent of the quantity involved. Again, a step function may be more 
realistic; but for purposes of illustration and simplicity, this assumption is appropriate. 
 5. 
Cost figures can be reasonably estimated and are constant for the planning horizon. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
LO11.4 Describe some of 
the graphical and quantitative 
techniques planners use.

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
469
 6. 
Inventories are built up and drawn down at a uniform rate, and output occurs at a uni-
form rate throughout each period. However, backlogs are treated as if they exist for an 
entire period, even though in periods where they initially appear, they would tend to 
build up toward the end of the period. Hence, this assumption is a bit unrealistic for 
some periods, but it simplifies computations. 
 In the examples and problems in this chapter, we use the following relationships to deter-
mine the number of workers, the amount of inventory, and the cost of a particular plan. 
 The number of workers available in any period is calculated as follows:
 
Number of
workers in
a period
Number of
workers at end of
the previous period
Number of new
workers at start of
the period
Number of laid-off
workers at start of
the period



 
 Note:  An organization would not hire and lay off simultaneously, so at least one of the last 
two terms will equal zero. 
 The amount of inventory at the end of a given period is calculated as follows:
 
Inventory
at the end of
a period
Inventory
at end of the
previous period
Production
in the
current period
Amount used to
satisfy demand in the
current period



 
 The average inventory for a period is equal to
 Beginning inventory
Ending inventory
2

 
 The cost of a particular plan for a given period can be determined by summing the appro-
priate costs:
 





=
Cost for
a period
Output cost
(Reg
OT
Subcontract)
Hire/lay-off
cost
Inventory
cost
Backorder
cost
 
 
Period
Forecast
Output
Output – Forecast
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
Regular
Overtime
Subcontract
Beginning
Ending
Average
Inventory
Inventory
Back orders
Total
Hire/Lay off
Backlog
Costs
Output
1
2
3
4
5
Total
 
 TABLE 11.4 
 Worksheet/spreadsheet 

470 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 The appropriate costs are calculated as follows: 
 Type of Cost 
 How to Calculate 
 Output 
 
 Regular 
 Regular cost per unit    Quantity of regular output 
 Overtime 
 Overtime cost per unit    Overtime quantity 
 Subcontract 
 Subcontract cost per unit    Subcontract quantity 
 Hire/lay off 
 
 Hire 
 Cost per hire    Number hired 
 Lay off 
 Cost per layoff    Number laid off 
 Inventory 
 Carrying cost per unit    Average inventory 
 Back order 
 Backorder cost per unit    Number of backorder units 
 The following examples are only two of many possible options that could be tried. Perhaps 
some of the others would result in a lower cost. With trial and error, you can never be com-
pletely sure you have identified the lowest-cost alternative unless every possible alternative is 
evaluated. Of course, the purpose of these examples is to illustrate the process of developing 
and evaluating an aggregate plan rather than to find the lowest-cost plan. Problems at the end 
of the chapter cover still other alternatives. 
 In practice, successful achievement of a good plan depends on the resourcefulness and per-
sistence of the planner. Computer software such as the Excel templates that accompany this 
book can eliminate the computational burden of trial-and-error techniques. 
 Planners for a company that makes several models of skateboards are about to prepare the 
aggregate plan that will cover six periods. They have assembled the following information:
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 200 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 500 
 200 
 1,800 
 Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Regular time      $2 per skateboard 
   Overtime 
    $3 per skateboard 
  Subcontract 
    $6 per skateboard 
 Inventory 
    $1 per skateboard per period on average inventory 
 Back orders 
    $5 per skateboard per period 
 They now want to evaluate a plan that calls for a steady rate of regular-time output, mainly 
using inventory to absorb the uneven demand but allowing some backlog. Overtime and 
subcontracting are not used because they want steady output. They intend to start with zero 
inventory on hand in the first period. Prepare an aggregate plan and determine its cost using 
the preceding information. Assume a level output rate of 300 units (skateboards) per period 
with regular time (i.e., 1,800/6    300). Note that the planned ending inventory is zero. There 
are 15 workers, and each can produce 20 skateboards per period. 
 E X A M P L E  1 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e     
 S O L U T I O N 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 200 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 500 
 200 
 1,800 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 1,800 
 Overtime 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 Subcontract 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 Output 2 Forecast 
 100 
 100 
 0  (100) 
 (200) 
 100 
 0 
 Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beginning 
 0 
 100 
 200 
 200 
 100 
 0 
 
 Ending 
 100 
 200 
 200 
 100 
 0 
 0 
 
 Average 
 50 
 150 
 200 
 150 
 50 
 0 
 600 
 Backlog 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 100 
 0 
 100 
LO11.5 Prepare aggregate 
plans and compute their costs.

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
471
  Very often, graphs can be used to guide the development of alternatives. Some planners 
prefer cumulative graphs while others prefer to see a period-by-period breakdown of a plan. 
For instance,  Figure 11.3  shows a cumulative graph for a plan with steady output (the slope of 
the dashed line represents the production rate) and inventory absorption of demand variations. 
 Figure 11.2  is an example of a period-by-period graph. The obvious advantage of a graph is 
that it provides a visual portrayal of a plan. The preference of the planner determines which of 
these two types of graphs is chosen. 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Total 
 Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Regular 
 $600 
 600 
 600 
 600 
 600 
 600 
 $3,600 
  Overtime 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
  Subcontract 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
  Hire/Lay off 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 Inventory 
 $  50 
 150 
 200 
 150 
 50 
 0 
 $   600 
 Back orders 
 $    0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 500 
 0 
 $   500 
  Total 
 $650 
 750 
 800 
 750  1,150 
 600 
 $4,700 
 Note that the total regular-time output of 1,800 units equals the total expected demand.  Ending 
inventory equals beginning inventory plus or minus the quantity Output    Forecast. If Out-
put    Forecast is negative, inventory is decreased in that period by that amount. If insufficient 
inventory exists, a backlog equal to the shortage amount appears, as in period 5. This is taken 
care of using the excess output in period 6. 
 The costs were computed as follows: Regular cost in each period equals 300 units    $2 per 
unit or $600. Inventory cost equals average inventory    $1 per unit. Backorder cost is $5 per 
unit. The total cost for this plan is $4,700. 
 Note that the first two quantities in each column are givens. The remaining quantities in the 
upper portion of the table were determined working down each column, beginning with the first 
column. The costs were then computed based on the quantities in the upper part of the table.  
 After reviewing the plan developed in the preceding example, planners have decided to 
develop an alternative plan. They have learned that one person is about to retire from the com-
pany. Rather than replace that person, they would like to stay with the smaller workforce and 
use overtime to make up for the lost output. The reduced regular-time output is 280 units per 
period. The maximum amount of overtime output per period is 40 units. Develop a plan and 
compare it to the previous one. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e     
 FIGURE 11.3 
 A cumulative graph 
2,000
1,600
1,200
800
400
0
Cumulative output/demand (aggregate units)
Period
2
3
4
5
6
1
Cumulative
demand
Surplus
output
Demand
exceeds
output
Cumulative
production

472 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 The amount of overtime that must be scheduled has to make up for lost output of 20 units 
per period for six periods, which is 120. This is scheduled toward the center of the planning 
horizon because that is where the bulk of demand occurs. Although other amounts and time 
periods could be used as long as the total equals 120, scheduling it earlier would increase 
inventory carrying costs; scheduling it later would increase the backlog cost. 
 Overall, the total cost for this plan is $4,640, which is $60 less than the previous plan. 
Regular-time production cost and inventory cost are down, but there is overtime cost. How-
ever, this plan achieves savings in backorder cost, making it somewhat less costly overall than 
the plan in Example 1. 
 Mathematical Techniques 
A number of mathematical techniques have been developed to handle aggregate planning. 
They range from mathematical programming models to heuristic and computer search mod-
els. This section briefly describes some of the better-known techniques. 
 Linear Programming.  Linear programming (LP) models are methods for obtaining 
 optimal solutions to problems involving the allocation of scarce resources in terms of cost 
minimization or profit maximization. With aggregate planning, the goal is usually to mini-
mize the sum of costs related to regular labor time, overtime, subcontracting, carrying inven-
tory, and costs associated with changing the size of the workforce. Constraints involve the 
capacities of the workforce, inventories, and subcontracting. 
 The problem can be formulated as a transportation-type programming model as a way to obtain 
aggregate plans that would match capacities with demand requirements and minimize costs. In 
order to use this approach, planners must identify capacity (supply) of regular time, overtime, sub-
contracting, and inventory on a period-by-period basis, as well as related costs of each variable. 
  Table 11.5  shows the notation and setup of a transportation table. Note the systematic way 
that costs change as you move across a row from left to right. Regular cost, overtime cost, 
and subcontracting cost are at their lowest when the output is consumed (i.e., delivered, etc.) 
in the same period it is produced (at the intersection of period 1 row and column for regular 
cost, at the intersection of period 2 row and column for regular cost, and so on). If goods are 
made available in one period but carried over to later periods (i.e., moving across a row), 
holding costs are incurred at the rate of  h per period. Thus, holding goods for two periods 
results in a unit cost of 2 h,  whether or not the goods came from regular production, overtime, 
or  subcontracting. Conversely, with back orders, the unit cost increases as you move across a 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 S O L U T I O N 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 200 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 500 
 200 
 1,800 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 280 
 280 
 280 
 280 
 280 
 280 
 1,680 
 Overtime 
 0 
 0 
 40 
 40 
 40 
 0 
 120 
 Subcontract 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 Output – Forecast 
 80 
 80 
 20 
 (80) 
 (180) 
 80 
 0 
 Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beginning 
 0 
 80 
 160 
 180 
 100 
 0 
 
 Ending 
 80 
 160 
 180 
 100 
 0 
 0 
 
 Average 
 40 
 120 
 170 
 140 
 50 
 0 
 520 
 Backlog 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 80 
 0 
 80 
 Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Regular 
 $560 
 560 
 560 
 560 
 560 
 560 
 $3,360 
  Overtime 
 0 
 0 
 120 
 120 
 120 
 0 
 $   360 
  Subcontract 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
  Hire/Lay off 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 
 Inventory 
 40 
 120 
 170 
 140 
 50 
 0 
 $   520 
 Back orders 
 $    0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 400 
 0 
 $   400 
  Total 
 $600 
 680 
 850 
 820  1,130 
 560 
 $4,640 
 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
473
row from right to left, beginning at the intersection of a row and column for the same period 
(e.g., period 3). For instance, if some goods are produced in period 3 to satisfy back orders 
from period 2, a unit backorder cost of  b  is incurred. And if goods in period 3 are used to sat-
isfy back orders two periods earlier (e.g., from period 1), a unit cost of 2 b  is incurred. Unused 
capacity is generally given a unit cost of 0, although it is certainly possible to insert an actual 
cost if that is relevant. Finally, beginning inventory is given a unit cost of 0 if it is used to sat-
isfy demand in period 1. However, if it is held over for use in later periods, a holding cost of  h 
per unit is added for each period. If the inventory is to be held for the entire planning horizon, 
a total unit cost of  h times the number of periods,  n, will be incurred. 
  Example 3 illustrates the setup and final solution of a transportation model of an aggregate 
planning problem. 
 
Period
1
Period
2
Period
3
Unused
capacity
Ending
inventory
period n
Capacity
Period
Beginning
inventory
1
2
Demand
Total
3
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
0
h
2h
(n – 1)h
0
r + (n – 1)h
t + (n – 1)h
s + (n – 1)h
0
0
0
r + (n – 2)h
0
t + (n – 2)h
0
s + (n – 2)h
0
r + (n – 3)h
0
t + (n – 3)h
0
s + (n – 3)h
0
r
r + h
r + 2h
t
t + h
t + 2h
s
s + h
s + 2h
r + b
r
r + h
t + b
t
t + h
s + b
s
s + h
r + 2b
r + b
r
t + 2b
t + b
t
s + 2b
s + b
s
I0
R1
R2
R3
O1
O2
O3
S1
S2
S3
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
 
 TABLE 11.5 
 Transportation notation for aggregate planning 
 r     Regular production cost per unit 
 t     Overtime cost per unit 
 s     Subcontracting cost per unit 
 h     Holding cost per unit period 
 b     Backorder cost per unit per period 
 n     Number of periods in planning horizon 
 Given the following information, set up the problem in a transportation table (see Table 11.6) 
and solve for the minimum-cost plan:
 
 PERIOD 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Demand 
 550 
 700 
 750 
 Capacity 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 500 
 500 
 500 
 Overtime 
 50 
 50 
 50 
 Subcontract 
 120 
 120 
 100 
 Beginning inventory 
 100 
 
 
 Costs 
 
 
 
 Regular time 
 $60 per unit 
 Overtime 
 $80 per unit 
 Subcontract 
 $90 per unit 
 Inventory carrying cost 
 $1 per unit per month 
  Backorder cost 
 $3 per unit per month 
 E X A M P L E  3 
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e     

474 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
  Where backlogs are not permitted, the cell costs for the backlog positions can be made 
prohibitively high so that no backlogs will appear in the solution. 
 The main limitations of LP models are the assumptions of linear relationships among vari-
ables, the inability to continuously adjust output rates, and the need to specify a single objec-
tive (e.g., minimize costs) instead of using multiple objectives (e.g., minimize cost while 
stabilizing the workforce). 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The transportation table and solution are shown in  Table 11.6 . Some of the entries require 
additional explanation: 
 a. 
In this example, inventory carrying costs are $1 per unit per period (costs are shown 
in the upper right-hand corner of each cell in the table). Hence, units produced in one 
period and carried over to a later period will incur a holding cost that is a linear function 
of the length of time held. 
   b. Linear programming models of this type require that supply (capacity) and demand be 
equal. A dummy column has been added (nonexistent capacity) to satisfy that require-
ment. Since it does not “cost” anything extra to not use capacity that doesn’t actually 
exist, cell costs of $0 have been assigned. 
 c. 
No backlogs were needed in this example. 
 d. 
The quantities (e.g., 100 and 450 in column 1) are the amounts of output or inventory that 
will be used to meet demand requirements. Thus, the demand of 550 units in period 1 will 
be met using 100 units from inventory and 450 obtained from regular-time output.  
 TABLE 11.6 
 Transportation solution 
 
Supply from
Demand for
Period
1
Period
2
Period
3
Unused
capacity
(dummy)
Total
capacity
available
(supply)
Period
Beginning inventory
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
0
1
2
0
100
450
50
50
500
50
20
100
500
50
100
50
30
90
500
120
50
500
120
50
500
550
700
750
90
2,090
100
100
60
61
62
0
63
60
61
0
66
63
60
0
86
83
80
0
96
93
90
0
83
80
81
0
93
90
91
0
80
81
82
0
90
91
92
0
1
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
2
Regular time
Overtime
Subcontract
Demand
3
 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
475
 Simulation Models.  A number of   simulation models  have been developed for aggregate 
planning. (An introduction to simulation is available on the textbook Web site.) The essence 
of simulation is the development of computerized models that can be tested under a variety 
of conditions in an attempt to identify reasonably acceptable (although not always optimal) 
solutions to problems. 
 Table 11.7 summarizes planning techniques. 
 Aggregate planning techniques other than trial and error do not appear to be widely used. 
Instead, in the majority of organizations, aggregate planning seems to be accomplished more 
on the basis of experience along with trial-and-error methods. It is difficult to say exactly why 
some of the mathematical techniques mentioned are not used to any great extent. Perhaps the 
level of mathematical sophistication discourages greater use, or the assumptions required in 
certain models appear unrealistic, or the models may be too narrow in scope. Whatever the 
reasons, none of the techniques to date have captured the attention of aggregate planners 
on a broad scale. Simulation is one technique that seems to be gaining favor. Research on 
improved approaches to aggregate planning is continuing. 
 11.4 AGGREGATE PLANNING IN SERVICES 
      Aggregate planning for services takes into account projected customer demands, equipment 
capacities, and labor capabilities. The resulting plan is a time-phased projection of service 
staff requirements. 
 Here are examples of service organizations that use aggregate planning:
 Hospitals:  Hospitals use aggregate planning to allocate funds, staff, and supplies to 
meet the demands of patients for their medical services. For example, plans for bed 
capacity, medications, surgical supplies, and personnel needs are based on patient load 
forecasts.  
 Airlines:  Aggregate planning in the airline industry is fairly complex due to the need 
to take into account a wide range of factors (planes, flight personnel, ground personnel) 
and multiple routes and landing/departure sites. Also, capacity decisions must take into 
account the percentage of seats to be allocated to various fare classes in order to maxi-
mize profit or yield. 
 Restaurants:  Aggregate planning in the case of a high-volume product output business 
such as a restaurant is directed toward smoothing the service rate, determining the size of 
the workforce, and managing demand to match a fixed kitchen and eating capacity. The 
general approach usually involves adjusting the number of staff according to the time of 
day and the day of the week. 
 Other services:  Financial, hospitality, transportation, and recreation services provide a 
high-volume, intangible output. Aggregate planning for these and similar services involves 
managing demand and planning for human resource requirements. The main goals are to 
accommodate peak demand and to find ways to effectively use labor resources during 
periods of low demand.  
 Simulation models  Comput-
erized models that can be tested 
under different scenarios to 
identify acceptable solutions to 
problems. 
 TABLE 11.7 
 Summary of planning techniques 
LO11.6 Discuss aggregate 
planning in services.
 Technique 
 Solution Approach 
 Characteristics 
 Spreadsheet 
 Heuristic (trial and error) 
 Intuitively appealing, easy to understand; 
solution not necessarily optimal 
 Linear programming 
 Optimizing 
 Computerized; linear assumptions not always 
valid 
 Simulation 
 Heuristic (trial and error) 
 Computerized models can be examined under 
a variety of conditions 

476 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
Lunchtime line of people at 
Chacarero, a popular fast-
food Chilean restaurant at 
Downtown Crossing, Boston, 
Massachussetts. Predicting 
steady demand from nearby 
office workers makes it much 
easier to provide staffing and 
prompt food service.
 Aggregate planning for manufacturing and aggregate planning for services share similarities 
in some respects, but there are some important differences—related in general to the differences 
between manufacturing and services:
 1. 
 Demand for service can be difficult to predict. The volume of demand for services is 
often quite variable. In some situations, customers may  need prompt service (e.g., police, 
fire, medical emergency), while in others, they simply  want prompt service and may be 
willing to go elsewhere if their wants are not met. These factors place a greater burden 
on service providers to anticipate demand. Consequently, service providers must pay 
careful attention to planned capacity levels.  
 2.  Capacity availability can be difficult to predict. Processing requirements for ser-
vices can sometimes be quite variable, similar to the variability of work in a job shop 
setting. Moreover, the variety of tasks required of servers can be great, again similar to 
the variety of tasks in a job shop. However, in services, the types of variety are more 
pervasive than they are in manufacturing. This makes it more difficult to establish 
simple measures of capacity. For example, what would be the capacity of a person 
who paints interiors of houses? The number of rooms per day or the number of square 
feet per hour are possible measures, but rooms come in many different sizes, and 
because the level of detail (and, thus, the painting implements that can be used) vary 
tremendously, a suitable measure for planning purposes can be quite difficult to arrive 
at. Similarly, bank tellers are called upon to handle a wide variety of transactions and 
requests for information, again making it difficult to establish a suitable measure of 
their capacity.  
 3.  Labor flexibility can be an advantage in services. Labor often comprises a signifi-
cant portion of service compared to manufacturing. That, coupled with the fact that 
service providers are often able to handle a fairly wide variety of service require-
ments, means that to some extent, planning is easier than it is in manufacturing. Of 
course, manufacturers recognize this advantage, and many are cross-training their 
employees to achieve the same flexibility. Moreover, in both manufacturing 
and service systems, the use of part-time workers can be an important option. Note 
that in self-service systems, the (customer) labor automatically adjusts to changes 
in demand!  

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
477
 4. 
 Services occur when they are rendered. Unlike manufacturing output, most ser-
vices can’t be inventoried. Services such as financial planning, tax counseling, and oil 
changes can’t be stockpiled. This removes the option of building up inventories during 
a slow period in anticipation of future demand. Moreover, service capacity that goes 
unused is essentially wasted. Consequently, it becomes even more important to be able 
to match capacity and demand. 
 Because service capacity is perishable (e.g., an empty seat on an airplane flight can’t 
be saved for use on another flight), aggregate planners need to take that into account when 
deciding how to match supply and demand.   Yield management is an approach that seeks to 
maximize revenue by using a strategy of variable pricing; prices are set relative to capacity 
availability. Thus, during periods of low demand, price discounts are offered to attract a wider 
population. Conversely, during peak periods, higher prices are posted to take advantage of 
limited supply relative to demand. Users of yield management include airlines, restaurants, 
theaters, hotels, resorts, cruise lines, and parking lots. 
 11.5 DISAGGREGATING THE AGGREGATE PLAN 
      For the production plan to be translated into meaningful terms for production, it is necessary 
to  disaggregate  the aggregate plan. This means breaking down the aggregate plan into specific 
product requirements in order to determine labor requirements (skills, size of workforce), 
materials, and inventory requirements. 
 Working with aggregate units facilitates intermediate planning. However, to put the pro-
duction plan into operation, one must convert, or disaggregate, those aggregate units into 
units of actual products or services that are to be produced or offered. For example, a lawn 
mower manufacturer may have an aggregate plan that calls for 200 riding mowers in January, 
300 in February, and 400 in March. That company may produce three different models of rid-
ing mowers. Although all the mowers probably contain some of the same parts and involve 
some similar or identical operations for fabrication and assembly, there would be some dif-
ferences in the materials, parts, and operations that each type requires. Hence, the 200, 300, 
and 400 aggregate lawn mowers that are to be produced during those three months must be 
translated into specific numbers of mowers of each model prior to actually purchasing the 
appropriate materials and parts, scheduling operations, and planning inventory requirements. 
 The result of disaggregating the aggregate plan is a    master production schedule (MPS)   , 
or simply master schedule, showing the quantity and timing of  specific  end items for a sched-
uled horizon, which often covers about six to eight weeks ahead. A master schedule shows the 
planned output for individual products rather than an entire product group, along with the tim-
ing of production. The master schedule contains important information for marketing as well 
as for production. It reveals when orders are scheduled for production and when completed 
orders are to be shipped. 
 Figure 11.4 shows an overview of the context of disaggregation. 
  Figure 11.5  illustrates disaggregating the aggregate plan. The illustration makes a simple 
assumption in order to clearly show the concept of disaggregation: The totals of the aggregate 
and the disaggregated units are equal. In reality, that is not always true. As a consequence, 
disaggregating the aggregate plan may require considerable effort. 
  Figure 11.5  shows the aggregate plan broken down by units. However, it also can be useful 
to show the breakdown in  percentages for different products or product families. 
 11.6 MASTER SCHEDULING 
 The master schedule is the heart of production planning and control. It determines the quanti-
ties needed to meet demand from all sources, and that governs key decisions and activities 
throughout the organization. 
 Yield management  The 
application of pricing strategies 
to allocate capacity among 
various categories of demand. 
 Master production schedule 
(MPS)  This schedule indi-
cates the quantity and timing of 
planned completed production.  
 FIGURE 11.4 
 Moving from the aggregate plan 
to a master production schedule 
Aggregate
planning
Disaggregation
Master
schedule
LO11.7 Disaggregate an 
aggregate plan.

478 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 The master schedule interfaces with marketing, capacity planning, production plan-
ning, and distribution planning: It enables marketing to make valid delivery commitments 
to warehouses and final customers; it enables production to evaluate capacity requirements; 
it provides the necessary information for production and marketing to negotiate when cus-
tomer requests cannot be met by normal capacity; and it provides senior management with 
the opportunity to determine whether the business plan and its strategic objectives will be 
achieved. The master schedule also drives the material requirements planning (MRP) system 
that will be discussed in the next chapter. 
 The capacities used for master scheduling are based on decisions made during aggregate 
planning. Note that there is a time lapse between the time the aggregate plan is made and the 
development of a master schedule. Consequently, the outputs shown in a master schedule will not 
necessarily be identical to those of the aggregate plan for the simple reason that more  up-to-date 
demand information might be available, which the master schedule would take into account. 
 The central person in the master scheduling process is the master scheduler. 
 The Master Scheduler 
 Most manufacturing organizations have (or should have) a master scheduler. The duties of the 
master scheduler generally include
 1. Evaluating the impact of new orders. 
 2. Providing delivery dates for orders. 
 3. Dealing with problems:
 a. Evaluating the impact of production delays or late deliveries of purchased goods. 
 b. Revising the master schedule when necessary because of insufficient supplies or capacity.  
   c. Bringing instances of insufficient capacity to the attention of production and marketing 
personnel so that they can participate in resolving conflicts. 
 11.7 THE MASTER SCHEDULING PROCESS 
    A master schedule indicates the quantity and timing (i.e., delivery times) for a product, or a 
group of products, but it does not show planned  production.  For instance, a master schedule 
may call for delivery of 50 cases of cranberry-apple juice to be delivered on May 1. But this 
may not require any production; there may be 200 cases in inventory. Or it may require  some 
production: If there were 40 cases in inventory, an additional 10 cases would be needed to 
achieve the specified delivery amount. Or it may involve production of 50 or more cases: In 
some instances, it is more economical to produce large amounts rather than small amounts, with 
the excess temporarily placed in inventory until needed. Thus, the  production lot size might be 
70 cases, so if additional cases were needed (e.g., 50 cases), a run of 70 cases would be made. 
 The master production schedule is one of the primary outputs of the master scheduling 
process, as illustrated in  Figure 11.6 . 
LO11.8 Describe the master 
scheduling process and explain 
its importance.
 Aggregate plan 
 Month Planned output * 
 Jan. 
 Feb. 
 Mar. 
 
 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 * Aggregate units 
 Master schedule 
 Month Planned output * 
 Jan. 
 Feb. 
 Mar. 
 
 RMa 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 
 RMb 
 75 
 150 
 200 
 
 RMc 
 25 
 50 
 100 
 
 Total 
 200 
 300 
 400 
 * Actual units 
 FIGURE 11.5 
 Disaggregating the aggregate 
plan 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
479
 Once a  tentative  master schedule has been developed, it must be validated. This is an 
extremely important step. Validation is referred to as    rough-cut capacity planning (RCCP)   . 
It involves testing the feasibility of a proposed master schedule relative to available 
capacities, to assure that no obvious capacity constraints exist. This means checking 
capacities of production and warehouse facilities, labor, and vendors to ensure that no 
gross  deficiencies exist that will render the master schedule unworkable. The master pro-
duction schedule then serves as the basis for  short-range  planning. It should be noted that 
whereas the aggregate plan covers an interval of, say, 12 months, the master schedule cov-
ers only a portion of this. In other words, the aggregate plan is disaggregated in stages, or 
phases, that may cover a few weeks to two or three months. Moreover, the master sched-
ule may be updated monthly, even though it covers two or three months. For instance, the 
lawn mower master schedule would probably be updated at the end of January to include 
any revisions in planned output for February and March as well as new information on 
planned output for April.  
 Time Fences 
 Changes to a master schedule can be disruptive, particularly changes to the early, or near, por-
tions of the schedule. Typically, the further out in the future a change is, the less the tendency 
to cause problems. 
 High-performance organizations have an effective master scheduling process. A key compo-
nent of effective scheduling is the use of  time fences  to facilitate order promising and the entry 
of orders into the system.    Time fences    divide a scheduling time horizon into three sections or 
phases, sometimes referred to as  frozen, slushy,  and  liquid,  in reference to the firmness of the 
schedule (see  Figure 11.7 ).  
 Frozen is the near-term phase that is so soon that delivery of a new order would be impos-
sible, or only possible using very costly or extraordinary options such as delaying another 
order. Authority for new-order entry in this phase usually lies with the VP of manufacturing. 
The length of the frozen phase is often a function of the total time needed to produce a prod-
uct, from procuring materials to shipping the order. There is a high degree of confidence in 
order-promise dates. 
 Slushy is the next phase, and its time fence is usually a few periods beyond the frozen 
phase. Order entry in this phase necessitates trade-offs, but is less costly or disruptive than 
in the frozen phase. Authority for order entry usually lies with the master scheduler. There is 
relative confidence in order-promise dates, and capacity planning becomes very specific. 
 Liquid is the farthest out on the time horizon. New orders or cancellations can be entered 
with ease. Order promise dates are tentative, and will be firmed up with the passage of time 
when orders are in the firm phase of the schedule horizon. 
 A key element in the success of the master scheduling process is strict adherence to time 
fence policies and rules. It is essential that they be adhered to and communicated throughout 
the organization. 
 Rough-cut capacity planning 
(RCCP)  Approximate balancing 
of capacity and demand to test the 
feasibility of a master schedule.  
 Time fences  Points in time 
that separate phases of a master 
schedule planning horizon.  
 FIGURE 11.6 
 The master scheduling process 
Beginning inventory
Forecast
Customer orders
Projected inventory of finished goods
Master production schedule
Uncommitted inventory
Inputs
Outputs
Master
scheduling
 FIGURE 11.7 
 Time fences in an MPS 
Period
frozen
(firm or fixed)
slushy
(somewhat
firm)
liquid
(open)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

480 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 Inputs 
 The master schedule has three inputs: the beginning inventory, which is the actual quantity 
on hand from the preceding period; forecasts for each period of the schedule; and customer 
orders, which are quantities already  committed to customers. Other factors that might need 
to be taken into consideration include any hiring or firing restrictions imposed by HR, skill 
levels, limits on inventory such as available space, whether items are perishable, and whether 
there are some market lifetime (e.g., seasonal or obsolescence) considerations. 
 Outputs 
 The master scheduling process uses this information on a period-by-period basis to determine the 
projected inventory, production requirements, and the resulting uncommitted inventory, which is 
referred to as   available-to-promise (ATP) inventory .  Knowledge of the uncommitted inventory 
can enable marketing to make realistic promises to customers about deliveries of new orders. 
 The master scheduling process begins with a preliminary calculation of projected on-hand 
inventory. This reveals when additional inventory (i.e., production) will be needed. Consider 
this example. A company that makes industrial pumps wants to prepare a master production 
schedule for June and July. Marketing has forecasted demand of 120 pumps for June and 160 
pumps for July. These have been evenly distributed over the four weeks in each month: 30 per 
week in June and 40 per week in July, as illustrated in  Figure 11.8 A. 
 Now, suppose that there are currently 64 pumps in inventory (i.e., beginning inventory is 
64 pumps), and that there are customer orders that have been committed (booked) and must 
be filled (see  Figure 11.8B) . 
 Figure 11.8 B contains the three primary inputs to the master scheduling process: the begin-
ning inventory, the forecast, and the customer orders that have been booked or committed. 
This information is necessary to determine three quantities: the projected on-hand inventory, 
the master production schedule, and the uncommitted (ATP) inventory. The first step is to 
calculate the projected on-hand inventory, one week at a time, until it falls below a speci-
fied limit. In this example, the specified limit will be zero. Hence, we will continue until the 
 projected on-hand ending inventory becomes negative. 
 The projected on-hand inventory is calculated as follows:
 


Projected on-hand
inventory
Inventory from
previous week
Current week’s
requirements
 
 (11–1) 
where the current week’s requirements are the  larger  of forecast and customer orders 
(committed). 
 Available-to-promise (ATP) 
inventory  Uncommitted 
inventory. 
 FIGURE 11.8A 
 Weekly forecast requirements for 
industrial pumps 
Forecast
June
July
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
 FIGURE 11.8B 
 Eight-week schedule showing 
forecasts, customer orders, and 
beginning inventory 
Forecast
Customer orders
(committed)
June
July
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
33
20
10
4
2
64
Beginning
  inventory

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
481
 For the first week, projected on-hand inventory equals beginning inventory minus the 
larger of forecast and customer orders. Because customer orders (33) are larger than the fore-
cast (30), the customer orders amount is used. Thus, for the first week, we obtain
 Projected on-hand inventory
64
33
31



 
 Projected on-hand inventories are shown in  Figure 11.9  for the first three weeks (i.e., until 
the projected on-hand amount becomes negative). 
 When the projected on-hand inventory becomes negative, this is a signal that production 
will be needed to replenish inventory. Hence, a negative projected on-hand inventory will 
require planned production. Suppose that a production lot size of 70 pumps is used, so that 
whenever production is called for, 70 pumps will be produced. (The determination of lot size 
is described in Chapter 13.) Hence, the negative projected on-hand inventory in the third week 
will require production of 70 pumps, which will meet the projected shortfall of 29 pumps and 
leave 41 (i.e., 70    29    41) pumps for future demand. 
 These calculations continue for the entire schedule. Every time projected inventory becomes 
negative, another production lot of 70 pumps is added to the schedule.  Figure 11.10  illustrates 
the calculations. The result is the master schedule and projected on-hand inventory for each 
week of the schedule. These can now be added to the master schedule (see  Figure 11.11 ).  
 FIGURE 11.9 
 Projected on-hand inventory is 
computed week by week until it 
becomes negative 
Beginning
  inventory
Forecast
Customer orders
(committed)
Projected on-hand
inventory
June
July
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
33
20
10
4
2
31
1
–29
64
Customer orders are larger
than forecast in week 1;
projected on-hand inventory 
is 64 – 33 = 31
Forecast is larger than
customer orders in week 2;
projected on-hand inventory 
is 31 – 30 = 1
Forecast is larger than
customer orders in week 3;
projected on-hand inventory 
is 1 – 30 = –29
 FIGURE 11.10 
 Determining the MPS and 
projected on-hand inventory 
 Week 
 Inventory 
from 
Previous 
Week 
 Requirements * 
 Net 
Inventory 
before MPS 
 
 (70) 
MPS 
 
 Projected 
Inventory 
 1 
 64 
 33 
 31 
 
 
 
 31 
 2 
 31 
 30 
 1 
 
 
 
 1 
 3 
 1 
 30 
  29 
  
 70 
  
 41 
 4 
 41 
 30 
 11 
 
 
 
 11 
 5 
 11 
 40 
  29 
  
 70 
  
 41 
 6 
 41 
 40 
 1 
 
 
 
 1 
 7 
 1 
 40 
  39 
  
 70 
  
 31 
 8 
 31 
 40 
  9 
  
 70 
  
 61 
 *Requirements equals the larger of forecast and customer orders in each week. 

482 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 It is now possible to determine the amount of inventory that is uncommitted and, hence, 
available to promise. Several methods are used in practice. The one we shall employ involves 
a “look-ahead” procedure: Sum booked customer orders week by week until (but not includ-
ing) a week in which there is an MPS amount. For example, in the first week, this procedure 
results in summing customer orders of 33 (week 1) and 20 (week 2) to obtain 53. In the first 
week, this amount is subtracted from the beginning inventory of 64 pumps plus the MPS (zero 
in this example) to obtain the amount that is available to promise. Thus,
 64
0
(33
20)
11




 
This inventory is uncommitted, and it can be delivered in either week 1 or 2, or part can be 
delivered in week 1 and part in week 2. (Note that the ATP quantity is only calculated for the 
first week and for other weeks in which there is an MPS quantity. Hence, it is calculated for 
weeks 1, 3, 5, 7, 8.) See  Figure 11.12 . 
 For weeks other than the first week, the beginning inventory drops out of the computation, 
and ATP is the look-ahead quantity subtracted from the MPS quantity. 
 Thus, for week 3, the promised amounts are 10    4    14, and the ATP is 70    14    56. 
 For week 5, customer orders are 2 (future orders have not yet been booked). The ATP is 
70    2    68. 
 For weeks 7 and 8, there are no customer orders, so for the present, all of the MPS amount 
is available to promise. 
 As additional orders are booked, these would be entered in the schedule, and the ATP 
amounts would be updated to reflect those orders. Marketing can use the ATP amounts to 
provide realistic delivery dates to customers. 
 FIGURE 11.11 
 Projected on-hand inventory and 
MPS are added to the master 
schedule  
Forecast
Customer orders
(committed)
Projected on-hand
inventory
MPS
June
July
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
33
20
10
4
2
31
1
41
11
41
1
31
61
70
70
70
70
64
 FIGURE 11.12 
 The available-to-promise 
inventory quantities have been 
added to the master schedule 
Forecast
Customer orders
(committed)
Projected on-hand
inventory
MPS
Available-to-
promise inventory
(uncommitted)
June
July
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
30
30
30
30
40
40
40
40
33
20
10
4
2
31
1
41
11
41
1
31
61
70
70
70
70
11
56
68
70
70
64

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
483
 Aggregate planning establishes general levels of employment, output, and inventories for periods of 
2 to 12 months. In the spectrum of planning, it falls between the broad decisions of long-range planning 
and the very specific and detailed short-range planning decisions. It begins with an overall forecast for 
the planning horizon and ends with preparations for applying the plans to specific products and services. 
 The essence of aggregate planning is the aggregation of products or services into one “product” 
or “service.” This permits planners to consider overall levels of employment and inventories without 
having to become involved with specific details that are better left to short-range planning. Planners 
often use informal graphic and charting techniques to develop plans, although various mathematical 
techniques have been suggested. It appears that the complexity and the restrictive assumptions of these 
techniques limit their widespread use in practice. 
 After the aggregate plan has been developed, it is disaggregated or broken down into specific prod-
uct requirements. This leads to a master schedule, which indicates the planned quantities and timing of 
specific outputs. Inputs to the master schedule are on-hand inventory amounts, forecasts of demand, and 
customer orders. The outputs are projected production and inventory requirements, and the projected 
uncommitted inventory, which is referred to as available-to-promise (ATP) inventory. 
 SUMMARY 
 1. 
An aggregate plan is an intermediate-range plan for a collection of similar products or services 
that sets the stage for shorter-range plans. See  Table 11.8 for a convenient summary of aggregate 
planning. 
 2. 
Master scheduling breaks an aggregate plan into specific shorter-range output quantity and timing 
requirements.
 KEY POINTS 
 Purpose 
 Decide on the combination of 
 Output rates 
 Employment levels 
 On-hand inventory levels 
 Objectives 
 Minimize cost 
 Others, may include 
  Maintain a desirable level of customer service 
  Minimize workforce fluctuations 
 Possible Strategies 
 A. Supply Management (reactive) 
  Level Production 
 Allow inventory to absorb variations in demand 
 Use backordering during periods of high demand 
  Chase Production 
 Vary output by varying the number of workers by hiring or layoffs to track demand 
 Vary output throughout the use of overtime or idle time 
 Vary output using part-time workers 
 Use subcontracting to supplement output 
  Mixed Strategy 
 Use a combination of level and chase approaches 
 B. Demand Management (proactive) 
 Influence demand through promotion, pricing, etc. 
 Produce goods or services that have complementary demand patterns 
 Managerial Importance of Aggregate Planning 
 Has an effect on 
  Costs 
  Equipment utilization 
  Customer satisfaction 
  Employment levels 
  Synchronization of flow throughout the supply chain 
 TABLE 11.8 
 Summary of aggregate planning 

484 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 aggregate planning, 457 
 available-to-promise (ATP) 
inventory, 480 
 chase demand strategy, 465 
 level capacity strategy, 465 
 master production schedule 
(MPS), 477 
 rough-cut capacity planning 
(RCCP), 479 
 sales and operations 
planning, 457 
 simulation models, 475 
 time fences, 479 
 yield management, 477 
 KEY TERMS 
 a. Rough-cut capacity planning tests the feasibility of a tentative master plan in terms of capacity. 
   b. Time fences describe the various time periods in terms of the degree to which the master schedule is 
firm or flexible. Early periods do not generally allow changes, while later periods have more flexibility.     
 3. 
It is essential to include the entire supply chain when developing the aggregate plan. 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 A manager is attempting to put together an aggregate plan for the coming nine months. She has 
obtained a forecast of expected demand for the planning horizon. The plan must deal with highly 
seasonal demand; demand is relatively high in periods 3 and 4 and again in period 8, as can be seen 
from the following forecasts: 
 Problem 1 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 190 
 230 
 260 
 280 
 210 
 170 
 160 
 260 
 180 
 1,940 
 The department now has 20 full-time employees, each of whom produces 10 units of output per 
period at a cost of $6 per unit. Beginning inventory for period 1 is zero. Inventory carrying cost is 
$5 per unit per period, and backlog cost is $10 per unit per period.  
 a. Will the current work force be able to handle the forecast demand? 
 b. Determine the total cost of the plan, including production, inventory, and backorder costs. 
    a. With the current workforce of 20 people each producing 10 units per period, regular capacity is 
1,800 units for the 9-month period. That is 140 units less than expected demand. So there will be 
a backlog of unfilled demand if actual demand equals the forecast. 
 b. The production plan is 
 Solution 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 190 
 230 
 260 
 280 
 210 
 170 
 160 
 260 
 180 
 1,940 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 1,800 
 Overtime 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Subcontract 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 Output    Forecast 
 10 
 (30) 
 (60) 
 (80) 
 (10) 
 30 
 40 
 (60) 
 20 
 (140) 
 Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beginning 
 0 
 10 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 20 
 0 
 
 Ending 
 10 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 20 
 0 
 0 
 
 Average 
 5 
 5 
 10 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 10 
 10 
 0 
 10 
 Backlog 
 0 
 20 
 80 
 160 
 170 
 140 
 100 
 160 
 140 
 970 
 Costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular @ $6 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200  $10,800 
 Overtime 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Subcontract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inventory @ $5 
 $     25  $     25 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0  $       50 
 Back order @ $10 
 0  $   200 
 800 
 1,600 
 1,700 
 1,400 
 1,000 
 1,600 
 1,400  $  9,700 
  Total 
 $1,225 
 1,425 
 2,000 
 2,800 
 2,900 
 2,600 
 2,200 
 2,800 
 2,600  $20,550 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
485
 The total cost for this plan is $20,550. This plan may or may not be good. The manager would 
need information on other costs and options before settling on one plan. 
 Although the calculations are relatively straightforward, the backlogs can sometimes seem dif-
ficult to obtain. Consider these rules for computing the backlog:
 1. Start with the Output    Forecast value. If this is positive and there was a backlog in the preced-
ing period, reduce the backlog by this amount. If the amount exceeds the backlog, the difference 
becomes the ending inventory for the period. If they are exactly equal, the backlog and the end-
ing inventory will both be equal to zero. 
 2. If Output    Forecast is negative, subtract it from the beginning inventory. If this produces a 
negative value, that value becomes the backlog for that period. 
 You also can use the Excel template Aggregate Planning (B) to obtain the solution: 
 Spring and Summer Fashions, a clothing producer, has generated a forecast for the next eight weeks. 
Demand is expected to be fairly steady, except for periods 3 and 4, which have higher demands: 
 Problem 2 
 Period 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,400 
 3,000 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 1,200 
 11,600 
The company typically hires seasonal workers to handle the extra workload in periods 3 and 4. The 
cost for hiring and training a seasonal worker is $50 per worker, and the company plans to hire two 
additional workers and train them in period 3, for work in period 4, and then lay them off (no cost for 
layoff). Develop an aggregate plan that uses steady output from regular workers with added output 
from the two seasonal workers in period 4. The output rate for the seasonal workers is slightly less 
than that of regular workers, so their cost per unit is higher. The cost per unit for regular workers is 
$4 per unit, while cost per unit for the seasonal workers is $5 per unit. Backlog cost is $1 per unit 
per period. 
Period
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Total
Forecast
190
230
260
280
210
170
160
260
180
1,940
Output
 Regular Part
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
200
1,800
 Time
0
 Overtime
0
 Subcontract
0
Output  Forecast
10
30
60
80
10
30
40
60
20
140
Inventory
 Beginning
0
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10
 Ending
10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
 Average
5
5
0
0
0
0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Backlog
0
20
80
160
170
140
100
160
140
970
Costs
 Regular         @
 6
$1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200 $1,200
$10,800
 Part Time      @
$       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0
$         0
 Overtime       @
$       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0
$         0
 Subcontract  @
$       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0
$         0
 Hire/Layoff
$         0
 Inventory      @
 5
$     25 $     25 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0 $       0
$       50
 Back orders  @
10
$       0 $   200
$800 $1,600 $1,700 $1,400 $1,000 $1,600 $1,400
$  9,700
  Total
$1,225 $1,425 $2,000 $2,800 $2,900 $2,600 $2,200 $2,800 $2,600
$20,550

486 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 Solution   
 Prepare a schedule like that shown in  Figure 11.12  for the following situation: The forecast for each 
period is 70 units. The starting inventory is zero. The MPS rule is to schedule production if the pro-
jected inventory on hand is negative. The production lot size is 100 units. The following table shows 
committed orders. 
 Problem 3 
  Starting Inv.    0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Forecast 
 70 
 70 
 70 
 70 
 Customer orders 
 80 
 50 
 30 
 10 
 Projected on-hand inventory 
 20 
 50 
 80 
 10 
 MPS 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 0 
 ATP 
 20 
 50 
 60 
 0 
 Period 
 Customer Orders 
 1 
 80 
 2 
 50 
 3 
 30 
 4 
 10 
 Solution 
Period 
 (A)
Projected Inventory 
from Previous Period 
 (B)
Requirements  *  
  (C    A    B) 
 Net Inventory 
before MPS 
 MPS 
  (MPS    C) 
 Projected On-
Hand Inventory 
 1 
 0 
 80 
 (80) 
 100 
 20 
 2 
 20 
 70 
 (50) 
 100 
 50 
 3 
 50 
 70 
 (20) 
 100 
 80 
 4 
 80 
 70 
 10 
 0 
 10 
 *Requirements equal the larger of forecast and customer orders in each period. 
 Week 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Forecast 
 
 70 
 70 
 70 
 70 
 
 
 
 
 Customer Orders (committed) 
 
 80 
 50 
 30 
 10 
 
 
 
 
 Projected on-hand inventory 
 
 20 
 50 
 80 
 10 
 10 
 10 
 10 
 10 
 MPS 
 
 100 
 100 
 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 ATP 
 
 20 
 50 
 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 You could also obtain the same solution using the Excel template for master scheduling: 
Period
Forecast
Output
Regular
Part Time
Overtime
Subcontract
Output - Forecast
Inventory
Beginning
Ending
Average
Backlog
Costs :
Regular
Part Time
OverTime
Subcontract
Hire/Layoff
Inventory
Back orders
Total
@
4
5
50
100
100
1
0
4,800.0 4,800.0 5,100.0
4,800.0
14,800
4,800.0 4,800.0 4,800.0 48,700.0
0.0
0
0.0
200
0
0.0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
0.0
200
0.0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10,000
4,800
4,800
4,800
4,800
4,800
4,800
4,800
4,800
38,400
10,000
0
0
0
0
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
2,000
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
9,600
2,000
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
1,200
11,600
1,400
3,000
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Total
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
-200
200
200
0
0
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
0
0
0
0.0
200
0
@
@
@
@
@

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
487
 1. What three levels of planning involve operations managers? What kinds of decisions are made at 
the various levels? 
 2. What are the three phases of intermediate planning? 
 3. What is aggregate planning? What is its purpose? 
 4. Why is there a need for aggregate planning? 
 5. What are the most common decision variables for aggregate planning in a manufacturing setting? 
In a service setting? 
 6. What aggregate planning difficulty that might confront an organization offering a variety of products 
and/or services would not confront an organization offering one or a few similar products or services?  
 7. Briefly discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each of these planning strategies:
  a. Maintain a level rate of output and let inventories absorb fluctuations in demand. 
  b. Vary the size of the workforce to correspond to predicted changes in demand requirements. 
  c.  Maintain a constant workforce size, but vary hours worked to correspond to predicted demand 
requirements. 
 8. What are the primary advantages and limitations of informal graphic and charting techniques for 
aggregate planning? 
 9. Briefly describe the planning techniques listed below, and give an advantage and disadvantage for 
each:
  a. Spreadsheet 
  b. Linear programming 
  c. Simulation 
 10. What are the inputs to master scheduling? What are the outputs? 
 11. Explain the managerial significance of aggregate planning. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What general trade-offs are involved in master scheduling in terms of the frozen portion of the 
schedule? 
 2. Who needs to interface with the master schedule and why? 
 3. How has technology had an impact on master scheduling? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. Service operations often face more difficulty in planning than their manufacturing counterparts. 
However, service does have certain advantages that manufacturing often does not. Explain service 
planning difficulty, and the advantages and disadvantages. 
 2. Name several behaviors related to aggregate planning or master scheduling that you believe would 
be unethical, and the ethical principle that would be violated for each.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. Compute the total cost for each aggregate plan using these unit costs:
  
 
 Regular output    $40 
  
 
 Overtime    $50 
  
 
 Subcontract    $60 
  
 
 Average Balance Inventory    $10 
 a.  
 PROBLEMS 
 Month 
 Jan 
 Feb 
 Mar 
 Apr 
 May 
 Jun 
 Forecast Output 
 300 
 320 
 320 
 340 
 320 
 320 
 Regular 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 Overtime 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 Subcontract 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 Output—Forecast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beginning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ending 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Average 
 
 
 
 
 
 

488 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 Month 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Forecast 
 380 
 400 
 420 
 440 
 460 
 480 
 Month 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Forecast 
 230 
 200 
 240 
 240 
 250 
 240 
 b.  
 c. (Refer to part  b. ) After complaints from some workers about working overtime every month dur-
ing the first half of the year, the manager is now considering adding some temporary workers for 
the second half of the year, which would increase regular output to a steady 350 units a month, 
not using any overtime, and using subcontracting to make up needed output. Determine the total 
cost of that plan.  
 2. A manager would like to know the total cost of a chase strategy that matches the forecast below 
using a steady regular production rate of 200 units a month, a maximum of 20 units per month of 
overtime, and subcontracting as needed to make up any shortages. The unit costs are:
  
 
 Regular production    $35 
  
 
 Overtime    $70 
  
 
 Subcontracting    $80 
 3. Determine the total cost for this plan given the following forecast: 
  Use steady regular output of 400 units per month, use overtime as needed for up to 40 units per 
month, and use subcontracting to make up any needed output to match the forecast. Unit costs are:
  
 
 Regular output    $25 
  
 
 Overtime    $40 
  
 
 Subcontract    $60 
  
 
 Average Balance Inventory    $15 
 4.  a.   Given the following forecast and steady regular output of 550 every month, what total cost 
would result if overtime is limited to a maximum of 40 units a month, and subcontracting is 
limited to a maximum of 10 units a month? Unit costs are:
  
 
 Regular output    $20 
  
 
 Overtime    $30 
  
 
 Subcontract    $25 
  
 
 Average Inventory    $10 
  
 
 Backlog    $18 
 Month 
 Jul 
 Aug 
 Sep 
 Oct 
 Nov 
 Dec 
 Forecast 
 320 
 340 
 360 
 380 
 400 
 400 
 Output 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 300 
 Overtime 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 20 
 30 
 30 
 Subcontract 
 20 
 30 
 40 
 40 
 60 
 70 
 Output—Forecast 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Inventory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Beginning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ending 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Average 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
Forecast
540
540
570
590
600
580
 b. Suppose now that backlogs are not allowed. Modify your plan from part  a to accommodate that new 
condition as economically as possible. The limits on overtime and subcontracting remain the same.  
 5. Manager T. C. Downs of Plum Engines, a producer of lawn mowers and leaf blowers, must develop 
an aggregate plan given the forecast for engine demand shown in the table. The department has a 
regular output capacity of 130 engines per month. Regular output has a cost of $60 per engine. The 
beginning inventory is zero engines. Overtime has a cost of $90 per engine.
 a. Develop a chase plan that matches the forecast and compute the total cost of your plan. 
 Regular production can be less than regular capacity. 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
489
 Month 
 Mar 
 Apr 
 May 
 Jun 
 Jul 
 Aug 
 Sep 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 50 
 44 
 55 
 60 
 50 
 40 
 51 
 350 
 Month 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 250 
 300 
 250 
 300 
 280 
 275 
 270 
 1,925 
 b. Compare the costs to a level plan that uses inventory to absorb fluctuations. Inventory carrying 
cost is $2 per engine per month. Backlog cost is $90 per engine per month. There should not be 
a backlog in the last month. 
 
 MONTH 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 120 
 135 
 140 
 120 
 125 
 125 
 140 
 135 
 1,040 
 6. Manager Chris Channing of Fabric Mills, Inc., has developed the forecast shown in the table for 
bolts of cloth. The figures are in hundreds of bolts. The department has a regular output capacity of 
275(00) bolts per month, except for the seventh month, when capacity will be 250(00) bolts. Regu-
lar output has a cost of $40 per hundred bolts. Workers can be assigned to other jobs if production 
is less than regular. The beginning inventory is zero bolts.
 a. Develop a chase plan that matches the forecast and compute the total cost of your plan. Over-
time is $60 per hundred bolts. Regular production can be less than regular capacity. 
 b. Would the total cost be less with regular production with no overtime, but using a subcontractor 
to handle the excess above regular capacity at a cost of $50 per hundred bolts? Backlogs are not 
allowed. The inventory carrying cost is $2 per hundred bolts. 
 7. SummerFun, Inc., produces a variety of recreation and leisure products. The production manager 
has developed an aggregate forecast: 
 Use the following information to develop aggregate plans. 
 Regular production cost 
 $10 per case 
 Regular production capacity 
 5,000 cases 
 Overtime production cost 
 $16 per case 
 Subcontracting cost 
 $20 per case 
 Holding cost 
 $1 per case per month 
 Beginning inventory 
 0 
 Regular production cost 
 $80 per unit 
 Backorder cost 
 $20 per unit 
 Overtime production cost 
 $120 per unit 
 Beginning inventory 
 0 units 
 Regular capacity 
 40 units per month 
 
 
 Overtime capacity 
 8 units per month 
 
 
 Subcontracting cost 
 $140 per unit 
 
 
 Subcontracting capacity 
 12 units per month 
 
 
 Holding cost 
 $10 per unit per month 
 
 
 Develop an aggregate plan using each of the following guidelines and compute the total cost for 
each plan.  Hint: You will need extra output in April and August to accommodate demand in the fol-
lowing months.
 a. Use regular production. Supplement using inventory, overtime, and subcontracting as needed. 
No backlogs allowed. 
 b. Use a level strategy. Use a combination of backlogs, subcontracting, and inventory to handle 
variations in demand. There should not be a backlog in the final period. 
 8. Nowjuice, Inc., produces Shakewell ® fruit juice. A planner has developed an aggregate forecast for 
demand (in cases) for the next six months. 
 Month 
 May 
 Jun 
 Jul 
 Aug 
 Sep 
 Oct 
 Forecast 
 4,000 
 4,800 
 5,600 
 7,200 
 6,400 
 5,000 
 Use the following information to develop aggregate plans. 

490 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
   Develop an aggregate plan using each of the following guidelines and compute the total cost for 
each plan. Which plan has the lowest total cost? Note: Backlogs are not allowed.
  a. Use level production. Supplement using overtime as needed. 
  b.  Use a combination of overtime (500 cases per period maximum), inventory, and subcontracting 
(500 cases per period maximum) to handle variations in demand. 
  c. Use overtime up to 750 cases per period and inventory to handle variations in demand. 
  9. Wormwood, Ltd., produces a variety of furniture products. The planning committee wants to pre-
pare an aggregate plan for the next six months using the following information: 
 
 Month 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Demand 
 160 
 150 
 160 
 180 
 170 
 140 
 Capacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Regular 
 150 
 150 
 150 
 150 
 160 
 160 
 Overtime 
 10 
 10 
 0 
 10 
 10 
 10 
 Cost Per Unit 
 Regular time 
 $50 
 Overtime 
 75 
 Subcontract 
 80 
 Inventory holding, per month 
 4 
   Subcontracting can handle a maximum of 10 units per month. Beginning inventory is zero. Develop 
a plan that minimizes total cost. No back orders are allowed. Regular capacity  Regular production.  
 10. Refer to Solved Problem 1. Prepare two additional aggregate plans. Call the one in the solved 
problem plan A. For plan B, hire one more worker at a cost of $200. Make up any shortfall using 
subcontracting at $8 per unit, with a maximum of 20 units per period (i.e., use subcontracting to 
reduce back orders when the forecast exceeds regular output). Note that the ending inventory in 
period 9 should be zero. Therefore, Total forecast    Total output    Quantity subcontracted. An 
additional constraint is that back orders cannot exceed 80 units in any period. For plan C, assume 
no workers are hired (so regular output is 200 units per period instead of 210 as in plan B). Use 
subcontracting as needed, but no more than 20 units per period. Compute the total cost of each 
plan. Which plan has the lowest cost? Assume regular monthly production  regular capacity. 
 11. Refer to Solved Problem 1. Suppose another option is to use part-time workers to assist during 
seasonal peaks. The cost per unit, including hiring and training, is $11. The output rate is 10 units 
per worker per period for all workers. A maximum of 10 part-time workers can be used, and the 
same number of part-time workers must be used in all periods that have part-time workers. The 
ending inventory in period 9 should be 10 units. The limit on backlogs is 20 units per period. Try 
to make up backlogs as soon as possible. Compute the total cost for this plan, and compare it to 
the cost of the plan used in the solved problem. Assume 20 full-time workers and regular monthly 
production  regular capacity. 
 12. Refer to Solved Problem 1. Prepare an aggregate plan that uses overtime ($9 per unit, maximum 
output 25 units per period) and inventory variation. Try to minimize backlogs. The ending inven-
tory in period 9 should be zero, and the limit on backlogs is 60 units per period. Compute the total 
cost of your plan, and compare it to the total cost of the plan used in the solved problem. Assume 
20 full-time workers. 
 13. Refer to Example 2. Determine if a plan to use subcontracting at a maximum rate of 50 units per 
period as needed with no overtime would achieve a lower total cost than the plan shown in Exam-
ple 2. Again, plan for a zero inventory balance at the end of period 6. Regular production can be 
less than regular capacity. 
 14. Verify the transportation solution shown in Example 3. 
 15. Refer to Example 3. Suppose that an increase in warehousing costs and other costs brings inven-
tory carrying costs to $2 per unit per month. All other costs and quantities remain the same. Deter-
mine a revised solution to this transportation problem. Solve by modifying Table 11.6. 
 16. Refer to Example 3. Suppose that regular-time capacity will be reduced to 440 units in period 3 to 
accommodate a companywide safety inspection of equipment. What will the additional cost of the 
optimal plan be as compared to the one shown in Example 3? Assume all costs and quantities are 
the same as given in Example 3 except for the regular-time output in period 3. Solve by modifying 
Table 11.6. 
 17. Solve Problem 16 using an inventory carrying cost of $2 per unit per period. 
 18. Dundas Bike Components Inc. of Wheelville, Illinois, manufactures bicycle wheels in two dif-
ferent sizes for the Big Bike Co. assembly plant located across town. David Dundas, the firm’s 
owner-manager, has just received Big Bike’s order for the next six months. 

 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
491
  a.  Under what circumstances will it be possible to develop just one aggregate plan rather than two 
(one for each size wheel)? Explain in two to three sentences without calculations. 
  b.  Currently Dundas employs 28 full-time, highly skilled employees, each of whom can produce 
50 wheels per month. Because skilled labor is in short supply in the Wheelville area, David 
would like to develop one pure level-output plan. There is no inventory of finished wheels on 
hand at present, but David would like to have 300 on hand at the end of April. Big Bike will 
tolerate back orders of up to 200 units per month. Show your level plan in tabular form. The 
amount produced using overtime should be the same except for the last month. 
  c. Calculate the total annual cost of your plan using these costs: 
 
 Nov. 
 Dec. 
 Jan. 
 Feb. 
 Mar. 
 Apr. 
 20-Inch Wheels 
 1,000 units 
 900 
 600 
 700 
 1,100 
 1,100 
 24-Inch Wheels 
 500 units 
 500 
 300 
 500 
 400 
 600 
 Week 
 Customer Orders 
 1 
 52 
 2 
 35 
 3 
 20 
 4 
 12 
 Period 
 Customer Orders 
 1 
 82 
 2 
 80 
 3 
 60 
 4 
 40 
 5 
 20 
 Regular 
 $5.00 
 Hiring 
 $300 
 Overtime 
 $7.50 
 Layoff 
 $400 
 Part-time 
 NA 
 Inventory 
 $1.00 
 Subcontract 
 NA 
 Back order 
 $6.00 
  19. Prepare a master production schedule for industrial pumps in the manner of  Figure 11.11 in the  chapter. 
Use the same inputs as the example, and lot sizes of 70, but change the MPS rule from “schedule pro-
duction when the projected on-hand inventory would be negative without production” to “schedule 
production when the projected on-hand inventory would be less than 10 without production.”  
 20. Update the master schedule shown in  Figure 11.11 given these updated inputs: It is now the end 
of week 1; customer orders are 25 for week 2, 16 for week 3, 11 for week 4, 8 for week 5, and 3 
for week 6. Use the MPS rule of ordering production when projected on-hand inventory would be 
negative without production. Prepare the master schedule for weeks 2–8. 
 21. Prepare a master schedule like that shown in  Figure 11.11 given this information: The forecast for 
each week of an eight-week schedule is 50 units. The MPS rule is to schedule production if the 
projected on-hand inventory would be negative without it. Customer orders (committed) are as 
follows: 
   Use a production lot size of 75 units and no beginning inventory. 
 22. Determine the available-to-promise (ATP) quantities for each period for Problem 21. 
 23. Prepare a schedule like that shown in  Figure 11.12 for the following situation: The forecast is 80 
units for each of the first two periods and 60 units for each of the next three periods. The starting 
inventory is 20 units. The company uses a chase strategy for determining the production lot size, 
except there is an upper limit on the lot size of 70 units. Also, the desired safety stock is 10 units. 
 Note: The ATP quantities are based on maximum allowable production. 
  Note: A negative projected on-hand can occur.
  Committed orders are as follows: 

492 
Chapter Eleven Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling
 The EGAD Bottling Company has decided to introduce a new line of 
premium bottled water that will include several “designer” flavors. 
 Marketing manager Georgianna Mercer is predicting an upturn in 
demand based on the new offerings and the increased public aware-
ness of the health benefits of drinking more water. She has prepared 
aggregate forecasts for the next six months, as shown in the following 
table (quantities are in tankloads): 
 Production manager Mark Mercer (no relation to Georgianna) has devel-
oped the following information. (Costs are in thousands of dollars.) 
Among the strategies being considered are the following:
    1. Level production supplemented by up to 10 tankloads a month from 
overtime. 
   2. A combination of overtime, inventory, and subcontracting. Regular 
production should be the same each month. 
   3. Using overtime for up to 15 tankloads a month, along with inventory 
to handle variations. Regular production should be the same each 
month. 
 Questions 
    1. The objective is to choose the plan that has the lowest cost. Which 
plan would you recommend? 
   2. Presumably, information about the new line has been shared with 
supply chain partners. Explain what information should be shared 
with various partners, and why sharing that information is important.       
 CASE  
 Eight Glasses a Day (EGAD) 
 Month 
 May 
 Jun 
 Jul 
 Aug 
 Sept 
 Oct 
 Total 
 Forecast 
 50 
 60 
 70 
 90 
 80 
 70 
 420 
 Regular production cost 
 $1 per tankload 
 Regular production capacity 
 60 tankloads 
 Overtime production cost 
 $1.6 per tankload 
 Subcontracting cost 
 $1.8 per tankload 
 Holding cost 
 $2 per tankload per month 
 Backordering cost 
 Backlogs are not allowed 
 Beginning inventory 
 0 tankloads 
 Burrows, Robert P., Lora Cecere, and Gregory P. 
Hackett.  The Market-Driven Supply Chain: A 
Revolutionary Model for Sales and Operations 
Planning in the New On-Demand Economy. 
Miama, FL: The Hackett Group, 2012. 
 Jacobs, F. Robert, William L. Berry, D. Clay Whybark, 
and Thomas Vollman.  Manufacturing Planning and 
Control for Supply Chain Management. 6th ed. Burr 
Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2011. 
 Wallace, Thomas F. and Robert A. Stahl.  Sales and 
Operations Planning: The How-to Handbook, 
3rd ed. T. F. Wallace and Company, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

This page intentionally left blank

494
 C H AP T E R 
 12 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 MRP and ERP 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 12.1 Introduction,  495 
 12.2 An Overview of MRP,  495 
 12.3 MRP Inputs,  496 
 The Master Schedule,  496 
 The Bill of Materials,  497 
 The Inventory Records,  500 
 12.4 MRP Processing,  500 
 Updating the System,  505 
 12.5 MRP Outputs,  507 
 12.6 Other Considerations,  508 
 Safety Stock,  508 
 Lot Sizing,  509 
 12.7 MRP in Services,  510 
 12.8 Benefits and Requirements of 
MRP,  510 
 Benefits,  510 
 Requirements,  511 
 12.9 MRP II,  511 
 Closed-Loop MRP,  512 
 12.10 Capacity Requirements Planning,  513 
 Distribution Resource Planning for the 
Supply Chain,  515 
 12.11 ERP,  516 
 ERP in Services,  522 
 12.12 Operations Strategy,  524 
 Cases: Promotional Novelties,  540 
 DMD Enterprises,  541 
 Operations Tour: Stickley 
Furniture,  541 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
  LO12.1 
Describe the conditions under which MRP is most appropriate. 
  LO12.2 
Describe the inputs, outputs, and nature of MRP processing. 
  LO12.3 
Explain how requirements in a master production schedule are 
translated into material requirements for lower-level items. 
  LO12.4 
Discuss the benefits and requirements of MRP. 
  LO12.5 
Describe some of the difficulties users have encountered 
with MRP. 
  LO12.6 
Describe MRP II and its benefits. 
  LO12.7 
Explain how an MRP system is useful in capacity requirements 
planning. 
  LO12.8 
Describe ERP, what it provides, and its hidden costs.   

495
 This chapter describes material requirements planning (MRP) and enterprise resource plan-
ning (ERP). MRP is a planning and scheduling technique used for batch production of assem-
bled items. The first portion of the chapter is devoted to MRP. The remainder of the chapter is 
devoted to ERP, which involves the use of extensive software to integrate record keeping and 
information sharing throughout an organization and portions of its supply chain. 
 12.1 INTRODUCTION  
      A major distinction in the way inventories are managed results from the nature of demand for 
those items. When demand for items is derived from plans to make certain products, as it is 
with raw materials, parts, and assemblies used in producing a finished product, those items 
are said to have   dependent demand   .  The parts and materials that go into the production of 
cars are examples of dependent demand because the total quantity of parts and raw materials 
needed during any time period depends on the number of cars that will be produced. Con-
versely, demand for the  finished  cars is independent—a car is not a component of another item.  
 12.2 AN OVERVIEW OF MRP 
  Material requirements planning (MRP)    is a methodology used for planning the production 
of assembled products such as smart phones, automobiles, kitchen tables, and a whole host 
of other products that are assembled. Some items are produced repetitively while others are 
produced in batches. The process begins with a master schedule. The master schedule desig-
nates the quantity and completion time of an assembled product, often referred to as the end 
item. Materials requirements planning then generates a production plan for the end item that 
indicates the quantities and timing of the subassemblies, component parts, and raw materials 
required for assembly of that end item. This sequence is depicted in  Figure 12-1 . 
LO12.1 Describe the condi-
tions under which MRP is most 
appropriate.
 Dependent demand  Demand 
for items that are subassemblies 
or component parts to be used in 
the production of finished goods. 
 Material requirements 
planning (MRP)  A methodol-
ogy that translates master sched-
ule requirements for end items 
into time-phased requirements 
for subassemblies, components, 
and raw materials.  

496 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 MRP is designed to answer three questions:  What  is needed?  How much  is needed? and 
 When is it needed? 
 The primary inputs of MRP are a bill of materials, which tells the composition of a finished 
product; a master schedule, which tells how much finished product is desired and when; and an 
inventory records file, which tells how much inventory is on hand or on order. The planner pro-
cesses this information to determine the  net requirements for each period of the planning horizon. 
 Outputs from the process include planned-order schedules, order releases, changes, perfor-
mance-control reports, planning reports, and exception reports. These topics are discussed in 
more detail in subsequent sections. (See  Figure 12.2 .) 
 12.3 MRP INPUTS  
 An MRP system has three major sources of information: a master schedule, a bill-of-materials 
file, and an inventory records file (see  Figure 12.2 ). Let’s consider each of these inputs. 
 The Master Schedule 
 The  master schedule , also referred to as the  master production schedule, states which end 
items are to be produced, when they are needed, and in what quantities.  Figure 12.3  illustrates 
a portion of a master schedule that shows planned output for end item X for the planning 
horizon. The schedule indicates that 100 units of X will be needed (e.g., for shipments to cus-
tomers) at the  start  of week 4 and that another 150 units will be needed at the  start  of week 8.  
 Master schedule  One of three 
primary inputs in MRP; states 
which end items are to be pro-
duced, when these are needed, 
and in what quantities. 
 FIGURE 12.1 
 A material requirements plan 
indicates quantity and timing 
details needed to achieve the 
master schedule 
Master Schedule:
Quantity and completion time of an end item
Material Requirements Plan:
Quantities and timing of subassemblies,
components, and raw materials required to
achieve the master schedule.
 FIGURE 12.2 
 MRP Inputs, Processing, 
and Outputs 
LO12.2 Describe the inputs, 
outputs, and nature of MRP 
processing.
Master
schedule
Forecast
Orders
Design
changes
Withdrawals
Receipts
MRP computer
programs
Exception reports
Planning reports
Performance-
control
reports
Changes
Order releases
Planned-order
schedules
Inventory
transaction
MRP outputs
MRP processing
MRP inputs
Primary
reports
Secondary
reports
B
i
l
l
 
o
f 
m
a
t
e
r
i
a
l
s
 
I
n
v
e
n
t
o
r
y
 
r
e
c
o
r
d
s
 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
497
 The quantities in a master schedule come from a number of different sources, including 
customer orders, forecasts, and orders from warehouses to build up seasonal inventories. 
 The master schedule separates the planning horizon into a series of time periods or time 
 buckets,  which are often expressed in weeks. However, the time buckets need not be of equal 
length. In fact, the near-term portion of a master schedule may be in weeks, but later portions 
may be in months or quarters. Usually, plans for those more distant time periods are more 
tentative than near-term requirements. 
 Although a master production schedule has no set time period that it must cover, most 
managers like to plan far enough into the future so they have some general idea of probable 
upcoming demands for the near term. It is important, though, that the master schedule cover 
the  stacked or   cumulative lead time   necessary to produce the end items. This amounts to the 
sum of the lead times that sequential phases of the production or assembly process require, 
as illustrated in  Figure 12.4 , where a total of nine weeks of lead time is needed from ordering 
parts and raw materials until final assembly is completed. Note that lead times include move 
and wait times in addition to setup and run times. 
 The Bill of Materials 
 A   bill of materials (BOM)    contains a listing of all of the assemblies, subassemblies, parts, 
and raw materials that are needed to produce  one  unit of a finished product. Thus, each fin-
ished product has its own bill of materials. 
 The listing in the bill of materials is hierarchical; it shows the quantity of each item 
needed to complete one unit of its parent item. The nature of this aspect of a bill of materi-
als is clear when you consider a    product structure tree    ,  which provides a visual depiction 
of the subassemblies and components needed to assemble a product.  Figure 12.5  shows an 
 assembly diagram  for a chair and a simple product structure tree for the chair. The end item 
(in this case, the chair, the finished product) is shown at the top of the tree. Just beneath it 
are the subassemblies, or major components, that must be put together to make up the end 
item. Beneath each major component are the necessary lesser components. At each stage 
moving down the tree are the components (parts, materials) needed to make one unit of the 
next higher item in the tree.  
 A product structure tree is useful in illustrating how the bill of materials is used to deter-
mine the quantities of each of the ingredients (requirements) needed to obtain a desired num-
ber of end items. Items at the lowest levels of a tree often are raw materials or purchased parts, 
while items at higher levels are typically assemblies or subassemblies. Product-structure trees 
for items at the lowest levels are the concerns of suppliers. 
 Let’s consider the product structure tree shown in  Figure 12.6 . End item X is composed of 
two Bs and one C. Moreover, each B requires three Ds and one E, and each D requires four 
Es. Similarly, each C is made up of two Es and two Fs. These  requirements  are listed by  level, 
 Cumulative lead time  
The sum of the lead times that 
sequential phases of a process 
require, from ordering of parts or 
raw materials to completion of 
final assembly. 
 Bill of materials (BOM)  
One of the three primary inputs 
of MRP; a listing of all of the 
raw materials, parts, subassem-
blies, and assemblies needed to 
produce one unit of a product.  
 Product structure tree  
A visual depiction of the 
 requirements in a bill of materials, 
where all components are listed 
by levels. 
 FIGURE 12.3 
 A master schedule for end item X 
Week number
Item: X 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8
Quantity 
 
 
 
100 
 
 
 
150
 FIGURE 12.4 
 The planning horizon must cover 
the cumulative lead time 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Procurement
Fabrication
Subassembly
Assembly
Time period (weeks)

498 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 Bill of Materials 
 Level  
 Quantity 
 0 
 Chair 
 1 
 1 
  Leg assembly 
 1 
 2 
  Legs 
 2 
 2 
  Cross bar 
 1 
 1 
  Seat 
 1 
 1 
  Back assemby 
 1 
 2 
  Side rails 
 2 
 2 
  Cross bar 
 1 
 2 
  Back supports 
 3 
 FIGURE 12.5 
 Assembly diagram and product 
structure tree for chair assembly 
Chair
Seat
Leg
assembly
Legs (2)
Cross
bar
Back
assembly
Side
rails (2)
Cross
bar
Back
supports (3)
Front legs
Cross
bar
Seat
Back supports
Cross
bar
Side rails
Finished chair
Assembly
diagram
Product structure
tree
 FIGURE 12.6 
 A product structure tree for end 
item X 
X
2
0
1
Level
3
B (2) 
C
D (3) 
E 
E (2) 
F (2)
E (4)
 E X A M P L E  1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Use the information presented in  Figure 12.6 to do the following:
 a. 
Determine the quantities of B, C, D, E, and F needed to assemble one X. 
 b. 
Determine the quantities of these components that will be required to assemble 10 Xs, 
taking into account the quantities on hand (i.e., in inventory) of various components:
 Component 
 On Hand 
 B 
 4 
 C 
 10 
 D 
 8 
 E 
 60 
beginning with 0 for the end item, then 1 for the next level, and so on. The items at each level 
are  components  of the next level up and, as in a family tree, are  parents  of their respective 
components. Note that the quantities of each item in the product structure tree refer only to the 
amounts needed to complete the assembly at the next higher level. 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
499
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
 
X
B: 2  1  2
B(2)
C: 1  1  1
C
D: 3  2  6 D(3)
E: 1  2  2 
E
E: 2  1  2 
E(2)
F: 2  1  2 
F(2)
E: 4  6  24 E(4)
 Thus, one X will require
 B: 
 2 
 C: 
 1 
 D: 
 6 
 E: 
 28 (Note that E occurs in three places, with requirements of 24    2    2    28) 
 F: 
 2 
 b. 
10 X
B(2)
C
D(3) E: 1  16  16 
E
E(2)
F(2)
E(4)
160

 48 
8
40
C: 1  10  10
10
0
B: 2  10 
16
20
4
60
100
E: 
D: 
4  40 
3  16 
(No lower-
level
components
required)
 Thus, given the amounts of on-hand inventory, 10 Xs will require
 B: 
 16 
 C: 
 0 
 D: 
 40 
 E: 
 116 
 F: 
 0 
 Determining total requirements is usually more complicated than Example 1 might sug-
gest. For one thing, many products have considerably more components. For another, the 
issue of  timing is essential (i.e., when must the components be ordered or made) and must 
be included in the analysis. Finally, for a variety of reasons, some of the components/subas-
semblies may be on hand (i.e., currently in inventory). Consequently, in determining total 
requirements, the amounts on hand must be  netted out  (i.e., subtracted from the apparent 
requirements) to determine the true requirements as illustrated in Example 1. 

500 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 When an MRP system calculates requirements, the computer scans a bill of materials 
by level. When a component such as E in  Figure 12.6  appears on more than one level, 
 low-level coding  is used so that all occurrences of that component appear on the lowest 
level at which the component appears. In  Figure 12.6 , conceptually that would be equiva-
lent to lengthening the vertical line for the two appearances of E at level 2 so that all three 
occurrences line up at level 3 in the tree. 
 Comment It is extremely important that the bill of materials accurately reflect the compo-
sition of a product, particularly since errors at one level become magnified by the multi-
plication process used to determine quantity requirements. As obvious as this might seem, 
many companies find themselves with incorrect bill-of-material records. These make it 
impossible to effectively determine material requirements; moreover, the task of correcting 
these records can be complex and time-consuming. Accurate records are a prerequisite for 
effective MRP.  
 The Inventory Records 
 Inventory records  refer to stored information on the status of each item by time period, 
called  time buckets.  This includes quantities on hand quantities ordered. It also includes 
other details for each item, such as supplier, lead time, and lot size policy. Changes due 
to stock receipts and withdrawals, canceled orders, and similar events also are recorded in 
this file. 
 Like the bill of materials, inventory records must be accurate. Erroneous information on 
requirements or lead times can have a detrimental impact on MRP and create turmoil when 
incorrect quantities are on hand or expected delivery times are not met. 
 12.4 MRP PROCESSING 
      MRP processing takes the end item requirements specified by the master schedule and 
“explodes” them into  time-phased  requirements for assemblies, parts, and raw materials using 
the bill of materials offset by lead times. You can see the time-phasing of requirements in the 
assembly time chart in  Figure 12.7 . For example, raw materials D, F, and I must be ordered at 
the start of week 2; part C at the start of week 4; and part H at the start of week 5 in order to 
be available for delivery as planned. 
 MRP processing combines the time phasing and “explosion” into a sequence of spread-
sheet sections, where each section has the following format: 
 Low-level coding  Restructur-
ing the bill of materials so that 
multiple occurrences of a 
component all coincide with 
the lowest level at which the 
component occurs. 
 Inventory records  One of the 
three primary inputs in MRP; 
includes information on the sta-
tus of each item by time period. 
LO12.3 Explain how require-
ments in a master production 
schedule are translated into 
material requirements for 
lower-level items.
 
 VX Corporation’s CAD/CAM 
software can be used not only 
for design specification but 
also to prepare parts lists. 
This screen shows a parts list 
for a bass drum pedal along 
with a three-dimensional view 
of the product subassemblies. 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
501
 The terms in the spreadsheet are defined as follows:
 Gross requirements:  The total expected demand for an item or raw material  during 
each time period without regard to the amount on hand. For end items, these quantities 
are shown in the master schedule; for components, these quantities are derived from the 
planned-order releases of their immediate “parents.” 
 Scheduled receipts:  Open orders (orders that have been placed and are scheduled to arrive 
from vendors or elsewhere in the pipeline by the  beginning  of a period). Note that the end-
ing inventory for a period becomes the beginning inventory for the following period.  
 Projected on hand:  The expected amount of inventory that will be on hand at the  begin-
ning of each time period: scheduled receipts plus available inventory from last period. 
 Net requirements: The actual amount needed in each time period. 
 Planned-order receipts: The quantity expected to be received by the  beginning of 
the period in which it is shown. Under lot-for-lot ordering, this quantity will equal 
net requirements. Under lot-size ordering, this quantity may exceed net requirements. 
 FIGURE 12.7 
 Assembly time chart showing 
material order points needed to 
meet scheduled availability of the 
end item 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Available
for delivery
Week number
Order point
Procurement of
raw material F
Procurement of
raw material D
Procurement of
raw material I
Fabrication
of part E
Procurement
of part C
Procurement
of part H
Final assembly
and inspection
Subassembly B
Subassembly A
Fabrication
of part G
Item:
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Week Number
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Projected on hand Expected 
amount of inventory that will be 
on hand at the beginning of each 
time period.
Gross requirements Total 
expected demand for an item or 
raw material in a time period.
Scheduled receipts Open 
orders scheduled to arrive from 
vendors or elsewhere in the 
pipeline.
Net requirements The actual 
amount needed in each time 
period.

502 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
Any excess is added to available inventory in the  next  time period for simplicity, although 
in reality, it would be available in that period. 
 Planned-order releases: Indicates a  planned amount to order in each time period; equals 
planned-order receipts offset by lead time. This amount generates gross requirements 
at the next level in the assembly or production chain. When an order is executed, it is 
removed from “planned-order releases” and entered under “scheduled receipts.” 
 The quantities that are generated by exploding the bill of materials are  gross requirements; 
they do not take into account any inventory that is currently on hand or due to be received. 
 



Project inventory on-hand for current period
Planned receipts
for previous period
Net requirements for previous period
Scheduled receipts for current period
 
 (12–1) 
The materials that a firm must actually acquire to meet the demand generated by the master 
schedule are the net material requirements.
The determination of the net requirements ( netting ) is the core of MRP processing. One 
accomplishes it by subtracting from gross requirements the sum of inventory on hand and any 
scheduled receipts.
 
Net requirements for current period
Gross requirements for current
period
Projected on-hand inventory for current period


 
 (12–2) 
(Negative results for equations 12-1 or 12-2 should be rounded up to zero.) Projected on-hand 
inventory includes scheduled receipts, which are executed orders for components that are 
scheduled to be completed in-house or received from suppliers. 
 The timing and sizes of orders (i.e., materials ordered from suppliers or work started 
within the firm) are determined by  planned-order releases.  The timing of the receipts of 
these quantities is indicated by  planned-order receipts.  Depending on ordering policy, the 
planned-order releases may be multiples of a specified quantity (e.g., 50 units), or they may 
be equal to the quantity needed at that time. Although there are other possibilities, these 
two seem to be the most widely used. Example 2 illustrates the difference between these 
two ordering policies as well as the general concepts of time-phasing material requirements 
in MRP. 
 Development of a material requirements plan is based on the product structure tree 
diagram. Requirements are determined level by level, beginning with the end item 
(the top of the tree) and working down the tree, because the timing and quantity of each 
“parent” item become the basis for determining the timing and quantities of the “chil-
dren” items directly below it. The children items then become the parent items for the 
next level, and so on.  
 Planned-order 
receipts  Quantity expected to 
be received by the beginning of 
the period in which it is shown. 
 Planned-order 
releases  Planned amount 
to order in each time period; 
planned-order receipts offset by 
lead time. 
A firm that produces wood shutters and bookcases has received two orders for shutters: 
one for 100 shutters and one for 150 shutters. The 100-unit order is due for delivery at the 
start of week 4 of the current schedule, and the 150-unit order is due for delivery at the start 
of week 8. Each shutter consists of two frames and four slatted wood sections. The wood 
sections are made by the firm, and fabrication takes one week. The frames are ordered, and 
lead time is two weeks. Assembly of the shutters requires one week. There is a scheduled 
receipt of 70 wood sections in (i.e., at the beginning of) week 1. Determine the size and tim-
ing of planned-order releases necessary to meet delivery requirements under each of these 
conditions:
 1. 
Lot-for-lot ordering (i.e., planned-order release equal to net requirements). 
 2. 
Lot-size ordering with a lot size of 320 units for frames and 70 units for wood sections. 
 
 E X A M P L E  2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
503
 S O L U T I O N 
 FIGURE 12.8 
 MRP schedule with lot-for-lot ordering 
1
Beg.
Inv.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100
100
100
100
400
150
150
150
150
600
times
2
times
2
times
4
times
4
100
150
200
200
200
200
330
330
330
600
600
600
300
300
300
300
70
70
70
70
Week number
Quantity
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Shutters:
LT = 1 week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Frames:
LT = 2 weeks
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Wood
sections:
LT = 1 week
Master schedule
for shutters:
 a. 
Develop a master schedule:
 Week number 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Quantity 
 
 
 
 100 
 
 
 
 150 
 b. 
Develop a product structure tree:
  
 
Shutter
Frames (2)
Wood
sections (4) 
 c. 
Using the master schedule, determine gross requirements for shutters. Next, compute 
net requirements. Using  lot-for-lot ordering, determine planned-order receipt quantities 
and the planned-order release timing to satisfy the master schedule (see  Figure 12.8 ). 
    The master schedule calls for 100 shutters to be ready for delivery, and no shutters are 
projected to be on hand at the start of week 4, so the net requirements are also 100 shutters. 
Therefore, planned receipts for week 4 equal 100 shutters. Because shutter assembly requires 

504 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
one week, this means a planned-order release at the start of week 3. Using the same logic, 150 
shutters must be assembled during week 7 in order to be available for delivery at the start of 
week 8. 
 The planned-order release of 100 shutters at the start of week 3 means that 200 frames 
(gross requirements) must be available at that time. Because none are expected to be on 
hand, this generates net requirements of 200 frames and necessitates planned receipts of 
200 frames by the start of week 3. With a two-week lead time, this means that the firm 
must order 200 frames at the start of week 1. Similarly, the planned-order release of 150 
shutters at week 7 generates gross and net requirements of 300 frames for week 7 as well as 
planned receipts for that time. The two-week lead time means the firm must order frames 
at the start of week 5. 
 The planned-order release of 100 shutters at the start of week 3 also generates gross require-
ments of 400 wood sections at that time. However, because 70 wood sections are expected to 
be on hand, net requirements are 400    70    330. This means a planned receipt of 330 by the 
 FIGURE 12.9 
 MRP schedule with lot sizes for components 
1
Beg.
Inv.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100
100
100
100
400
150
150
150
150
600
times
2
times
2
times
4
times
4
100
150
200
200
320
320
330
350
350
580
630
630
300
180
320
320
70
70
70
70
120
20
20
20
20
50
120
120
120
140
Week number
Quantity
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Shutters:
LT = 1 week
Lot size =
   lot-for-lot
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Frames:
LT = 2 weeks
Lot size = 
multiples of 
320
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Wood
sections:
LT = 1 week
Lot size = 
multiples of
70
Master schedule
for shutters:

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
505
 MRP provides plans for the end item and each of its subassemblies and components. Con-
ceptually, this amounts to what is depicted in  Figure 12.10 . Practically speaking, however, the 
number of components in even a relatively simple product would make the width of the result-
ing spreadsheet far too wide to handle. Consequently, the plans for the individual components 
are  stacked,  as illustrated in the preceding example. Because of this, it is important to refer to 
the product tree in order to track relationships between components. 
 Example 2 is useful for describing some of the main features of MRP processing, but it 
understates the enormity of the task of keeping track of material requirements, especially in 
situations where the same subassemblies, parts, or raw materials are used in a number of dif-
ferent products. Differences in timing of demands and quantities needed, revisions caused by 
late deliveries, high scrap rates, and canceled orders all have an impact on processing. 
 Consider the two product structure trees shown in  Figure 12.11 . Note that both products 
have D as a component. Suppose we want to develop a material requirements plan for D given 
this additional information: There is a beginning inventory of 110 units of D on hand, and all 
items have lead times of one week. The master schedule calls for 80 units of A in week 4 and 
50 units of C in week 5. The plan is shown in  Figure 12.12 . Note that requirements for B and 
F are not shown because they are not related to (i.e., neither a “parent” nor a “child” of) D. 
 The term   pegging  denotes working this process in reverse, that is, identifying the par-
ent items that have generated a given set of material requirements for some item such as D. 
Although the process may appear simple enough given the product trees and schedules shown 
in this chapter, when multiple products are involved, the process is more complex. Pegging 
enables managers to determine which product(s) will be affected if orders are late due to late 
deliveries, quality problems, or other problems. 
 The importance of the computer becomes evident when you consider that a typical firm 
would have not one but many end items for which it needs to develop material requirements 
plans, each with its own set of components. Inventories on hand and on order, schedules, 
order releases, and so on must all be updated as changes and rescheduling occur. Without the 
aid of a computer, the task would be almost hopeless; with the computer, planners can accom-
plish all of these things with much less difficulty. 
 Updating the System 
 A material requirements plan is not a static document. As time passes, some orders will have 
been completed, other orders will be nearing completion, and new orders will have been 
entered. In addition, there may have been changes to orders, such as changes in quantity, 
delays, missed deliveries of parts or raw materials, and so on. Hence, a material requirements 
plan is a “living” document, one that changes over time. And what we refer to as “Period 1” 
(i.e., the current period) is continually moving ahead; so what is now Period 2 will soon be 
 Pegging  The process of identi-
fying the parent items that have 
generated a given set of material 
requirements for an item. 
start of week 3. Since fabrication time is one week, the fabrication must start (planned-order 
release) at the beginning of week 2. 
 Similarly, the planned-order release of 150 shutters in week 7 generates gross require-
ments of 600 wood sections at that point. Because no on-hand inventory of wood sections is 
projected, net requirements are also 600, and planned-order receipt is 600 units. Again, the 
one-week lead time means 600 sections are scheduled for fabrication at the start of week 6. 
 d. 
Under lot-size ordering, the only difference is the possibility that planned receipts will 
exceed net requirements. The excess is recorded as projected inventory in the following 
period. For example, in  Figure 12.9 , the order size for frames is 320 units. Net require-
ments for week 3 are 200; thus, there is an excess of 320    200    120 units, which 
become projected inventory in the next week. Similarly, net frame requirements of 180 
units are 140 less than the 320 order size; again, the excess becomes projected inventory 
in week 8. The same thing happens with wood sections; an excess of planned receipts 
in weeks 3 and 7 is added to projected inventory in weeks 4 and 8. Note that the order 
size must be in  multiples of the lot size; for week 3 it is 5 times 70, and for week 7 it is 
9 times 70.
  

506 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
Period 1. In a sense, schedules such as these have a  rolling horizon,  which means that plans 
are updated and revised so that they reflect the moving horizon over time. 
 The two basic systems used to update MRP records are  regenerative  and  net change. A 
 regenerative system is updated periodically; a  net-change system is continuously updated. 
 A regenerative system is essentially a batch-type system, which compiles all changes 
(e.g., new orders, receipts) that occur within the time interval (e.g., day) and periodically 
updates the system. Using that information, a revised production plan is developed in the 
same way that the original plan was developed (e.g., exploding the bill of materials, level 
by level). 
 In a net-change system, the production plan is modified to reflect changes as they occur. 
If some defective purchased parts had to be returned to a vendor, the manager can enter this 
information into the system as soon as it becomes known. Only the  changes  are exploded 
through the system, level by level; the entire plan would not be regenerated. 
 The regenerative system is best suited to fairly stable systems, whereas the net-change sys-
tem is best suited to systems that have frequent changes. The obvious disadvantage of a regen-
erative system is the potential amount of lag between the time information becomes available 
and the time it can be incorporated into the material requirements plan. On the other hand, 
processing costs are typically less using regenerative systems; changes that occur in a given 
time period could ultimately cancel each other, thereby avoiding the need to modify and then 
remodify the plan. The disadvantages of the net-change system relate to the costs involved in 
 Regenerative system  
Approach that updates MRP 
records periodically. 
 Net-change system  Approach 
that updates MRP records 
continuously. 
 FIGURE 12.10 
 Net requirements at each level 
determine gross requirements at 
the next 
Week number
Quantity
Master schedule
for shutters:
Item: Shutters
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Item: Frames
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Item: Wood sections
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
1
Beg.
Inv.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 FIGURE 12.11 
 Two different products have D as 
a component 
C
D(2) 
F
A
 B 
D

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
507
continuously updating the system and the constant state of flux in a system caused by many 
small changes. One way around this is to enter minor changes periodically and major changes 
immediately. The primary advantage of the net-change system is that management can have 
up-to-date information for planning and control purposes. 
 12.5 MRP OUTPUTS 
    MRP systems have the ability to provide management with a fairly broad range of outputs. 
These are often classified as  primary reports,  which are the main reports, and  secondary 
reports, which are optional outputs. 
 FIGURE 12.12 
 Material requirements plan for 
component D 
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
80
4
80
80
80
5
6
times
2
A 
LT = 1
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
50
5
50
50
50
6
C 
LT = 1
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv.
1
110
110
2
110
3
80
110
70
4
100
30
70
70
5
6
D 
LT = 1
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
1
2
3
4
5
80
50
6
Week number
Quantity of A
Quantity of C
Master schedule

508 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 Primary Reports.  Production and inventory planning and control are part of primary 
reports. These reports normally include the following:
 1. 
 Planned orders , a schedule indicating the amount and timing of future orders. 
 2. 
 Order releases , authorizing the execution of planned orders. 
 3. 
 Changes to planned orders, including revisions of due dates or order quantities and can-
cellations of orders. 
 Secondary Reports.  Performance control, planning, and exceptions belong to secondary 
reports. 
 1. 
 Performance-control reports evaluate system operation. They aid managers by mea-
suring deviations from plans, including missed deliveries and stockouts, and by provid-
ing information that can be used to assess cost performance. 
 2. 
 Planning reports  are useful in forecasting future inventory requirements. They include pur-
chase commitments and other data that can be used to assess future material requirements. 
 3. 
 Exception reports call attention to major discrepancies such as late and overdue orders, 
excessive scrap rates, reporting errors, and requirements for nonexistent parts. 
 The wide range of outputs generally permits users to tailor MRP to their particular needs. 
 12.6 OTHER CONSIDERATIONS  
 Aside from the main details of inputs, outputs, and processing, managers must be knowledge-
able about a number of other aspects of MRP. These include the holding of safety stock, lot-
sizing choices, and the possible use of MRP for unfinished products. 
 Safety Stock 
 Theoretically, inventory systems with dependent demand should not require safety stock below 
the end item level. This is one of the main advantages of an MRP approach. Supposedly, safety 
stock is not needed because the manager can project precise usage quantities once the master 
schedule has been established because demand is not variable. Practically, however, there may be 
exceptions. For example, a bottleneck process or one with varying scrap rates can cause shortages 
in downstream operations. Furthermore, shortages may occur if orders are late or fabrication or 
assembly times are longer than expected. On the surface, these conditions lend themselves to the 
use of safety stock to maintain smooth operations; but the problem becomes more complicated 
when dealing with multiechelon items (i.e., multiple-level arenas such as assembled products) 
because a shortage of  any  component will prevent manufacture of the final assembly. However, a 
major advantage of MRP is lost by holding safety stock for all lower-level items. 
 MRP systems deal with these problems in several ways. The manager’s first step is to 
identify activities or operations that are subject to variability and to determine the extent of 
that variability. When lead times are variable, the concept of safety  time  instead of safety  stock 
is often used. This results in scheduling orders for arrival or completion sufficiently ahead of 
the time they are needed in order to eliminate or substantially reduce the element of chance 
in waiting for those items. When quantities tend to vary, some safety stock may be called for, 
but the manager must carefully weigh the need and cost of carrying extra stock. Frequently, 
managers elect to carry safety stock for end items, which are subject to random demand, and 
for selected lower-level operations when safety time is not feasible. 
 It is important in general to make sure that lead times are accurate, particularly when the 
objective is to have incoming shipments of parts and materials arrive shortly before they are 
needed. Early arrivals increase on-hand inventory and carrying costs, but late arrivals can 
raise havoc, possibly delaying all following operations. Knowing this, managers may inflate 
lead times (i.e., use safety time) and cause early arrivals, defeating the objective of matching 
the arrival of orders with production schedules. 
 Planned orders  Schedule indi-
cating the amount and timing of 
future orders.  
 Order releases  Authorization 
for the execution of planned 
orders. 
 Changes  Revisions of due dates 
or order quantities, or cancella-
tions of orders.  
 Performance-control 
reports  Evaluation of system 
operation, including deviations 
from plans and cost information.  
 Planning reports  Data use-
ful for assessing future material 
requirements. 
 Exception reports  Data 
on any major discrepancies 
encountered.  

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
509
 If safety stock is needed, planned-order release amounts can be increased by the safety 
stock quantities for the designated components. 
 Lot Sizing 
 Determining a lot size to order or to produce is an important issue in inventory management 
for both independent- and dependent-demand items. This is called    lot sizing    .  For independent-
demand items, managers often use economic order sizes and economic production quantities. 
For dependent-demand systems, however, a much wider variety of plans is used to determine 
lot sizes, mainly because no single plan has a clear advantage over the others. Some of the 
most popular plans for lot sizing are described in this section. 
 A primary goal of inventory management for both independent- and dependent-demand 
systems is to minimize the sum of ordering cost (or setup cost) and holding cost. With 
independent demand, that demand is frequently distributed uniformly throughout the 
planning horizon (e.g., six months, year). In some cases, demand tends to be lumpy and 
the planning horizon shorter (e.g., three months), so that economic lot sizes are usually 
much more difficult to identify. Consider the situation depicted in  Figure 12.13 . Period 
demands vary from 1 to 80 units, and no demand size repeats over the horizon shown.  
 Managers can realize economies by grouping orders. This would be the case if the addi-
tional cost incurred by holding the extra units until they were used led to a savings in setup 
or ordering cost. This determination can be very complex at times, for several reasons. First, 
combining period demands into a single order, particularly for middle-level or end items, has 
a cascading effect down through the product tree: To achieve this grouping, it becomes nec-
essary to also group items at lower levels in the tree and incorporate their setup and holding 
costs into the decision. Second, the uneven period demand and the relatively short planning 
horizon require a continual recalculation and updating of lot sizes. Not surprisingly, the meth-
ods used to handle lot sizing range from the complex, which attempt to include all relevant 
costs, to the very simple, which are easy to use and understand. In certain cases, the simple 
models seem to approach cost minimization although generalizations are difficult. Let’s con-
sider some of these models. 
 Lot-for-Lot Ordering.  Perhaps the simplest of all the methods is lot-for-lot ordering. 
The order or run size for each period is set equal to demand for that period. Example 2 
demonstrated this method. Not only is the order size obvious, it also virtually eliminates 
holding costs for parts carried over to other periods. Hence, lot-for-lot ordering minimizes 
investment in inventory. Its two chief drawbacks are that it usually involves many different 
order sizes and thus cannot take advantage of the economies of fixed order size (e.g., stan-
dard containers and other standardized procedures), and it requires a new setup for each 
production run. If setup costs can be significantly reduced, this method may approximate a 
minimum-cost lot size.  
 Economic Order Quantity Model.  Sometimes economic order quantity (EOQ) models 
are used. They can lead to minimum costs if usage is fairly uniform. This is sometimes the 
case for lower-level items that are common to different parents and for raw materials. How-
ever, the more lumpy demand is, the less appropriate such an approach is, because the mis-
match in supply and demand results in leftover inventories. 
 Fixed-Period Ordering.  This type of ordering provides coverage for some predetermined 
number of periods (e.g., two or three). In some instances, the span is simply arbitrary; in 
 FIGURE 12.13 
 Demand for part K 
Period
1
2
3
4
5
Demand
70
50
1
80
4
Cumulative 
demand
70
120
121
201
205

510 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
other cases, a review of historical demand patterns may lead to a more rational designation of 
a fixed period length. A simple rule is: Order to cover a two-period interval. The rule can be 
modified when common sense suggests a better way. For example, take a look at the demands 
shown in  Figure 12.13 . Using a two-period rule, an order size of 120 units would cover the 
first two periods. The next two periods would be covered by an order size of 81 units. How-
ever, the demands in periods 3 and 5 are so small, it would make sense to combine them both 
with the 80 units and order 85 units. 
 Other Models.  There are other models, such as the part-period model and the Wagner-
Whitin model, that are used for lot sizing which are beyond the scope of this book. 
 12.7 MRP IN SERVICES 
 MRP has applications in services as well as in manufacturing. These applications may involve 
material goods that form a part of the product–service package, or they may involve mainly 
service components. 
 An example of a product–service package is a food catering service, particularly in 
instances that require preparing and serving meals for large numbers of people. To estimate 
quantities and costs of an order, the food manager would have to determine the quantities of 
the ingredients for each recipe on the menu (i.e., a bill of materials), which would then be 
combined with the number of each meal to be prepared to obtain a material requirements plan 
for the event. 
 Similar examples occur for large-scale renovations, such as a sports stadium or a major 
hotel, where there are multiple repetitions of activities and related materials that must be 
“exploded” into their components for purposes of cost estimation and scheduling. 
 12.8 BENEFITS AND REQUIREMENTS OF MRP 
 Benefits 
 MRP enables managers to easily determine the quantities of every component for a given 
order size, to know when to release orders for each component, and to be alerted when items 
need attention. Still other benefits include the following:
 1. 
Low levels of in-process inventories, due to an exact matching of supply to demand. 
 2. 
The ability to keep track of material requirements. 
 3. 
The ability to evaluate capacity requirements generated by a given master schedule. 
 4. 
A means of allocating production time. 
 5. 
The ability to easily determine inventory usage by  backflushing. 
 Backflushing  is a procedure in which an end item’s bill of materials (BOM) is periodi-
cally exploded to determine the quantities of the various components that were used to 
make the item, eliminating the need to collect detailed usage information on the produc-
tion floor. 
 A range of people in a typical manufacturing company are important users of the infor-
mation provided by an MRP system. Production planners are obvious users of MRP. Pro-
duction managers, who must balance workloads across departments and make decisions 
about scheduling work, and plant foremen, who are responsible for issuing work orders and 
maintaining production schedules, also rely heavily on MRP output. Other users include 
customer service representatives, who must be able to supply customers with projected 
delivery dates; purchasing managers; and inventory managers. The benefits of MRP depend 
in large measure on the use of a computer to maintain up-to-date information on material 
requirements.  
LO12.4 Discuss the benefits 
and requirements of MRP.
 Backflushing  Exploding an 
end item’s BOM to determine 
the quantities of the components 
that were used to make the item. 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
511
 Requirements 
 In order to implement and operate an effective MRP system, it is necessary to have
 1. 
A computer and the necessary software programs to handle computations and maintain 
records. 
 2. 
Accurate and up-to-date
 a. 
Master schedules. 
 b. 
Bills of materials. 
 c. 
Inventory records. 
 3. 
Integrity of file data. 
 Accuracy is absolutely essential for a successful MRP system. Inaccuracies in inventory 
record files or bill-of-material files can lead to unpleasant surprises, ranging from missing 
parts to ordering too many of some items and too few of others, and failure to stay on sched-
ule, all of which contribute to inefficient use of resources, missed delivery dates, and poor 
customer service. Companies also need to exert scheduling discipline and have in place stan-
dard procedures for maintaining and updating bills of material. 
 Other common problems associated with using MRP include those due to the assumption 
of constant lead times, products being produced differently from the bill of materials, and 
failure to alter a bill of materials when customizing a product. 
 Similarly, inaccurate forecasts can have serious consequences for producers of assembled 
items. If forecasts are overly optimistic, companies will experience relatively high holding costs, 
considering the excess inventory represented by the components and raw materials. Conversely, 
forecasts that are too low will result in shortages of component parts and will require long lead 
times to acquire the needed components and assemble the products to alleviate the shortages.  
 12.9 MRP II 
    MRP was developed as a way for manufacturing companies to calculate more precisely what 
materials were needed to produce a product, and when and how much of those materials were 
needed.    Manufacturing resources planning (MRP II)    evolved from MRP because manu-
facturers recognized additional needs. MRP II expanded the scope of materials planning to 
include capacity requirements planning, and to involve other functional areas of the organiza-
tion such as marketing and finance in the planning process. 
 Material requirements planning is at the heart of the process (see  Figure 12.14 ). The process 
begins with an aggregation of demand from all sources (e.g., firm orders, forecasts, safety stock 
requirements). Production, marketing, and finance personnel work toward developing a master 
production schedule. Although manufacturing people will have a major input in determining that 
schedule and a major responsibility for making it work, marketing and finance will also have 
important inputs and responsibilities. The rationale for having these functional areas work together 
is the increased likelihood of developing a plan that works and with which everyone can live. 
Moreover, because each of these functional areas has been involved in formulating the plan, they 
will have reasonably good knowledge of the plan and more reason to work toward achieving it.  
 In addition to the obvious manufacturing resources needed to support the plan, financing 
resources will be needed and must be planned for, both in amount and timing. Similarly, mar-
keting resources also will be needed in varying degrees throughout the process. In order for 
the plan to work, the firm must have all of the necessary resources available as needed. Often, 
an initial plan must be revised based on an assessment of the availability of various resources. 
Once these have been decided, the master production schedule can be firmed up. 
 At this point, material requirements planning comes into play, generating material and 
schedule requirements. Next, management must make more detailed capacity requirements 
planning to determine whether these more specific capacity requirements can be met. Again, 
some adjustments in the master production schedule may be required. 
LO12.5 Describe some of the 
difficulties users have encoun-
tered with MRP.
 Manufacturing resources 
planning (MRP II)  Expanded 
approach to production resource 
planning, involving other areas 
of a firm in the planning process 
and enabling capacity require-
ments planning. 
LO12.6 Describe MRP II and 
its benefits.

512 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 As the schedule unfolds and actual work begins, a variety of reports help managers to 
monitor the process and to make any necessary adjustments to keep operations on track. 
 In effect, this is a continuing process, where the master production schedule is updated and 
revised as necessary to achieve corporate goals. The business plan that governs the entire pro-
cess usually undergoes changes too, although these tend to be less frequent than the changes 
made at lower levels (i.e., the master production schedule). 
 Most MRP II systems have the capability of performing simulation, enabling managers 
to answer a variety of what-if questions so they can gain a better appreciation of available 
options and their consequences. 
 Closed-Loop MRP 
 When MRP was introduced, it did not have the capability to assess the feasibility of a pro-
posed plan (i.e., if sufficient capacity existed at every level to achieve the plan). Thus, there 
was no way of knowing before executing a proposed plan if it could be achieved, or after 
executing the plan if it had been achieved. Consequently, a new plan had to be developed 
each week. When MRP II systems began to include feedback loops, they were referred to 
as closed-loop MRP. Closed-loop MRP systems evaluate a proposed material plan relative 
to available capacity. If a proposed plan is not feasible, it must be revised. The evaluation is 
referred to as capacity requirements planning. 
 FIGURE 12.14 
 An overview of MRP II 
No
Aggregate
planning
Market
demand
Master
production
schedule
No
No
Yes
Adjust
production plan
Yes
Yes
Adjust
MRP
Problems?
Manufacturing
Marketing
Finance
MRP
Problems?
Capacity
requirements 
planning
Problems?
Final material 
requirement plans 
and capacity 
requirement plans

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
513
 12.10  CAPACITY REQUIREMENTS 
PLANNING 
    One of the most important features of MRP II is its ability to aid managers in capacity planning. 
 Capacity requirements planning  is the process of determining short-range capacity 
requirements. The necessary inputs include planned-order releases for MRP, the current 
shop load, routing information, and job times. Key outputs include load reports for each 
work center. When variances (underloads or overloads) are projected, managers might 
consider remedies such as alternative routings, changing or eliminating of lot sizing or 
safety stock requirements, and lot splitting. Moving production forward or backward 
can be extremely challenging because of precedence requirements and the availability of 
components. 
 A firm usually generates a master schedule initially in terms of what is needed but 
not what is possible. The initial schedule may or may not be feasible given the limits of 
the production system and availability of materials when end items are translated into 
requirements for procurement, fabrication, and assembly. Consequently, it is often nec-
essary to run a proposed master schedule through MRP processing in order to obtain a 
clearer picture of actual requirements, which can then be compared to available capacity 
and materials. If it turns out that the current master schedule is not feasible, management 
may make a decision to increase capacity (e.g., through overtime or subcontracting) or 
to revise the master schedule. In the latter case, this may entail several revisions, each of 
which is run through the system until a feasible plan is obtained. At that point, the master 
schedule is  frozen, at least for the near term, thus establishing a firm schedule from which 
to plan requirements. 
 Stability in short-term production plans is very important; without it, changes in order 
quantity and/or timing can render material requirements plans almost useless. The term  sys-
tem nervousness  describes the way a system might react to changes. The reaction can some-
times be greater than the original change. For example, a small change near the top of a 
product tree can reverberate throughout much of the lower parts of the tree, causing major 
changes to order quantities and production schedules of many components. That, in turn, 
might cause queues to form at various portions of the system, leading to late orders, increased 
work in process, and added carrying costs. 
 To minimize such problems, many firms establish a series of time intervals, called   time 
fences  ,  during which changes can be made to orders. For example, a firm might specify 
time fences of 4, 8, and 12 weeks, with the nearest fence being the most restrictive and the 
farthest fence being the least restrictive. Beyond 12 weeks, changes are expected; from 
8 to 12 weeks, substitutions of one end item for another may be permitted as long as the 
components are available and the production plan is not compromised; from 4 to 8 weeks, 
the plan is fixed, but small changes may be allowed; and the plan is frozen out to the four-
week fence. 
 Some companies use two fences: One is a near-term  demand  fence, and the other is a 
long-term  planning  fence. For example, the demand fence might be 4 weeks from the pres-
ent time while the planning fence might be 10 weeks away. In the near term, customer orders 
receive precedence over the forecast. The time beyond the planning fence is available for 
inserting new orders into the master schedule. Between the demand fence and the planning 
fence, management must make trade-offs when changes are introduced unless excess capacity 
is expected to be available. 
 In establishing time fences, a manager must weigh the benefits of stability in the produc-
tion plan against the possible negative impact on the competitive advantage of being able to 
quickly respond to new orders. 
 Figure 12.15 presents an overview of the capacity planning process. The process begins 
with a proposed or tentative master production schedule that must be tested for feasibility 
and possibly adjusted before it becomes permanent. The proposed schedule is processed 
LO12.7 Explain how an MRP 
system is useful in capacity 
requirements planning.
 Capacity requirements 
planning  The process of deter-
mining short-range capacity 
requirements.  
 Time fences  Series of 
time intervals during which 
order changes are allowed or 
restricted; the nearest fence is 
most restrictive to change, the 
farthest is least restrictive. 

514 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
using MRP to ascertain the material requirements the schedule would generate. These are 
then translated into resource (i.e., capacity) requirements, often in the form of a series of 
 load reports  for each department or work center, which compares known and expected 
future capacity requirements with projected capacity availability.  Figure 12.16  illustrates 
the nature of a load report. It shows expected resource requirements (i.e., usage) for jobs 
currently being worked on, planned orders, and expected orders for the planning horizon. 
Given this sort of information, the manager can more easily determine whether capacity 
is sufficient to satisfy these requirements. If there is enough capacity, he or she can freeze 
the portion of the master production schedule that generates these requirements. In the load 
 Load reports  Department or 
work center reports that com-
pare known and expected future 
capacity requirements with pro-
jected capacity availability. 
 FIGURE 12.15 
 Using MRP to assist in planning 
capacity requirements 
 Source: Stephen Love,  Inventory Control 
(New York: McGraw-Hill). Reprinted by 
permission. 
No
Yes
Is shop
capacity
adequate?
Develop a tentative
master production
schedule
Firm up a portion
of the MPS
Use MRP to
simulate material
requirements
Convert material
requirements to
resource requirements
(load report)
Can
capacity be
changed to meet
requirements?
Revise tentative
master production
schedule
Change
capacity
Yes
No
 FIGURE 12.16 
 A hypothetical department load 
profile 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Time period
Load (hours per period)
Capacity
Now in
production
Planned-
order
releases
Expected
orders
0

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
515
profile illustrated in   Figure 12.16 , planned-order releases in time period 4 will cause an 
overload. However, it appears possible to accommodate demand by slightly shifting some 
orders to adjacent periods. Similarly, an overload appears likely in period 11, but that too 
can be handled by shifting some jobs to adjacent time periods. In cases where capacity is 
insufficient, a manager may be able to increase capacity (by scheduling overtime, transfer-
ring personnel from other areas, or subcontracting some of the work) if this is possible and 
economical, or else revise the master production schedule and repeat the process until an 
acceptable production schedule is obtained.  
 If the master production schedule must be revised, this generally means that the man-
ager must assign priorities to orders, if some orders will be finished later than originally 
planned. 
 One note of caution is in order concerning capacity load reports. Often, the load reports 
are only approximations, and they may not give a true picture because the loading does 
not take into account scheduling and queuing delays. Consequently, it is possible to expe-
rience system backups even though a load report implies sufficient capacity to handle 
projected loads. 
 An important aspect of capacity requirements planning is the conversion of quantity 
requirements into labor and machine requirements. One accomplishes this by multiplying 
each period’s quantity requirements by standard labor and/or machine requirements per unit. 
For instance, if 100 units of product A are scheduled in the fabrication department, and each 
unit has a labor standard time of 2 hours and a machine standard time of 1.5 hours, then 100 
units of A convert into these capacity requirements:
 
Labor:
100 units
2 hours/unit
200 labor hours
Machine:
100 units
1.5 hours/unit
150 machine hours




 One can then compare these capacity requirements with available department capacity to 
determine the extent to which this product utilizes capacity. For example, if the department 
has 200 labor hours and 200 machine hours available, labor utilization will be 100 percent 
because all of the labor capacity will be required by this product. However, machine capacity 
will be underutilized.
 
Required
Available
100
150 hours
200 hours
100
75 percent




 
Underutilization may mean that unused capacity can be used for other jobs; overutilization 
indicates that available capacity is insufficient to handle requirements. To compensate, pro-
duction may have to be rescheduled or overtime may be needed. 
 Distribution Resource Planning 
for the Supply Chain 
  Distribution resource planning (DRP)    ,  also referred to as  distribution requirements plan-
ning,  is a method used for planning orders in a supply chain. It extends MRP concepts, 
enabling a planner to compute time-phased inventory requirements for a supply chain. The 
goal is to achieve a balance of supply and demand throughout the supply chain. 
 It begins with a forecast of demand plus actual orders for future periods at the distribution 
end (e.g., retail) of a supply chain. Other information needed includes the quantity and tim-
ing of scheduled receipts at various points in the supply chain as well as on-hand inventories, 
and any safety stock requirements. Some versions of DRP also include projections for labor, 
material handling facilities, and storage space that will be needed. 
 In a procedure similar to MRP, the planned-order release quantities at each level in the 
supply chain become the gross requirements one level back, as illustrated in   Figure 12.17 . 
In effect, the process pulls inventory shipment through the supply chain based on demand.  
 Distribution resource plan-
ning (DRP)  A method used 
for planning orders in a supply 
chain. 

516 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 12.11 ERP 
  Business organizations are complex systems in which various functions such as purchasing, 
production, distribution, sales, human resources, finance, and accounting must work together 
to achieve the goals of the organization. However, in the functional structure used by many 
business organizations, information flows freely within each function, but not so between 
functions. That makes information sharing among functional areas burdensome. 
  Enterprise resource planning (ERP)    is a computerized system designed to con-
nect all parts of a business organization as well as key portions of its supply chain to 
a single database for the purpose of information sharing. Some of the key connections 
are depicted in  Figure 12.18 . SAP and PeopleSoft are major vendors, although there are 
many others.  
 ERP software provides a system to capture and make data available in real time to deci-
sion makers and other users throughout an organization. It also provides a set of tools for 
planning and monitoring various business processes to achieve the goals of the organiza-
tion. ERP systems are composed of a collection of integrated modules. There are many 
modules to choose from, and different software vendors offer different but similar lists of 
modules. Some are industry specific, and others are general purpose. The modules relate to 
the functional areas of business organizations. For example, there are modules for account-
ing and finance, HR, product planning, purchasing, inventory management, distribution, 
order tracking, finance, accounting, and marketing. Organizations can select the modules 
that best serve their needs and budgets.  Table 12.1  provides an overview of some widely 
used modules.  
 An important feature of the modules is that data entered in one module is automatically 
routed to other modules, so all data is immediately updated and available to all functional 
areas. 
 It should be noted that implementations are costly and time consuming, often lasting many 
years, and require extensive employee training throughout the organization. 
 The following reading provides additional insight into ERP. 
LO12.8 Describe ERP, what it 
provides, and its hidden costs.
 Enterprise resource planning 
(ERP)  Integration of financial, 
manufacturing, and human 
resources in a single database.  
 FIGURE 12.17 
 Supply chain order planning 
Shipments
Supplier
Supplier
Factory
Retail
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
517
 FIGURE 12.18 
 Key Connections to the ERP 
System 
Inventory
Purchasing
Supply Chain
Management
Production
or
Service
Sales and
Marketing
Financials
ERP
Human
Resource
Management
Customer
Relationship
Management
 Module 
 Brief Description 
 Accounting/Finance 
 A central component of most ERP systems. It provides a range of 
financial reports, including general ledger, accounts payable, 
accounts receivable, payroll, income statements, and balance sheets. 
 Marketing 
 Supports lead generation, target marketing, direct mail, and sales. 
 Human Resources 
 Maintains a complete database of employee information such as date 
of hire, salary, contact information, performance evaluations, and 
other pertinent information. 
 Purchasing 
 Facilitates vendor selection, price negotiation, making purchasing 
decisions, and bill payment. 
 Production Planning 
 Integrates information on forecasts, orders, production capacity, 
on-hand inventory quantities, bills of material, work in process, 
schedules, and production lead times. 
 Inventory Management 
 Identifies inventory requirements, inventory availability, replenishment 
rules, and inventory tracking. 
 Distribution 
 Contains information on third-party shippers, shipping and delivery 
schedules, delivery tracking. 
 Sales 
 Information on orders, invoices, order tracking, and shipping. 
 Supply Chain Management 
 Facilitates supplier and customer management, supply chain visibility, 
and event management. 
 Customer Relationship Management  Contact information, buying behavior, shipping preferences, contracts, 
payment terms, and credit history. 
 TABLE 12.1 
 An overview of some ERP 
software modules 

 READING 
 The ABCs of ERP 
518 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
shipping it and billing for it. With ERP, when 
a customer service representative takes an 
order from a customer, he or she has all the 
information necessary to complete the order (the customer’s credit rat-
ing and order history, the company’s inventory levels and the shipping 
dock’s trucking schedule). Everyone else in the company sees the same 
computer screen and has access to the single database that holds the 
customer’s new order. When one department finishes with the order it is 
automatically routed via the ERP system to the next department. To find 
out where the order is at any point, one need only log into the ERP system 
and track it down. With luck, the order process moves like a bolt of light-
ning through the organization, and customers get their orders faster and 
with fewer mistakes than before. ERP can apply that same magic to the 
other major business processes, such as employee benefits or financial 
reporting. 
 That, at least, is the dream of ERP. The reality is much harsher. 
 Let’s go back to those inboxes for a minute. That process may 
not have been efficient, but it was simple. Finance did its job, the 
warehouse did its job, and if anything went wrong outside of the 
department’s walls, it was somebody else’s problem. Not anymore. 
With ERP, the customer service representatives are no longer just typ-
ists entering someone’s name into a computer and hitting the return 
key. The ERP screen makes them business people. It flickers with the 
customer’s credit rating from the finance department and the product 
inventory levels from the warehouse. Will the customer pay on time? 
Will we be able to ship the order on time? These are decisions that 
customer service representatives have never had to make before and 
which affect the customer and every other department in the com-
pany. But it’s not just the customer service representatives who have 
to wake up. People in the warehouse who used to keep inventory in 
their heads or on scraps of paper now need to put that information 
online. If they don’t, customer service will see low inventory levels 
on their screens and tell customers that their requested item is not 
in stock. Accountability, responsibility and communication have never 
been tested like this before.  
 How Long Will an ERP Project Take? 
 Companies that install ERP do not have an easy time of it. Don’t be 
fooled when ERP vendors tell you about a three or six month average 
implementation time. Those short (that’s right, six months is short) 
implementations all have a catch of one kind or another: the company 
was small, or the implementation was limited to a small area of the 
company, or the company only used the financial pieces of the ERP 
system (in which case the ERP system is nothing more than a very 
expensive accounting system). To do ERP right, the ways you do busi-
ness will need to change and the ways people do their jobs will need 
to change too. And that kind of change doesn’t come without pain. 
Unless, of course, your ways of doing business are working extremely 
well (orders all shipped on time, productivity higher than all your com-
petitors, customers completely satisfied), in which case there is no 
reason to even consider ERP. 
Compiled from Reports by  Christopher  Koch ,  Derek  Slater , 
and  E.  Baatz 
 What is ERP? 
 How can ERP improve a company’s business performance? 
 How long will an ERP project take? 
 What will ERP fix in my business? 
 Will ERP fit the way I do business? 
 What does ERP  really cost? 
 When will I get payback from ERP—and how much will it be? 
 The hidden costs of ERP? 
 How do you configure ERP software? 
 How do companies organize their ERP projects? 
 How does ERP fit with electronic commerce? 
 What Is ERP? 
 Enterprise resource planning software, or ERP, doesn’t live up to its 
acronym. Forget about planning—it doesn’t do that—and forget about 
resource, a throwaway term. But remember the enterprise part. This is 
ERP’s true ambition. It attempts to integrate all departments and func-
tions across a company onto a single computer system that can serve 
all those different departments’ particular needs. 
 That is a tall order, building a single software program that serves 
the needs of people in finance as well as it does the people in human 
resources and in the warehouse. Each of those departments typically 
has its own computer system, each optimized for the particular ways 
that the department does its work. But ERP combines them all together 
into a single, integrated software program that runs off a single data-
base so that the various departments can more easily share information 
and communicate with each other. 
 That integrated approach can have a tremendous payback if com-
panies install the software correctly. Take a customer order, for example. 
Typically, when a customer places an order, that order begins a mostly 
paper-based journey from in-basket to in-basket around the company, 
often being keyed and rekeyed into different departments’ computer sys-
tems along the way. All that lounging around in in-baskets causes delays 
and lost orders, and all the keying into different computer systems invites 
errors. Meanwhile, no one in the company truly knows what the status 
of the order is at any given point because there is no way for the finance 
department, for example, to get into the warehouse’s computer system 
to see whether the item has been shipped. “You’ll have to call the ware-
house,” is the familiar refrain heard by frustrated customers.  
 How Can ERP Improve a Company’s 
Business Performance? 
 ERP automates the tasks involved in performing a business process—
such as order fulfillment, which involves taking an order from a customer, 
(continued )

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
519
difficult, because the customizations will need to be torn apart and 
rewritten to fit with the new version. 
 Needless to say, the move to ERP is a project of breathtaking scope, 
and the price tags on the front end are enough to make the most placid 
CFO a little twitchy. In addition to budgeting for software costs, finan-
cial executives should plan to write checks to cover consulting, process 
rework, integration testing and a long laundry list of other expenses 
before the benefits of ERP start to manifest themselves. Underestimat-
ing the price of teaching users their new job processes can lead to a 
rude shock down the line. So can failure to consider data warehouse 
integration requirements and the cost of extra software to duplicate the 
old report formats. A few oversights in the budgeting and planning stage 
can send ERP costs spiraling out of control faster than oversights in 
planning almost any other information system undertaking. 
 What Does ERP  Really Cost? 
 Meta Group recently did a study looking at the Total Cost of Owner-
ship (TCO) of ERP, including hardware, software, professional services, 
and internal staff costs. The TCO numbers include getting the software 
installed and the two years afterward, which is when the real costs of 
maintaining, upgrading and optimizing the system for your business are 
felt. Among the 63 companies surveyed—including small, medium and 
large companies in a range of industries—the average TCO was $15 
million (the highest was $300 million and lowest was $400,000). While 
it’s hard to draw a solid number from that kind of a range of companies 
and ERP efforts, Meta came up with one statistic that proves that ERP 
is expensive no matter what kind of company is using it. The TCO for a 
“heads-down” user over that period was a staggering $53,320. 
 When Will I Get Payback from ERP—and 
How Much Will It Be? 
 Don’t expect to revolutionize your business with ERP. It is a navel gazing 
exercise that focuses on optimizing the way things are done internally 
rather than with customers, suppliers or partners. Yet the navel gazing 
has a pretty good payback if you’re willing to wait for it—a Meta Group 
study of 63 companies found that it took eight months after the new 
system was in (31 months total) to see any benefits. But the median 
annual savings from the new ERP system was $1.6 million per year. 
 The Hidden Costs of ERP 
 Although different companies will find different land mines in the bud-
geting process, those who have implemented ERP packages agree that 
certain costs are more commonly overlooked or underestimated than 
others. Armed with insights from across the business, ERP pros vote the 
following areas as most likely to result in budget overrun. 
 1.  Training.  Training is the near-unanimous choice of experienced ERP 
implementers as the most elusive budget item. It’s not so much that 
this cost is completely overlooked as it is consistently underesti-
mated. Training expenses are high because workers almost invari-
ably have to learn a new set of processes, not just a new software 
interface. 
 The important thing is not to focus on how long it will take—real 
transformational ERP efforts usually run between one to three years, on 
average—but rather to understand why you need it and how you will 
use it to improve your business. 
 What Will ERP Fix in My Business? 
 There are three major reasons why companies undertake ERP:
 To integrate financial data —As the CEO tries to understand the 
company’s overall performance, he or she may find many different 
versions of the truth. Finance has its own set of revenue numbers, 
sales has another version, and the different business units may each 
have their own versions of how much they contributed to revenues. 
ERP creates a single version of the truth that cannot be questioned 
because everyone is using the same system. 
 To standardize manufacturing processes —Manufacturing com-
panies—especially those with an appetite for mergers and acquisi-
tions—often find that multiple business units across the company 
make the same widget using different methods and computer sys-
tems. Standardizing those processes and using a single, integrated 
computer system can save time, increase productivity and reduce 
headcount. 
 To standardize HR information —Especially in companies with 
multiple business units, HR may not have a unified, simple method 
for tracking employee time and communicating with them about 
benefits and services. ERP can fix that. 
 In the race to fix these problems, companies often lose sight of the 
fact that ERP packages are nothing more than generic representations 
of the ways a typical company does business. While most packages are 
exhaustively comprehensive, each industry has its quirks that make it 
unique. Most ERP systems were designed to be used by discreet manu-
facturing companies (who make physical things that can be counted), 
which immediately left all the process manufacturers (oil, chemical and 
utility companies that measure their products by flow rather than indi-
vidual units) out in the cold. Each of these industries has struggled with 
the different ERP vendors to modify core ERP programs to their needs. 
 Will ERP Fit the Ways I Do Business? 
 It’s critical for companies to figure out if their ways of doing business 
will fit within a standard ERP package before the checks are signed and 
the implementation begins. The most common reason that companies 
walk away from multimillion-dollar ERP projects is that they discover 
that the software does not support one of their important business pro-
cesses. At that point there are two things they can do: They can change 
the business process to accommodate the software, which will mean 
deep changes in long-established ways of doing business (that often 
provide competitive advantage) and shake up important peoples’ roles 
and responsibilities (something that few companies have the stomach 
for). Or they can modify the software to fit the process, which will slow 
down the project, introduce dangerous bugs into the system and make 
upgrading the software to the ERP vendor’s next release excruciatingly 
(continued )

520 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
bonus offers than you can afford—or that your HR policies permit. 
Huddle with HR early on to develop a retention bonus program 
and to create new salary strata for ERP veterans. If you let them 
go, you’ll wind up hiring them—or someone like them—back as 
consultants for twice what you paid them in salaries.  
 7.  Implementation teams can never stop.  Most companies intend 
to treat their ERP implementations as they would any other soft-
ware project. Once the software is installed, they figure, the team 
will be scuttled and everyone will go back to his or her day job. But 
after ERP, you can’t go home again. You’re too valuable. Because 
they have worked intimately with ERP, they know more about the 
sales process than the salespeople do and more about the manu-
facturing process than the manufacturing people do. Companies 
can’t afford to send their project people back into the business 
because there’s so much to do after the ERP software is installed. 
Just writing reports to pull information out of the new ERP sys-
tem will keep the project team busy for a year at least. And it 
is in analysis—and, one hopes, insight—that companies make 
their money back on an ERP implementation. Unfortunately, few 
IS departments plan for the frenzy of post-ERP installation activ-
ity, and fewer still build it into their budgets when they start their 
ERP projects. Many are forced to beg for more money and staff 
immediately after the go-live date, long before the ERP project has 
demonstrated any benefit.  
 8.  Waiting for ROI.  One of the most misleading legacies of tradi-
tional software project management is that the company expects 
to gain value from the application as soon as it is installed; the 
project team expects a break, and maybe a pat on the back. Nei-
ther expectation applies to ERP. Most don’t reveal their value until 
after companies have had them running for some time and can 
concentrate on making improvements in the business processes 
that are affected by the system. And the project team is not going 
to be rewarded until their efforts pay off.  
 9.  Post-ERP depression.  ERP systems often wreak havoc in the 
companies that install them. In a recent Deloitte Consulting survey 
of 64 Fortune 500 companies, one in four admitted that they suf-
fered a drop in performance when their ERP systems went live. 
The true percentage is undoubtedly much higher. The most com-
mon reason for the performance problems is that everything looks 
and works differently from the way it did before. When people 
can’t do their jobs in the familiar way and haven’t yet mastered the 
new way, they panic, and the business goes into spasms.  
 How Do You Configure ERP Software? 
 Even if a company installs ERP software for the so-called right reasons 
and everyone can agree on the optimal definition of a customer, the 
inherent difficulties of implementing something as complex as ERP is 
like, well, teaching an elephant to do the hootchy-kootchy. The pack-
ages are built from database tables, thousands of them, that IS pro-
grammers and end users must set to match their business processes; 
 2.  Integration and testing. Testing the links between ERP packages 
and other corporate software links that have to be built on a case-
by-case basis is another often underestimated cost. A typical man-
ufacturing company may have add-on applications for logistics, 
tax, production planning and bar coding. If this laundry list also 
includes customization of the core ERP package, expect the cost of 
integrating, testing and maintaining the system to skyrocket. 
 As with training, testing ERP integration has to be done from a 
process-oriented perspective. Instead of plugging in dummy data 
and moving it from one application to the next, veterans recom-
mend running a real purchase order through the system, from 
order entry through shipping and receipt of payment—the whole 
order-to-cash banana—preferably with the participation of the 
employees who will eventually do those jobs.  
 3.  Data conversion.  It costs money to move corporate information, 
such as customer and supplier records, product design data and 
the like, from old systems to new ERP homes. Although few CIOs 
will admit it, most data in most legacy systems is of little use. 
Companies often deny their data is dirty until they actually have to 
move it to the new client/server setups that popular ERP packages 
require. Consequently, those companies are more likely to under-
estimate the cost of the move. But even clean data may demand 
some overhaul to match process modifications necessitated—or 
inspired—by the ERP implementation.  
 4.  Data analysis.  Often, the data from the ERP system must be 
combined with data from external systems for analysis purposes. 
Users with heavy analysis needs should include the cost of a data 
warehouse in the ERP budget—and they should expect to do quite 
a bit of work to make it run smoothly. Users are in a pickle here: 
Refreshing all the ERP data in a big corporate data warehouse 
daily is difficult, and ERP systems do a poor job of indicating which 
information has changed from day to day, making selective ware-
house updates tough. One expensive solution is custom program-
ming. The upshot is that the wise will check all their data analysis 
needs before signing off on the budget.  
 5.  Consultants ad infinitum.  When users fail to plan for disengage-
ment, consulting fees run wild. To avoid this, companies should 
identify objectives for which [their] consulting partners must aim 
when training internal staff. Include metrics in the consultants’ 
contract; for example, a specific number of the user company’s 
staff should be able to pass a project-management leadership 
test—similar to what Big Five consultants have to pass to lead an 
ERP engagement.  
 6.  Replacing your best and brightest.  ERP success depends on 
staffing the project with the best and brightest from the business 
and IS. The software is too complex and the business changes 
too dramatic to trust the project to just anyone. The bad news is, 
a company must be prepared to replace many of those people 
when the project is over. Though the ERP market is not as hot as 
it once was, consulting firms and other companies that have lost 
their best people will be hounding yours with higher salaries and 
(continued )

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
521
the core business of the corporation will not be disrupted if something 
goes wrong. Once the project team gets the system up and running 
and works out all the bugs, the team begins selling other units on ERP, 
using the first implementation as a kind of in-house customer refer-
ence. Plan for this strategy to take a long time. 
 Slam-dunk —ERP dictates the process design in this method, 
where the focus is on just a few key processes, such as those con-
tained in an ERP system’s financials module. The slam-dunk is gener-
ally for smaller companies expecting to grow into ERP. 
 The goal here is to get ERP up and running quickly and to ditch the 
fancy reengineering in favor of the ERP system’s “canned” processes. 
Few companies that have approached ERP this way can claim much 
payback from the new system. Most use it as an infrastructure to support 
more diligent installation efforts down the road. Yet many discover that a 
slammed-in ERP system is little better than a legacy system, because it 
doesn’t force employees to change any of their old habits. In fact, doing 
the hard work of process reengineering after the system is in can be 
more challenging than if there had been no system at all, because at that 
point few people in the company will have felt much benefit.  
 How Does ERP Fit with Electronic 
Commerce? 
 After all of that work inventing, perfecting and selling ERP to the 
world, the major ERP vendors are having a hard time shifting gears 
from making the applications that streamline business practices 
inside a company to those that face outward to the rest of the world. 
These days, the hottest areas for outward-looking (that is, Internet) 
post-ERP work are electronic commerce, planning and managing your 
supply chain, and tracking and serving customers. Most ERP vendors 
have been slow to develop offerings for these areas, and they face 
stiff competition from niche vendors. ERP vendors have the advan-
tage of a huge installed base of customers and a virtual stranglehold 
on the “back office” functions—such as order fulfillment. Recently 
ERP vendors have begun to shrink their ambitions and focus on being 
the back-office engine that powers electronic commerce, rather than 
trying to own all the software niches that are necessary for a good 
electronic commerce Web site. Indeed, as the niche vendors make 
their software easier to hook into electronic commerce Web sites, 
and as middleware vendors make it easier for IS departments to hook 
together applications from different vendors, many people wonder 
how much longer ERP vendors can claim to be the primary platform 
for the Fortune 500. 
 Questions 
 1. What is ERP?  
 2. What are the three main reasons firms adopt ERP?  
 3. What are some hidden costs of ERP?  
   4. How does ERP fit with e-commerce and supply chain management?     
 Source: Christopher Koch, “ABC: An Introduction to ERP,”  Cio.com , Copyright 
© 2008 CXO Media. Used with permission. 
each table has a decision “switch” that leads the software down one 
decision path or another. By presenting only one way for the company 
to do each task—say, run the payroll or close the books—a company’s 
individual operating units and far-flung divisions are integrated under 
one system. But figuring out precisely how to set all the switches in the 
tables requires a deep understanding of the existing processes being 
used to operate the business. As the table settings are decided, these 
business processes are reengineered, ERP’s way. Most ERP systems are 
not shipped as a shell system in which customers must determine at 
the minutia level how all the functional procedures should be set, mak-
ing thousands of decisions that affect how their system behaves in line 
with their own business activities. Most ERP systems are preconfigured, 
allowing just hundreds— rather than thousands—of procedural set-
tings to be made by the customer. 
 How Do Companies Organize Their ERP 
Projects? 
 Based on our observations, there are three commonly used ways of 
installing ERP. 
 The big bang —In this, the most ambitious and difficult of 
approaches to ERP implementation, companies cast off all their legacy 
systems at once and implement a single ERP system across the entire 
company. 
 Though this method dominated early ERP implementations, few 
companies dare to attempt it anymore because it calls for the entire 
company to mobilize and change at once. Most of the ERP imple-
mentation horror stories from the late ’90s warn us about companies 
that used this strategy. Getting everyone to cooperate and accept a 
new software system at the same time is a tremendous effort, largely 
because the new system will not have any advocates. No one within 
the company has any experience using it, so no one is sure whether 
it will work. Also, ERP inevitably involves compromises. Many depart-
ments have computer systems that have been honed to match the 
ways they work. In most cases, ERP offers neither the range of func-
tionality, nor the comfort of familiarity that a custom legacy system 
can offer. In many cases, the speed of the new system may suffer 
because it is serving the entire company rather than a single depart-
ment. ERP implementation requires a direct mandate from the CEO. 
 Franchising strategy —This approach suits large or diverse compa-
nies that do not share many common processes across business units. 
Independent ERP systems are installed in each unit, while linking common 
processes, such as financial bookkeeping, across the enterprise. 
 This has emerged as the most common way of implementing ERP. 
In most cases, the business units each have their own “instances” 
of ERP—that is, a separate system and database. The systems link 
together only to share the information necessary for the corporation to 
get a performance big picture across all the business units (business 
unit revenues, for example), or for processes that don’t vary much 
from business unit to business unit (perhaps HR benefits). Usually, 
these implementations begin with a demonstration or “pilot” instal-
lation in a particularly open-minded and patient business unit where 
(concluded)

 READING 
 The Top 10 ERP Mistakes 
522 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 ERP in Services 
 Although ERP was initially developed for manufacturing, it now has a long list of service 
applications. These include professional services, postal services, retail, banking, health care, 
higher education, engineering and construction services, logistics services, and real estate 
management. 
 In a manufacturing environment, ERP systems generally encompass the major functions 
such as production planning and scheduling, inventory management, product costing, and 
distribution. In a service environment, the major functions can differ from one service orga-
nization to another. For example, many universities use ERP systems; they typically are used 
to integrate and access student information, course prerequisites, course schedules, room 
schedules, human resources, accounting, and financial information. Hospitals’ ERP systems 
include patient records, medication data, treatment plans, and scheduling information (e.g., 
rooms, equipment, surgery) as well as human resources information. 
 ERP is now about enterprise applications  integration,  an issue that generally arises with 
any major technology acquisition. The following reading underscores this point. 
promise their board of directors that with 
the ERP project, they are going to see sav-
ings in 24 to 36 months of such-and-such 
amount. They want to see the return on investment now. 
 7.  Starting too late to address all things data (architecture, stan-
dards, management, cleansing, and so on).  These systems are 
only as good as the fundamental data that enters them. And that’s 
where a common problem erupts. Far too often, research indicates, 
companies think about the quality and accuracy of their data too late 
in the project. The consistency and accuracy of data is [ sic ] critical.  
 6.  Failing to staff the team with “A” players from business and 
technical sides of the organization, including program man-
agement.  This can be a major challenge. You need top-notch 
players for these projects—not just technical stars but stellar per-
formers from the business side as well. Indeed, if you have to trade 
off in terms of quality in one area, never skimp on business talent. 
You can perhaps trade off on technical expertise because the con-
sultant you retain can bring in skilled technicians. 
 And the “A” players should encompass program managers to 
the most junior members of the team. 
 5.  Starting without an effective and dedicated senior governance 
council, including a single executive sponsor.  Any major ERP 
project overhauls a lot of business processes, roles, responsibili-
ties, standards, and data definitions—and these are changes that 
cannot be pursued from the bottom up. An effective governing 
council—a steering group—is essential, as is a single executive 
sponsor, dedicated and effective, to chair it. The project will trigger 
difficult, sometimes nasty, issues and a senior executive who is 
accountable can make those decisions and see that the steering 
group understands and accepts them. 
Clive  Weightman 
 Although faulty technology often is blamed for problems, it is frequently 
other shortcomings that create performance-related problems—such 
as the people employing the ERP application don’t fully understand 
what it is or how it works. 
 Execution of a successful ERP project provides the backbone for a 
company’s internal and external operations—from integrating back-
office financials with business performance data to building a launch 
platform for an extended enterprise and collaborative commerce. This 
foundation can serve as the competitive weapon of the future. 
 Top 10 Mistakes 
 10.  Believing the journey is complete at “go live.”  Treat the day your 
ERP project goes live as the start of the next phase of your journey, 
not the finish because an ERP implementation represents much 
more than simply a project . . . So don’t disband the team a month 
after the project goes live. 
 9.  Not planning for—and minimizing—the interim performance 
dip after start up.  Research shows that even the projects that 
have gone the smoothest in the execution stage suffer a dip in per-
formance after the new system launches. Transactional efficiency, 
the pace of taking sales orders may slow down, or the speed of 
pushing products into the warehouse may decline a bit. Recognize 
that performance is going to suffer some at the outset, but with 
excellent execution, this effect can be very slim and very short.  
  8.  Failing to balance the needs and power of integration with 
seeking quick business hits.  Today, every chief executive officer 
must deliver results now, not in 15 months from now. Given the 
challenges of a full ERP implementation, it’s difficult for them to 
(continued )

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
523
local) and future production schedules. The agent can freeze and 
commit from this schedule to the customer’s immediate needs, 
among other things.  
 1.  Embarking on the journey without a solid, approved busi-
ness case, including mechanisms to update the business 
case continuously and to ensure the savings are baked into 
operational budgets.  Since an ERP project is going to take a 
minimum of 12 months and as much as 36 months to employ, 
and often costs between $5 million and $50 million out-of-pocket 
costs, stamina is essential. So you must be absolutely certain 
why you’re embarking on this journey; that is, have a solid busi-
ness case. 
 At the same time, if a solid business case hasn’t been made for 
the project, you won’t get the commitment from the entire busi-
ness team to make the journey successful. Many times when a 
company pursues an ERP implementation, it isn’t simply to cut 
technology costs, because total technical costs may well increase 
with the application. Most of the time, the project is undertaken 
for broader business reasons, so if those reasons aren’t clearly 
expressed, fully understood, and approved in both qualitative and 
quantitative terms, members of the senior executive team won’t 
give their full support. 
 While this is far less of an issue than it was five years ago, a 
number of major companies still complete the business case for an 
ERP project, submit a capital appropriation request, eventually get 
it approved, only to park the business case on the shelf to gather 
dust while the project proceeds. 
 A business case should be a living, breathing document of how 
to drive out both the original and updated business benefits from 
the ERP journey for, say, the next 20 years. It must outline how 
to track the benefits the application will produce, and it must be 
used for the CEO to bake into the annual operating budgets the 
cost-reductions and revenue increases that each vice president 
has committed to. It must make senior and middle executives 
accountable for the goals so that the anticipated bottom-line ben-
efits are realized. This type of discipline still is relatively rare, in 
part because many managers think, “Hey, I’m not going to be here 
to see the end of this.” 
 But, for an ERP project to succeed, it is critical that this busi-
ness case is documented and becomes well worn. Just how vital is 
it? It does head this list of mistakes to avoid! 
 Source: Condensed from Clive Weightman and Deloitte Consulting, “The Top 10 
ERP Mistakes.” Copyright © Clive Weightman. Used with permission. 
 The project’s executive “angel” must be from the corporate 
suite and, preferably, not the chief information officer. 
 4.  Selecting a strong systems integrator and then not heeding its 
advice. In selecting an SI, a company should:
    • Consider compatibility. Do you want a firm that wants to come in 
to do it to you rather than do it with you? Some SI firms favor a 
“let’s solve this together” approach, while others prefer the “here 
are your marching orders, this is how it’s going to be, so let’s get 
down to business.” Determine which approach you favor for your 
firm’s culture.  
   • Clearly look at the SI’s track record. Look beyond its marketing, talk 
to the software vendors you’ll be working with and also talk with 
industry analysts. 
   • Spend considerable time examining the members of the actual 
team that will be working with you every day. Be sure to put lan-
guage in the contract that at least binds the team leaders and the 
firm’s partner with you for its duration. 
 3.  Trying to create a solution incompatible with the company’s 
culture.  In the 1990s, research found that many companies with 
ERP projects saw them as a silver bullet that would solve all their 
problems—even if the “style” of solution wasn’t compatible with 
their corporate culture traditions. 
 An executive might say he or she wants to operate in a 
globally centralized fashion—to be more like a Wal-Mart, with 
the strength and discipline of a global head office. However, 
this doesn’t work if your firm’s culture is one of decentralized 
entrepreneurship. You can’t use technology to force change in 
the culture of your company. So if yours is a very decentralized 
structure, you’d better opt to install a decentralized ERP applica-
tion or recognize the enormous change-management mountain 
you face.  
 2.  Treating this as a technical project vs. a change that balances 
people, process, and technology; not using the power of the 
new, integrated information.  The new technology brings inte-
gration and, generally, makes information available instantly. For 
example, when raw material arrives at a company’s receiving dock 
and is scanned into the system, anyone can access that informa-
tion and use it. 
 Real-time integration and accurate data change people’s 
jobs. A traditional sales order taker can change into a full-ser-
vice customer agent. For example, with full online access to an 
integrated ERP backbone, the agent enjoys immediate access 
to the customer’s history and other vital identifiers. The agent 
can examine real-time open inventory at all warehouses (not just 
(concluded)
 Conversion to an ERP system from a traditional operation is a major undertaking that 
requires a project approach to manage the process. The following reading provides some sug-
gestions for achieving ERP project success. 
 
  

524 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 1. The usage of components in production of assembled items depends on how many of each component 
are needed per item, and how many items are to be produced. Hence the term  dependent demand.  
 2. MRP is a tool used for dependent-demand components, to assist in making the two basic decisions 
in inventory management: how much of each component to order, and when to order it. 
 3. MRP II is an enhancement of MRP that gives management the ability to relate financial and other 
information to an MRP plan. 
 4. ERP is a software-based enterprise-wide system that allows access to production, sales, accounting, 
warehouse, and supply chain information. 
 KEY POINTS 
 12.12 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Acquisition of technology on the order of ERP has strategic implications. Among the consider-
ations are a high initial cost, a high cost to maintain, the need for future upgrades, and the intensive 
training required. An ERP team is an excellent example of the value of a cross-functional team. 
Purchasing, which will ultimately place the order, typically does not have the technical expertise to 
select the best vendor. Information technology can assess various technical requirements, but won’t 
be the user. Various functional users (marketing, operations, and accounting) will be in the best 
position to evaluate inputs and outputs, and finance must evaluate the effect on the organization’s 
bottom line. Also, it is important to have a member of the purchasing staff involved from the begin-
ning of negotiations on ERP acquisition because this will have major implications for purchasing. 
 The real-time aspect of ERP makes it valuable as a strategic planning tool. For example, it can 
improve supply chain management, with stronger links between their customers and their sup-
pliers, and make the organizations more capable of satisfying changing customer requirements. 
 Because ERP tracks the flow of information and materials through a company, it offers 
opportunities for collecting information on waste and environmental costs and, hence, oppor-
tunities for process improvement. 
 MRP is a planning technique that creates a schedule for all the (dependent-demand) items in an end 
item’s bill of materials based on fixed manufacturing lead times. The end item is exploded using the bill 
of materials, and material requirements plans are developed that show quantity and timing for ordering 
or producing components. 
 The main features of MRP are the time-phasing of requirements, calculating component require-
ments, and planned-order releases. To be successful, MRP requires accurate master production sched-
ules, bills of materials, and inventory data. Firms without reasonably accurate records or schedules have 
experienced major difficulties in trying to implement MRP-type systems. A potential weakness of MRP 
is the assumption of constant lead times. 
 MRP is utilized by most MRP II and ERP systems. MRP II adds software applications designed to 
better manage the entire manufacturing process involving finance and marketing, and including capacity 
planning. ERP is the third generation of manufacturing software that encompasses all business func-
tions, including order entry and an option for financial management  integrated  with the manufacturing 
functions available in MRP II. 
 SUMMARY 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
525
 backflushing, 510 
 bill of materials (BOM), 497 
 capacity requirements 
planning, 513 
 changes, 508 
 cumulative lead time, 497 
 dependent demand, 495 
 distribution resource planning 
(DRP), 515 
 enterprise resource planning 
(ERP), 516 
 exception reports, 508 
 gross requirements, 501 
 inventory records, 500 
 load reports, 514 
 low-level coding, 500 
 manufacturing resources 
planning (MRP II), 511 
 master schedule, 496 
 material requirements planning 
(MRP), 495 
 net-change system, 506 
 net requirements, 501 
 order releases, 508 
 pegging, 505 
 performance-control 
reports, 508 
 planned-order receipts, 502 
 planned-order releases, 508 
 planned orders, 502 
 planning reports, 508 
 product structure tree, 497 
 projected on hand, 501 
 regenerative system, 506 
 scheduled receipts, 501 
 time fences, 513 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 The following product structure tree indicates the components needed to assemble one unit of prod-
uct W. Determine the quantities of each component needed to assemble 100 units of W.   
 An easy way to compute and keep track of component requirements is to do it right on the tree, 
as shown in the following figure.  Note:  For the procedure when there are on-hand inventories, see 
Example 1, page 498. 
 Summary: 
 Problem 1 
W
A 
B (2) 
C (4)
D (2) 
E 
E (2) 
F 
D (3) 
G (2)
D
Solution
W
2
1
3
D
A 
B(2) 
C(4)
 
E 
E(2) 
F 
 
G(2)
D(2) 
D(3)
100
1100100
2100200
2100200
1100100
2200400
1200200
34001200
2400800
1800800
4100400
 
 Level 
 Item  Quantity 
 0 
 W 
 100 
 1 
 A 
 100 
 
 B 
 200 
 
 C 
 400 
 2 
 E 
 500 
 
 F 
 200 
 
 G 
 800 
 3 
 D 
 2,200 

526 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 Steps 
 1. If a question asks for a materials requirement plan for a component such as D in the tree dia-
gram, circle all occurrences of that component so you will be sure to include them. 
 2. Label the spreadsheet sections, top to bottom, following the order shown in the tree diagram:
 Top section: End Item 
 Next section: A 
 Next section: B 
 Last section: D 
 (You don’t need one for C because the problem asks for D, and C isn’t needed for D.) 
 3. Add the LT (lead time) for the end item and each component next to the section labels. 
 4. Add any beginning inventory (on hand) for the end item and each component to their spread-
sheet sections. 
 5. Place the desired end item quantity in the master schedule in the week it is needed, and in the 
gross requirements of the end item in that same week.  
6. Complete the remainder of the plan.  
End
D(2)
D(4)
C(3)
B
A(3)
Step 1 Circle all occurrences
of the component on
the tree diagram.
Problem 2
 Item 
 End  A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Units on hand 
 2 
 6 
 4 
 32  15 
 Lead time (weeks) 
 1 
 2 
 1 
  2   2 
 Material Requirements Plan Setup Guide 
 Twelve units of the end item are needed at the beginning of week 6. Prepare a material require-
ments plan for component D given that there is a scheduled receipt of 10 units of subassembly A in 
week 3 plus the following information:  
End
D(2)
D(4)
C(3)
B
A(3)

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
527
 
Master
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
Schedule
Quantity
End 
Beg.
Inv. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand  
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
A (3)
Beg.
Inv.  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
B
1 
2 
Beg.
Inv. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
D(2) D(4)
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv. 
Gross requirements
Gross requirements
Step 2. Label spreadsheet sections
              in the order shown in the
              tree diagram.  

528 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
Master
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
Schedule
Quantity
End                LT = 1
Beg.
Inv. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand  
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
A (3)               LT = 2
Beg.
Inv.  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
B                    LT = 1
1 
2 
Beg.
Inv. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planne-order releases
D(2)  D(4)       LT = 2
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv. 
Gross requirements
Gross requirements
Step 3. Add lead times.

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
529
Master
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
Schedule
Quantity
End                LT = 1
Beg.
Inv. 
1 
2
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand  
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
A (3)               LT = 2
Beg.
Inv.  
1 
2 
3 
10
6
4
15
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
B                    LT = 1
1 
2 
Beg.
Inv. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
D(2)  D(4)       LT = 2
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv. 
Gross requirements
Gross requirements
Step 4. Enter specified beginning
inventory and scheduled
receipts quantities.

530 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
Master
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
Schedule
Quantity
End                LT = 1
Beg.
Inv. 
1 
2
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
12
12
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand  
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
A (3)               LT = 2
Beg.
Inv.  
1 
2 
3 
10
6
4
15
4 
5 
6 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
B                    LT = 1
1 
2 
Beg.
Inv. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
D(2)  D(4)       LT = 2
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Beg.
Inv. 
Gross requirements
Gross requirements
Step 5 . Enter the master schedule
               quantities and end item
              gross requirements
              in the specified week(s).

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
531
Master
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
Schedule
Quantity
12
End                LT = 1
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
12
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Net requirements
10
Planned-order receipts
10
Planned-order releases
10
A (3)               LT = 2
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
30
Scheduled receipts
10
Projected on hand
6
6
6
16
16
16
Net requirements
14
Planned-order receipts
14
Planned-order releases
14
B                    LT = 1
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
10
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
4
4
4
4
4
4
Net requirements
6
Planned-order receipts
6
Planned-order releases
6
D(2)  D(4)       LT = 2
Beg.
Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
28
24
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
15
15
15
15
24
Net requirements
13
24
Planned-order receipts
13
24
Planned-order releases
13
24
Step 6. Complete the remainder of the plan, 
starting with the end item and working 
down, subtracting projected on hand from 
gross requirements to get net requirements. 
Planned order receipts = Net requirements, 
and all are in the same week.
Planned order releases are always the same 
as planned order receipts, but earlier by lead 
time (one week in this case).
Subassemblies A and B both come 
under End in the tree diagram, so 
their gross requirements are in 
the same column as the End 
item’s planned-order releases
(Week 5), using the multiples 
given in the tree diagram:
 
3 times 10 for A = 30 
 
1 times 10 for B = 10
D(2) comes under A in the tree diagram, 
so its gross requirements are related to 
A’s planned-order release sand in that 
same week:
 
2 times 14 = 28 in week 3
D(4) comes under B in the tree diagram, 
so its gross requirements are related to 
B’s planned-order releases and in that 
same week:
 
4 times 6 = 24 in week 4

532 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 The product structure tree for end item E follows. The manager wants to know the material require-
ments for ordered part R that will be needed to complete 120 units of E by the start of week 5. Lead 
times for items are one week for level 0 items, one week for level 1 items, and two weeks for level 2 
items. There is a scheduled receipt of 60 units of M at the  start  of week 2 and 100 units of R at the 
 start of week 1. Lot-for-lot ordering is used. 
 Problem 3 
Week number
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Assemble M
Assemble E
Procure R
 
P
N
V
I
R
E
M
2
0
1
Level
(2)
(4)
(3)
(2)
 A partial assembly-time chart that includes R and leads to completion of E by the start of week 5 
looks like this: 
 Solution 
 The table entries are arrived at as follows: 
Master schedule: 120 units of E to be available at the start of week 5. 
Item E:  Gross requirements equal the quantity specified in the master production schedule. 
Since there is no on-hand inventory, net requirements also equal 120 units. Using lot-for-lot 
ordering, 120 units must be scheduled to be available at the start of week 5. Because there is a 
one-week lead time for assembly of Es, an order will need to be released (i.e., work started) at the 
beginning of week 4. 
Item M: The  gross  requirements for M are three times the  net  requirements for E, because each E 
requires three Ms. These must be available at the start of week 4. The net requirements are 60 units 
fewer due to the 60 units expected to be on hand at that time. Hence, 300 additional units of M must 
be available at the start of week 4. With the one-week lead time, there must be an order release at the 
start of week 3. 
 Item R:  Because each M requires two units of R, 600 Rs will be needed to assemble 300 units of 
M. However, 100 units will be on hand, so only 500 need to be ordered. Because there is a lead time 
of two weeks, the 500 Rs must be ordered at the start of week 1. 
 The master schedule for E and requirements plans for E, M, and R follow. 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
533
 Capacity requirements planning.  Given the following production schedule in units and the produc-
tion standards for labor and machine time for this product, determine the labor and machine capacity 
requirements for each week. Then compute the percent utilization of labor and machines in each 
week if labor capacity is 200 hours per week and machine capacity is 250 hours per week. 
 Problem 4 
 
Item: M  LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Multiplied by 2
(see product tree)
Gross requirements
Item: R  LT = 2 weeks 
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Gross requirements
300
60
60
60
60
100
100
100
500
360
300
300
600
500
500
Week number 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
Quantity
Item: E  LT = 1 week
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
Multiplied by 3
(see product tree)
Master schedule for E
Gross requirements
120
120
120
120
120
Beg.
Inv.
100
 Production Schedule: 
 Week 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Quantity 
 200 
 300 
 100 
 150 
 Standard Times: 
 Labor 
 .5 hour/unit 
 Machine 
 1.0 hour/unit 

534 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 Convert the quantity requirements into labor and machine requirements by multiplying the quantity 
requirements by the respective standard times (i.e., multiply each quantity by .5 to obtain the labor 
hours and multiply each quantity by 1.0 to obtain the machine hours): 
 Solution 
 
 Week 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Labor 
 50% 
  75% 
 25% 
 37.5% 
 Machine 
 80% 
 120% 
 40% 
   60% 
  Week 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Quantity 
 200 
 300 
 100 
 150 
 Labor hours 
 100 
 150 
  50 
  75 
 Machine hours 
 200 
 300 
 100 
 150 
 To compute utilization, divide the capacity requirements by the available capacity (200 hours per 
week for labor and 250 hours per week for machine) and multiply by 100. The results are 
 Note that machine capacity in week 2 is overutilized (i.e., capacity is insufficient) because the utili-
zation exceeds 100 percent. To compensate, some production could be shifted to weeks 1 and/or 3 
where labor and machine time are available. 
 1. Contrast independent and dependent demand. 
 2. When is MRP appropriate? 
 3. Briefly define or explain each of these terms.
  a. Master schedule. 
  b. Bill of materials. 
  c. Inventory records. 
  d. Gross requirements. 
  e. Net requirements. 
  f. Time-phased plan. 
 4. How is safety stock included in a material requirements plan? 
 5. What factors can create safety stock requirements in an MRP system? 
 6. What is meant by the term  safety time? 
 7. Contrast  net-change systems and  regenerative systems for MRP. 
 8. Briefly discuss the requirements for effective MRP. 
 9. What are some of the main advantages and limitations of MRP? 
 10. How can the use of MRP contribute to productivity? 
 11. Briefly describe MRP II and closed-loop MRP. 
 12. What is lot sizing, what is its goal, and why is it an issue with lumpy demand? 
 13. Contrast planned-order receipts and scheduled receipts. 
 14. If seasonal variations are present, is their incorporation into MRP fairly simple or fairly difficult? 
Explain briefly. 
 15. How does the purpose of ERP differ from the purpose of MRP II? 
 16. What are some unforeseen costs of ERP? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What trade-offs are involved in the decision to purchase an ERP software package? 
 2. Who in the organization needs to be involved in designing and implementing MRP II? Who needs 
to be involved in the decision to purchase an ERP system? Who needs to be trained to use ERP? 
 3. To what extent has technology such as ERP software improved the ability to manage a business 
organization? How important are each of the following considerations?
 a. Ease of use. 
 b. Complete integration. 
 c. Reliability. 
 TAKING STOCK 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
535
 b. Draw a tree diagram for a stapler given the following bill of materials: 
 1. Suppose you work for a furniture manufacturer, one of whose products is the chair depicted in 
 Figure 12.5 . Finished goods inventory is held in a central warehouse in anticipation of customer 
orders. Finished goods are controlled using EOQ/ROP methods. The warehouse manager, Juan 
Villa, has suggested using the same methods for controlling component inventory. Write him a 
brief memo outlining your opinion on doing that. 
 2. Give one example of unethical behavior involving MRP and one involving ERP, and state the 
ethical principle violated for each example. 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1.  a.  Given the following diagram for a product, determine the quantity of each component required 
to assemble one unit of the finished product.  
 PROBLEMS 
 
E
F (2)
G
H
J (2)
D (4)
L (2)
J (2)
D (2)
A (4)
 
 Item 
 End 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 G 
 H 
 LT (wk) 
 1 
  2 
  3 
  3 
  1 
  2 
 1 
 2 
 Amount on hand 
 0 
 10 
 10 
 25 
 12 
 30 
 5 
 0 
 
 Item 
 Components 
 Stapler 
 Top assembly, base assembly 
 Top assembly 
 Cover, spring, slide assembly 
 Cover 
 
 Spring 
 
 Slide assembly 
 Slide, spring 
  Slide 
 
  Spring 
 
 Base assembly 
 Base, strike plate, rubber pad (2) 
 Base 
 
 Strike plate 
 
 Rubber pad (2) 
 
 2. The following table lists the components needed to assemble an end item, lead times, and quantities 
on hand. 
 a. If 20 units of the end item are to be assembled, how many additional units of E are needed? 
( Hint: You don’t need to develop an MRP plan to determine this.) 
 b. An order for the end item is scheduled to be shipped at the start of week 11. What is the latest 
week that the order can be started and still be ready to ship on time? ( Hint: You don’t need to 
develop an MRP plan for this part either.) 
 3. The following table lists the components needed to assemble an end item, lead times (in weeks), 
and quantities on hand. 
 
End Item
B (2)
C
D (3)
E (2)
F (3)
H (4)
E (2)
G (2)
E (2)

536 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 a. Prepare a material requirements plan for component J. 
 b. Suppose that in week 4 the quantity of E needed is changed from 80 to 70. The planned-order releases 
through week 3 have all been executed. How many more Bs and Js will be on hand in week 6?  
 5.  a.  One hundred twenty units of end item Z are needed at the beginning of week 7. Prepare a material 
requirements plan for component C. Take into account that on hand there are 40 units of Z, 70 units 
of A, 100 units of B, and 30 units of C. Also, there is a scheduled receipt of 20 units of component 
C in week 4. Lead times are two weeks for Z and B, and one week for the other components. Lot-
for-lot ordering will be used for all items.  
 a. If 40 units of the end item are to be assembled, how many additional units of B are needed? 
( Hint: You don’t need to develop an MRP plan.) 
 b. An order for the end item is scheduled to be shipped at the start of week 8. What is the latest 
week that the order can be started and still be ready to ship on time? ( Hint: You don’t need to 
develop an MRP plan.) 
 4. Eighty units of end item E are needed at the beginning of week 6. Three cases (30 units per case) of J 
have been ordered and one case is scheduled to arrive in week 3, one in week 4, and one in week 5. 
 Note: J must be ordered by the case, and B must be produced in multiples of 120 units. There are 60 units 
of B and 20 units of J now on hand. Lead times are two weeks each for E and B, and one week for J. 
 
 Item 
 Lead Time 
 Amount on Hand 
 Direct Components 
 End 
 1 
 — 
 L(2), C(1), K(3) 
 L 
 2 
 10 
 B(2), J(3) 
 C 
 3 
 15 
 G(2), B(2) 
 K 
 3 
 20 
 H(4), B(2) 
 B 
 2 
 30 
 
 J 
 3 
 30 
 
 G 
 3 
 5 
 
 H 
 2 
 — 
 
 
E
B(2)
J(3)
J(4)
F(2)
 
Z
D(2)
C(3)
C(2)
E(2)
B(4)
A(2)
E
I(2)
D(2)
D(2)
S(2)
C(2)
B(3)
 b. Ninety-five units of end item E are needed at the beginning of week 7. Prepare a material 
requirements plan  for component D. Take into account that 5 units of E are currently on hand, 
as well as 50 units of B, 100 units of C, and 80 units of D. Also, 30 units of C have been 
outsourced and are expected to arrive in week 4. Lead times are two weeks for E and C, and 
one week for the other components. Assume lot-for-lot ordering except for D, where multiples 
of 40 must be used.  

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
537
 7. Eighty units of end item X are needed at the beginning of week 6, and another 30 units are needed 
at the beginning of week 8. Prepare a material requirements plan for component D. D can only be 
ordered in whole cases (50 units per case). One case of D is automatically received every other 
week, beginning in week 1 (i.e., weeks 1, 3, 5, 7). Lot-for-lot ordering will be used for all items 
except D. Also, there are 30 units of B and 20 units of D now on hand. Lead times for all items are 
a function of quantity: one week for up to 100 units, two weeks for 101 to 200 units, three weeks 
for 201 to 300 units, and four weeks for 301 or more units.  
 6. A table is assembled using three components, as shown in the accompanying product structure tree. 
The company that makes the table wants to ship 100 units at the beginning of day 4, 150 units at 
the beginning of day 5, and 200 units at the beginning of day 7. Receipts of 100 wood sections are 
scheduled at the beginning of day 2. There are 120 legs on hand. There are 60 braces on hand. Lead 
times (in days) for all items are shown in the following table. Prepare a material requirements plan 
using lot-for-lot ordering.  
 
X
B(2)
D(3)
D(2)
F(2)
 
A 
B 
C
D 
E 
D(2) 
F 
D(4) 
G
 
 Quantity 
 Lead Time 
 1–200 
 1 
 201–550 
 2 
 551–999 
 3 
 
Table
Wood sections (2)
Legs (4)
Braces (3)
 8. Oh No!, Inc., sells three models of radar detector units. It buys the three basic models (E, F, and G) 
from a Japanese manufacturer and adds one, two, or four lights (component D) to further differenti-
ate the models. D is bought from a domestic producer. 
  
  Lead times are one week for all items except C, which is two weeks. There are ample supplies of 
the basic units (E, F, and G) on hand. There are also 10 units of B, 10 units of C, and 25 units of D 
on hand. Lot-sizing rules are lot-for-lot ordering for all items except D, which must be ordered in 
multiples of 100 units. There is a scheduled receipt of 100 units of D in week 1. 
  
  The master schedule calls for 40 units of A in week 4, 60 units of B in week 5, and 30 units of C 
in week 6. Prepare a material requirements plan for D and its parents. 
 9. Assume that you are the manager of a shop that assembles power tools. You have just received an 
order for 50 chain saws, which are to be shipped at the start of week 8. Pertinent information on the 
saws is 
 
 Item 
 Lead Time (weeks) 
 On Hand 
 Components 
 Saw 
 2 
 15 
 A(2), B(1), C(4) 
 A 
 1 
 10 
 E(3), D(1) 
 B 
 2 
  5 
 D(2), F(3) 
 C 
 2 
 65 
 E(2), D(2) 
 D 
 1 
 20 
 
 E 
 1 
 10 
 
 F 
 2 
 30 
 
 a. Develop a product structure tree, an assembly time chart, and a master schedule. 
 b. Develop the material requirements plan for component E using lot-for-lot ordering for all items. 

538 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 11. Determine material requirements plans for parts N and V and subassembly I as described in 
Solved Problem 3 (see p. 532) for each of the following:
  a.  Assume that there are currently 100 Ns on hand and scheduled receipts of 40 Is and 10 Vs at the 
beginning of week 3. No Es are on hand; 120 Es are needed at the start of week 5. 
  b.  Assume on-hand and scheduled receipts as in part  a. Now suppose that 100 Es are needed at the 
start of week 5 and 55 at the start of week 7. Also, use multiples of these order sizes: N, 800; V, 
200. Use lot-for-lot ordering for I. 
  c.  Using your answer to part  b, update the MRP for V, using the following additional information 
for each of these cases: (1) one week has elapsed (making it the start of week 2), and (2) three 
weeks have elapsed (making it the start of week 4). 
 
 
The updated master schedule now has an order for 100 units of E in week 9. Your plan should 
cover weeks 2–9 for case 1, and weeks 4–11 for case 2. Assume all orders are released and received 
as planned.  
  12. A firm that produces electric golf carts has just received an order for 200 carts, which must be ready 
for delivery at the start of week 8. Information concerning the product structure, lead times, and 
quantities on hand is shown in the following table. Use this information to do each of the following:
  a. Construct a product tree. 
  b. Construct an assembly time chart. 
  c.  Develop a material requirements plan that will provide 200 golf carts by week 8 assuming lot-
for-lot ordering.  
 10. Assume that you are the manager of Assembly, Inc. You have just received an order for 40 units of 
an industrial robot, which is to be delivered at the start of week 7 of your schedule. Using the fol-
lowing information, determine how many units of subassembly G to order and the timing of those 
orders, given that subassembly G must be ordered in multiples of 80 units and all other compo-
nents are ordered lot-for-lot. Assume that the components are used only for this particular robot.  
 
 Item 
 Lead Time (weeks) 
 On Hand 
 Components 
 Robot 
 2 
 10 
 B, G, C(3) 
 B 
 1 
  5 
 E, F 
 C 
 1 
 20 
 G(2), H 
 E 
 2 
  4 
 — 
 F 
 3 
  8 
 — 
 G 
 2 
 15 
 — 
 H 
 1 
 10 
 — 
 
Parts List for 
Electric Golf Cart
Lead 
Time
Quantity 
on Hand
Electric golf cart
1
    0
 Top
1
  40
  Supports (4)
1
200
  Cover
1
    0
 Base
1
  20
  Motor
2
300
  Body
3
  50
   Frame
1
  35
   Controls
1
    0
   Wheel assemblies (4)
1
240
 Seats (2)
2
120
 13. Refer to Problem 12. Assume that unusually mild weather has caused a change in the quantity and 
timing of orders for golf carts. The revised plan calls for 100 golf carts at the start of week 6, 100 
at the start of week 8, and 100 at the start of week 9.
  a. Develop a master schedule for this revised plan. 
  b. Determine the timing and quantities for orders for tops and bases. 

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
539
  c.  Assume that equipment problems reduce the firm’s capacity for assembling bases to 50 units 
per week. Revise your material plan for bases to reflect this, but still meet delivery dates. 
 14. Using the diagram below, do the following:
  a. Draw a tree diagram for the scissors. 
  b.  Prepare an MRP plan for scissors. Lead times are one day for each component and final scissor 
assembly, but two days for the plastic grips. Six hundred pairs of scissors are needed on day 6.  Note: 
There are 200 straight blades and 350 bent blades on hand, and 40 top blade assemblies on hand. 
Use lot-for-lot ordering for all items.  
 
Bottom
Top
Bent
plastic
grip
Bent
blade
Straight
plastic grip
Straight
blade
  15. A company that manufactures paving material for driveways and parking lots expects the following 
demand for its product for the next four weeks:  
 
 
 Labor 
 Machine 
 Production standard (hours per ton) 
    4 
    3 
 Weekly production capacity (hours) 
 300 
 200 
 
 Week number 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Material (tons) 
 40 
 80 
 60 
 70 
  The company’s labor and machine standards and available capacities are as follows: 
  a. Determine the capacity utilization for labor and machine for each of the four weeks. 
  b.  In which weeks do you foresee a problem? What options would you suggest to resolve any 
problems? What costs are relevant in making a decision on choosing an option? 
 16. A company produces two very similar products that go through a three-step sequence of fabrica-
tion, assembly, and packaging. Each step requires one day for a lot to be completely processed and 
moved to the next department. Processing requirements for the departments (hours per unit) are 
 
 
 FABRICATION 
 ASSEMBLY 
 PACKAGING 
 Product 
 Labor 
 Machine 
 Labor 
 Machine 
 Labor 
 Machine 
 A 
 2 
 1 
 1.5 
 1 
 1 
 .5 
 B 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1 
 1.5 
 .5 
  Department capacities are all 700 hours of labor and 500 hours of machine time, except Friday, 
when capacities are 200 hours for both labor and machine time. The following production sched-
ule is for next week: 
 
 Product 
 Mon 
 Tues 
 Wed 
 Thurs 
 Fri 
 A 
 200 
 400 
 100 
 300 
 100 
 B 
 300 
 200 
 200 
 200 
 200 
  a.  Determine the labor and machine capacity requirements for each product and the total load for 
each department for each day. Ignore changeover time. 

540 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
  18. Develop a material requirements plan for component H. Lead times for the end item and each 
component except B are one week. The lead time for B is three weeks. Sixty units of A are needed 
at the start of week 8. There are currently 15 units of B on hand and 130 of E on hand, and 50 units 
of H are in production and will be completed by the start of week 2. Lot-for-lot ordering will be 
used for all items.  
 
A
B(2)
D(2)
E(2)
C
D(2)
E(4)
H(3)
K
H(3)
K
  b.  Evaluate the projected loading for the first three days of the week. Is the schedule feasible? 
What do you suggest for balancing the load?  
 17. The MRP Department has a problem. Its computer “died” just as it spit out the following infor-
mation: Planned order release for item J27    640 units in week 2. The firm has been able to 
reconstruct all the information they lost except the master schedule for end item 565. The firm is 
fortunate because J27 is used only in 565s. Given the following product structure tree and asso-
ciated inventory status record information, determine what master schedule entry for 565 was 
exploded into the material requirements plan that killed the computer. 
 Part Number 
 On Hand 
 Lot Size 
 Lead Time 
 565 
    0 
 Lot-for-lot 
 1 week 
 X43 
  60 
 Multiples of 120 
 1 week 
 N78 
    0 
 Lot-for-lot 
 2 weeks 
 Y36 
 200 
 Lot-for-lot 
 1 week 
 J27 
    0 
 Lot-for-lot 
 2 weeks 
 
565
X43
J27 (4)
X43
Y36 (2)
N78
 The company can complete final assembly of the 
tractor-trailers at the rate of 10,000 a week. The trac-
tor and trailer bodies are purchased; lead time is three weeks. The wheels 
are the manager’s main concern. 
 The company has a sufficient supply of brackets on hand. Assem-
bly time is one week each for tractors, trailers, and wheel assembly. 
However, the wheel department can only produce wheels at the rate 
of 100,000 a week. The manager plans to use the wheel department 
to full capacity, starting in week 2 of the schedule, and order additional 
wheels from a supplier as needed. Ordered wheels come in sets of 
6,400. The lead time for delivery from the supplier is expected to be 
two to three weeks. Use lot-for-lot ordering for all items except the pur-
chased wheels. 
 Questions 
 1. How many wheels sets should the manager order? 
 2. When should the wheel sets be ordered? 
 Promotional Novelties provides a wide range of novelty items for its 
 corporate customers. It has just received an order for 20,000 toy trac-
tor-trailers that will be sold by a regional filling station company as part 
of a holiday promotion. The order is to be shipped at the beginning of 
week 8. The tree diagram shows the various components of the trucks. 
 CASE 
 Promotional Novelties 
 
Tractor-trailer
Tractor
Wheel
assembly
Body
Trailer
Wheel
assembly
Body
Wheels (6)
Bracket
Wheels (12)
Bracket

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
541
 One of Marty’s partners, Ann, has organized 
information on lead times, inventory on hand, and 
lot-sizing rules (established by suppliers): 
 Scheduled receipts are 
 After the dot-com business he tried to start folded, David “Marty” 
Dawkins decided to pursue his boyhood dream of owning a bike  
factory. After several false starts, he finally got the small company up 
and running. The company currently assembles two models Marty 
designed: the Arrow and the Dart. The company hasn’t turned a profit 
yet, but Marty feels that once he resolves some of the problems he’s 
having with inventory and scheduling, he can increase productivity and 
reduce costs. 
 At first, he ordered enough bike parts and subassemblies for four 
months’ worth of production. Parts were stacked all over the place, 
seriously reducing work space and hampering movement of workers 
and materials. And no one knew exactly where anything was. In Marty’s 
words, “It was a solid mess!” 
 He and his two partners eventually managed to work off most of the 
inventory. They hope to avoid similar problems in the future by using 
a more orderly approach. Marty’s first priority is to develop a materi-
als requirement plan for upcoming periods. He wants to assemble 15 
Arrows and 10 Darts each week, to have them ready at the start of 
weeks 4 through 8. The product structure trees for the two bikes follow.  
 CASE 
 DMD Enterprises 
 
Arrow
X
F
M
W
Dart
K(2)
F
W(2)
Q
 Item 
 Lead Time (weeks) 
 On Hand 
 Lot-Sizing Rule 
 Arrow 
 2 
 5 
 Lot-for-lot 
 Dart 
 2 
 2 
 Lot-for-lot 
 X 
 1 
 5 
 Multiples of 25 
 W 
 2 * 
 2 
 Multiples of 12 
 F 
 1 
 10 
 Multiples of 30 
 K 
 1 
 3 
 Lot-for-lot 
 Q 
 1 
 15 
 Multiples of 30 
 M 
 1 
 0 
 Lot-for-lot 
 *LT    3 weeks for orders of 36 or more units on this item. 
 
 Period 1: 
 20 Arrows and 18 Ws 
 Period 2: 
 20 Darts and 15 Fs 
 As the third partner, it is your job to develop the material require-
ments plan. 
 Introduction 
 www.stickley.com 
 L.&J.G. Stickley was founded in 1900 by brothers Leopold and George 
Stickley. Located just outside of Syracuse, New York, the company is 
a producer of fine cherry, white oak, and mahogany furniture. In the 
1980s, the company reintroduced the company’s original line of mis-
sion oak furniture, which now accounts for nearly 50 percent of the 
company’s sales. 
 Over the years, the company experienced both good and bad times, 
and at one point, it employed over 200 people. But by the early 1970s, the 
business was in disarray; there were only about 20 full-time employees, 
and the company was on the brink of bankruptcy. The present owners 
bought the ailing firm in 1974, and under their leadership, the company 
has prospered and grown, and now has 1,350 employees. Stickley has 
five retail showrooms in New York State, two in Connecticut, one in North 
Carolina, and its furniture is sold nationally by some 120 dealers.  
 Production 
 The production facility is a large, rectangular build-
ing with a 30-foot ceiling. Furniture making is labor intensive, although 
saws, sanders, and other equipment are very much a part of the pro-
cess. In fact, electric costs average about $60,000 a month. The com-
pany has its own tool room where cutting tools are sharpened, and 
replacement parts are produced as needed. 
 Worker skills range from low-skilled material handlers to highly 
skilled craftsmen. For example, seven master cabinet makers handle 
customized orders. 
 The process (see figure on p. 543) begins with various sawing oper-
ations where large boards received from the lumber mills are cut into 
smaller sizes. The company recently purchased a computer-controlled 
“optimizer” saw that greatly improves sawing productivity, and elimi-
nates some waste. Workers inspect and mark knot locations and other 
defects they find on each piece of lumber before feeding it into the saw. 
The computer then determines the optimal set of cuttings, given the 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Stickley Furniture 
(continued )

542 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 The company uses a level production plan (maintain steady output 
and steady labor force). Demand is seasonal; it is highest in the first and 
third quarters. During the second and fourth quarters, excess output 
goes into inventory; during the first and third quarters, excess demand 
is met using inventory. The production scheduler uses a schedule that is 
set for the next 8 to 10 weeks. 
 Production Control 
 Job sequence is determined by the amount of remaining inventory 
(days’ supply on hand), and processing time. Lot sizes are determined 
by factoring in demand, setup costs, and carrying costs. Typical lot 
sizes are 25 to 60 pieces. There are many jobs being done concur-
rently. Each job is accompanied by a set of bar codes that identify the 
job and the operation. As each operation is completed, the operator 
removes a bar code sticker and delivers it to the scheduling office 
where it is scanned into the computer, thereby enabling production 
control to keep track of progress on a job, and to know its location in 
the shop. 
 The company’s policy of level output coupled with seasonal demand 
patterns means that prior to peak demand periods, excess output is 
used to build up inventories, which is then drawn down when demand 
exceeds production capacity during periods of peak production. 
 Inventory 
 In addition to the “white” inventory and a small finished goods inven-
tory, the company maintains an inventory of furniture pieces (e.g., table 
and chair legs) and partially assembled items. This inventory serves two 
important functions. One is to reduce the amount of time needed to 
respond to customer orders rather than having to go through the entire 
location of knots and other defects, and standard lengths needed for 
subsequent operations. Approximately 20,000 board feet are cut each 
day. Subsequent sawing operations provide additional cuts for specific 
jobs. 
 Workers then glue some of the pieces together; they will end up as 
tops of tables, desks, dressers, or a similar item. Large presses hold 20 
to 30 glued sections at a time. Other pieces that will become table or 
chair legs, chair backs or other items go through various shaping opera-
tions. Next comes a series of sanding operations, which remove excess 
glue from the glued sections, and smooth the surface of both glued 
pieces and other pieces. 
 Some of the pieces may require drilling or mortising, an operation 
in which rectangular holes and other shapes are cut into the wood. The 
company has a CNC (numerically controlled) router that can be pro-
grammed to make grooves and other specialty cuts. Some items require 
carving, which involves highly skilled workers. 
 Next, workers assemble the various components, either into subas-
semblies, or sometimes directly to other components to obtain com-
pleted pieces. Each item is stamped with the date of production, and 
components such as dresser drawers, cabinet doors, and expansion 
leaves of tables also are stamped to identify their location (e.g., top 
drawer, left door). Careful records are kept so that if a piece of furniture 
is ever returned for repairs, complete instructions are available (type of 
wood, finish, etc.) to enable repair people to closely match the original 
piece. 
 The furniture items then usually move to the “white inventory” 
(unfinished) section, and eventually to the finishing department where 
workers apply linseed oil or another finish before the items are moved to 
the finished goods inventory to await shipment to stores or customers. 
(continued )
© L. & J.G. Stickley, Inc.

 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP 
543
an inventory of commonly used pieces and subassemblies. Moreover, 
because pieces are being made for inventory, there is flexibility in 
sequencing. This permits jobs that have similar setups to be produced 
in sequence, thereby reducing setup time and cost. 
production process to obtain needed items, and the other is that it helps 
to smooth production and utilize idle machinery/workers. Because of 
unequal job times on successive operations, some workstations invari-
ably have slack time while others work at capacity. This is used to build 
 
Assembly
Assembly area
White
inventory
Finishing
area
Finished inventory
Office
Finished
pieces and
subassemblies
Stacks of raw lumber
Custom
shop
Optimizer
saw
Saw
Saw
Sander
Sander
Sander
Sander
Sander
Gluing
machine
Gluing
machine
Gluing
machine
Gluing
machine
Router
Router
CNC
router
CNC
router
Tool
shop
(continued )

544 
Chapter Twelve MRP and ERP
 Hopp, Wallace, and Mark L. Spearman.  Factory Physics. 
3rd ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
 Jacobs, F. Robert, William L. Berry, D. Clay Whybark, 
and Thomas E. Vollman.  Manufacturing Planning 
and Control for Supply Chain Management. 6th ed. 
Burr Ridge, IL: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2011. 
 Wagner, Brett, and Ellen Monk. Enterprise Resource 
Planning. 3rd ed. Cengage Learning, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
Why? What other type of processing is used to a lesser extent? 
Explain. 
   2. How does management keep track of job status and location during 
production?  
   3. Suppose the company has just received an order for 40 mission oak 
dining room sets. Briefly list the kinds of information the company 
will need to plan, schedule, and process this job. 
   4. What benefits, and what problems, would you expect, given the 
company’s level production policy? 
   5. Can you suggest any changes that might be beneficial to the com-
pany? What are they? 
 Quality 
 Each worker is responsible for checking his or her quality, as well as the 
quality of materials received from preceding operations, and to report 
any deficiencies. In addition, on several difficult operations, quality con-
trol people handle inspections and work with operators to correct any 
deficiencies. The company is considering a TQM approach, but has not 
yet made a decision on whether to go in that direction. 
 Questions 
    1. Which type of production processing—job shop, batch, repetitive, or 
continuous—is the primary mode of operation at Stickley Furniture? 
(concluded)

This page intentionally left blank

546
 CHAP TE R 
 13  Inventory 
Management 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 13.1 Introduction,  547 
 13.2 The Nature and Importance of 
Inventories,  548 
 Functions of Inventory,  549 
 Objective of Inventory Management,  550 
 13.3 Requirements for Effective Inventory 
Management,  551 
 Inventory Counting Systems,  551 
 Demand Forecasts and Lead-Time 
Information,  553 
 Inventory Costs,  553 
 Classification System,  554 
 13.4 Inventory Ordering Policies,  557 
 13.5 How Much to Order: Economic Order 
Quantity Models,  557 
 Basic Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) 
Model,  557 
 Economic Production Quantity (EPQ),  561  
 Quantity Discounts,  564 
 13.6 Reorder Point Ordering,  569 
 13.7 How Much to Order: Fixed-Order-
Interval Model,  573 
 Reasons for Using the Fixed-Order-
Interval Model,  574 
 Determining the Amount to Order,  574 
 Benefits and Disadvantages,  576 
 13.8 The Single-Period Model,  576 
 Continuous Stocking Levels,  577 
 Discrete Stocking Levels,  578 
 13.9 Operations Strategy,  581 
 Cases: UPD Manufacturing,  596 
 Harvey Industries,  596 
 Grill Rite,  598 
 Farmers Restaurant,  599 
 Operations Tours: 
 Bruegger's Bagel Bakery,  600 
 PSC, Inc.,  601 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO13.1 
Define the term  inventory. 
 LO13.2 
List the different types of inventory. 
 LO13.3 
Describe the main functions of inventories. 
 LO13.4 
Discuss the main requirements for effective management. 
 LO13.5 
Explain periodic and perpetual review systems. 
 LO13.6 
Describe the costs that are relevant for inventory management. 
 LO13.7 
Describe the A-B-C approach and explain how it is useful. 
 LO13.8 
Describe the basic EOQ model and its assumptions and solve 
typical problems. 
 LO13.9 
Describe the economic production quantity model and solve 
typical problems. 
 LO13.10 Describe the quantity discount model and solve typical 
problems. 
 LO13.11 Describe reorder point models and solve typical problems. 
 LO13.12 Describe situations in which the fixed-order interval model is 
appropriate, and solve typical problems. 
 LO13.13 Describe situations in which the single-period model is 
appropriate and solve typical problems. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

547
 Inventory management is a core operations management activity. Effective inventory manage-
ment is important for the successful operation of most businesses and their supply chains. 
Inventory management impacts operations, marketing, and finance. Poor inventory manage-
ment hampers operations, diminishes customer satisfaction, and increases operating costs. 
 Some organizations have excellent inventory management, and many have satisfactory 
inventory management. Too many, however, have unsatisfactory inventory management. They 
either have too little or too much inventory, inaccurate inventory tracking, or incorrect pri-
orities. What is lacking is an understanding of what needs to be done and how to do it. This 
chapter presents the concepts and knowledge base for effective inventory management. 
 13.1 INTRODUCTION 
 An  inventory is a stock or store of goods. Firms typically stock hundreds or even thousands 
of items in inventory, ranging from small things such as pencils, paper clips, screws, nuts, and 
bolts to large items such as machines, trucks, construction equipment, and airplanes. Natu-
rally, many of the items a firm carries in inventory relate to the kind of business it engages 
in. Thus, manufacturing firms carry supplies of raw materials, purchased parts, partially fin-
ished items, and finished goods, as well as spare parts for machines, tools, and other supplies. 
Department stores carry clothing, furniture, carpeting, stationery, cosmetics, gifts, cards, and 
toys. Some also stock sporting goods, paints, and tools. Hospitals stock drugs, surgical sup-
plies, life-monitoring equipment, sheets and pillow cases, and more. Supermarkets stock fresh 
and canned foods, packaged and frozen foods, household supplies, magazines, baked goods, 
dairy products, produce, and other items. 
 The inventory models described in this chapter relate primarily to what are referred to 
as  independent-demand  items, that is, items that are ready to be sold or used. Chapter 12 
described models that are used for  dependent-demand  items, which are components of fin-
ished products, rather than the finished products themselves. Thus, a computer would be an 
 LO13.1  Define the term 
inventory. 
 Inventory  A stock or store of 
goods. 

548 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
independent-demand item, while the components that are used to assemble a computer would 
be dependent-demand items: The demand for those items would depend on how many of each 
item is needed for a computer, as well as how many computers are going to be made. 
 13.2 THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF 
INVENTORIES 
     Inventories are a vital part of business. Not only are they necessary for operations, but they also 
contribute to customer satisfaction. To get a sense of the significance of inventories, consider the 
following: Some very large firms have tremendous amounts of inventory. For example, General 
Motors was at one point reported to have as much as $40 billion worth of materials, parts, cars, 
and trucks in its supply chain! Although the amounts and dollar values of inventories carried 
by different types of firms vary widely, a typical firm probably has about 30 percent of its cur-
rent assets and perhaps as much as 90 percent of its working capital invested in inventory. One 
widely used measure of managerial performance relates to  return on investment  (ROI), which is 
profit after taxes divided by total assets. Because inventories may represent a significant portion 
of total assets, a reduction of inventories can result in a significant increase in ROI, although that 
benefit has to be weighed against a possible risk of a decrease in customer service. It is interest-
ing to note that the ratio of inventories to sales in the manufacturing, wholesale, and retail sec-
tors is one measure that is used to gauge the health of the U.S. economy. 
 Inventory decisions in service organizations can be especially critical. Hospitals, for example, 
carry an array of drugs and blood supplies that might be needed on short notice. Being out of stock 
on some of these could imperil the well-being of a patient. However, many of these items have a 
limited shelf life, so carrying large quantities would mean having to dispose of unused, costly sup-
plies. On-site repair services for computers, printers, copiers, and fax machines also have to care-
fully consider which parts to bring to the site to avoid having to make an extra trip to obtain parts. 
The same goes for home repair services such as electricians, appliance repairers, and plumbers. 
 The major source of revenues for retail and wholesale businesses is the sale of merchandise 
(i.e., inventory). In fact, in terms of dollars, the inventory of goods held for sale is one of the 
largest assets of a merchandising business. Retail stores that sell clothing wrestle with decisions 
about which styles to carry, and how much of each to carry, knowing full well that fast-selling 
items will mean greater profits than having to heavily discount goods that didn't sell. 
 The different kinds of inventories include the following:
 Raw materials and purchased parts. 
 Partially completed goods, called  work-in-process  (WIP). 
 LO13.2 List the different types 
of inventory.
the point home to upper management? I sug-
gested that he go to the accounting depart-
ment and borrow enough money to be equal 
to the bin's value for as long as it had been sitting there, and pile it on 
the top of the bin. I further suggested that he do that for every bin on 
the production line. We rapidly figured out that by the time we had the 
money piled up on the bin, you would not even be able to  see  the bin. 
My opinion was that if the upper managers were given a tour of the line 
with the money piled up, they would  never forget it. 
 Source: Gene Woolsey, “On Doing Good Things and Dumb Things in Production 
and Inventory Control,”  Interfaces 5, no. 3 (May 1975). Copyright © 1975 The 
Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS). 
Reprinted by permission. 
 We proceed as follows. First look for a five-by-five-by-three-foot bin 
of gears or parts that looks like it has been there awhile. Pick up a 
gear and ask, casually, “How much is this worth?” You then ask, “How 
many of these are in the bin?” followed by, “How long has this bin been 
here?” and, “What's your cost of money for this company?” I recall 
one case in a nameless South American country where the unit cost 
times the number of parts times the time it had been there times the 
interest rate resulted in a cost-per-day figure that would insure com-
fortable retirement for the plant manager on the bank of the Rio de la 
Plata at one of the better resorts to be found there. The plant manager 
suddenly realized that what he was holding was not just a chunk of 
high-test steel, but was  real money. He then pointed out that  he now 
understood the value of the inventory but could I suggest a way to drive 
 READING 
 $$$ 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
549
 Finished-goods inventories (manufacturing firms) or merchandise (retail stores). 
 Tools and supplies. 
 Maintenance and repairs (MRO) inventory. 
 Goods-in-transit to warehouses, distributors, or customers (pipeline inventory). 
 Both manufacturing and service organizations have to take into consideration the space 
requirements of inventory. In some cases, space limitations may pose restrictions on inventory 
storage capability, thereby adding another dimension to inventory decisions. 
 To understand why firms have inventories at all, you need to be aware of the various func-
tions of inventory. 
 Functions of Inventory 
 Inventories serve a number of functions. Among the most important are the following:
 1.  To meet anticipated customer demand.  A customer can be a person who walks in 
off the street to buy a new stereo system, a mechanic who requests a tool at a tool crib, 
or a manufacturing operation. These inventories are referred to as  anticipation stocks 
because they are held to satisfy expected (i.e.,  average ) demand. 
 2.  To smooth production requirements.  Firms that experience seasonal patterns in 
demand often build up inventories during preseason periods to meet overly high require-
ments during seasonal periods. These inventories are aptly named  seasonal inventories. 
Companies that process fresh fruits and vegetables deal with seasonal inventories. So 
do stores that sell greeting cards, skis, snowmobiles, or Christmas trees. 
 3.  To decouple operations.  Historically, manufacturing firms have used inventories as 
buffers between successive operations to maintain continuity of production that would 
otherwise be disrupted by events such as breakdowns of equipment and accidents that 
cause a portion of the operation to shut down temporarily. The buffers permit other 
operations to continue temporarily while the problem is resolved. Similarly, firms have 
used buffers of raw materials to insulate production from disruptions in deliveries from 
suppliers, and finished goods inventory to buffer sales operations from manufacturing 
 LO13.3  Describe the main 
functions of inventories.
 By initiating a program 
that utilizes bar codes and 
scanners, such as this one 
by Motorola, hospitals can 
control inventory supply 
areas, as well as keep track 
of all equipment in use across 
the enterprise. Stockroom 
inventory applications 
track consumable items 
such as medication and 
supplies, while check in/out 
applications track shared 
or reusable items such as 
X-rays, lab results, diagnostic 
tools, and other medical 
equipment. 

550 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
disruptions. More recently, companies have taken a closer look at buffer inventories, 
recognizing the cost and space they require, and realizing that finding and eliminating 
sources of disruptions can greatly decrease the need for decoupling operations. 
 Inventory buffers are also important in  supply chains.  Careful analysis can reveal 
both points where buffers would be most useful and points where they would merely 
increase costs without adding value. 
 4.  To reduce the risk of stockouts. Delayed deliveries and unexpected increases in 
demand increase the risk of shortages. Delays can occur because of weather conditions, 
supplier stockouts, deliveries of wrong materials, quality problems, and so on. The risk 
of shortages can be reduced by holding  safety stocks,  which are stocks in excess of 
expected demand to compensate for  variabilities in demand and lead time. 
 5.  To take advantage of order cycles. To minimize purchasing and inventory costs, a firm 
often buys in quantities that exceed immediate requirements. This necessitates storing 
some or all of the purchased amount for later use. Similarly, it is usually economical to 
produce in large rather than small quantities. Again, the excess output must be stored 
for later use. Thus, inventory storage enables a firm to buy and produce in  economic lot 
sizes  without having to try to match purchases or production with demand requirements 
in the short run. This results in  periodic orders or order  cycles. 
 6.  To hedge against price increases.  Occasionally a firm will suspect that a substantial 
price increase is about to occur and purchase larger-than-normal amounts to beat the 
increase. 
 7.  To permit operations.  The fact that production operations take a certain amount of 
time (i.e., they are not instantaneous) means that there will generally be some work-in-
process inventory. In addition, intermediate stocking of goods—including raw materi-
als, semifinished items, and finished goods at production sites, as well as goods stored 
in warehouses—leads to  pipeline  inventories throughout a production-distribution 
system.  Little's Law can be useful in quantifying pipeline inventory. It states that the 
average amount of inventory in a system is equal to the product of the average rate at 
which inventory units leave the system (i.e., the average demand rate) and the average 
time a unit is in the system. Thus, if units are in the system for an average of 10 days, 
and the demand rate is 5 units per day, the average inventory is 50 units: 5  units/
day    10 days    50 units. 
 8.  To take advantage of quantity discounts.  Suppliers may give discounts on large orders.     
 Objective of Inventory Management 
 Inadequate control of inventories can result in both under- and overstocking of items. Under-
stocking results in missed deliveries, lost sales, dissatisfied customers, and production bot-
tlenecks; overstocking unnecessarily takes up space and ties up funds that might be more 
productive elsewhere. Although overstocking may appear to be the lesser of the two evils, 
the price tag for excessive overstocking can be staggering when inventory holding costs are 
high—as illustrated by the reading about the bin of gears at the beginning of the chapter—and 
matters can easily get out of hand. It is not unheard of for managers to discover that their firm 
has a 10-year supply of some item. (No doubt the firm got a good buy on it!) 
 Inventory management has two main concerns. One is the  level of customer service,  that is, 
to have the right goods, in sufficient quantities, in the right place, at the right time. The other 
is the  costs of ordering and carrying inventories. 
 The overall objective of inventory management is to achieve satisfactory levels of customer 
service while keeping inventory costs within reasonable bounds. Toward this end, the decision 
maker tries to achieve a balance in stocking. He or she must make two fundamental decisions: 
the  timing and  size of orders (i.e., when to order and how much to order). The greater part of 
this chapter is devoted to models that can be applied to assist in making those decisions. 
 Managers have a number of performance measures they can use to judge the effectiveness 
of inventory management. The most obvious, of course, is customer satisfaction, which they 
might measure by the number and quantity of backorders and/or customer complaints. A widely 
 Little's Law  The average 
amount of inventory in a sys-
tem is equal to the product of 
the average demand rate and 
the average time a unit is in the 
system. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
551
used measure is   inventory turnover , which is the ratio of annual cost of goods sold to average 
inventory investment. The turnover ratio indicates how many times a year the inventory is sold. 
Generally, the higher the ratio, the better, because that implies more efficient use of inventories. 
However, the desirable number of turns depends on the industry and what the profit margins 
are. The higher the profit margins, the lower the acceptable number of inventory turns, and vice 
versa. Also, a product that takes a long time to manufacture, or a long time to sell, will have 
a low turnover rate. This is often the case with high-end retailers (high profit margins). Con-
versely, supermarkets (low profit margins) have a fairly high turnover rate. Note, though, that 
there should be a balance between inventory investment and maintaining good customer service. 
Managers often use inventory turnover to evaluate inventory management performance; moni-
toring this metric over time can yield insights into changes in performance. 
 Another useful measure is days of inventory on hand, a number that indicates the expected 
number of days of sales that can be supplied from existing inventory. Here, a balance is desir-
able; a high number of days might imply excess inventory, while a low number might imply a 
risk of running out of stock. 
 13.3 REQUIREMENTS FOR EFFECTIVE 
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT 
     Management has two basic functions concerning inventory. One is to establish a system to 
keep track of items in inventory, and the other is to make decisions about how much and when 
to order. To be effective, management must have the following:
 1. 
A system to  keep track of the inventory on hand and on order. 
 2. 
A reliable  forecast of demand that includes an indication of possible  forecast error. 
 3. 
Knowledge of  lead times and  lead time variability. 
 4. 
Reasonable estimates of inventory  holding costs, ordering costs, and  shortage costs. 
 5. 
A  classification system for inventory items. 
 Let's take a closer look at each of these requirements. 
 Inventory Counting Systems 
    Inventory counting systems can be periodic or perpetual. Under a   periodic system , a physical 
count of items in inventory is made at periodic, fixed intervals (e.g., weekly, monthly) in order 
to decide how much to order of each item. Many small retailers use this approach: A manager 
periodically checks the shelves and stockroom to determine the quantity on hand. Then the 
manager estimates how much will be demanded prior to the next delivery period and bases 
the order quantity on that information. An advantage of this type of system is that orders for 
many items occur at the same time, which can result in economies in processing and ship-
ping orders. There are also several disadvantages of periodic reviews. One is a lack of control 
between reviews. Another is the need to protect against shortages between review periods by 
carrying extra stock. 
 A  perpetual inventory system  (also known as a  continuous review  system) keeps track of 
removals from inventory on a continuous basis, so the system can provide information on the 
current level of inventory for each item. When the amount on hand reaches a predetermined 
minimum, a fixed quantity,  Q,  is ordered. An obvious advantage of this system is the control 
provided by the continuous monitoring of inventory withdrawals. Another advantage is the 
fixed-order quantity; management can determine an optimal order quantity. One disadvantage 
of this approach is the added cost of record keeping. Moreover, a physical count of inventories 
must still be performed periodically to verify records because of possible errors, pilferage, 
spoilage, and other factors that can reduce the effective amount of inventory. Bank transac-
tions such as customer deposits and withdrawals are examples of continuous recording of 
inventory changes. 
 Inventory turnover  Ratio 
of annual cost of goods sold to 
average inventory investment. 
 LO13.4  Discuss the main 
requirements for effective 
management.
 LO13.5  Explain periodic and 
perpetual review systems.
 Periodic system  Physical 
count of items in inventory made 
at periodic intervals (weekly, 
monthly). 
 Perpetual inventory sys-
tem  System that keeps track of 
removals from inventory contin-
uously, thus monitoring current 
levels of each item. 

552 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Perpetual systems range from very simple to very sophisticated. A   two-bin system , a very 
elementary system, uses two containers for inventory. Items are withdrawn from the first bin 
until its contents are exhausted. It is then time to reorder. Sometimes an order card is placed at 
the bottom of the first bin. The second bin contains enough stock to satisfy expected demand 
until the order is filled, plus an extra cushion of stock that will reduce the chance of a stockout 
if the order is late or if usage is greater than expected. The advantage of this system is that 
there is no need to record each withdrawal from inventory; the disadvantage is that the reorder 
card may not be turned in for a variety of reasons (e.g., misplaced, the person responsible 
forgets to turn it in). 
 Supermarkets, discount stores, and department stores have always been major users of peri-
odic counting systems. Today, most have switched to computerized checkout systems using a 
laser scanning device that reads a   universal product code (UPC) , or  bar code,  printed on an 
item tag or on packaging. A typical grocery product code is illustrated here: 
 The zero on the left of the bar code identifies this as a grocery item, the first five numbers 
(14800) indicate the manufacturer (Mott's), and the last five numbers (23208) indicate the 
specific item (natural-style applesauce). Items in small packages, such as candy and gum, use 
a six-digit number. 
 Point-of-sale (POS) systems  electronically record actual sales. Knowledge of actual sales 
can greatly enhance forecasting and inventory management: By relaying information about 
actual demand in real time, these systems enable management to make any necessary changes 
to restocking decisions. These systems are being increasingly emphasized as an important 
input to effective supply chain management by making this information available to suppliers. 
 UPC scanners represent major benefits to supermarkets. In addition to their increase in 
speed and accuracy, these systems give managers continuous information on inventories, 
reduce the need for periodic review and order-size determinations, and improve the level of 
customer service by indicating the price and quantity of each item on the customer's receipt. 
 Two-bin system  Two contain-
ers of inventory; reorder when 
the first is empty. 
 Universal product code 
(UPC)  Bar code printed on a 
label that has information about 
the item to which it is attached. 
 
14800 23208
0
 Point-of-sale (POS) systems  
Record items at time of sale.  
 Poor inventory accuracy 
leads to too much inventory 
or shortages. Software 
systems maintain enormous 
amounts of data and have a 
great amount of functionality. 
Systems can analyze 
inventory levels, allocate 
stock plan purchases, 
and allocate deliveries 
accordingly. They can identify 
key suppliers of each stocked 
item and can give lead times 
and dock-to-stock times for 
realistic time-phasing. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
553
 Bar coding is important for other sectors of business besides retailing. Manufacturing and ser-
vice industries benefit from the simplified production and inventory control it provides. In manu-
facturing, bar codes attached to parts, subassemblies, and finished goods greatly facilitate counting 
and monitoring activities. Automatic routing, scheduling, sorting, and packaging can also be done 
using bar codes. In health care, the use of bar codes can help to reduce drug dispensing errors. 
Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags  are also used to keep track of inventory in cer-
tain applications. 
 Demand Forecasts and Lead-Time Information 
 Inventories are used to satisfy demand requirements, so it is essential to have reliable estimates 
of the amount and timing of demand. Similarly, it is essential to know how long it will take for 
orders to be delivered. In addition, managers need to know the extent to which demand and   lead 
time    (the time between submitting an order and receiving it) might vary; the greater the poten-
tial variability, the greater the need for additional stock to reduce the risk of a shortage between 
deliveries. Thus, there is a crucial link between forecasting and inventory management.  
 Inventory Costs 
    Four basic costs are associated with inventories: purchase, holding, ordering, and shortage costs. 
 Purchase cost   is the amount paid to a vendor or supplier to buy the inventory. It is typi-
cally the largest of all inventory costs. 
 Holding, or carrying, costs  relate to physically having items in storage. Costs include 
interest, insurance, taxes (in some states), depreciation, obsolescence, deterioration, spoil-
age, pilferage, breakage, tracking, picking, and warehousing costs (heat, light, rent, workers, 
equipment, security). They also include opportunity costs associated with having funds that 
could be used elsewhere tied up in inventory. Note that it is the  variable  portion of these costs 
that is pertinent. 
 The significance of the various components of holding cost depends on the type of item 
involved, although taxes, interest, and insurance are generally based on the dollar value of an 
inventory. Items that are easily concealed (e.g., pocket cameras, transistor radios, calculators) 
or fairly expensive (cars, TVs) are prone to theft. Fresh seafood, meats and poultry, produce, 
and baked goods are subject to rapid deterioration and spoilage. Dairy products, salad dress-
ings, medicines, and batteries also have limited shelf lives. 
 Holding costs are stated in either of two ways: as a percentage of unit price or as a dollar 
amount per unit. Typical annual holding costs range from 20 percent to 40 percent or more of 
the value of an item. In other words, to hold a $100 item in inventory for one year could cost 
from $20 to $40. 
 Lead time  Time interval 
between ordering and receiving 
the order. 
 Purchase cost  The amount 
paid to buy the inventory. 
 Holding (carrying) cost  Cost 
to carry an item in inventory for 
a length of time, usually a year. 
 LO13.6  Describe the costs 
that are relevant for inventory 
management.
 In agriculture, fruit growers might use 
RFID tags to constantly monitor temperatures 
around fruit during shipping. This ensures that 
the fruit is kept at the appropriate temperature. The tags can be used 
for a wide range of agricultural products, containing information such as 
cultivation history, as well as whether the fruit is organically grown and 
what fertilizers or chemicals have been used. 
 Because major retail chains, such as Walmart and Target, and gov-
ernmental agencies now require their suppliers to use RFID tags, many 
companies have already made RFID a priority in their business strategies. 
 Although RFID technology holds the potential for improved safety, 
convenience, and inventory management, widespread adoption, partic-
ularly in retail operations, could take several years. Until a global stan-
dard is established and cheap disposable tags are developed, the main 
areas of growth continue to be in nonretail operations. 
 Keeping track of inventories in-house and throughout a supply chain 
is vitally important for manufacturing, service, and retail operations. 
Bar codes have long been used for that purpose, but they carry only 
a limited amount of information and require direct line-of-sight to be 
scanned. Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags are a technological 
breakthrough in inventory management, providing real-time informa-
tion that increases the ability to track and process shipping containers, 
parts in warehouses, items on supermarket shelves, and a whole lot 
more. They carry much more information than bar codes, and they don't 
require line-of-sight to be scanned. 
 RFID tags transmit product information or other data to network-
connected RFID readers via radio waves. Tags attached to pallets, 
boxes, or individual items can enable a business to identify, track, moni-
tor, or locate any object that is within range of a reader. For example, the 
tags are used in “speed passes” for toll roads. 
 READING 
 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Tags 

554 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Ordering costs are the costs of ordering and receiving inventory. They are the costs that 
occur with the actual placement of an order. They include determining how much is needed, 
preparing invoices, inspecting goods upon arrival for quality and quantity, and moving the 
goods to temporary storage. Ordering costs are generally expressed as a fixed dollar amount 
per order, regardless of order size. 
 When a firm produces its own inventory instead of ordering it from a supplier, machine 
 setup costs  (e.g., preparing equipment for the job by adjusting the machine, changing cutting 
tools) are analogous to ordering costs; that is, they are expressed as a fixed charge per produc-
tion run, regardless of the size of the run. 
 Shortage costs  result when demand exceeds the supply of inventory on hand. These costs 
can include the opportunity cost of not making a sale, loss of customer goodwill, late charges, 
backorder costs, and similar costs. Furthermore, if the shortage occurs in an item carried for 
internal use (e.g., to supply an assembly line), the cost of lost production or downtime is con-
sidered a shortage cost. Such costs can easily run into hundreds of dollars a minute or more. 
Shortage costs are sometimes difficult to measure, and they may be subjectively estimated. 
 Classification System 
    An important aspect of inventory management is that items held in inventory are not of equal 
importance in terms of dollars invested, profit potential, sales or usage volume, or stockout pen-
alties. For instance, a producer of electrical equipment might have electric generators, coils of 
wire, and miscellaneous nuts and bolts among the items carried in inventory. It would be unreal-
istic to devote equal attention to each of these items. Instead, a more reasonable approach would 
be to allocate control efforts according to the  relative importance of various items in inventory. 
 The  A-B-C approach  classifies inventory items according to some measure of impor-
tance, usually annual dollar value (i.e., dollar value per unit multiplied by annual usage rate), 
and then allocates control efforts accordingly. Typically, three classes of items are used: A 
(very important), B (moderately important), and C (least important). However, the actual 
number of categories may vary from organization to organization, depending on the extent 
 Ordering costs  Costs of order-
ing and receiving inventory. 
 Setup costs  The costs involved 
in preparing equipment for a job. 
 Shortage costs  Costs resulting 
when demand exceeds the sup-
ply of inventory; often unreal-
ized profit per unit. 
 LO13.7 Describe the A-B-C 
approach and explain how it is 
useful.
 A-B-C approach  Classify-
ing inventory according to 
some measure of importance, 
and allocating control efforts 
accordingly. 
 One way to lower inventory 
holding costs is to improve 
space utilization through 
narrow aisle handling 
equipment, mezzanines, 
layout, or other appropriate 
storage modes. Another is 
an inventory management 
system that allows companies 
to maintain tight control over 
inventory levels. This allows 
process planners to optimize 
material and maintain 
accurate quantities. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
555
to which a firm wants to differentiate control efforts. With three classes of items, A items 
generally account for about 10 to 20 percent of the  number of items in inventory but about 60 
to 70 percent of the  annual dollar value.  At the other end of the scale, C items might account 
for about 50 to 60 percent of the number of items but only about 10 to 15 percent of the dol-
lar value of an inventory. These percentages vary from firm to firm, but in most instances a 
relatively small number of items will account for a large share of the value or cost associated 
with an inventory, and these items should receive a relatively greater share of control efforts. 
For instance, A items should receive close attention through frequent reviews of amounts on 
hand and control over withdrawals, where possible, to make sure that customer service levels 
are attained. The C items should receive only loose control (two-bin system, bulk orders), and 
the B items should have controls that lie between the two extremes. 
 Note that C items are not necessarily  un important; incurring a stockout of C items such as the 
nuts and bolts used to assemble manufactured goods can result in a costly shutdown of an assem-
bly line. However, due to the low annual dollar value of C items, there may not be much addi-
tional cost incurred by ordering larger quantities of some items, or ordering them a bit earlier. 
 Figure 13.1 illustrates the A-B-C concept. 
 To solve an A-B-C problem, follow these steps:
 1. 
For each item, multiply annual volume by unit price to get the annual dollar value. 
 2. 
Arrange annual dollar values in descending order. 
 3. 
The few (10 to 15 percent) with the highest annual dollar value are A items. The most 
(about 50 percent) with the lowest annual dollar value are C items. Those in between 
(about 35 percent) are B items. 
 FIGURE 13.1 
 A typical A-B-C breakdown in 
relative annual dollar value of 
items and number of items by 
category 
High
Percentage of items
Moderate
C items
A items
B items
Low
Moderate
Annual dollar
value of items
High
Low
 E X A M P L E  1  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 A manager has obtained a list of unit costs and estimated annual demands for 10 inventory 
items and now wants to categorize the items on an A-B-C basis. Multiplying each item's 
annual demand by its unit cost yields its annual dollar value:
 Item 
Number 
 Annual 
Demand (00) 
  
 Unit 
Cost  
  
 Annual Dollar 
Value (00) 
 1 
 25 
 
 $ 360 
 
 $ 9,000 
 2 
 10 
 
 70 
 
 700 
 3 
 24 
 
 500 
 
 12,000 
 4 
 15 
 
 100 
 
 1,500 
 5 
 7 
 
 70 
 
 490 
 6 
 10 
 
 1,000 
 
 10,000 
 7 
 2 
 
 210 
 
 420 
 8 
 10 
 
 4,000 
 
 40,000 
 9 
 80 
 
 10 
 
 800 
 10 
 5 
 
 200 
 
 1,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 75,910 

556 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
  Although annual dollar value may be the primary factor in classifying inventory items, 
a manager may take other factors into account in making exceptions for certain items (e.g., 
changing the classification of a B item to an A item). Factors may include the risk of obsoles-
cence, the risk of a stockout, the distance of a supplier, and so on. 
 Managers use the A-B-C concept in many different settings to improve operations. One key 
use occurs in customer service, where a manager can focus attention on the most important 
aspects of customer service by categorizing different aspects as very important, important, 
or of only minor importance. The point is to not overemphasize minor aspects of customer 
service at the expense of major aspects. 
 Another application of the A-B-C concept is as a guide to   cycle counting  ,  which is a physical 
count of items in inventory. The purpose of cycle counting is to reduce discrepancies between 
the amounts indicated by inventory records and the actual quantities of inventory on hand. Accu-
racy is important because inaccurate records can lead to disruptions in operations, poor cus-
tomer service, and unnecessarily high inventory carrying costs. The counts are conducted more 
frequently than once a year, which reduces the costs of inaccuracies compared to only doing an 
annual count, by allowing for investigation and correction of the causes of inaccuracies. 
 The key questions concerning cycle counting for management are
 1. 
How much accuracy is needed? 
 2. 
When should cycle counting be performed? 
 3. 
Who should do it? 
 APICS recommends the following guidelines for inventory record accuracy:   .2 percent 
for A items,   1 percent for B items, and   5 percent for C items. A items are counted fre-
quently, B items are counted less frequently, and C items are counted the least frequently. 
 Some companies use certain events to trigger cycle counting, whereas others do it on a 
periodic (scheduled) basis. Events that can trigger a physical count of inventory include an 
out-of-stock report written on an item indicated by inventory records to be in stock, an inven-
tory report that indicates a low or zero balance of an item, and a specified level of activity 
(e.g., every 2,000 units sold). 
 Some companies use regular stockroom personnel to do cycle counting during periods of 
slow activity, while others contract with outside firms to do it on a periodic basis. Use of an 
outside firm provides an independent check on inventory and may reduce the risk of problems 
created by dishonest employees. Still other firms maintain full-time personnel to do cycle 
counting.    
 Cycle counting  A physical 
count of items in inventory. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Arranging the annual dollars values in descending order can facilitate assigning items to 
categories:
 Item 
Number  
 Annual Dollar 
Value 
 Classification 
  Percentage of 
Items  
 Percentage of 
Annual Dollar Value 
 8 
 $40,000 
 A 
 
 10 
 52.7 
 3 
 12,000 
 B 
 
 30 
 40.8 
 6 
 10,000 
 B 
 
 1 
 9,000 
 B 
 4 
 1,500 
 C 
 
 60 
 6.5 
 10 
 1,000 
 C 
 
 9 
 800 
 C 
 2 
 700 
 C 
 
 
5
 490 
 C 
 7 
 420 
 C 
 
 
 75,910 
 
 
 100 
 100 
 Note that category A has the fewest number of items but the highest percentage of annual 
dollar value, while category C has the most items but only a small percentage of the annual 
dollar value. 
⎫⎬⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
557
 13.4 INVENTORY ORDERING POLICIES 
  Inventory ordering policies address the two basic issues of inventory management, which 
are how much to order and when to order. In the following sections, a number of models are 
described that are used for these issues. 
 Inventory that is intended to meet expected demand is known as   cycle stock , while inven-
tory that is held to reduce the probability of experiencing a stockout (i.e., running out of 
stock) due to demand and/or lead time variability is known as   safety stock . 
 The discussion begins with the issue of how much to order. 
 13.5 HOW MUCH TO ORDER: ECONOMIC 
ORDER QUANTITY MODELS 
 The question of how much to order can be determined by using an   economic order quantity 
(EOQ)  model. EOQ models identify the optimal order quantity by minimizing the sum of 
certain annual costs that vary with order size and order frequency. Three order size models are 
described here:
 1. 
The basic economic order quantity model. 
 2. 
The economic production quantity model. 
 3. 
The quantity discount model. 
 Basic Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) Model 
    The basic EOQ model is the simplest of the three models. It is used to identify a  fixed order 
size that will minimize the sum of the annual costs of holding inventory and ordering inven-
tory. The unit purchase price of items in inventory is not generally included in the total cost 
because the unit cost is unaffected by the order size unless quantity discounts are a factor. If 
holding costs are specified as a percentage of unit cost, then unit cost is indirectly included in 
the total cost as a part of holding costs. 
 The basic model involves a number of assumptions. They are listed in  Table 13.1 . 
 Inventory ordering and usage occur in cycles.  Figure 13.2  illustrates several inventory 
cycles. A cycle begins with receipt of an order of  Q  units, which are withdrawn at a constant 
rate over time. When the quantity on hand is just sufficient to satisfy demand during lead 
time, an order for  Q units is submitted to the supplier. Because it is assumed that both the 
usage rate and the lead time do not vary, the order will be received at the precise instant that 
the inventory on hand falls to zero. Thus, orders are timed to avoid both excess stock and 
stockouts.  
 The optimal order quantity reflects a balance between carrying costs and ordering costs: 
As order size varies, one type of cost will increase while the other decreases. For example, if 
the order size is relatively small, the average inventory will be low, resulting in low carrying 
costs. However, a small order size will necessitate frequent orders, which will drive up annual 
ordering costs. Conversely, ordering large quantities at infrequent intervals can hold down 
annual ordering costs, but that would result in higher average inventory levels and therefore 
increased carrying costs.  Figure 13.3 illustrates these two extremes. 
 Cycle stock  The amount 
of inventory needed to meet 
expected demand. 
 Safety stock  Extra inventory 
carried to reduce the probability 
of a stockout due to demand and/
or lead time variability. 
 Economic order quantity 
(EOQ)  The order size that 
minimizes total annual cost.  
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO13.8  Describe the basic 
EOQ model and its assumptions 
and solve typical problems.
 1. Only one product is involved. 
 2. Annual demand requirements are known. 
 3. Demand is spread evenly throughout the year so that the demand rate is reasonably constant. 
 4. Lead time is known and constant. 
 5. Each order is received in a single delivery. 
 6. There are no quantity discounts. 
 TABLE 13.1 
 Assumptions of the basic EOQ 
model 

558 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Thus, the ideal solution is an order size that causes neither a few very large orders nor 
many small orders, but one that lies somewhere between. The exact amount to order will 
depend on the relative magnitudes of carrying and ordering costs. 
 Annual carrying cost is computed by multiplying the average amount of inventory on hand 
by the cost to carry one unit for one year, even though any given unit would not necessarily 
be held for a year. The average inventory is simply half of the order quantity: The amount 
on hand decreases steadily from  Q  units to 0, for an average of ( Q     0)/2, or  Q /2. Using the 
 FIGURE 13.2 
 The inventory cycle: profile of 
inventory level over time 
Reorder
point = 100 units 
Receive 
order
Place 
order
Receive 
order
Place 
order
Receive 
order
Day
Lead time
= 2 days
Quantity
on hand
Q = 350 units
Usage
rate = 50 units
per day
Order size, Q = 350 units
Usage rate = 50 units per day
Lead time = 2 days
Reorder point = 100 units (2 days’ supply)
0
5
7
12
14
 FIGURE 13.3 
 Average inventory level and 
number of orders per year 
are inversely related: As one 
increases, the other decreases 
Average
inventory
0
Q
Q/2
Q/2
Many orders produce a low average inventory.
1 year
1 year
Time
Average
inventory
0
Q
Few orders produce a high average inventory.
Time

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
559
symbol  H  to represent the average annual carrying cost per unit, the  total annual carrying 
cost is
 
Annual carrying cost
2
Q H

 
 where
 Q     Order quantity in units 
 H     Holding (carrying) cost per unit per year 
 Carrying cost is thus a linear function of  Q:  Carrying costs increase or decrease in direct 
proportion to changes in the order quantity  Q, as  Figure 13.4A illustrates. 
 On the other hand, annual ordering cost will decrease as order size increases because, for 
a given annual demand, the larger the order size, the fewer the number of orders needed. For 
instance, if annual demand is 12,000 units and the order size is 1,000 units per order, there 
must be 12 orders over the year. But if  Q     2,000 units, only six orders will be needed; if 
 Q     3,000 units, only four orders will be needed. In general, the number of orders per year 
will be  D/Q,  where  D     Annual demand and  Q     Order size. Unlike carrying costs, order-
ing costs are relatively insensitive to order size; regardless of the amount of an order, certain 
activities must be done, such as determining how much is needed, periodically evaluating 
sources of supply, and preparing the invoice. Even inspection of the shipment to verify qual-
ity and quantity characteristics is not strongly influenced by order size since large shipments 
are sampled rather than completely inspected. Hence, ordering cost is treated as a constant. 
 Annual ordering cost  is a function of the number of orders per year and the ordering cost 
per order:
 
Annual ordering cost
D
Q S

 
 where
 D     Demand, usually in units per year 
 S     Ordering cost per order 
 Because the number of orders per year,  D/Q, decreases as  Q increases, annual ordering 
cost is inversely related to order size, as  Figure 13.4B illustrates. 
 The total annual cost (TC) associated with carrying and ordering inventory when  Q units 
are ordered each time is
 
TC
Annual
carrying
cost
Annual
ordering
cost
2
Q H
D
Q S




 
  
(13–1) 
 FIGURE 13.4 
 Carrying cost, ordering cost, and total cost curve 
Order quantity
Annual cost
Order quantity
Annual cost
Order quantity
Annual cost
Q
2
H
D
Q
S
Q
2
H
D
Q
S
TC  =
+
Q 0
A. Carrying costs are linearly related
     to order size.
B. Ordering costs are inversely and
     nonlinearly related to order size.
C. The total-cost curve is U-shaped.

560 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 (Note that  D  and  H  must be in the same units, e.g., months, years.)  Figure 13.4C  reveals 
that the total-cost curve is U-shaped (i.e., convex, with one minimum) and that  it reaches its 
minimum at the quantity where carrying and ordering costs are equal.  An expression for the 
optimal order quantity,  Q 0 , can be obtained using calculus. 1 The result is the formula
 
2
0
Q
DS
H

 
 
(13–2)
 
 Thus, given annual demand, the ordering cost per order, and the annual carrying cost per 
unit, one can compute the optimal (economic) order quantity. The minimum total cost is then 
found by substituting  Q 0 for  Q in Formula 13–1. 
 The length of an order cycle (i.e., the time between orders) is
 
 
Length of order cycle
Q
D

 
 (13–3) 
 
 1 We can find the minimum point of the total-cost curve by differentiating TC with respect to  Q,  setting the result 
equal to zero, and solving for  Q. Thus,
 1. d
dQ
H
DS Q


TC
/2
/
2
 2. 0
/2
/
, so
2
and
2
2
2
H
DS Q
Q
DS
H
Q
DS
H




 Note that the second derivative is positive, which indicates a minimum has been obtained. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 
 A local distributor for a national tire company expects to sell approximately 9,600 steel-belted 
radial tires of a certain size and tread design next year. Annual carrying cost is $16 per tire, 
and ordering cost is $75. The distributor operates 288 days a year.
 a. 
What is the EOQ? 
 b. 
How many times per year does the store reorder? 
 c. 
What is the length of an order cycle? 
 d. 
What is the total annual cost if the EOQ quantity is ordered? 
 
D
H
S



9,600 tires per year
$16 per unit per year
$75
 a. 
  
2
2(9,600)75
16
300 tires.
0
Q
DS
H



 
 b. 
Number of orders per year:  /
9,600 tires/year
300 tires/order
32 orders.
D Q 

 
 c. 
Length of order cycle:  /
300 tires
9,600 tires/year
of a year, which is
288,
132
132
Q D 


  
or nine workdays. 
 d. 
Q
H
D Q S









TC
Carrying cost
Ordering co
( /2)
(
/ )
(300/2)16
(9,600/300)75
$2,400
$2,400
$4,800
 
 Note that the ordering and carrying costs are equal at the EOQ, as illustrated in  Figure 13.4C . 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
561
 Carrying cost is sometimes stated as a percentage of the price of an item rather than as a 
dollar amount per unit. However, as long as the percentage is converted into a dollar amount, 
the EOQ formula is still appropriate. 
D
S
H
Q
DS
H
Q
H
D Q S
3,600 security cameras per year
$50
.20($180)
$36
2
2(3,600)(50)
36
100 security cameras
TC
Carrying costs
Ordering costs
(
/2)
 
( /
)
(100/2)36
(3,600/100)50
$1,800
$1,800
$3,600
0
0
0









  
  
  

  


 E X A M P L E  3  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
Piddling Manufacturing assembles security systems. It purchases 3,600 high-definition 
security cameras a year at $180 each. Ordering costs are $50, and annual carrying costs are 
20  percent of the purchase price. Compute the optimal quantity and the total annual cost of 
ordering and carrying the inventory. 
 Comment Holding and ordering costs, and annual demand, are typically estimated values 
rather than values that can be precisely determined, say, from accounting records. Holding 
costs are sometimes  designated  by management rather than computed. Consequently, the 
EOQ should be regarded as an  approximate  quantity rather than an exact quantity. Thus, 
rounding the calculated value (to a whole number) is perfectly acceptable; stating a value to 
several decimal places would tend to give an unrealistic impression of the precision involved. 
An obvious question is: How good is this “approximate” EOQ in terms of minimizing cost? 
The answer is that the EOQ is fairly robust; the total cost curve is relatively flat near the EOQ, 
especially to the right of the EOQ. In other words, even if the order quantity differs from the 
actual EOQ, total costs will not increase much at all. This is particularly true for quantities 
larger than the real EOQ, because the total cost curve rises very slowly to the right of the 
EOQ. (See  Figure 13.5 .) 
 Because the total cost curve is relatively flat around the EOQ, there can be some flexibility 
to modify the order quantity a bit from the EOQ (say, to achieve a round lot or full truckload) 
without incurring much of an increase in total cost. 
 Economic Production Quantity (EPQ) 
    The batch mode is widely used in production. Even in assembly operations, portions of the 
work are done in batches. The reason for this is that in certain instances, the capacity to 
produce a part exceeds the part's usage or demand rate. As long as production continues, 
 FIGURE 13.5 
 The total cost curve is relatively 
flat near the EOQ 
Order quantity
Range of TC
Q 0
EOQ “zone”
0
TC
Total cost

562 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
inventory will continue to grow. In such instances, it makes sense to periodically produce 
such items in batches, or  lots, instead of producing continually. 
 The assumptions of the EPQ model are similar to those of the EOQ model, except that 
instead of orders received in a single delivery, units are received incrementally during produc-
tion. The assumptions are
 1. 
Only one product is involved. 
 2. 
Annual demand is known. 
 3. 
The usage rate is constant. 
 4. 
Usage occurs continually, but production occurs periodically. 
 5. 
The production rate is constant when production is occurring. 
 6. 
Lead time is known and constant. 
 7. 
There are no quantity discounts. 
  Figure 13.6  illustrates how inventory is affected by periodically producing a batch of a 
particular item. 
 During the production phase of the cycle, inventory builds up at a rate equal to the difference 
between production and usage rates. For example, if the daily production rate is 20 units and the 
daily usage rate is 5 units, inventory will build up at the rate of 20    5    15 units per day. As 
long as production occurs, the inventory level will continue to build; when production ceases, 
the inventory level will begin to decrease. Hence, the inventory level will be maximum at the 
point where production ceases. Inventory will then decrease at the constant usage rate. When the 
amount of inventory on hand is exhausted, production is resumed, and the cycle repeats itself. 
 Because the company makes the product itself, there are no ordering costs as such. None-
theless, with every production run (batch) there are setup costs—the costs required to prepare 
the equipment for the job, such as cleaning, adjusting, and changing tools and fixtures. Setup 
costs are analogous to ordering costs because they are independent of the lot (run) size. They 
are treated in the formula in exactly the same way. The larger the run size, the fewer the num-
ber of runs needed and, hence, the lower the annual setup cost. The number of runs or batches 
per year is  D/Q,  and the annual setup cost is equal to the number of runs per year times the 
setup cost,  S, per run: ( D/Q ) S. 
 The total cost is
TC
Carrying cost
Setup cost
2
(
/ )
min
max
I
H
D Q S




⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
 
 (13–4) 
 where
 I max     Maximum inventory 
 Unlike the EOQ case, where the entire quantity, Q, goes into inventory, in this case usage 
continually draws off some of the output, and what's left goes into inventory. So the inventory 
level will never be at the run size, Q0. You can see that in  Figure 13.6 . 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO13.9 Describe the 
economic production quantity 
model and solve typical 
problems.
 FIGURE 13.6 
 EPQ with incremental 
inventory buildup  
Time
Run
size, Q 0
Q
Maximum
inventory,
Imax
Production
and usage
Production
and usage
Production
and usage
Usage
only
Usage
only
Usage
only
Cumulative
production
Inventory

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
563
 The economic run quantity is
 
2
Q
DS
H
p
p
u
p 

 
 (13–5) 
 where
 p     Production or delivery rate 
 u     Usage rate 
Note: p and u must be in the same units (e.g., both in units per day, or units per week).
 The cycle time (the time between setups of consecutive runs) for the economic run size 
model is a function of the run size and usage (demand) rate:
 Cycle time
Q
u
p

 
 (13–6) 
 Similarly, the run time (the production phase of the cycle) is a function of the run (lot) size 
and the production rate:
 Run time
Q
p
p

 
 (13–7) 
 The maximum and average inventory levels are
 
(
)
or
and
2
max
average
max




⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
I
Q
p
p
u
Q
Q
P
u
I
I
p
p
p
 
 (13–8) 
 E X A M P L E  4 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 
D
S
H
p
u





48,000 wheels per year
$45
$1 per wheel per year
800 wheels per day
48,000 wheels per 240 days, or 200 wheels per day
 a. 
 
2
2(48,000)45
1
800
800
200
2,400 wheels
Q
DS
H
p
p
u
p 




 
 b. 
 TC
Carrying cost
Setup cost
2
(
/
)
min
max
I
H
D Q
S
p




⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
 Thus, first compute  I max :
 
(
)
2,400
800 (800
200)
1,800 wheels
TC
1,800
2
$1
48,000
2,400
$45
$900
$900
$1,800
max
I
Q
p
p
u
p












 A toy manufacturer uses 48,000 rubber wheels per year for its popular dump truck series. 
The firm makes its own wheels, which it can produce at a rate of 800 per day. The toy 
trucks are assembled uniformly over the entire year. Carrying cost is $1 per wheel a year. 
Setup cost for a production run of wheels is $45. The firm operates 240 days per year. 
Determine the
 a. 
Optimal run size. 
 b. 
Minimum total annual cost for carrying and setup. 
 c. 
Cycle time for the optimal run size. 
 d. 
Run time. 

564 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
   Quantity Discounts 
 Quantity discounts  are price reductions for larger orders offered to customers to induce 
them to buy in large quantities. For example, a Chicago surgical supply company publishes 
the price list shown in  Table 13.2  for boxes of gauze strips. Notice how the price per box 
decreases as order quantity increases. 
 When quantity discounts are available, there are a number of questions that must be 
addressed to decide whether to take advantage of a discount. These include:
 1. 
Will storage space be available for the additional items? 
 2. 
Will obsolescence or deterioration be an issue? 
 3. 
Can we afford to tie up extra funds in inventory? 
 If the decision is made to take advantage of a quantity discount, the goal is to select the 
order quantity that will minimize total cost, where total cost is the sum of carrying cost, order-
ing cost,  and purchasing (i.e., product) cost:
 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
Q H
D
Q
S
PD






TC
Carrying cost
Ordering cost
Purchasing cost
2
 
 (13–9) 
 Where
 Q     Order quantity 
 H     Holding cost per unit (usually annual) 
 D     Demand (usually annual) 
 S     Ordering cost 
 P     Unit price or cost 
 Recall that in the basic EOQ model, determination of order size does not involve the pur-
chasing cost. The rationale for not including unit price is that under the assumption of no 
quantity discounts, price per unit is the same for all order sizes. Inclusion of unit price in the 
total-cost computation in that case would merely increase the total cost by the amount  P times 
 D.  A graph of total annual purchase cost versus quantity would be a horizontal line. Hence, 
including purchasing costs would merely raise the total-cost curve by the same amount ( PD ) 
at every point. That would not change the EOQ. (See  Figure 13.7 .) 
 When quantity discounts are offered, there is a separate U-shaped total-cost curve for each 
unit price. Again, including unit prices merely raises each curve by a constant amount. How-
ever, because the unit prices are all different, each curve is raised by a different amount: 
Smaller unit prices will raise a total-cost curve less than larger unit prices. Note that no one 
curve applies to the entire range of quantities; each curve applies to only a  portion of the 
range. (See  Figure 13.8 .) Hence, the applicable or  feasible  total cost is initially on the curve 
with the highest unit price and then drops down, curve by curve, at the  price breaks,  which are 
the minimum quantities needed to obtain the discounts. Thus, in  Table 13.2 , the price breaks 
for gauze strips are at 45 and 70 boxes. The result is a total-cost curve with  steps  at the price 
breaks. 
 Quantity discounts  Price 
reductions for larger orders. 
 LO13.10 Describe the quantity 
discount model and solve typi-
cal problems.
 Note again the equality of cost (in this example, setup and carrying costs) at the EOQ. 
 c. Cycle time
2,400 wheels
200 wheels per day
12 days
Q
u
p



 
 Thus, a run of wheels will be made every 12 days. 
 d. Run time
2,400 wheels
800 wheels per day
3 days
Q
p
p



 
 Thus, each run will require three days to complete. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
565
 Even though each curve has a minimum, those points are not necessarily feasible. For exam-
ple, the minimum point for the $1.40 curve in  Figure 13.8  appears to be about 65 units. How-
ever, the price list shown in  Table 13.2  indicates that an order size of 65 boxes will involve a unit 
price of $1.70. The actual total-cost curve is denoted by the solid lines; only those price–quan-
tity combinations are feasible. The objective of the quantity discount model is to identify the 
order quantity that will represent the lowest total cost for the entire set of curves. 
 Analysis of quantity discount problems differs slightly, depending on whether holding 
costs are independent of unit price (i.e., constant), or whether they are a percentage of unit 
price. The following table illustrates the two ways, using 20 percent to illustrate holding costs 
that are a percentage of unit price. 
 When carrying costs are constant, there will be a single minimum point. All curves will 
have their minimum point at the same quantity. Consequently, the total-cost curves line up 
vertically, differing only in that the lower unit prices are reflected by lower total-cost curves 
as shown in  Figure 13.9A . (For purposes of illustration, the horizontal purchasing cost lines 
have been omitted.) 
 When carrying costs are specified as a percentage of unit price, each curve will have a 
different minimum point. Because carrying costs are a percentage of price, lower prices 
will mean lower carrying costs and larger minimum points. Thus, as price decreases, each 
curve's minimum point will be to the right of the next higher curve's minimum point. (See 
 Figure 13.9B .) 
 Order Quantity 
 Price per Box 
 1 to 44 
 $2.00 
 45 to 69 
 1.70 
 70 or more 
 1.40 
 TABLE 13.2 
 Price list for extra-wide gauze 
strips 
 FIGURE 13.7 
 Adding  PD doesn't change the 
EOQ 
Quantity
Cost
EOQ
PD
TC without PD
TC with PD
0
 FIGURE 13.8 
 The total-cost curve with quantity discounts is composed of 
a portion of the total-cost curve for each price 
Quantity
Cost
45
PD @ $2.00
each
0
PD @ $1.70
each
PD @ $1.40
each
70
TC @ $1.40 each
TC @ $1.70 each
TC @ $2.00 each
 Order Quantity 
 Unit Price 
 H constant @ $4 
 H 20% of Unit Price 
 1 to 99 
 $10 
 4 
 .20(10)    2.00 
 100 to 299 
 9 
 4 
 .20 (9)    1.80 
 300 or more 
 8 
 4 
 .20 (8)    1.60 

566 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 The procedure for determining the overall EOQ differs slightly, depending on which of 
these two cases is relevant. For carrying costs that are constant, the procedure is as follows:
 1. 
Compute the common minimum point. 
 2. 
Only one of the unit prices will have the minimum point in its feasible range since the 
ranges do not overlap. Identify that range. 
   a. 
 If the feasible minimum point is on the lowest price range (i.e., the lowest cost 
curve), that is the optimal order quantity. 
  b. 
 If the feasible minimum point is in any other range, compute the total cost for the 
feasible minimum point and for the price breaks of all  lower  unit costs. Compare the 
total costs; the quantity (minimum point or price break) that yields the lowest total 
cost is the optimal order quantity. 
 FIGURE 13.9 
 Comparison of TC curves for constant carrying costs and carrying costs that are a percentage of unit costs 
Quantity
Cost
TCb
TCa
TCc
CCa, b, c
OC
Decreasing
price
EOQ
0
Cost
Quantity
TCb
TCa
TCc
CCa
OC
CCb
CCc
 A. When carrying costs are constant, all curves have their minimum 
points at the same quantity. 
 B. When carrying costs are stated as a percentage of unit price, the 
minimum points do not line up. 
 E X A M P L E  5 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
The maintenance department of a large hospital uses about 816 cases of liquid cleanser annu-
ally. Ordering costs are $12, carrying costs are $4 per case a year, and the new price schedule 
indicates that orders of less than 50 cases will cost $20 per case, 50 to 79 cases will cost $18 
per case, 80 to 99 cases will cost $17 per case, and larger orders will cost $16 per case. Deter-
mine the optimal order quantity and the total cost. 
 See  Figure 13.10 :
 
816 cases per year
$12
$4 per case per year
D
S
H



 Range 
 Price 
 1 to 49 
 $20 
 50 to 79 
 18 
 80 to 99 
 17 
 100 or more 
 16 
 1. 
Compute the common  minimum Q:
2
2(816)12
4
69.97
70 cases
DS
H




 . 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
567
 When carrying costs are expressed as a percentage of price, determine the best purchase 
quantity with the following procedure:
 1. 
Beginning with the lowest unit price, compute the minimum points for each price range 
until you find a feasible minimum point (i.e., until a minimum point falls in the quantity 
range for its price). 
 2. 
If the minimum point for the lowest unit price is feasible, it is the optimal order quan-
tity. If the minimum point is not feasible in the lowest price range, compare the total 
cost at the price break for all  lower price ranges with the total cost of the feasible mini-
mum point. The quantity that yields the lowest total cost is the optimum. 
 FIGURE 13.10 
 Total-cost curves for Example 5  
Quantity
Cost
50
0
70
80
100
$16/case
$17/case
$18/case
$20/case
   2. The 70 cases can be bought at $18 per case because 70 falls in the range of 50 to 79 cases. 
The total cost to purchase 816 cases a year, at the rate of 70 cases per order, will be
 
Q
H
D Q S
PD










TC
Carrying cost
Order cost
Purchase cost
( /2)
(
/ )
(70/2)4
(816/70)12
18(816)
$14,968
70
 
 Because lower cost ranges exist, each must be checked against the minimum cost generated 
by 70 cases at $18 each. In order to buy at $17 per case, at least 80 cases must be purchased. 
(Because the TC curve is rising, 80 cases will have the lowest TC for that curve's feasible 
region.) The total cost at 80 cases will be
 TC
(80/2)4
(816/80)12
17(816)
$14,154
80 



 
 To obtain a cost of $16 per case, at least 100 cases per order are required, and the total cost at 
that price break will be
 TC
(100/2)4
(816/100)12
16(816)
$13,354
100 



 
 Therefore, because 100 cases per order yields the lowest total cost, 100 cases is the overall 
optimal order quantity. 
 E X A M P L E  6 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
Surge Electric uses 4,000 toggle switches a year. Switches are priced as follows: 1 to 
499, 90 cents each; 500 to 999, 85 cents each; and 1,000 or more, 80 cents each. It costs 
approximately $30 to prepare an order and receive it, and carrying costs are 40 percent of 
purchase price per unit on an annual basis. Determine the optimal order quantity and the 
total annual cost. 

568 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 S O L U T I O N 
 See  Figure 13.11 :
 
4,000 switches per year
$30
.40
D
S
H
P



 
 Range 
 Unit Price 
 H 
    1 to 499 
 $.90 
 .40(.90)    .36 
  500 to 999 
 $.85 
 .40(.85)    .34 
 1,000 or more 
 $.80 
 .40(.80)    .32 
 Find the minimum point for each price, starting with the lowest price, until you locate a fea-
sible minimum point.
 
Minimum point
2
2(4,000)30
.32
866 switches
.80
DS
H



 
 Because an order size of 866 switches will cost $.85 each rather than $.80 each, 866 is not a 
feasible minimum point for $.80 per switch. Next, try $.85 per unit.
 
Minimum point
2(4,000)30
.34
840 switches
.85 

 
 This is feasible; it falls in the $.85 per switch range of 500 to 999. 
 Now compute the total cost for 840, and compare it to the total cost of the minimum quan-
tity necessary to obtain a price of $.80 per switch.
 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
Q H
D
Q
S
PD














TC
Carrying costs
Ordering costs
Purchasing costs
2
TC
840
2 (.34)
4,000
840 (30)
.85(4,000)
$3,686
TC
1,000
2
(.32)
4,000
1,000 (30)
.80(4,000)
$3,480
840
1,000
 
 Thus, the minimum-cost order size is 1,000 switches. 
 FIGURE 13.11 
 Total-cost curves for Example 6 
 
Quantity
Cost
500
0
840
866
TC @ $.90 ea.
TC @ $.85 ea.
TC @ $.80 ea.
1,000

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
569
 13.6 REORDER POINT ORDERING 
     EOQ models answer the question of how much to order, but not the question of when to 
order. The latter is the function of models that identify the   reorder point (ROP)   in terms 
of a  quantity:  The reorder point occurs when the quantity on hand drops to a predetermined 
amount. That amount generally includes expected demand during lead time and perhaps an 
extra cushion of stock, which serves to reduce the probability of experiencing a stockout dur-
ing lead time. Note that in order to know when the reorder point has been reached,  perpetual
inventory monitoring is required. 
 The goal in ordering is to place an order when the amount of inventory on hand is suffi-
cient to satisfy demand during the time it takes to receive that order (i.e., lead time). There are 
four determinants of the reorder point quantity:
 1. 
The rate of demand (usually based on a forecast). 
 2. 
The lead time. 
 3. 
The extent of demand and/or lead time variability. 
 4. 
The degree of stockout risk acceptable to management. 
 If demand and lead time are both constant, the reorder point is simply
ROP
LT
d


 
 (13–10) 
 where
 d     Demand rate (units per day or week) 
 LT    Lead time in days or weeks 
Note: Demand and lead time must be expressed in the same time units. 
 Reorder point (ROP)  When 
the quantity on hand of an item 
drops to this amount, the item is 
reordered. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 LO13.11  Describe reorder 
point models and solve typical 
problems.
 E X A M P L E  7  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N  
Tingly takes Two-a-Day vitamins, which are delivered to his home by a routeman seven days 
after an order is called in. At what point should Tingly reorder? 







Usage
Lead time
ROP
2 vitamins a day
7 days
Usage
Lead time
2 vitamins per day
7 days
14 vitamins
 Thus, Tingly should reorder when 14 vitamin tablets are left, which is equal to a seven-day 
supply of two vitamins a day. 
 When variability is present in demand or lead time, it creates the possibility that actual demand 
will exceed expected (average) demand. Consequently, it becomes necessary to carry additional 
inventory, called   safety stock , to reduce the risk of running out of inventory (a stockout) during 
lead time. The reorder point then increases by the amount of the safety stock:
ROP
Expected demand
during lead time
Safety stock


 
 (13–11) 
 For example, if expected demand during lead time is 100 units, and the desired amount of 
safety stock is 10 units, the ROP would be 110 units. 
  Figure 13.12  illustrates how safety stock can reduce the risk of a stockout during lead time 
(LT). Note that stockout protection is needed only during lead time. If there is a sudden surge 
at any point during the cycle, that will trigger another order. Once that order is received, the 
danger of an imminent stockout is negligible. 
 Safety stock  Stock that is held 
in excess of expected demand 
due to variable demand and/or 
lead time. 

570 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Because it costs money to hold safety stock, a manager must carefully weigh the cost of 
carrying safety stock against the reduction in stockout risk it provides. The customer  service 
level  increases as the risk of stockout decreases. Order cycle   service level  can be defined as 
the probability that demand will not exceed supply during lead time (i.e., that the amount of 
stock on hand will be sufficient to meet demand). Hence, a service level of 95 percent implies 
a probability of 95 percent that demand will not exceed supply during lead time. An equiva-
lent statement that demand will be satisfied in 95 percent of such instances does  not  mean that 
95 percent of demand will be satisfied. The risk of a stockout is the complement of service 
level; a customer service level of 95 percent implies a stockout risk of 5 percent. That is,
 Service level
100 percent
Stockout risk


 
 Later you will see how the order cycle service level relates to the  annual service level. 
 Consider for a moment the importance of stockouts. When a stockout occurs, demand 
cannot be satisfied at that time. In manufacturing operations, stockouts mean that jobs will be 
delayed and additional costs will be incurred. If the stockout involves parts for an assembly 
line, or spare parts for a machine or conveyor belt on the line, the line will have to shut down, 
typically at a very high cost per hour, until parts can be obtained. For service operations, 
stockouts mean that services cannot be completed on time. Aside from the added cost that 
results from the time delay, there is not only the matter of customer dissatisfaction but also the 
fact that schedules will be disrupted, sometimes creating a “domino effect” on following jobs. 
In the retail sector, stockouts create a competitive  disadvantage  that can result in customer 
dissatisfaction and, ultimately, the loss of customers. 
 The amount of safety stock that is appropriate for a given situation depends on the follow-
ing factors:
 1. 
The average demand rate and average lead time. 
 2. 
Demand and lead time variability. 
 3. 
The desired service level. 
 For a given order cycle service level, the greater the variability in either demand rate or lead 
time, the greater the amount of safety stock that will be needed to achieve that service level. 
Similarly, for a given amount of variation in demand rate or lead time, achieving an increase in 
the service level will require increasing the amount of safety stock. Selection of a service level 
 Service level  Probability that 
demand will not exceed supply 
during lead time. 
 FIGURE 13.12 
 Safety stock reduces risk of 
stockout during lead time 
Time
Quantity
LT
Place
order
Receive
order
Maximum probable
demand during
lead time
Expected demand
during lead time
ROP
Safety stock

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
571
may reflect stockout costs (e.g., lost sales, customer dissatisfaction) or it might simply be a 
policy variable (e.g., the manager wants to achieve a specified service level for a certain item). 
 Let us look at several models that can be used in cases when variability is present. The first 
model can be used if an estimate of expected demand during lead time and its standard devia-
tion are available. The formula is
 ROP
Expected demand
during lead time
LT
z
d

 
 
 (13–12) 
 where
 z     Number of standard deviations 
 s  d LT     The standard deviation of lead time demand 
 The models generally assume that any variability in demand rate or lead time can be ade-
quately described by a normal distribution. However, this is not a strict requirement; the mod-
els provide approximate reorder points even where actual distributions depart from normal. 
 The value of  z  (see  Figure 13.13 ) used in a particular instance depends on the stockout risk 
that the manager is willing to accept. Generally, the smaller the risk the manager is willing to 
accept, the greater the value of  z.  Use Appendix B, Table B, to obtain the value of  z,  given a 
desired service level for lead time. 
 FIGURE 13.13 
 The ROP based on a normal 
distribution of lead time demand 
Expected
demand
ROP
0
z
Quantity
Service level
Risk of
a stockout
(Probability of
no stockout)
Safety
stock
z scale
 E X A M P L E  8  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Suppose that the manager of a construction supply house determined from historical records 
that demand for sand during lead time averages 50 tons. In addition, suppose the manager 
determined that demand during lead time could be described by a normal distribution that has 
a mean of 50 tons and a standard deviation of 5 tons. Answer these questions, assuming that 
the manager is willing to accept a stockout risk of no more than 3 percent:
 a. 
What value of  z is appropriate? 
 b. 
How much safety stock should be held? 
 c. 
What reorder point should be used? 
 S O L U T I O N  
 Expected lead time demand  50 tons
 
d



Risk
5 tons
3 percent
LT
 
 a. 
From Appendix B, Table B, using a service level of 1    .03  .9700, you obtain a value 
of  z       1.88. 
 b. 
Safety stock     z   d LT     1.88(5)    9.40 tons. 
 c. 
ROP    Expected lead time demand    Safety stock    50    9.40    59.40 tons. 

572 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 When data on lead time demand are not readily available, Formula 13–12 cannot be used. 
Nevertheless, data are generally available on daily or weekly demand, and on the length of 
lead time. Using those data, a manager can determine whether demand and/or lead time is 
variable, if variability exists in one or both, and the related standard deviation(s). For those 
situations, one of the following formulas can be used: 
 If only demand is variable, then  
LT,
LT
d
d

 
 and the reorder point is
 ROP
LT
LT
d
z
d
    
 
 
 (13–13) 
 where
 d
Average

 daily or weekly demand 
   d      Standard deviation of demand in days or weeks 
 LT    Lead time in days or weeks 
 If only lead time is variable, then    d LT      d  LT , and the reorder point is
 ROP
LT
LT
d
zd




 
 (13–14) 
 where
 d     Daily or weekly demand 
 LT
Average

 lead time in days or weeks 
  LT     Standard deviation of lead time in days or weeks 
 If both demand and lead time are variable, then
 
LT
LT
2
2
LT
2




+ d
d
d
 
 and the reorder point is
 ROP
LT
LT
2
2
LT
2
d
z
d
d





+
 
 (13–15) 
 Note: Each of these models assumes that demand and lead time are  independent. 
 E X A M P L E  9 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
 A restaurant uses an average of 50 jars of a special sauce each week. Weekly usage of sauce 
has a standard deviation of 3 jars. The manager is willing to accept no more than a 10 percent 
risk of stockout during lead time, which is two weeks. Assume the distribution of usage is 
normal.
 a. 
Which of the above formulas is appropriate for this situation? Why? 
 b. 
Determine the value of  z. 
 c. 
Determine the ROP. 
 
d
d





50 jars per week
3 jars per week
LT
2 weeks
Acceptable risk
10 percent, so service level is .90  
 a. 
Because only demand is variable (i.e., has a standard deviation), Formula 13–13 is 
appropriate. 
 b. 
From Appendix B, Table B, using a service level of .9000, you obtain  z       1.28. 
c. 
ROP
LT
LT
50
2
1.28(3) 2
100
5.43
105.43.
d
z
d


 






 d. 
Because the inventory is discrete units (jars), we round this amount to 106. (Generally, 
round up.) 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
573
 Note that a two-bin ordering system (see p. 552) involves ROP reordering: The quantity in the 
second bin is equal to the ROP. 
 The logic of the three formulas for the reorder point may not be immediately obvious. The 
first part of each formula is the expected demand, which is the product of daily (or weekly) 
demand and the number of days (or weeks) of lead time. The second part of the formula is  z 
times the standard deviation of lead time demand. For the formula in which only demand is 
variable, daily (or weekly) demand is assumed to be normally distributed and has the same 
mean and standard deviation (see  Figure 13.14 ). The standard deviation of demand for the 
entire lead time is found by summing the  variances of daily (or weekly) demands, and then 
finding the square root of that number because, unlike variances, standard deviations are not 
additive. Hence, if the daily standard deviation is    d  , the  variance is   
2
d  , and if lead time is 
four days, the variance of lead time demand will equal the sum of the four variances, which 
is 4  
2
d   . The standard deviation of lead time demand will be the square root of this, which is 
equal to 2   d  . In general, this becomes
LT
d
  and, hence, the last part of Formula 13–13. 
 When only lead time is variable, the explanation is much simpler. The standard deviation 
of lead time demand is equal to the constant daily demand multiplied by the standard devia-
tion of lead time. 
 When both demand and lead time are variable, the formula appears truly impressive. How-
ever, it is merely the result of squaring the standard deviations of the two previous formulas to 
obtain their variances, summing them, and then taking the square root. 
 It is sometimes convenient to think of service level in annual terms. One definition of 
annual service level is the percentage of demand filled directly from inventory. This is also 
known as the   fill rate . Thus, if  D     1,000, and 990 units were filled directly from inventory 
(shortages totaling 10 units over the year were recorded), the annual service level (fill rate) 
would be 990/1,000    99 percent. 
 13.7 HOW MUCH TO ORDER: FIXED-ORDER-
INTERVAL MODEL 
 The  fixed-order-interval (FOI) model  is used when orders must be placed at fixed time 
intervals (weekly, twice a month, etc.): The timing of orders is set. The question, then, at each 
order point, is how much to order. Fixed-interval ordering systems are widely used by retail 
businesses. If demand is variable, the order size will tend to vary from cycle to cycle. This is 
quite different from an EOQ/ROP approach in which the order size generally remains fixed 
from cycle to cycle, while the length of the cycle varies (shorter if demand is above average, 
and longer if demand is below average). 
 Fill rate  The percentage of 
demand filled by the stock on 
hand. 
 Fixed-order-interval (FOI) 
model  Orders are placed at 
fixed time intervals. 
 FIGURE 13.14 
 Lead time demand 
Q0 + ss
ROP
ss
0
Inventory on hand
Distributions
of daily demand
Lead time
Risk
Service
level
Distribution of
lead time demand
Safety stock (ss)

574 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Reasons for Using the Fixed-Order-Interval Model 
 In some cases, a supplier's policy might encourage orders at fixed intervals. Even when that 
is not the case, grouping orders for items from the same supplier can produce savings in ship-
ping costs. Furthermore, some situations do not readily lend themselves to continuous moni-
toring of inventory levels. Many retail operations (e.g., drugstores, small grocery stores) fall 
into this category. The alternative for them is to use fixed-interval ordering, which requires 
only periodic checks of inventory levels. 
 Determining the Amount to Order 
 If both the demand rate and lead time are constant, the fixed-interval model and the fixed-
quantity model function identically. The differences in the two models become apparent only 
when examined under conditions of variability. Like the ROP model, the fixed-interval model 
can have variations in demand only, in lead time only, or in both demand and lead time. How-
ever, for the sake of simplicity and because it is perhaps the most frequently encountered situ-
ation, the discussion here will focus only on  variable demand and  constant lead time. 
  Figure 13.15  provides a comparison of the fixed-quantity and fixed-interval systems. In 
the fixed-quantity arrangement, orders are triggered by a  quantity  (ROP), while in the fixed-
interval arrangement orders are triggered by a  time. Therefore, the fixed-interval system must 
have stockout protection for lead time plus the next order cycle, but the fixed-quantity system 
needs protection only during lead time because additional orders can be placed at any time 
 LO13.12 Describe situations 
in which the fixed-order inter-
val model is appropriate, and 
solve typical problems.
 FIGURE 13.15 
 Comparison of fixed-quantity and 
fixed-interval ordering
 A. Fixed quantity 
 B. Fixed interval 
Order
quantity
Order
quantity
Order
quantity
Place
order
Receive
order
Place
order
Receive
order
Place
order
Receive
order
LT
(Protection interval = Lead time)
Time
Safety
stock
ROP
Amount on hand
Order
quantity
Order
quantity
Order
quantity
Place
order
Receive
order
Place
order
Receive
order
Place
order
Receive
order
OI
Time
Safety
stock
LT
Protection interval
Amount on hand

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
575
and will be received shortly (lead time) thereafter. Consequently, there is a greater need for 
safety stock in the fixed-interval model than in the fixed-quantity model. Note, for example, 
the large dip into safety stock during the second order cycle with the fixed-interval model. 
 Both models are sensitive to demand experience just prior to reordering, but in somewhat 
different ways. In the fixed-quantity model, a higher-than-normal demand causes a  shorter 
time  between orders, whereas in the fixed-interval model, the result is  a larger order size. 
Another difference is that the fixed-quantity model requires close monitoring of inventory 
levels in order to know  when  the amount on hand has reached the reorder point. The fixed-
interval model requires only a periodic review (i.e., physical count) of inventory levels just 
prior to placing an order to determine how much is needed. 
 Order size in the fixed-interval model is determined by the following computation:









Amount
to order
Expected demand
during protection
interval
Safety
stock
Amount on hand
at reorder time
(OI
LT)
OI
LT
Q
d
z
A
d
  (13–16) 
 where
 OI     Order interval (length of time between orders) 
  A     Amount on hand at reorder time 
 As in previous models, we assume that demand during the protection interval is normally 
distributed. 
 E XAM PL E  10 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Given the following information, determine the amount to order.
 
d
d

 




30 units per day
3 units per day
LT
2 days
Desired service level
99 percent
Amount on hand at reorder time
71 units
OI
7 days
  
 S O L U T I O N 
 z     2.33 for 99 percent service level
 
d
z
A
Q
d
Amount
to order
(OI
LT)
OI
LT
30(7
2)
2.33(3) 7
2
71
220 units


 








 
 An issue related to fixed-interval ordering is the risk of a stockout. From the perspective (i.e., the 
point in time) of placing an order, there are two points in the order cycle at which a stockout could 
occur. One is shortly after the order is placed, while waiting to receive the current order (refer to 
 Figure 13.15 ). The second point is near the end of the cycle, while waiting to receive the next order. 
 To find the initial risk of a stockout, use the ROP formula (13–13), setting ROP equal to the 
quantity on hand when the order is placed, and solve for  z,  then obtain the service level for that 
value of  z from Appendix B, Table B, and subtract it from 1.0000 to get the risk of a stockout. 
 To find the risk of a stockout at the end of the order cycle, use the fixed-interval formula 
(13–16) and solve for  z.  Then obtain the service level for that value of  z from Appendix B, 
Table B, and subtract it from 1.0000 to get the risk of a stockout. 
 Let's look at an example. 
 E XAM PL E  11 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Given the following information:
 
A
Q
d
d







LT
4 days
43 units
OI
12 days
171 units
10 units/day
2 units/day
 
 Determine the risk of a stockout at
 a. 
The end of the initial lead time. 
 b. 
The end of the second lead time. 

576 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Benefits and Disadvantages 
 The fixed-interval system results in tight control. In addition, when multiple items come from 
the same supplier, grouping orders can yield savings in ordering, packing, and shipping costs. 
Moreover, it may be the only practical approach if inventory withdrawals cannot be closely 
monitored. 
 On the negative side, the fixed-interval system necessitates a larger amount of safety stock 
for a given risk of stockout because of the need to protect against shortages during an entire 
order interval plus lead time (instead of lead time only), and this increases the carrying cost. 
Also, there are the costs of the periodic reviews.  
 13.8 THE SINGLE-PERIOD MODEL 
 The  single-period model  (sometimes referred to as the  newsboy problem ) is used to handle 
ordering of perishables (fresh fruits, vegetables, seafood, cut flowers) and items that have 
a limited useful life (newspapers, magazines, spare parts for specialized equipment). The 
 period  for spare parts is the life of the equipment, assuming that the parts cannot be used for 
other equipment. What sets unsold or unused goods apart is that they are not typically car-
ried over from one period to the next, at least not without penalty. Day-old baked goods, for 
instance, are often sold at reduced prices; leftover seafood may be discarded; and out-of-date 
magazines may be offered to used book stores at bargain rates. There may even be some cost 
associated with disposal of leftover goods. 
 Analysis of single-period situations generally focuses on two costs: shortage and excess. 
Shortage cost may include a charge for loss of customer goodwill as well as the opportunity 
cost of lost sales. Generally,   shortage cost is simply unrealized profit per unit. That is,
 
Revenue per unit
Cost per unit
shortage
C
Cs



 
 If a shortage or stockout relates to an item used in production or to a spare part for a machine, 
then shortage cost refers to the actual cost of lost production. 
 Excess cost  pertains to items left over at the end of the period. In effect, excess cost is the 
difference between purchase cost and salvage value. That is,
 
Original cost per unit
Salvage value per unit
excess
C
Ce



 
 If there is cost associated with disposing of excess items, the salvage will be negative and will 
therefore  increase the excess cost per unit. 
 The goal of the single-period model is to identify the order quantity, or stocking level, that 
will minimize the long-run excess and shortage costs. 
 There are two general categories of problems that we will consider: those for which 
demand can be approximated using a continuous distribution (perhaps a theoretical one such 
as a uniform or normal distribution) and those for which demand can be approximated using 
a discrete distribution (say, historical frequencies or a theoretical distribution such as the 
Poisson). The kind of inventory can indicate which type of model might be appropriate. For 
example, demand for petroleum, liquids, and gases tends to vary over some  continuous scale, 
 LO13.13 Describe situations 
in which the single-period 
model is appropriate and solve 
typical problems.
 Single-period model  Model 
for ordering of perishables and 
other items with limited useful 
lives. 
 Shortage cost  Generally, the 
unrealized profit per unit. 
 Excess cost  Difference 
between purchase cost and sal-
vage value of items left over at 
the end of a period.  
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
For the risk of stockout for the first lead time, we use Formula 13–13. Substituting the 
given values, we get 43    10    4     z (2)(2). Solving,  z       .75. From Appendix B, 
Table B, the service level is .7734. The risk is 1    .7734    .2266, which is fairly high. 
 b. 
For the risk of a stockout at the end of the second lead time, we use Formula 13–16. 
Substituting the given values we get 171    10    (4    12)     z (2)(4)    43. Solving, 
 z     16.75. This value is way out in the right tail of the normal distribution, making the 
service level virtually 100 percent, and, thus, the risk of a stockout at this point is essen-
tially equal to zero. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
577
thus lending itself to description by a continuous distribution. Demand for tractors, cars, and 
computers is expressed in terms of the  number of units  demanded and lends itself to descrip-
tion by a discrete distribution. 
 Continuous Stocking Levels 
 The concept of identifying an optimal stocking level is perhaps easiest to visualize when 
demand is  uniform.  Choosing the stocking level is similar to balancing a seesaw, but instead 
of a person on each end of the seesaw, we have excess cost per unit ( C  e  ) on one end of the 
distribution and shortage cost per unit ( C  s  ) on the other. The optimal stocking level is analo-
gous to the fulcrum of the seesaw; the stocking level equalizes the cost weights, as illustrated 
in  Figure 13.16 .  
 The  service level  is the  probability  that demand will not exceed the stocking level, and 
computation of the service level is the key to determining the optimal stocking level,  S  o  .
 Service level
C
C
C
s
s
e


 
 (13–17) 
 where
 C  s      Shortage cost per unit 
 C  e      Excess cost per unit 
 If actual demand exceeds  S  o  , there is a shortage; hence,  C  s   is on the right end of the distri-
bution. Similarly, if demand is less than  S  o  , there is an excess, so  C  e   is on the left end of the 
distribution. When  C  e       C  s  , the optimal stocking level is halfway between the endpoints of 
the distribution. If one cost is greater than the other,  S  o  will be closer to the larger cost. 
 FIGURE 13.16 
 The optimal stocking level 
balances unit shortage and 
excess costs 
Service level
Ce
Cs
So
Balance point
Quantity
So = Optimum
        stocking quantity
 E XAM PL E  12 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N  
Sweet cider is delivered weekly to Cindy's Cider Bar. Demand varies uniformly between 300 
liters and 500 liters per week. Cindy pays 20 cents per liter for the cider and charges 80 cents 
per liter for it. Unsold cider has no salvage value and cannot be carried over into the next week 
due to spoilage. Find the optimal stocking level and its stockout risk for that quantity. 
 
C
C
C
C
C
e
s
s
s
e















Cost per unit
Salvage value per unit
$.20
$0
$.20 per unit
Revenue per unit
Cost per unit
$.80
$.20
$.60 per unit
SL
$.60
$.60
$.20
.75
 

578 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 A similar approach applies when demand is normally distributed.  
 Thus, the optimal stocking level must satisfy demand 75 percent of the time. For the uniform 
distribution, this will be at a point equal to the minimum demand plus 75 percent of the differ-
ence between maximum and minimum demands:
 
300
.75(500
300)
450 liters
So 



 
75%
300
450
500 
 The stockout risk is 1.00    .75    .25. 
 E X A MP LE 1 3 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N 
Cindy's Cider Bar also sells a blend of cherry juice and apple cider. Demand for the blend is 
approximately normal, with a mean of 200 liters per week and a standard deviation of 10 liters 
per week.  C  s      60 cents per liter, and  C  e      20 cents per liter. Find the optimal stocking level 
for the apple-cherry blend. 
 
SL
$.60
$.60
$.20
.75
C
C
C
s
s
e





 
 This indicates that 75 percent of the area under the normal curve must be to the left of the 
stocking level. Appendix B, Table B, shows that a value of  z between   .67 and   .68, Use the 
value of z that has a probability nearest to .75. In this case, it is .67. The optimal stocking level 
is  S  o      mean     z  . Thus,
 S
200 liters
.67(10 liters)
206.7 liters
o 


 
 
200
So
Quantity
75%
 
 Discrete Stocking Levels 
 When stocking levels are discrete rather than continuous, the service level computed using the 
ratio  C  s  /( C  s       C  e  ) usually does not coincide with a feasible stocking level (e.g., the optimal 
amount may be  between  five and six units). The solution is to stock at the  next higher level 
(e.g., six units). In other words, choose the stocking level so that the desired service level is 
equaled or  exceeded.  Figure 13.17 illustrates this concept. 
 Example 14 illustrates the use of an empirical distribution. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
579
  The logic behind Formula 13–17 can be seen by solving the problem using a  decision table 
approach.  Table 13.3  illustrates this approach. The table enumerates the expected cost of each 
combination of stocking level and demand. For instance, if the stocking level is three, and 
demand turns out to be zero (see the blue-shaded cell), that would result in an excess of three 
units, at a cost of $800 each. The probability of a demand of zero units is .20, so the expected 
cost of that cell is .20(3)($800)    $480. Similarly, if no units are stocked and demand is two 
(see the yellow-shaded cell), the expected cost is the probability of demand being two (i.e., 
.30) multiplied by two units multiplied by the shortage cost per unit. Thus, the expected cost 
is .30(2)($4,200)    $2,520. For the cases in which the demand and stocking level are the 
same (the green-shaded cells), supply    demand, so there is neither a shortage nor an excess, 
and thus the cost is $0. 
 FIGURE 13.17 
 The service level achievement 
must equal or exceed the ratio 
 Cs /( Cs      Ce ) 
Stocking level
Cs
1
0
2
4
6
3
5
7
8
Cs + Ce
Cumulative
probability   
Service
level
=
 E XAM PL E  14 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N  
 Historical records on the use of spare parts for several large hydraulic presses are to serve as 
an estimate of usage for spares of a newly installed press. Stockout costs involve downtime 
expenses and special ordering costs. These average $4,200 per unit short. Spares cost $800 
each, and unused parts have zero salvage. Determine the optimal stocking level.
 Spares Used 
 Relative Frequency 
 Cumulative Frequency 
 0 
 .20 
 .20 
 1 
 .40 
 .60 
 2 
 .30 
 .90 
 3 
 .10 
 1.00 
 4 or more 
 .00 
 
 
 1.00 
 
$4,200
$800
SL
$4,200
$4,200
$800
.84
C
C
C
C
C
s
e
s
s
e







 
 The cumulative-frequency column indicates the percentage of time that demand did not 
exceed (was equal to or less than) some amount. For example, demand does not exceed one 
spare 60 percent of the time, or two spares 90 percent of the time. Thus, in order to achieve a 
service level of  at least  84 percent, it will be necessary to stock two spares (i.e., to go to the 
next higher stocking level). 

580 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 The lowest expected cost is $1,060, which occurs for a stocking level of two units, so two 
is the optimal stocking level, which agrees with the ratio approach. 
 Example 15 illustrates how to solve a problem when demand is described by a Poisson 
distribution. 
 And the demand probabilities are 
 If the 
stocking 
level is 
 0 
prob.    .20 
 1 
prob.    .40 
 2 
prob.    .30 
 3 
prob.    .10 
 The expected 
cost will be 
 0 
 S    D 
$0 
 1 unit short .40(1)
($4,200)    $1,680 
 2 units short .30(2)
($4,200)    $2,520 
 3 units short .10(3)
($4,200)    $1,260 
 $5,460 
 1  
 1-unit excess .20(1)
($800)    $160 
 S    D
$0 
 1 unit short .30(1)
($4,200)    $1,260 
 2 units short .10(2)
($4,200)    $840 
 $2,260 
 2  
 2-unit excess .20(2)
($800)    $320 
 1-unit excess .40(1)
($800)    $320 
 S    D 
$0 
 1 unit short .10(1)
($4,200)    $420 
 $1,060 
 3  
 3-unit excess .20(3)
($800)    $480 
 2-unit excess .40(2)
($800)    $640 
 1-unit excess .30(1)
($800)    $240 
 S    D 
 $0 
 $1,360 
 TABLE 13.3 
 Expected cost for each possible outcome 
 E X A MP LE 1 5 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 S O L U T I O N  
 One final point about discrete stocking levels: If the computed service level is  exactly 
equal to the cumulative probability associated with one of the stocking levels, there are 
 two  equivalent stocking levels in terms of minimizing long-run cost—the one with equal 
probability and the next higher one. In the preceding example, if the ratio had been equal to 
.629, we would be indifferent between stocking four dozen and stocking five dozen roses 
each day.  
 
$3
$2
SL
$3
$3
$2
.60
C
C
C
C
C
s
e
s
s
e







 
 Obtain the cumulative frequencies from the Poisson table (Appendix B, Table C) for a mean 
of 4.0:
 Demand (dozen per day) 
 Cumulative Frequency 
 0 
 .018 
 1 
 .092 
 2 
 .238 
 3 
 .433 
 4 
 .629 
 5 
 .785 
  
  
 Compare the service level to the cumulative frequencies. In order to attain a service level of at 
least .60, it is necessary to stock four dozen. 
Demand for long-stemmed red roses at a small flower shop can be approximated using a Pois-
son distribution that has a mean of four dozen per day. Profit on the roses is $3 per dozen. 
Leftover flowers are marked down and sold the next day at a loss of $2 per dozen. Assume 
that all marked-down flowers are sold. What is the optimal stocking level? 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
581
 13.9 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Inventories often represent a substantial investment. More important, improving inventory 
processes can offer significant benefits in terms of cost reduction and customer satisfaction. 
Among the areas that have potential are the following: 
 Record keeping.  It is important to have inventory records that are accurate and up-to-date, 
so that inventory decisions are based on correct information. Estimates of holding, order-
ing, and setup costs, as well as demand and lead times, should be reviewed periodically and 
updated when necessary. 
 Variation reduction.  Lead time variations and forecast errors are two key factors that 
impact inventory management, and variation reduction in these areas can yield significant 
improvement in inventory management. 
 Lean operation.  Lean systems are demand driven, which means that goods are pulled through 
the system to match demand instead of being pushed through without a direct link to demand. 
Moreover, lean systems feature smaller lot sizes than more traditional systems, based in part on 
the belief that holding costs are higher than those assigned by traditional systems, and partly as 
a deliberate effort to reduce ordering and setup costs by simplifying and standardizing neces-
sary activities. An obvious benefit is a decrease in average inventory on hand and, hence, lower 
carrying costs. Other benefits include fewer disruptions of work flow, reduction in space needs, 
enhanced ability to spot problems, and increased feasibility to place machines and workers closer 
together, which allows more opportunities for socialization, communication, and cooperation. 
 Supply chain management.  Working more closely with suppliers to coordinate shipments, 
reduce lead times, and reduce supply chain inventories can reduce the size and frequency 
of stockouts while lowering inventory carrying costs. Blanket orders and vendor-managed 
inventories can reduce transaction costs. Also, consignment agreements, where buyers are 
not charged for inventory items until the items are sold, may be an option. Storage costs can 
sometimes be reduced by using cross-docking, whereby inbound trucks with goods arriving 
at distributor warehouses from suppliers are directly loaded onto outbound trucks for store or 
dealer delivery, avoiding warehouse handling and storage costs. 
 Inventory management is a core operations management activity. Good inventory management is often 
the mark of a well-run organization. Inventory levels must be planned carefully in order to balance the 
cost of holding inventory and the cost of providing reasonable levels of customer service. Successful 
inventory management requires a system to keep track of inventory transactions, accurate information 
about demand and lead times, realistic estimates of certain inventory-related costs, and a priority system 
for classifying the items in inventory and allocating control efforts. 
 Four classes of models are described: EOQ, ROP, fixed-order-interval, and single-period models. 
The first three are appropriate if unused items can be carried over into subsequent periods. The single-
period model is appropriate when items cannot be carried over. EOQ models address the question of 
how much to order. The ROP models address the question of when to order and are particularly helpful 
in dealing with situations that include variations in either demand rate or lead time. ROP models involve 
service level and safety stock considerations. When the time between orders is fixed, the FOI model is 
useful for determining the order quantity. The single-period model is used for items that have a “shelf 
life” of one period. The models presented in this chapter are summarized in  Table 13.4 . 
 SUMMARY 
 1. 
All businesses carry inventories, which are goods held for future use or potential future use. 
 2. 
Inventory represents money that is tied up in goods or materials. 
 3. 
Effective inventory decisions depend on having good inventory records, good cost information, 
and good estimates of demand. 
 4. 
The decision of how much inventory to have on hand reflects a trade-off, for example, how much 
money to tie up in inventory versus having it available for other uses. Factors related to the deci-
sion include purchase costs, holding costs, ordering costs, shortage and backlog costs, available 
space to store the inventory, and the return that can be had from other uses of the money. 
   5. 
As with other areas of operations, variations are present and must be taken into account. Uncertainties 
can be offset to some degree by holding safety stock, although that adds to the cost of holding inventory.   
 KEY POINTS 

582 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 A-B-C approach, 554 
 cycle counting, 556 
 cycle stock, 557 
 economic order quantity 
(EOQ), 557 
 excess cost, 576 
 fill rate, 573 
 fixed-order-interval (FOI) 
model, 573 
 holding (carrying) cost, 553 
 inventory, 547 
 inventory turnover, 551 
 lead time, 553 
 Little's Law, 550 
 ordering costs, 554 
 periodic system, 551 
 perpetual inventory system, 551 
 point-of-sale (POS) 
system, 552 
 purchase cost, 553 
 quantity discounts, 564 
 reorder point (ROP), 569 
 safety stock, 557, 569 
 service level, 570 
 setup costs, 554 
 shortage costs, 554, 576 
 single-period model, 576 
 two-bin system, 552 
 universal product code 
(UPC), 552 
 KEY TERMS 
 TABLE 13.4 
 Summary of inventory formulas 
 Model 
 Formula 
 Symbols 
 1. Basic EOQ 
 Q
DS
H
2
0 
 
 (13–2) 
 


TC
2 H
Q
D
Q S  
 (13–1) 
 
Q
D
Length of order cycle 
  
(13–3) 
 
Average inventory
2
Q

 
  Q  o      Economic order quantity 
 
  D     Annual demand 
 
  S     Order cost per order 
 
  H     Annual carrying cost per unit 
 
  Q     Order quantity 
 2. Economic production quantity 
 Q
DS
H
p
p
u
p
2


 
 (13–5) 
 


TC
2
I
H
D
Q S
max
 
 (13–4) 
 
Q
u
Cycle time 
 
 (13–6) 
 
Q
p
Run time 
 
 (13–7) 
 I
Q
p p
u
(
)
max
0


 
 (13–8) 
 
Average inventory
2
max
I

 
  Q  p      Optimal run or order size 
 
  p     Production or delivery rate 
 
  u     Usage rate 
 
  I max     Maximum inventory level 
 3. Quantity discounts 
 
Q H
D
Q S
PD
TC
2



  
 (13–9) 
 
  P     Unit price 
 4.  Reorder point under:
 a. Constant demand and lead time 
  b. Variable demand rate 
  c. Variable lead time 
  d. Variable lead time and demand 
 
d
ROP
(LT)

  
 (13–10) 
 
d
z
d
ROP
LT
(
) LT



 
  (13–13) 
 
d
z
d
ROP
LT
(
)
LT



 
  (13–14) 
 





ROP
LT
LT
2
2
2
LT
d
z
d
d
  
 (13–15) 
 
 ROP    Quantity on hand at reorder point 
 
  d     Demand rate 
 
  LT     Lead time 
 d
Average demand rate

 
 
    d      Standard deviation of demand rate 
 
  z     Standard normal deviation 
 LT
Average lead time

  
 
   LT     Standard deviation of lead time 
 5. Fixed interval 
 
Q
d
z
A
d
(OI
LT)
OI
LT


 


  
 (13–16) 
 
 OI    Time between orders 
 
  A     Amount on hand at order time 
 6. Single period 
 
C
C
C
s
s
e
SL 

  
 (13–17) 
 
 SL    Service level 
 
  C  s      Shortage cost per unit 
 
  C  e      Excess cost per unit 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
583
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Basic EOQ.  This type of problem can be recognized when annual demand ( D ), ordering cost ( S ), and 
holding or carrying cost per unit ( H ) are given. Use Formula 13–2 for order quantity, Formula 13–1 
for total cost, and  D / Q for number of orders a year. 
 A toy manufacturer uses approximately 32,000 silicon chips annually. The chips are used at a 
steady rate during the 240 days a year that the plant operates. Annual holding cost is $3 per chip, and 
ordering cost is $120. Determine
 a. The optimal order quantity. 
 b. The number of workdays in an order cycle. 
 
D
S
H



32,000 chips per year
$120
$3 per unit per year
  
 a. 
2
2(32,000)120
3
1,600 chips.
0
Q
DS
H



 
 b. 
1,600 chips
32,000 chips/yr.
1
20
year (i.e., 120
240 days), or 12 days
Q
D



 
 Economic production quantity.  This type of problem can be recognized when a production rate ( p ) 
is given in addition to the basic EOQ information. Use Formula 13–5 to compute the optimal run 
quantity. Production (run) time is  Q / p.   I max  is (Q/p)(p  u). The time between the end of one run and 
the start of the next is ( I max )/ u     setup time. 
 The Dine Corporation is both a producer and a user of brass couplings. The firm operates 220 
days a year and uses the couplings at a steady rate of 50 per day. Couplings can be produced at a rate 
of 200 per day. Annual storage cost is $2 per coupling, and machine setup cost is $70 per run. 
 a. Determine the economic run quantity. 
 b. Approximately how many runs per year will there be? 
 c. Compute the maximum inventory level. 
 d. What is the average inventory on hand? 
 e. Determine the length of the  pure consumption portion of the cycle. 
 
D
S
H
p
u







50 units per day
220 days per year
11,000 units per year
$70 per order
$2 per unit per year
200 units per day
50 units per day
 
 a.  
2
2(11,000)70
2
200
200
50
1,013 units.
Q
DS
H
p
p
u
p 




 
 b. Number of runs per year:  D / Q 0     11,000/1,013    10.86, or approximately 11. 
 c.  
(
)
1,013
200 (200
50)
759.75
max
I
Q
p
p
u
p





 or 760 units. 
 d. Average inventory     I max/2     760/2    380 units. 
 e. Imax/u  760/50  15.2 days. 
Problem 1
Solution
Problem 2
Solution

584 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
Quantity discounts.  This type of problem can be recognized when a list showing prices for each 
quantity range is given along with the basic EOQ information.
 a. If unit holding cost is constant, use these steps to solve the problem:
 1. Use Formula 13–2 to find  Q. 
 2. Locate  Q in the price schedule. 
 3. Compute TC using Formula 13–1 for  Q and for all lower-cost price breaks. 
 b. If unit holding cost is a percentage of unit price, use these steps to solve the problem:
 1. Beginning with the lowest cost, and using the corresponding  H for that cost, compute  Q 
using Formula 13–2. Continue moving up in unit cost until a feasible  Q is found. 
 2. Locate the feasible  Q in the price schedule. 
 3. Compute TC using Formula 13–9 for  Q and for all lower-cost price breaks. Remember to use 
the corresponding  H for each price. 
 A small manufacturing firm uses roughly 3,400 pounds of chemical dye a year. Currently the firm 
purchases 300 pounds per order and pays $3 per pound. The supplier has just announced that orders 
of 1,000 pounds or more will be filled at a price of $2 per pound. The manufacturing firm incurs a 
cost of $100 each time it submits an order and assigns an annual holding cost of 17 percent of the 
purchase price per pound.
 a. Determine the order size that will minimize the total cost. 
   b. If the supplier offered the discount at 1,500 pounds instead of 1,000 pounds, what order size 
would minimize total cost?
3,400 pounds per year
$100 per order
.17
D
S
H
P



 a. Compute the EOQ for $2 per pound: 
 The quantity ranges are
2
2(3,400)100
.17(2)
1,414 pounds
$2/pound
Q
DS
H



 Because this quantity is feasible at $2 per pound, it is the optimum. 
   b. When the discount is offered at 1,500 pounds, the EOQ for the $2 per pound range is no longer 
feasible. Consequently, it becomes necessary to compute the EOQ for $3 per pound and compare 
the total cost for that order size with the total cost using the price break quantity (i.e., 1,500).
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
Q
DS
H
Q H
D
Q
S
PD




















2
2(3,400)100
.17(3)
1,155 pounds
TC
2
TC
1,155
2
.17(3)
3,400
1,155 100
3(3,400)
$294.53
$294.37
$10,200
$10,789
TC
1,500
2
.17(2)
3,400
1,500 100
2(3,400)
$255
$226.67
$6,800
$7,282
$3/pound
1,155
1,500
 Hence, because it would result in a lower total cost, 1,500 is the optimal order size. 
Problem 3
Solution
 Range 
 Unit Price 
 1 to 999 
 $3 
 1,000  
 $2 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
585
Reorder point.  This type of problem can be recognized when the demand rate ( d ), lead time (LT), 
and desired service level or stockout risk are given. Use these steps to solve this type of problem:
 1. Match the choice of formula to the standard deviation(s) that are given in the problem (e.g., if 
both demand and lead time standard deviations are given, use Formula 13–15 for the ROP). 
   2. If the problem asks for the amount of safety stock, use the second part of the appropriate ROP formula.  
 3. If the “expected demand during lead time” and the “standard deviation of lead time demand” are 
given, use Formula 13–12. 
ROP for variable demand and constant lead time.  The Problem 4housekeeping department of a 
motel uses approximately 400 washcloths per day. The actual number tends to vary with the number 
of guests on any given night. Usage can be approximated by a normal distribution that has a mean 
of 400 and a standard deviation of nine washcloths per day. A linen supply company delivers towels 
and washcloths with a lead time of three days. If the motel policy is to maintain a stockout risk of 2 
percent, what is the minimum number of washcloths that must be on hand at reorder time, and how 
much of that amount can be considered safety stock? 
 
d
d


 


400 washcloths per day
LT
3 days
9 washcloths per day
Risk
2 percent, so service level
98 percent
 From Appendix B, Table B, the nearest  z  value that corresponds to an area under the normal curve to 
the left of  z for 98 percent is   2.05.
ROP
LT
LT
400(3)
2.05(9) 3
1,200
31.96, or approximately 1,232 washcloths
d
z
d

 




 Safety stock is approximately 32 washcloths.  
ROP for constant demand and variable lead time.  The motel in the preceding example uses approxi-
mately 600 bars of soap each day, and this tends to be fairly constant. Lead time for soap delivery is 
normally distributed with a mean of six days and a standard deviation of two days. A service level of 
90 percent is desired. 
 a. Find the ROP. 
 b. How many days of supply are on hand at the ROP? 
Problem 4
Solution
 
1,200
1,232
2%
SL = 98%
Problem 5
Quantity
Total cost
0
1,500
1,155
1,414

586 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 
d
z


 



600 bars per day
SL
90 percent, so
1.28 (from Appendix B, Table B)
LT
6 days
2 days
LT
 a.   
d
z
d






ROP
LT
(
)
600(6)
1.28(2)(600)
5,136 bars of soap
LT
 
 b. ROP
5,136
600
8.56 days
d


 
ROP for variable demand rate and variable lead time.  The motel replaces broken glasses at a rate 
of 25 per day. In the past, this quantity has tended to vary normally and have a standard deviation 
of three glasses per day. Glasses are ordered from a Cleveland supplier. Lead time is normally dis-
tributed with an average of 10 days and a standard deviation of 2 days. What ROP should be used to 
achieve a service level of 95 percent? 
 
d
z
d
z
d
d
d
25 glasses per day
LT
10 days
3 glasses per day
2 days
SL
95 percent, so
1.65 (Appendix B, Table B)
ROP
LT
LT
25(10)
1.65 10(3)
(25) (2)
334 glasses
LT
2
2
2
LT
2
2
2







 









Fixed-order-interval.  This type of problem can be recognized when an order interval is given (e.g., 
inventory is ordered every 10 days) along with the demand rate, lead time, and quantity on hand at 
order time. Use Formula 13–16 to find the optimal order size. 
 A lab orders a number of chemicals from the same supplier every 30 days. Lead time is five 
days. The assistant manager of the lab must determine how much of one of these chemicals to order. 
A check of stock revealed that eleven 25-milliliter (ml) jars are on hand. Daily usage of the chemical 
is approximately normal with a mean of 15.2 ml per day and a standard deviation of 1.6 ml per day. 
The desired service level for this chemical is 95 percent. 
 a. How many jars of the chemical should be ordered? 
 b. What is the average amount of safety stock of the chemical? 
d
z
d










15.2 ml per day
OI
30 days
SL
95 percent requires
1.65
1.6 ml per day
LT
5 days
A
11 jars
25 ml per jar
275 ml
Solution
Problem 6
Solution
Problem 7
Solution
 
3,600
5,136
SL = 90%
250
334
SL = 95%

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
587
 a. 
d
z
A
d


 








Amount to order
(OI
LT)
OI
LT
15.2(30
5)
1.65(1.6) 30
5
275
272.62 ml
 Convert this to number of jars:
272.62 ml
25 ml per jar
10.90 or 11 jars

 b.  Safety stock
OI
LT
1.65(1.6) 30
5
15.62 ml.
z
d






 
Single-period.  This type of problem can be recognized when a probability distribution or empirical 
distribution for demand for a “perishable” item is given along with unit shortage and excess costs, or 
information that can be used to calculate them. Use these steps to solve the problem:
 1. Compute the optimal service level using Formula 13–17. 
 2. If the given distribution is uniform or normal, use that to obtain the exact stocking level. 
 3. If the distribution is Poisson or empirical, SL will fall between two cumulative frequencies. 
Round up to the higher frequency to find the optimal stocking level.  Note: If the distribution is 
empirical, first obtain the cumulative frequencies or probabilities. 
 A firm that installs cable TV systems uses a certain piece of equipment for which it carries two spare 
parts as optimal. The parts cost $500 each and have no salvage value or useful life after one period. Part 
failures can be modeled by a Poisson distribution with a mean of two failures during the useful life of 
the equipment. Holding and disposal costs are negligible. Estimate the apparent range of shortage cost.  
is unknown
$500
C
C
s
e 
 The Poisson table (Appendix B, Table C) provides these values for a mean of 2.0: 
 For the optimal stocking level, the service level must usually be rounded up to a feasible stocking 
level. Hence, you know that the service level must have been between .406 and .677 in order to make 
two units the optimal level. By setting the service level equal first to .406 and then to .677, you can 
establish bounds on the possible range of shortage costs.
$500
.406, so
.406($500
)
C
C
C
C
s
s
s
s




 Solving, you find  C  s      $341.75. Similarly,
 
$500
.677, so
.677($500
)
C
C
C
C
s
s
s
s




 
 Solving, you find  C  s      $1,047.99. Hence, the apparent range of shortage cost is $341.75 to $1,047.99.   
Problem 8
Solution
 Number of 
Failures 
 Cumulative 
Probability  
 0 
 .135 
 1 
 .406 
 2 
 .677 
 3 
 .857 
 4 
 .947 
 5 
 .983 

  

588 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 1. What are the primary reasons for holding inventory? 
 2. What are the requirements for effective inventory management? 
 3. Briefly describe each of the costs associated with inventory. 
 4. What potential benefits and risks do RFID tags have for inventory management? 
 5. Why might it be inappropriate to use inventory turnover ratios to compare inventory performance of 
companies that are in different industries? 
 6. How can managers use the results of A-B-C classification? 
 7.  a. List the major assumptions of the EOQ model. 
 b.  How would you respond to the criticism that EOQ models tend to provide misleading results 
because values of  D, S, and  H are, at best, educated guesses? 
 8. Explain briefly how a higher carrying cost can result in a decrease in inventory. 
 9. What is safety stock, and what is its purpose? 
 10. Under what circumstances would the amount of safety stock held be
 a. Large?     b. Small?    c. Zero? 
 11. What is meant by the term  service level?  Generally speaking, how is service level related to the 
amount of safety stock held? 
 12. Describe briefly the A-B-C approach to inventory control. 
 13. The purchasing agent for a company that assembles and sells air-conditioning equipment in a Latin 
American country noted that the cost of compressors has increased significantly each time they 
have been reordered. The company uses an EOQ model to determine order size. What are the 
implications of this price escalation with respect to order size? What factors other than price must 
be taken into consideration? 
 14. Explain how a decrease in setup time can lead to a decrease in the average amount of inventory a 
firm holds, and why that would be beneficial. 
 15. What is the single-period model, and under what circumstances is it appropriate? 
 16. Can the optimal stocking level in the single-period model ever be less than expected demand? 
Explain briefly. 
 17. What are some ways in which a company can reduce the need for inventories? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What trade-offs are involved in each of these aspects of inventory management?
 a. Buying additional amounts to take advantage of quantity discounts. 
 b. Treating holding cost as a percentage of unit price instead of as a constant amount. 
 c. Conducting cycle counts once a quarter instead of once a year. 
 2. Who needs to be involved in inventory decisions involving holding costs? Setting inventory levels? 
Quantity discount purchases? 
 3. How has technology aided inventory management? How have technological improvements in prod-
ucts such as automobiles and computers impacted inventory decisions? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. To be competitive, many fast-food chains began to expand their menus to include a wider range of 
foods. Although contributing to competitiveness, this has added to the complexity of operations, 
including inventory management. Specifically, in what ways does the expansion of menu offerings 
create problems for inventory management? 
 2. As a supermarket manager, how would you go about evaluating the criticalness of an inventory 
shortage? 
 3. Sam is at the post office to mail a package. After he pays for mailing the package, the clerk asks if 
he would like to buy some stamps. Sam pauses to think before he answers. He doesn't have a credit 
card with him. After paying for the package, he has about $30 in his pocket. Analyze this from an 
inventory standpoint. Identify the relevant considerations. 
 4. Give two examples of unethical conduct involving inventory management and the ethical principle 
each one violates.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
589
 1.  a. Determine an A-B-C classification for these items: 
  b. Find the EOQ given this information:  D     4,500 units/year,  S     $36, and  H     $10 per unit per year.  
 c. Find the economic production quantity given this information. 
 D     18,000 units/year,  S     $100,  H     $40 per unit per year,  p     120 units per day, 
and  u     90 units/day. 
 2.    a.  The following table contains figures on the monthly volume and unit costs for a random sample 
of 16 items from a list of 2,000 inventory items at a health care facility. Develop an A-B-C clas-
sification for these items: 
 b.  Given the monthly usages in the following table, classify the items in A, B, and C categories 
according to dollar usage: 
 Item 
 Unit Cost 
 Annual Volume (00) 
 1 
 $100 
 25 
 2 
   80 
 30 
 3 
   15 
 60 
 4 
   50 
 10 
 5 
   11 
 70 
 6 
   60 
 85 
7
  10
60
 Item 
 Unit Cost 
 Usage 
 Item 
 Unit Cost 
 Usage 
 K34 
 $10 
 200 
 F99 
 20 
 60 
 K35 
 25 
 600 
 D45 
 10 
 550 
 K36 
 36 
 150 
 D48 
 12 
 90 
 M10 
 16 
 25 
 D52 
 15 
 110 
 M20 
 20 
 80 
 D57 
 40 
 120 
 Z45 
 80 
 200 
 N08 
 30 
 40 
 F14 
 20 
 300 
 P05 
 16 
 500 
 F95 
 30 
 800 
 P09 
 10 
 30 
 PROBLEMS 
 Item 
 Usage 
 Unit Cost 
 4021 
 90 
 $1,400 
 9402 
 300 
 12 
 4066 
 30 
 700 
 6500 
 150 
 20 
 9280 
 10 
 1,020 
 4050 
 80 
 140 
 6850 
 2,000 
 10 
 3010 
 400 
 20 
 4400 
 5,000 
 5 
 c.  Determine the percentage of items in each category and the annual dollar value for each cat-
egory for part b. 
  3.  A bakery buys flour in 25-pound bags. The bakery uses 1,215 bags a year. Ordering cost is $10 per 
order. Annual carrying cost is $75 per bag.
 a.  Determine the economic order quantity. 
 b.  What is the average number of bags on hand? 
 c.  How many orders per year will there be? 
 d.  Compute the total cost of ordering and carrying flour. 
 e.  If holding costs were to increase by $9 per year, how much would that affect the minimum total 
annual cost?  
  4.  A large law firm uses an average of 40 boxes of copier paper a day. The firm operates 260 days a 
year. Storage and handling costs for the paper are $30 a year per box, and it costs approximately 
$60 to order and receive a shipment of paper.

590 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 a.  What order size would minimize the sum of annual ordering and carrying costs? 
 b.  Compute the total annual cost using your order size from part  a. 
 c.  Except for rounding, are annual ordering and carrying costs always equal at the EOQ? 
 d.  The office manager is currently using an order size of 200 boxes. The partners of the firm 
expect the office to be managed “in a cost-efficient manner.” Would you recommend that the 
office manager use the optimal order size instead of 200 boxes? Justify your answer. 
  5.  Garden Variety Flower Shop uses 750 clay pots a month. The pots are purchased at $2 each. Annual 
carrying costs per pot are estimated to be 30 percent of cost, and ordering costs are $20 per order. 
The manager has been using an order size of 1,500 flower pots.
 a.  What additional annual cost is the shop incurring by staying with this order size? 
 b.  Other than cost savings, what benefit would using the optimal order quantity yield? 
  6.  A produce distributor uses 800 packing crates a month, which it purchases at a cost of $10 each. 
The manager has assigned an annual carrying cost of 35 percent of the purchase price per crate. 
Ordering costs are $28. Currently the manager orders once a month. How much could the firm save 
annually in ordering and carrying costs by using the EOQ? 
  7.  A manager receives a forecast for next year. Demand is projected to be 600 units for the first half of 
the year and 900 units for the second half. The monthly holding cost is $2 per unit, and it costs an 
estimated $55 to process an order.
 a.  Assuming that monthly demand will be level during each of the six-month periods covered by 
the forecast (e.g., 100 per month for each of the first six months), determine an order size that 
will minimize the sum of ordering and carrying costs for each of the six-month periods. 
 b.  Why is it important to be able to assume that demand will be level during each six-month 
period? 
 c.  If the vendor is willing to offer a discount of $10  per order for ordering in multiples of 50 
units (e.g., 50, 100, 150), would you advise the manager to take advantage of the offer in either 
period? If so, what order size would you recommend?  
  8.  A food processor uses approximately 27,000 glass jars a month for its fruit juice product. Because 
of storage limitations, a lot size of 4,000 jars has been used. Monthly holding cost is 18 cents per 
jar, and reordering cost is $60 per order. The company operates an average of 20 days a month.
 a.  What penalty is the company incurring by its present order size? 
 b.  The manager would prefer ordering 10 times each month but would have to justify any 
change in order size. One possibility is to simplify order processing to reduce the ordering 
cost. What ordering cost would enable the manager to justify ordering every other day 
(i.e., 10 times a month)?  
  9.  The Friendly Sausage Factory (FSF) can produce hot dogs at a rate of 5,000 per day. FSF supplies 
hot dogs to local restaurants at a steady rate of 250 per day. The cost to prepare the equipment for 
producing hot dogs is $66. Annual holding costs are 45 cents per hot dog. The factory operates 300 
days a year. Find
 a.  The optimal run size. 
 b.  The number of runs per year. 
 c. How many days does it take to produce the optimal run quantity? 
  10. A chemical firm produces sodium bisulfate in 100-pound bags. Demand for this product is 20 tons 
per day. The capacity for producing the product is 50 tons per day. Setup costs $100, and storage and 
handling costs are $5 per ton a year. The firm operates 200 days a year. ( Note:  1 ton    2,000 pounds.)
 a.  How many bags per run are optimal? 
 b.  What would the average inventory be for this lot size? 
 c.  Determine the approximate length of a production run, in days. 
 d.  About how many runs per year would there be? 
 e.  How much could the company save annually if the setup cost could be reduced to $25 per run?  
  11.  A company is about to begin production of a new product. The manager of the department that 
will produce one of the components for the product wants to know how often the machine used 
to produce the item will be available for other work. The machine will produce the item at a rate 
of 200 units a day. Eighty units will be used daily in assembling the final product. Assembly will 
take place five days a week, 50 weeks a year. The manager estimates that it will take almost a full 
day to get the machine ready for a production run, at a cost of $300. Inventory holding costs will 
be $10 a year.
 a.  What run quantity should be used to minimize total annual costs? 
 b.  How many days does it take to produce the optimal run quantity? 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
591
 c.  What is the average amount of inventory? 
 d.  If the manager wants to run another job between runs of this item, and needs a minimum of 10 
days per cycle for the other work, will there be enough time? 
 e.  Given your answer to part  d, the manager wants to explore options that will allow this other job 
to be performed using this equipment. Name three options the manager can consider. 
 f.  Suppose the manager decides to increase the run size of the new product. How many additional 
units would be needed to just accommodate the other job? How much will that increase the 
total annual cost?  
  12.  A company manufactures hair dryers. It buys some of the components, but it makes the heating ele-
ment, which it can produce at the rate of 800 per day. Hair dryers are assembled daily, 250 days a 
year, at a rate of 300 per day. Because of the disparity between the production and usage rates, the 
heating elements are periodically produced in batches of 2,000 units.
 a.  Approximately how many  batches of heating elements are produced annually? 
 b.  If production on a batch begins when there is no inventory of heating elements on hand, how 
much inventory will be on hand  two days later? 
 c.  What is the average inventory of elements, assuming each production cycle begins when there 
are none on hand? 
 d.  The same equipment that is used to make the heating elements could also be used to make 
a component for another of the firm's products. That job would require four days, including 
setup. Setup time for making a batch of the heating elements is a half day. Is there enough time 
to do this job between production of batches of heating elements? Explain.  
  13.  A mail-order house uses 18,000 boxes a year. Carrying costs are 60 cents per box a year, and order-
ing costs are $96. The following price schedule applies. Determine
 a.  The optimal order quantity. 
 b.  The number of orders per year. 
  14.  A jewelry firm buys semiprecious stones to make bracelets and rings. The supplier quotes a price of 
$8 per stone for quantities of 600 stones or more, $9 per stone for orders of 400 to 599 stones, and 
$10 per stone for lesser quantities. The jewelry firm operates 200 days per year. Usage rate is 25 
stones per day, and ordering costs are $48.
 a.  If carrying costs are $2 per year for each stone, find the order quantity that will minimize total 
annual cost. 
 b.  If annual carrying costs are 30 percent of unit cost, what is the optimal order size? 
 c.  If lead time is six working days, at what point should the company reorder? 
  15.  A manufacturer of exercise equipment purchases the pulley section of the equipment from a sup-
plier who lists these prices: less than 1,000, $5 each; 1,000 to 3,999, $4.95 each; 4,000 to 5,999, 
$4.90 each; and 6,000 or more, $4.85 each. Ordering costs are $50, annual carrying costs per unit 
are 40 percent of purchase cost, and annual usage is 4,900 pulleys. Determine an order quantity that 
will minimize total cost. 
  16.  A company will begin stocking remote control devices. Expected monthly demand is 800 units. The 
controllers can be purchased from either supplier A or supplier B. Their price lists are as follows: 
 Ordering cost is $40 and annual holding cost is 25 percent of unit price per unit. Which supplier 
should be used and what order quantity is optimal if the intent is to minimize total annual costs? 
  17.  A manager just received a new price list from a supplier. It will now cost $1.00 a box for order 
quantities of 801 or more boxes, $1.10 a box for 200 to 800 boxes, and $1.20 a box for smaller 
 Number of Boxes 
 Price per Box 
 1,000 to 1,999 
 $1.25 
 2,000 to 4,999 
  1.20 
 5,000 to 9,999 
  1.15 
 10,000 or more 
  1.10 
 SUPPLIER A 
 SUPPLIER B 
 Quantity 
 Unit Price 
 Quantity 
 Unit Price 
  1–199 
 $14.00 
 1–149 
 $14.10 
 200–499 
  13.80 
 150–349 
  13.90 
 500   
  13.60 
 350    
  13.70 

592 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
quantities. Ordering cost is $80 per order and carrying costs are $10 per box a year. The firm uses 
3,600 boxes a year. The manager has suggested a “round number” order size of 800 boxes. The 
manager's rationale is that with a U-shaped cost curve that is fairly flat at its minimum, the differ-
ence in total annual cost between 800 and 801 units would be small anyway. How would you reply 
to the manager's suggestion? What order size would you recommend? 
  18.  A newspaper publisher uses roughly 800 feet of baling wire each day to secure bundles of newspa-
pers while they are being distributed to carriers. The paper is published Monday through Saturday. 
Lead time is six workdays. What is the appropriate reorder point quantity, given that the company 
desires a service level of 95 percent, if that stockout risk for various levels of safety stock is as fol-
lows: 1,500 feet, .10; 1,800 feet, .05; 2,100 feet, .02; and 2,400 feet, .01? 
  19. Given this information:
 
  Expected demand during lead time    300 units 
 
  Standard deviation of lead time demand    30 units 
 
  Determine each of the following, assuming that lead time demand is distributed normally:
 a.  The ROP that will provide a risk of stockout of 1 percent during lead time. 
 b.  The safety stock needed to attain a 1 percent risk of stockout during lead time. 
 c.  Would a stockout risk of 2 percent require more or less safety stock than a 1 percent risk? 
Explain. Would the ROP be larger, smaller, or unaffected if the acceptable risk were 2 percent 
instead of 1 percent? Explain.  
  20. Given this information:
 
  Lead-time demand    600 pounds 
 
  Standard deviation of lead time demand    52 pounds (Assume normality.) 
 
  Acceptable stockout risk during lead time    4 percent
 a.  What amount of safety stock is appropriate? 
 b.  When should this item be reordered? 
 c.  What risk of stockout would result from a decision not to have any safety stock? 
  21.  Demand for walnut fudge ice cream at the Sweet Cream Dairy can be approximated by a normal 
distribution with a mean of 21 gallons per week and a standard deviation of 3.5 gallons per week. 
The new manager desires a service level of 90 percent. Lead time is two days, and the dairy is open 
seven days a week. ( Hint: Work in terms of weeks.)
 a.  If an ROP model is used, what ROP would be consistent with the desired service level? How 
many days of supply are on hand at the ROP, assuming average demand? 
 b.  If a fixed-interval model is used instead of an ROP model, what order size would be needed for 
the 90 percent service level with an order interval of 10 days and a supply of 8 gallons on hand 
at the order time? What is the probability of experiencing a stockout before this order arrives? 
 c.  Suppose the manager is using the ROP model described in part  a. One day after placing an order 
with the supplier, the manager receives a call from the supplier that the order will be delayed 
because of problems at the supplier's plant. The supplier promises to have the order there in two 
days. After hanging up, the manager checks the supply of walnut fudge ice cream and finds that 
2 gallons have been sold since the order was placed. Assuming the supplier's promise is valid, 
what is the probability that the dairy will run out of this flavor before the shipment arrives?  
  22.  The injection molding department of a company uses an average of 30 gallons of special lubricant a 
day. The supply of the lubricant is replenished when the amount on hand is 170 gallons. It takes four 
days for an order to be delivered. Safety stock is 50 gallons, which provides a stockout risk of 9 per-
cent. What amount of safety stock would provide a stockout risk of 3 percent? Assume normality.  
  23.  A company uses 85 circuit boards a day in a manufacturing process. The person who orders the boards 
follows this rule: Order when the amount on hand drops to 625 boards. Orders are delivered approxi-
mately six days after being placed. The delivery time is normal with a mean of six days and a standard 
deviation of 1.10 days. What is the probability that the supply of circuit boards will be exhausted before 
the order is received if boards are reordered when the amount on hand drops to 625 boards?  
  24.  One item a computer store sells is supplied by a vendor who handles only that item. Demand for 
that item recently changed, and the store manager must determine when to replenish it. The manager 
wants a probability of at least 96 percent of not having a stockout during lead time. The manager 
expects demand to average a dozen units a day and have a standard deviation of two units a day. Lead 
time is variable, averaging four days with a standard deviation of one day. Assume normality and that 
seasonality is not a factor.

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
593
 a.  When should the manager reorder to achieve the desired probability? 
 b.  Why might the model not be appropriate if seasonality were present? 
  25.  The manager of a car wash received a revised price list from the vendor who supplies soap, and a 
promise of a shorter lead time for deliveries. Formerly the lead time was four days, but now the 
vendor promises a reduction of 25 percent in that time. Annual usage of soap is 4,500 gallons. The 
car wash is open 360 days a year. Assume that daily usage is normal, and that it has a standard 
deviation of 2 gallons per day. The ordering cost is $30 and annual carrying cost is $3 a gallon. The 
revised price list (cost per gallon) is shown in the following table:
 a.  What order quantity is optimal? 
 b.  What ROP is appropriate if the acceptable risk of a stockout is 1.5 percent? 
  26.  A small copy center uses five 500-sheet boxes of copy paper a week. Experience suggests that 
usage can be well approximated by a normal distribution with a mean of five boxes per week and a 
standard deviation of one-half box per week. Two weeks are required to fill an order for letterhead 
stationery. Ordering cost is $2, and annual holding cost is 20 cents per box.
 a.  Determine the economic order quantity, assuming a 52-week year. 
 b.  If the copy center reorders when the supply on hand is 12 boxes, compute the risk of a 
stockout. 
 c.  If a fixed interval of seven weeks instead of an ROP is used for reordering, what risk does the 
copy center incur that it will run out of stationery before this order arrives if it orders 36 boxes 
when the amount on hand is 12 boxes? 
  27.  Ned's Natural Foods sells unshelled peanuts by the pound. Historically, Ned has observed 
that daily demand is normally distributed with a mean of 80 pounds and a standard devia-
tion of 10 pounds. Lead time also appears normally distributed with a mean of eight days 
and a standard deviation of one day. What ROP would provide a stockout risk of 10 percent 
during lead time?  
  28.  Regional Supermarket is open 360 days per year. Daily use of cash register tape averages 10 rolls. 
Usage appears normally distributed with a standard deviation of 2 rolls per day. The cost of order-
ing tape is $1, and carrying costs are 40 cents per roll a year. Lead time is three days.
 a.  What is the EOQ? 
 b.  What ROP will provide a lead time service level of 96 percent? 
  29.  A service station uses 1,200 cases of oil a year. Ordering cost is $40, and annual carrying cost is $3 
per case. The station owner has specified a service level of 99 percent.
 a. What is the optimal order quantity? 
 b.  What level of safety stock is appropriate if lead time demand is normally distributed with a 
mean of 80 cases and a standard deviation of 6 cases?  
  30.  Caring Hospital’s dispensary reorders doses of a drug when the supply on hand falls to 18 units. 
Lead time for resupply is three days. Given the typical usage over the last 10 days, what service level 
is achieved with the hospital’s reorder policy? ( Hint: Use Formula 13–13.) 
 Day 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 Units 
 3 
 4 
 7 
 5 
 5 
 6 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 5 
  31.  A drugstore uses fixed-order cycles for many of the items it stocks. The manager wants a service 
level of .98. The order interval is 14 days, and lead time is 2 days. Average demand for one item is 
40 units per day, and the standard deviation of demand is 3 units per day. Given the on-hand inven-
tory at the reorder time for each order cycle shown in the following table, determine the order 
quantities for cycles 1, 2, and 3: 
 Quantity 
 Unit Price 
 1–399 
 $2.00 
 400–799 
   1.70 
 800   
   1.62 
 Cycle 
 On Hand 
 1 
 42 
 2 
 8 
 3 
 103 

594 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
  32.  A manager must set up inventory ordering systems for two new production items, P34 and P35. P34 
can be ordered at any time, but P35 can be ordered only once every four weeks. The company oper-
ates 50 weeks a year, and the weekly usage rates for both items are normally distributed. The man-
ager has gathered the following information about the items:
 a.  When should the manager reorder each item? 
 b.  Compute the order quantity for P34. 
 c.  Compute the order quantity for P35 if 110 units are on hand at the time the order is placed. 
  33. Given the following list of items,
 a.  Classify the items as A, B, or C. 
 b.  Determine the economic order quantity for each item (round to the nearest whole unit). 
 
 Item P34 
 Item P35 
 Average weekly demand 
 60 units 
 70 units 
 Standard deviation 
 4 units per week 
 5 units per week 
 Unit cost 
 $15 
 $20 
 Annual holding cost 
 30% 
 30% 
 Ordering cost 
 $70 
 $30 
 Lead time 
 2 weeks 
 2 weeks 
 Acceptable stockout risk 
 2.5% 
 2.5% 
 Demand 
(dozens)  
 Relative 
Frequency 
 Demand 
(dozens)  
 Relative 
Frequency 
 19 
 .01 
 25 
 .10 
 20 
 .05 
 26 
 .11 
 21 
 .12 
 27 
 .10 
 22 
 .18 
 28 
 .04 
 23 
 .13 
 29 
 .02 
 24 
 .14 
 
 
 Item 
 Estimated 
Annual Demand 
 Ordering
Cost  
 Holding 
Cost (%) 
 Unit 
Price 
 H4-010 
 20,000 
 50 
 20 
 2.50 
 H5-201 
 60,200 
 60 
 20 
 4.00 
 P6-400 
 9,800 
 80 
 30 
 28.50 
 P6-401 
 14,500 
 50 
 30 
 12.00 
 P7-100 
 6,250 
 50 
 30 
 9.00 
 P9-103 
 7,500 
 50 
 40 
 22.00 
 TS-300 
 21,000 
 40 
 25 
 45.00 
 TS-400 
 45,000 
 40 
 25 
 40.00 
 TS-041 
   800 
 40 
 25 
 20.00 
 V1-001 
 33,100 
 25 
 35 
 4.00 
  34.  Demand for jelly doughnuts on Saturdays at Don's Doughnut Shoppe is shown in the following table. 
Determine the optimal number of doughnuts, in dozens, to stock if labor, materials, and overhead are 
estimated to be $3.20 per dozen, doughnuts are sold for $4.80 per dozen, and leftover doughnuts at 
the end of each day are sold the next day at half price. What is the  resulting service level?  
  35.  A public utility intends to buy a turbine as part of an expansion plan and must now decide on the 
number of spare parts to order. One part, no. X135, can be purchased for $100 each. Carrying and 
disposal costs are estimated to be 145 percent of the purchase price over the life of the turbine. 
A stockout would cost roughly $88,000 due to downtime, ordering, and “special purchase” factors. 
Historical records based on the performance of similar equipment operating under similar condi-
tions suggest that demand for spare parts will tend to approximate a Poisson distribution with a 
mean of 3.2 parts for the useful life of the turbine.
 a.  What is the optimal number of spares to order? 
 b.  Carrying no spare parts would be the best strategy for what range of shortage cost? 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
595
  36.  Skinner's Fish Market buys fresh Boston bluefish daily for $4.20 per pound and sells it for $5.70 
per pound. At the end of each business day, any remaining bluefish is sold to a producer of cat food 
for $2.40 per pound. Daily demand can be approximated by a normal distribution with a mean of 80 
pounds and a standard deviation of 10 pounds. What is the optimal stocking level? 
  37.  A small grocery store sells fresh produce, which it obtains from a local farmer. During the straw-
berry season, demand for fresh strawberries can be reasonably approximated using a normal distri-
bution with a mean of 40 quarts per day and a standard deviation of 6 quarts per day. Excess costs 
run 35 cents per quart. The grocer orders 49 quarts per day.
 a.  What is the implied cost of shortage per quart? 
 b.  Why might this be a reasonable figure? 
  38.  Demand for devil's food whipped-cream layer cake at a local pastry shop can be approximated 
using a Poisson distribution with a mean of six per day. The manager estimates it costs $9 to pre-
pare each cake. Fresh cakes sell for $12. Day-old cakes sell for $9 each. What stocking level is 
appropriate if one-half of the day-old cakes are sold and the rest thrown out? 
  39.  Burger Prince buys top-grade ground beef for $1.00 per pound. A large sign over the entrance 
guarantees that the meat is fresh daily. Any leftover meat is sold to the local high school cafeteria 
for 80 cents per pound. Four hamburgers can be prepared from each pound of meat. Burgers sell for 
60 cents each. Labor, overhead, meat, buns, and condiments cost 50 cents per burger. Demand is 
normally distributed with a mean of 400 pounds per day and a standard deviation of 50 pounds per 
day. What daily order quantity is optimal? ( Hint: Shortage cost must be in dollars per pound.) 
  40. Demand for rug-cleaning machines at Clyde's U-Rent-It is shown in the following table. Machines are 
rented by the day only. Profit on the rug cleaners is $10 per day. Clyde has four rug-cleaning machines. 
 Demand 
 Frequency 
 0 
  .30 
 1 
  .20 
 2 
  .20 
 3 
  .15 
 4 
  .10 
 5 
 .05 
 
 1.00 
 Demand 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Probability 
 .15 
 .35 
 .30 
 .20 
 Number 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Probability 
 .10 
 .50 
 .25 
 .15 
 a.  Assuming that Clyde's stocking decision is optimal, what is the implied range of excess cost 
per machine? 
 b.  Your answer from part  a has been presented to Clyde, who protests that the amount is too low. 
Does this suggest an increase or a decrease in the number of rug machines he stocks? Explain. 
 c.  Suppose now that the $10 mentioned as profit is instead the excess cost per day for each 
machine and that the shortage cost is unknown. Assuming that the optimal number of machines 
is four, what is the implied range of shortage cost per machine?  
  41.  A manager is going to purchase new processing equipment and must decide on the number of 
spare parts to order with the new equipment. The spares cost $200 each, and any unused spares 
will have an expected salvage value of $50 each. The probability of usage can be described by this 
distribution: 
 
  If a part fails and a spare is not available, two days will be needed to obtain a replacement and 
install it. The cost for idle equipment is $500 per day. What quantity of spares should be ordered?
 a.  Use the ratio method. 
 b.  Use the tabular method (see  Table 13.3 ). 
  42.  A Las Vegas supermarket bakery must decide how many wedding cakes to prepare for the upcom-
ing weekend. Cakes cost $33 each to make, and they sell for $60 each. Unsold cakes are reduced 
to half-price on Monday, and typically one-third of those are sold. Any that remain are donated to a 
nearby senior center. Analysis of recent demand resulted in the following table: 

596 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 UPD Manufacturing produces a range of health care appliances for hos-
pital as well as for home use. The company has experienced a steady 
demand for its products, which are highly regarded in the health care 
field. Recently the company has undertaken a review of its inventory 
ordering procedures as part of a larger effort to reduce costs. 
 One of the company's products is a blood pressure testing kit. UPD 
manufactures all of the components for the kit in-house except for the 
digital display unit. The display units are ordered at six-week intervals 
from the supplier. This ordering system began about five years ago, 
because the supplier insisted on it. However, that supplier was bought 
out by another supplier about a year ago, and the six-week ordering 
requirement is no longer in place. Nonetheless, UPD has continued to 
use the six-week ordering policy. According to purchasing manager Tom 
Chambers, “Unless somebody can give me a reason for changing, I'm 
going to stick with what we've been doing. I don't have time to reinvent 
the wheel.” 
 Further discussions with Tom revealed a cost 
of $32 to order and receive a shipment of display 
units from the supplier. The company assembles 89 kits a week. Also, 
information from Sara James, in Accounting, indicated a weekly carry-
ing cost of $.08 for each display unit. 
 The supplier has been quite reliable with deliveries; orders are 
received five working days after they are faxed to the supplier. Tom indi-
cated that as far as he was concerned, lead-time variability is virtually 
nonexistent. 
 Questions 
    1. Would using an order interval other than every six weeks reduce 
costs? If so, what order interval would be best, and what order size 
would that involve? 
   2. Would you recommend changing to the optimal order interval? 
Explain. 
 CASE 
 UPD Manufacturing 
 Background 
 Harvey Industries, a Wisconsin company, specializes in the assembly of high-
pressure washer systems and in the sale of repair parts for these systems. 
The products range from small portable high-pressure washers to large 
industrial installations for snow removal from vehicles stored outdoors during 
the winter months. Typical uses for high-pressure water cleaning include:  
 Industrial customers include General Motors, 
Ford, Chrysler, Delta Airlines, United Parcel Service, 
and Shell Oil Company. 
 Although the industrial applications are a significant part of its sales, 
Harvey Industries is primarily an assembler of equipment for coin oper-
ated self-service car wash systems. The typical car wash is of concrete 
block construction with an equipment room in the center, flanked on 
either side by a number of bays. The cars are driven into the bays where 
the owner can wash and wax the car, utilizing high-pressure hot water 
and liquid wax. A dollar bill changer is available to provide change for the 
use of the equipment and the purchase of various products from dispens-
ers. The products include towels, tire cleaner, and upholstery cleaner.  
 CASE 
 Harvey Industries 
 Automobiles 
 Airplanes 
 Building maintenance 
 Barns 
 Engines 
 Ice cream plants 
 Lift trucks 
 Machinery 
 Swimming pools 
 
(continued )
  How many cakes should be prepared to maximize expected profit?
 a.  Use the ratio method. 
 b.  Use the tabular method (see  Table 13.3 ). 
 43.  Offwego Airlines has a daily flight from Chicago to Las Vegas. On average, 18 ticket holders can-
cel their reservations, so the company intentionally overbooks the flight. Cancellations can be 
described by a normal distribution with a mean of 18 passengers and a standard deviation of 4.55 
passengers. Profit per passenger is $99. If a passenger arrives but cannot board due to overbooking, 
the company policy is to provide a cash payment of $200. How many tickets should be overbooked 
to maximize expected profit? 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
597
 In recent years Harvey Industries has been in financial difficulty. 
The company has lost money for three of the last four years, with 
the last year's loss being $17,174 on sales of $1,238,674. Inven-
tory levels have been steadily increasing to their present levels of 
$124,324. 
 The company employs 23 people with the management team 
consisting of the following key employees: president, sales manager, 
manufacturing manager, controller, and purchasing manager. The 
abbreviated organization chart reflects the reporting relationship of 
the key employees and the three individuals who report directly to the 
manufacturing manager.  
 Current Inventory Control 
System 
 The current inventory control “system” consists of orders for stock 
replenishment being made by the stockroom foreman, the pur-
chasing manager, or the manufacturing manager whenever one of 
them notices that the inventory is low. An order for replenishment 
of inventory is also placed whenever someone (either a customer 
or an employee in the assembly area) wants an item and it is not 
in stock. 
 Some inventory is needed for the assembly of the high-pressure 
equipment for the car wash and industrial applications. There are cur-
rent and accurate bills of material for these assemblies. The material 
needs to support the assembly schedule are generally known well in 
advance of the build schedule. 
 The majority of inventory transactions are for repair parts and for 
supplies used by the car washes, such as paper towels, detergent, 
and wax concentrate. Because of the constant and rugged use of the 
car wash equipment, there is a steady demand for the various repair 
parts. 
 The stockroom is well organized, with parts stored in locations 
according to each vendor. The number of vendors is relatively limited, 
with each vendor generally supplying many different parts. For exam-
ple, the repair parts from Allen Bradley, a manufacturer of electrical 
motors, are stocked in the same location. These repair parts will be 
used to provide service for the many electrical motors that are part 
of the high-pressure pump and motor assembly used by all of the car 
washes. 
 Because of the heavy sales volume of repair parts, there are gen-
erally two employees working in the stockroom—a stockroom fore-
man who reports to the manufacturing manager and an assistant to 
the foreman. One of these two employees will handle customer orders. 
Many customers stop by and order the parts and supplies they need. 
Telephone orders are also received and are shipped by United Parcel 
Service the same day. 
 The assembly area has some inventory stored on the shop floor. 
This inventory consists of low-value items that are used every day, 
such as nuts, bolts, screws, and washers. These purchased items 
do not amount to very much dollar volume throughout the year. 
Unfortunately, oftentimes the assembly area is out of one of these 
basic items and this causes a significant amount of downtime for the 
assembly lines. 
 Paperwork is kept to a minimum. A sales slip listing the part num-
bers and quantities sold to a customer is generally made out for each 
sale. If the assembly department needs items that are not stocked on 
the assembly floor, someone from that department will enter the stock-
room and withdraw the necessary material. There is no paperwork 
made out for the items needed on the assembly floor. 
 
 
Manufacturing
manager
Sales
manager
Purchasing
manager
Controller
President
Stockroom
foreman
Assembly
foreman
Quality
engineer
(continued )

598 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Grill Rite is an old-line company that started out making wooden 
matches. As that business waned, the company entered the electric 
barbecue grill market, with five models of grills it sells nationally. For 
many years the company maintained a single warehouse from which it 
supplied its distributors. 
 The plant where the company produces barbecue sets is located in 
a small town, and many workers have been with the company for many 
years. During the transition from wooden matches to barbecue grills, 
many employees gave up their weekends to help with changing over 
the plant and learning the new skills they would need, without pay. In 
fact, Mac Wilson, the company president, can reel off a string of such 
instances of worker loyalty. He has vowed to never lay off any workers, 
and to maintain a full employment, steady rate of output. “Yes, I know 
demand for these babies (barbecue grills) is seasonal, but the inven-
tory boys will just have to deal with it. On an annual basis, our output 
matches sales.” 
 Inventory is handled by a system of four warehouses. There is a 
central warehouse located near the plant that supplies some customers 
directly, and the three regional warehouses. 
 The vice president for sales, Julie Berry, is becoming increas-
ingly frustrated with the inventory system that she says “is anti-
quated and unresponsive.” She points to increasing complaints 
from regional sales managers about poor customer service, saying 
customer orders go unfilled or are late, apparently due to short-
ages at the regional warehouse. Regional warehouse managers, 
stung by complaints from sales managers, have 
responded by increasing their order sizes from 
the main warehouse, and maintaining larger amounts of safety stock. 
This has resulted in increased inventory holding costs, but it hasn't 
eliminated the problem. Complaints are still coming in from sales-
people about shortages and lost sales. According to managers of 
the regional warehouses, their orders to the main warehouse aren't 
being shipped, or when they are, they are smaller quantities than 
requested. The manager of the main warehouse, Jimmy Joe (“JJ”) 
Sorely, says his policy is to give preference to “filling direct orders 
from actual customers, rather than warehouse orders that might 
simply reflect warehouses trying to replenish their safety stock. And 
besides, I never know when I'll get hit with an order from one of the 
regional warehouses. I guess they think we've got an unlimited sup-
ply.” Then he adds, “I thought when we added the warehouses, we 
could just divide our inventory among the warehouses, and every-
thing would be okay.” 
 When informed of the “actual customers” remark, a regional ware-
house manager exclaimed, “We're their biggest customer!” 
 Julie Berry also mentioned that on more than one occasion she has 
found that items that were out of stock at one regional warehouse were 
in ample supply in at least one other regional warehouse. 
 Take the position of a consultant called in by president Mac Wilson. 
What recommendations can you make to alleviate the problems the 
company is encountering? 
 CASE 
 Grill Rite 
(concluded)
 There were 973 different part numbers purchased for stock last 
year and those purchases amounted to $314,673. An analysis of 
inventory records shows that $220,684 was spent on just 179 of the 
part numbers. 
 Fortunately for Harvey Industries, most of the items they purchase 
are stocked by either the manufacturer or by a wholesaler. When it is 
discovered that the company is out of stock on an item, it generally 
takes only two or three days to replenish the stock. 
 Due to the company's recent losses, its auditing firm became con-
cerned about the company's ability to continue in business. Recently 
the company sold off excess vacant land adjoining its manufacturing 
facility to generate cash to meet its financial obligations. 
 New President 
 Because of the recent death of the owner, the trust department of a 
Milwaukee bank (as trustee for the state) has taken over the company's 
affairs and has appointed a new company president. The new president 
has identified many problem areas—one of which is improper inventory 
control. He has retained you as a consultant to make specific recom-
mendations concerning a revised inventory control system. What are 
your recommendations and their rationale? 
 Source: Case “Harvey Industries” by Donald Condit presented at Midwest 
Case Writer's Association Workshop, 1984. Copyright © 1984 Donald Condit. 
Reprinted by permission. 

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
599
 Sarah  Lubbers  and  Chris  Rusche 
 Farmers Restaurant is a full service restaurant offering a variety of 
breakfast, lunch, and dinner items. Currently, Kristin Davis is the gen-
eral manager for the Farmers Restaurant located in the Grand Rapids/
Wyoming metro area of Michigan. Since becoming manager, Kristin has 
faced some difficulties with ordering the right amounts of food items 
for the restaurant. Because of this, there are some weeks the restau-
rant has a surplus of menu items that are no longer fresh, and must 
be discarded. At other times, the restaurant has experienced shortages 
of some items. The fact that inventory accounts for an average cost 
of 26% of the restaurant's total revenues underscores the importance 
of managing inventory. Kristin would like to find a way to ensure that 
she is maintaining the proper amount of inventory. Customer counts 
at Kristin's restaurant have been declining recently, so one of Kristin's 
greatest focuses is to keep current customers and attract new custom-
ers. She believes that a key aspect of this is having all of the items on 
the menu in stock. 
 The restaurant industry is competitive. In the Grand Rapids/
Wyoming metro area alone there are over 1,600 restaurants. Some of 
Farmers Restaurant's most serious competitors are IHOP, Applebee's, 
and Big Boy, all of which are located within 20 miles of the Farm-
ers Restaurant, so customers have many alternatives from which to 
choose. 
 Online inventory systems are used to assist restaurant managers 
in determining on-hand inventory and gauging how well the restau-
rant is controlling food costs. The fiscal week for Farmers Restaurant 
starts on Thursday and ends on Wednesday of the following week. 
Each Wednesday, the manager physically counts the inventory on 
hand and enters the data into the online inventory system. The com-
puter software system then compares the on-hand inventory for that 
week, the amount of food ordered, and the inventory on hand for 
the end of the previous week with the sales for the current week. 
By doing so, it is able to determine a total food cost. The manager 
compares this cost with the benchmark cost to see how well the 
restaurant has been managing its inventory. This is one of the most 
important numbers to managers at the Farmers Restaurant because 
it accounts for approximately 30% of total costs in terms of a store's 
cost structure. 
 The computer software system also compares the total cost of food 
on hand with the total amount of sales for that week and computes 
a percentage of on-hand inventories. As a guideline, the company 
has set a standard of having between 29% and 36% for its on-hand 
inventory level. The company feels that this level of inventory is an 
appropriate average to ensure quality food that is fresh and within 
expiration. Lastly, it is better to keep the inventory at a minimum level 
to ensure the accuracy and ease of inventory counts. 
 The Farmers Restaurant Kristin manages has 
been running above average in terms of food 
costs. For this reason, her boss has become concerned with the 
performance of the ordering system she is using at her restaurant. 
Kristin has been using her intuitition to decide how much product 
to order despite the fact that the product order sheets provide a 
moving average usage of each product. Kristin bases her inventory 
management on her intuition because she does not understand how 
to utilize the moving average forecasting technique when placing 
orders. An additional complication with ordering inventory is that 
each item is packed in multiple quantities, so she cannot order the 
exact amount that she needs. Her boss requested that she create 
a more accurate way of ordering food and to report back to him in 
one month. Kristin is worried that if she cuts inventory levels too 
low she will run out of products, which may result in a decrease in 
customer counts. 
 After Kristin met with her boss, she began to think about what 
changes she could make. She knows that inventory has been a weak 
point for her, but she remembers one of her employees talking about 
inventory management from one of his college courses. Kristin decides 
to ask the employee if he would be willing to help her try and come up 
with a better way for her to order products. Kristin tells him how the 
ordering system works, shows him the ordering form, and relates the 
above information. 
 Suppose you have been asked to work with Kristin to improve inven-
tory ordering. 
 Questions 
    1. Describe the importance of inventory management as it relates to 
the Farmers Restaurant. 
 2. What ordering system would be best for this situation? 
   3. Given the following information, provide an example of how much 
of Farmers Sausage Gravy Mix should be ordered. You are doing the 
order for Thursday. Also, Kristin would like a service level of 95%, 
and you have found that there is a standard deviation of 3.5 units 
per week, and a moving average weekly demand of 35 servings. 
The gravy mix comes in packs of two servings. There are currently 
three packs in inventory. 
   4. Given the above information and an on-hand inventory of 12, deter-
mine the risk of stock out at the end of initial lead time and at the 
end of the second lead time. The lead time is 2 days and orders are 
placed once a week. 
   5. The supplier Kristin uses is located in Ohio. Why might Kristin con-
sider dealing with a nearby supplier instead of the one in Ohio? What 
reasons might there be for not switching suppliers? 
 CASE 
 Farmers Restaurant 

600 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
 Bruegger’s Bagel Bakery makes and sells a variety of bagels, includ-
ing plain, onion, poppyseed, and cinnamon raisin, as well as assorted 
flavors of cream cheese. Bagels are the major source of revenue for 
the company. 
 The bagel business is a $3 billion industry. Bagels are very popular 
with consumers. Not only are they relatively low in fat, they are filling, 
and they taste good! Investors like the bagel industry because it can be 
highly profitable: it only costs about $.10 to make a bagel, and they can 
be sold for $.50 each or more. Although some bagel companies have 
done poorly in recent years, due mainly to poor management, Brueg-
ger’s business is booming; it is number one nationally, with over 450 
shops that sell bagels, coffee, and bagel sandwiches for takeout or on-
premise consumption. Many stores in the Bruegger’s chain generate an 
average of $800,000 in sales annually. 
 Production of bagels is done in batches, according to flavor, with 
each flavor being produced on a daily basis. Production of bagels at 
Bruegger’s begins at a processing plant, where the basic ingredients 
of flour, water, yeast, and flavorings are combined in a special mixing 
machine. After the dough has been thoroughly mixed, it is transferred 
to another machine that shapes the dough into individual bagels. Once 
the bagels have been formed, they are loaded onto refrigerated trucks 
for shipping to individual stores. When the bagels reach a store, they 
are unloaded from the trucks and temporarily stored while they rise. 
The final two steps of processing involve boiling the bagels in a kettle of 
water and malt for one minute, and then baking the bagels in an oven 
for approximately 15 minutes. 
 The process is depicted in the figure. 
 Quality is an important feature of a successful business. Custom-
ers judge the quality of bagels by their appearance (size, shape, and 
shine), taste, and consistency. Customers are also sensitive to the 
service they receive when they make their purchases. Bruegger’s 
devotes careful attention to quality at every stage of operation, from 
choosing suppliers of ingredients, careful monitoring of ingredients, 
and keeping equipment in good operating condition to monitoring 
output at each step in the process. At the stores, 
employees are instructed to watch for deformed 
bagels and to remove them when they find them. (Deformed bagels 
are returned to a processing plant where they are sliced into bagel 
chips, packaged, and then taken back to the stores for sale, thereby 
reducing the scrap rate.) Employees who work in the stores are care-
fully chosen and then trained so that they are competent to operate 
the necessary equipment in the stores and to provide the desired level 
of service to customers. 
 The company operates with minimal inventories of raw materials 
and inventories of partially completed bagels at the plant and very little 
inventory of bagels at the stores. One reason for this is to maintain a 
high degree of freshness in the final product by continually supplying 
fresh product to the stores. A second reason is to keep costs down; 
minimal inventories mean less space is needed for storage. 
 Questions 
 1. Bruegger’s maintains relatively little inventory at either its plants 
or its retail stores. List the benefits and risks of this policy.  
 2. Quality is very important to Bruegger’s. 
  
a.  What features of bagels do customers look at to judge their 
quality?  
  
b.  At what points in the production process do workers check 
bagel quality? 
  
c.  List the steps in the production process, beginning with 
purchasing ingredients, and ending with the sale, and state 
how quality can be positively affected at each step. 
 3. Which inventory models could be used for ordering the 
ingredients for bagels? Which model do you think would be 
most appropriate for deciding how many bagels to make in 
a given batch?  
 4. Bruegger’s has bagel-making machines at its plants. Another pos-
sibility would be to have a bagel-making machine at each store. 
What advantages does each alternative have? 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Bruegger’s Bagel Bakery 
(D f
d b
l
 
Processing plant
A retail store
Mixer
Shaper
Kettle
Oven
Trays of
bagels
FLOUR

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
601
 PSC designs and produces a variety of laser bar code scanning devices. 
The products include handheld bar code readers, high-speed fixed-
position industrial scanners, and retail checkout scanners as well as a 
full line of accessories, software, and supplies to support its products. 
Headquartered in Eugene, Oregon, the company has manufacturing 
facilities in Eugene and Paris, France, with roughly 1,200 employees 
worldwide. 
 Products 
 Bar code scanners are designed for a variety of situations that can 
involve long-range scanning, reading small bar codes, and perform-
ing high-speed scans. They are used extensively in industry, business, 
and government to manage and control the entire supply chain, which 
includes suppliers, production, warehousing, distribution, retail sales, 
and service. Examples of bar code readers include the familiar point-
of-sale scanners encountered at supermarkets and other retail stores. 
They come in a variety of forms, ranging from handheld to built-in 
models. High-speed, unattended scanners are used for automated 
material handling and sorting. Typical installations include high-
volume distribution centers such as JC Penney's catalog operation 
and airport baggage handling systems. The company also produces 
“reader engines” that it supplies to other companies for use in their 
products. These may be as small as 1.2 cubic inches. One application 
for an “engine product” is found in lottery ticket validation machines. 
Use of bar code readers has greatly increased the speed and accu-
racy of data collection, resulting in increased productivity, improved 
production and inventory tracking and control, and improved market 
information.  
 Operations 
 Forecasting 
 Forecasting is not a significant activity at PSC due to several factors. 
There is high standardization of scanner components, which creates 
stability in usage requirements. Supplier lead times are relatively 
short, often only a few days. Orders are typically small; 70 percent of 
all orders are for 10 units or less. There is a fair degree of production 
flexibility, particularly in terms of product customization. As a result of 
these factors, the company relies mainly on short-term, moving average 
forecasts. 
 Product Design 
 PSC has developed a robust design in many of its products, enabling 
them to perform effectively under a broad range of operating condi-
tions. For example, many of its handheld scanners can operate at 
temperatures ranging from   22   F to 120   F, and can withstand 
drops onto concrete surfaces from heights up to six feet and still 
function. This has enabled the company to offer warranties ranging 
from 24 to 36 months, far exceeding the industry standard of 3 to 
12 months.  
 Layout 
 PSC has developed an efficient production layout 
that consists of assembly lines and work centers. The assembly lines 
handle standardized production and subassemblies and the work cen-
ters handle final assembly and customization of products. Assembly 
lines are U-shaped to facilitate communication among workers. The 
work centers are designed for production flexibility; they can be recon-
figured in about four hours. Work centers are staffed by teams of three 
to six cross-trained workers who are responsible for an order from start 
to finish. 
 The Production Process 
 Production involves a combination of assembly line and batch process-
ing that provides high volume and flexibility to customized individual 
orders. Because of the high standardization among the internal compo-
nents of different scanners, many of the subassemblies can be produced 
on assembly lines. Customization is done primarily on the external por-
tion of various products according to customer specification. 
 The production process for scanner engines is depicted in the pro-
cess flowchart shown in the figure. The process begins when an order 
is received from a customer. The order is then configured according to 
customer specifications. Next it is entered into the computer to obtain a 
bill of materials (BOM), and the order is transmitted to production con-
trol so that it can be scheduled for production. A “traveler” packet con-
taining product specifications and the BOM is created. It will accompany 
the order throughout the process. 
 The traveler is sent to the “kitting” area where standard parts and 
any customized parts are obtained and placed into a bin (“kit”) and then 
placed in a flow rack until the assigned work center is ready for the job 
(i.e., a pull system). 
 The next phase of the process transforms unprogrammed, panelized 
circuit boards into programmed boards. The boards first pass through 
a screen printer which uses a stencil to coat the boards with a solder 
paste. Next the boards pass through a chip mounter which enters val-
ues for the smaller, passive components of the circuit board at a rate 
of 25,000 parts per hour. A second mounter enters values for the larger, 
programmable components at a rate of 7,000 parts per hour. The slower 
rate for the larger components is offset by the fact that there are fewer 
of those components. The process ends up being balanced, and no 
bottlenecks occur. 
 The programmed boards move by conveyor to a station for visual 
inspection. Rejects are returned to the chip mounter area, and boards 
that pass are sent through an oven to solidify the solder, making the 
programming permanent. The circuit boards are then removed from the 
panels and placed into the kit. The kits are then taken to designated 
work centers for customization and placement in scanner engines. 
 Work centers typically have builders, computer operators, and a tes-
ter. A builder mounts the laser diodes on the circuit board and passes 
it to a computer operator who downloads the customer specifications 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 PSC, Inc. 
Th
bl li
(continued )

602 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management
Builder mounts
laser diodes on
circuit boards
Board is transformed
into a scanner engine
Tester checks
performance &
quality
Computer operator
mounts optical
components &
downloads attributes
Technician for
repair
Not repaired
Repaired
The scanners are
packaged and
shipped to the
customers
Scanner engine
is put into a
LRG casing
Scanner engines
are labeled &
serialized
Customer label &
PSC serial #
FAIL
PASS
PASS
PASS
or
FAIL
PASS
or
FAIL
FAIL
FAIL
Audit double-
checks engines
for
performance &
quality
Returned to
original work
center for
rework
Customer places
order
Customer svc rep
configures &
enters order
BOM
Kitting department
assembles parts &
creates an order "kit"
Kits are placed into a
flow rack for holding
until work centers are 
ready to receive
materials
Conveyor belt
Traveler created
Chip mounter #1
Chip mounter #2
Conveyor belt
Conveyor belt
Order transmitted
via computer to
production control
Unprogrammed /
panelized circuit
boards are fed into
a screen printer
Operator of
automated process
gathers
unprocessed
circuit boards
Supervisor reviews
flow rack and 
prepares daily
schedules for work
centers
FAIL:
Return to
chip
mounter #1
Visual
inspection
Oven solidifies
circuit board
programming
Circuit
board
depanelized
Circuit board
added to kit
PASS
Conveyor belt
PSC Inc. Scanner Engine Production Process Flowchart
PASS
or
FAIL
(continued )

 
Chapter Thirteen Inventory Management 
603
 Quality 
 Quality is strongly emphasized at PSC. Employees are trained in qual-
ity concepts and the use of quality tools. Training is incorporated on-
the-job so that employees can see the practical applications of what 
they are learning. Employees are responsible for performing in-process 
quality checks (quality at the source), and to report any defects they 
discover to their supervisor. Defects are assigned to one of three cat-
egories for problem solving:
 • Operator/training error. The supervisor notifies a trainer who then 
provides appropriate retraining. 
 • Process/equipment problem. The supervisor notifies the manufac-
turing engineer who is then responsible for diagnosing the cause 
and correcting the problem. 
 • Parts/material problem. The supervisor notifies quality assurance, 
who then notifies the vendor to correct the problem. Defective parts 
are either scrapped or returned to the vendor. 
 Lean Production 
 PSC strives to operate on lean production principles. In addition to 
emphasizing high levels of quality, production flexibility, low levels of 
inventories, and having some deliveries come right to the production 
floor, its organization structure is fairly flat, and it uses a team approach. 
Still another feature of lean production is that many of PSC's workers 
are multiskilled. The company encourages employees to master new 
skills through a pay-for-skill program, and bases hourly pay rates on the 
number of skills a worker can perform. 
 Business Strategy 
 The company has developed what it believes is a strong strategy for 
success. Strategic initiatives include anticipating customer demand for 
miniaturization and the ability to customize products; expanding its pro-
prietary technology; and expanding internationally into Western Europe 
(now accounts for about 35 percent of sales) and the Pacific Rim (now 
accounts for about 10 percent of sales). Several plants or groups are 
ISO certified, which has been important for European sales. The com-
pany intends to continue to expand its product lines through acquisition 
of other companies. 
into the microprocessor of the scan engine. The operator also mounts 
the optical components and adjusts them for the design of the scanner 
(e.g., long-range scanning). Next, the engine goes to the tester, who 
checks to make sure that the scanner is capable of reading bar codes 
and laser characteristics. Engines that fail are sent for repair and later 
retested. If the engine fails a second time, it is either returned for further 
repair or scrapped. Engines which pass are placed in an electrostatic 
bag which protects them from static electricity that could damage the 
programming. 
 Engines are then sent to Audit for another check for performance 
quality. 
 Engines that pass are incorporated into the final product, a serial 
number is added, along with a label, and the product is sent to the pack-
ing area and then shipped to the customer. 
 Inventory 
 The company uses a variety of methods for inventory management, and 
it attempts to minimize the amount of inventory. A computer determines 
component requirements and generates purchase orders for the com-
ponents for each order, and then appropriate orders for various com-
ponents from vendors are prepared. However, the company maintains 
a stock of standard components that are replenished using a reorder 
point system. The company has adopted point-of-use replenishment for 
some areas of operations, having deliveries come directly to the pro-
duction floor. Finished products are immediately shipped to the cus-
tomer, which enhances the company's delivery performance and avoids 
finished goods inventory. 
 Suppliers 
 Approximately 40 vendors supply parts and materials to PSC, each of 
which has been subjected to a multiple-step supplier certification pro-
gram that includes the supplier's completing a self-evaluation question-
naire; an on-site visit of supplier facilities by a team from PSC made up of 
people from engineering, purchasing, and operations; a probation period; 
and rating of products using government MIL-STD 105 specifications. 
Vendor performance is tracked on product quality, delivery, and service. 
 When an item is removed from inventory, it is scanned into the com-
puter, and this information is transmitted directly to suppliers, along 
with purchase orders to restock components. 
(concluded)
 Hopp, Wallace J., and Mark L. Spearman.  Factory Physics.  
3rd ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
 Muller, Max.  Essentials of Inventory Management. 2nd 
ed. New York: Amacom Books, 2011. 
 Piasecki, David J.  Inventory Management Explained: A 
Focus on Forecasting, Lot Sizing, Safety Stock, and 
Ordering. Kenosha, WI: Ops Publishing. 2009.
 rfidjournal.com 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

604
 CHAP TE R 
 14  JIT and Lean 
Operations 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO14.1 
Explain the terms  lean operations and  JIT. 
 LO14.2 
Describe the main characteristics of lean systems. 
 LO14.3 
List the five principles of the way lean systems function. 
 LO14.4 
List some of the benefits and some of the risks of lean 
operation. 
 LO14.5 
Describe the Toyota Production System (TPS). 
 LO14.6 
List the three goals of a lean system and explain the 
importance of each. 
 LO14.7 
List the eight wastes according to lean 
philosophy. 
 LO14.8 
Identify and briefly discuss the four building blocks of a lean 
production system. 
 LO14.9 
Describe key lean improvement tools. 
 LO14.10 Outline considerations for successful conversion from a 
traditional system to a lean system. 
 LO14.11 Describe some of the obstacles to lean 
success. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 14.1 Introduction,  606 
 Characteristics of Lean Systems  606 
 Benefits and Risks of Lean 
Systems  607 
 The Toyota Approach,  607 
 14.2 Supporting Goals,  609 
 14.3 Building Blocks,  610 
 Product Design,  610 
 Process Design,  611 
 Personnel/Organizational Elements,  616 
 Manufacturing Planning and Control,  618 
 14.4 Lean Tools  627 
 Value Stream Mapping,  627 
 Process Improvement Using 5W2H,  628 
 Lean and Six Sigma,  628 
 JIT Deliveries and the Supply Chain,  628 
 Lean and ERP,  629 
 14.5 Transitioning to a Lean System,  629 
 Planning a Successful Conversion,  629 
 Obstacles to Conversion,  629 
 A Cooperative Spirit,  630 
 14.6 Lean Services,  630 
 14.7 JIT II,  633 
 14.8 Operations Strategy,  633 
 Case: Level Operations,  637 
 Operations Tour: Boeing,  638 
 Supplement: Maintenance,  640 

605
 As business organizations strive to maintain competitiveness in an ever-changing global 
economy, they are increasingly seeking new and better ways of operating. For some, this 
means changing from the traditional ways of operating to what is now referred to as lean 
operation. A  lean operation  is a flexible system of operation that uses considerably fewer 
resources (i.e., activities, people, inventory, and floor space) than a traditional system. More-
over, lean systems tend to achieve greater productivity, lower costs, shorter cycle times, and 
higher quality than nonlean systems. 
 Lean systems are sometimes referred to as   just-in-time (JIT)   systems owing to their 
highly coordinated activities and delivery of goods that occur just as they are needed. The 
lean approach was pioneered by Toyota’s founder, Taiichi Ohno, and Shigeo Shingo as a 
much faster and less costly way of producing automobiles. Following its success, today the 
lean approach is being applied in a wide range of manufacturing and service operations. 
 Lean is both a philosophy and a methodology that focuses on eliminating waste (non-
value-added activities) and streamlining operations by closely coordinating all activities. 
Lean systems have three basic elements: They are demand driven, are focused on waste 
reduction, and have a culture that is dedicated to excellence and continuous improvement. 
 This chapter describes the lean production approach, including the basic elements of 
these systems and what it takes to make them work effectively. It also points out the ben-
efits of these systems and the potential obstacles that companies may encounter when they 
attempt to convert from a traditional system to a lean production system. 
 Lean operation  A  flexible 
system that uses minimal 
resources and produces high-
quality goods or services.  
 Just-in-time (JIT)  A highly 
coordinated processing system 
in which goods move through 
the system, and services are 
 performed, just as they are 
needed. 
 LO14.1  Explain the terms  lean 
operations and JIT.

606 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 14.1 INTRODUCTION 
     Lean operations began as lean manufacturing in the mid-1900s. It was developed by the 
Japanese automobile manufacturer Toyota. The development in Japan was influenced by the 
limited resources available at the time. Not surprisingly, the Japanese were very  sensitive to 
waste and inefficiency. Widespread interest in lean manufacturing occurred after a book about 
automobile production,  The Machine That Changed the World,  by James  Womack, Daniel 
Jones, and Daniel Roos, was published in 1990. As described in the book, Toyota’s focus 
was on the elimination of all waste from every aspect of the process. Waste was defined as 
anything that interfered with, or did not add value to, the process of producing automobiles. 
 A stunning example of the potential of lean manufacturing was illustrated by the successful 
adoption of lean methods in the mid-1980s in a Fremont, California, auto plant. The plant was 
originally operated by General Motors (GM). However, GM closed the plant in 1982 because 
of its low productivity and high absenteeism. A few years later the plant was reopened as a 
joint venture of Toyota and GM, called NUMMI (New United Motor  Manufacturing, Inc.). 
About 80 percent of the former plant workers were rehired, but the white-collar jobs were 
shifted from directing to supporting workers, and small teams were formed and trained to 
design, measure, and improve their performance. The result? By 1985 productivity and  quality 
improved dramatically, exceeding all other GM plants, and  absenteeism was negligible. 
 As other North American companies attempted to adopt the lean approach, they began to 
realize that in order to be successful, they needed to make major organizational and cultural 
changes. They also recognized that mass production, which emphasizes the efficiency of indi-
vidual operations and leads to unbalanced systems and large inventories, was outmoded. Instead, 
they discovered that lean methods involve demand-based operations, flexible operations with 
rapid changeover capability, effective worker behaviors, and continuous improvement efforts.  
 Characteristics of Lean Systems 
  There are a number of characteristics that are commonly found in lean systems. An overview 
of these will provide a better understanding of lean systems.
 Waste reduction —A hallmark of lean systems. 
 Continuous improvement —Another hallmark; never-ending efforts to improve. 
 Use of teams —Cross-functional teams, especially for process improvement. 
 Work cells —Along with cellular layouts allow for better communication and use of people.  
 Visual controls —Simple signals that enable efficient flow and quick assessment of 
operations.  
 High quality —In processes and in output. 
 Minimal inventory —Excess inventory is viewed as a waste. 
 Output only to match demand —Throughout the entire system; referred to a “demand pull.”  
 Quick changeovers —Enables equipment flexibility and output variety without 
disruption.  
 Small lot sizes —Enables variety for batch production. 
 Lean culture —The entire organization embraces lean concepts and strives to achieve them.  
 Five principles embody the way lean systems function. Note the connections to the 
 preceding characteristics.
 Identify customer values. 
 Focus on processes that create value. 
 Eliminate waste to create “flow”. 
 Produce only according to customer demand. 
 Strive for perfection. 
 LO14.2 Describe the main 
characteristics of lean systems.
 LO14.3 List the five principles 
of the way lean systems 
function.

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
607
 Benefits and Risks of Lean Systems 
  There are numerous benefits of lean systems, as well as some risks. The key benefits include:
 Reduced waste due to emphasis on waste reduction. 
 Lower costs due to reduced waste and lower inventories. 
 Increased quality motivated by customer focus and the need for high-quality processes. 
 Reduced cycle time due to elimination of non-value-added operations. 
 Increased flexibility due to quick changeovers and small lot sizes. 
 Increased productivity due to elimination of non-value-added processes. 
 There are also certain risks that often accompany lean operations, such as:
   Increased stress on workers due to increased responsibilities for equipment changeovers, 
problem solving, and process and quality improvement. 
 Fewer resources (e.g., inventory, people, time) available if problems occur. 
 Supply chain disruptions can halt operations due to minimal inventory or time buffers. 
 John Deere, the well-known tractor supply company, bolstered profits during a recession 
by using a JIT approach to reduce inventory levels. However, when demand picked up as the 
economy strengthened, a shortage of parts led to stretched-out delivery dates. Long lead times 
to replenish parts meant that in some cases harvesting equipment farmers wanted wouldn’t be 
available until  after  harvest time! As a result, some farmers turned to Deere competitors to 
purchase needed equipment. 
 The Toyota Approach 
  Many of the methods that are common to lean operations were developed as part of Japanese 
car maker Toyota’s approach to manufacturing. Toyota’s approach came to be known as the 
Toyota Production System (TPS), and it has served as a model for many implementations of 
lean systems, particularly in manufacturing. Many of the terms Toyota used are now com-
monly used in conjunction with lean operations, especially the following:
 •  Muda : Waste and inefficiency. Perhaps the driving philosophy. Waste and inefficiency 
can be minimized by using the following tactics. 
 •  Kanban : A manual system used for controlling the movement of parts and materials 
that responds to  signals of the need (i.e., demand) for delivery of parts or materials. 
This applies both to delivery to the factory and delivery to each workstation. The result 
is the delivery of a steady stream of containers of parts throughout the workday. Each 
 container holds a small supply of parts or materials. New containers are delivered to 
replace empty containers. 
 •  Heijunka : Variations in production volume lead to waste. The workload must be 
 leveled; volume and variety must be averaged to achieve a steady flow of work. 
 •  Kaizen : Continuous improvement of the system. There is always room for 
 improvement, so this effort must be ongoing. 
 •  Jidoka : Quality at the source. A machine automatically stops when it detects a bad part. 
A worker then stops the line. Also known as  autonomation. 
 In some respects, the just-in-time concept was operational over 60 years ago at Henry 
Ford’s great industrial complex in River Rouge, Michigan. 
 Toyota learned a great deal from studying Ford’s operations and based its lean approach on 
what it saw. However, Toyota was able to accomplish something that Ford couldn’t: a system 
that could handle some variety. 
 A widely held view of JIT/lean production is that it is simply a system for scheduling 
production that results in low levels of work-in-process and inventory. But in its truest 
sense, JIT/lean production represents a  philosophy that encompasses every aspect of the 
 LO14.4  List some of the 
benefits and some of the risks 
of lean operation.
 LO14.5  Describe the Toyota 
Production System (TPS).
 Muda  Waste and inefficiency. 
 Kanban  A manual system that 
signals the need for parts or 
materials. 
 Heijunka  Workload leveling. 
 Kaizen  Continuous 
 improvement of the system. 
 Jidoka  Quality at the source 
(autonomation). 

608 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 In recent years Toyota has been plagued by more than a few recalls of 
its popular vehicles. This was somewhat surprising, given Toyota’s repu-
tation as a world leader in quality and lean production. Various news 
reports pointed to the following as possible causes: overdoing its quest 
 READING 
 Toyota Recalls 
 FIGURE 14.1 
 An overview of the goals and 
building blocks of lean production 
systems 
Source:  Adapted from Thomas E. Vollmann, 
William L. Berry, and D. Clay Whybark, 
Manufacturing Planning and Control 
 Systems, 5th ed. Copyright 2005 Irwin/
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Used with 
permission. 
Ultimate
Goal
Eliminate disruptions
Make the system flexible
Eliminate waste
Supporting
Goals
Product Design:
• Standard parts
• Modular design
• Quality
• Concurrent 
  engineering
Process Design:
• Small lot sizes
• Setup time 
  reduction
• Manufacturing cells
• Quality improvement
• Production flexibility
• A balanced system
• Little inventory
  storage
• Fail-safe methods
Personnel/Organizational
Elements:
• Workers as assets
• Cross-trained workers
• Continuous improvement
• Cost accounting
• Leadership/project
  management
Manufacturing Planning 
and Control:
• Level loading
• Pull systems
• Visual systems
• Limited work-in-
      process (WIP)
• Close vendor 
  relationships
• Reduced transaction
  processing
• Preventive maintenance
  and housekeeping
Building Blocks
A
balanced,
rapid flow
 In the mid-1920s, the Ford 
assembly plant in River 
Rouge, Michigan, was a 
state-of-the-art industrial 
complex employing over 
75,000 workers. In 1982, 
Eiji Toyoda, head of the 
Toyota Company, toasted 
Ford’s then-president 
Philip Caldwell, saying, 
“There is no secret to how 
we learned to do what we 
do—we learned it at the 
Rouge.” 
for cost reduction; failure to heed early reports 
of problems and address them, possibly due 
to a refusal to admit there were problems; and increased difficulty in 
overseeing the entire system from Japan as overseas sales expanded. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
609
process, from design to after the sale of a product. The philosophy is to pursue a  system 
that functions well with minimal levels of inventories, minimal waste, minimal space, 
and minimal transactions. Truly, a  lean  system. As such, it must be a system that is not 
prone to disruptions and is flexible in terms of the product variety and range of volume that 
it can handle. 
 In lean systems, quality is ingrained in both the product and the process. Companies that 
use lean operations have achieved a level of quality that enables them to function with small 
batch sizes and tight schedules. Lean systems have high reliability; major sources of ineffi-
ciency and disruption have been eliminated, and workers have been trained not only to func-
tion in the system but also to continuously improve it. 
 The ultimate goal of a lean operation is to achieve a system that matches supply to customer 
demand; supply is synchronized to meet customer demand in a smooth, uninterrupted flow. 
 Figure 14.1 provides an overview of the goals and building blocks of a lean production system. 
The following pages provide more details about the supporting goals and building blocks.  
 14.2 SUPPORTING GOALS  
   The ultimate goal of lean is a  balanced  system, that is, one that achieves a smooth, rapid flow 
of materials and/or work through the system. The idea is to make the process time as short as 
possible by using resources in the best possible way. The degree to which the overall goal is 
achieved depends on how well certain supporting goals are achieved. Those goals are to
 1. 
Eliminate disruptions. 
 2. 
Make the system flexible. 
 3. 
Eliminate waste, especially excess inventory. 
 Disruptions  have a negative influence on the system by upsetting the smooth flow of prod-
ucts through the system, and they should be eliminated. Disruptions are caused by a variety of 
factors, such as poor quality, equipment breakdowns, changes to the schedule, and late deliv-
eries. Quality problems are particularly disruptive because in lean systems there is no extra 
inventory that can be used to replace defective items. All disruptions should be eliminated 
where possible. This will reduce the uncertainty that the system must deal with. 
 A  flexible system  is one that is robust enough to handle a mix of products, often on a 
daily basis, and to handle changes in the level of output while still maintaining balance and 
throughput speed. This enables the system to deal with some uncertainty. Long setup times 
and long lead times negatively impact the flexibility of the system. Hence, reduction of setup 
and lead times is very important in a lean system. 
 Waste  represents unproductive resources; eliminating waste can free up resources and 
enhance production.  Inventory  is an idle resource, taking up space and adding cost to the 
system. It should be minimized as much as possible. In the lean philosophy, there are eight 
wastes:
 1. 
 Excess inventory —beyond minimal quantities, an idle resource takes up floor space 
and adds to cost. 
 2. 
 Overproduction —involves excessive use of manufacturing resources. 
 3. 
 Waiting time —requires space, adds no value. 
 4. 
 Unnecessary transporting —increases handling, increases work-in-process inventory. 
 5. 
 Processing waste —makes unnecessary production steps, scrap. 
 6. 
 Inefficient work methods —reduce productivity, increase scrap, increase work-in- 
process inventory. 
 7. 
 Product defects —require rework costs and possible lost sales due to customer 
dissatisfaction. 
 8. 
Underused people—relates to mental and creative abilities as well as physical abilities. 
 LO14.6  List the three goals of 
a lean system and explain the 
importance of each.
 LO14.7  List the eight wastes 
according to lean philosophy.

610 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 The existence of these wastes is an indication that improvement is possible. The list of 
wastes also can identify potential targets for continuous improvement efforts. 
 The  kaizen philosophy for eliminating waste is based on the following tenets: 1 
 1. Waste is the enemy, and to eliminate waste it is necessary to get the hands dirty. 
 2. Improvement should be done gradually and continuously; the goal is not big improve-
ments done intermittently. 
 3. Everyone should be involved: top managers, middle managers, and workers. 
 4.  Kaizen is built on a cheap strategy, and it does not require spending great sums on tech-
nology or consultants. 
 5. It can be applied anywhere. 
 6. It is supported by a visual system: a total transparency of procedures, processes, and 
values, making problems and wastes visible to all. 
 7. It focuses attention where value is created. 
 8. It is process oriented. 
 9. It stresses that the main effort of improvement should come from new thinking and a 
new work style. 
 10. The essence of organizational learning is to learn while doing. 
 14.3 BUILDING BLOCKS 
  The design and operation of a lean system provide the foundation for accomplishing the 
aforementioned goals. As shown in  Figure 14.1 , the building blocks are:
 1. 
Product design. 
 2. 
Process design. 
 3. 
Personnel/organizational elements. 
 4. 
Manufacturing planning and control. 
 Speed and simplicity are two common threads that run through these building blocks. 
 Product Design 
 Four elements of product design are important for a lean production system:
 1. 
Standard parts. 
 2. 
Modular design. 
 3. 
Highly capable production systems with quality built in. 
 4. 
Concurrent engineering. 
The first two elements relate to speed and simplicity. 
 The use of  standard parts  means that workers have fewer parts to deal with, and training 
times and costs are reduced. Purchasing, handling, and checking quality are more routine and 
lend themselves to continual improvement. Another important benefit is the ability to use 
standard processing. 
 Modular design  is an extension of standard parts. Modules are clusters of parts treated as 
a single unit. This greatly reduces the number of parts to deal with, simplifying assembly, 
purchasing, handling, training, and so on. Standardization has the added benefit of reducing 
the number of different parts contained in the bill of materials for various products, thereby 
simplifying the bill of materials. 
 1 Adapted from Jorge Nascimento Rodrigues with Masaaki Imai, “Masaaki Imai: The Father of Kaizen,”  www
.gurusonline.tv/uk/conteudos/imai.asp .
 LO14.8 Identify and briefly 
discuss the four building blocks 
of a lean production system.

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
611
 Lean requires highly capable production systems. Quality is the sine qua non (“without 
which not”) of lean. It is crucial to lean systems because poor quality can create major disrup-
tions. Quality must be embedded in goods and processes. The systems are geared to a smooth 
flow of work; the occurrence of problems due to poor quality creates disruption in this flow. 
Because of small lot sizes and the absence of buffer stock, production must cease when prob-
lems occur, and it cannot resume until the problems have been resolved. Obviously, shutting 
down an entire process is costly and cuts into planned output levels, so it becomes imperative 
to try to avoid shutdowns and to quickly resolve problems when they do appear. 
 Lean systems use a comprehensive approach to quality. Quality is designed into the prod-
uct and the production process. High quality levels can occur because lean systems produce 
standardized products that lead to standardized job methods, employ workers who are very 
familiar with their jobs, and use standardized equipment. Moreover, the cost of product design 
quality (i.e., building quality in at the  design  stage) can be spread over many units, yielding a 
low cost per unit. It is also important to choose appropriate quality levels in terms of the final 
customer and of manufacturing capability. Thus, product design and process design must go 
hand in hand. 
 Engineering changes can be very disruptive to smooth operations. Concurrent engineering 
practices (described in Chapter 4) can substantially reduce these disruptions. 
 Process Design 
 Eight aspects of process design are particularly important for lean production systems:
 1. 
Small lot sizes. 
 2. 
Setup time reduction. 
 3. 
Manufacturing cells. 
 4. 
Quality improvement. 
 5. 
Production flexibility. 
 6. 
A balanced system. 
 7. 
Little inventory storage. 
 8. 
Fail-safe methods. 
 Small Lot Sizes.  In the lean philosophy, the ideal lot size is one unit, a quantity that may 
not always be realistic owing to practical considerations requiring minimum lot sizes (e.g., 
machines that process multiple items simultaneously, heat-treating equipment that processes 
multiple items simultaneously, and machines with very long setup times). Nevertheless, the 
goal is still to reduce the lot size as much as possible. Small lot sizes in both the production 
process and deliveries from suppliers yield a number of benefits that enable lean systems to 
operate effectively. First, with small lots moving through the system, in-process inventory is 
considerably less than it is with large lots. This reduces carrying costs, space requirements, 
and clutter in the workplace. Second, inspection and rework costs are less when problems 
with quality occur, because there are fewer items in a lot to inspect and rework. 
 Small lots also permit greater flexibility in scheduling. Repetitive systems typically pro-
duce a small variety of products. In traditional systems, this usually means long production 
runs of each product, one after the other. Although this spreads the setup cost for a run over 
many items, it also results in long cycles over the entire range of products. For instance, sup-
pose a firm has three product versions, A, B, and C. In a traditional system, there would be 
a long run of version A (e.g., covering two or three days or more), then a long run of version 
B, followed by a long run of version C before the sequence would repeat. In contrast, a lean 
system, using small lots, would frequently shift from producing A to producing B and C. This 
flexibility enables lean systems to respond more quickly to changing customer demands for 
output: lean systems can produce just what is needed, when it is needed. The contrast between 
small and large lot sizes is illustrated in  Figure 14.2 . A summary of the benefits of small lot 
sizes is presented in  Table 14.1 . 

612 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 It is important to note that the use of small lot sizes is not in conflict with the economic 
order quantity (EOQ) approach. Space is at a premium in Japan, making warehousing costs 
and the cost of space to store extra inventory near manufacturing very high. Also, on-site 
inventory increases the space between operations, which decreases communications, increases 
cycle time, and reduces visibility. All of these add to the burden of carrying inventory. So in 
an EOQ computation, using higher carrying cost, with carrying cost in the denominator, lot 
sizes naturally end up being smaller, and in some cases, much smaller. 
 Setup Time Reduction.  Small lots and changing product mixes require frequent setups. 
Unless these are quick and relatively inexpensive, the time and cost to accomplish them can 
be prohibitive. Moreover, long setup times require holding more inventory than with short 
setup times. Hence, there is strong emphasis on reducing setup times. In JIT, workers are 
often trained to do their own setups. Moreover, programs to reduce setup time and cost are 
used to achieve the desired results; a deliberate effort is required, and workers are usually a 
valuable part of the process. 
 FIGURE 14.2 
 Small versus large-lot run sizes 
AAA    BBBBBBB    CC    AAA    BBBBBBB    CC    AAA    BBBBBBB    CC    AAA    BBBBBBB    CC
Time
Small-lot approach
AAAAAAAAAAAA    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
    CCCCCCCCC    AAAAAAAAAAA
Time
Large-lot approach
A = units of product A
B = units of product B
C = units of product C
 Reduced inventory, lower carrying costs 
 Less space required to store inventory 
 Less rework if defects occur 
 Less inventory to “work off” before implementing product improvements 
 Increased visibility of problems 
 Increased production flexibility 
 Increased ease of balancing operations 
 TABLE 4.1 
 Benefits of small lot sizes 
 Karen  Mills 
 MINNEAPOLIS—When General Mills wanted to cut the time it takes to 
make a product changeover at a Betty Crocker plant, it turned to NASCAR 
for help. The food company sent a team to work with a pit crew “because 
nobody can change over a car faster than these guys can,” said Randy 
Darcy, senior vice president of General Mills’ supply chain operations. 
 After studying the NASCAR crew, General Mills cut to 12 minutes—
from as long as 412 hours—the time it takes to switch production 
 READING 
 General Mills Turns to NASCAR to Reduce Changeover Time 
 Shigeo Shingo made a very significant contribution to lean operation with the development 
of what is called the    single-minute exchange of die (SMED)    system for reducing change-
over time. It involves first categorizing changeover activities as either “internal” or “exter-
nal” activities. Internal activities are those that can only be done while a machine is stopped 
(i.e., not running). Hence, they contribute to long changeover times. External activities 
are those that do not involve stopping the machine; they can be done before or after the  changeover. 
 Single-minute exchange 
of die (SMED)  A system for 
reducing changeover time. 
lines from one Betty Crocker meal to another. One 
thing the mechanics learned from working with 
the NASCAR pit crew was to videotape each of the changeovers, then 
 critique everything that happened. 
 Source: Excerpted from Karen Mills, “General Mills Looks Outside the 
Box for Innovation.” Copyright © The Associated Press. Used with 
permission. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
613
Hence, they do not affect changeover time. After activities have been categorized, a simple 
approach to achieving quick changeovers is to convert as many internal  activities as possible 
to external activities and then streamline the remaining internal activities. 
 The potential benefits that can be achieved using the SMED system were impressively 
illustrated in 1982 at Toyota, when the changeover time for a machine was reduced from 
100 minutes to 3 minutes! The principles of the SMED system can be applied to any change-
over operation. 
 Setup tools and equipment and setup procedures must be simple and standardized. Multi-
purpose equipment or attachments can help to reduce setup time. For instance, a machine with 
multiple spindles that can easily be rotated into place for different job requirements can dras-
tically reduce job changeover time. Moreover,  group technology  (described in Chapter 6) may 
be used to reduce setup cost and time by capitalizing on similarities in recurring operations. 
For instance, parts that are similar in shape, materials, and so on, may require very similar set-
ups. Processing them in sequence on the same equipment can reduce the need to completely 
change a setup; only minor adjustment may be necessary. 
 Manufacturing Cells. One characteristic of lean production systems is multiple 
 manufacturing cells.  The cells contain the machines and tools needed to process families of 
parts  having similar processing requirements. In essence, the cells are highly specialized and 
 efficient production centers. Among the important benefits of manufacturing cells are reduced 
changeover times, high utilization of equipment, and ease of cross-training operators.   
 Quality Improvement.  The occurrence of quality defects during the process can disrupt 
the orderly flow of work. Consequently, problem solving is important when defects occur. 
Moreover, there is a never-ending quest for  quality improvement,  which often focuses on 
 finding and eliminating the causes of problems so they do not continually crop up. 
 Lean production systems sometimes minimize defects through the use of   autonomation  
(note the extra syllable  on  in the middle of the word). Also referred to as  jidoka,  it involves 
the automatic  detection of defects during  production. It can be used with machines or manual 
operations. It consists of two mechanisms: one for detecting defects when they occur and 
another for a human stopping production to  correct the cause of the defects. Thus, the halting 
of production forces immediate attention to the problem, after which an  investigation of the 
problem is conducted, and corrective action is taken to resolve the problem.  
 Autonomation  Automatic 
detection of defects during 
production. 
A worker is assembling a 
Louis Vuitton handbag at the 
company’s fine leather goods 
factory in the Normany town 
of Ducey in France. To keep its 
brand exclusive and contain 
costs, the company monitors 
growth and incorporates lean 
production processes.

614 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Work Flexibility.  The overall goal of a lean system is to achieve the ability to process a mix 
of  products or services in a smooth flow. One potential obstacle to this goal is  bottlenecks that 
occur when portions of the system become overloaded. The existence of bottlenecks reflects 
inflexibilities in a system. Process design can increase  production flexibility  and reduce bottle-
necks in a variety of ways.  Table 14.2 lists some of the techniques used for this purpose.  
 A Balanced System.  Line balancing of production lines (i.e., distributing the workload 
evenly among workstations) helps to achieve a rapid flow of work through the system. Time 
needed for work assigned to each workstation must be less than or equal to the cycle time. The 
cycle time is set equal to what is referred to as the  takt time. ( Takt  is the German word for musical 
meter.)   Takt  time  is the cycle time needed in a production system to match the pace of produc-
tion to the demand rate. It is sometimes said to be the heartbeat of a lean production system. 
 Takt time is often set for a work shift. The procedure for obtaining the  takt time is:
 1. 
Determine the net time available per shift by subtracting any nonproductive time from 
total shift time. 
 2. 
If there is more than one shift per day, multiply the net time per shift by the number of 
shifts to obtain the net available time per day. 
 3. 
Compute  takt time by dividing the net available time by demand. 
 Takt  time  The cycle time 
needed to match customer 
demand for final product.  
 S O L U T I O N 
 1. 
Compute net time available per shift:
 Total time 
  480 minutes
Rest breaks 
40 minutes
Lunch 
30 minutes
 
410 minutes per shift 
 2. 
Compute the net time available per day:
 
410 minutes per shift
2 shifts/day
820 minutes per day
 
 
 3. 
Compute the  takt time:
 
 Takt time
Net time available per day
Daily demand
820 minutes per day
80 units per day
10.25 minutes per cycle



 
 (14–1) 
 E X A M P L E  1 
 Given the following information, compute the  takt  time: Total time per shift is 480 minutes 
per day, and there are two shifts per day. There are two 20-minute rest breaks and a 30-minute 
lunch break per shift. Daily demand is 80 units. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 1. Reduce downtime due to changeovers by reducing changeover time. 
 2. Use preventive maintenance on key equipment to reduce breakdowns and downtime. 
 3. Cross-train workers so they can help when bottlenecks occur or other workers are absent. Train workers 
to handle equipment adjustments and minor repairs. 
 4. Use many small units of capacity; many small cells make it easier to shift capacity temporarily and to 
add or subtract capacity than a few units of large capacity. 
 5. Use offline buffers. Store infrequently used safety stock away from the production area to decrease con-
gestion and to avoid continually turning it over. 
 6. Reserve capacity for important customers. 
 Source: Adapted from Edward M. Knod Jr. and Richard J. Schonberger,  Operations Management: Meeting Customers’ Demands, 7th ed. 
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001) 
 TABLE 14.2 
 Guidelines for increasing 
production flexibility 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
615
 Once the  takt  time for the system has been determined, it can be used to determine the 
time that should be allotted to each workstation in the production process. Using the  takt 
time results in minimizing work-in-process (WIP) inventory in instances where demand is 
stable and the system capacity matches demand. For unstable demand, additional inventory is 
needed to offset demand variability. 
 Inventory Storage.  Lean systems are designed to  minimize  inventory storage. Recall that 
in the lean philosophy, inventory storage is a waste. Inventories are buffers that tend to cover 
up recurring problems that are never resolved, partly because they aren’t obvious and partly 
because the presence of inventory makes them seem less serious. When a machine breaks 
down, it won’t disrupt the system if there is a sufficient inventory of the machine’s output 
to feed into the next workstation. 
The use of inventory as the “solu-
tion” can lead to increasing amounts 
of inventory if breakdowns increase. 
A better solution is to investigate the 
 causes  of machine breakdowns and 
focus on eliminating them. Similar 
problems with quality, unreliable 
vendors, and scheduling also can be 
solved by having ample inventories 
to fall back on. However, carrying all 
that extra inventory creates a tremen-
dous burden in cost and space and 
allows problems to go unresolved. 
 The lean approach is to pare 
down inventories gradually in order 
to uncover the problems. Once they 
are uncovered and solved, the sys-
tem removes more inventory, finds 
and solves additional problems, and 
so on. A useful analogy is a boat on 
a pond that has large, hidden rocks. 
(See  Figure 14.3 .) The rocks repre-
sent problems that can hinder pro-
duction (the boat). The water in the 
pond that covers the rocks is the 
inventory in the system. As the water 
 A worker attaches wheels and 
hubcaps to a GM Montana 
Sport pick-up truck on an 
assembly line in Brazil. 
 FIGURE 14.3 
 Large rocks (problems) are hidden by a high water level (inventory) in A. Lower water level (B) reveals 
rocks (problems such as bottlenecks, waste, poor timing). Once the large rocks are removed, the water level (inventory) 
can be lowered (C). This process would be done repeatedly in the spirit of continuous improvement, achieving additional 
improvements with each iteration. 
B
C
A

616 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
level is slowly lowered, the largest rocks are the first to appear (those problems are the first 
to be identified). At that point, efforts are undertaken to remove these rocks from the water 
(resolve these problems). Once that has been accomplished, additional water is removed from 
the pond, revealing the next layer of rocks, which are then worked on. As more rocks are 
removed, the need for water to cover them diminishes. Likewise, as more of the major pro-
duction problems are solved, there is less need to rely on inventory or other buffers. 
 Low inventories are the result of a  process  of successful problem solving, one that has 
occurred over time. Furthermore, because it is unlikely that all problems will be found and 
resolved, it is necessary to be able to deal quickly with problems when they do occur. Hence, 
there is a continuing need to identify and solve problems within a short time span to prevent 
new problems from disrupting the smooth flow of work through the system. 
 One way to minimize inventory storage in a lean system is to have deliveries from 
suppliers go directly to the production floor, which completely eliminates the need to 
store incoming parts and materials. At the other end of the process, completed units are 
shipped out as soon as they are ready, which minimizes storage of finished goods. Cou-
pled with low work-in-process inventory, these features result in systems that operate 
with very little inventory. 
 Among the advantages of lower inventory are less carrying cost, less space needed, less 
tendency to rely on buffers, less rework if defects occur, and less need to “work off” current 
inventory before implementing design improvements. But carrying less inventory also has 
some risks: The primary one is that if problems arise, there is no safety net. Another is missed 
opportunities if the system is unable to respond quickly to them. 
 Fail-Safe Methods.  Failsafing refers to building safeguards into a process to reduce or 
eliminate the potential for errors during a process. The term that was used initially was 
 baka-yoke,  which meant “foolproofing.” However, due to its offensive connotation, the 
term was changed to   poka-yoke,    which means “mistake proofing.” Some examples of 
failsafing include an alarm that sounds if the weight of a packaged item is too low, indi-
cating missing components; putting assembly components in “egg cartons” to ensure that 
no parts are left out; and designing parts that can only be attached in the correct position. 
There are several everyday examples in vehicles, including signals that warn that the key 
is still in the ignition if the car door is opened, warn if a door is ajar, warn if seatbelts 
are not fastened, or warn if the fuel level is low. Other examples include an ATM signal 
if a card is left in a machine, detectors at department stores that signal if a monitoring 
tag hasn’t been removed from an item, electrical fuses and circuit breakers that interrupt 
electrical supply if a circuit is overloaded, computers and other devices that won’t oper-
ate if an incorrect password is used, and so on. Much of the credit for poka-yoke thinking 
is attributed to the work of Shigeo Shingo, who extensively promoted the use of failsafing 
in operations.  
 Personnel/Organizational Elements 
 There are five elements of personnel and organization that are particularly important for lean 
systems:
 1. 
Workers as assets. 
 2. 
Cross-trained workers. 
 3. 
Continuous improvement. 
 4. 
Cost accounting. 
 5. 
Leadership/project management. 
 Workers as Assets. A fundamental tenet of the lean philosophy is that  workers are assets. 
Well-trained and motivated workers are the heart of a lean system. They are given more 
authority to make decisions than their counterparts in more traditional systems, but they are 
also expected to do more. 
 Poka-yoke  Safeguards built 
into a process to reduce the 
 possibility of errors. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
617
 Companies that treat employees as valuable assets, invest in training 
programs and use innovative workplace practices are more profitable 
than those that don’t, a study found. 
 The two-year look at the workplace strategies of American compa-
nies was conducted by the management consulting firm Ernst & Young 
LLP for the Labor Department. 
 “This is a path-breaking study that shows the surest way to profits and 
productivity is to treat employees as assets to be developed rather than 
costs to be cut,” Labor Secretary Robert Reich said at a press conference. 
 For the study, researchers at Harvard and Wharton business schools 
in partnership with the Ernst & Young Center for Business Innovation, 
reviewed over 100 papers examining business practices of thousands 
of U.S. companies. 
 The report focused on the economic benefits to companies of such 
Japanese-inspired concepts of labor-management cooperation as Just-
In-Time inventory, which moves components to factories only as they 
are needed. 
 READING 
 “People” Firms Boost Profits, Study Shows 
 The Andon board in the GM 
Powertrain Engine facility is a 
visual communication tool. It 
advises employees of the real-
time status of each machine 
within the manufacturing lines, 
enabling the production system 
to be run more effectively. 
 Among the findings:
    • Economic benefits to companies were greatest 
when they  successfully integrated innovations in management and 
technology with the appropriate employee training and “empower-
ment” programs. 
   • Companies investing in employee development enjoy significantly 
higher market values on average than their industry peers. 
   • Companies that were first among their competitors in implementing 
new management practices reaped the largest rewards. 
 According to the study, Motorola, Inc. estimates it earns $30 for 
every $1 invested in employee training, while Xerox Corp. found 
that in cooperation with its employee union it has reduced manufactur-
ing costs by 30 percent and halved the time needed to develop new 
products. 
 Source: “People Firms Boost Profits, Study Shows.” Copyright © 1995, The 
Associated Press. Used with permission. 
 Cross-Trained Workers.  Workers are  cross-trained  to perform several parts of a process and 
operate a variety of machines. This adds to system flexibility because workers are able to help 
one another when bottlenecks occur or when a coworker is absent. It also helps line balancing.  
 Continuous Improvement.  Workers in a lean system have greater responsibility for qual-
ity than workers in traditional systems, and they are expected to be involved in problem solv-
ing and  continuous improvement.  Lean system workers receive extensive training in statistical 
process control, quality improvement, and problem solving. 
 Problem solving is a cornerstone of any lean system. Of interest are problems that inter-
rupt, or have the potential to interrupt, the smooth flow of work through the system. When 
such problems surface, it becomes important to resolve them quickly. This may entail increas-
ing inventory levels  temporarily  while the problem is investigated, but the intent of problem 
solving is to eliminate the problem, or at least greatly reduce the chances of it recurring. 

618 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Problems that occur during production must be dealt with quickly. Some companies use a 
light system to signal problems; in Japan, such a system is called   andon. Each workstation is 
equipped with a set of three lights. A green light means no problems, an amber light means a 
worker is falling a little bit behind, and a red light indicates a serious problem. The purpose of 
the light system is to keep others in the system informed and to enable workers and supervi-
sors to immediately see when and where problems are occurring. 
 Japanese companies have been very successful in forming teams composed of workers 
and managers who routinely work on problems. Moreover, workers are encouraged to report 
problems and potential problems to the teams. 
 It is important that all levels of management actively support and become involved in 
problem solving. This includes a willingness to provide financial support and to recognize 
achievements. It is desirable to formulate goals with the help of workers, publicize the goals, 
and carefully document accomplishments. Goals give workers something tangible to strive 
for; recognition can help maintain worker interest and morale. 
 A central theme of a true lean approach is to work toward continual improvement of the 
system—reducing inventories, reducing setup cost and time, improving quality, increasing the 
output rate, and generally cutting waste and inefficiency. Toward that end, problem solving 
becomes a way of life—a “culture” that must be assimilated into the thinking of management 
and workers alike. It becomes a never-ending quest for improving operations as all members 
of the organization strive to improve the system. 
 One challenge to continuous improvement is that once the “easy” improvements have been 
made, it becomes more difficult to keep workers motivated to continue to look for further 
improvements. 
 Workers in lean systems have more stress than their counterparts in more traditional sys-
tems. Stress comes not only from their added authority and responsibility but also from the 
high-paced system they work in, where there is little slack and a continual push to improve. 
 Cost Accounting.  Another feature of some lean systems is the method of allocating over-
head. Traditional accounting methods sometimes distort overhead allocation because they 
allocate it on the basis of direct labor hours. However, that approach does not always accu-
rately reflect the consumption of overhead by different jobs. In addition, the number of direct 
labor hours in some industries has declined significantly over the years and now frequently 
accounts for a relatively small portion of the total cost. Conversely, other costs now represent 
a major portion of the total cost. Therefore, labor-intensive jobs (i.e., those that use relatively 
large proportions of direct labor) may be assigned a disproportionate share of overhead, one 
that does not truly reflect actual costs. That in turn can cause managers to make poor deci-
sions. Furthermore, the need to track direct labor hours can itself involve considerable effort. 
 One alternative method of allocating overhead is   activity-based costing. This method is 
designed to more closely reflect the actual amount of overhead consumed by a particular job 
or activity. Activity-based costing first identifies traceable costs and then assigns those costs 
to various types of activities such as machine setups, inspection, machine hours, direct labor 
hours, and movement of materials. Specific jobs are then assigned overhead based on the per-
centage of activities they consume. 
 Leadership/Project Management.  Another feature of lean systems relates to  leader-
ship.  Managers are expected to be leaders and facilitators, not order givers. Lean encourages 
two-way communication between workers and managers. 
 Manufacturing Planning and Control 
 Seven elements of manufacturing planning and control are particularly important for lean 
systems:
 1. 
Level loading. 
 2. 
Pull systems. 
 3. 
Visual systems. 
 Andon  System of lights used at 
each workstation to signal prob-
lems or slowdowns. 
 Activity-based costing   
Allocation of overhead to 
 specific jobs based on their 
 percentage of activities. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
619
 4. 
Limited work-in-process (WIP). 
 5. 
Close vendor relationships. 
 6. 
Reduced transaction processing. 
 7. 
Preventive maintenance and housekeeping. 
 Level Loading.  Lean systems place a strong emphasis on achieving stable, level daily mix 
schedules. Toward that end, the master production schedule is developed to provide  level 
 capacity loading.  That may entail a rate-based production schedule instead of the more famil-
iar quantity-based schedule. Moreover, once established, production schedules are relatively 
fixed over a short time horizon, and this provides certainty to the system. Even so, some 
adjustments may be needed in day-to-day schedules to achieve level capacity requirements. 
Suppliers like level loading because it means smooth demand for them. 
 A level production schedule requires smooth production. When a company produces dif-
ferent products or product models, it is desirable to produce in small lots (to minimize work-
in-process inventory and to maintain flexibility) and to spread the production of the different 
products throughout the day to achieve smooth production. The extreme case would be to pro-
duce one unit of one product, then one of another, then one of another, and so on. While this 
approach would allow for maximum smoothness, it would generally not be practical because 
it would generate excessive setup costs. 
 Mixed-model sequencing  begins with daily production requirements of each product or 
model. For instance, suppose a department produces three models, A, B, and C, with these 
daily requirements: 
 Three issues then need to be resolved. One is which sequence to use (C-B-A, A-C-B, etc.), 
another is how many times (i.e., cycles) the sequence should be repeated daily, and the third is 
how many units of each model to produce in each cycle. 
 The choice of sequence can depend on several factors, but the key one is usually the setup 
time or cost, which may vary depending on the sequence used. For instance, if two of the 
models, say A and C, are quite similar, the sequences A-C and C-A may involve only minimal 
setup changes, whereas the setup for model B may be more extensive. Choosing a sequence 
that has A-C or C-A will result in about 20 percent fewer setups over time than having B pro-
duced between A and C on every cycle. 
 The number of cycles per day depends on the daily production quantities. If every model 
is to be produced in every cycle, which is often the goal, determining the smallest integer that 
can be evenly divided into each model’s daily quantity will indicate the number of cycles. 
This will be the fewest number of cycles that will contain one unit of the model with the low-
est quantity requirements. For models A, B, and C shown in the preceding table, there should 
be five cycles (5 can be evenly divided into each quantity). High setup costs may cause a man-
ager to use fewer cycles, trading off savings in setup costs and level production. If dividing by 
the smallest daily quantity does not yield an integer value for each model, a manager may opt 
for using the smallest production quantity to select a number of cycles, but then produce more 
of some items in some cycles to make up the difference. 
 Sometimes a manager determines the number of units of each model in each cycle by 
dividing each model’s daily production quantity by the number of cycles. Using five cycles 
per day would yield the following: 
 Model 
 Daily Quantity 
 A 
 10 
 B 
 15 
 C 
  5 
 Model 
 Daily Quantity 
 Units per Cycle 
 A 
 10 
 10/5    2 
 B 
 15 
 15/5    3 
 C 
  5 
  5/5    1 

620 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 These quantities may be unworkable due to restrictions on lot sizes. For example, model B 
may be packed four to a carton, so producing three units per cycle would mean that at times 
finished units (inventory) would have to wait until sufficient quantities were available to fill 
a crate. Similarly, there may be standard production lot sizes for some operations. A heat-
treating process might involve a furnace that can handle six units at a time. If the different 
models require different furnace temperatures, they could not be grouped. What would be 
necessary here is an analysis of the trade-off between furnace lot size and the advantages of 
level production. 
 Determine a production plan for these three models using the sequence A-B-C:
 
 Model 
 Daily Quantity 
 A 
  7 
 B 
 16 
 C 
  5 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The smallest daily quantity is 5, but dividing the other two quantities by 5 does not yield inte-
gers. The manager might still decide to use five cycles. Producing one unit of models A and C 
and three units of model B in each of the five cycles would leave the manager short two units 
of model A and one unit of model B. The manager might decide to intersperse those units like 
this to achieve nearly level production:
 Cycle 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 Pattern 
 A B(3) C 
 A(2) B(3) C 
 A B(4) C 
 A(2) B(3) C 
 A B(3) C 
 Extra unit(s) 
 
 A 
 B 
 A 
 
 If the requirement for model A had been 8 units a day instead of 7, the manager might decide 
to use the following pattern:
 
 Cycle 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 Pattern 
 A(2) B(3) C 
 A B(3) C 
 A(2) B(4) C 
 A B(3) C 
 A(2) B(3) C 
 Extra unit(s) 
 A 
 
 A B 
 
 A 
 Pull Systems.  The terms  push  and  pull  are used to describe two different systems for 
 moving work through a production process. In traditional production environments, a   push 
 system  is used: When work is finished at a workstation, the output is  pushed  to the next sta-
tion; or, in the case of the final operation, it is pushed on to final inventory. Conversely, in a 
 pull  system,    control of moving the work rests with the following operation; each workstation 
 pulls  the output from the preceding station as it is needed; output of the final operation is 
pulled by customer demand or the master schedule. Thus, in a pull system, work moves on in 
response to demand from the next stage in the process, whereas in a push system, work moves 
on as it is completed, without regard to the next station’s readiness for the work.  Consequently, 
work may pile up at workstations that fall behind schedule because of  equipment failure or the 
detection of a problem with quality. 
 Communication moves backward through the system from station to station. Each 
 workstation (i.e., customer) communicates its need for more work to the preceding work-
station (i.e., supplier), thereby assuring that supply equals demand. Work moves “just in 
time” for the next operation; the flow of work is thereby coordinated, and the accumula-
tion of excessive inventories between operations is avoided. Of course, some inventory 
is usually present because operations are not instantaneous. If a workstation waited until 
 Push system  Work is pushed 
to the next station as it is 
completed. 
 Pull system  A workstation 
pulls output from the preceding 
station as it is needed. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
621
it received a request from the next workstation before starting its work, the next station 
would have to wait for the preceding station to perform its work. Therefore, by design, 
each workstation produces just enough output to meet the (anticipated) demand of the next 
station. This can be accomplished by having the succeeding workstation communicate its 
need for input sufficiently ahead of time to allow the preceding station to do the work. Or 
there can be a small buffer of stock between stations; when the buffer decreases to a certain 
level, this signals the preceding station to produce enough output to replenish the buffer 
supply. The size of the buffer supply depends on the cycle time at the preceding worksta-
tion. If the cycle time is short, the station will need little or no buffer; if the cycle time is 
long, it will need a considerable amount of buffer. However, production occurs only in 
response to  usage  of the succeeding station; work is still pulled by the demand generated 
by the next operation.  
 Pull systems aren’t necessarily appropriate for all manufacturing operations because they 
require a fairly steady flow of repetitive work. Large variations in volume, product mix, or 
product design will undermine the system. 
 Visual Systems.  In a pull system work flow is dictated by “next-step demand.” A system 
can communicate such demand in a variety of ways, including a shout or a wave, but by far 
the most commonly used device is the   kanban  card.  Kanban  is a Japanese word meaning 
“signal” or “visible record.” When a worker needs materials or work from the preceding sta-
tion, he or she uses a kanban card. In effect, the kanban card is the  authorization  to move or 
work on parts. In kanban systems, no part or lot can be moved or worked on without one of 
these cards. 
 There are two main types of kanbans:
 1. 
 Production kanban (p-kanban): signals the need to produce parts. 
 2. 
 Conveyance kanban (c-kanban): signals the need to deliver parts to the next work 
center. 
 The system works this way: A kanban card is affixed to each container. When a worksta-
tion needs to replenish its supply of parts, a worker goes to the area where these parts are 
stored and withdraws one container of parts. Each container holds a predetermined quantity. 
The worker removes the kanban card from the container and posts it in a designated spot 
 Kanban  Card or other device 
that communicates demand 
for work or materials from the 
 preceding station. 
 At TriState Industries, a kanban system is in effect to move 
work through the production system. Shown here, a kanban 
card provides the authorization to move or work on parts. 
   Special carts were designed that, when filled, act as a visual signal 
that they are ready to be moved to the next work cell. An empty cart 
indicates that it is time to produce, in order to refill the cart.  

622 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
where it will be clearly visible, and the worker moves the container to the workstation. The 
posted kanban is then picked up by a stock person who replenishes the stock with another 
container, and so on down the line. Demand for parts triggers a replenishment, and parts are 
supplied as usage dictates. Similar withdrawals and replenishments—all controlled by kan-
bans—occur all the way up and down the line from vendors to finished-goods inventories. 
If supervisors decide the system is too loose because inventories are building up, they may 
decide to tighten the system and withdraw some kanbans. Conversely, if the system seems too 
tight, they may introduce additional kanbans to bring the system into balance. Vendors also 
can influence the number of containers. Moreover, trip times can affect the number: Longer 
trip times may lead to fewer but larger containers, while shorter trip times may involve a 
greater number of small containers. 
 It is apparent that the number of kanban cards in use is an important variable. One can 
compute the ideal number of kanban cards using this formula:
 
 N
DT
X
C
(1
)


 
 (14–2) 
 where
 N     Total number of containers (1 card per container) 
 D     Planned usage rate of using work center 
 T      Average waiting time for replenishment of parts plus average production time for 
a container of parts 
 X      Policy variable set by management that reflects possible inefficiency in the 
system (the closer to 0, the more efficient the system) 
 C      Capacity of a standard container (should be no more than 10 percent of daily 
usage of the part) 
 Note that  D and  T must use the same units (e.g., minutes, days). 
 Usage at a work center is 300 parts per day, and a standard container holds 25 parts. It takes 
an average of .12 day for a container to complete a circuit from the time a kanban card is 
received until the container is returned empty. Compute the number of kanban cards (contain-
ers) needed if  X     .20. 
 E X A M P L E  3 
 S O L U T I O N 
 
N
D
T
C
X
N
?
300 parts per day
.12 day
25 parts per container
.20
300(.12)(1
.20)
25
1.728; round to 2 containers








 
 Note: Rounding up will cause the system to be looser, and rounding down will cause it to be 
tighter. Usually, rounding up is used. 
 Although the goals of MRP and kanban are essentially the same (i.e., to improve customer 
service, reduce inventories, and increase productivity), their approaches are different. Neither 
MRP nor kanban is a stand-alone system—each exists within a larger framework. MRP is a 
computerized system; kanban is a manual system that may be part of a lean system, although 
lean can exist without kanban. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
623
 Kanban is essentially a two-bin type of inventory: Supplies are replenished semiautomati-
cally when they reach a predetermined level. MRP is more concerned with projecting require-
ments and with planning and scheduling operations. 
 A major benefit of the kanban system is its simplicity; a major benefit of MRP is its abil-
ity to handle complex planning and scheduling. In addition, MRP II enables management to 
answer what-if questions for capacity planning. 
 The philosophies that underlie kanban systems are quite different from those tradition-
ally held by manufacturers. Nonetheless, both approaches have their merits, so it probably 
would not make sense in most instances to switch from one method of operation to the other. 
Moreover, to do so would require a tremendous effort. It is noteworthy that at the same time 
that Western manufacturers are studying kanban systems, some Japanese manufacturers are 
studying MRP systems. This suggests the possibility that either system could be improved by 
incorporating selected elements of the other. That would take careful analysis to determine 
which elements to incorporate as well as careful implementation of selected elements, and 
close monitoring to assure that intended results were achieved. 
 Whether manufacturers should adopt the kanban method is debatable. Some form of it 
may be useful, but kanban is merely an information system; by itself it offers little in terms 
of helping manufacturers become more competitive or productive. By the same token, MRP 
alone will not achieve those results either. Instead, it is the overall approach to manufacturing 
that is crucial; it is the commitment and support of top management and the continuing efforts 
of all levels of management to find new ways to improve their manufacturing planning and 
control techniques, and to adapt those techniques to fit their particular circumstances, that will 
determine the degree of success. 
 Comment The use of either kanban or MRP does not preclude the use of the other. In fact, it is 
not unusual to find the two systems used in the same production facility. Some Japanese manufac-
turers, for example, are turning to MRP systems to help them plan production. Both approaches 
have their advantages and limitations. MRP systems provide the capability to explode the bill of 
materials to project timing and material requirements that can then be used to plan production. 
But the MRP assumption of fixed lead times and infinite capacity can often result in significant 
problems. At the shop floor level, the discipline of a kanban system, with materials pull, can be 
very effective. But kanban works best when there is a uniform flow through the shop; a variable 
flow requires buffers, and this reduces the advantage of a pull system. 
 In effect, some situations are more conducive to a visual approach, others to an MRP 
approach. Still others can benefit from a hybrid of the two. Hybrid systems like kanban/ MRP 
can be successful if MRP is used for planning and kanban is used as the execution system. 
 Limited Work-in-Process (WIP).  Movement of materials and WIP in a lean system is 
carefully coordinated, so that they arrive at each step in a process just as they are needed. Con-
trolling the amount of WIP in a production system can yield substantial benefits. One is lower 
carrying costs due to lower WIP inventory. Another is the increased flexibility that would be 
lost if there were large amounts of WIP in the system. In addition, low WIP aids scheduling 
and saves costs of rework and scrapping if there are design changes. 
 Controlling WIP also results in low cycle-time variability. WIP is determined by cycle time 
and the arrival rate of jobs. According to Little’s law, WIP    Cycle time    Arrival rate. If 
both WIP and the arrival rate of jobs are held constant, the cycle time will also be constant. In 
a push system, the arrival rate of jobs is not held constant, so there is the possibility of large 
WIP buildups, which results in high variability in cycle times. This forces companies to quote 
longer lead times to customers to allow for variable cycle times. 
 There are two general approaches to controlling WIP; one is kanban and the other is con-
stant work-in-process (CONWIP). Kanban’s control of WIP focuses on individual worksta-
tions, while CONWIP’S focus is on the system as a whole. With CONWIP, when a job exits 
the system, a new job is allowed to enter. This results in a constant level of work-in-process. 
 Kanban works best in an environment that is stable and predictable. CONWIP offers an 
advantage if there is variability in a line, perhaps due to a breakdown in an operation or 

624 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
a quality problem. With kanban, upstream work is blocked and processing will stop fairly 
quickly, while with CONWIP upstream stations can continue to operate for a somewhat lon-
ger time. Then, after the reason for stoppage has been corrected, there will be less need to 
make up lost production than if the entire line had been shut down, as it would be under 
kanban. Also, in a mixed product environment, CONWIP can be easier than kanban because 
kanban focuses on specific part numbers whereas CONWIP does not. 
 Close Vendor Relationships.  Lean systems typically have  close relationships with ven-
dors,  who are expected to provide frequent small deliveries of high-quality goods. Traditionally, 
buyers have assumed the role of monitoring the quality of purchased goods, inspecting ship-
ments for quality and quantity, and returning poor-quality goods to the vendor for rework. JIT 
systems have little slack, so poor-quality goods cause a disruption in the smooth flow of work. 
Moreover, the inspection of incoming goods is viewed as inefficient because it does not add 
value to the product. For these reasons, the burden of ensuring quality shifts to the vendor. Buy-
ers work with vendors to help them achieve the desired quality levels and to impress upon them 
the importance of consistent, high-quality goods. The ultimate goal of the buyer is to be able 
to  certify  a vendor as a producer of high-quality goods. The implication of certification is that 
a vendor can be relied on to deliver high-quality goods without the need for buyer inspection. 
 Suppliers also must be willing and able to ship in small lots on a regular basis. Ideally, 
suppliers themselves will be operating under JIT systems. Buyers can often help suppliers 
convert to JIT production based on their own experiences. In effect, the supplier becomes part 
of an extended JIT system that integrates the facilities of buyer and supplier. Integration is 
easier when a supplier is dedicated to only one or a few buyers. In practice, a supplier is likely 
to have many different buyers, some using traditional systems and others using JIT. Conse-
quently, compromises may have to be made by both buyers and suppliers. 
 Traditionally, a spirit of cooperation between buyer and seller has not been present; buyers 
and vendors have had a somewhat adversarial relationship. Buyers have generally regarded 
price as a major determinant in sourcing, and they have typically used  multiple-source pur-
chasing, which means having a list of potential vendors and buying from several to avoid 
getting locked into a sole source. In this way, buyers play vendors off against each other to get 
better pricing arrangements or other concessions. The downside is that vendors cannot rely on 
a long-term relationship with a buyer, and they feel no loyalty to a particular buyer. Further-
more, vendors have often sought to protect themselves from losing a buyer by increasing the 
number of buyers they supply. 
 Under JIT purchasing, good vendor relationships are very important. Buyers take measures 
to reduce their lists of suppliers, concentrating on maintaining close working relationships 
with a few good ones. Because of the need for frequent, small deliveries, many buyers attempt 
to find local vendors to shorten the lead time for deliveries and to reduce lead time variability. 
An added advantage of having vendors nearby is quick response when problems arise. 
 JIT purchasing is enhanced by long-term relationships between buyers and vendors. Ven-
dors are more willing to commit resources to the job of shipping according to a buyer’s JIT 
system given a long-term relationship. Moreover, price often becomes secondary to other 
aspects of the relationship (e.g., consistent high quality, flexibility, frequent small deliveries, 
and quick response to problems). 
 Supplier Tiers A key feature of many lean production systems is the relatively small num-
ber of suppliers used. In traditional production, companies often deal with hundreds or even 
thousands of suppliers in a highly centralized arrangement not unlike a giant wheel with many 
spokes. The company is at the hub of the wheel, and the spokes radiate out to suppliers, 
each of whom must deal directly with the company. In traditional systems, a supplier does 
not know the other suppliers or what they are doing. Each supplier works to specifications 
provided by the buyer. Suppliers have very little basis (or motivation) for suggesting improve-
ments. Moreover, as companies play one supplier off against others, the sharing of informa-
tion is more risky than rewarding. In contrast, lean production companies may employ a tiered 
approach for suppliers: They use relatively few first-tier suppliers who work directly with 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
625
the company or who supply major subassemblies. The first-tier suppliers are responsible for 
dealing with second-tier suppliers who provide components for the subassemblies, thereby 
relieving the final buyer from dealing with large numbers of suppliers. 
 The automotive industry provides a good example of this situation. Suppose a certain car 
model has an electric seat. The seat and motor together might entail 250 separate parts. A tra-
ditional producer might use more than 30 suppliers for the electric seat, but a lean producer 
might use a single (first-tier) supplier who has the responsibility for the entire seat unit. The 
company would provide specifications for the overall unit, but leave to the supplier the details 
of the motor, springs, and so on. The first-tier supplier, in turn, might subcontract the motor to 
a second-tier supplier, the track to another second-tier supplier, and the cushions and fabric to 
still another. The second-tier suppliers might subcontract some of their work to third-tier sup-
pliers, and so on. Each tier has only to deal with those just above it or just below it. Suppliers 
on each level are encouraged to work with each other, and they are motivated to do so because 
that increases the probability that the resulting item (the seat) will meet or exceed the final buy-
er’s expectations. In this “team of suppliers” approach, all suppliers benefit from a successful 
product, and each supplier bears full responsibility for the quality of its portion of the product. 
 Figure 14.4  illustrates the difference between the traditional approach and the tiered approach.    
 Reduced Transaction Processing.  Traditional manufacturing systems often have many 
built-in transactions that do not add value. In their classic article, “The Hidden Factory,”  2 
Jeffrey G. Miller and Thomas Vollmann identify a laundry list of transaction processing that 
comprises a “hidden factory” in traditional manufacturing planning and control systems, and 
point out the tremendous cost burden that results. The transactions can be classified as logisti-
cal, balancing, quality, or change transactions. 
 Logistical transactions  include ordering, execution, and confirmation of materials trans-
ported from one location to another. Related costs cover shipping and receiving personnel, 
expediting orders, data entry, and data processing. 
 Balancing transactions  include forecasting, production planning, production control, pro-
curement, scheduling, and order processing. Associated costs relate to the personnel involved 
in these and supporting activities. 
 Quality transactions  include determining and communicating specifications, monitoring, 
recording, and followup activities. Costs relate to appraisal, prevention, internal failures (e.g., 
scrap, rework, retesting, delays, administration activities) and external failures (e.g., warranty 
costs, product liability, returns, potential loss of future business). 
 2 Excerpted from Jeffrey Miller and Thomas Vollmann, “The Hidden Factory,”  Harvard Business Review, 
 September/October 1985, pp. 141–50. Copyright © 1985 by the Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation. 
All rights reserved. 
 FIGURE 14.4 
 Traditional supplier network compared to supplier tiers 
Buyer
Buyer
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier
First-tier
supplier
Second-tier
suppliers
Third-tier
suppliers
Supplier
A.  Traditional
B.  Tiered

626 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Change transactions  primarily involve engineering changes and the ensuing changes gen-
erated in specifications, bills of material, scheduling, processing instructions, and so on. Engi-
neering changes are among the most costly of all transactions. 
 Lean systems cut transaction costs by reducing the number and frequency of transactions. 
For example, suppliers deliver goods directly to the production floor, bypassing the storeroom 
entirely, thereby avoiding the transactions related to receiving the shipment into inventory 
storage and later moving the materials to the production floor. In addition, vendors are certi-
fied for quality, eliminating the need to inspect incoming shipments for quality. The unending 
quest for quality improvement that pervades lean systems eliminates many of the above- 
mentioned quality transactions and their related costs. The use of bar coding (not exclusive to 
lean systems) can reduce data entry transactions and increase data accuracy. 
 Preventive Maintenance and Housekeeping.  Because lean systems have very little 
in-process inventory, equipment breakdowns can be extremely disruptive. To minimize break-
downs, companies use   preventive maintenance  programs, which emphasize maintaining 
equipment in good operating condition and replacing parts that have a tendency to fail before 
they fail. Workers are often responsible for maintaining their own equipment. 
 Even with preventive maintenance, occasional equipment failures will occur. Companies 
must be prepared for this, so they can quickly return equipment to working order. This may 
mean maintaining supplies of critical spare parts and making other provisions for emergency 
situations, perhaps maintaining a small force of repair people or training workers to do certain 
repairs themselves. Note that when breakdowns do occur, they indicate potential opportuni-
ties to be exploited in a lean environment. 
 Housekeeping  involves keeping the workplace clean as well as keeping it free of any 
materials that are not needed for production, because those materials take up space and may 
cause disruptions to the work flow. 
 Housekeeping is part of what is often referred to as the five S’s, which are five behaviors 
intended to make the workplace effective:
 1. 
 Sort. Decide which items are needed to accomplish the work, and keep only those items. 
 2. 
 Straighten. Organize the workplace so that the needed items can be accessed quickly 
and easily. 
 3. 
 Sweep. Keep the workplace clean and ready for work. Perform equipment maintenance 
regularly. 
 4. 
 Standardize. Use standard instructions and procedures for all work. 
 5. 
 Self-discipline. Make sure that employees understand the need for an uncluttered 
workplace. 
 Among the benefits of the five S’s are increased productivity, improved employee morale, 
decreased risk of accidents, and improved appearance for visitors. Employees and managers 
must appreciate the rationale for the five S’s. Otherwise, they may view them as unnecessary 
and a waste of effort. 
 Lean systems have been described and compared with traditional manufacturing systems 
in the preceding pages.  Table 14.3 provides a brief overview of those comparisons. 
 Preventive maintenance  
Maintaining equipment in good 
operating condition and replac-
ing parts that have a tendency to 
fail before they actually do fail. 
 Housekeeping  Maintaining a 
workplace that is clean and free 
of unnecessary materials.  
 Factor 
 Traditional 
 Lean 
 Inventory 
 Much, to offset forecast errors, late deliveries 
 Minimal necessary to operate 
 Deliveries 
 Few, large 
 Many, small 
 Lot sizes 
 Large 
 Small 
 Setups, runs 
 Few, long runs 
 Many, short runs 
 Vendors 
 Long-term relationships are unusual 
 Partners 
 Workers 
 Necessary to do the work 
 Assets 
 TABLE 4.3 
 Comparison of lean and 
traditional production 
philosophies 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
627
 14.4 LEAN TOOLS 
 This section describes several tools that are used for process improvement in lean systems.  
 Value Stream Mapping 
 Value stream mapping is a visual tool to systematically examine the flow of materials and 
information involved in bringing a product or service to a consumer. The technique originated 
at Toyota, where it is referred to as “Material and Information Flow Mapping.” 
 The map is a sketch of an entire process that typically ranges from incoming goods from 
suppliers to shipment of a product or delivery of a service to the customer. The map shows 
all processes in the value stream, from arrivals of supplies to the shipping of the product. The 
objective is to increase value to the customer, where value is typically defined in terms of qual-
ity, time, cost, or flexibility (e.g., rapid response or agility). Data collected during the mapping 
process might include times (e.g., cycle time, setup time, changeover time, touch time, lead 
time), distances traveled (e.g., by parts, workers, paperwork), mistakes (e.g., product defects, 
data entry errors), inefficient work methods (e.g., extra motions, excessive lifting or moving, 
repositioning), and waiting lines (e.g., workers waiting for parts or equipment repairs, orders 
waiting to be processed). Information flows are also included in the mapping process. 
 You can get a sense of value stream mapping from the following tips for developing an 
effective mapping of a value stream: 3 
 1. 
Map the value stream in person. 
 2. 
Begin with a quick walk through of the system from beginning to end to get a sense of 
the system. 
 3. 
Then do a more thorough walkthrough following the actual pathway to collect current 
information on material or information flow. 
 4. 
Record elements of the system such as cycle times, scrap rates, amounts of inventory, 
downtimes, number of operators, distances between processes, and transfer times. 
 Value improvement for a product or a service embodies the five lean principles described ear-
lier and repeated here. It begins by specifying value from the customer’s standpoint. You can 
see where value stream mapping can help process improvement:
 1. 
Specify value from the standpoint of the end customer. 
 2. 
Identify all the steps in the value stream and create a visual (map) of the value stream. 
 3. 
Eliminate steps that do not create value to create flow. 
 4. 
Use next-customer-in-the-process demand to pull from each preceding process as 
needed to control the flow. 
 5. 
Repeat this process as long as waste exists in the system. 
 Once a value stream map is completed, data analysis can uncover improvement opportuni-
ties by asking key questions, such as:
 Where are the process bottlenecks? 
 Where do errors occur? 
 Which processes have to deal with the most variation? 
 Where does waste occur? 
 All business organizations, whether they are primarily engaged in service or manufactur-
ing, can benefit by applying lean principles to their office operations. This includes purchas-
ing, accounting, order entry, and other office functions. Office wastes might include:
 1. 
 Excess inventory —excess supplies and equipment. 
 2. 
 Overprocessing —excess paperwork and redundant approvals. 
 LO14.9  Describe key lean 
improvement tools.
 Value stream mapping  A 
visual tool to systematically 
examine the flow of materials 
and information. 
 3 Adapted from Rother, Mike, and John Shook.  Learning to See.  Cambridge, MA: Lean Enterprise Institute, 2009. 

628 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 3. 
 Waiting times —orders waiting to be processed, requests for information awaiting 
answers. 
 4. 
 Unnecessary transportation —inefficient routing. 
 5. 
 Processing waste —using more resources than necessary to accomplish a task. 
 6. 
 Inefficient work methods —poor layout design, unnecessary steps, inadequate training. 
 7. 
 Mistakes —order entry errors, lost files, miscommunications. 
 8. 
Underused people—Not tapping all of the mental and creative capabilities of workers. 
 Process Improvement Using 5W2H 
 Asking certain questions about a process can lead to cost and waste reduction. The   5W2H 
approach  (five questions that begin with  w,  and two questions that begin with  h ) is outlined in 
 Table 14.4 . This approach can be used by itself or in conjunction with value stream mapping.   
 Lean and Six Sigma 
 Some believe that lean and six sigma are two alternate approaches for process improve-
ment. However, another view is that the two approaches are complementary and, when used 
together, can lead to superior results. 
 Lean strives to eliminate non-value-added activities, using simple tools to find and elimi-
nate them. It focuses on maximizing process velocity, and it employs tools to analyze and 
improve process flow. However, variation exists in all processes. Understanding and reducing 
variation are important for quality improvement. Lean principles alone cannot achieve statis-
tical process control, and six sigma alone cannot achieve improved process speed and flow. 
Using the two approaches in combination integrates lean principles and six sigma statistical 
tools for variation reduction to achieve a system that has both a balanced flow and quality. 
 JIT Deliveries and the Supply Chain 
 Direct suppliers must be able to support frequent just-in-time deliveries of small batches of 
parts. That may lead to an increase in transportation costs if trucks carry partial loads, and 
perhaps to congestion at loading docks. Moreover, the JIT delivery requirement may extend to 
other portions of the supply chain, in which case close coordination among supply chain part-
ners is critical. Also, JIT delivery results in pressure for on-time deliveries to avoid production 
interruptions due to stockouts. 
 5W2H approach  A method of 
asking questions about a process 
that includes what, why, where, 
when, who, how, and how much. 
 Category 
 5W2H 
 Typical Questions 
 Goal 
 Subject 
 What? 
 What is being done? 
 Identify the focus of analysis. 
 Purpose 
 Why? 
 Why is this necessary? 
 Eliminate unnecessary tasks. 
 Location 
 Where? 
 Where is it being done? 
 Improve the location. 
 
 
 Why is it done there? 
 
 
  
 Would it be better to do it someplace else? 
  
 Sequence 
 When? 
 When is it done? 
 Improve the sequence. 
 
  
 Would it be better to do it at another time? 
  
 People 
 Who? 
 Who is doing it? 
 Improve the sequence or output. 
 
 
 Could someone else do it better? 
 
 Method 
 How? 
 How is it being done? 
 Simplify tasks, improve output. 
 
 
 Is there a better way? 
 
 Cost 
 How much? 
 How much does it cost now? 
 Select an improved method. 
 
 
 What would the new cost be? 
 
 Source: Adapted from Alan Robinson, ed.,  Continuous Improvement in Operations: A Systematic Approach to Waste Reduction, p. 246. 
Copyright © 1991 Productivity Press.  www.productivitypress.com . 
 TABLE 14.4 
 The 5W2H approach 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
629
 Lean and ERP 
 Lean systems focus on pacing production and synchronizing delivery of incoming supply. 
SAP’s Lean Planning and Operations module extends ERP to lean operation by providing 
lean planning and scheduling capability linked to customer demand. It enables leveling of 
schedules and synchronization of supply chain activities with paced company operations. 
 14.5 TRANSITIONING TO A LEAN SYSTEM 
     The success of lean systems in Japan and the United States has attracted keen interest among 
other traditional manufacturers. 
 Planning a Successful Conversion
 To increase the probability of successful transition, companies should adopt a carefully 
planned approach that includes the following elements:
 1. 
Make sure top management is committed to the conversion and that they know what will 
be required. Make sure that management is involved in the process and knows what it will 
cost, how long it will take to complete the conversion, and what results can be expected.  
 2. 
Study the operations carefully; decide which parts will need the most effort to convert. 
 3. 
Obtain the support and cooperation of workers. Prepare training programs that include 
sessions in setups, maintenance of equipment, cross-training for multiple tasks, coopera-
tion, and problem solving. Make sure workers are fully informed about what lean is and 
why it is desirable. Reassure workers that their jobs are secure. 
 4. 
Begin by trying to reduce setup times while maintaining the current system. Enlist the aid 
of workers in identifying and eliminating existing problems (e.g., bottlenecks, poor quality). 
 5. 
Gradually convert operations, beginning at the  end of the process and working  back-
ward. At each stage, make sure the conversion has been relatively successful before 
moving on. Do not begin to reduce inventories until major problems have been resolved. 
 6. 
As one of the last steps, convert suppliers to JIT and be prepared to work closely with 
them. Start by narrowing the list of vendors, identifying those who are willing to 
embrace the lean philosophy. Give preference to vendors who have long-term track 
records of reliability. Use vendors located nearby if quick response time is important. 
Establish long-term commitments with vendors. Insist on high standards of quality and 
adherence to strict delivery schedules. 
 7. 
Be prepared to encounter obstacles to conversion. 
 Obstacles to Conversion
    Converting from a traditional system to a lean system may not be smooth. For example,   cultures
vary from organization to organization. Some cultures relate better to the lean  philosophy than 
others. If a culture doesn’t relate, it can be difficult for an organization to change its culture 
within a short time. Also, manufacturers that operate with large amounts of inventory to han-
dle varying customer demand may have difficulty acclimating themselves to less inventory. 
 LO14.10 Outline  considerations 
for successful conversion from 
a traditional system to a lean 
system.
 LO14.11  Describe some of the 
obstacles to lean success.
 Ford Motor Company took a page out of Toyota’s just-in-time book at 
its Chicago plant by having some of its suppliers locate very close to its 
assembly plant. It leased production facilities on its 155 acres to about 
10 key suppliers. Suppliers’ parts and components feed directly into 
Ford’s assembly operation, carefully coordinated to match the sequence 
 READING 
 Nearby Suppliers Match Ford’s Mix 
of vehicles Ford is producing, which can range 
from small cars to SUVs. Not only are suppliers 
nearby in case problems arise, the shortened travel distance and lead 
times yield tremendous savings in the pipeline inventories of parts and 
materials. 

630 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Some other obstacles include the following:
 1. 
Management may not be totally committed or may be unwilling to devote the necessary 
resources to conversion. This is perhaps the most serious impediment because the con-
version is probably doomed without serious commitment. 
 2. 
Workers and/or management may not display a cooperative spirit. The system is 
 predicated on cooperation. Managers may resist because lean shifts some of the respon-
sibility from management to workers and gives workers more control over the work. 
Workers may resist because of the increased responsibility and stress. 
 3. 
It can be very difficult to change the culture of the organization to one consistent with 
the lean philosophy. 
 4. 
Suppliers may resist for several reasons:
   a. 
 Buyers may not be willing to commit the resources necessary to help them adapt to 
the lean systems. 
 b. 
They may be uneasy about long-term commitments to a buyer. 
  c. 
 Frequent, small deliveries may be difficult, especially if the supplier has other buyers 
who use traditional systems. 
 d. 
The burden of quality control will shift to the supplier. 
  e. 
 Frequent engineering changes may result from continuing lean improvements by the 
buyer. 
 A Cooperative Spirit 
 Lean systems require a cooperative spirit among workers, management, and vendors. Unless 
that is present, it is doubtful that a truly effective lean system can be achieved. The Japanese 
have been very successful in this regard, partly because respect and cooperation are ingrained 
in the Japanese culture. In Western cultures, workers, managers, and vendors have historically 
been strongly at odds with each other. Consequently, a major consideration in converting to 
a lean system is whether a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation can be achieved. This 
requires an appreciation of the importance of cooperation and a tenacious effort by manage-
ment to instill and maintain that spirit. 
 Finally, it should be noted that not all organizations lend themselves to a lean approach. 
Lean is best used for repetitive operations under fairly stable demand. 
 Despite the many advantages of lean production systems, an organization must take into 
account a number of other considerations when planning a conversion. 
 The key considerations are the time and cost requirements for successful conversion, which 
can be substantial. But it is absolutely essential to eliminate the major sources of disruption 
in the system. Management must be prepared to commit the resources necessary to achieve 
a high level of quality and to function on a tight schedule. That means attention to even the 
smallest of details during the design phase and substantial efforts to debug the system to 
the point where it runs smoothly. Beyond that, management must be capable of responding 
quickly when problems arise, and both management and workers must be committed to the 
continuous improvement of the system. Although each case is different, a general estimate of 
the time required for conversion is one to three years. 
 14.6 LEAN SERVICES 
 The discussion of lean systems has focused on manufacturing simply because that is where 
it was developed, and where it has been used most often. It is important to recognize that the 
full spectrum of lean benefits are more difficult to achieve in service operations. Nonetheless, 
services can and do benefit from many lean concepts. When just-in-time is used in the context 
of services, the focus is often on the time needed to perform a service—because speed is often 
an important order winner for services. Some services do have inventories of some sort, so 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
631
inventory reduction is another aspect of lean that can apply to services. Examples of speedy 
delivery (“available when requested”) are Domino’s Pizza, FedEx and Express Mail, fast-
food restaurants, and emergency services. Other examples include just-in-time publishing and 
work cells at fast-food restaurants. 
 In addition to speed, lean services emphasize consistent, high-quality, standard work meth-
ods; flexible workers; and close supplier relationships. 
 Process improvement and problem solving can contribute to streamlining a system, result-
ing in increased customer satisfaction and higher productivity. The following are the ways 
lean benefits can be achieved in services:
 •  Eliminate disruptions. For example, try to avoid having workers who are servicing 
customers also answer telephones. 
 •  Make the system flexible. This can cause problems unless approached carefully. Often, 
it is desirable to standardize work because that can yield high productivity. On the other 
hand, being able to deal with variety in task requirements can be a competitive advan-
tage. One approach might be to train workers so that they can handle more variety. 
Another might be to assign work according to specialties, with certain workers handling 
different types of work according to their specialty. 
 •  Reduce setup times and processing times. Have frequently used tools and spare parts 
readily available. Additionally, for service calls, try to estimate what parts and supplies 
might be needed so they will be on hand, and avoid carrying huge inventories. 
 •  Eliminate waste. This includes errors and duplicate work. Keep the emphasis on qual-
ity and uniform service. 
 •  Minimize work-in-process. Examples include orders waiting to be processed, calls 
waiting to be answered, packages waiting to be delivered, trucks waiting to be unloaded 
or loaded, applications waiting to be processed. 
 •  Simplify the process. This works especially when customers are part of the system 
(self-service systems including retail operations, ATMs and vending machines, service 
stations, etc.). 
 The Pyxis® ProcedureStation™ 
system provides rapid access to 
inventory in the operating room, 
cath and cardiac labs, and other 
specialty departments. Usage, 
inventory, and replenishment 
information are transmitted 
electronically, creating an 
efficient supply management and 
workflow process. 

632 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 When you think of a hospital, what comes to mind? Patients, emergency 
rooms, technology and medical advancements. Making the sick and 
injured well again. 
 When officials at Virginia Mason think of hospitals, they think of cars. 
A car manufacturing plant, to be exact. 
 Beginning in 2000 the hospital’s leaders looked at their infrastruc-
ture and saw it was designed around them, not the patient, said Dr. Gary 
Kaplan, Virginia Mason’s chairman and chief executive officer. 
 For example, you hurry up and be on time, only to wait for the physi-
cian to see you. 
 They began looking for a better way to improve quality, safety and 
patient satisfaction. After two years of searching, they discovered the 
Toyota Production System, also known as lean manufacturing. Devel-
oped in part by Japanese businessman Taiichi Ohno, the idea is to elimi-
nate waste and defects in production. Virginia Mason has tailored the 
Japanese model to fit health care. 
 Kaplan and other Virginia Mason managers took their first trip to 
Japan in 2002 where they visited manufacturing plants such as Toyota 
and Yamaha. Nearly 200 employees have toured plants in Japan and a 
ninth trip is planned for this summer. While Virginia Mason couldn’t say 
exactly how much they paid over the years to send the staff overseas, 
officials liken it to leadership training other companies pay for their 
employees. They say the benefits offset the costs. 
 “‘People are not cars’ is very common for me to hear,” Kaplan said. 
“We get so wrapped up in the seriousness and specialness of health 
care, but we also have to open our eyes to other industries—we’re way 
behind in information specialists and taking waste out of our process. 
Toyota is obsessed with the customer and customer satisfaction . . . all 
those things Toyota was about was what we wanted.” 
 So what does that mean? 
 There are seven wastes, according to the production system. One 
is wasting time, such as patients waiting for a doctor or for test results 
to come back. Others are inventory waste—having more materials and 
information than is necessary—and overproduction waste, producing 
more than is necessary. 
 Take, for example, stockpiling brochures and pamphlets in storage 
closets. They take up space. There is wasted cost to make so many 
pamphlets that aren’t needed. 
 The hospital and all of its campuses in the Seattle area implemented 
a Kanban system, which signals the need to restock. Kanban, which 
means “visual card” in Japanese, uses exactly that—a card put near 
the bottom of a pile of tongue dispensers, gauze strips or brochures, for 
example. When a nurse or physician sees the card, he or she knows it’s 
time to refill. Supplies don’t run out, but they also aren’t over-ordered. 
 The hospital created standardized instrument trays for surgeries and 
procedures, which saved several hundred dollars by no longer setting 
out extra instruments no one used. Unused but opened instruments 
have to be thrown away. 
 It takes a series of simple steps to make improvements, said Janine 
Wentworth, an administrative director who returned from a two-week 
trip to Japan last month. One example is the development of a flip chart 
 READING 
 To Build a Better Hospital, Virginia Mason Takes Lessons 
from Toyota Plants 
showing the level of mobility in physical therapy 
patients. The chart shows the appropriate picture of what the patient can 
do, and each nurse or physician who comes in the room doesn’t have to 
waste time searching charts or asking questions. 
 Wentworth also wants to implement a production plan to hire more staff 
before a shortage exists based on turnover rates on any given hospital floor. 
 Another adaptation from the Toyota model is a patient safety alert 
system. At the manufacturing plant, if there’s a problem, the whole line 
is stopped and the problem is fixed immediately. Virginia Mason’s prac-
tice had been to identify and fix problems after the fact, perhaps leading 
to mistakes recurring many times before a solution was found. The alert 
system allows nurses and physicians to signal a problem when it hap-
pens and fix it immediately. Virginia Mason’s Kirkland site has about 10 
alerts each day. 
 The Kirkland campus implemented the Toyota model in 2003. They’ve 
reduced appointment and telephone delays by having medical assistants 
handle incoming calls, instead of medically untrained operators. 
 Also, instead of doctors waiting until the end of the day to go through 
a stack of patient records, they now write comments and recommenda-
tions immediately after seeing the patient before going to see the next 
one. The time saved increases the time a physician can spend with a 
patient. Dr. Kim Pittenger, medical director at Virginia Mason Kirkland, 
said most of the cost of medical care involves clogs in the flow of infor-
mation—paper forms, lab results, phone messages, often leading to 
irritated patients. Working the backlog down costs more than if you 
never let things pile up in the first place, he said. 
 He said not everyone has agreed with the new system and a few 
physicians have left Virginia Mason because of it. 
 “To some it seems like obsessive-compulsive disorder run amok, 
but it’s part of a solution that eliminates mistakes,” Pittenger said. 
 Other hospitals, including Swedish Medical Center, have incorpo-
rated the lean system into parts of their operation. 
 Virginia Mason said overall benefits include an 85 percent reduction 
in how long patients wait to get lab results back, and lowering inven-
tory costs by $1 million. They’ve redesigned facilities to make patient 
and staff work flow more productive. The hospital reduced overtime and 
temporary labor expenses by $500,000 in one year and increased pro-
ductivity by 93 percent. While direct cost savings aren’t passed on to 
patients with the new system, less waiting, increased safety and more 
efficient care are. 
 Kaplan’s vision is to have patients start their appointment in the 
parking garage with a smart card that triggers their entire appointment 
process. No more waiting rooms, just move directly from the garage to 
an examination room. 
 Total flow—no waiting, no waste and it’s all about the patient. 
 “We have more than enough resources in health care,” Kaplan said. 
“We just need to stop wasting it and only do what’s appropriate and 
value-added and we’d save billions.” 
 Source: Cherie Black, “To Build a Better Hospital, Virginia Mason Takes Lessons 
from Toyota Plant,”  Seattle Post-Intelligencer, March 15, 2008. Copyright © 
2008. Used with permission. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
633
 JIT service can be a major competitive advantage for companies that can achieve it. An 
important key to JIT service is the ability to provide service when it is needed. That requires 
flexibility on the part of the provider, which generally means short setup times, and it requires 
clear communication on the part of the requester. If a requester can determine when it will 
need a particular service, a JIT server can schedule deliveries to correspond to those needs, 
eliminating the need for continual requests, and reducing the need for provider flexibility—
and therefore probably reducing the cost of the JIT service. 
 Although lean concepts are applicable to service organizations, the challenge of imple-
menting lean in service is that there are still relatively few lean service applications that 
service companies can reference to see how to apply the underlying lean principles. Con-
sequently, it can be difficult to build a strong commitment among workers to achieve a lean 
service system. 
 14.7 JIT II 
  In some instances, companies allow  suppliers  to manage restocking of inventory obtained 
from the suppliers. A supplier representative works right in the company’s plant, making sure 
there is an appropriate supply on hand. The term  JIT II  is used to refer to this practice. JIT II 
was popularized by the Bose Corporation. It is often referred to as  vendor-managed inventory 
(VMI).  You can also read more about vendor-managed inventories in the supply chain man-
agement chapter (Chapter 15). 
 14.8 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 The lean operation offers new perspectives on operations that must be given serious consider-
ation by managers in repetitive and batch systems who wish to be competitive. 
 Potential adopters should carefully study the requirements and benefits of lean production 
systems, as well as the difficulties and strengths of their current systems, before making a 
decision on whether to convert. Careful estimates of time and cost to convert, and an assess-
ment of how likely workers, managers, and suppliers are to cooperate in such an approach, 
are essential. 
 The decision to convert can be sequential, giving management an opportunity to gain first-
hand experience with portions of lean operations without wholly committing themselves. For 
instance, improving vendor relations, reducing setup times, improving quality, and reducing 
waste and inefficiency are desirable goals in themselves. Moreover, a level production sched-
ule is a necessary element of a lean system, and achieving that will also be useful under a 
traditional system of operation. 
 It is prudent to carefully weigh the risks and benefits of a just-in-time approach to inven-
tories. A just-in-time approach can make companies and even countries vulnerable to disrup-
tions in their supply chains. For example, low stockpiles of flu vaccine at hospitals lower their 
costs but leave the health system at risk if there is a flu outbreak. Also, severe weather such 
as hurricanes, floods, and tornadoes, and other natural disasters caused by earthquakes can 
cut off supply routes, leaving community services as well as companies desperately in need 
of supplies. 
 Supplier management is critical to a JIT operation. Generally, suppliers are located nearby 
to facilitate delivery on a daily or even hourly basis. Moreover, suppliers at every stage must 
gauge the ability of their production facilities to meet demand requirements that are subject 
to change. 
 Finally, the success of a lean system relies heavily on leadership commitment, involve-
ment, and support, achieving a lean thinking “culture” that includes everyone in the organiza-
tion, and having effective teamwork. Without these three elements, the full benefits of lean are 
not likely to be realized. 

634 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Lean operation is an alternative to traditional operation that an increasing number of organizations are 
adopting. The ultimate goal of a lean system is to achieve a balanced, smooth flow of operations. Sup-
porting goals include eliminating disruptions to the system, making the system flexible, and eliminating 
waste. The building blocks of a lean production system are product design, process design, personnel 
and organization, and manufacturing planning and control. 
 Lean systems require the elimination of sources of potential disruption to the even flow of work. 
High quality is essential because problems with quality can disrupt the process. Quick, low-cost setups, 
special layouts, allowing work to be pulled through the system rather than pushed through, and a spirit 
of cooperation are important features of lean systems. So, too, are problem solving aimed at reduc-
ing disruptions and making the system more efficient, and an attitude of working toward continual 
improvement. 
 Key benefits of lean systems are reduced inventory levels, high quality, flexibility, reduced lead 
times, increased productivity and equipment utilization, reduced amounts of scrap and rework, and 
reduced space requirements. The risks stem from the absence of buffers, such as extra personnel and 
inventory stockpiles to fall back on if something goes wrong. The possible results of risks include lost 
sales and lost customers. 
 Just-in-time (JIT) is a system of lean production used mainly in repetitive operations, in which goods 
move through the system and tasks are completed just in time to maintain the schedule. JIT systems 
require very little inventory because successive operations are closely coordinated. Careful planning and 
much effort are needed to achieve a smoothly functioning system in which all resources needed for pro-
duction come together at precisely the right time throughout the process. Raw materials and purchased 
parts must arrive when needed, fabricated parts and subassemblies must be ready when needed for final 
assembly, and finished goods must be delivered to customers when needed. Special attention must be 
given to reducing the risk of disruptions to the system as well as rapid response to resolving any disrup-
tions that do occur. Usually, a firm must redesign its facilities and rework labor contracts to implement 
lean operation. Teamwork and cooperation are important at all levels, as are problem-solving abilities of 
workers and an attitude of continuous improvement. 
 Table 14.5 provides an overview of lean. 
 SUMMARY 
 Lean systems are designed to operate with fewer resources than 
traditional systems. 
 Elements of lean operation include: 
 Smooth flow of work (the ultimate goal). 
 Elimination of waste. 
 Continuous improvement. 
 Elimination of anything that does not add value. 
 Simple systems that are easy to manage. 
 Use of product layouts that minimize time spent moving materials and parts. 
 Quality at the source: Each worker is responsible for the quality of his 
or her output. 
  Poka-yoke: fail-safe tools and methods to prevent mistakes. 
 Preventive maintenance to reduce the risk of equipment breakdown. 
 Good housekeeping: an orderly and clean workplace. 
 Setup time reduction. 
 Cross-trained workers. 
 A pull system. 
 There are seven types of waste: 
 Inventory. 
 Overproduction. 
 Waiting time. 
 Excess transportation. 
 Processing waste. 
 Inefficient work methods. 
 Product or service defects. 
 TABLE 14.5 
 Overview of lean 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
635
 1. 
Lean systems produce high-quality goods or services using fewer resources than traditional opera-
tions systems. 
 2. 
Lean thinking helps business organizations to become more productive, reduce costs, and be more 
market-responsive. 
   3. 
Lean operations are designed to eliminate waste (value stream mapping), minimize inventory 
(JIT deliveries), maximize work flow (small batches with quick changeovers), make only what is 
needed (demand pull), empower work teams, do it right the first time (quality at the source), and 
continually improve. 
 KEY POINTS 
 activity-based costing, 618 
andon, 618 
 autonomation, 613 
 5W2H approach, 628 
 heijunka, 607 
 housekeeping, 626 
 jidoka, 607 
 just-in-time (JIT), 605 
 kaizen, 607 
 kanban, 607, 621 
 lean operation, 605 
 muda, 607 
 poka-yoke, 616 
 preventive maintenance, 626 
 pull system, 620 
 push system, 620 
 single-minute exchange of die 
(SMED), 612 
takt time, 614 
 value stream mapping, 627 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Determine the number of containers needed for a workstation that uses 100 parts per hour if the time 
for a container to complete a cycle (move, wait, empty, return, fill) is 90 minutes and a standard con-
tainer holds 84 parts. An inefficiency factor of .10 is currently being used. 
 Problem 1 
 Solution 
 
N
D
T
C
X
N
D T
X
C
?
100 parts per hour
90 minutes (1.5 hours)
84 parts
.10
( )(1
)
100(1.5)(1
.10)
84
1.96; round to 2 containers










 Problem 2 
 Determine the number of cycles per day and the production quantity per cycle for this set of 
products. The department operates five days a week. Assume the sequence A-B-C-D will be used. 
 Product 
 Weekly Quantity 
 A 
 20 
 B 
 40 
 C 
 30 
 D 
 15 
 Solution 
 Convert weekly quantities to daily quantities. The smallest  daily  quantity is 3 units. Producing in 
multiples of 3 units leaves A and B a few units short: 
 Use three cycles, producing all four products in every cycle. Produce units that are short by adding units 
to some cycles. Disperse the additional units as evenly as possible. There are several possibilities. One is    
 Product 
  Daily Quantity    Weekly Quantity    5 
 Units Short Using 3 Cycles 
 A 
 20    5    4 
 1 
 B 
 40    5    8 
 2 
 C 
 30    5    6 
 — 
 D 
 15    5    3 
 — 
 Cycle 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Pattern 
 A B(3) C(2) D 
 A B(3) C(2) D 
 A(2) B(2) C(2) D 
 Extra unit(s) 
 B 
 B 
 A 

636 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 Product 
 Daily Quantity 
 A 
 21 
 B 
 12 
 C 
  3 
 D 
 15 
 1. Some key elements of production systems are listed in Table   14.3. Explain briefly how lean sys-
tems differ from traditional production systems for each of those elements. 
 2. What is the ultimate goal of a lean system? What are the supporting goals? What are the building 
blocks? 
 3. Describe the philosophy that underlies JIT (i.e., what is JIT intended to accomplish?). 
 4. What are some of the main obstacles that must be overcome in converting from a traditional sys-
tem to lean? 
 5. Briefly discuss vendor relations in lean systems in terms of the following issues:
 a. Why are they important? 
 b. How do they tend to differ from the more adversarial relations of the past? 
 c. Why might suppliers be hesitant about JIT purchasing? 
 6. Certain Japanese have claimed that Henry Ford’s assembly line provided some of the rationale for 
lean. What features of assembly lines are common to lean systems? 
 7. What is the kanban aspect of JIT? 
 8. Contrast push and pull methods of moving goods and materials through production systems. 
 9. What are the main benefits of a lean system? 
 10. What are the benefits and risks of small lot sizes? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What trade-offs are involved in shifting from a traditional operations system to a lean system for:
 a. A manufacturing firm? 
 b. A service firm? 
 2. Who in the organization is affected by a decision to shift from a traditional operations system to a 
lean system? 
 3. To what extent has technology had an impact on lean systems? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. In operations management, as in life, a balanced approach is often the best policy. One of the best 
examples of the benefits of this in operations management is the lean approach. Explain the basic 
factors that must be in place in order to achieve a balanced lean system. 
 2. Give three examples of unethical behavior involving lean operations, and state the relevant ethical 
principle that would be violated.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. A manager wants to determine the number of containers to use for incoming parts for a kanban sys-
tem to be installed next month. The process will have a usage rate of 80 pieces per hour. Because 
the process is new, the manager has assigned an inefficiency factor of .35. Each container holds 
45 pieces, and it takes an average of 75 minutes to complete a cycle. How many containers should 
be used? As the system improves, will more or fewer containers be required? Why? 
 2. A JIT system uses kanban cards to authorize movement of incoming parts. In one portion of the 
system, a work center uses an average of 100 parts per hour while running. The manager has 
assigned an inefficiency factor of .20 to the center. Standard containers are designed to hold six 
dozen parts each. The cycle time for parts containers is about 105 minutes. How many containers 
are needed? 
 3. A machine cell uses 200 pounds of a certain material each day. Material is transported in vats that 
hold 20 pounds each. Cycle time for the vats is about two hours. The manager has assigned an inef-
ficiency factor of .08 to the cell. The plant operates on an eight-hour day. How many vats will be 
used? 
 4. Determine the number of cycles per day and the production quantity per cycle for this set of 
vehicles: 
 PROBLEMS 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
637
 Level Operations is a small company located in eastern Pennsylvania. 
It produces a variety of security devices and safes. The safes come in 
several different designs. Recently, a number of new customers have 
placed orders, and the production facility has been enlarged to accom-
modate increased demand for safes. Production manager Stephanie 
Coles is currently working on a production plan for the safes. She needs 
a plan for each day of the week. She has obtained the following infor-
mation from the marketing department on projected demand for the 
next five weeks:
Model 
 S1 
 S2 
 S7 
 S8 
 S9 
Weekly Quantity 
 120 
 102 
 48 
 90 
 25 
 The department operates five days a week. One 
complexity is that partially completed safes are not 
permitted; each cycle must turn out finished units. 
 After discussions with engineering, Stephanie determined that the 
best production sequence for each cycle is S7-S8-S9-S1-S2. 
 Question 
 What might Stephanie determine as the best production quantity per 
cycle for each day of the week? 
 CASE 
 Level Operations 
  
Use the sequence A-B-C-D. 
 5. Given this set of daily service operations, and assuming a processing order of A-B-C-D-E:
 a. Give one reason that each arrangement might be preferred over the other. 
 b. Determine the number of repetitions for each service if four cycles are used. 
 c. Determine the number of repetitions for each service if two cycles are used. 
 6. Determine the number of cycles per day and a production quantity per cycle for this set of products 
that achieves fairly level production: 
  
Assume the production sequence will be F-G-H-K. 
 7. Compute the  takt time for a system where the total time per shift is 480 minutes, there is 
one shift, and workers are given two 15-minute breaks and 45 minutes for lunch. Daily demand is 
300 units. 
 8. What cycle time would match capacity and demand if demand is 120 units a day, there are two 
shifts of 480 minutes each, and workers are given three half-hour breaks during each shift, one of 
which is for lunch or dinner? 
 9. Compute the  takt time for a service system that intended to perform a standardized service. The 
system will have a total work time of 440 minutes per day, two 10-minute breaks, and an hour for 
lunch. The service system must process 90 jobs a day. 
 Service Operation 
 Number of Daily Reps 
 A 
 22 
 B 
 12 
 C 
  4 
 D 
 18 
 E 
  8 
 Product 
 Daily Quantity 
 F 
 9 
 G 
 8 
 H 
 5 
 K 
 6 

638 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations
 The Boeing Company, headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, is one of the 
two major producers of aircraft in the global market. The other major 
producer is European Airbus. 
 Boeing produces three models in Everett, Washington: 747s, 767s, 
and 777s. The planes are all produced in the same building. At any one 
time, there may be as many as six planes in various stages of produc-
tion. Obviously the building has to be fairly large to accommodate such 
a huge undertaking. In fact, the building is so large that it covers over 98 
acres and it is four stories high, making it the largest building by volume 
in the world. It is so large that all of Disneyland would fit inside, and still 
leave about 15 acres for indoor parking! The windowless building has 
six huge doors along one side, each about 100 yards wide and 40 yards 
high (the size of a football field)—large enough to allow a completed 
airplane to pass through. 
 Boeing sells airplanes to airlines and countries around the globe. 
There isn’t a set price for the planes; the actual price depends on what 
features the customer wants. Once the details have been settled and 
an order submitted, the customer requirements are sent to the design 
department. 
 Design 
 Designers formerly had to construct a mock-up to determine the exact 
dimensions of the plane and to identify any assembly problems that 
might occur. That required time, materials, labor, and space. Now they 
use computers (CAD) to design airplanes, avoiding the cost of the mock-
ups and shortening the development time. 
 The Production Process 
 Once designs have been completed and approved by the customer, pro-
duction of the plane is scheduled, and parts and materials are ordered. 
Parts come to the plant by rail, airplane, and truck, and are delivered to 
the major assembly area of the plane they will be used for. The parts are 
scheduled so they arrive at the plant just prior to when they will be used 
in assembly, and immediately moved to storage areas close to where 
they will be used. Time-phasing shipments to arrive as parts are needed 
helps to keep inventory investment low and avoids having to devote 
space to store parts that won’t be used immediately. There is a trade-
off, though, because if any parts are missing or damaged and have to be 
reordered, that could cause production delays. When missing or defec-
tive parts are discovered, they are assigned priorities according to how 
critical the part is in terms of disruption of the flow of work. The parts 
with the highest priorities are assigned to expediters who determine the 
best way to replace the part. The expediters keep track of the progress 
of the parts and deliver them to the appropriate location as soon as 
they arrive. In the meantime, a portion of the work remains unfinished, 
awaiting the replacement parts, and workers complete other portions 
of the assembly. If the supplier is unable to replace the part in a time 
frame that will not seriously delay assembly, as a last resort, Boeing has 
a machine shop that can make the necessary part. 
 The partially assembled portions of the plane, and in later stages, 
the plane itself, move from station to station as the work progresses, 
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Boeing 
staying about five days at each station. Giant over-
head cranes are used to move large sections from 
one station to the next, although once the wheel assemblies have been 
installed, the plane is towed to the remaining stations. 
 Finished planes are painted in one of two separate buildings. Paint-
ing usually adds 400 to 600 pounds to the weight of a plane. The paint-
ing process involves giving the airplane a negative charge and the paint 
a positive charge so that the paint will be attracted to the airplane. 
 Testing and Quality Control 
 Boeing has extensive quality control measures in place throughout the 
entire design and production process. Not only are there quality inspec-
tors, individual employees inspect their own work and the work previ-
ously done by others on the plane. Buyers’ inspectors also check on the 
quality of the work. 
 There are 60 test pilots who fly the planes. Formerly planes were 
tested to evaluate their flight worthiness in a wind tunnel, which 
required expensive testing and added considerably to product develop-
ment time. Now new designs are tested using a computerized wind tun-
nel before production even begins, greatly reducing both time and cost. 
And in case you’re wondering, the wings are fairly flexible; a typical 
wing can flap by as much as 22 feet before it will fracture. 
 Re-engineering 
 Boeing is re-engineering its business systems. A top priority is to 
upgrade its computer systems. This will provide better links to suppli-
ers, provide more up-to-date information for materials management, 
and enable company representatives who are at customer sites to cre-
ate a customized aircraft design on their laptop computer. 
 Another aspect of the re-engineering involves a shift to lean produc-
tion. Key goals are to reduce production time and reduce inventory. 
 Boeing wants to reduce the time that a plane spends at each work 
station from 5 days to 3 days, a reduction of 40 percent. Not only will 
that mean that customers can get their planes much sooner, it will 
also reduce labor costs and inventory costs, and improve cash flow. 
One part of this will be accomplished by moving toward late-stage 
customization, or delayed differentiation. That would mean standard-
izing the assembly of planes as long as possible before adding custom 
features. This, and other time-saving steps, will speed up production 
considerably, giving it a major competitive advantage. It also wants to 
reduce the tremendous amount of inventory it carries (a 747 jumbo 
jet has about 6 million parts, including 3 million rivets). One part of 
the plan is to have suppliers do more predelivery work by  assembling 
the parts into kits that are delivered directly to the staging area 
where they will be installed on the aircraft instead of delivering 
 separate parts to inventory. That would cut down on inventory carrying 
costs and save time. 
 Boeing is also hoping to reduce the number of suppliers it has, and 
to establish better links and cooperation from suppliers. Currently Boe-
ing has about 3,500 suppliers. Compare that with GM’s roughly 2,500 
suppliers, and you get an idea of how large this number is. 

 
Chapter Fourteen JIT and Lean Operations 
639
 Chalice, Robert.  Improving Healthcare Using Toyota 
Lean Production Methods: 46 Steps for Improve-
ment. 2nd ed. Milwaukee: ASQ Quality Press, 2007. 
 El-Haik, Basem, and David M. Roy.  Service Design for 
Six Sigma: A Roadmap for Excellence. New York: 
Wiley-Interscience, 2005. 
 Hariharan, Arun. “CEO’s Guide to Six Sigma Success.” 
 ASQ Six Sigma Forum Magazine, May 2006, 
pp. 16–25. 
 Hopp, Wallace J., and Mark Spearman.  Factory 
 Physics: Foundations of Manufacturing Manage-
ment. 3rd ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
 Jacobs, F. Robert, William L. Berry, D. Clay Whybark, 
and Thomas E. Vollmann.  Manufacturing Planning 
and Control Systems for Supply Chain Management. 
6th ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Liker, Jeffrey.  The Toyota Way: 14 Management Prin-
ciples from the World’s Greatest Manufacturer. New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
 Liker, Jeffery K., and Gary Convis.  The Toyota Way to 
Lean Leadership: Achieving and Sustaining Excel-
lence through Leadership Development. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Mann, David.  Creating a Lean Culture: Tools to Sustain 
Lean Conversions. New York: Productivity Press, 
2005. 
 Monden, Yasuhiro. “What Makes the Toyota Production 
System Really Tick?”  Industrial Engineering 13, 
no. 1 (January 1981), pp. 38–46. 
 Rich, Nick, Nicola Bateman, Ann Esain, Lynn Massey, 
and Donna Samuel.  Lean Evolution: Lessons from 
the Workplace. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006. 
 Rother, Mike, and John Shook.  Learning to See. 
 Cambridge, MA: The Lean Institute, 2009. 
 Shingo, Shigeo.  Non-Stock Production: The Shingo 
System for Continuous Improvement. New York: 
Productivity Press, 2006. 
 Spear, Steven, and H. Kent Bowen. “Decoding the 
DNA of the Toyota Production System.”  Harvard 
 Business Review, 77, no. 5, (Sept. – Oct, 1999). 
 Swank, Cynthia Karen. “The Lean Service Machine.” 
 Harvard Business Review, October 2003, 
pp. 123–129. 
 Taghizadegan, Salman.  Essentials of Lean Six Sigma. 
Burlington, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2006. 
 Womack, James P., and Daniel T. Jones.  Lean Thinking: 
Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your Corpora-
tion. New York: Free Press, 2003. 
 Womack, James P., Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos. 
 The Machine that Changed the World. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1991, 2007. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

640
 Maintaining the production capability of an organization is an important function in any pro-
duction system.   Maintenance  encompasses all those activities that relate to keeping facilities 
and equipment in good working order and making necessary repairs when breakdowns occur, 
so that the system can perform as intended. 
 Maintenance activities are often organized into two categories: (1) buildings and grounds 
and (2) equipment maintenance. Buildings and grounds is responsible for the appearance and 
functioning of buildings, parking lots, lawns, fences, and the like. Equipment maintenance is 
responsible for maintaining machinery and equipment in good working condition and making 
all necessary repairs. 
 14S.1 INTRODUCTION  
 The goal of maintenance is to keep the production system in good working order at minimal 
cost. There are several reasons for wanting to keep equipment and machines in good operating 
condition, such as to
 1. 
Avoid production or service disruptions. 
 2. 
Not add to production or service costs. 
 3. 
Maintain high quality. 
 4. 
Avoid missed delivery dates. 
 Maintenance  All activities that 
maintain facilities and equipment 
in good working order so that a 
system can perform as intended.  
LO14S.1 Explain the 
importance of maintenance 
in production systems.
 SUPPLEMENT TO 
CHAP TE R  14 
 SUPPLEMENT OUTLINE 
 14S.1 Introduction,  640 
 14S.2 Preventive Maintenance,  642 
 14S.3 Breakdown Programs,  644 
 14S.4 Replacement,  644 
 Maintenance 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this supplement, you 
should be able to: 
 LO14S.1 Explain the importance of 
maintenance in production systems. 
 LO14S.2 Describe the range of 
maintenance activities. 
 LO14S.3 Discuss preventive maintenance and 
the key issues associated with it. 
 LO14S.4 Explain breakdown maintenance 
and name the key issues 
associated with it. 
 LO14S.5 State how the Pareto 
phenomenon pertains to 
maintenance decisions. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance 
641
 When breakdowns occur, there are a number of adverse consequences:
 1. 
Operations capacity is reduced, and orders are delayed. 
 2. 
There is no output, but overhead continues, increasing the cost per unit. 
 3. 
There are quality issues; output may be damaged. 
 4. 
There are safety issues; employees or customers may be injured. 
 Decision makers have two basic options with respect to maintenance. One option is  reac-
tive: It is to deal with breakdowns or other problems when they occur. This is referred to as 
 breakdown maintenance  .  The other option is  proactive:  It is to reduce breakdowns through 
a program of lubrication, adjustment, cleaning, inspection, and replacement of worn parts. 
This is referred to as   preventive maintenance . 
 Decision makers try to make a trade-off between these two basic options that will mini-
mize their combined cost. With no preventive maintenance, breakdown and repair costs would 
be tremendous. Furthermore, hidden costs, such as lost output and the cost of wages while 
equipment is not in service, must be factored in. So must the cost of injuries or damage to 
other equipment and facilities or to other units in production. However, beyond a certain 
point, the cost of preventive maintenance activities exceeds the benefit. 
 As an example, if a person never had the oil changed in his or her car, never had it lubri-
cated, and never had the brakes or tires inspected, but simply had repairs done when abso-
lutely necessary, preventive costs would be negligible but repair costs would be quite high, 
considering the wide range of parts (engine, steering, transmission, tires, brakes, etc.) that 
could fail. In addition, property damage and injury costs might be incurred, plus there would 
be the uncertainty of when failure might occur (e.g., on the expressway during rush hour, or 
late at night). On the other hand, having the oil changed and the car lubricated every morning 
would obviously be excessive because automobiles are designed to perform for much longer 
periods without oil changes and lubrications. The best approach is to seek a balance between 
preventive maintenance and breakdown maintenance. The same concept applies to maintain-
ing production systems: Strike a balance between prevention costs and breakdown costs. This 
concept is illustrated in  Figure 14S.1 . 
 The age and condition of facilities and equipment, the degree of technology involved, the 
type of production process, and similar factors enter into the decision of how much preventive 
maintenance is desirable. Thus, in the example of a new automobile, little preventive main-
tenance may be needed since there is slight risk of breakdowns. As the car ages and becomes 
worn through use, the desirability of preventive maintenance increases because the risk of 
breakdown increases. Thus, when tires and brakes begin to show signs of wear, they should 
 Breakdown maintenance  
Reactive approach; dealing with 
breakdowns or problems when 
they occur. 
 Preventive maintenance  
Proactive approach;  reducing 
breakdowns through a  program 
of lubrication, adjustment, 
 cleaning, inspection, and 
replacement of worn parts. 
 FIGURE 14S.1 
 Total maintenance cost as 
a function of preventive 
maintenance effort 
Optimum
Cost
Amount of preventive maintenance
Total cost
Preventive
maintenance cost
Breakdown and
repair cost

642 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance
be replaced before they fail; dents and scratches should be periodically taken care of before 
they begin to rust; and the car should be lubricated and have its oil changed after exposure 
to high levels of dust and dirt. Also, inspection and replacement of critical parts that tend to 
fail suddenly should be performed before a road trip to avoid disruption of the trip and costly 
emergency repair bills. 
 14S.2 PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE  
 The goal of preventive maintenance is to reduce the incidence of breakdowns or failures in the 
plant or equipment to avoid the associated costs. Those costs can include loss of output; idle 
workers; schedule disruptions; injuries; damage to other equipment, products, or facilities; 
and repairs, which may involve maintaining inventories of spare parts, repair tools and equip-
ment, and repair specialists. 
 Preventive maintenance is  periodic.  It can be scheduled according to the availability of 
maintenance personnel and to avoid interference with operating schedules. Managers usually 
schedule preventive maintenance using some combination of the following:
 1. 
The result of planned inspections that reveal a need for maintenance. 
 2. 
According to the calendar (passage of time). 
 3. 
After a predetermined number of operating hours. 
 An important issue in preventive maintenance is the frequency of preventive maintenance. 
As the time between periodic maintenance episodes increases, the cost of preventive main-
tenance decreases while the risk (and cost) of breakdowns increases. As noted, the goal is to 
strike a balance between the two costs (i.e., to minimize total cost). 
 Determining the amount of preventive maintenance to use is a function of the expected fre-
quency of breakdown, the cost of a breakdown (including actual repair costs as well as poten-
tial damage or injury, lost production, and so on). The following two examples illustrate this. 
LO14S.2 Describe the range 
of maintenance activities.
 The frequency of breakdown of a machine per month is shown in the table. The cost of a 
breakdown is $1,000 and the cost of preventive maintenance is $1,250 per month. If preven-
tive maintenance is performed, the probability of a machine breakdown is negligible. Should 
the manager use preventive maintenance, or would it be cheaper to repair the machine when 
it breaks down?
 
 Number of breakdowns 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 Frequency of occurrence 
 .20 
 .30 
 .40 
 .10 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 EXAMPLE 14S–1 
 S O L U T I O N 
 The expected number of breakdowns without preventive maintenance is 1.40:
 
 Number of 
Breakdowns  
    
 Frequency of 
Occurrence  
  
 Expected Number of 
Breakdowns  
 0 
 
  .20 
 
      0 
 1 
 
  .30 
 
  .30 
 2 
 
  .40 
 
  .80 
 3 
 
  .10 
 
  .30 
 
 
 1.00 
 
 1.40 
 Expected cost using repair policy is 1.40 breakdowns/month    $1,000/breakdown    $1,400. 
Preventive maintenance would cost $1,250. 
 Therefore, preventive maintenance would yield a savings of $150/month. 

 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance 
643
 Ideally, preventive maintenance will be performed just prior to a breakdown or failure 
because this will result in the longest possible use of facilities or equipment without a break-
down.  Predictive maintenance  is an attempt to determine when to perform preventive main-
tenance activities. It is based on historical records and analysis of technical data to predict 
when a piece of equipment or part is about to fail. The better the predictions of failures are, 
the more effective preventive maintenance will be. A good preventive maintenance effort 
relies on complete records for each piece of equipment. Records must include information 
such as date of installation, operating hours, dates and types of insurance, and dates and types 
of repairs. 
 Some companies have workers perform preventive maintenance on the machines they 
operate, rather than use separate maintenance personnel for that task. Called   total  productive 
maintenance  ,  this approach is consistent with JIT systems and lean operations, where 
employees are given greater responsibility for quality, productivity, and the general function-
ing of the system. 
 In the broadest sense, preventive maintenance extends back to the design and selection stage 
of equipment and facilities. Maintenance problems are sometimes  designed into  a system. For 
example, equipment may be designed in such a way that it needs frequent maintenance, or 
maintenance may be difficult to perform (e.g., the equipment has to be partially dismantled in 
order to perform routine maintenance). An extreme example of this was a certain car model 
that required the engine block to be lifted slightly in order to change the spark plugs! In such 
cases, maintenance is very likely to be performed less often than if its performance were less 
demanding. In other instances, poor design can cause equipment to wear out at an early age 
or experience a much higher than expected breakdown rate.  Consumer Reports,  for example, 
publishes annual breakdown data on automobiles. The data indicate that some models tend to 
break down with a much higher frequency than other models. 
 One possible reason for maintenance problems being designed into a product is that 
designers have considered other aspects of design more important. Cost is one such aspect. 
Another is appearance; an attractive design may be chosen over a less attractive one even 
though it will be more demanding to maintain. Customers may contribute to this situation; 
the buying public probably has a greater tendency to select an attractive design over one that 
offers ease of maintenance. 
 Obviously, durability and ease of maintenance can have long-term implications for preven-
tive maintenance programs. Training of employees in proper operating procedures and in how 
to keep equipment in good operating order—and providing the incentive to do so—are also 
important. More and more, U.S. organizations are taking a cue from the Japanese and trans-
ferring routine maintenance (e.g., cleaning, adjusting, inspecting) to the users of equipment, 
 Predictive maintenance  An 
attempt to determine when 
best to perform preventive 
 maintenance activities. 
 Total productive 
 maintenance  JIT approach 
where workers perform 
 preventive maintenance on the 
machines they operate. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Begin by computing the ratio of preventive cost to the breakdown cost:
 
Preventive cost
Breakdown cost
$250
$1,000
.25


 
 Find the number of standard deviations from the mean represented by an area under the nor-
mal curve equal to .25 using Appendix B, Table B. It is   .67. Use this value of  z to compute 
the maintenance interval:
 
z
Mean
standard deviations
3
.67(.60)
2.598 (round to 2.6 weeks)




 
 Another approach that might be used relates to the time before a breakdown occurs. Suppose 
that the average time before breakdown is normally distributed and has a mean of 3 weeks and 
a standard deviation of .60 week. If breakdown cost averages $1,000 and preventive mainte-
nance costs $250, what is the optimal maintenance interval? 
 EXAMPLE 14S–2 

644 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance
in an effort to give them a sense of responsibility and awareness of the equipment they use and 
to cut down on abuse and misuse of the equipment. 
 14S.3 BREAKDOWN PROGRAMS 
 The risk of a breakdown can be greatly reduced by an effective preventive maintenance 
program. Nonetheless, occasional breakdowns still occur. Even firms with good preven-
tive practices have some need for breakdown programs. Of course, organizations that rely 
less on preventive maintenance have an even greater need for effective ways of dealing with 
breakdowns. 
 Unlike preventive maintenance, management cannot schedule breakdowns but must deal 
with them on an irregular basis (i.e., as they occur). Among the major approaches used to deal 
with breakdowns are the following:
 1. 
 Standby or backup equipment that can be quickly pressed into service. 
 2. 
 Inventories of spare parts that can be installed as needed, thereby avoiding lead times 
involved in ordering parts, and  buffer inventories, so that other equipment will be less 
likely to be affected by short-term downtime of a particular piece of equipment. 
 3. 
 Operators who are able to perform at least minor repairs on their equipment. 
 4. 
 Repair people who are well trained and readily available to diagnose and correct prob-
lems with equipment. 
 The degree to which an organization pursues any or all of these approaches depends on 
how important a particular piece of equipment is to the overall operations system. At one 
extreme is equipment that is the focal point of a system (e.g., printing presses for a newspaper, 
or vital operating parts of a car, such as brakes, steering, transmission, ignition, and engine). 
At the other extreme is equipment that is seldom used because it does not perform an impor-
tant function in the system, and equipment for which substitutes are readily available. 
 The implication is clear: Breakdown programs are most effective when they take into 
account the degree of importance a piece of equipment has in the operations system, and the 
ability of the system to do without it for a period of time. The Pareto phenomenon exists in 
such situations: A relatively few pieces of equipment will be extremely important to the func-
tioning of the system, thereby justifying considerable effort and/or expense; some will require 
moderate effort or expense; and many will justify little effort or expense. 
 14S.4 REPLACEMENT  
 When breakdowns become frequent and/or costly, the manager is faced with a trade-off deci-
sion in which costs are an important consideration: What is the cost of replacement com-
pared with the cost of continued maintenance? This question is sometimes difficult to resolve, 
especially if future breakdowns cannot be readily predicted. Historical records may help to 
project future experience. Another factor is technological change; newer equipment may 
have features that favor replacement over either preventive or breakdown maintenance. On 
the other hand, the removal of old equipment and the installation of new equipment may 
cause disruptions to the system, perhaps greater than the disruptions caused by breakdowns. 
Also, employees may have to be trained to operate the new equipment. Finally, forecasts of 
future demand for the use of the present or new equipment must be taken into account. The 
demand for the replacement equipment might differ because of the different features it has. 
For instance, demand for output of the current equipment might be two years, while demand 
for output of the replacement equipment might be much longer. 
 These decisions can be fairly complex, involving a number of different factors. Neverthe-
less, most of us are faced with a similar decision with our personal automobiles: When is it 
time for a replacement? 
LO14S.3 Discuss preventive 
maintenance and the key 
issues associated with it.
LO14S.4 Explain breakdown 
maintenance and name the 
key issues associated with it.

 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance 
645
 breakdown maintenance, 641 
 maintenance, 640 
 predictive maintenance, 643 
 preventive maintenance, 641 
 total productive 
maintenance, 643  
 KEY TERMS 
 Maintaining the productive capability of an organization is an important function. Maintenance includes 
all of the activities related to keeping facilities and equipment in good operating order and maintaining 
the appearance of buildings and grounds. 
 The goal of maintenance is to minimize the total cost of keeping the facilities and equipment in good 
working order. Maintenance decisions typically reflect a trade-off between preventive maintenance, 
which seeks to reduce the incidence of breakdowns and failures, and breakdown maintenance, which 
seeks to reduce the impact of breakdowns when they do occur. 
 SUMMARY 
 1. What is the goal of a maintenance program? 
 2. List the costs associated with equipment breakdown. 
 3. What are three different ways preventive maintenance is scheduled? 
 4. Explain the term  predictive maintenance and the importance of good records. 
 5. List the major approaches organizations use to deal with breakdowns. 
 6. Explain how the Pareto phenomenon applies to
 a. Preventive maintenance. 
 b. Breakdown maintenance. 
 7. Discuss the key points of this supplement as they relate to maintenance of an automobile. 
 8. What advantages does preventive maintenance have over breakdown maintenance? 
 9. Explain why having a good preventive maintenance program in place is necessary prior to imple-
menting a lean system. 
 10. Discuss the relationship between preventive maintenance and quality. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. The probability that equipment used in a hospital lab will need recalibration is given in the follow-
ing table. A service firm is willing to provide maintenance and provide any necessary calibrations 
for a fee of $650 per month. Recalibration costs $500 per time. Which approach would be most 
cost-effective, recalibration as needed or the service contract? 
 2. The frequency of breakdown of a machine that issues lottery tickets is given in the following table. 
Repairs cost an average of $240. A service firm is willing to provide preventive maintenance under 
either of two options: #1 is $500 and covers all necessary repairs, and #2 is $350 and covers any 
repairs after the first one. Which option would have the lower expected cost: pay for all repairs, ser-
vice option #1, or service option #2?  
 3. Determine the optimum preventive maintenance frequency for each of the pieces of equipment if 
breakdown time is normally distributed: 
 PROBLEMS 
 Number of Breakdowns/Month 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Frequency of Occurrence 
 .10 
 .30 
 .30 
 .20 
 .10 
 Number of Recalibrations 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Probability of Occurrence 
 .15 
 .25 
 .30 
 .20 
 .10 
 Equipment 
 Preventive 
Maintenance Cost 
 Breakdown 
Cost 
 A201 
 $300 
 $2,300 
 B400 
 $200 
 $3,500 
 C850 
 $530 
 $4,800 
 Equipment 
 Average Time (days) 
between Breakdowns 
 Standard 
Deviation  
 A201 
 20 
 2 
 B400 
 30 
 3 
 C850 
 40 
 4 

646 
Supplement to Chapter Fourteen Maintenance
 Hall, Robert W. “Total Productive Maintenance—
Essential to Maintain Progress.”  Target 3, no. 3 
(Fall 1987), pp. 4–11. 
 http://www.epa.gov/lean/environment/methods/tpm.htm
Mann, Lawrence, Jr.  Maintenance Management. Rev. 
ed. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1983. 
 Mather, D. “The Value of RCM.” Plant Services, 
2008. 
 Nolden, Carol. “Predictive Maintenance: Route to Zero 
Unplanned Downtime.”  Plant Engineering 41, no. 
4 (February 1987), pp. 38–43. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

This page intentionally left blank

648
 CHAP TE R 
 15 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO15.1 
Explain the terms  supply chain and  logistics. 
 LO15.2 
Name the key aspects of supply chain management. 
 LO15.3 
List, and briefly explain, current trends in supply chain 
management. 
 LO15.4 
Outline the benefits and risks related to outsourcing. 
 LO15.5 
Explain what the main supply chain risks are and what 
businesses can do to minimize those risks. 
 LO15.6 
Describe some of the complexities related to global supply 
chains. 
 LO15.7 
Briefly describe ethical issues in supply chains and the key steps 
companies can take to avoid ethical problems. 
 LO15.8 
Describe the three concerns of small businesses related to the 
supply chain and suggest ways to manage those concerns. 
 LO15.9 
List several strategic, tactical, and operational responsibilities 
related to managing the supply chain. 
 LO15.10 Discuss procurement in terms of the purchasing interfaces, the 
purchasing cycle, ethics, and centralized versus decentralized 
decision making. 
 LO15.11 Briefly describe the key aspects of supplier management. 
 LO15.12 Discuss the logistics aspects of supply chain management, 
including RFID technology. 
 LO15.13 Discuss the issues involved in managing returns. 
 LO15.14 Describe some of the challenges in creating an effective supply 
chain and some of the trade-offs involved. 
 Supply Chain 
Management 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 15.1 Introduction,  649 
 15.2 Trends in Supply Chain 
Management,  653 
 Risk Management and Resiliency  654 
 Shortening the Supply Chain  656 
 15.3 Global Supply Chains,  656 
 15.4 ERP and Supply Chain 
Management,  656 
 15.5 Ethics and the Supply Chain,  657 
 15.6 Small Business  657 
 15.7 Management Responsibilities,  658 
 Strategic Responsibilities,  659 
 Key Tactical and Operational 
Responsibilities,  659 
 15.8 Procurement,  660 
 Purchasing Interfaces,  660 
 The Purchasing Cycle,  661 
 Centralized versus Decentralized 
Purchasing,  662 
 Ethics in Purchasing,  662 
 15.9 E-Business,  663 
 15.10 Supplier Management,  667 
 Choosing Suppliers,  667 
 Supplier Audits,  667 
 Supplier Certification,  668 
 Supplier Relationship 
Management,  668 
 Supplier Partnerships,  668 
 Strategic Partnering,  669 
 15.11 Inventory Management,  670 
 15.12 Order Fulfillment,  671 
 15.13 Logistics,  672 
 Movement within a Facility,  672 
 Operations Tour: Wegmans’ Shipping 
System,  673 
 Incoming and Outgoing Shipments,  674  
 Tracking Goods: RFID,  674 
 Evaluating Shipping Alternatives,  676 
 3-PL,  677 
 15.14 Creating an Effective Supply Chain,  678 
 Managing Returns,  679 
 Challenges,  681 
 15.15 Strategy,  683 
 Cases: MasterTag,  685 
 B & L Inc.,  686 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

649
 In this chapter you will learn about recent trends in supply chain management, key supply 
chain processes and management responsibilities, procurement, logistics, managing returns, 
managing risks, and creating an effective supply chain. You can get an indication of the impor-
tance of supply chains from this statistic: According to one estimate, the value of inventories in 
supply chains of U.S. companies is over a trillion dollars. 1  
 15.1 INTRODUCTION 
 A  supply chain  is the sequence of organizations—their facilities, functions, and activities—
that are involved in producing and delivering a product or service. The sequence begins 
with basic suppliers of raw materials and extends all the way to the final customer. Facilities 
include warehouses, factories, processing centers, distribution centers, retail outlets, and 
offices. Functions and activities include forecasting, purchasing, inventory management, 
 Supply chain  A sequence of 
organizations—their facilities, 
functions, and activities—that 
are involved in producing and 
delivering a product or service. 
 1 “What in the World is the Global Supply Chain?” Video, Council of Supply Chain Management  Professionals, 2005. 
 The Wegmans supermarket chain (see the Wegmans Operations Tour 
in Chapter 1) is often mentioned as being one of the best-run super-
market chains in the United States. It’s now being mentioned for its 
leadership in supply chain management in the grocery industry. When 
a Wegmans spokesperson was asked how many of its people work in 
its supply chain, the spokesperson essentially said all of them. 
 The fact of the matter is that most if not all of the people who 
work in any business organization are somehow involved with the 
supply chain. And no matter where your career takes you, in every 
job you do, you’ll be involved in one (or more) supply chain(s). 

650 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
information management, quality assurance, scheduling, production, distribution, delivery, 
and customer service. 
 Supply chain management  is the strategic coordination of business functions within a 
business organization and throughout its supply chain for the purpose of  integrating supply 
and demand management. Supply chain managers are people at various levels of the organiza-
tion who are responsible for managing supply and demand both within and across  business 
organizations. They are involved with planning and coordinating activities that include 
 sourcing and procurement of materials and services, transformation activities, and logistics. 
 Logistics  is the part of a supply chain involved with the forward and reverse flow of goods, 
services, cash, and information. Logistics management includes management of inbound and 
outbound transportation, material handling, warehousing, inventory, order fulfillment and dis-
tribution, third-party logistics, and reverse logistics (the return of goods from customers). 
 Every business organization is part of at least one supply chain, and many are part of  multiple 
supply chains. Often the number and type of organizations in a supply chain are determined by 
whether the supply chain is manufacturing or service oriented.  Figure 15.1  illustrates several 
 LO15.1 Explain the terms 
 supply chain and  logistics. 
 Supply chain management  
The strategic coordination of the 
supply chain for the purpose of 
 integrating supply and demand 
management. 
 Logistics  The movement 
of goods,  services, cash, and 
 information in a supply chain. 
 FIGURE 15.1 
 Typical supply chains 
Supplier
Supplier
Storage
Storage
Supplier
Supplier
Supplier


Mfg.
Storage
Distributor
Retailer
Service
Customer
Customer
Production
Logistics
SUPPLY CHAIN
Reverse 
Logistics
Customers
Suppliers
Consumers
Cash flow
Product/Service
Design
Marketing
Goods and services
Transportation
a.   A typical manufacturing 
supply chain.
b.   A typical service supply 
chain.
c.   Goods and services flow 
clockwise in this diagram, 
and cash flows counter-
clockwise. Information flows in 
both directions.

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
651
perspectives of supply chains.  Figure 15.2 shows a more detailed version of the farm-to-market 
supply chain that was shown in Chapter 1, with key suppliers at each stage included.  
 Supply chains are sometimes referred to as  value chains,  a term that reflects the concept 
that value is added as goods and services progress through the chain. Supply or value chains 
typically comprise separate business organizations, rather than just a single organization. 
Moreover, the supply or value chain has two components for each organization: a supply 
component and a demand component. The supply component starts at the beginning of the 
chain and ends with the internal operations of the organization. The demand component of the 
chain starts at the point where the organization’s output is delivered to its immediate customer 
and ends with the final customer in the chain. The  demand chain is the sales and distribu-
tion portion of the value chain. The length of each component depends on where a particular 
organization is in the chain; the closer the organization is to the final customer, the shorter its 
demand component and the longer its supply component. 
 Supply chains are the lifeblood of any business organization. They connect suppliers, 
producers, and final customers in a network that is essential to the creation and delivery of 
goods and services. Managing the supply chain is the process of planning, implementing, and 
controlling supply chain operations. The basic components are strategy, procurement, supply 
management, demand management, and logistics. The goal of supply chain management is to 
match supply to demand as effectively and efficiently as possible. Key aspects relate to:
 1. 
Determining the appropriate level of outsourcing. 
 2. 
Managing procurement. 
 3. 
Managing suppliers. 
 4. 
Managing customer relationships. 
 5. 
Being able to quickly identify problems and respond to them. 
 LO15.2  Name the key aspects 
of supply chain management.
 FIGURE 15.2 
 A farm-to-market supply chain 
Supermarket
Bakery
Mill
Farm
Bread
$1.29
Farm Suppliers:
Trucking
Trucking
Trucking
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Feed, seed, fertilizers, pesticides
Energy/fuel
Bakery Suppliers:
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Other ingredients
Energy
Trucking Suppliers:
Fuel
Repairs
Tires
Drivers
Mill Suppliers:
Equipment suppliers
Equipment repair
Energy

652 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 An important aspect of supply chain management is  flow management.  The three types of 
flow that need to be managed are product and service flow, information flow, and financial 
flow. Product and service flow involves the movement of goods or services from suppliers to 
customers as well as handling customer service needs and product returns. Information flow 
involves sharing forecast and sales data, transmitting orders, tracking shipments, and updating 
order status. Financial flow involves credit terms, payments, and consignment and title owner-
ship arrangements. Technological advances have greatly enhanced the ability to effectively man-
age these flows. A dramatic decrease in the cost of transmitting and receiving information and 
the increased ease and speed of communication have facilitated the ability to coordinate supply 
chain activities and make timely decisions. In effect, a supply chain is a complex supply network. 
 Think food distribution is a low-tech 
enterprise? Just try getting a box of 
lettuce and other perishables across the 
country without sophisticated software 
and systems. 
 When people hear the name “Sysco,” they probably think of Cisco, 
the San Jose–based maker of routers and other high-tech gear. But 
 Houston-based food distributor Sysco, which each year ships 21.5 million 
tons of produce, meats, prepared meals, and other food-related products, 
is pretty technologically savvy too. The company supplies goods to one 
in three U.S. restaurants, cafeterias, and sports stadiums—anyplace 
that serves food. To get all that food safely to the right venue at the right 
time, Sysco maintains a complex web of software, databases, scanning 
systems, and robotics that surely would impress Silicon Valley types 
(including executives from that homonymic company). 
 Sysco’s supply-chain logistics are especially complex because a 
single jar of caviar can’t be handled the same way as a box of frozen 
onion rings or an 80-pound tub of flour. That rules out most off-the-shelf 
inventory-management software. So Sysco uses customized tech tools 
to crank out a logistical plan every day and then execute it. That way a 
restaurant that wants Fuji apples doesn’t get Macintoshes instead, or 
an elementary school cafeteria doesn’t end up with meals meant for 
the assisted-living facility down the street. In the process, the company 
has found ways to cut costs and speed delivery times, which is helping 
Sysco weather a downturn that is forcing many of its restaurant cus-
tomers to cut back or close altogether.   
 Food Sorting the Sysco Way 
 On a recent afternoon around 5:40, a whirring noise picks up, punc-
tuated by honks as men drive forklifts across the floor of Sysco’s 
450,000-square-foot facility in Jersey City, N.J. This is where restau-
rant supplies and food are sorted and loaded before reaching their final 
destination. (Sysco refers to each of its sorting centers as an “operating 
company.”) Every driver is wearing a wireless scanner made by Symbol, 
a unit of Motorola, plus a printer on his hip with exact instructions on 
what to load on his forklift. Sysco has software that calculates exactly 
how each pallet—a forklift can accommodate three of the large portable 
 READING 
 Veggie Tales 
(Continued)
 
platforms—should be arranged, based on the 
weight of its items, its location, and its destination. 
 “It’s like the game of Tetris,” says the facility’s vice president of 
operations, Robert Heim, who says hello to everyone who drives by. 
 The “selectors,” as the men are called, point their scanners at a bar 
code above an item, grab it, and put it on a pallet. The facility is arranged 
so that people work methodically in one direction, never doubling back, 
which could create chaos. The aisles are organized according to weight 
and temperature; heavier cans that weigh 40 to 50 pounds are put on 
one side of the warehouse, while lighter items, like boxes of potato 
chips, go on the other. It’s all about maximum efficiency. 
 At this location 11,000 items turn over every 17 days. To achieve 
that, each product—even the napkins and silverware—has a kind of 
expiration date on it, because Sysco wants everything to move out in a 
particular order. If an item passes its “expiration,” the inventory-man-
agement software alerts workers to pull it. Or if supplies of it are run-
ning low, they are replenished. 
 Fuller Trucks Hit the Roads 
 Thanks to the geographic spread and diversity of its customers, Sys-
co’s trucks are seemingly everywhere. To make sure the trucks are 
as full as can be, Sysco in 2000 
began revamping its supply-chain 
operations. In the past Sysco 
had its food suppliers—such as 
Kraft and Kellogg—ship directly 
to operating centers like the one 
in Jersey City. The problem was 
that suppliers were sending a 
separate truck to each operating 
company. Not only did each truck 
take 2½ hours to unload, but 
they often arrived only half full. 
The upshot: Sysco, which covers 
these suppliers’ delivery costs, 
was wasting time and money. 
Today a centralized supply-chain 
group in Houston, with the help of 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
653
 15.2 TRENDS IN SUPPLY CHAIN 
MANAGEMENT 
      Although different industries and different businesses vary widely in terms of where they 
are in the evolution of their supply chain management, many businesses emphasize the 
following:
 • Measuring supply chain ROI. 
 • “Greening” the supply chain. 
 • Reevaluating outsourcing. 
 • Integrating IT. 
 • Adopting lean principles. 
 • Managing risks. 
 Measuring supply chain ROI  enables managers to incorporate economics into  outsourcing 
and other decisions, giving them a rational basis for managing their supply chains. 
 Greening the supply chain  is generating interest for a variety of reasons,  including 
 corporate responsibility, regulations, and public pressure. This may involve  redesigning 
 products and services; reducing packaging; near-sourcing to reduce pollution from 
 transportation (one estimate is that marine shipping alone causes about 60,000 premature 
deaths annually worldwide due to lung cancer and cardiopulmonary disease);  2 choosing 
“green” suppliers; managing returns; and implementing end-of-life programs, particularly for 
appliances and electronic equipment. 
 Reevaluating outsourcing.  Companies are taking a second look at outsourcing, especially 
global suppliers. Business organizations outsource for a variety of reasons. Often decisions to 
outsource have been based on lower prices resulting from lower labor costs. Other potential 
benefits include: the ability to focus on core strengths, converting fixed costs to variable costs, 
freeing up capital to devote to other needs, shifting some risks to suppliers, taking advantage 
of supplier expertise, and ease of expansion outside the home country. Some potential dif-
ficulties, depending on the nature of what is outsourced and the length of the supply chain, 
include inflexibility due to longer lead times for delivery of goods with distant suppliers, 
increased transportation costs, language and cultural differences, loss of jobs, loss of control, 
 LO15.3  List, and briefly 
explain, current trends in sup-
ply change management.
 LO15.4  Outline the 
benefits and risks related to 
outsourcing.
software from Manhattan Associates, directs shipments from suppliers 
to one of two new redistribution centers, where Sysco workers consoli-
date and pack into trucks large quantities of supplies before sending 
them on to the appropriate operating companies. In some cases the 
redistribution centers can get pallets for customers packed and ready, 
so the operating companies need to assemble only a few more pallets 
before sending the truck out for delivery. The result: Fewer trucks on 
the road—each one fuller—and Sysco spends less time turning prod-
ucts around. Sysco says that in the first three quarters of last year it 
increased shipped cases per employee (a key metric of efficiency) 5%.  
 Sysco has also saved money by revamping its truck routes. That 
became imperative last year when fuel prices skyrocketed. It uses 
Roadnet, a software program developed by UPS, to determine the most 
efficient routes for its trucks. In the past nine months, the company 
says, diesel usage is down almost 8% from a year earlier. It also is 
trying to get all its units to coordinate by moving to an SAP software 
platform, which should take a few more years to complete. 
 Total Recall 
 Sysco’s technology not only helps the company run more efficiently, 
it can aid government agencies after outbreaks related to tainted 
food. When the Food and Drug Administration ordered the recall of 
salmonella-contaminated peanut products supplied by Peanut Corp. 
of America last year, Sysco quickly identified six operating companies 
that potentially carried tainted goods. The company says it also used its 
tracking software to help the FDA investigate the sources of contamina-
tion by triangulating information about its shipments, eateries that had 
reported outbreaks, and the suspected ingredients. Using that kind of 
information, Sysco also helped health officials identify sources of con-
tamination during the 2006 spinach E. coli outbreak. 
 2 James J. Corbett, James J. Winebrake, Erin H. Green, Prasad Kasibhatla, Veronika Eyring, and Axel Lauer, 
“Mortality from Ship Emissions: A Global Assessment,”  Environmental Science & Technology  41, no. 24 (December 
15, 2007), pp. 8512–8518. 

654 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
lower productivity, loss of ability to do the work internally and loss of business knowledge, 
knowledge transfer, concerns about intellectual property security, and increased effort needed 
to manage the supply chain. 
 One example of where this is getting increased attention is the clothing industry. Rising 
wages in China and other countries where suppliers make most of the clothing for retail sales 
provide less of a cost benefit than previously, and long lead times eliminate agility in an 
industry where the market rewards it. Add in instances of late deliveries and substandard 
quality, and events like factory fires and building collapses, and the decision to back-shore 
becomes easier to consider. 
 Integrating IT  produces real-time data that can enhance strategic planning and help businesses 
to control costs, measure quality and productivity, respond quickly to problems, and improve sup-
ply chain operations. This is why ERP systems are so important for supply chain management. 
 Managing risks.  For some businesses, the supply chain is a major source of risk, so it is 
essential to adopt procedures for managing risks. According to a Deloitte survey,  3 45 percent 
of supply chain leaders lack confidence in their risk management. The following section dis-
cusses sources of risk and actions businesses can take to reduce risks. 
 Many businesses are turning to  lean principles  to improve the performance of their 
supply chains. In too many instances, traditional supply chains are a collection of loosely 
connected steps, and business processes are not linked to suppliers’ or customers’ needs. 
Applying lean principles to supply chains can overcome this weakness by eliminating non-
value-added processes; improving product flow by using pull systems rather than push sys-
tems; using fewer suppliers and supplier certification programs, which can nearly eliminate 
the need for inspection of incoming goods; and adopting the lean attitude of never ceasing to 
improve the system. 
 As a result of these current and possible future trends, organizations are likely to give 
serious thought to reconfiguring their supply chains to reduce risks, improve flow, increase 
profits, and generally increase customer satisfaction. 
 Risk Management and Resiliency 
 Risk management involves identifying risks, assessing their likelihood of occurring and their 
potential impact, and then developing strategies for addressing those risks. Strategies can 
 LO15.5 Explain what the 
main supply chain risks are 
and what businesses can do to 
minimize those risks.
 Supply chain disruptions can 
reduce revenue and threaten 
production and distribution. 
A risk from accidents is shown 
here with containers falling from 
the deck of a damaged cargo 
ship off the Mumbai coast after 
a collision between two cargo 
ships 
 3 Deloitte Survey: “Executives Face Growing Threats to Their Supply Chains.” New York: Press release, February 
7, 2013. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
655
pertain to risk avoidance, risk reduction, and risk sharing with supply chain partners. Risk 
avoidance may mean not dealing with suppliers in a certain area, risk reduction can mean 
replacing unreliable suppliers, and risk sharing can mean contractual arrangements with sup-
ply chain partners that spread the risk.   Resiliency   is the ability of a business to recover from 
an event that negatively impacts the supply chain. Recovery is a function of the severity of the 
impact and the plans that are in place to cope with the event. Businesses can reduce, but not 
eliminate, the need for resiliency by managing risks. 
 The first step in risk management is to identify potential risks. Supply chain risks fall into 
several categories. One is disruptions, which can come from natural disasters such as fires, 
flooding, hurricanes and the like that either disrupt shipping or that affect suppliers directly 
(by damaging production or storage facilities) or indirectly (by impacting access to facilities 
or impacting employees in other ways). Other disruptions can occur as a result of supplier 
issues such as labor strife, production problems, and issues with their suppliers, including 
bankruptcy. Another source of risk is quality issues, which can disrupt supplies and may lead 
to product recalls, liability claims, and negative publicity. Still another risk is the potential for 
suppliers divulging sensitive information to competitors that weakens a competitive advantage. 
 Key elements of successful risk management include:
Know your suppliers.  Mapping the supply chain can be helpful in grasping the scope 
of the supply chain, identifying suppliers, and seeing if there are any supplier concentra-
tions in first or second tiers of suppliers, which can greatly amplify risk. This might also 
lead to the desirability of simplifying (shortening) the supply chain. 
Provide supply chain visibility.  Supply chain visibility  means that a major trading 
partner can connect to any part of its supply chain to access data in real time on inventory 
levels, shipment status, and similar key information. This requires data sharing. 
Develop event-response capability.  Event-response capability  is the ability to detect 
and respond to unplanned events such as delayed shipment or a warehouse running low 
on a certain item. An event management system should have four capabilities: monitoring 
the system; notifying when certain planned or unplanned events occur; simulating poten-
tial solutions when an unplanned event occurs; and measuring the long-term performance 
of suppliers, transporters, and other supply chain partners. 
 Event response can mean identifying alternate sources of supply. It should also be some-
what general to be able to deal with the possibility of unknown disruptions, which are events 
that cannot generally be predicted, but which can, if they do occur, have an impact on the 
 Resiliency  The ability of a 
business to recover from an 
event that negatively impacts the 
supply chain. 
 Supply chain visibility  
A major trading partner can 
 connect to its supply chain to 
access data in real time. 
 Event-response capability  
The ability to detect and respond 
to unplanned events. 
 Situations like this can arise when busi-
nesses acquire other companies and then elect 
to maintain their processing operations in their 
current locations. 
 Questions 
    1. Businesses sometimes acquire widely  dispersed processing facili-
ties through a number of mergers or acquisitions. What trade-offs 
might they face in  considering consolidation? 
   2. This reading offers one possible reason for the existence of a long 
supply process. Can you think of some other possible reasons for 
long supply processes? 
 Based on: “3M Begins Untangling Their Hairballs.”  The Wall Street Journal,
May 17, 2012. 
 One of 3M’s many products is a plastic hook. Production occurred at 
several widely scattered locations in the Midwest. The process started 
in a Springfield, Missouri, plant that made adhesives, which were then 
shipped about 550 miles to a plant in Hartford City, Indiana, where the 
adhesive was applied to foam. Next, the foam was shipped another 600 
miles to a plant in near Minneapolis, Minnesota, where the foam was cut 
into individual pieces and imprinted with the 3M logo. Finally the foam 
pieces were shipped to a plant in central Wisconsin, another 200 miles 
or so, were they were bundled with the hooks and packages for sale. 
This entire process took over a hundred days and over 1,000 miles to 
complete.  
 3M eventually consolidated operations in a single plant in  Hutchinson, 
Minnesota, where a number of other 3M products are made. That elimi-
nated all the travel and reduced the process time by two-thirds. 
 READING 
 At 3M, a Long Road Became a Shorter Road 

656 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
supply chain. Because these are unknowns, the severity and length of a disruption are impos-
sible to predict. Consequently, it is important to recognize that unforeseen events could occur, 
and to have a plan for addressing them should they occur. 
 Simplify (shorten) the supply chain if need be.  The following section discusses this 
important topic. 
 Shortening the Supply Chain 
 As businesses search for ways to reduce transportation time and cost, some are placing more 
emphasis on using nearby suppliers, storage facilities, and processing centers. Others are 
finding savings by consolidating their supply chains, as described in the following reading. 
 15.3 GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS 
       As businesses increasingly make use of outsourcing and pursue opportunities beyond their 
domestic markets, their supply chains are becoming increasingly global. For example, prod-
uct design often uses inputs from around the world, and products are sold globally. 
 As businesses recognize the strategic importance of effective supply chain management, 
they are also discovering that global supply chains have additional complexities that were 
either negligible or nonexistent in domestic operations. These complexities include language 
and cultural differences, currency fluctuations, armed conflicts, increased transportation costs 
and lead times, and the increased need for trust and cooperation among supply chain partners. 
Furthermore, managers must be able to identify and analyze factors that differ from country 
to country, which can affect the success of the supply chain, including local capabilities; 
financial, transportation, and communication infrastructures; governmental, environmental, 
and regulatory issues; and political issues. 
 These and other factors have made risk management an important aspect of global supply 
chain management. To compensate for this, some firms have increased the amount of inven-
tory at various points in their supply chains, thereby losing some of the benefits of global 
sourcing. 
 Risks can relate to supply (e.g., supplier failure, quality issues, sustainability issues, trans-
portation issues, pirates, terrorism), costs (e.g., increasing commodity costs), and demand 
(e.g., decreasing demand, demand volatility, and transportation issues). Still other risks can 
involve intellectual rights issues, contract compliance issues, competitive pressure, forecast-
ing errors, and inventory management. 
 A positive factor of globalization has been the set of technological advances in communi-
cations: the ability to link operations around the world with real-time information exchange. 
Consequently, information technology has a key role in integrating operations across global 
supply chains. 
 15.4 ERP AND SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
  Supply chain management that integrates ERP is a formal approach to effectively plan and 
manage all the resources of a business enterprise. Implementation of ERP involves establish-
ing operating systems and operating performance measurements to enable them to manage 
business operations and meet business and financial objectives. ERP encompasses supply 
chain management activities such as planning for demand and managing supply, inventory 
replenishment, production, warehousing, and transportation. ERP software also plays a key 
role in centralizing transaction data. 
 ERP software provides the ability to coordinate, monitor, and manage a supply chain. It 
is an integrated system that provides for system-wide visibility of key activities and events in 
areas such as supplier relationships, performance management, sales and order fulfillment, 
and customer relationships. 
 LO15.6 Describe some of the 
complexities related to global 
supply chains.

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
657
 Supplier Relationship Management  ERP integrates purchasing, receiving, information 
about vendor ratings and performance, lead times, quality, electronic funds disbursements, 
simplifying processes, and enabling analysis of those processes. 
 Performance Management  This aspect of ERP pulls together information on costs and 
profits, productivity, quality performance, and customer satisfaction. 
 Sales and Order Fulfillment  ERP includes the ability to provide inventory and quality 
management, track returns, and schedule and monitor production, packaging, and distribu-
tion. Reports can provide information on order and inventory status, delivery dates, and logis-
tics performance. 
 Customer Relationship Management  An ERP system not only centralizes basic con-
tact information, details on contracts, payment terms, credit history, and shipping preferences, 
it also provides information on purchasing patterns, service, and returns. 
 15.5 ETHICS AND THE SUPPLY CHAIN 
       There are many examples of unethical behavior involving supply chains. They include bribing 
government or company officials to secure permits or favorable status; “exporting smoke-
stacks” to developing countries; claiming a “green” supply chain when in reality the level of 
“green” is only minimal; ignoring health, safety, and environmental standards; violating basic 
rights of workers (e.g., paying substandard wages; using sweatshops, forced labor, or child 
labor); mislabeling country of origin; and selling goods abroad that are banned at home. 
 Every company should develop an ethical supply chain code to guide behavior. A code 
should cover behaviors that involve customers, suppliers, suppliers’ behaviors, contract 
 negotiation, recruiting, and the environmental issues. 
 A major risk of unethical behavior is that when such behavior is exposed in the media, 
consumers tend to blame the major company or brand in the supply chain associated with 
the ethical infractions that were actually committed by legally independent companies in 
the supply chain. The problem is particularly difficult to manage when supply chains are 
global, as they often are in manufacturing operations. Unfortunately, many companies lack 
the ability to quickly contact most or all of the companies in their supply chain, and com-
municate with suppliers on critical issues of ethics and compliance. Although monitoring 
of supply chain activities is essential, it is only one aspect of maintaining an ethical supply 
chain. With global manufacturing and distribution, supply chain scrutiny should include 
all supply chain activities from purchasing, manufacturing, assembly, and transportation, 
to service and repair operations, and eventually to proper disposal of products at the end of 
their useful life. 
 Key steps companies can take to reduce the risk of damages due to unethical supplier 
behavior are to choose those that have a reputation for good ethical behavior; incorporate 
compliance with labor standards in supplier contracts; develop direct, long-term relationships 
with ethical suppliers; and address quickly any problems that occur. 
 15.6 SMALL BUSINESSES 
       Small businesses do not always give adequate attention to their supply chains. However, there 
are many benefits to be had for small businesses by actively managing their supply chains, 
including increased efficiencies, reduced costs, reduced risks, and increased profits. And size 
can actually be a competitive advantage for small businesses because they often are more 
agile than larger companies, enabling them to make decisions and changes more quickly 
when the need arises. 
 LO15.7  Briefly describe 
 ethical issues in supply chains 
and the key steps companies 
can take to avoid ethical 
problems.
 LO15.8  Describe the three 
concerns of small businesses 
related to the supply chain and 
suggest ways to manage those 
concerns.

658 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 Three aspects of supply chain management that are often of concern to small busi-
nesses are:
 • Inventory management 
 • Reducing risks 
 • International trade 
 Inventories can be an issue for small businesses. They may carry extra inventory as a 
way to avoid shortages due to supply chain interruptions. However, that can tie up capital 
and take up space. An alternative is to have backup suppliers for critical items. Similarly, 
having  backups for delivery from suppliers and deliveries to customers can help overcome 
 disruptions. Because it can take a fair amount of time to set up accounts, it is prudent to have 
these systems in place before they are needed to maintain operations. 
 Another area that often needs attention is risk management. The key to reducing risks is 
managing suppliers. Important steps are:
 • Use only reliable suppliers. 
 • Determine which suppliers are critical; get to know them, and any challenges they have. 
 • Measure supplier performance (e.g., quality, reliability, flexibility). 
 • Recognize warning signs of supplier issues (e.g., late deliveries, incomplete orders, 
quality problems). 
 • Have plans in place to manage supply chain problems. 
 Exporting can offer opportunities for small business producers to greatly expand their 
businesses, although they typically lack the knowledge to do so, which can cause unforeseen 
problems. For instance, exporting nonconforming goods or packaging can result in shipments 
being held up at a port of entry, which can be costly and time-consuming, and can lead to 
 dissatisfied customers. 
 Importing can have benefits for small businesses. The Small Business Administration has 
some tips for using foreign suppliers: 4  
 • Work with someone who has expertise to help oversee foreign suppliers, preferably 
someone who spends a good deal of time in that country. Also, a licensed customs 
 broker can help with laws and regulations, necessary documents, and working with 
importers and exporters. 
 • Describe your buying patterns and schedules to set expectations for demand and timing. 
 • Don’t rely on a single supplier; a backup supplier can reduce risk and provide 
 bargaining leverage. 
 • Building goodwill can have benefits in negotiations and resolving problems when they 
arise. 
 • Consider using domestic suppliers if the risks or other issues with foreign suppliers are 
formidable. Advantages can involve lower shipping times and costs, closer interactions 
with suppliers, and increased agility. 
 15.7 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES 
  Generally speaking, corporate management responsibilities have legal, economic, and 
ethical aspects. Legal responsibilities include being knowledgeable about laws and reg-
ulations of the countries where supply chains exist, obeying the laws, and operating 
to conform to  regulations. Economic responsibilities include supplying products and 
 4 U.S. Small Business Administration, “5 Tips for Managing an Efficient Global Supply Chain,”  Small Business 
Operations, March 12, 2013. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
659
services to meet demand as efficiently as possible. Ethical responsibilities include con-
ducting business in ways that are consistent with the moral standards of society. 
 More specific areas of responsibility relate to organizational strategy, tactics, and 
operations.   
 SOME SUPPLY CHAIN STRATEGIES 
 There are many different strategies a business organization can 
choose from. Here is a sample of some of those strategies: 
 Responsive/agile.  A flexible supply chain that has the ability to 
quickly respond to changes in product requirements or volume of 
demand as well as adapt to supply chain disruptions. 
 Lean supply chain.  Focused on eliminating non-value-added 
activities to create an efficient, low-cost supply chain. 
 Near-sourcing. Using nearby suppliers shortens the supply 
chain, reducing transportation time and cost, reducing supply 
chain  inventory, reducing the risk of disruptions, and increasing 
responsiveness. 
 Purchasing is “critical to supply chain efficiency because it is the 
job of purchasing to select suppliers and then establish mutu-
ally  beneficial relationships with them. Without good suppliers and 
 without superior purchasing, supply chains cannot compete in 
today’s  marketplace.” Purchasing is also very involved in product 
design and development work. Many “manufacturers have found out 
that manufacturing costs can be reduced, product quality maximized, 
and new products brought to market at a much faster rate if purchas-
ing brings key suppliers into the product design and development at 
the earliest stage of the process.” And purchasing is directly involved 
in the implementation of e-commerce systems. 
 Source: Based on Kevin R. Fitzgerald, “Purchasing Occupies Key Position in 
Supply Chains,”  Supply Chain Yearbook 2000 (New York: Cahners Business 
Information, 2000), p. 21. 
 Strategic Responsibilities 
 Top management has certain strategic responsibilities that have a major impact on the suc-
cess not only of supply chain management but also of the business itself. These strategies 
include:
 Supply chain strategy alignment:  Aligning supply and distribution strategies with 
organizational strategy and deciding on the degree to which outsourcing will be 
employed.  
 Network configuration:  Determining the number and location of suppliers, warehouses, 
production/operations facilities, and distribution centers. 
 Information technology:  Integrating systems and processes throughout the supply chain 
to share information, including forecasts, inventory status, tracking of shipments, and 
events. 
 Products and services: Making decisions on new product and services selection and 
design. 
 Capacity planning: Assessing long-term capacity needs, including when and how much 
will be needed and the degree of flexibility to incorporate. 
 Strategic partnerships: Partnership choices, level of partnering, and degree of formality. 
 Distribution strategy:  Deciding whether to use centralized or decentralized distribution, 
and deciding whether to use the organization’s own facilities and equipment for distribu-
tion or to use third-party logistics providers. 
 Uncertainty and risk reduction:  Identifying potential sources of risk and deciding the 
amount of risk that is acceptable. 
 Key Tactical and Operational Responsibilities 
 The key tactical and operational responsibilities are outlined in  Table 15.1 . 
 LO15.9  List several strategic, 
tactical, and operational 
responsibilities related to 
managing the supply chain.

660 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 15.8 PROCUREMENT 
 The purchasing department of an organization is responsible for obtaining the materials, parts, 
supplies, and services needed to produce a product or provide a service. You can get some 
idea of the importance of purchasing when you consider that, in manufacturing, upwards of 
60 percent of the cost of finished goods comes from purchased parts and materials. Further-
more, the percentages for purchased inventories are even higher for retail and wholesale com-
panies, sometimes exceeding 90 percent. Nonetheless, the importance of purchasing is more 
than just the cost of goods purchased; other important factors include the  quality  of goods and 
services and the  timing  of deliveries of goods or services, both of which can have a significant 
impact on operations. 
 Among the duties of purchasing are identifying sources of supply, negotiating contracts, 
maintaining a database of suppliers, obtaining goods and services that meet or exceed opera-
tions requirements in a timely and cost-efficient manner, and managing suppliers. 
 Purchasing Interfaces 
 Purchasing has interfaces with a number of other functional areas, as well as with outside sup-
pliers. It is the connecting link between the organization and its suppliers. In this capacity, it 
exchanges information with suppliers and functional areas. The interactions between purchas-
ing and these other areas are briefly summarized in the following paragraphs. 
 Operations  constitute the main source of requests for purchased materials, and close 
cooperation between these units and the purchasing department is vital if quality, quantity, 
and delivery goals are to be met. Cancellations, changes in specifications, or changes in quan-
tity or delivery times must be communicated immediately for purchasing to be effective. 
 The purchasing department may require the assistance of the  legal  department in contract 
negotiations, in drawing up bid specifications for nonroutine purchases, and in helping inter-
pret legislation on pricing, product liability, and contracts with suppliers. 
 Accounting is responsible for handling payments to suppliers and must be notified 
promptly when goods are received in order to take advantage of possible discounts. In many 
firms,  data processing  is handled by the accounting department, which keeps inventory 
records, checks invoices, and monitors vendor performance. 
 LO15.10 Discuss procurement 
in terms of the purchasing 
interfaces, the purchasing 
cycle, ethics, and centralized 
versus decentralized decision 
making.
 Tactical Responsibilities 
  Forecasting: Prepare and evaluate forecasts. 
  Sourcing: Choose suppliers and some make-or-buy decisions. 
  Operations planning: Coordinate the external supply chain and internal operations. 
  Managing inventory: Decide where in the supply chain to store the various types of inventory 
(raw  materials, semifinished goods, finished goods). 
  Transportation planning: Match capacity with demand. 
  Collaborating: Work with supply chain partners to coordinate plans. 
 Operational Responsibilities 
  Scheduling: Short-term scheduling of operations and distribution. 
  Receiving: Management of inbound deliveries from suppliers. 
  Transforming: Conversion of inputs into outputs. 
  Order fulfilling: Linking production resources and/or inventory to specific customer orders. 
  Managing inventory: Maintenance and replenishment activities. 
  Shipping: Management of outbound deliveries to distribution centers and/or customers. 
  Information sharing: Exchange of information with supply chain partners. 
  Controlling: Control of quality, inventory, and other key variables and implementing corrective action, 
including variation reduction, when necessary. 
 TABLE 15.1 
 Key tactical and operational 
responsibilities 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
661
 Design and engineering usually prepare material specifications, which must be commu-
nicated to purchasing. Because of its contacts with suppliers, purchasing is often in a position 
to pass information about new products and materials improvements on to design person-
nel. Also, design and purchasing people may work closely to determine whether changes in 
specifications, design, or materials can reduce the cost of purchased items (see the following 
section on value analysis). 
 Receiving  checks incoming shipments of purchased items to determine whether quality, 
quantity, and timing objectives have been met, and it moves the goods to temporary storage. 
Purchasing must be notified when shipments are late; accounting must be notified when 
shipments are received so that payments can be made; and both purchasing and accounting 
must be apprised of current information on continuing vendor evaluation. 
 Suppliers  or vendors work closely with purchasing to learn what materials will be pur-
chased and what kinds of specifications will be required in terms of quality, quantity, and 
deliveries. Purchasing must rate vendors on cost, reliability, and so on (see the later section on 
vendor analysis). Good supplier relations can be important on rush orders and changes, and 
vendors provide a good source of information on product and material improvements. 
 Figure 15.3 depicts the purchasing interfaces. 
 The Purchasing Cycle 
 The  purchasing cycle  begins with a request from within the organization to purchase mate-
rial, equipment, supplies, or other items from outside the organization, and the cycle ends 
when the purchasing department is notified that a shipment has been received in satisfactory 
condition. The main steps in the cycle are these:
 1. 
 Purchasing receives the requisition. The requisition includes ( a ) a description of the 
item or material desired, ( b ) the quantity and quality necessary, ( c ) desired delivery 
dates, and ( d ) who is requesting the purchase. 
 2. 
 Purchasing selects a supplier. The purchasing department must identify suppliers who 
have the capability of supplying the desired goods. If no suppliers are currently listed 
in the files, new ones must be sought. Vendor ratings may be referred to in choosing 
among vendors, or perhaps rating information can be relayed to the vendor with the 
thought of upgrading future performance. 
 Purchasing cycle  Series of 
steps that begin with a request 
for purchase and end with noti-
fication of shipment received in 
satisfactory condition.  
 FIGURE 15.3 
 Purchasing interfaces 
The firm
Legal
Accounting
Design
Receiving
Operations
Data
processing
Purchasing
Suppliers

662 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 3. 
 Purchasing places the order with a vendor. If the order involves a large expenditure, 
particularly for a one-time purchase of equipment, for example, vendors will usually be 
asked to bid on the job, and operating and design personnel may be asked to assist in 
negotiations with a vendor. Large-volume, continuous-usage items may be covered by 
blanket purchase orders, which often involve annual negotiation of prices with deliveries 
subject to request throughout the year. Moderate-volume items may also have blanket 
purchase orders, or they may be handled on an individual basis. Small purchases may 
be handled directly between the operating unit requesting a purchased item and the sup-
plier, although some control should be exercised over those purchases so they don’t get 
out of hand. 
 4. 
 Monitoring orders. Routine follow-up on orders, especially large orders or those with 
lengthy lead times, allows the purchasing department to project potential delays and 
relay that information to the operating units. Conversely, the purchasing department 
must communicate changes in quantities and delivery needs of the operating units to 
suppliers to allow them time to change their plans. 
 5. 
 Receiving orders. Receiving must check incoming shipments for quality and quantity. 
It must notify purchasing, accounting, and the operating unit that requested the goods. If 
the goods are not satisfactory, they may have to be returned to the supplier or subjected 
to further inspection. 
 Centralized versus Decentralized Purchasing 
 Purchasing can be centralized or decentralized. Centralized purchasing means that purchasing 
is handled by one special department. Decentralized purchasing means that individual depart-
ments or separate locations handle their own purchasing requirements. 
 Centralized purchasing may be able to obtain lower prices than decentralized units if the 
higher volume created by combining orders enables it to take advantage of quantity discounts 
offered on large orders. Centralized purchasing may also be able to obtain better service and 
closer attention from suppliers. In addition, centralized purchasing often enables companies 
to assign certain categories of items to specialists, who tend to be more efficient because they 
are able to concentrate their efforts on relatively few items instead of spreading themselves 
across many items. 
 Decentralized purchasing  has the advantage of awareness of differing “local” needs 
and being better able to respond to those needs. Decentralized purchasing usually can offer 
quicker response than centralized purchasing. Where locations are widely scattered, decen-
tralized purchasing may be able to save on transportation costs by buying locally, which has 
the added attraction of creating goodwill in the community. 
 Some organizations manage to take advantage of both centralization and decentraliza-
tion by permitting individual units to handle certain items while centralizing purchases of 
other items. For example, small orders and rush orders may be handled locally or by depart-
ments, while centralized purchases would be used for high-volume, high-value items for 
which discounts are applicable or specialists can provide better service than local buyers or 
departments.  
 Ethics in Purchasing 
 Ethical behavior is important in all aspects of business. This is certainly true in purchas-
ing, where the temptations for unethical behavior can be enormous. Buyers often hold great 
power, and salespeople are often eager to make a sale. Unless both parties act in an ethical 
manner, the potential for abuse is very real. Furthermore, with increased globalization, the 
challenges are particularly great because a behavior regarded as customary in one country 
might be regarded as unethical in another country. 
 The National Association of Purchasing Management has established a set of guidelines 
for ethical behavior. (See  Table 15.2 .) As you read through the list, you get insight into the 
scope of ethics issues in purchasing. 
 Centralized purchasing  
Purchasing is handled by one 
special department. 
 Decentralized purchasing  
Individual departments or 
 separate locations handle their 
own purchasing requirements. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
663
 15.9 E-BUSINESS 
  The commercial blossoming of the Internet has led to an explosion of Internet-related 
 activities, many of which have a direct impact on organizations’ supply chains, even if 
those organizations aren’t themselves users of the Internet.   E-business   refers to the use of 
E-business The use of 
 electronic technology to 
 facilitate business transactions.
 PRINCIPLES 
 Integrity in Your Decisions and Actions 
 Value for Your Employer 
 Loyalty to Your Profession 
STANDARDS 
 1.  Perceived Impropriety. Prevent the intent and appearance of unethical or 
 compromising conduct in relationships, actions, and communications. 
 2.  Conflicts of Interest. Ensure that any personal, business, or other activity does not 
conflict with the lawful interests of your employer. 
 3.  Issues of Influence. Avoid behaviors or actions that may negatively influence, or 
appear to influence, supply management decisions. 
 4.  Responsibilities to Your Employer. Uphold fiduciary and other responsibilities 
using reasonable care and granted authority to deliver value to your employer. 
 5.  Supplier and Customer Relationships. Promote positive supplier and customer 
relationships. 
 6.  Sustainability and Social Responsibility. Champion social responsibility and 
 sustainability practices in supply management. 
 7.  Confidential and Proprietary Information. Protect confidential and proprietary 
information.  
 8.  Reciprocity. Avoid improper reciprocal agreements. 
 9.  Applicable Laws, Regulations, and Trade Agreements. Know and obey the letter 
and spirit of laws, regulations, and trade agreements applicable to supply management.  
 10.  Professional Competence. Develop skills, expand knowledge, and conduct business 
that demonstrates competence and promotes the supply management profession. 
 TABLE 15.2 
 Guidelines for ethical behavior in 
purchasing 
 Reprinted with permission from the pub-
lisher. The Institute for Supply Manage-
ment ™ ,  Principles and Standards of Ethical 
Supply Management Conduct. Adopted 
January 2012. 
 We have always maintained an open chan-
nel of communications with suppliers to set 
expectations. Today, in an increasingly inter-
connected world market, the expectations for all players across the 
entire supply chain go up. Therefore, we are both reaffirming our exist-
ing policies and instituting some new practices, which are spelled out 
in the following Supplier Conduct Principles. These principles establish 
for our suppliers the minimum standards we expect from them as a 
condition of doing business with IBM. IBM will have the right to take 
action with suppliers that fail to comply with these principles, including 
terminating our relationship with them. 
 Source: Reprinted courtesy of International Business Machines Corporation. 
Copyright © 2008 International Business Machines Corporation. 
 From its inception almost a century ago, IBM has been based on a set 
of fundamental values. IBM’s values shape and define our company and 
permeate all of our relationships—between our company’s people and 
our shareholders, our clients, the communities where our people live 
and work, and among our network of suppliers. 
 Within our supply chain relationships, we know that our company’s 
sizable purchasing power is a unique resource that we must manage 
responsibly, and we do. IBM spends nearly $2 billion a year with diverse 
suppliers, for example, greater than any other technology company. Yet 
more than managing our spending, we have a responsibility to hold 
 ourselves—and our suppliers—to high standards of behavior. This 
means complying with all applicable laws and regulations. But it goes 
beyond that. It entails a strong commitment to work with suppliers to 
encourage sound practices and develop sound global markets. 
 READING 
 IBM’s Supply Chain Social Responsibility 

664 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
electronic technology to facilitate business transactions. E-business, or e-commerce, involves 
the interaction of different business organizations as well as the interaction of individuals 
with business organizations. Applications include Internet buying and selling, e-mail, order 
and shipment tracking, and electronic data interchange. In addition, companies use e-business 
to promote their products or services, and to provide information about them. Delivery firms 
have seen the demand for their services increase dramatically due to e-business. Among them 
are giants UPS and FedEx. 
 Table 15.3 lists some of the numerous advantages of e-business. 
 There are two essential features of e-business: the Web site and order fulfillment. Compa-
nies may invest considerable time and effort in front-end design (the Web site), but the back 
end (order fulfillment) is at least as important. It involves order processing, billing, inventory 
management, warehousing, packing, shipping, and delivery. 
 Many of the problems that occur with Internet selling are supply related. The ability to 
order quickly creates an expectation in customers that the remainder of the process will pro-
ceed smoothly and quickly. But the same capability that enables quick ordering also enables 
demand fluctuations that can inject a certain amount of chaos into the system, almost guar-
anteeing that there won’t be a smooth or quick delivery. Oftentimes the rate at which orders 
come in via the Internet greatly exceeds an organization’s ability to fulfill them. Not too long 
ago, Toys “R” Us had that experience during the busy Christmas season; it ended up offering 
thousands of disappointed customers a $100 coupon to make up for it. 
 In the early days of Internet selling, many organizations thought they could avoid bearing 
the costs of holding inventories by acting solely as intermediaries, having their suppliers ship 
directly to their customers. Although this approach worked for some companies, it failed for 
others, usually because suppliers ran out of certain items. This led some companies to rethink 
the strategy. Industry giants such as  Amazon.com  and  Barnesandnoble.com  built huge ware-
houses around the country so they could maintain greater control over their inventories. Still 
others are outsourcing fulfillment, turning over that portion of their business to third-party 
fulfillment operators such as former catalog fulfillment company Fingerhut, now a unit of 
Federated Department Stores. 
 Companies and publishers have a global presence and the customer has global choices and easy access to 
information. 
 Companies can improve competitiveness and quality of service by allowing access to their services 
any place, any time. Companies also have the ability to monitor customers’ choices and requests 
electronically. 
 Companies can analyze the interest in various products based on the number of hits and requests for 
information. 
 Companies can collect detailed information about clients’ preferences, which enables mass customization 
and personalized products. An example is the purchase of PCs over the Web, where the buyer specifies 
the final configuration. 
 Supply chain response times are shortened. The biggest impact is on products that can be delivered directly 
on the Web, such as forms of publishing and software distribution. 
 The roles of the intermediary and sometimes the traditional retailer or service provider are reduced or elimi-
nated entirely in a process called  disintermediation. This process reduces costs and adds alternative 
purchasing options. 
 Substantial cost savings and substantial price reductions related to the reduction of transaction costs can be 
realized. Companies that provide purchasing and support through the Web can save significant personnel 
costs. 
 E-commerce allows the creation of virtual companies that distribute only through the Web, thus reducing 
costs.  Amazon.com and other net vendors can afford to sell for a lower price because they do not need to 
maintain retail stores and, in many cases, warehouse space. 
 The playing field is leveled for small companies that lack significant resources to invest in infrastructure and 
marketing. 
 Source: Reprinted by permission from David Simchi-Levi, Philip Kaminsky, and Edith Simchi-Levi,  Designing and Managing the Supply 
Chain: Concepts, Strategies, and Case Studies (New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000), p. 235. 
 TABLE 15.3 
 Advantages of e-business 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
665
 Using third-party fulfillment means losing control over fulfillment. It might also result 
in fulfillers substituting their standards for the company they are serving, and using the ful-
filler’s shipping price structure. On the other hand, an e-commerce company may not have the 
resources or infrastructure to do the job itself. Another alternative might be to form a strategic 
partnership with a bricks-and-mortar company. This can be a quick way to jump-start an 
e-commerce business. In any case, somewhere in the supply chain there has to be a bricks-
and-mortar facility. 
 A growing portion of e-business involves business-to-business (B2B) commerce rather 
than business-to-consumer commerce. To facilitate business-to-business commerce, B2B 
marketplaces are created.  Table 15.4 describes B2B marketplace enablers. 
 B2B exchanges can improve supply chain visibility to trading partners from a single point 
of access, facilitating the development of common standards and data formats for  schedules, 
product codes, location codes, and performance criteria. And e-businesses focusing on 
 transportation services can benefit from having an efficient hub for collaboration between 
 shippers and transportation providers, helping to translate customer shipment forecasts into 
more predictable demand for equipment, and enabling carriers to deploy their equipment 
more effectively. 
 Fingerhut is now a major e-commerce fulfill-
ment player, thanks as much to its massive 
data warehouse of customer information as 
to its four million square feet of high-tech warehouse space. 
 In addition to handling its own business, Fingerhut handles the 
back end of other high-volume retailers, such as Walmart and eToys. 
Their massive warehouse in St. Cloud, MN, can process as many as 
30,000 items per hour. 
 Big shippers like UPS and FedEx have also successfully branched 
into e-commerce fulfillment. In addition to their traditional shipping 
niche, they’ll warehouse your inventory for you, handle all back-end 
tasks, and offer complete solutions including Web site design, devel-
opment, and hosting. Their e-commerce edge came not only from 
their overnight, single-order delivery infrastructure, but also from hav-
ing already developed package-tracking software. 
 Hiring a fulfillment giant is de rigueur these days for huge “click 
and bricks” retailers like Walmart and Pier One, who have to switch in 
a hurry from their old operating model of moving big pallets of goods 
to stores to moving single items to individuals. 
 Third-party fulfillers are treasured for their efficiencies and 
advanced technology. But some can be unresponsive and not always 
capable of supporting [clients’] software. There has also been some 
grumbling in  Barron’s  that the big third-party fulfillers are doomed 
middlemen, a mere transitory phase for e-commerce. 
 Source: Excerpted from Judith Silverstein, “Desperately Seeking 
 E-Fulfillment,”  Digital Chicago, November/December 1999, pp. 29 and 30. 
 READING 
 Desperately Seeking E-Fulfillment 
 Behind the scenes of e-commerce: Order processing and 
fulfillment at Fingerhut. 

666 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 Type 
 Description 
 Financial 
 Provide financial and other resources for Web-enhanced 
commerce. 
 Technology 
 Provide software, applications, and expertise necessary to create 
B2B marketplace. 
 Source: Adapted from  Forbes, July 2000. 
 TABLE 15.4 
 B2B marketplace enablers 
 “In 1999, IBM did what would seem to be a near impossible task. It 
began doing business with 12,000 suppliers over the Internet—sending 
purchase orders, receiving invoices and paying suppliers, all using the 
World Wide Web as its transaction-processing network.” 
 Setting up 12,000 suppliers to do business on the Internet was rela-
tively easy compared to the resistance of suppliers to link to IBM via EDI 
(electronic data interchange). Suppliers who didn’t have large contracts 
with IBM balked at EDI because of the expense of special software and 
a VAN (value-added network) that were needed to do EDI. No such prob-
lem with using the Internet: Suppliers don’t need special software or a 
costly VAN to do business with IBM. 
 The Internet’s simplicity reduces costs for IBM and its suppliers. IBM 
estimated that it saved $500 million in 1999 by moving procurement 
to the Web, and believes that is only the tip of the iceberg. Much of 
the savings came from eliminating intermediaries. IBM uses the Web to 
manage multiple tiers of suppliers and as a tool to work with suppliers 
to improve quality and reduce costs. 
 But cost reduction was not the only reason IBM switched to Internet 
procurement. Web-based procurement is a key part of its supplier man-
agement strategy: IBM sees great value in using the Internet to collabo-
rate with suppliers and tap into their expertise much more rapidly than 
previously. “The Internet will also allow IBM to collaborate with suppli-
ers over scheduling issues. If the company wants to increase production 
of a certain product it will be able to check with component suppliers 
and determine if suppliers can support the increase. If there are sched-
ule cutbacks, [it] will be able to notify suppliers almost instantaneously 
and excess inventory can be avoided.” 
 And although supply chains are viewed as sequential, IBM doesn’t 
necessarily want to manage them that way. Rather, it wants to use 
the Internet to manage multiple tiers of suppliers simultaneously. An 
example of this is how it deals with CMs (contract manufacturers). 
The company sends forecasts and purchase orders to the CMs for the 
printed circuit boards they supply. It also gives all the component manu-
facturers the requirements and they ship parts directly to the CM. The 
company estimates it saved in excess of $150 million in 1999. “The 
savings were the difference between contract manufacturers’ price for 
components used on the boards and IBM’s price that it had negotiated 
with component suppliers.” 
 Because the Internet is becoming crucial to IBM’s supplier- 
management strategies, IBM is trying to make it easier for suppliers 
 READING 
 E-Procurement at IBM 
to do business over the Web. The company 
has developed a Web-based portal to provide 
a single entry point to IBM. As is the case with 
most large companies, IBM has multiple interfaces with its suppliers, 
including engineering, quality, as well as purchasing, and typically sup-
pliers have to connect to separate URLs (universal resource locators) in 
a company. IBM’s portal provides a single point of entry for suppliers, 
making it easier for suppliers to do business with IBM and increasing 
the speed of the supply chain. Speed is vitally important in the electron-
ics industry due to very short product life cycles. If products don’t get to 
the market quickly, most of the profit opportunity is lost. 
 Still another benefit envisioned by IBM will be the ability to form 
strategic alliances with some of its suppliers. In the past, the fact that 
many suppliers used by IBM for its production processes were as far 
as 12,000 miles away made it difficult to build strategic alliances with 
them. IBM believes that using the Internet will strengthen relations and 
enable it to develop alliances. 
 “The Internet also will play an important role in IBM’s general pro-
curement . . . IBM was doing EDI with core production suppliers, but 
not with . . . other forms of general procurement. Purchasers were still 
faxing and phoning orders, which is timely and costly.” 
 Additional cost savings come from small volume, one-of-a-kind 
special purchases, because of the speed and ease of using the Internet. 
 Web-based procurement will eliminate mistakes that occur during 
the procurement process due to having to type or enter prices and other 
figures on paper documents. 
 Questions 
    1. How did IBM achieve cost reductions by using the Internet for 
procurement?  
   2. What advantage did IBM’s use of the Internet have for small 
suppliers? 
   3. Aside from cost reduction, what major value does IBM envision for 
its interaction with suppliers? 
   4. How does use of the Internet for procurement reduce mistakes? 
Indicate how using the Internet made that benefit possible. 
 5. How does having a Web-based portal help IBM’s suppliers? 
 Source: Based on James Carbone, “E-Procurement at IBM: POs Are Just the 
Beginning,”  Purchasing 128, no. 4 (March 23, 2000), p. S50. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
667
 15.10 SUPPLIER MANAGEMENT 
 Reliable and trustworthy suppliers are a vital link in an effective supply chain. Timely deliver-
ies of goods or services and high quality are just two of the ways that suppliers can contribute 
to effective operations. A purchasing manager may function as an “external operations man-
ager,” working with suppliers to coordinate supplier operations and buyer needs. 
 In this section, various aspects of supplier management are described, including supplier 
audits, supplier certification, and supplier partnering. The section starts with an aspect that 
can have important ramifications for the entire organization: choosing suppliers. 
 Choosing Suppliers 
 In many respects, choosing a vendor involves taking into account many of the same factors asso-
ciated with making a major purchase (e.g., a car or stereo system). A company considers price, 
quality, the supplier’s reputation, past experience with the supplier, and service after the sale. The 
main difference is that a company, because of the quantities it orders and operations requirements, 
often provides suppliers with detailed specifications of the materials or parts it wants instead of 
buying items off the shelf, although most organizations buy standard items that way. The main 
factors a company takes into account when it selects a vendor are outlined in  Table 15.5 .  
 Because different factors are important for different situations, purchasing must decide, 
with the help of operations, the importance of each factor (i.e., how much weight to give to 
each factor), and then rate potential vendors according to how well they can be expected to 
perform against this list. This process is called   vendor analysis  ,  and it is conducted periodi-
cally, or whenever there is a significant change in the weighting assigned to the various factors.  
 Supplier Audits 
 Periodic audits of suppliers are a means of keeping current on suppliers’ production (or ser-
vice) capabilities, quality and delivery problems and resolutions, and suppliers’ performance 
on other criteria. If an audit reveals problem areas, a buyer can attempt to find a solution 
before more serious problems develop. Among the factors typically covered by a supplier 
audit are management style, quality assurance, materials management, the design process 
used, process improvement policies, and procedures for corrective action and follow-up. 
 Supplier audits are also an important first step in supplier certification programs. 
 LO15.11  Briefly describe 
the key aspects of supplier 
management.
 Vendor analysis  Evaluating 
the sources of supply in terms 
of price, quality, reputation, and 
service. 
 Factor 
 Typical Questions 
 Quality and quality 
assurance 
 What procedures does the supplier have for quality control and quality 
assurance? 
 
 Are quality problems and corrective actions documented? 
 Flexibility 
 How flexible is the supplier in handling changes in delivery schedules, quantity, 
and product or service changes? 
 Location 
 Is the supplier nearby? 
 Price 
 Are prices reasonable given the entire package the supplier will provide? 
 
 Is the supplier willing to negotiate prices? 
 
 Is the supplier willing to cooperate to reduce costs? 
 Product or service 
changes 
 How much advance notification does the supplier require for product or service 
changes? 
 Reputation and 
financial stability 
 What is the reputation of the supplier? 
 How financially stable is the supplier? 
 Lead times and 
on-time delivery 
 What lead times can the supplier provide? 
 What procedures does the supplier have for assuring on-time deliveries? 
 
 What procedures does the supplier have for documenting and correcting 
problems? 
 Other accounts 
 Is the supplier heavily dependent on other customers, causing a risk of giving 
 priority to those needs over ours? 
 TABLE 15.5 
 Choosing a supplier 

668 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 Supplier Certification 
 Supplier certification is a detailed examination of the policies and capabilities of a supplier. 
The certification process verifies that a supplier meets or exceeds the requirements of a buyer. 
This is generally important in supplier relationships, but it is particularly important when 
buyers are seeking to establish a long-term relationship with suppliers. Certified suppliers are 
sometimes referred to as  world class  suppliers. One advantage of using certified suppliers is 
that the buyer can eliminate much or all of the inspection and testing of delivered goods. And 
although problems with supplier goods or services might not be totally eliminated, there is 
much less risk than with noncertified suppliers. 
 Rather than develop their own certification programs, some companies rely on standard indus-
try certifications such as ISO 9000, perhaps the most widely used international certification.  
 Supplier Relationship Management 
 Purchasing has the ultimate responsibility for establishing and maintaining good supplier 
relationships. The type of relationship is often related to the length of a contract between 
buyers and sellers. Short-term contracts involve competitive bidding. Companies post spec-
ifications and potential suppliers bid on the contracts. Suppliers are kept at arm’s length, 
and the relationship is minimal. Business may be conducted through computerized interac-
tion. Medium-term contracts often involve ongoing relationships. Long-term contracts often 
evolve into partnerships, with buyers and sellers cooperating on various issues that tend to 
benefit both parties. Increasingly, business organizations are establishing long-term relation-
ships with suppliers in certain situations that are based on  strategic considerations. 
 Some business organizations use  supplier forums to educate potential suppliers about the 
organization’s policies and requirements and to enhance opportunities for receiving contracts. 
Others use supplier forums to share information, strengthen cooperation, and encourage joint 
thinking. And some organizations use a  supplier code of conduct  that requires suppliers to 
maintain safe working conditions, treat workers with respect and dignity, and have production 
processes that do not harm workers, customers, or the environment. 
 Business organizations are becoming increasingly aware of the importance of building 
good relationships with their suppliers. In the past, too many firms regarded their suppliers 
as adversaries and dealt with them on that basis. One lesson learned from the Japanese is that 
numerous benefits derive from good supplier relations, including supplier flexibility in terms 
of accepting changes in delivery schedules, quality, and quantities. Moreover, suppliers can 
often help identify problems and offer suggestions for solving them. Thus, simply choosing 
and switching suppliers on the basis of price is a very shortsighted approach to handling an 
ongoing need. 
 Keeping good relations with suppliers is increasingly recognized as an important factor in 
maintaining a competitive edge. Many companies are adopting a view of suppliers as part-
ners. This viewpoint stresses a stable relationship with relatively few reliable suppliers who 
can provide high-quality supplies, maintain precise delivery schedules, and remain flexible 
relative to changes in productive specifications and delivery schedules. A comparison of the 
contrasting views of suppliers is provided in  Table 15.6 . 
 Supplier Partnerships 
 More and more business organizations are seeking to establish partnerships with other organi-
zations in their supply chains. This implies fewer suppliers, longer-term relationships, sharing 
of information (forecasts, sales data, problem alerts), and cooperation in planning. Among the 
possible benefits are higher quality, increased delivery speed and reliability, lower inventories, 
lower costs, higher profits, and, in general, improved operations. 
 There are a number of obstacles to supplier partnerships, not the least of which is that 
because many of the benefits go to the buyer, suppliers may be hesitant to enter into such 
relationships. Suppliers may have to increase their investment in equipment, which might put 
a strain on cash flow. Another possibility is that the cultures of the buyer and supplier might 
be quite different and not lend themselves to such an arrangement. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
669
 Strategic Partnering 
 Strategic partnering   occurs when two or more business organizations that have comple-
mentary products or services that would  strategically  benefit the others agree to join so that 
each may realize a strategic benefit. One way this occurs is when a supplier agrees to hold 
inventory for a customer, thereby reducing the customer’s cost of holding the inventory, in 
exchange for the customer’s agreeing to a long-term commitment, thereby relieving the sup-
plier of the costs that would be needed to continually find new customers, negotiate prices and 
services, and so on. 
 Collaborative planning, forecasting, and replenishment (CPFR) is a contractual agreement 
used to achieve supply chain integration by cooperative management of inventory in the sup-
ply chain by major supply chain partners. It involves information sharing, forecasting, and 
joint decision making. If done well, it can lead to cost savings on inventory, logistics, and 
merchandising for the partners. 
 Strategic partnering  Two or 
more business organizations that 
have complementary products 
or services join so that each may 
realize a strategic benefit. 
 Aspect 
 Adversary 
 Partner 
 Number of suppliers 
 Many; play one off against the others 
 One or a few 
 Length of relationship 
 May be brief 
 Long-term 
 Low price 
 Major consideration 
 Moderately important 
 Reliability 
 May not be high 
 High 
 Openness 
 Low 
 High 
 Quality 
 May be unreliable; buyer inspects 
 At the source; vendor certified 
 Volume of business 
 May be low due to many suppliers 
 High 
 Flexibility 
 Relatively low 
 Relatively high 
 Location 
 Widely dispersed 
 Nearness is important for short lead 
times and quick service 
 TABLE 15.6 
 Supplier as adversary versus 
supplier as partner 
 Glendale, CA—01/25/02—The NestléUSA—Beverage Division and 
Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc., announced today that they have 
formed a long-term strategic operations alliance that will enable both 
 companies to significantly increase manufacturing and supply chain 
 efficiency, while maintaining high quality products for their respective 
juice businesses. 
 “Ocean Spray shares many of our same business values, in 
 particular their commitment to high quality manufacturing standards,” 
said Mike Mitchell, President and General Manager of NestléUSA— 
Beverage Division. “By capitalizing upon each other’s best practices, we 
feel both Nestlé and Ocean Spray will be better equipped to grow in this 
highly aggressive juice category in which we compete.” 
 READING 
 NestléUSA and Ocean Spray Form Strategic Operations Alliance 
 Within the strategic operations alliance, 
Nestlé will transition over time its manufactur-
ing of  Libby’s Juicy Juice and Libby’s Kerns 
Nectars to Ocean Spray facilities. The companies will also pursue collab-
orative procurement of common raw and packaging materials, and com-
mon operating supplies, as well as shared logistics to increase process 
efficiency across the supply chain. 
 “This alliance between two great companies creates a powerful 
synergy,” said Ocean Spray President and Chief Operating Officer Randy 
Papadellis. “By bringing Nestlé juice production into our plants and join-
ing forces with them on purchasing and distribution, we will establish 
an economy of scale that will boost the profitability of both companies.” 
 With Ocean Spray leading the category of shelf stable juices and 
 Libby’s Juicy Juice being the leader in 100% juice for kids, the operations 
alliance is expected to create added value of mutual benefit. The strategic 
operations alliance will be governed by a leadership team and an executive 
operating committee, both comprised of members from each company. 
 Source:  www.Nestleusa.com ,  www.NestleNewsroom.com . 

670 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 15.11 INVENTORY MANAGEMENT  
 Inventories are a key component of supply chains. Although inventory management is dis-
cussed in more detail in several other chapters, certain aspects of inventory management are 
particularly important for supply chain management. They relate to the location of inventories 
in the supply chain, the speed at which inventory moves through the supply chain, and dealing 
with the effect of demand variability on inventories. 
 The location of inventories is an important factor for effective material flow through the 
chain and for order fulfillment. Often trade-offs must be made. One approach is to use cen-
tralized inventories, which generally results in lower overall inventory than there would be if 
decentralized inventories were used, because with decentralized inventories, one location may 
be understocked while another location is overstocked. Conversely, decentralized locations 
can provide faster delivery and generally lower shipping costs. 
 The rate at which material moves through a supply chain is referred to as   inventory 
 velocity . The greater the velocity, the lower the inventory holding costs and the faster orders 
are filled and goods are turned into cash. 
 Without careful management, demand variations can easily cause inventory fluctuations to 
get out of control. Variations in demand at the consumer end of a supply chain tend to ripple 
backwards through the chain. Moreover, periodic ordering and reaction to shortages can mag-
nify variations, causing inventories to oscillate in increasingly larger swings. This is known as 
the   bullwhip effect  ,  because the pattern of demand variation is analogous to the motion of a 
bullwhip in response to a slight jerking of the handle. Consequently, shortages and surpluses 
occur throughout the chain, resulting in higher costs and lower customer satisfaction, unless 
preventive action is taken. The bullwhip effect is illustrated in  Figure 15.4 . 
 The causes of inventory variability can be not only demand variability but also factors such 
as quality problems, labor problems, unusual weather conditions, and delays in shipments of 
goods. Adding to this can be communication delays, incomplete communications, and lack of 
coordination of activities among organizations in the supply chain. 
 Still other factors can contribute to the bullwhip effect. They include forecast inaccuracies, 
overreaction to stockouts (customers often order more than they need after experiencing a 
shortage), order batching to save on ordering and transportation costs (e.g., full truckloads, 
economic lot sizes), sales incentives and promotions, and service and product mix changes, 
which can create uneven demand patterns, and liberal return policies. 
 Good supply chain management can overcome the bullwhip effect by  strategic buffering of 
inventory, information sharing, and inventory replenishment based on needs. An example of 
strategic buffering would be holding the bulk of retail inventory at a distribution center rather 
than at retail outlets. That way, inventories of specific retail outlets can be replenished as 
needed based on point-of-sale information from retail outlets as well as information on retail 
outlet inventories. 
 This is sometimes accomplished using   vendor-managed inventory (VMI) . Vendors track 
goods shipped to distributors and retail outlets, and monitor retail supplies, enabling the 
 Inventory velocity  The speed 
at which goods move through a 
supply chain. 
 Bullwhip effect  Inventory 
oscillations become 
 progressively larger looking 
backward through the supply 
chain.  
 Vendor-managed inventory 
(VMI)  Vendors monitor goods 
and replenish retail inventories 
when supplies are low. 
 FIGURE 15.4 
 The bullwhip effect: demand 
variations begin at the customer 
end of the chain and become 
increasingly large as they radiate 
backward through the chain 
Demand
Final
customer
Backward
effect
Initial
supplier

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
671
 vendors to replenish inventories when supplies are low. The practice is common in the retail 
sector, and is also used in other phases of supply chains. VMI lets companies reduce overhead 
by shifting responsibility for owning, managing, and replenishing inventory to vendors. Not 
only do assets decrease, the amount of working capital needed to operate a business also 
decreases. 
 15.12 ORDER FULFILLMENT  
 Order fulfillment  refers to the processes involved in responding to customer orders. 
 Fulfillment time can be an important criterion for customers. It is often a function of the 
degree of customization required. Here are some common approaches:
 •  Engineer-to-Order (ETO). With this approach, products are designed and built 
 according to customer specifications. This approach is frequently used for large-scale 
construction projects, custom homebuilding, home remodeling, and for products made 
in job shops. The fulfillment time can be relatively lengthy because of the nature of the 
project, as well as the presence of other jobs ahead of the new one. 
 •  Make-to-Order (MTO). With this approach, a standard product design is used, but 
production of the final product is linked to the final customer’s specifications. This 
approach is used by aircraft manufacturers such as Boeing. Fulfillment time is generally 
less than with ETO fulfillment, but still fairly long. 
 •  Assemble-to-Order (ATO). With this approach, products are assembled to customer 
specifications from a stock of standard and modular components. Computer manufac-
turers such as Dell operate using this approach. Fulfillment times are fairly short, often 
a week or less. 
 •  Make-to-Stock (MTS). With this approach, production is based on a forecast, and 
products are sold to the customer from finished goods stock. This approach is used in 
department stores and supermarkets. The order fulfillment time is immediate. 
A  variation of this is e-commerce; although goods have already been produced, there is 
a lag in fulfillment to allow for shipping. 
 Order fulfillment  The 
 processes involved in responding 
to customer orders. 
 Employees assemble Boeing 
777 airplanes on a moving 
production line at the company’s 
facility in Everett, Washington.
Airplanes move slowly but at a 
steady pace toward completion 
and the hangar door. If there is 
a production problem along the 
route, the line stops, responsible 
teams are alerted, and the issue 
is addressed until it is resolved. 

672 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 15.13 LOGISTICS 
  Logistics  refers to the movement of materials, services, cash, and information in a supply 
chain. Materials include all of the physical items used in a production process. In addition to 
raw materials and work in process, there are support items such as fuels, equipment, parts, 
tools, lubricants, office supplies, and more. Logistics includes movement within a facility, 
overseeing incoming and outgoing shipments of goods and materials, and information flow 
throughout the supply chain. 
 Movement within a Facility 
 Movement of goods within a manufacturing facility is part of production control.  Figure 15.5 
shows the many steps where materials move within a manufacturing facility: 
 1. 
From incoming vehicles to receiving. 
 2. 
From receiving to storage. 
 3. 
From storage to the point of use (e.g., a work center). 
 4. 
From one work center to the next or to temporary storage. 
 5. 
From the last operation to final storage. 
 6. 
From storage to packaging/shipping. 
 7. 
From shipping to outgoing vehicles. 
 In some instances, the goods being moved are supplies; in other instances, the goods are 
actual products or partially completed products; and in still other instances, the goods are raw 
materials or purchased parts. 
 LO15.12 Discuss the logistics 
aspects of supply chain 
management, including RFID 
technology.
 Logistics  The movement of 
materials, services, cash, and 
information in a supply chain. 
 FIGURE 15.5 
 Movement within a facility 
Work center
Work center
Work
center
Storage
Work
center
Storage
Receiving
In
Out
Shipping
Storage
Machines

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
673
 Movement of materials must be coordinated to arrive at the appropriate destinations at 
appropriate times. Workers and supervisors must take care so that items are not lost, stolen, or 
damaged during movement. 
 The Wegmans supermarket chain (see the Wegmans Operations Tour 
at the end of Chapter 1) has been cited as a leader in supply chain 
management in the grocery industry. Its distribution system provides a 
number of examples of strategies and tactics that contribute to its suc-
cess in managing its supply chain. 
 Wegmans operates a number of warehouses that are used to supply 
its stores. Some warehouses stock grocery items, while others stock 
frozen foods, and still others stock bakery products, seasonal items, 
and/or produce. Even though all stores and warehouses are owned by 
Wegmans, the warehouses service the stores on a B2B basis. 
 Distribution 
 Individual stores’ orders are generated automatically on a daily basis. 
These are directed to the appropriate warehouses. Order fulfillment 
begins when a warehouse downloads a store’s order to its information 
system. There are a variety of methods used to replenish stores’ inven-
tories. Several of these avoid the need for warehouse storage, saving 
the company storage and handling costs. Those methods are
 1.  Cross-dock: A full inbound pallet is redirected to an outbound 
shipment. 
 2.  Cross-distribution: An inbound pallet is broken down into cases 
right on the dock, and then the cases are immediately distributed to 
outbound pallets. 
 3.  Vendor-managed inventory: Vendors of some non–store brand 
items such as bread and soft drinks handle replenishment, and 
those items come directly from the vendor’s warehouse to the 
stores. 
 Warehoused replenishment items are handled as full pallets, or bro-
ken down into cases, depending on quantities ordered:
 1.  Block pick: An entire pallet of goods in the warehouse is placed on 
an outbound truck. 
 2.  Case pick: Individual cases or packages are pulled from inventory, 
placed on pallets and shrink wrapped, and then placed on out-
bound trucks. 
 Computerized information on incoming orders is checked against 
incoming shipments of stocks to determine which items can be filled 
using cross-docking or cross-distribution right in the loading area. 
These items are then subtracted from a store’s order. The remaining 
items are filled from warehouse supplies. 
 Warehoused Items 
 Here is a brief description of retrieval of warehoused items in a dry 
goods (canned, boxed, etc.) warehouse: The system is semiautomated, 
and only a few workers are needed to process orders and monitor the 
system. 
 Warehoused items are classified for either con-
veyor belt or non–conveyor belt handling. Items are 
designated for conveyor belt handling based on their packaging and vol-
ume. If volume is low and packaging can withstand the conveyor belt, it 
will be assigned to the conveyor belt. If the packaging cannot withstand the 
conveyor belt, the items will be individually case-picked. Non–conveyor belt 
items that are high volume are automatically moved in bulk from their ware-
house locations to a staging area to await loading onto an outbound truck. 
 When orders for conveyor belt items are received, a worker is given 
bar code labels that contain the number of the ordering store. The 
worker then goes to the section where an item is stored, affixes the 
appropriate store bar code, and places the item on the conveyor belt. 
As items move along the conveyer, their bar codes are scanned and 
they are sorted according to store number. After scanning and sorting, 
items move to staging areas where they are placed on pallets and 
shrink wrapped, and then placed in a slot designated for the appropri-
ate store. The figure illustrates the handling of low-volume items.  
 OPERATIONS TOUR 
 Wegmans’ Shipping System 
k
i
d
l
Receive an order
Information systems
Conveyor items
Non-conveyor
items are placed
at a store’s slot
Items are scanned
and  directed to a slot
of a particular
store
Items are palletized
and wrapped
Loaded on a truck and
shipped to a particular store
Items are palletized
and wrapped
FIGURE 1  Distribution Diagram
Continued

674 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 Incoming and Outgoing Shipments 
 Overseeing the shipment of incoming and outgoing goods comes under the heading of   traffic 
management  .  This function handles schedules and decisions on shipping method and times, 
taking into account costs of various alternatives, government regulations, the needs of the 
organization relative to quantities and timing, and external factors such as potential shipping 
delays or disruptions (e.g., highway construction, truckers’ strikes). 
 Computer tracking of shipments often helps to maintain knowledge of the current status of 
shipments as well as to provide other up-to-date information on costs and schedules. 
 Tracking Goods: RFID 
 Advances in technology are revolutionizing the way businesses track goods in their supply 
chains.  Radio frequency identification (RFID)  is a technology that uses radio waves to 
identify objects, such as goods in supply chains. This is done through the use of an RFID tag 
that is attached to an object. The tag has an integrated circuit and an antenna that project infor-
mation or other data to network-connected RFID readers using radio waves. RFID tags can 
be attached to pallets, cases, or individual items. They provide unique identification, enabling 
businesses to identify, track, monitor, or locate practically any object in the supply chain that 
is within range of a tag reader. These tags are similar to bar codes, but they have the advan-
tage of conveying much more information, and they do not require a line-of-sight for reading 
that bar codes require. And unlike bar codes, which must be scanned individually and usually 
manually, multiple RFID tags can be read simultaneously and automatically. Furthermore, 
an RFID tag provides more precise information than a bar code: Tags contain detailed infor-
mation on each object, whereas bar 
codes convey only an object’s clas-
sification, such as its stockkeeping 
unit (SKU). This enables manage-
ment to know where every object 
is in the supply chain. RFID has the 
potential to fundamentally change 
the way companies track inventory 
and share information, and to dra-
matically improve the management 
of supply chains. This technology 
increases supply chain visibility, 
improves inventory management, 
improves 
quality 
control, 
and 
enhances relationships with suppli-
ers and customers. 
 Traffic management   
Overseeing the shipment of 
incoming and outgoing goods. 
 Radio frequency 
 identification (RFID)  
A technology that uses radio 
waves to identify objects, such as 
goods in supply chains. 
 New Approaches 
 Wegmans is now using RFID tags. The tags are very small micro chips, 
no bigger than a grain of salt. The tags are somewhat similar to bar 
codes, but offer greater potential for supply chain management because 
they can be more quickly read (e.g., multiple items can be scanned 
at once and, unlike bar codes, no line-of-sight is required for a read-
ing), and scanning devices can be placed in warehouses and even on 
supermarket shelves that would warn when stocks of individual items 
are running low. The tags initially cost about $1 each, and currently 
cost about five cents each, making them cost effective for tracking 
shipments and bulk quantities of items, but still too costly to use on 
individual store items. However, they hold great promise for increasing 
supply chain visibility and event management capabilities. 
 Collaboration with Vendors 
 A desire to improve conveyer belt transporting has led Wegmans to col-
laborate with vendors in an effort to improve packaging design. Occa-
sionally goods will fall off the belt, and those items have to be inspected 
to see if they have been damaged. Damaged goods not only are costly, 
but they are also lost from inventory and must be replaced. Improved 
packaging also increases the number of goods that can be handled with 
the conveyer system. 
 Forecasting 
 Wegmans implemented a program of consistent low pricing. This program 
reduced the number of promotional and sale items, reduced much of the 
volatility in demand, and made forecasting and inventory planning easier. 
 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
675
 RFID eliminates the need for manual counting and bar-code scanning of goods at receiving 
docks, in warehouses, and on retail shelves. This eliminates errors and greatly speeds up the 
process. Tags could reduce employee and customer theft by placing readers at building exits 
and in parking lots. Still other advantages include increased accuracy in warehouse “picking” 
of items for shipping or for use in assembly operations, increased accuracy in dispensing 
drugs to patients in hospitals, and reduced surgical errors. 
 RFID may enable small, agile businesses to compete with larger, more bureaucratic busi-
nesses that may be slow to adopt this new technology. Conversely, large businesses may be 
better able to afford the costs involved. These include the costs of the tags themselves as well 
as the cost of affixing individual tags, the cost of readers, and the cost of computer hardware 
and software to transmit and analyze the data generated. 
 The Springdale Farm is a demonstration farm located near Rochester, 
New York. One area of the farm is dedicated to advances in dairy cow 
management that involves a unique application of RFID technology. 
The farm has a milking parlor that features a robotic milking system 
that has been “trained” on a cow-by-cow basis so that it automati-
cally adapts to the physical aspects of each particular cow. When a 
cow enters the milking parlor, it is immediately identified by its RFID 
tag, and the milking machine adjusts itself and then attaches itself to 
the cow for milking. The system includes a self-cleaning, laser-guided 
robot plus an automatic feeder, all managed by a software program tied 
 READING 
 Springdale Farm 
into RFID tags worn by the cows. The accompa-
nying software keeps track of data regarding the 
cow’s health, history, milk production, and milk quality. It also allows 
the cows to be milked whenever they want, without human intervention, 
freeing workers to focus on other aspects of the operation of the farm. 
When a cow enters the milking parlor, it is bathed, and then the milking 
equipment automatically attaches itself to the cow and begins milking. 
Meanwhile, the cow is given a snack especially formulated for that cow. 
When the milking is complete, the machine detaches from the cow, the 
snack is withdrawn, the front door swings open, and the cow exits. 
real-time information about what’s happening 
on store shelves. Here’s how the system would 
work: 
 The supply chain of the consumer packaged goods industry works well 
when sales are steady, but it often breaks down when confronted by 
a sudden surge in demand. RFID tags could change that by providing 
 READING 
 RFID Tags: Keeping the Shelves Stocked 
W
al
m
ar
t 
in
ve
nt
or
y 
ma
n
a
g
e
m
e
nt
 s
ys
te
m
 
Pr
oc
te
r 
& 
G
a
m
bl
e 
su
p
pl
y 
ch
ai
n 
so
ft
w
ar
e 
A special offer causes 
Walmart shoppers to snap 
up boxes of 
Baby-Dry Pampers. 
1
Each box of Pampers has
an RFID tag. Shelf-mounted 
scanners alert the
stockroom of urgent
need for restock.
2
Walmart’s Inventory 
Management System tracks 
and links its in-store stock and 
its warehoused stock, 
prompting quicker 
replenishment and providing 
accurate real-time data.
3
The Walmart IMS is linked 
to the P&G Supply Chain 
Management System. 
Demand spikes reported by 
RFID tags are immediately 
visible throughout the 
supply chain.
4
P&G’s logistics software 
tracks its trucks with GPS 
locators, and tracks their 
contents with RFID tag 
readers. Regional managers 
can reroute trucks to fill 
urgent needs.
5
P&G suppliers also use RFID 
tags and readers on their raw 
materials, giving P&G visibility 
several tiers down the supply 
chain, and giving suppliers 
ability to accurately forecast 
demand and production.
6
Walmart
Walmart 
distribution center
WAREHOUSE
ALERT!
NEED
PAMPERS!
STORE
ALERT!
NEED
PAMPERS!
RESUPPLY
RESUPPLY
SHELF
ALERT!
NEED
PAMPERS!
RESUPPLY
P&G regional 
supply manager
P&G suppliers
 Source: As seen in  Business 2.0 Copyright © 2002, Xplane Corp. Used with permission. 
675

676 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 The potential benefits for supply chain management are huge, and widespread adoption 
of RFID technology by retailers and manufacturers is predicted. In order to take advantage 
of RFID technology, businesses must first assess the capabilities of their existing informa-
tion systems, then identify where RFID can have the greatest impact, estimate the time and 
resources that will be needed to implement the new system, estimate the risks and rewards of 
early versus late adoption, and then decide the best course of action. Important concerns at 
the retail level relate to privacy concerns if tags are not deactivated after items have been pur-
chased and placement of tags so they do not hide important customer information on products. 
 The following reading provides an explanation of how an RFID system would work. 
So higher value “things” at the pallet level and 
above often require active tags. Considering 
the total cost of ownership, an active tag’s 
higher cost is offset by a lower cost reader and processor infrastructure 
making the cost justification easier. Containers, trucks, and trailers are 
the best examples of high value items that require active tags. 
 In summary, passive and active RFID capabilities are related, but 
they are distinctly different technologies which should be matched 
to the application’s technical and economic requirements. Auto-
matically identifying personnel, assets, and vehicles are “active” 
applications and the cornerstones of automated visibility, security, 
and quality improvements in the enterprise. In the supply chain, for 
example, total visibility, security and quality can only be attained by 
utilizing both. 
 Source: Excerpted from:  www.rfidsb.com/index.php?page  rfidsb&c_ID  156 . 
Copyright © 2008 Axcess International, Inc. Used with permission. 
Allan  Griebenow 
 RFID tag technology falls into two broad categories—passive or active. 
Active RFID has an on-board power supply (e.g., a battery) while pas-
sive relies on capturing and “re-using” a small portion of the wake-up 
signal’s energy to transmit its RFID tag I.D. back to the receiver. This is 
a “good news, bad news” situation. The “good news” is that passive 
tags can be manufactured and sold at a much lower price point today 
than active tags. This is a critical element in many RFID supply chain 
applications requiring the tagging of millions of units. The “bad news” 
is that passive tags often struggle to provide reliable reads given the 
performance limitations of a technology using only a small amount of 
power to push its signal off metal surfaces, through layers of pallet-
ized products, etc. Also, passive tags sometimes struggle to provide a 
highly reliable signal when supply chain goods are in motion. Active 
tags therefore have an innate performance advantage over passive tags 
when it comes to providing a consistently robust, penetrating signal. 
 READING 
 Active RFID vs. Passive RFID 
 Evaluating Shipping Alternatives 
 Evaluation of shipping alternatives is an important component of supply chain management. 
Considerations include not only shipping costs, but also coordination of shipments with 
other supply chain activities, flexibility, speed, and environmental issues. Shipping options 
can involve trains, trucks, planes, and boats. Relevant factors include cost, time, availability, 
materials being shipped, and sometimes environmental considerations. At times options may 
be limited due to one or more of these factors. For example, heavy materials such as coal 
and iron ore would not be shipped by plane. High costs in some cases may rule out certain 
options. Also, time–cost trade-offs can be important. Organizations using a low-cost strategy 
often opt for slower, lower cost options, whereas organizations using a responsive strategy 
more often opt for quicker, higher cost options. 
 A situation that often arises in some businesses is the need to make a choice between rapid 
(but more expensive) shipping alternatives such as overnight or second-day air and slower 
(but less expensive) alternatives. In some instances, an overriding factor justifies sending a 
shipment by the quickest means possible, so there is little or no choice involved. However, in 
other instances, urgency is not the primary consideration, so there is a choice. The decision 
in such cases often focuses on the cost savings of slower alternatives versus the incremen-
tal holding cost (here, the annual dollar amount that could be earned by the revenue from 
the item being shipped) that would result from using the slower alternative. An important 
assumption is that the seller gets paid upon receipt of the goods by the buyer (e.g., through 
electronic data interchange). 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
677
 The incremental holding cost incurred by using the slower alternative is computed as
Incremental holding cost
( )
365
H d

 
 (15–1) 
 where
H     Annual earning potential of shipped item 
d   Difference (in days) between shipping alternatives 
 Determine which shipping alternative, one day or three days, is best when the holding cost of 
an item is $1,000 per year, the one-day shipping cost is $40, and the three-day shipping cost is
 a. 
$35 
 b. 
$30 
 E X A M P L E  1 
 S O L U T I O N 
H     $1,000 per year 
 Time savings    2 days using 1-day shipping 
 Holding cost for additional 2 days    $1,000    (2/365)    $5.48
 a. 
Cost savings    $5. Because the actual savings of $5 is less than the holding cost ($5.48), 
use the one-day alternative. 
 b. 
Cost savings    $10. Because the actual savings of $10 exceeds the savings in holding 
cost of $5.48, use the three-day alternative. 
 3-PL 
 Third-party logistics (3-PL)  is the term used to describe the outsourcing of logistics 
 management. This might involve part or even all of the logistics function. For example, 
some companies use third-party providers just for shipping, others include warehousing and 
 distribution, and still others rely on third-party companies to manage most or all of their 
supply chains. Companies are turning over warehousing and distribution to companies 
that  specialize in these areas. Among the potential benefits of this are taking advantage of 
 specialists’  knowledge, their well-developed information system, and their ability to obtain 
more  favorable shipping rates, and enabling the company to focus more on its core business. 
 Third-party logistics 
(3-PL)  The outsourcing of 
logistics management.  
 ARC and  SCTN  conducted a survey of man-
ufacturers and retailers to better understand 
their perspective of this emerging trend. 
 “Since software is generally coupled with specific business pro-
cesses, it’s not surprising that companies are . . . expecting 3PLs to 
provide a certain level of IT sophistication,” explains ARC analyst Adrian 
Gonzalez, author of the report. “Hence, technology is becoming a com-
petitive differentiator for 3PLs, especially for small and midsize players 
that want to level the playing field with ‘the big boys.’ Technology also 
enables 3PLs to scale their operations without incurring additional over-
head, assets and other costs. Simply stated, it allows them to do more 
with less.” 
 Over 40 percent of companies plan to outsource more software from 
third-party logistics providers (3PLs) over the next five years, according 
to “Beyond Software: Maximizing Value Via Outsourcing,” a new strate-
gic report developed by ARC Advisory Group and  SUPPLY CHAIN TECH-
NOLOGY NEWS.  Outsourcing is becoming the preferred choice for many 
companies, as evidenced by the strong growth of 3PLs and the increas-
ing number of solution vendors that are offering hosted solutions. 
 Major companies such as Ford Motor, Procter & Gamble, General Mills, 
DuPont and CVS are all outsourcing various logistics-related tasks from 
transportation management to global trade management to fleet man-
agement. In the case of Ford, for instance, the automaker uses a 3PL to 
manage its import and export trade processes throughout North America. 
 READING 
 Rise of the 3PL 
Continued

678 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 15.14 CREATING AN EFFECTIVE SUPPLY CHAIN 
 Creating an effective supply chain requires a thorough analysis of all aspects of the supply 
chain. Strategic sourcing is a term that is sometimes used to describe the process.    Strategic 
sourcing  is a systematic process for analyzing the purchase of products and services to reduce 
costs by reducing waste and non-value-added activities, increase profits, reduce risks, and 
improve supplier performance. Strategic sourcing differs from more traditional sourcing in 
that it emphasizes total cost rather than purchase price. Total cost includes storage costs, 
repair costs, disposal costs, and sustainability costs in addition to purchase price. It also seeks 
to consolidate purchasing power to achieve lower prices, relies on fewer suppliers and collab-
orative relationships, works to eliminate redundancies, and employs cross-functional teams to 
help overcome traditional organizational barriers. 
 Strategic sourcing looks at current procurement in terms of what is bought, where and 
from what suppliers it is bought, and what other sources of supply are available; a sourcing 
strategy then is designed to minimize a combination of costs and risks. The goal is to have a 
cooperative relationship among supply chain partners that will facilitate planning and coor-
dination of activities. It is essential for major trading partners to trust each other and to feel 
confident that partners share similar goals and will take actions that are mutually beneficial. 
The process is repeated periodically. A system for tracking results and making changes when 
needed is also established. 
 The SCOR ®  (Supply Chain Operations Reference) model (www.supply-chain/SCOR) 
 provides steps that can be used to create an effective supply chain:
 1. 
 Plan. Develop a strategy for managing all the resources that go into meeting expected 
customer demand for a product or service, including a set of metrics to monitor the 
 supply chain. 
 2. 
 Source. Select suppliers that will provide the goods and services needed to  create 
 products or support services. Also, develop a system for delivery, receiving, and 
 verifying shipments or services. Structure payment along with metrics for monitoring 
and, if necessary, improving relationships. 
 3. 
 Make. Design the processes necessary for providing services or producing, testing, 
and packaging goods. Monitor quality, service levels or production output, and worker 
productivity. 
 4. 
 Deliver. Establish systems for coordinating receipt of shipments from vendors; develop 
a network of warehouses; select carriers to transport goods to customers; set up an 
invoicing system to receive payments; and devise a communication system for two-way 
flow of information among supply chain partners. 
 5. 
 Manage returns. Create a responsive and flexible network for receiving defective and 
excess products from customers. 
 Achieving an effective supply chain requires integration of all aspects of the supply chain. 
Three important aspects of this are effective communication, the speed with which informa-
tion moves through the supply chain, and having performance metrics.
 Strategic sourcing  Analyzing 
the procurement process to lower 
costs by reducing waste and non-
value-added activities, increase 
profits, reduce risks, and 
improve supplier performance. 
   • If a company decides to outsource just the technology, a software 
vendor is preferred over a 3PL. 
 Questions 
    1. Why do you think that large companies are more inclined to out-
source than smaller ones? 
   2. How important is technology in the 3PL decision? Why do you think this is?    
 Source: Excerpted from “The Rise of the 3PL,”  www.totalmedia.com . 
 Key findings of the report indicate that:
    • Large companies are more inclined to outsource than smaller ones, 
but both want to maintain some level of control, particularly for solu-
tions/business process that directly impact customer and supplier 
relationships. 
   • When companies decide to outsource, they generally prefer to bun-
dle the technology with managed services, primarily from a 3PL (as 
opposed to a software vendor). 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
679
Effective communication.  Effective supply chain communication requires integrated 
technology and standardized ways and means of communicating among partners. 
Information velocity.  Information velocity   is important; the faster information flows 
(two-way), the better. 
Performance metrics.  Performance metrics are necessary to confirm that the supply 
chain is functioning as expected, or that there are problems that must be addressed. There 
are a variety of measures that can be used, which relate to such things as late deliveries, 
inventory turnover, response time, quality issues, and so on. In the retail sector, the   fill 
rate (the percentage of demand filled from stock on hand) is often very important. 
 Table 15.7 lists some other key performance measures. 
Managing Returns 
 Products are returned to companies or third-party handlers for a variety of reasons, and in a 
variety of conditions. Among them are the following:
 • Defective products. 
 • Recalled products. 
 • Obsolete products. 
 Information velocity  The 
speed at which information is 
communicated in a supply chain.  
 Fill rate  The percentage of 
demand filled from stock on 
hand. 
 LO15.13  Discuss the issues 
involved in managing returns.
 Financial 
Operations 
 Order fulfillment 
 Return on assets 
 Productivity 
 Order accuracy 
 Cost 
 Quality 
 Time to fill orders 
 Cash flow 
 Percentage of incomplete orders shipped 
 Profits 
 Percentage of orders delivered on time 
 Suppliers 
Inventory 
 Customers 
 Quality 
 Average value 
 Customer satisfaction 
 On-time delivery 
 Turnover 
 Percentage of customer complaints 
 Cooperation 
 Weeks of supply  
 Flexibility 
 
 TABLE 15.7 
 Supply chain performance 
measures 
The term “clicks-or-bricks” refers to a business model in which a com-
pany has either an online (clicks) or an offline (bricks) presence. Many 
companies have both. Sometimes that business model is referred to 
as “clicks-and-mortar” or “clicks-and-bricks.” In one version, a chain 
store may allow a customer to order goods online and pick them up 
at a local store. In another version, large items such as appliances or 
furniture may be viewed at a local store and then ordered electronically 
for home delivery. In both instances, the “bricks” portion necessitates a 
location decision.
Even companies that are seemingly pure “clicks,” selling elec-
tronic products such as computers, still have warehousing and delivery 
facilities behind businesses that trade in material goods. Again, location 
decisions are necessary.
The choice of which business model to use requires taking into 
account the costs of having a physical presence and what the balance 
between the two should be. Of course, customer preferences and shop-
ping  patterns are important. For example, some reasons people shop 
online include ease of price comparison, con-
venience, availability of hard-to-find items, 
research recommendations, and elimination of 
the need to travel. Reasons for offline shopping include immediate pos-
session of an item, ease of returns, the security risks of online shopping, 
the need to use a credit card, the burden of logistics for returns, and 
ability to “kick the tires” (e.g., try on clothing or footwear, judge quality).
Questions
 1. Retail outlets that do not have an Internet presence often complain 
that consumers come in to “kick the tires” but then buy online from a 
competitor. Can you suggest some ways outlets can overcome that?
 2. Some customers of Internet businesses can avoid paying state sales 
taxes on purchases if the Internet businesses don’t have a physical 
presence in their state. However, more states are enacting laws to 
collect taxes. What impact might this have on the clicks, bricks, or 
both choices?
READING
Clicks or Bricks, or Both?

680 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 • Unsold products returned from retailers. 
 • Parts replaced in the field. 
 • Items for recycling. 
 • Waste. 
 The importance of returns is underscored by the fact that in the United States, the annual 
value of returns is estimated to be in the neighborhood of $100 billion. In the past, most 
items—except unsold products—were typically discarded. More recently, companies are rec-
ognizing that substantial value can be reclaimed from returned items. For example, defective 
parts can be repaired or replaced, and products can be resold as reconditioned. Obsolete prod-
ucts may have usable parts or subassemblies, or they may have value in other markets. Parts 
replaced in the field may in fact not be defective at all; it is estimated that about a third of such 
parts are not defective and may be reusable as “reconditioned” replacement parts. Recyclable 
items can be sold to recyclers and might be usable for energy production; other waste and 
unusable products and parts might require disposal according to sometimes stringent guide-
lines. For example, governments, particularly in Europe, are increasingly enacting legislation 
making original manufacturers responsible for acquiring and disposing of their products at 
the end of their products’ useful lives. 
 To make a determination as to the appropriate disposition of returned items, the items must 
be sorted, inspected, or tested and directed to the appropriate destination for repair and reuse, 
recycling, or disposal. Often, transportation is required.   Reverse logistics is the process of 
physically transporting returned items. This involves either retrieving items from the field or 
moving items from the point of return to a facility where they will be inspected and sorted and 
then transporting to their final destination. 
 Two key elements of managing returns are  gatekeeping  and  avoidance.  Gatekeeping  
 oversees the acceptance of returned goods with the intent of reducing the cost of returns by 
screening returns at the point of entry into the system and refusing to accept goods that should 
not be returned or goods that are returned to the wrong destination. Effective gatekeeping 
enables organizations to control the rate of returns without negatively impacting customer ser-
vice.   Avoidance  refers to finding ways to minimize the number of items that are returned. It can 
involve product design and quality assurance. It may also involve monitoring forecasts during 
promotional programs to avoid overestimating demand to minimize returns of unsold product. 
 Reverse logistics  The process 
of transporting returned items. 
 Gatekeeping  Screening 
returned goods to prevent 
 incorrect acceptance of goods. 
 Avoidance  Finding ways to 
minimize the number of items 
that are returned.  
 An  Amazon.com employee 
inspects returned products at 
a distribution warehouse in 
Nevada. The returned goods 
are inspected for restocking if 
in pristine condition, forwarded 
to a repair center if necessary, 
inventoried, and examined for 
potential product, process, or 
packaging improvements if they 
are defective. 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
681
 The condition of returned products as well as the timing of returns may vary, making it 
difficult to plan for the reverse flow. On the other hand, returns can provide valuable infor-
mation, such as how and why failures occurred, which can improve product quality and/or 
product design and minimize future returns for that reason. They can also help identify some 
sources of customer dissatisfaction, which can have design benefits. 
 It is likely that the importance of this aspect of supply chain management will grow due to 
shortened product life cycles, increasing returns from increasing Internet commerce sales from 
dissatisfied customers, replacement of consumer electronics that are in working order as newer 
models become available, pressures on manufacturers to reduce costs, and increasing con-
sumer and government environmental concerns. The term    closed-loop supply chain    is used 
to describe a situation where a manufacturer controls both the forward and reverse logistics.  
 Challenges 
    The often dynamic supply chain environment and the complexity of supply chains can make 
managing them very challenging. 
 Barriers to Integration of Separate Organizations.  Organizations, and their func-
tional areas, have traditionally had an inward focus. They set up buffers between themselves 
and their suppliers. Changing that attitude can be difficult. The objective of supply chain 
management is to be efficient across the entire supply chain. 
 One difficulty in achieving this objective is that different components of the supply chain 
often have conflicting objectives. For example, to reduce their inventory holding costs, some 
companies opt for frequent small deliveries of supplies. This can result in increased holding 
costs for suppliers, so the cost is merely transferred to suppliers. Similarly, within an orga-
nization, functional areas often make decisions with a narrow focus, doing things that “opti-
mize” results under their control; in so doing, however, they may suboptimize results for the 
overall organization. To be effective, organizations must adopt a  systems approach  to both the 
internal and external portions of their supply chains, being careful to make decisions that are 
consistent with optimizing the supply chain. 
 Another difficulty is that for supply chain management to be successful, organizations in 
the chain must allow other organizations access to their data. There is a natural reluctance to 
do this in many cases. One reason can be lack of trust; another can be unwillingness to share 
proprietary information in general; and another can be that an organization, as a member of 
multiple chains, fears exposure of proprietary information to competitors. 
 Getting CEOs, Boards of Directors, Managers, and Employees “Onboard.”  CEOs 
and boards of directors need to be convinced of the potential payoffs from supply chain man-
agement. And because much of supply chain management involves a change in the way busi-
ness has been practiced for an extended period of time, getting managers and workers to adopt 
new attitudes and practices that are consistent with effective supply chain operations poses a 
real challenge. 
 Dealing with Trade-offs.  Authors Hau Lee and C. Billington list a number of trade-offs 
that must be taken into account in structuring a supply chain: 5 
 1.  Lot size–inventory trade-off.  Producing or ordering large lot sizes yields benefits in 
terms of quantity discounts and lower annual setup costs, but it increases the amount 
of safety stock carried by suppliers and, hence, the carrying cost. It also can create the 
bullwhip effect. 
 It is caused by the way inventories are replenished at various points along a supply chain. 
For a variety of reasons, organizations tend to periodically order batches of an item from their 
suppliers. This creates “lumpy” demand for suppliers and, hence, high-variability demand, 
 Closed-loop supply chain  
A manufacturer controls both the 
forward and reverse shipment of 
product. 
 LO15.14  Describe some of the 
challenges in creating an effec-
tive supply chain and some of 
the trade-offs involved.
 5 Excerpted from Hau Lee and C. Billington, “Managing Supply Chain Inventory,”  Sloan Management Review, 
Spring 1992, pp. 65–68, by permission of publisher. Copyright © 1992 by  Sloan Management Review. All rights 
reserved. 

682 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
which causes suppliers to carry relatively large amounts of safety stock. Starting with the 
final customer and moving backward through the supply chain, batch sizes tend to increase, 
thereby increasing the level of safety stock carried. What is so striking about this phenomenon 
is that any demand variations that exist at the customer end of the supply chain get magnified 
as orders are generated back through the supply chain. 
 2.  Inventory–transportation cost trade-off.  Suppliers prefer to ship full truckloads 
instead of partial loads in order to spread shipping costs over as many units as possible. 
This leads to higher holding costs for customers. Solutions include combining orders to 
realize full truckloads, downsizing truck capacity, and shipping late in the process along 
with  cross-docking.  Cross-docking  is a technique whereby goods arriving at a ware-
house from a supplier are unloaded from the supplier’s truck and immediately loaded 
on one or more outbound trucks, thereby avoiding storage at the warehouse completely. 
Walmart is among the companies that have used this technique successfully to reduce 
inventory holding costs and lead times. 
 3.  Lead time–transportation cost trade-off.  Suppliers usually prefer to ship in full loads, 
as mentioned previously. But waiting for sufficient orders and/or production to achieve 
a full load increases lead time. In addition to the preceding suggestions, improved 
forecasting information to suppliers might improve the timing of their production and 
orders to their suppliers. 
 4.  Product variety–inventory trade-off.  Higher product variety generally means smaller 
lot sizes, which results in higher setup costs, as well as higher transportation and 
inventory management costs. One possible means of reducing some costs is   delayed 
 differentiation  ,  which means producing standard components and subassemblies, 
then waiting until late in the process to add differentiating features. For example, an 
 automobile producer may produce and ship cars without radios, allowing customers to 
select from a range of radios that can be installed by the dealer, thereby eliminating that 
variety from much of the supply chain.  Other examples include delaying adding labels, 
postponing packaging, and delaying mixing or additives. 
 5.  Cost–customer service trade-off.  Producing and shipping in large lots reduces costs, 
but it increases lead times, as previously noted. One approach to reducing lead time is to 
ship directly from a warehouse to the customer, bypassing a retail outlet. Reducing one 
or more steps in a supply chain by cutting out one or more intermediaries is referred to 
as   disintermediation  .  Although transportation costs are higher, storage costs are lower.     
 Cross-docking  A technique 
whereby goods arriving at a 
warehouse from a supplier are 
unloaded from the supplier’s 
truck and loaded onto outbound 
trucks, thereby avoiding ware-
house storage.  
 Delayed differentiation   
Production of standard 
 components and subassemblies, 
which are held until late in the 
process to add differentiating 
features.  
 Disintermediation  Reducing 
one or more steps in a supply 
chain by cutting out one or more 
intermediaries.  
 TABLE 15.8 
 Benefits and possible drawbacks 
of potential improvements to a 
supply chain 
 Problem 
 Potential 
Improvement 
 Benefits 
 Possible 
Drawbacks 
 Large inventories  Smaller, more 
 frequent deliveries, 
cross- docking 
 Reduced holdings costs 
 Traffic congestion, 
increased ordering 
costs, increased 
supplier costs 
 Long lead times 
 Delayed differentiation 
 Disintermediation 
 Quick response 
 Quick response 
 May not be feasible 
 May need to absorb 
functions 
 Large number of 
parts 
 Modular construction 
 Fewer parts to keep track of, 
 simpler ordering 
 Less variety 
 Cost, quality 
 Outsourcing 
 Reduced cost, higher quality, fewer 
internal problems, remaining 
operations more focused 
 Loss of control 
 Variability 
 Shorter lead times, 
better forecasts, 
reduction in product/ 
service variety 
 Better able to match supply and 
demand 
 Less variety 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
683
 Small Businesses.  Small businesses may be reluctant to embrace supply chain management 
because it can involve specialized, complicated software as well as sharing sensitive informa-
tion with outside companies. Nonetheless, in order for them to survive, they may have to do so. 
 Variability and Uncertainty.  Variations create uncertainty, thereby causing inefficiencies 
in a supply chain. Variations occur in incoming shipments from suppliers, internal operations, 
deliveries of products or services to customers, and customer demands. Increases in product 
and service  variety  add to uncertainty, because organizations have to deal with a broader 
range and frequent changes in operations. Hence, when deciding to increase variety, organiza-
tions should consider this trade-off. 
 Although variations exist throughout most supply chains, decision makers often treat the 
uncertainties as if they were certainties and make decisions on that basis. In fact, systems are 
often designed on the basis of certainty, so they may not be able to cope with uncertainty. Unfor-
tunately, uncertainties are detrimental to effective management of supply chains because they 
result in various undesirable occurrences, such as inventory buildups, bottleneck delays, missed 
delivery dates, and frustration for employees and customers at all stages of a supply chain.  
 Response Time.  Response time is an important issue in supply chain management. Long 
lead times impair the ability of a supply chain to quickly respond to changing conditions, such as 
changes in the quantity or timing of demand, changes in product or service design, and quality or 
logistics problems. Therefore, it is important to work to reduce long product lead times and long 
collaborative lead times, and a plan should be in place to deal with problems when they arise. 
 Table 15.8 lists some potential solutions to supply chain problems and possible drawbacks. 
 15.15 STRATEGY 
 Effective supply chains are critical to the success of business organizations. Development of 
supply chains should be accorded strategic importance. Achieving an effective supply chain 
requires integration of all aspects of the chain. Supplier relationships are a critical component 
of supply chain management. Collaboration and joint planning and coordination are keys to 
supply chain success. In that regard, a systems view of the supply chain is essential. 
 Many businesses are employing principles of lean operations and six sigma methodology 
to improve supply chain performance. However, lean supply chains can increase supply chain 
risk and may necessitate increased inventories to offset those risks. 
 A supply chain consists of all of the organizations, facilities, functions, and activities involved in pro-
ducing a product or providing a service. The chapter provides a list of strategic, tactical, and operational 
responsibilities related to supply chain management. The chapter covers key issues, recent trends, pro-
curement, ethical behavior, e-business, supplier management, inventory management, returns manage-
ment, and risk management. 
 The basic components of supply chain management are strategy formulation, procurement, supply 
management, demand management, and logistics management. The key issues in supply chain manage-
ment relate to determining the appropriate level of outsourcing, managing procurement, managing sup-
pliers, managing customer relationships, being able to quickly identify problems and respond to them, 
and managing risk. 
 The goal of supply chain management is to match supply and demand as effectively and efficiently 
as possible. Because supply chains are made up of multiple organizations, cooperation and collaboration 
among supply chain partners is very important. Supply chain functioning benefits from mutual trust, 
information sharing, and collaborative forecasting and planning. 
 Recent trends in supply chain management relate to managing risk, reevaluating outsourcing, man-
aging inventories, and applying lean principles to improve supply chain performance. 
 SUMMARY 

684 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 1. What trade-offs are involved in ( a ) sharing information with other organizations in a supply chain 
and ( b ) the acquisition of information-processing technology? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in ( a ) decisions on technology acquisition for supply chain 
 management and ( b ) supply chain management? 
 3. Name three different ways that technology has improved the ability to manage supply chains. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. 
Supply chains are a vital part of every business organization and need to be managed effectively 
to achieve a balance of supply and demand. 
 2. 
Among important trends in supply chain management are measuring ROI, “greening” the supply 
chain, reevaluating outsourcing, integrating IT, managing risks, and adopting lean principles. 
 3. 
It is important for businesses to encourage their supply chain partners to act ethically. 
  4. 
Effective supply chains involve trust, communication, a rapid, two-way flow of information, vis-
ibility, and event-response capability. 
 KEY POINTS 
 avoidance, 680 
 bullwhip effect, 670 
 centralized purchasing, 662 
 closed-loop supply chain, 681 
 cross-docking, 682 
 decentralized purchasing, 662 
 delayed differentiation, 682 
 disintermediation, 682 
 e-business, 663 
 event-response capability, 655 
 fill rate, 679 
 gatekeeping, 680 
 information velocity, 679 
 inventory velocity, 670 
 logistics, 650, 672 
 order fulfillment, 671 
 purchasing cycle, 661 
 reverse logistics, 680 
 radio frequency identification 
(RFID), 674 
 resiliency, 655 
 strategic partnering, 669 
 strategic sourcing, 678 
 supply chain, 649 
 supply chain 
management, 650 
 supply chain visibility, 655 
 third-party logistics 
(3-PL), 677 
 traffic management, 674 
 vendor analysis, 667 
 vendor-managed inventory 
(VMI), 670 
 KEY TERMS 
 1. What is a supply chain? 
 2. What are some recent trends in supply chain management? 
 3. What are the elements of supply chain management? 
 4. What are the strategic, tactical, and operations responsibilities in supply chain management? 
 5. What is the bullwhip effect, and why does it occur? How can it be overcome? 
 6. Explain the increasing importance of the procurement function. 
 7. What is meant by the term  inventory velocity and why is this important? What is  information 
velocity, and why is it important? 
 8. Explain strategic partnering. 
 9. What impact has e-business had on supply chain management? 
 10. What are some of the advantages of e-business? 
 11. What are some of the trade-offs that might be factors in designing a supply chain? 
 12. Why is managing returns important? 
 13. Explain the importance of supply chain visibility. 
 14. Describe what purchasing managers do. 
 15. Describe how purchasing interacts with two other functional areas of an organization. 
 16. Discuss the importance of RFID for supply chain management. 
 17. Discuss centralization versus decentralization in purchasing. What are the advantages 
of each? 
 18. Describe vendor analysis. 
 19. Describe supplier certification and explain why it can be important. 
 20. Compare viewing suppliers as adversaries with viewing them as partners. 
 21. Explain the benefit of cross-docking. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
685
 1. Explain why each of these is critical for a successful supply chain operation:
 a. Integrated technology 
 b. Information sharing 
 c. Trust among trading partners 
 d. Real-time information availability 
 e. Event-response capability 
 f.  Procurement 
 g. Risk management 
 2. Given the complexities and risks involved with supply chains, might it make sense for a business 
organization to vertically integrate and be its own supply chain? 
 3. From a systems viewpoint, what are some of the environmental issues involved in a decision by a 
company to outsource manufacturing operations to a foreign country? 
 4. Select three of the examples of unethical behavior on p. 657, other than those that violate basic 
human rights, and indicate which principle in  Table 15.2 would be violated. 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. A manager at Strateline Manufacturing must choose between two shipping alternatives: two-
day freight and five-day freight. Using five-day freight would cost $135 less than using two-day 
freight. The primary consideration is holding cost, which is $10 per unit a year. Two thousand 
items are to be shipped. Which alternative would you recommend? Explain. 
 2. Determine which shipping alternative would be most economical to ship 80 boxes of parts when 
each box has a price of $200 and holding costs are 30 percent of price, given this shipping infor-
mation: overnight, $300, two-day, $260, six-day, $180. 
 3. A manager must make a decision on shipping. There are two shippers, A and B. Both offer a two-
day rate: A for $500 and B for $525. In addition, A offers a three-day rate of $460 and a nine-day 
rate of $400, and B offers a four-day rate of $450 and a seven-day rate of $410. Annual holding 
costs are 35 percent of unit price. Three hundred boxes are to be shipped, and each box has a price 
of $140. Which shipping alternative would you recommend? Explain. 
 PROBLEMS 
 Nicole  Foster ,  Grand Valley State University 
 When MasterTag was founded in 1949, its founder, Ludwig Schmidt, 
set out to be a manufacturer of plastic fishing bobbers. Then, in 1950, 
Mr. Schmidt was approached by a local greenhouse owner and was 
asked if he could produce a line of horticultural labels for plants. At 
the time, these labels were made of wood. Mr. Schmidt adapted his 
machines to produce these labels and has been manufacturing the 
plastic “tags” for plants ever since. Over the years, the labels have 
increased in quality and now feature full-color pictures of the plants 
along with the name and planting and care instructions. 
 Many of MasterTag’s largest customers are seed companies that 
sell the seeds to commercial growers. The large seed companies typi-
cally place one or two large orders with MasterTag at the beginning of 
the growing season. The seed companies then sell their seeds and the 
labels to their customers who grow the plants and sell them to the end 
consumer. For various reasons, the seed companies do not like ordering 
tags, but do so because their customers demand labels with their seeds. 
 However, there are several problems with this ordering process. 
The main issue stems from the fact that the exact quantities of tags 
that will be needed is difficult to predict due to 
possible crop failures and the introduction of new 
items. To avoid a shortage of tags, seed companies order and ship a 
large quantity of tags to their customers. Tags are ordered early to 
allow for the time needed to incorporate the tags with the seeds. Seed 
companies usually end up each year with huge numbers of leftover 
tags. In fact, MasterTag’s largest customers often end up with  millions 
of leftover tags. 
 When MasterTag’s management became aware of all the unused 
labels and unhappy customers, they decided they must come up 
with a better solution for achieving a match between supply and 
demand of the tags. One possible solution would be to make an 
initial, fairly large batch, which would be produced and shipped 
directly to the growers instead of the seed companies, as is now 
being done. Later, when the grower results became available, a 
second batch would be produced using information from growers 
on how many additional tags are needed. The second batch would 
then be made and shipped to the growers. (See figure for Before 
and After.) 
 CASE 
 MasterTag 
Continued

686 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management
 Brian Wilson, materials manager at B&L Inc. in Lancaster,  Pennsylvania, 
was considering a proposal from his purchasing agent to outsource 
manufacturing for an outrigger bracket. It was the end of April and 
Mr. Wilson had to evaluate the proposal and make a decision regarding 
whether to proceed. 
 B&L Inc. Background 
 B&L Inc. manufactured trailers for highway transport trucks. The com-
pany comprised three divisions: the Trailer, Sandblast & Paint, and Metal 
Fabricating Divisions. Each division operated as a separate profit center, 
but manufacturing operations between each were highly integrated. 
The Metal Fabricating Division produced most of 
the component parts of the trailers, the Trailer Divi-
sion performed the assembly operations, and the Sandblast & Paint 
Division was responsible for completing the sandblasting and final 
painting operation. B&L manufactured approximately 40 trailers per 
year, with about two-thirds produced during the period from November 
to April.  
 The Outrigger Bracket 
 The outrigger bracket, part number T-178, was an accessory that could 
be used to secure oversized containers. The bracket consisted of four 
 CASE 
 B&L Inc. 
Continued
 Questions 
 1. Explain the key benefit of the revised approach, and the reason for 
the benefit. 
   2. MasterTag has not yet decided to implement this plan. List the pros 
and cons you think should be considered. 
 
After
Before
MasterTag sends
tags to seed
companies.
Seed companies
send plants without
tags to growers.
Seed companies
send plants and tags
to growers.
MasterTag sends
a large batch of
tags to growers. 
Growers receive
plants from seed
companies and tags
from MasterTag.
Growers receive
plants and tags from
seed companies.
MasterTag sends
additional tags to
growers as
needed.
Growers receive
additional tags from
MasterTag.
Plants with tags are
shipped to retailers.
Plants with tags are
shipped to retailers.
End customers buy
plants with tags.
End customers buy
plants with tags.

 
Chapter Fifteen Supply Chain Management 
687
 Benton, W. C.  Purchasing and Supply Chain Manage-
ment. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010. 
 Blanchard, David.  Supply Chain Management: Best 
Practices. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 2011. 
 Bowersox, Donald J., David J. Closs, and M. Bixby 
Cooper.  Supply Chain Logistics Management. 3rd 
ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2010. 
 Chopra, Sunil, and Peter Meidl.  Supply Chain 
 Management: Strategy, Planning, and Operation. 
5th ed. New York: Pearson, 2012. 
 Guide, V. Daniel R., Jr., and Luk N. Van Wassenhove. 
“The Reverse Supply Chain.”  Harvard Business 
Review 80, (2), pp. 25–26, 2002. 
 Handfield, Robert B., and Ernest L. Nichols Jr. 
 Introduction to Supply Chain Management. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1999. 
 Johnson, P. Fraser, Michiel R. Leenders, and Anna 
E. Flynn.  Purchasing and Supply Management. 
14th ed. New York: McGrawHill/Irwin, 2011. 
 Lee, Hau L. “The Triple-A Supply Chain.”  Harvard 
Business Review, October 2004. 
 Monczka, Robert M., Robert H. Handfield, Larry 
Guinipero, and James Patterson.  Purchasing and 
Supply Chain Management. 5th ed. Stamford, CT: 
South-Western - Cengage Learning, 2011. 
 RFID  Journal.com 
 Simchi-Levi, David, Philip Kaminsky, and Edith 
Simchi-Levi.  Designing and Managing the Supply 
Chain: Concepts, Strategies, and Case Studies. New 
York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
 Webster, Scott.  Principles and Tools for Supply Chain 
Management. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
component parts welded together, and each trailer sold by B&L had 20 
brackets—10 per side. 
 The Metal Fabricating Division was currently manufacturing the out-
rigger bracket. The subassembly parts—T-67, T-75, T-69, and T-77—
were processed on a burn table, which cut the raw material to size. 
Although the burn table could work with eight stations, this machine 
had only been operating with one station. The final assembly operation, 
T-70, was performed at a manual welding station. 
 Manufacturing lead time for the outrigger bracket was two weeks. 
However, the Metal Fabricating Division had been able to coordinate 
supply and production with assembly operations. Consequently, finished 
inventory levels of the outrigger bracket were kept to a minimum. B&L’s 
inventory holding costs were 20 percent per annum. 
 The Outsourcing Decision 
 In an effort to reduce costs, the purchasing agent, Alison Beals, who 
reported to Brian Wilson, solicited quotes from three local companies 
to supply the outrigger bracket. Mayes Steel Fabricators (Mayes), a 
current supplier to B&L for other components, offered the lowest bid, 
with a cost of $108.20, FOB B&L. 
 Brian met with the controller, Mike Carr, who provided a breakdown 
of the manufacturing costs for the outrigger bracket. Looking at the 
spreadsheet, Mike commented: “These are based on estimates of our 
costs from this year’s budget. Looking at the material, labor, and over-
head costs, I would estimate that the fixed costs for this part are in the 
area of about 20 percent. Keep in mind that it costs us about $75 to 
place an order with our vendors.”  Exhibit 1  provides B&L’s internal cost 
breakdown and details from the quote from Mayes. 
 Brian expected that B&L would have to arrange for extra storage 
space if he decided to outsource the outrigger bracket to Mayes, who 
had quoted delivery lead time of four weeks. Because Mayes was local 
and had a good track record, Brian didn’t expect the need to carry much 
safety stock, but the order quantity issue still needed to be resolved. 
 B&L was operating in a competitive environment and Brian had 
been asked by the division general manager to look for opportunities 
to reduce costs. As he sat down to review the information, Brian knew 
that he should make a decision quickly if it was possible to cut costs by 
outsourcing the outrigger bracket. 
 Analyze the information and make a recommendation. 
 Source: Johnson, P. Fraser, Michiel R. Leenders, and Anna E. Flynn.  Purchasing 
and Supply Management, 14th ed. New York: McGrawHill/Irwin, 2011, 
pp. 131–7. 
 Parts 
 Mayes Steel 
Fabricators 
 B&L Manufacturing 
Costs 
 T-67 
 $14.60 
 $17.92 
 T-75 
 21.10 
  17.92 
 T-69 
 18.50 
  45.20 
 T-77 
 13.00 
  10.37 
 T-70 
 41.00 
  58.69 
 Total 
 $108.20 
 $150.10 
 EXHIBIT 1 
 Manufacturing Costs and Mayes Quote: Outrigger 
Bracket T-178 

688
 CHAP TE R 
 16 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO16.1 
Explain what scheduling involves and the importance of good 
scheduling. 
 LO16.2 
Compare product and service scheduling hierarchies. 
 LO16.3 
Describe scheduling needs in high-volume systems. 
 LO16.4 
Describe scheduling needs in intermediate-volume 
systems. 
 LO16.5 
Describe scheduling needs in job shops. 
 LO16.6 
Use and interpret Gantt charts. 
 LO16.7 
Use the assignment method for loading. 
 LO16.8 
Give examples of commonly used priority rules. 
 LO16.9 
Discuss the theory of constraints and that approach to 
scheduling. 
 LO16.10 Summarize some of the unique problems encountered in 
service systems, and describe some of the approaches used for 
scheduling service systems. 
 Scheduling 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 16.1 Scheduling Operations,  690 
 Scheduling in High-Volume Systems,  690 
 Scheduling in Intermediate-Volume 
Systems,  692 
 16.2 Scheduling in Low-Volume Systems,  693 
 Loading,  693 
 Sequencing,  700 
 Sequencing Jobs through Two Work 
Centers,  707 
 Sequencing Jobs When Setup Times Are 
Sequence-Dependent,  709 
 Why Scheduling Can Be Difficult,  709 
 Minimizing Scheduling Difficulties,  710 
 The Theory of Constraints,  710 
 16.3 Scheduling Services,  711 
 Appointment Systems,  712 
 Reservation Systems,  712 
 Yield Management,  712 
 Scheduling the Workforce,  714 
 Cyclical Scheduling,  714 
 Scheduling Multiple 
Resources,  715 
 16.4 Operations Strategy,  716 
 Case: Hi-Ho, Yo-Yo, Inc.,  728 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

689
   Airline travel can be difficult when flights are delayed or 
canceled due to weather problems. And even though it may 
be clear and dry in some areas, flights in those places can 
still be affected by weather in other areas. Because of all 
the interdependencies, a problem in one area, especially 
around major hub airports like Chicago, Atlanta, and New 
York, has a cascading effect with impacts throughout the 
nation. This results in massive scheduling problems. Flight 
arrivals and departures have to be rescheduled, which then 
means flight crews, terminal gates, connections, and bag-
gage and freight also must be rescheduled. Airline and air 
traffic control software scheduling systems include and 
optimize thousands of variables. 
 Within an organization,   scheduling  pertains to establishing the 
timing of the use of specific resources of that organization. It 
relates to the use of equipment, facilities, and human activi-
ties. Scheduling occurs in every organization, regardless of the 
nature of its activities. For example, manufacturers must sched-
ule production, which means developing schedules for workers, 
equipment, purchases, maintenance, and so on. Hospitals must 
schedule admissions, surgery, nursing assignments, and support 
services such as meal preparation, security, maintenance, and 
cleaning. Educational institutions must schedule classrooms, 
instruction, and students. And lawyers, doctors, dentists, hair-
dressers, and auto repair shops must schedule appointments. 
 In the decision-making hierarchy, scheduling decisions are 
the final step in the transformation process before actual output 
occurs. Many decisions about system design and operation have 
been made long before scheduling decisions. They include the capacity of the system, 
product or service design, equipment selection, selection and training of workers, and 
aggregate planning and master scheduling. Consequently, scheduling decisions must 
be made within the constraints established by many other decisions, making them 
fairly narrow in scope and latitude.  Figure  16.1  depicts scheduling hierarchies for 
manufacturing and service scheduling. 
 Effective scheduling can yield cost savings, increases in productivity, and other 
benefits. For example, in hospitals, effective scheduling can save lives and improve 
patient care. In educational institutions, it can reduce the need for expansion of 
 facilities. In competitive environments, effective scheduling can give a company a 
competitive advantage in terms of customer service (shorter wait time for their orders) 
if its competitors are less effective with their scheduling. 
 Scheduling  Establishing the 
timing of the use of equipment, 
facilities, and human activities in 
an organization. 
 LO16.1  Explain what 
 scheduling involves and the 
importance of good scheduling.

690 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 FIGURE 16.1 
 Scheduling hierarchies 
Manufacturing
Service
Aggregate Planning
Master Production Schedule
Master Schedule
Material Requirements Planning
Monthly or Weekly Schedule
Shop Floor Schedule
Daily Schedule
Aggregate Planning
 Generally, the objectives of scheduling are to achieve trade-offs among conflicting goals, 
which include efficient utilization of staff, equipment, and facilities, and minimization of 
 customer waiting time, inventories, and process times. 
 This chapter covers scheduling in both manufacturing and service environments. Although 
the two environments have many similarities, some basic differences are important. 
 16.1 SCHEDULING OPERATIONS  
    Scheduling tasks are largely a function of the volume of system output. High-volume sys-
tems require approaches substantially different from those required by job shops, and project 
scheduling requires still different approaches. In this chapter, we will consider scheduling for 
high-volume systems, intermediate-volume systems, and low-volume (job shop) scheduling. 
Project scheduling is discussed in Chapter 17. 
 Scheduling in High-Volume Systems 
    Scheduling encompasses allocating workloads to specific work centers and determining the 
sequence in which operations are to be performed. High-volume systems are characterized by 
standardized equipment and activities that provide identical or highly similar operations on 
customers or products as they pass through the system. The goal is to obtain a smooth rate of 
flow of goods or customers through the system in order to get a high utilization of labor and 
equipment. High-volume systems, where jobs follow the same sequence, are often referred to 
as   flow systems ;  scheduling in these systems is referred to as   flow-shop  scheduling , although 
flow-shop scheduling also can be used in medium-volume systems. Examples of high-volume 
products include autos, personal computers, radios and televisions, stereo  equipment, toys, 
and appliances. In process industries, examples include petroleum  refining, sugar refining, 
mining, waste treatment, and the manufacturing of fertilizers.  Examples of  services include 
cafeteria lines, news broadcasts, and mass inoculations. Because of the highly repetitive 
nature of these systems, many of the loading and sequence decisions are determined during 
the design of the system. The use of highly specialized tools and equipment, the  arrangement 
of equipment, the use of specialized material-handling equipment, and the division of labor 
are all designed to enhance the flow of work through the system, since all items follow 
 virtually the same sequence of operations. 
 LO16.2 Compare product and 
service scheduling hierarchies.
 LO16.3 Describe scheduling 
needs in high-volume systems.
 Flow system  High-volume 
 system in which jobs all follow 
the same sequence.  
 Flow-shop scheduling   
Scheduling for flow systems.  

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
691
 A major aspect in the design 
of flow systems is  line  balancing, 
which 
concerns 
allocating 
the 
required tasks to workstations so that 
they satisfy technical  (sequencing) 
constraints and are balanced with 
respect to equal work times among 
stations. Highly  balanced systems 
result in the maximum  utilization 
of equipment and  personnel as well 
as the highest possible rate of out-
put. Line balancing is discussed in 
Chapter 6. 
 In setting up flow systems, 
designers must consider the poten-
tial discontent of workers in connec-
tion with the specialization of job 
tasks in these systems; high work 
rates are often achieved by dividing 
the work into a series of relatively 
simple tasks assigned to different workers. The resulting jobs tend to be boring and monoto-
nous and may give rise to fatigue, absenteeism, turnover, and other problems, all of which 
tend to reduce productivity and disrupt the smooth flow of work. These problems and poten-
tial solutions are elaborated on in Chapter 7, which deals with the design of work systems. 
 In spite of the built-in attributes of flow systems related to scheduling, a number of sched-
uling problems remain. One stems from the fact that few flow systems are  completely devoted 
to a single product or service; most must handle a variety of sizes and models. Thus, an 
automobile manufacturer will assemble many different combinations of cars—two-door and 
four-door models, some with air-conditioning and some not, some with deluxe trim and oth-
ers with standard trim, some with CD players, some with tinted glass, and so on. The same 
can be said for producers of appliances, electronic equipment, and toys. Each change involves 
slightly different inputs of parts, materials, and processing requirements that must be sched-
uled into the line. If the line is to operate smoothly, a supervisor must coordinate the flow of 
materials and the work, which includes the inputs, the processing, and the outputs, as well as 
purchases. In addition to achieving a smooth flow, it is important to avoid excessive buildup 
of inventories. Again, each variation in size or model will tend to have somewhat different 
inventory requirements, so that additional scheduling efforts will be needed. 
 One source of scheduling concern is possible disruptions in the system that result in less 
than the desired output. These can be caused by equipment failures, material shortages, acci-
dents, and absences. In practice, it is usually impossible to increase the rate of output to 
compensate for these factors, mainly because flow systems are designed to operate at a given 
rate. Instead, strategies involving subcontracting or overtime are often required, although sub-
contracting on short notice is not always feasible. Sometimes work that is partly completed 
can be made up off the line. 
 The reverse situation can also impose scheduling problems although these are less severe. 
This happens when the desired output is less than the usual rate. However, instead of slowing 
the ensuing rate of output, it is usually necessary to operate the system at the usual rate, but 
for fewer hours. For instance, a production line might operate temporarily for seven hours a 
day instead of eight. 
 High-volume systems usually require automated or specialized equipment for processing 
and handling. Moreover, they perform best with a high, uniform output. Shutdowns and start-
ups are generally costly, and especially costly in process industries. Consequently, the follow-
ing factors often determine the success of such a system:
 •  Process and product design. Here, cost and manufacturability are important, as is 
achieving a smooth flow through the system. 
 At the Wakefield, U.K. factory, 
Rexam produces 5,000 cans 
per minute and delivers them to 
its main customer, Coca-Cola 
Bottling. To meet Coke’s lean 
manufacturing requirements, 
Rexam needed to spray cans 
the same every single time. 
They added a spray monitor 
system to immediately identify 
spray malfunctions. The 
early diagnostics of the spray 
monitor system can save Rexam 
from coating hundreds of cans 
improperly. The objectives in 
upgrading were to improve 
quality, reduce variation, and 
reduce costs. 

692 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 •  Preventive maintenance. Keeping equipment in good operating order can minimize 
breakdowns that would disrupt the flow of work. 
 •  Rapid repair when breakdowns occur. This can require specialists as well as stocks of 
critical spare parts. 
 •  Optimal product mixes. Techniques such as linear programming can be used to deter-
mine optimal blends of inputs to achieve desired outputs at minimal costs. This is par-
ticularly true in the manufacture of fertilizers, animal feeds, and diet foods. 
 •  Minimization of quality problems. Quality problems can be extremely disruptive, 
requiring shutdowns while problems are resolved. Moreover, when output fails to meet 
quality standards, not only is there the loss of output but also a waste of the labor, mate-
rial, time, and other resources that went into it. 
 •  Reliability and timing of supplies. Shortages of supplies are an obvious source of dis-
ruption and must be avoided. On the other hand, if the solution is to stockpile supplies, 
that can lead to high carrying costs. Shortening supply lead times, developing reliable 
supply schedules, and carefully projecting needs are all useful. 
 Scheduling in Intermediate-Volume Systems 
    Intermediate-volume system outputs fall between the standardized type of output of the 
high-volume systems and made-to-order output of job shops. Like the high-volume systems, 
 intermediate-volume systems typically produce standard outputs. If manufacturing is involved, 
the products may be for stock rather than for special order. However, the volume of output in 
such cases is not large enough to justify continuous production. Instead, it is more economical 
to process these items  intermittently.  Thus, intermediate-volume work centers periodically shift 
from one job to another. In contrast to a job shop, the run (batch) sizes are relatively large. Exam-
ples of products made in these systems include canned foods, baked goods, paint, and cosmetics. 
 The three basic issues in these systems are the  run size  of jobs, the  timing  of jobs, and the 
 sequence in which jobs should be processed. 
 Sometimes, the issue of run size can be determined by using a model such as the economic 
run size model discussed in Chapter 13 on inventory management. The run size that would 
minimize setup and inventory costs is
 
 Q
DS
H
p
p
u
S
2
,
where
Setup cost
0 


 
 (16–1) 
 Setup cost may be an important consideration. Setup costs may depend on the order in 
which jobs are processed; similar jobs may require less setup change between them. For 
example, jobs in a print shop may be sequenced by ink color to reduce the number of setups 
needed. This opens up the possibility of reducing setup cost and time by taking processing 
sequence into account. It also makes sequencing more complex, and it requires estimating job 
setup costs for every sequence combination. 
 In another vein, companies are working to reduce setup times and, hence, experience less 
downtime for equipment changeover. Tactics include offline setups, snap-on parts, modular 
setups, and flexible equipment designed to handle a variety of processing requirements. 
 Another difficulty arises because usage is not always as smooth as assumed in the model. 
Some products will tend to be used up faster than expected and have to be replenished sooner. 
Also, because multiple products are to be processed, it is not always possible to schedule pro-
duction to correspond with optimum run times. 
 Another approach frequently used is to base production on a master schedule developed 
from customer orders and forecasts of demand. Companies engaged in assembly operations 
would then use an MRP approach (described in Chapter 12) to determine the quantity and 
projected timing of jobs for components. The manager would then compare projected require-
ments with projected capacity and develop a feasible schedule from that information. Compa-
nies engaged in producing processed rather than assembled goods (e.g., food products, such 
 LO16.4 Describe scheduling 
needs in intermediate-volume 
systems.

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
693
as canned goods and beverages; publishing, such as magazines; paints and cleaning supplies) 
would use a somewhat different approach; the  time-phasing  information provided by MRP 
would not be an important factor. 
 16.2 SCHEDULING IN LOW-VOLUME SYSTEMS 
    The characteristics of low-volume systems (job shops) are considerably different from those 
of high- and intermediate-volume systems. Products are made to order, and orders usually 
 differ considerably in terms of processing requirements, materials needed, processing time, 
and processing sequence and setups. Because of these circumstances,   job-shop  scheduling 
is usually fairly complex. This is compounded by the impossibility of establishing firm 
 schedules prior to receiving the actual job orders. 
 Job-shop processing gives rise to two basic issues for schedulers: how to distribute the 
workload among work centers and what job processing sequence to use. 
 Loading 
 Loading refers to the assignment of jobs to processing (work) centers. Loading decisions 
involve assigning specific jobs to work centers and to various machines in the work centers. In 
cases where a job can be processed only by a specific center, loading presents little difficulty. 
However, problems arise when two or more jobs are to be processed and there are a number of 
work centers capable of performing the required work. In such cases, the operations manager 
needs some way of assigning jobs to the centers. 
 When making assignments, managers often seek an arrangement that will minimize pro-
cessing and setup costs, minimize idle time among work centers, or minimize job completion 
time, depending on the situation. 
 Gantt Charts.  Visual aids called   Gantt charts  are used for a variety of purposes related 
to loading and scheduling. They derive their name from Henry Gantt, who pioneered the use 
of charts for industrial scheduling in the early 1900s. Gantt charts can be used in a number 
of different ways, two of which are illustrated in  Figure 16.2 , which shows scheduling class-
rooms for a university and scheduling hospital operating rooms for a day. 
 LO16.5  Describe scheduling 
needs in job shops.
 Job-shop scheduling  
Scheduling for low-volume 
systems with many variations in 
requirements.  
 Loading  The assignment of 
jobs to processing centers.  
 Gantt chart  Chart used as 
visual aid for loading and 
 scheduling purposes. 
 FIGURE 16.2 
 Examples of charts used for 
scheduling 
Classroom schedule: Fall           Friday
8
9
10
11
12
1
2
3
4
5
Room
A100
A105
A110
A115
Stat 1
Econ
101
Econ
102
Fin
201
Mar
210
Acct
212
Mar
410
Stat 2
Math
2a
Math
2b
Acct
210
CCE — — — — — — — 
Acct
340
Mgmt
250
Math
3
Mar
220
Mar
440
Mgmt
230
Fin
310
Acct
360
City hospital, surgery schedule         Date: 5/8
Operating
room
7
8
9
10
11
12
A
B
C
Peters
Henderson
Dun
Anderson
Smith
Hour
Scheduled
Idle
Cleaning and 
setup

694 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 The purpose of Gantt charts is to organize and visually display the actual or intended use 
of resources in a  time framework.  In most cases, a time scale is represented horizontally, 
and resources to be scheduled are listed vertically. The use and idle times of resources are 
reflected in the chart. 
 Managers may use the charts for trial-and-error schedule development to get an idea of 
what different arrangements would involve. Thus, a tentative surgery schedule might reveal 
insufficient allowance for surgery that takes longer than expected and can be revised accord-
ingly. Use of the chart for classroom scheduling would help avoid assigning two different 
classes to the same room at the same time. 
 There are a number of different types of Gantt charts. Two of the most commonly used are 
the  load chart and the  schedule chart. 
 A  load chart depicts the loading and idle times for a group of machines or a list of depart-
ments.  Figure 16.3  illustrates a typical load chart. This chart indicates that work center 3 is 
completely loaded for the entire week, center 4 will be available from Tuesday to Friday, and 
the other two centers have idle time scattered throughout the week. This information can help 
a manager rework loading assignments to better utilize the centers. For instance, if all centers 
perform the same kind of work, the manager might want to free one center for a long job or a 
rush order. The chart also shows when certain jobs are scheduled to start and finish, and where 
to expect idle time. 
 LO16.6 Use and interpret 
Gantt charts..
 Load chart  A Gantt chart that 
shows the loading and idle times 
for a group of machines or list of 
departments. 
 FIGURE 16.3 
 A. Sample Gantt load chart. 
B. The same Gantt chart using 
the Lekin software, developed 
at New York University, includes 
multiple scheduling routines 
along with graphics. 
Source: © Pinedo and Feldman. Used with 
permission. 
Mon.
Tues.
Wed.
Thurs.
Fri.
Work center
1
2
3
4
Job 3
Job 1
Job 10
Job 3
Job 7
Job 4
Job 6
Job 7
Processing
Center not available
(e.g., maintenance)
A.
B.

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
695
Infinite loading
Capacity
over
over
1
Period
2
3
4
5
6
Finite loading
Capacity
1
Period
2
3
4
5
6
 Two different approaches are used to load work centers:  infinite  loading and  finite loading. 
 Infinite loading  assigns jobs to work centers without regard to the capacity of the work cen-
ter. As you can see in the diagram that follows, this can lead to overloads in some time periods 
and underloads in others. The priority sequencing rules described in this chapter use infinite 
loading. One possible result of infinite loading is the formation of queues in some (or all) work 
centers. That requires a second step to correct the imbalance.   Finite loading  projects actual 
job starting and stopping times at each work center, taking into account the  capacities of each 
work center and the processing times of jobs, so that capacity is not exceeded. One output 
of finite loading is a detailed projection of hours each work center will operate.  Schedules 
based on finite loading may have to be updated often, perhaps daily, due to processing delays 
at work centers and the addition of new jobs or cancellation of current jobs. The  following 
diagram illustrates these two approaches: 
 With infinite loading, a manager may need to make some response to overloaded work 
centers. Among the possible responses are shifting work to other periods or other centers, 
working overtime, or contracting out a portion of the work. Note that the last two options in 
effect increase capacity to meet the workload. 
 Finite loading may reflect a fixed upper limit on capacity. For example, a bus line will have 
only so many buses. Hence, the decision to place into service a particular number of buses 
fixes capacity. Similarly, a manufacturer might have one specialized machine that it operates 
around the clock. Thus, it is operated at the upper limit of its capacity, so finite loading would 
be called for. 
 There are two general approaches to scheduling: forward scheduling and backward 
 scheduling.  Forward scheduling  means scheduling ahead from a point in time;   backward 
scheduling  means scheduling backward from a due date. Forward scheduling is used if the 
issue is “How long will it take to complete this job?” Backward scheduling would be used if 
the issue is “When is the latest the job can be started and still be completed by the due date?” 
Forward scheduling enables the scheduler to determine the earliest possible completion time 
for each job and, thus, the amount of lateness or the amount of slack can be determined. That 
information can be combined with information from other jobs in setting up a schedule for all 
current jobs. 
 A manager often uses a   schedule chart  to monitor the progress of jobs. The vertical axis 
on this type of Gantt chart shows the orders or jobs in progress, and the horizontal axis shows 
time. The chart indicates which jobs are on schedule and which are behind or ahead. 
 A typical schedule chart is illustrated in  Figure  16.4 . It shows the current status of a 
 landscaping job with planned and actual starting and finishing times for the five stages of the 
job. The chart indicates that approval and the ordering of trees and shrubs was on schedule. 
The site preparation was a bit behind schedule. The trees were received earlier than expected, 
and planting is ahead of schedule. However, the shrubs have not yet been received. The chart 
indicates some slack between scheduled receipt of shrubs and shrub planting, so if the shrubs 
arrive by the end of the week, it appears the schedule can still be met. 
 Despite the obvious benefits of Gantt charts and the fact that they are widely used, they 
possess certain limitations, the chief one being the need to repeatedly update a chart to keep it 
 Infinite loading  Jobs are 
assigned to work centers 
without regard to the capacity of 
the work center. 
 Finite loading  Jobs are 
assigned to work centers taking 
into account the work center 
capacity and job processing 
times. 
 Forward scheduling   
Scheduling ahead from a point 
in time. 
 Backward scheduling  
Scheduling backward from a due 
date. 
 Schedule chart  A Gantt chart 
that shows the orders or jobs in 
progress and whether they are on 
schedule. 

696 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
current. In addition, a chart does not directly reveal costs associated with alternative loadings. 
Finally, a job’s processing time may vary depending on the work center; certain stations or 
work centers may be capable of processing some jobs faster than other stations. Again, that 
situation would increase the complexity of evaluating alternative schedules. 
 In addition to Gantt charts, managers often rely on input/output reports to manage work 
flow. 
 Input/Output Control.   Input/output (I/O) control  refers to monitoring the work flow 
and queue lengths at work centers. The purpose of I/O control is to manage work flow so that 
queues and waiting times are kept under control. Without I/O control, demand may exceed 
processing capacity, causing an overload at a center. Conversely, work may arrive slower than 
the rate a work center can handle, leaving the work center underutilized. Ideally, a balance can 
be struck between the input and output rates, thereby achieving effective use of work center 
capacities without experiencing excessive queues at the work centers. A simple example of 
I/O control is the use of stoplights on some expressway on-ramps. These regulate the flow of 
entering traffic according to the current volume of expressway traffic. 
  Figure  16.5  illustrates an input/output report for a work center. A key portion of the 
report is the backlog of work waiting to be processed. The report also reveals deviations-
from-planned for both inputs and outputs, thereby enabling a manager to determine possible 
sources of problems. 
 The deviations in each period are determined by subtracting “planned” from “actual.” For 
example, in the first period, subtracting the planned input of 100 hours from the actual input 
 Input/output (I/O) control  
Managing work flow and queues 
at work centers.  
 FIGURE 16.4 
 Progress chart for landscaping 
job 
1
Stage
Drawings
Site
Trees
Shrubs
Final inspection
2
3
4
5
6
7
[Approval]
[Preparation]
[Order]
[Order]
[Plant]
[Approval]
[Plant]
[Receive]
[Receive]
Now
Scheduled
   Actual
   progress
[           ]
 FIGURE 16.5 
 A sample input/output report for 
a work center showing input and 
output in hours of processing 
time 
 Note: Figures represent standard hours of 
processing time. 
 *Given, not derived from the data. 
1
Input
Output
Planned 
100 
100 
90 
90 
90 
90 
Actual 
120 
95 
80 
88 
93 
94
Deviation 
20 
5 
10 
2 
3 
4
Cum. dev. 20 
15 
5 
3 
6 
10
Planned 
110 
110 
100 
100 
100 
95
Actual 
110 
105 
95 
101 
103 
96
Deviation 
0 
5 
5 
1 
3 
1
Cum. dev. 
0 
5 
10 
9 
6 
5
2
3
Period
4
5
6
50
40*
Backlog
40
25
12
2
0

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
697
of 120 hours produces a deviation of   20 hours. Similarly, in the first period, the planned and 
actual outputs are equal, producing a deviation of 0 hours. 
 The backlog for each period is determined by subtracting the “actual output” from the 
“actual input” and adjusting the backlog from the previous period by that amount. For exam-
ple, in the second period actual output exceeds actual input by 10 hours. Hence, the previous 
backlog of 50 hours is reduced by 10 hours to 40 hours. 
 Another approach that can be used to assign jobs to resources is the  assignment method. 
 Assignment Method of Linear Programming.  The   assignment model  is a special-
purpose linear programming model that is useful in situations that call for assigning tasks or 
other work requirements to resources. Typical examples include assigning jobs to machines 
or workers, territories to salespeople, and repair jobs to repair crews. The idea is to obtain 
an optimum  matching  of tasks and resources. Commonly used criteria include costs, profits, 
efficiency, and performance. 
  Table 16.1  illustrates a typical problem, where four jobs are to be assigned to four workers. 
The problem is arranged in a format that facilitates evaluation of assignments. The numbers 
in the body of the table represent the value or cost associated with each job–worker combina-
tion. In this case, the numbers represent costs. Thus, it would cost $8 for worker A to do job 
1, $6 for worker B to do job 1, and so on. If the problem involved minimizing the cost for job 
1 alone, it would clearly be assigned to worker C, since that combination has the lowest cost. 
However, that assignment does not take into account the other jobs and their costs, which 
is important since the lowest-cost assignment for any one job may not be consistent with a 
minimum-cost assignment when all jobs are considered.  
 If there are to be  n  matches, there are  n!  different possibilities. In this case, there are 
4!    24 different matches. One approach is to investigate each match and select the one with 
the lowest cost. However, if there are 12 jobs, there would be 479 million different matches! 
A much simpler approach is to use a procedure called the   Hungarian method   to identify the 
lowest-cost solution. 
 To be able to use the Hungarian method, a one-for-one matching is required. Each job, for 
example, must be assigned to only one worker. It is also assumed that every worker is capable 
of handling every job, and that the costs or values associated with each assignment combina-
tion are known and fixed (i.e., not subject to variation). The number of rows and columns 
must be the same. Solved Problem 1 at the end of the chapter shows what to do if they aren’t 
the same. 
 Once the relevant cost information has been acquired and arranged in tabular form, the 
basic procedure of the Hungarian method is as follows:
 1. 
Subtract the smallest number in each row from every number in the row. This is called a 
 row reduction. Enter the results in a new table. 
 2. 
Subtract the smallest number in each column of the new table from every number in the 
column. This is called a  column reduction. Enter the results in another table. 
 3. 
Test whether an optimum assignment can be made. You do this by determining the  mini-
mum number of lines (horizontal or vertical) needed to cross out (cover) all zeros. If the 
number of lines equals the number of rows, an optimum assignment is possible. In that 
case, go to step 6. Otherwise go on to step 4. 
 4. 
If the number of lines is less than the number of rows, modify the table in this way:
 a. Subtract the smallest uncovered number from every uncovered number in the table. 
 b. Add the smallest uncovered number to the numbers at  intersections  of cross-out lines.  
 c. Numbers crossed out but not at intersections of cross-out lines carry over to the 
next table. 
 5. 
Repeat steps 3 and 4 until an optimal table is obtained. 
 6. 
Make the assignments. Begin with rows or columns with only one zero. Match items 
that have zeros, using only one match for each row and each column. Eliminate both the 
row and the column after the match. 
 LO16.7  Use the assignment 
method for loading.
 Assignment model  A 
 linear programming model for 
 optimal assignment of tasks and 
resources.  
 Hungarian method  Method 
of assigning jobs by a one-for-
one matching to identify the 
lowest-cost solution. 
 WORKER 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
Job 
1 
 8 
 6 
 2 
 4 
 2 
 6 
 7 
 11 
 10 
 3 
 3 
 5 
 7 
 6 
 4 
 5 
 10 
 12 
 9 
 TABLE 16.1 
 A typical assignment problem 
showing job times for each job/
worker combination 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL

698 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 Determine the optimum assignment of jobs to workers for the following data (from  Table 16.1 ): 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Row 
Minimum  
 1 
 8 
 6 
 2 
 4 
 2 
 Job 
 2 
 6 
 7 
 11 
 10 
 6 
 3 
 3 
 5 
 7 
 6 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 10 
 12 
 9 
 5 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  1 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
Subtract the smallest number in each row from every number in the row, and enter the 
results in a new table. The result of this row reduction is
 
 
 WORKER 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 6 
 4 
 0 
 2 
 2 
 0 
 1 
 5 
 4 
 3 
 0 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 0 
 5 
 7 
 4 
 Column Minimum 
 0 
 1 
 0 
 2 
   b. 
Subtract the smallest number in each column from every number in the column, and enter 
the results in a new table. The result of this column reduction is
 
 
 WORKER 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 6 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 5 
 2 
 3 
 0 
 1 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 0 
 4 
 7 
 2 
 c. 
Determine the  minimum  number of lines needed to cross out all zeros. (Try to cross out as 
many zeros as possible when drawing lines.)
 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 6 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 0 
 0 
 5 
 2 
 3 
 0 
 1 
 4 
 1 
 4 
 0 
 4 
 7 
 2 
   d. Since only three lines are needed to cross out all zeros and the table has four rows, this is 
not the optimum. Note that the smallest uncovered value is 1. 
   e. 
Subtract the smallest uncovered value from every uncovered number that hasn’t been 
crossed out, and add it to numbers that are at the intersections of covering lines. The 
results are as follows:
 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 7 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 5 
 2 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 3 
 0 
 4 
 0 
 3 
 6 
 1 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
699
   f. Determine the minimum number of lines needed to cross out all zeros (four). Since this 
equals the number of rows, you can make the optimum assignment.
 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 7 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 5 
 2 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 3 
 0 
 4 
 0 
 3 
 6 
 1 
 g. 
Make assignments: Start with rows and columns with only one zero. Match jobs with 
machines that have a zero cost.
 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 1 
 7 
 3 
 0  
 0 
 Job 
 2 
 1 
 0  
 5 
 2 
 3 
 0 
 0 
 3 
 0  
 4 
 0  
 3 
 6 
 1 
      The assignment problem can also be solved using an Excel template, as seen in  Table 16.2 . 
The ones in the solution matrix denote assignments (i.e., assign C to job 1), and the zeros 
denote no assignment for a worker/machine and job combination.
 Assignment 
 Cost 
 1-C 
 $ 2 
 2-B 
 7 
 3-D 
 6 
 4-A 
 5 
 
 $20 
 TABLE 16.2 
 Excel solution to Example 1 
     As you can see, the process is relatively simple. The simplicity of the Hungar-
ian method belies its usefulness when the assumptions are met. Not only does it pro-
vide a rational method for making assignments, it guarantees an optimal solution, 
often  without the use of a computer, which is necessary only for fairly large problems. 

700 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 Local priority rules  Focus 
on information pertaining to 
a single workstation when 
 establishing a job sequence. 
 Global priority rules  
Incorporate information from 
multiple workstations when 
establishing a job sequence.  
When  profits instead of costs are involved, the profits can be converted to  relative costs 
by  subtracting every number in the table from the largest number and then proceeding as 
in a  minimization problem. 
 It is worth knowing that one extension of this technique can be used to prevent undesirable 
assignments. For example, union rules may prohibit one person’s assignment to a particular 
job, or a manager might wish to avoid assigning an unqualified person to a job. Whatever 
the reason, specific combinations can be avoided by assigning a relatively high cost to that 
combination. In the previous example, if we wish to avoid combination 1-A, assigning a cost 
of $50 to that combination will achieve the desired effect, because $50 is much greater than 
the other costs. 
 Sequencing 
     Although loading decisions determine the machines or work centers that will be used to process 
specific jobs, they do not indicate the  order  in which the jobs waiting at a given work center are 
to be processed.    Sequencing    is concerned with determining job processing order. Sequencing 
decisions determine both the order in which jobs are processed at various work centers and the 
order in which jobs are processed at individual    workstations    within the work centers. 
 If work centers are lightly loaded and if jobs all require the same amount of processing 
time, sequencing presents no particular difficulties. However, for heavily loaded work cen-
ters, especially in situations where relatively lengthy jobs are involved, the order of process-
ing can be very important in terms of costs associated with jobs waiting for processing and in 
terms of idle time at the work centers. In this section, we will examine some of the ways in 
which jobs are sequenced. 
 Typically, a number of jobs will be waiting for processing.   Priority rules are simple heu-
ristics used to select the order in which the jobs will be processed. Some of the most common 
are listed in  Table 16.3 . The rules generally rest on the assumption that job setup cost and 
time are  independent  of processing sequence. In using these rules, job processing times and 
due dates are important pieces of information.   Job time  usually includes setup and processing 
times. Jobs that require similar setups can lead to reduced setup times if the sequencing rule 
takes this into account (the rules described here do not). Due dates may be the result of delivery 
times promised to customers, material requirements planning (MRP) processing, or managerial 
decisions. They are subject to revision and must be kept current to give meaning to sequencing 
choices. Also, it should be noted that due dates associated with all rules except slack per opera-
tion (S/O) and critical ratio (CR) are for the operation about to be performed; due dates for S/O 
and CR are typically final due dates for orders rather than intermediate, departmental deadlines.  
 The priority rules can be classified as either  local  or  global.  Local priority rules take 
into account information pertaining only to a single workstation;   global priority rules take 
into account information pertaining to multiple workstations. First come, first served (FCFS), 
shortest processing time (SPT), and earliest due date (EDD) are local rules; CR and S/O are 
global rules. Rush can be either local or global. As you might imagine, global rules require 
more effort than local rules. A major complication in global sequencing is that not all jobs 
 Sequencing  Determining the 
order in which jobs at a work 
center will be processed.  
 Workstation  An area where 
one or a few workers and/or 
machines perform similar work. 
 Priority rules  Simple 
 heuristics used to select the order 
in which jobs will be processed. 
 Job time  Time needed for setup 
and processing of a job. 
 First come, first served (FCFS): Jobs are processed in the order in which they arrive at a machine or work 
center. 
 Shortest processing time (SPT): Jobs are processed according to processing time at a machine or work 
center, shortest job first. 
 Earliest due date (EDD): Jobs are processed according to due date, earliest due date first. 
 Critical ratio (CR): Jobs are processed according to smallest ratio of time remaining until due date to 
processing time remaining. 
 Slack per operation (S/O): Jobs are processed according to average slack time (time until due date minus 
remaining time to process). Compute by dividing slack time by number of remaining operations, including 
the current one. 
 Rush: Emergency or preferred customers first. 
 LO16.8 Give examples of 
commonly used priority rules.
 TABLE 16.3 
 Possible priority rules 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
701
require the same processing or even the same order of processing. As a result, the set of jobs 
is different for different workstations. Local rules are particularly useful for bottleneck opera-
tions, but they are not limited to those situations. 
 A number of assumptions apply when using the priority rules;  Table 16.4  lists them. In 
effect, the priority rules pertain to  static  sequencing: For simplicity, it is assumed that there is 
no variability in either setup or processing times, or in the set of jobs. The assumptions make 
the scheduling problem manageable. In practice, jobs may be delayed or canceled, and new 
jobs may arrive, requiring schedule revisions. 
 The effectiveness of any given sequence is frequently judged in terms of one or more  per-
formance measures. The most frequently used performance measures follow:
 •  Job flow time is the amount of time it takes from when a job arrives until it is com-
plete. It includes not only actual processing time but also any time waiting to be 
processed, transportation time between operations, and any waiting time related to 
equipment breakdowns, unavailable parts, quality problems, and so on. The average 
flow time for a group of jobs is equal to the total flow time for the jobs divided by the 
number of jobs. 
 •  Job lateness is the amount of time the job completion date is expected to exceed the 
date the job was due or promised to a customer. It is the difference between the actual 
completion time and the due date. If only differences for jobs with completion times 
that exceed due dates are recorded, and zeros are assigned to jobs that are early, the term 
used is job  tardiness. 
 •  Makespan is the total time needed to complete a  group of jobs. It is the length of time 
between the start of the first job in the group and the completion of the last job in the 
group. If processing involves only one work center, makespan will be the same regard-
less of the priority rule being used. 
 •  Average number of jobs. Jobs that are in a shop are considered to be work-in-process 
inventory. The average work-in-process for a group of jobs can be computed using the 
following formula:
 Average number of jobs
Total flow time
Makespan


     If the jobs represent equal amounts of inventory, the average number of jobs will also 
reflect the average work-in-process inventory. 
 Of the priority rules, rush scheduling is quite simple and needs no explanation. The other 
rules and performance measures are illustrated in the following two examples. 
 Job flow time  The amount of 
time from when a job arrives 
until it is finished. 
 Job lateness  The difference 
between the actual completion 
date and the due date.  
 Makespan  Total time needed 
to complete a group of jobs from 
the beginning of the first job to 
the completion of the last job. 
 The set of jobs is known; no new jobs arrive after processing begins; and no jobs are canceled. 
 Setup time is independent of processing sequence. 
 Setup time is deterministic. 
 Processing times are deterministic rather than variable. 
 There will be no interruptions in processing such as machine breakdowns, accidents, or 
worker illness. 
 TABLE 16.4 
 Assumptions of priority rules 
 Processing times (including setup times) and due dates for six jobs waiting to be processed 
at a work center are given in the following table. Determine the sequence of jobs, the average 
flow time, average tardiness, and average number of jobs at the work center, for each of these 
rules: 
 a. 
FCFS 
 b. 
SPT 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  2 

702 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 c. 
EDD 
 d. 
CR 
 Job 
 Processing 
Time (days) 
 Due Date 
(days from 
present time) 
 A 
 2 
 7 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 C 
 4 
 4 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 E 
 5 
 15 
 F 
 12 
 18 
 Assume jobs arrived in the order shown. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
The FCFS sequence is simply A-B-C-D-E-F. The measures of effectiveness are as fol-
lows (see table):
 (1)  Average flow time: 120/6    20 days. 
 (2)  Average tardiness: 54/6    9 days. 
 (3) The  makespan  is 41 days.  Average number of jobs at the work center: 120/41    2.93. 
 Job 
Sequence  
 (1) 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Flow 
Time 
 (3) 
Due 
Date 
 (2) – (3) 
Days Tardy 
[0 if negative] 
 A 
 2 
 2 
 7 
 0 
 B 
 8 
 10 
 16 
 0 
 C 
 4 
 14 
 4 
 10 
 D 
 10 
 24 
 17 
 7 
 E 
 5 
 29 
 15 
 14 
 F 
 12 
 41 
 18 
 23 
 
 41 
 120 
 
 54 
 The flow time column indicates  cumulative  processing time, so summing these times and 
dividing by the total number of jobs processed indicates the average time each job spends at 
the work center. Similarly, find the average number of jobs at the center by summing the flow 
times and dividing by the total processing time. 
 The Excel solution is shown in  Table 16.5. 
 b. 
Using the SPT rule, the job sequence is A-C-E-B-D-F (see the following table). The 
resulting values for the three measures of effectiveness are
 (1)  Average flow time: 108/6    18 days. 
 (2)  Average tardiness: 40/6    6.67 days. 
 (3)  Average number of jobs at the work center: 108/41    2.63. 
 Job 
Sequence  
 (1) 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Flow 
Time 
 (3) 
Due 
Date 
 (2) – (3) 
Days Tardy 
[0 if negative] 
 A 
 2 
  2 
 7 
 0 
 C 
 4 
  6 
 4 
 2 
 E 
 5 
 11 
 15 
 0 
 B 
 8 
 19 
 16 
 3 
 D 
 10 
 29 
 17 
 12 
 F 
 12 
 41 
 18 
 23 
 
 41 
 108 
 
 40 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
703
   c. 
Using earliest due date as the selection criterion, the job sequence is C-A-E-B-D-F. The 
measures of effectiveness are as follows (see table):
 (1)  Average flow time: 110/6    18.33 days. 
 (2)  Average tardiness: 38/6    6.33 days. 
 (3)  Average number of jobs at the work center: 110/41    2.68. 
 Job 
Sequence  
 (1) 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Flow 
Time 
 (3) 
Due 
Date 
 (2) – (3) 
Days Tardy 
[0 if negative] 
 C 
 4 
  4 
 4 
 0 
 A 
 2 
  6 
 7 
 0 
 E 
 5 
 11 
 15 
 0 
 B 
 8 
 19 
 16 
 3 
 D 
 10 
 29 
 17 
 12 
 F 
 12 
 41 
 18 
 23 
 
 41 
 110 
 
 38 
 TABLE 16.5 
 Excel solution for Example 2a 

704 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 d. 
Using the critical ratio we find
 Job 
Sequence  
 Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Critical Ratio 
Calculation  
 A 
 2 
  7 
 (7    0)/ 2    3.5 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 (16    0)/ 8    2.0 
 C 
 4 
 4 
 (4    0)/ 4    1.0 (lowest) 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 (17    0)/10    1.7 
 E 
 5 
 15 
 (15    0)/ 5    3.0 
 F 
 12 
 18 
 (18    0)/12    1.5 
 At day 4 [C completed], the critical ratios are 
 Job 
Sequence  
 Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Critical Ratio 
Calculation  
 A 
 2 
 7 
 (7    4)/ 2    1.5 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 (16    4)/ 8    1.5 
 C 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 (17    4)/10    1.3 
 E 
 5 
 15 
 (15    4)/ 5    2.2 
 F 
 12 
 18 
 (18    4)/12    1.17 (lowest) 
 At day 16 [C and F completed], the critical ratios are
 Job 
Sequence  
 Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Critical Ratio 
Calculation  
 A 
 2 
 7 
 (7    16)/ 2      4.5 (lowest) 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 (16    16)/ 8    0.0 
 C 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 (17    16)/10    0.1 
 E 
 5 
 15 
 (15    16)/ 5      0.2 
 F 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 At day 18 [C, F, and A completed], the critical ratios are
 Job 
Sequence  
 Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Critical Ratio 
Calculation  
 A 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 (16    18)/ 8      0.25 
 C 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 (17    18)/10      0.10 
 E 
 5 
 15 
 (15    18)/ 5      0.60 (lowest) 
 F 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 At day 23 [C, F, A, and E completed], the critical ratios are
 Job 
Sequence  
 Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Critical Ratio 
Calculation  
 A 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 B 
 8 
 16 
 (16    23)/ 8      0.875 (lowest) 
 C 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 D 
 10 
 17 
 (17    23)/10      0.60 
 E 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 F 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 The job sequence is C-F-A-E-B-D, and the resulting values for the measures of  effectiveness 
are as follows:
 (1)  Average flow time: 133/6    22.17 days. 
 (2)  Average tardiness: 58/6    9.67 days. 
 (3)  Average number of jobs at the work center: 133/41    3.24. 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
705
 Sequence 
 (1) 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Flow Time 
 (3) 
Due 
Date 
 (2) – (3) 
Days 
Tardy 
 C 
 4 
  4 
 4 
 0 
 F 
 12 
 16 
 18 
 0 
 A 
 2 
 18 
 7 
 11 
 E 
 5 
 23 
 15 
 8 
 B 
 8 
 31 
 16 
 15 
 D 
 10 
 41 
 17 
 24 
 
 41 
 133 
 
 58 
 The results of these four rules are summarized in  Table 16.6 .
 TABLE 16.6 
 Comparison of the four rules for 
Example 2 
       In Example 2, the SPT rule was the best according to two of the measures of effectiveness 
and a little worse than the EDD rule on average tardiness. The CR rule was the worst in every 
case. For a different set of numbers, the EDD rule (or perhaps another rule not mentioned 
here) might prove superior to SPT in terms of average job tardiness or some other measure of 
effectiveness. However, SPT is always superior in terms of minimizing flow time and, hence, 
in terms of minimizing the average number of jobs at the work center and completion time. 
This results in faster job completion, which has the potential to generate more revenue. 
 Generally speaking, the FCFS rule and the CR rule turn out to be the least effective of the 
rules. 
 The primary limitation of the FCFS rule is that long jobs will tend to delay other jobs. If a 
process consists of work on a number of machines, machine idle time for downstream work-
stations will increase. However, for service systems in which customers are directly involved, 
the FCFS rule is by far the dominant priority rule, mainly because of the inherent fairness 
but also because of the inability to obtain realistic estimates of processing time for individual 
jobs. The FCFS rule also has the advantage of simplicity. If other measures are important 
when there is high customer contact, companies may adopt the strategy of moving processing 
to the “backroom” so they don’t necessarily have to follow FCFS. 
 Because the SPT rule always results in the lowest (i.e., optimal) average completion (flow) 
time, it can result in lower in-process inventories. And because it often provides the lowest 
(optimal) average tardiness, it can result in better customer service levels. Finally, since it 
always involves a lower average number of jobs at the work center, there tends to be less con-
gestion in the work area. SPT also minimizes downstream idle time. However, due dates are 
often uppermost in managers’ minds, so they may not use SPT because it doesn’t incorporate 
due dates. 
 The major disadvantage of the SPT rule is that it tends to make long jobs wait, perhaps for 
rather long times (especially if new, shorter jobs are continually added to the system). That 
can be troubling if long jobs are from the company’s best customers. Various modifications 
may be used in an effort to avoid this. For example, after waiting for a given time period, any 
remaining jobs are automatically moved to the head of the line. This is known as the  truncated 
SPT rule. 
 Rule 
 Average 
Flow Time 
(days) 
 Average 
Tardiness 
(days) 
 Average 
Number of 
Jobs at the 
Work Center 
 FCFS 
 20.00 
 9.00 
 2.93 
 SPT 
 18.00 
 6.67 
 2.63 
 EDD 
 18.33 
 6.33 
 2.68 
 CR 
 22.17 
 9.67 
 3.24 

706 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 The EDD rule directly addresses due dates and minimizes lateness. Although it has intui-
tive appeal, its main limitation is that it does not take processing time into account. One pos-
sible consequence is that it can result in some jobs waiting a long time, which adds to both 
in-process inventories and shop congestion. 
 The CR rule is easy to use and has intuitive appeal. Although it had the poorest showing in 
Example 2 for all three measures, it usually does quite well in terms of minimizing job tardi-
ness. Therefore, if job tardiness is important, the CR rule might be the best choice among the 
rules. 
 Let’s take a look now at the S/O (slack per operation) rule. 
 Use the S/O rule to schedule the following jobs. Note that processing time includes the time 
remaining for the current and subsequent operations. In addition, you will need to know the 
number of operations remaining, including the current one.
 
 Job 
 Remaining 
Processing 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 Remaining 
Number of 
Operations  
 A 
 4 
 14 
 3 
 B 
 16 
 32 
 6 
 C 
 8 
 8 
 5 
 D 
 20 
 34 
 2 
 E 
 10 
 30 
 4 
 F 
 18 
 30 
 2 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  3 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Determine the difference between the due date and the processing time for each operation. 
Divide the difference by the number of remaining operations, and rank them from low to high. 
This yields the sequence of jobs:
 Job 
 (1) 
Remaining 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Due 
Date 
 (3) 
(2)  (1) 
Slack 
 (4) 
Remaining 
Number of 
Operations  
  (5)
(3)    (4)
Ratio 
 (6) 
Rank 
 A 
 4 
 14 
 10 
 3 
 3.33 
 3 
 B 
 16 
 32 
 16 
 6 
 2.67 
 2 
 C 
 8 
 8 
 0 
 5 
  0 
 1 
 D 
 20 
 34 
 14 
 2 
 7.00 
 6 
 E 
 10 
 30 
 20 
 4 
 5.00 
 4 
 F 
 18 
 30 
 12 
 2 
 6.00 
 5 
 The indicated sequence (see column 6) is C-B-A-E-F-D. 
 Using the S/O rule, the designated job sequence may change after any given operation, so 
if that happened, it would be necessary to reevaluate the sequence after each operation. Note 
that any of the previously mentioned priority rules could be used on a station-by-station basis 
for this situation; the only difference is that the S/O approach incorporates downstream infor-
mation in arriving at a job sequence. 
 In reality, many priority rules are available to sequence jobs, and some other rule might 
provide superior results for a given set of circumstances. The purpose in examining these 
few rules is to provide insight into the nature of sequencing rules. Each shop or organization 
should consider carefully its own circumstances and the measures of effectiveness it feels are 
important, when selecting a rule to use. 
 The following section describes a special-purpose algorithm that can be used to sequence a 
set of jobs that must all be processed at the same two machines or work centers. 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
707
 Sequencing Jobs through Two Work Centers 1 
 Johnson’s rule  is a technique that managers can use to minimize the makespan for a group of 
jobs to be processed on two machines or at two successive work centers (sometimes referred 
to as a two-machine flow shop).  2   It also minimizes the total idle time at the work centers. For 
the technique to work, several conditions must be satisfied: 
 • Job time (including setup and processing) must be known and constant for each job at 
each work center. 
 • Job times must be independent of the job sequence. 
 • All jobs must follow the same two-step work sequence. 
 • A job must be completed at the first work center before the job moves on to the second 
work center. 
 Application of Johnson’s rule begins with a listing of all jobs to be scheduled, and how 
much time will be required by each job at each workstation. The sequence is determined by 
following these steps:
 1. 
Select the job with the shortest time. If the shortest time is at the first work center, 
schedule that job first; if the time is at the second work center, schedule the job last. 
Break ties arbitrarily. 
 2. 
Eliminate the job and its time from further consideration. 
   3. 
Repeat steps 1 and 2, working toward the center of the sequence, until all jobs have been 
scheduled. 
 Successful application of these steps identifies the sequence with the minimum  makespan, 
or all work is completed as soon as possible. However, precisely  when  a certain job will 
be completed (its flow time) or when idle time will occur is not apparent by inspecting the 
sequence. To determine such detailed performance information, it is generally easiest to  create 
a Gantt chart illustrating the finished sequence, as demonstrated in Example 4. 
 When significant idle time at the second work center occurs, job splitting at the first center 
just prior to the occurrence of idle time may alleviate some of it and also shorten throughput 
time. In Example 4, this is not a concern. The last solved problem at the end of this chapter 
illustrates the use of job splitting. 
 Johnson’s rule  Technique 
for minimizing makespan for a 
group of jobs to be processed 
on two machines or at two work 
centers. 
 1 For a description of a heuristic that can be used for the case where a set of jobs is to be processed through more 
than two work centers, see Thomas Vollmann et al.,  Manufacturing Planning and Control Systems,  5th ed. (New 
York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2004). 
 2 S. M. Johnson, “Optimal Two- and Three-Stage Production with Setup Times Included,”  Naval Research 
 Quarterly 1 (March 1954), pp. 61–68.
 A group of six jobs is to be processed through a two-machine flow shop. The first operation 
involves cleaning and the second involves painting. Determine a sequence that will minimize 
the total completion time for this group of jobs. Processing times are as follows: 
 
 PROCESSING TIME (hours) 
 Job 
 Work Center 1 
 Work Center 2 
 A 
 5 
 5 
 B 
 4 
 3 
 C 
 8 
 9 
 D 
 2 
 7 
 E 
 6 
 8 
 F 
 12 
 15 
 To employ Johnson’s rule, create a “blank” sequence first, such as: 
 
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 E X A M P L E  4 

708 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
2
0
8
16
28
33
37
2
0
9
17
26 28
43
48 51
Time
Center 2
Center 1
Time
D
E
C
F
A
B
D
B
D
E
C
F
A
B
A
F
C
E
Idle
 a. 
Select the job with the shortest processing time. It is job D, with a time of two hours. 
   b. 
Since the time is at the first center, schedule job D first. Eliminate job D from further 
consideration. 
      c. Job B has the next shortest time. Since it is at the second work center, schedule it last and 
eliminate job B from further consideration. We now have 
 d. 
The remaining jobs and their times are
 Job 
 1 
 2 
 A 
 5 
 5 
 C 
 8 
 9 
 E 
 6 
 8 
 F 
 12 
 15 
 Note that there is a tie for the shortest remaining time; job A has the same time at each work 
center. It makes no difference, then, whether we place it toward the beginning or the end of 
the sequence. Suppose it is placed arbitrarily toward the end. We now have 
      e. 
The shortest remaining time is six hours for job E at work center 1. Thus, schedule that 
job toward the beginning of the sequence (after job D): 
      f. 
Job C has the shorter time of the remaining two jobs. Since it is for the first work center, 
place it third in the sequence. Finally, assign the remaining job (F) to the fourth position 
and the result is 
     g. Construct a Gantt chart to reveal flow time and idle time information. Be very careful not 
to schedule the beginning of work at center 2  before  work at center 1 has been completed 
for any given job. Traditionally, it is assumed that center 1 must finish and pass the job 
to center 2, which can cause idle time in center 2’s schedule, such as in the case of job F 
below:
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
D
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
D
B
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
D
B
A
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
D
B
A
E
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
D
B
A
E
C
F
 S O L U T I O N 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
709
    Thus, the group of jobs will take 51 hours to complete. The second work center will wait 
two hours for its first job and also wait two hours after finishing job C. Center 1 will be fin-
ished in 37 hours. Of course, idle periods at the beginning or end of the sequence could be 
used to do other jobs or for maintenance or setup/teardown activities. 
 Sequencing Jobs When Setup Times Are 
Sequence-Dependent 
 The preceding discussion and examples assumed that machine setup times are independent of 
processing order, but in many instances that assumption is not true. Consequently, a manager 
may want to schedule jobs at a workstation taking those dependencies into account. The goal 
is to minimize total setup time. 
 Consider the following table, which shows workstation machine setup times based on job 
processing order. For example, if job A is followed by job B, the setup time for B will be six 
hours. Furthermore, if job A is completed first, followed by job B, job C will then follow job B 
and have a setup time of four hours. If a job is done first, its setup time will be the amount 
shown in the setup time column to the right of the job. Thus, if job A is done first, its setup 
time will be three hours. 
 The simplest way to determine which sequence will result in the lowest total setup time 
is to list each possible sequence and determine its total setup time. In general, the num-
ber of different alternatives is equal to  n! ,  where  n  is the number of jobs. Here,  n  is 3, so 
 n!     3    2    1    6. The six alternatives and their total setup times are as follows: 
 Hence, to minimize total setup time, the manager would select sequence B-A-C. 
 This procedure is relatively simple to do manually when the number of jobs is two or three. 
However, as the number of jobs increases, the list of alternatives quickly becomes larger. For 
example, six jobs would have 720 alternatives. In such instances, a manager would employ 
a computer to generate the list and identify the best alternative(s). (Note that more than one 
alternative may be tied for the lowest setup time.) 
 Why Scheduling Can Be Difficult 
 Scheduling can be difficult for a number of reasons. One is that, in reality, an operation must 
deal with variability in setup times, processing times, interruptions, and changes in the set of 
 
 Resulting following job 
setup time (hrs.) is 
 Setup 
time (hrs.) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 If the 
preceding 
job is 
 A 
 3 
 — 
 6 
 2 
 B 
 2 
 1 
 — 
 4 
 C 
 2 
 5 
 3 
 — 
 Sequence 
 Setup 
Times  Total 
 A-B-C 
 3    6    4    13 
 A-C-B 
 3    2    3    8 
 B-A-C 
 2    1    2    5 ( best ) 
 B-C-A 
 2    4    5    11 
 C-A-B 
 2    5    6    13 
 C-B-A 
 2    3    1    6 

710 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
jobs. Another major reason is that, except for small job sets, there is no 
method for identifying the optimal schedule, and it would be virtually 
impossible to sort through the vast number of possible alternatives to 
obtain the best schedule. As a result, scheduling is far from an exact 
science and, in many instances, is an ongoing task for a manager. 
 Computer technology reduces the burden of scheduling and makes 
real-time scheduling possible. 
 Minimizing Scheduling Difficulties 
 There are a number of actions that managers can consider to minimize 
scheduling problems:
 • Setting realistic due dates. 
 •  Focusing on bottleneck operations: First, try to increase the 
capacity of the operations. If that is not possible or feasible, 
schedule the bottleneck operations first, and then schedule the 
nonbottleneck operations around the bottleneck operations. 
 •  Considering lot splitting for large jobs. This usually works best 
when there are relatively large differences in job times. Note that 
this doesn’t apply to single-unit jobs. 
 The Theory of Constraints 
    Another approach to scheduling was developed and promoted by Eli 
Goldratt. 3   He first described it in his book  The Goal.  Goldratt avoided 
much of the complexity often associated with scheduling problems 
by simply focusing on  bottleneck  operations (i.e., those for which 
there was insufficient capacity—in effect, a work center with zero 
idle time). He reasoned the output of the system was limited by the output of the bottleneck 
operation(s); therefore, it was essential to schedule the nonbottleneck operations in a way 
that minimized the idle time of the bottleneck operation(s). Thus, idle time of nonbottleneck 
operations was not a factor in overall productivity of the system, as long as the bottleneck 
operations were used effectively. These observations have been refined into a series of sched-
uling principles which include: 
 • An hour lost at a bottleneck operation is an hour lost by the system. The bottleneck 
operation determines the overall capacity of the system. 
 • Saving time through improvements of a nonbottleneck will not increase the ultimate 
output of the system. 
 • Activation of a resource is not the same as utilization of a resource. Because a nonbot-
tleneck operation is active does not necessarily mean it is being useful. 
 These principles are also the foundation of a specific scheduling technique for intermittent 
production systems, one that many firms have found simpler and less time-consuming to use 
than traditional analytical techniques. This technique uses a  drum-buffer-rope conceptualiza-
tion to manage the system. The “drum” is the schedule; it sets the pace of production. The 
goal is to schedule to make maximum use of bottleneck resources. The “buffer” refers to 
potentially constraining resources outside of the bottleneck. The role of the buffer is to keep a 
small amount of inventory ahead of the bottleneck operation to minimize the risk of having it 
be idle. The “rope” represents the synchronizing of the sequence of operations to ensure effec-
tive use of the bottleneck operations. The goal is to avoid costly and time-consuming multiple 
setups, particularly of capacity-constrained resources, so they do not become bottlenecks too. 
 The drum-buffer-rope approach provides a basis for developing a schedule that achieves 
maximum output and shorter lead times while avoiding carrying excess inventory. Use of 
 LO16.9 Discuss the theory of 
constraints and that approach 
to scheduling.
 
 3 Eli Goldratt,  The General Theory of Constraints (New Haven, CT: Avraham Y. Institute, 1989). 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
711
the drum-buffer-rope approach generally results in operations capable of consistent on-time 
delivery, reduced inventory, and shorter lead times, as well as a reduction in disruptions that 
require expediting. 
 Goldratt also developed a system of varying batch sizes to achieve the greatest output of 
bottleneck operations. He used the term   process batch  to denote the basic lot size for a job 
and the term   transfer batch  to denote a portion of the basic lot that could be used during pro-
duction to facilitate utilization of bottleneck operations. In effect, a lot could be split into two 
or more parts. Splitting a large lot at one or more operations preceding a bottleneck operation 
would reduce the waiting time of the bottleneck operation. 
 Traditional management has emphasized maximizing output of every operation. In con-
trast to that approach, the   theory of constraints  has as its goal maximizing flow through the 
entire system, which it does by emphasizing balancing the flow through the various opera-
tions. It begins with identifying the bottleneck operation. Next, there is a five-step procedure 
to improve the performance of the bottleneck operation:
 1. 
Determine what is constraining the operation. 
 2. 
Exploit the constraint (i.e., make sure the constraining resource is used to 
its maximum). 
 3. 
Subordinate everything to the constraint (i.e., focus on the constraint). 
 4. 
Determine how to overcome (eliminate) the constraint. 
 5. 
Repeat the process for the next highest constraint. 
 (Note the similarity to the plan-do-study-act [PDSA] approach discussed in Chapter 9.) 
 The goal, of course, is to make  money.  The theory of constraints uses three metrics to 
assess the effectiveness of improvements:
 •  Throughput: the rate at which the system generates  money through sales (i.e., the con-
tribution margin, or sales revenue less variable costs; labor costs are considered to be 
part of operating expense). 
 •  Inventory: Inventory represents  money tied up in goods and materials used in a process. 
 •  Operating expense: all the  money the system spends to convert inventory into 
 throughput; this includes utilities, scrap, depreciation, and so on. 
 Goldratt’s ideas are applicable to both manufacturing and service environments. 
 16.3 SCHEDULING SERVICES  
    Scheduling service systems presents certain problems not generally encountered in manu-
facturing systems. This is due primarily to (1) the inability to store or inventory services 
and (2) the random nature of customer requests for service. In some situations, the second 
 difficulty can be moderated by using appointment or reservation systems, but the inability to 
store  services in most cases is a fact of life that managers must contend with. 
 The approach used to schedule services generally depends on whether customer contact 
is involved. In back-office operations, where there is little or no customer contact—such as 
processing mail-order requests, loan approvals, and tax preparation—the same priority rules 
described in the preceding pages are used. The goal is to maximize worker efficiency, and 
work is often processed in batches. A key factor can be the due date, say for rush orders, 
orders where the customer has paid a premium for faster than normal delivery. That is similar 
to the situation that occurs in front-office operations, where there is a high degree of customer 
contact, and efficiency may become secondary to keeping customer waiting times to reason-
able levels, so scheduling the workforce to meet demand becomes a priority. Having too few 
workers causes waiting lines to form, but having more workers than needed increases labor 
costs, which can have a substantial impact on profits, particularly in service systems where 
labor is the major cost involved. 
 Process batch  The economical 
quantity to produce upon the 
 activation of a given operation.  
 Transfer batch  The  quantity 
to be transported from one 
 operation to another, assumed 
to be smaller than the first 
 operation’s process batch. 
 Theory of constraints  
Production planning approach 
that emphasizes balancing 
flow throughout a system, and 
pursues a perpetual five-step 
improvement process centered 
around the system’s currently 
most restrictive constraint. 
 LO16.10  Summarize some 
of the unique problems 
 encountered in service 
systems, and describe some 
of the approaches used for 
scheduling service systems.

712 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 An ideal situation is one that has a smooth flow of customers through the system. This 
would occur if each new customer arrives at the precise instant that the preceding customer’s 
service is completed, as in a physician’s office, or in air travel if the demand just equals the 
number of available seats. In each of these situations customer waiting time would be mini-
mized, and the service system staff and equipment would be fully utilized. Unfortunately, the 
random nature of customer requests for service that generally prevails in service systems 
makes it nearly impossible to provide service capability that matches demand. Moreover, if 
service times are subject to variability—say, because of differing processing requirements—
the inefficiency of the system is compounded. The inefficiencies can be reduced if arrivals 
can be scheduled (e.g., appointments), as in the case of doctors and dentists. However, in 
many situations appointments are not possible (supermarkets, gas stations, theaters, hospital 
emergency rooms, repair of equipment breakdowns). Chapter 18, on waiting lines, focuses 
on those kinds of situations. There, the emphasis is on intermediate-term decisions related 
to service capacity. In this section, we will concern ourselves with short-term  scheduling, in 
which much of the capacity of a system is essentially fixed, and the goal is to achieve a certain 
degree of customer service by efficient utilization of that capacity. 
 Scheduling in service systems may involve scheduling (1) customers, (2) the workforce, 
and (3) equipment. Scheduling customers often takes the form of appointment systems or 
reservation systems. 
 Appointment Systems 
 Appointment systems are intended to control the timing of customer arrivals in order to mini-
mize customer waiting while achieving a high degree of capacity utilization. A doctor can use 
an appointment system to schedule patients’ office visits during the afternoon, leaving the 
mornings free for hospital duties. Similarly, an attorney can schedule client meetings around 
court appearances. Even with appointments, however, problems can still arise due to lack of 
punctuality on the part of patients or clients, no-shows, and the inability to completely control 
the length of contact time (e.g., a dentist might run into complications in filling a tooth and 
have to spend additional time with a patient, thus backing up later appointments). Some of 
this can be avoided by trying to match the time reserved for a patient or client with the spe-
cific needs of that case rather than setting appointments at regular intervals. Even with the 
problems of late arrivals and no-shows, the appointment system is a tremendous improvement 
over random arrivals. 
 Reservation Systems 
 Reservation systems are designed to enable service systems to formulate a fairly accurate 
estimate of the demand on the system for a given time period and to minimize customer disap-
pointment generated by excessive waiting or inability to obtain service. Reservation systems 
are widely used by resorts, hotels and motels, restaurants, and some modes of transporta-
tion (e.g., airlines, car rentals). In the case of restaurants, reservations enable management 
to spread out or group customers so that demand matches service capabilities. Late arrivals 
and no-shows can disrupt the system. One approach to the no-show problem is to use deci-
sion theory (described in the supplement to Chapter 5). The problem also can be viewed as a 
single-period inventory problem, as described in Chapter 13. 
 Yield Management 
 Many companies, especially in the travel and tourist industries, operate with fixed capacities. 
Examples include hotels and motels, which operate with a fixed number of rooms to rent 
each night; airlines, which operate with a fixed number of seats to sell on any given flight; 
and cruise lines, which operate with a fixed number of berths to sell for any given cruise. The 
number of rooms, seats, or berths can be thought of as perishable inventory. For example, 
unsold seats on a flight cannot be carried over to the next flight; they are lost. The same is true 
for hotel rooms and cruise berths. Of course that unsold inventory does not generate income, 
so companies with fixed capacities must develop strategies to deal with sales. 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
713
 Yield management   is the application of pricing strategies to allocate capacity among 
 various categories of demand with the goal of maximizing the revenue generated by the 
fixed capacity. Demand for fixed capacity usually consists of customers who make advance 
 reservations and walk-ins. Customers who make advance reservations are typically price- 
sensitive, while walk-ins are often price-insensitive. Companies must decide on the  percentage 
of their limited inventory to allocate to reservations, trading off lower revenue per unit for 
increased certainty of sales, and how 
much to allocate to walk-ins, where 
demand is less  certain but revenue 
per unit is higher.  
 The ability to predict demand is 
critical to the success of yield manage-
ment, so forecasting plays a key role 
in the process. Seasonal variations are 
generally important, so forecasts must 
incorporate seasonality and plans must 
also be somewhat flexible to allow for 
ever-present random variations.  
 Yield management  The 
 application of pricing  strategies 
to allocate capacity among 
 various categories of demand. 
 The basic yield management 
concept is applicable to 
railroads as well as airlines. 
Yield management is 
multidisciplinary because it 
blends elements of marketing, 
operations, and financial 
management. 
Robert L.  Crandall  Former CEO—American Airlines 
 Before takeoff and after landing, you’ve probably noticed lots of people 
and various types of vehicles and equipment busily moving around on 
the ground outside with no apparent game plan, particularly at larger 
airports. Actually, all that activity is carefully orchestrated, and because 
the people involved are an important part of our team, I’d like to tell you 
what the hustle and bustle is all about. 
 When a flight lands and approaches the terminal, ramp personnel 
guide the aircraft to its parking position and after it comes to a stop, 
put chocks under its wheels. As soon as that’s been done, other work-
ers hook up ground-based power and air conditioning. Electric power 
comes from what looks like a large, industrial-strength extension cord 
plugged into the lower portion of the nose section. Heated or cooled air 
goes into the cabin via the big yellow hoses that run from the airplane 
either to the terminal, in cities where we have central air-handling facili-
ties or, in others, to mobile air-handling units. 
 On the airplane, meanwhile, flight attendants open the door and as pas-
sengers begin deplaning, a mechanic squeezes past them to get a debriefing 
from the cockpit and check to see if any maintenance work must be done. 
 Once all deplaning passengers are off, the cabin cleaners go into 
high gear on most flights, cleaning our seatback pockets, tidying up the 
cabin, cleaning the lavatories, doing a light vacuuming, repositioning 
safety belts for each seat’s next occupant, and so forth. (A more thor-
ough cleaning is done each night.) 
 Simultaneously, out on the ramp, our people are unloading baggage, 
freight, and mail from the airplane’s belly compartments and beginning 
the process of sorting by various categories and destinations. In addi-
tion to the bags and cargo that have reached their destination, which 
must be delivered promptly to passengers and shippers, some must be 
transferred to other American or American Eagle flights, and still oth-
ers must be transferred to other carriers. Complicating matters further, 
 READING 
 Servicing Passenger Planes 
baggage, freight, and mail are often handled in dif-
ferent facilities on the airport property. 
 If a meal has been served or is planned for the outbound flight, 
catering trucks pull up to service the First Class and main cabin galleys. 
Another special truck services the lavatory holding tanks, and in the 
midst of all this, mechanics are dealing with any problems reported by 
the crew and doing their own walk-around inspections. 
 Once all that is complete, customers start to board the aircraft 
for its next flight and everything happens in reverse. Ground workers 
start loading baggage in the forward belly and freight and mail in the 
rear. Fuel trucks pull up to refuel most flights. The airplanes must be 
“watered” as well; fresh water is pumped aboard from either a water 
truck or servicing equipment built into the gate itself. During cold-
weather months, deicing trucks add another element of ramp activity as 
they spray fluid on the airplane’s wings and fuselage. 
 Most of the work on the ramp is done by our own people, principally 
fleet-service personnel, but there are also various services, like cater-
ing, which are performed by contractors. 
 All this simultaneous activity can create conflicts. Baggage carts 
unloading the forward hold can encroach on the ground space needed 
by the trucks catering the First Class cabin, for example, and fuelers 
perform their function in the space needed by those unloading freight 
and mail. The ramp crew chiefs are the conductors, orchestrating the 
entire production, overseeing the detail, and seeing to it that all gets 
done without mishap—and on time. 
 It’s a delicate balancing act, and although our customers rarely 
come in contact with the folks working on the ramp, they are an impor-
tant part of a team that aims to serve every customer well and keep our 
operation running safely and on time. 
 Source: Robert L. Crandall, “Servicing Passenger Planes,”  American Way, March 
15, 1995. 

714 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 Scheduling the Workforce 
 Scheduling customers is demand management. Scheduling the workforce is capacity manage-
ment. This approach works best when demand can be predicted with reasonable accuracy. 
This is often true for restaurants, theaters, rush-hour traffic, and similar instances that have 
repeating patterns of intensity of customer arrivals. Scheduling hospital personnel, police, 
and telephone operators for catalog sales, credit card companies, and mutual fund companies 
also comes under this heading. An additional consideration is the extent to which variations 
in customer demands can be met with workforce flexibility. Thus, capacity can be adjusted 
by having cross-trained workers who can be temporarily assigned to help out on bottleneck 
operations during periods of peak demand. 
 Various constraints can affect workforce scheduling flexibility, including legal, 
 behavioral, technical—such as workers’ qualifications to perform certain operations—and 
budget  constraints. Union or federal work rules and vacations can make scheduling more 
complicated. 
 Cyclical Scheduling 
 In many services (e.g., hospitals, police departments, fire departments, restaurants, and super-
markets) the scheduling requirements are fairly similar: Employees must be assigned to work 
shifts or time slots, and have days off, on a repeating or cyclical basis. Here is a method for 
determining both a schedule and the minimum number of workers needed. 
 Generally a basic work pattern is set (e.g., work five consecutive days, have two consecu-
tive days off ), and a list of staffing needs for the schedule cycle (usually one week) is given. 
For example: 
 A fairly simple but effective approach for determining the minimum number of workers 
needed is the following: Begin by repeating the staff needs for worker 1. Then,
 1. 
Make the first worker’s assignment such that the two days with the lowest need 
(i.e., lowest sum) are designated as days off. Here Monday–Tuesday has the two  lowest 
consecutive requirements. Circle those days. (Note, in some instances, Sun–Mon might 
yield the two lowest days.) In case of a tie, pick the pair with the lowest adjacent 
requirement day to the left and day to the right. If there is still a tie, pick arbitrarily. 
 2. 
Subtract one from each day’s requirement, except for the circled days. Assign the 
next employee, again using the two lowest consecutive days as days off. Circle 
those days. 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Sun 
 Staff needed 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Sun 
 Staff needed 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Worker 1 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Sun 
 Staff needed 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Worker 1 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Worker 2 
 2 
 4 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 4 
 4 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
715
 3. 
Repeat the preceding step for each additional worker until all staffing requirements have 
been met. However, don’t subtract from a value of zero. Note the tie for worker 3: Mon–
Tue and Sun–Mon have the lowest consecutive requirements, 4. The Mon–Tue two 
 adjacents are Sun  3 and Wed  2, for a total of 5, which is less than the two adjacents 
for Sun–Mon (Sat  3 and Tue  3 for a total of 6). So circle Mon–Tue requirements 
for worker 3. Worker 4 also has a tie, and adjacents Sat and Tue total 5, whereas Tue–Fri 
adjacents total 6, so circle Sun–Mon requirements. 
  
For Worker 7, circle Wed and Thu  0     0.
  
To identify the days each worker is working, go across each worker’s row to find the 
nonzero values that are not circled, signifying that the worker is assigned for those days. 
Similarly, to find the workers who are assigned to work for any particular day, go down 
that day’s column to find the nonzero values that are not circled.  Note: Worker 6 will 
only work four days, and worker 7 will not work. 
 Scheduling Multiple Resources 
 In some situations, it is necessary to coordinate the use of more than one resource. For exam-
ple, hospitals must schedule surgeons, operating room staffs, recovery room staffs, admissions, 
special equipment, nursing staffs, and so on. Educational institutions must schedule faculty, 
classrooms, audiovisual equipment, and students. As you might guess, the greater the number 
of resources to be scheduled simultaneously, the greater the complexity and the less likely that 
an optimum schedule can be achieved. The problem is further complicated by the variable 
nature of such systems. For example, educational institutions frequently change their course 
offerings, student enrollments change, and students exhibit different course-selection patterns. 
 Some schools and hospitals are using computer software to assist them in devising acceptable 
schedules, although many appear to be using intuitive approaches with varying degrees of success. 
 Airlines are another example of service systems that require the scheduling of multiple 
resources. Flight crews, aircraft, baggage handling equipment, ticket counters, gate personnel, 
boarding ramps, and maintenance personnel all have to be coordinated. Furthermore, govern-
ment regulations on the number of hours a pilot can spend flying place an additional restric-
tion on the system. Another interesting variable is that, unlike most systems, the flight crews 
and the equipment do not remain in one location. Moreover, the crew and the  equipment are 
not usually scheduled as a single unit. Flight crews are often scheduled so that they return to 
their base city every two days or more, and rest breaks must be considered. On the other hand, 
the aircraft may be in almost continuous use except for periodic maintenance and repairs. 
Consequently, flight crews commonly follow different trip patterns than that of the aircraft. 
 There are also other activities that must be scheduled, some of which are described by 
American Airlines Chairman Robert L. Crandall in the reading on servicing passenger planes. 
 Service systems are prone to slowdowns when variability in demand for services causes 
bottlenecks. Part of the difficulty lies in predicting which operations will become bottlenecks. 
Moreover, bottlenecks may shift with the passage of time, so that different operations become 
bottleneck operations—further complicating the problem. 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Sun 
 Staff needed 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Worker 1 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 
 Worker 2 
 2 
 4 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 4 
 4 
 Worker 3 
 1 
 3 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 3 
 3 
 Worker 4 
 1 
 3 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 2 
 2 (tie) 
 Worker 5 
 1 
 2 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 1 
 2 
 Worker 6 
 0 
 1 
 0 
 1 
 1 
 0 
 1 (multiple ties) 
 Worker 7 
 0 
 1 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 No. working: 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 5 
 5 

716 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 16.4 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Scheduling can either help or hinder operations strategy. If scheduling is done well, goods or 
services can be made or delivered in a timely manner. Resources can be used to best advan-
tage and customers will be satisfied. Scheduling not performed well will result in inefficient 
use of resources and possibly dissatisfied customers. 
 The implication is clear: Management should not overlook the important role that schedul-
ing plays in the success of an organization and the supply chain, giving a competitive advan-
tage if done well or disadvantage if done poorly. Time-based competition depends on good 
scheduling. Coordination of materials, equipment use, and employee time is an important 
function of operations management. It is not enough to have good design, superior quality, 
and the other elements of a well-run organization if scheduling is done poorly—just as it is 
not enough to own a well-designed and well-made car, with all the latest features for comfort 
and safety, if the owner doesn’t know how to drive it! 
 1. 
Scheduling occurs in every business organization. 
 2. 
Scheduling decisions are made within constraints established by decisions on capacity, product or 
service design, process selection and layout, aggregate planning, and master scheduling. 
 3. 
Scheduling decisions occur just prior to the conversion of inputs into outputs. 
 4. 
Effective scheduling can reduce costs and increase productivity. 
 KEY POINTS 
 assignment model, 697 
 backward scheduling, 695 
 finite loading, 695 
 flow-shop scheduling, 690 
 flow system, 690 
 forward scheduling, 695 
 Gantt chart, 693 
 global priority rules, 700 
 Hungarian method, 697 
 infinite loading, 695 
 input/output (I/O) control, 696 
 job flow time, 701 
 job lateness, 701 
 job-shop scheduling, 693 
 job time, 700 
 Johnson’s rule, 707 
 load chart, 694 
 loading, 693 
 local priority rules, 700 
 makespan, 701 
 priority rules, 700 
 process batch, 711 
 schedule chart, 695 
 scheduling, 689 
 sequencing, 700 
 theory of constraints, 711 
 transfer batch, 711 
 workstation, 700 
 yield management, 713 
 KEY TERMS 
 Scheduling involves the timing and coordination of operations. Such activities are fundamental to virtu-
ally every organization. Scheduling problems differ according to whether a system is designed for high 
volume, intermediate volume, or low volume. Scheduling problems are particularly complex for job 
shops (low volume) because of the variety of jobs these systems are required to process. 
 The two major problems in job-shop scheduling are assigning jobs to machines or work centers, 
and designating the sequence of job processing at a given machine or work center. Gantt load charts are 
frequently employed to help managers visualize workloads, and they are useful for describing and ana-
lyzing sequencing alternatives. In addition, both heuristic and optimizing methods are used to develop 
loading and sequencing plans. For the most part, the optimization techniques can be used only if certain 
assumptions can be made. 
 Customer requirements in service systems generally present very different circumstances than those 
encountered in manufacturing systems. Some services can use appointments and reservations for sched-
uling purposes, although not all systems are amenable to this. When multiple resources are involved, the 
task of balancing the system can be fairly complex. 
 SUMMARY 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 The assignment method.  The following table contains information on the cost to run three jobs on 
four available machines. Determine an assignment plan that will minimize costs. 
 Problem 1 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
717
 In order for us to be able to use the assignment method, the numbers of jobs and machines must be 
equal. To remedy this situation, add a  dummy job with costs of 0, and then solve as usual.
 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 12 
 16 
 14 
 10 
 2 
 9 
 8 
 13 
 7 
 3 
 15 
 12 
 9 
 11 
 (dummy) 
 4 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 Solution 
 
 
 
 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 12 
 16 
 14 
 10 
 2 
 9 
 8 
 13 
 7 
 3 
 15 
 12 
 9 
 11 
 a. Subtract the smallest number from each row. The results are 
   b. Subtract the smallest number in each column. (Because of the dummy zeros in each column, the 
resulting table will be unchanged.) 
 c. Determine the minimum number of lines needed to cross out the zeros. One possible way is 
 d. Because the number of lines is less than the number of rows, modify the numbers.
 (1) Subtract the smallest uncovered number (1) from each uncovered number. 
 (2) Add the smallest uncovered number to numbers at line intersections.  
 The result is 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job
1 
 2 
 6 
 4 
 0 
2 
 2 
 1 
 6 
 0 
3 
 6 
 3 
 0 
 2 
4 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
Job 
 1 
 2 
 6 
 4 
 0 
 2 
 2 
 1 
 6 
 0 
 3 
 6 
 3 
 0 
 2 
 4 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 1 
 5 
 4 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 6 
 0 
 3 
 5 
 2 
 0 
 2 
 4 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 1 

718 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 e. Test for optimality: 
  Because the minimum number of lines equals the number of rows, an optimum assignment can 
be made. 
   f. Assign jobs to machines. Start with rows 1 and 3, since they each have one zero, and columns A 
and C, also with one zero each. After each assignment, cross out all the numbers in that row  and
column. The result is 
 Notice that there is only one assignment in each row, and only one assignment in each column. 
 g. Compute total costs, referring to the original table 
   h. The implication of assignment 4-A is that machine A will not be assigned a job. It may remain 
idle or be used for another job. 
 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
Job 
 1 
 1 
 5 
 4 
 0 
 2 
 1 
 0 
 6 
 0 
 3 
 5 
 2 
 0 
 2 
 4 
 0 
 0 
 1 
 1 
 
 
 MACHINE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Job 
 1 
 1 
 5 
 4 
 0  
 2 
 1 
 0  
 6 
 0 
 3 
 5 
 2 
 0  
 2 
 4 
 0  
 0 
 1 
 1 
 1-D 
 $10 
 2-B 
 8 
 3-C 
 9 
 4-A 
 0 
 
 $27 
 Problem 2 
Priority rules.  Job times (including processing and setup) are shown in the following table for five 
jobs waiting to be processed at a work center: 
 Determine the processing sequence that would result from each of these priority rules:
 a. SPT  
b. EDD 
 Job 
 Job Time 
(hours) 
 Due Date 
(hours) 
 a 
 12 
 15 
 b 
 6 
 24 
 c 
 14 
 20 
 d 
 3 
 8 
 e 
 7 
 6 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
719
 Assume job times are independent of processing sequence. 
 
 a. SPT 
 b. EDD 
 Job 
 Job 
Time 
 Processing 
Order 
 Hour 
Due 
 Processing 
Order 
 a 
 12 
 4 
 15 
 3 
 b 
 6 
 2 
 24 
 5 
 c 
 14 
 5 
 20 
 4 
 d 
 3 
 1 
 8 
 2 
 e 
 7 
 3 
 6 
 1 
 Solution 
 Problem 3 
Priority rules.  Using the job times and due dates from Solved Problem 2, determine each of the 
following performance measures for first-come, first-served processing order: Assume jobs listed 
in order of arrival.
 a. Makespan. 
 b. Average flow time. 
 c. Average tardiness. 
 d. Average number of jobs at the workstation. 
 Job 
 Job 
Time 
 Flow 
Time 
 Hour 
Due 
 Hours 
Tardy 
 a 
 12 
 12 
 15 
 0 
 b 
 6 
 18 
 24 
 0 
 c 
 14 
 32 
 20 
 12 
 d 
 3 
 35 
 8 
 27 
 e 
 7 
 42 
 6 
 36 
 Total 
 
 139 
 
 75 
 Solution 
 a. Makespan 
        42 hours 
 b. Average flow time
Total flow time
Number of jobs
139
5
27.80 hours
Average tardiness
Total hours tardy
Number of jobs
75
5
15 hours
Average number of
jobs at workstation
Total flow time
Makespan
139
42
3.31









 
 c. 
 
d. 
 
 Problem 4 
S/O rule.  Using the following information, determine an order processing sequence using the S/O 
priority rule. 
 Order 
 Processing 
Time 
Remaining 
(days) 
 Due Date 
(days) 
 Number of 
Operations 
Remaining  
 A 
 20 
 30 
 2 
 B 
 11 
 18 
 5 
 C 
 10 
 6 
 2 
 D 
 16 
 23 
 4 

720 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 Assume times are independent of processing sequence. 
 Solution 
 Order 
 (1) 
Remaining 
Processing 
Time 
 (2) 
Due 
Date 
 (3) 
(2) – (1) 
Slack 
 (4) 
Number of 
Operations  
 (5) 
Ratio  
 (6) 
Rank 
(sequence)  
 A 
 20 
 30 
 10 
 2 
 5.00 
 4 
 B 
 11 
 18 
 7 
 5 
 1.40 
 2 
 C 
 10 
 6 
  4 
 2 
  2.00 
 1 
 D 
 16 
 23 
 7 
 4 
 1.75 
 3 
 (Note that one ratio is negative. When negatives occur, assign the  lowest  rank to the  most negative
number.) 
 Problem 5 
Sequencing jobs through two work centers.  Use Johnson’s rule to obtain the optimum sequence for 
processing the jobs shown through work centers A and B. 
 Job 
 JOB TIMES (hours) 
 Work Center A 
 Work Center B 
 a 
 2.50 
 4.20 
 b 
 3.80 
 1.50 
 c 
 2.20 
 3.00 
 d 
 5.80 
 4.00 
 e 
 4.50 
 2.00 
 Solution 
    a. Identify the smallest time: job b (1.50 hours at work center B). Because the time is for B,  schedule 
this job last. 
 b. The next smallest time is job e (2.00 hours at B). Schedule job e next to last. 
   c. Identify the smallest remaining job time: job c (2.20 hours at center A). Since the time is in the A 
column, schedule job c first. At this point, we have: 
   c, _____, _____, e, b 
   d. The smallest time for the remaining jobs is 2.50 hours for job a at center A. Schedule this job after 
job c. The one remaining job (job d) fills the remaining slot. Thus, we have 
  c-a-d-e-b 
 Problem 6 
 For Solved Problem 5, determine what effect splitting jobs c, d, e, and b in work center A would have 
on the idle time of work center B and on the throughput time. Assume that each job can be split into 
two equal parts. 
 Solution 
 We assume that the processing sequence remains unchanged and proceed on that basis. The solution 
from the previous problem is shown in the following chart. The next chart shows reduced idle time 
at center B when splitting is used. 
 
2.20
0
2.20
0
B
A
c
4.70
10.50
15.00
18.80
5.20
9.40 10.50
14.50
17.00 18.80 20.30
a
c
d
a
e
b
d
e
b
2.20
0
1.10
0
B
A
c
4.70
10.50
15.00
18.80
4.10
8.90
14.00
18.05 19.55
a
c
d
a
e
b
d
e
b
7.60
12.75
1.10
16.00
12.90

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
721
 1. Why is scheduling fairly simple for repetitive systems but fairly complex for job shops? 
 2. What are the main decision areas of job-shop scheduling? 
 3. What are Gantt charts? How are they used in scheduling? What are the advantages of using Gantt 
charts? 
 4. What are the basic assumptions of the assignment method of linear programming? 
 5. Briefly describe each of these priority rules:
 
a.  FCFS  
     b.  SPT   
   c.  EDD  
 d.  S/O 
 
 e.  Rush 
 6. Why are priority rules needed? 
 7. What problems not generally found in manufacturing systems do service systems present in terms 
of scheduling the use of resources? 
 8. Explain forward and backward schedulings and each one’s advantage. 
 9. How are scheduling and productivity related? 
 10. What factors would you take into account in deciding whether to split a job? 
 11. Explain the term  makespan. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. One approach that can be effective in reducing the impact of production bottlenecks in a job shop 
or batch operations setting is to use smaller lot sizes.
 a. What is the impact of a production bottleneck? 
 b. Explain how small lot sizes can reduce the impact of bottleneck operations. 
 c. What are the key trade-offs in using small lot sizes for the purpose of reducing the bottleneck 
effect? 
 d. In some cases, the location of a bottleneck will shift (i.e., sometimes it is at workstation 3, 
another time it is at workstation 12). Furthermore, there can be more than one bottleneck 
operation at the same time. How would these situations impact scheduling using small 
lot sizes?  
 2. Doctors’ and dentists’ offices frequently schedule patient visits at regularly spaced intervals. 
What problems can this create? Can you suggest an alternative approach to reduce these prob-
lems? Under what circumstances would regularly spaced appointments constitute a reasonable 
approach to patient scheduling? 
 3. Name three examples of unethical behavior involving scheduling and state the ethical principle 
each violates.  
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 An inspection of these two figures reveals that throughput time has decreased from 20.30 hours 
to 19.55 hours. In addition, the original idle time was 5.6 hours. After splitting certain jobs, it was 
reduced to 4.85 hours, so some improvement was achieved. Note that processing times at B are gen-
erally less than at A for jobs toward the end of the sequence. As a result, jobs such as e and b at B 
were scheduled so that they were  centered  around the finishing times of e and b, respectively, at A, 
to avoid having to break the jobs due to waiting for the remainder of the split job from A. Thus, the 
greatest advantage from job splitting generally comes from splitting earlier jobs when Johnson’s rule 
is used for sequencing. 
 1. What general trade-offs are involved in sequencing decisions? In scheduling decisions? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in setting schedules? 
 3. How has technology had an impact on scheduling? 
 TAKING STOCK 

722 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 1. Use the assignment method to determine the best way to assign workers to jobs, given the following 
cost information. Compute the total cost for your assignment plan.  
 PROBLEMS 
 
 JOB 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Worker 
 1 
 5 
 8 
 6 
 2 
 6 
 7 
 9 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 3 
 2. Rework Problem 1, treating the numbers in the table as profits instead of costs. Compute the total 
profit. 
 3. Assign trucks to delivery routes so that total costs are minimized, given the cost data shown. What 
is the total cost?  
 4. Develop an assignment plan that will minimize processing costs, given the information shown, and 
interpret your answer. 
 5. Use the assignment method to obtain a plan that will minimize the processing costs in the following 
table under these conditions:
 a. The combination 2-D is undesirable. 
 b. The combinations 1-A and 2-D are undesirable. 
 6. The following table contains information concerning four jobs that are awaiting processing at a 
work center. 
 
 
 
 
 ROUTE 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 Truck 
 1 
 4 
 5 
  9 
 8 
 7 
 2 
 6 
 4 
  8 
 3 
 5 
 3 
 7 
 3 
 10 
 4 
 6 
 4 
 5 
 2 
  5 
 5 
 8 
 5 
 6 
 5 
  3 
 4 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 WORKER 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Job 
 1 
 12 
 8 
 11 
 2 
 13 
 10 
 8 
 3 
 14 
 9 
 14 
 4 
 10 
 7 
 12 
 
 
 WORKER 
 
 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 Job 
 1 
 14 
 18 
 20 
 17 
 18 
 2 
 14 
 15 
 19 
 16 
 17 
 3 
 12 
 16 
 15 
 14 
 17 
 4 
 11 
 13 
 14 
 12 
 14 
 5 
 10 
 16 
 15 
 14 
 13 
 Job 
 Job Time 
(days) 
 Due Date 
(days) 
 A 
 14 
 20 
 B 
 10 
 16 
 C 
 7 
 15 
 D 
 6 
 17 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
723
 a.  Sequence the jobs using (1) FCFS, (2) SPT, (3) EDD, and (4) CR. Assume the list is by order 
of arrival. 
 b.  For each of the methods in part  a, determine (1) the average job flow time, (2) the average tar-
diness, and (3) the average number of jobs at the work center. 
 c.  Is one method superior to the others? Explain. 
  7. Using the information presented in the following table, identify the processing sequence that 
would result using (1) FCFS, (2) SPT, (3) EDD, and (4) CR. For each method, determine 
(1) average job flow time, (2) average job tardiness, and (3) average number of jobs in the system. 
Jobs are listed in order of arrival. ( Hint: First determine the total job time for each job by 
computing the total processing time for the job and then adding in the setup time. All times 
and due dates are in hours.)  
  8. The following table shows orders to be processed at a machine shop as of 8:00 a.m. Monday. The 
jobs have different operations they must go through. Processing times are in days. Jobs are listed 
in order of arrival.
 a.  Determine the processing sequence at the first work center using each of these rules: (1) FCFS, 
(2) S/O. 
 b.  Compute the effectiveness of each rule using each of these measures: (1) average flow time, 
(2) average number of jobs at the work center. 
  9. A wholesale grocery distribution center uses a two-step process to fill orders. Tomorrow’s work 
will consist of filling the seven orders shown. Determine a job sequence that will minimize the 
time required to fill the orders. 
 10. The times required to complete each of eight jobs in a two-machine flow shop are shown in the 
table that follows. Each job must follow the same sequence, beginning with machine A and mov-
ing to machine B.
 a.  Determine a sequence that will minimize makespan time. 
 b.  Construct a chart of the resulting sequence, and find machine B’s idle time. 
 Job 
 Processing 
Time 
(days) 
 Due 
Date 
(days) 
 Remaining 
Number of 
Operations  
 A 
 8 
 20 
 2 
 B 
 10 
 18 
 4 
 C 
 5 
 25 
 5 
 D 
 11 
 17 
 3 
 E 
 9 
 35 
 4 
 Job 
 Processing 
Time per Unit 
 Units 
per Job 
 Setup 
Time 
 Due 
Date 
 a 
 .14 
 45 
 0.7 
 4 
 b 
 .25 
 14 
 0.5 
 10 
 c 
 .10 
 18 
 0.2 
 12 
 d 
 .25 
 40 
 1.0 
 20 
 e 
 .10 
 75 
 0.5 
 15 
 
 Order 
 TIME (hours) 
 Step 1 
 Step 2 
 A 
 1.20 
 1.40 
 B 
 0.90 
 1.30 
 C 
 2.00 
 0.80 
 D 
 1.70 
 1.50 
 E 
 1.60 
 1.80 
 F 
 2.20 
 1.75 
 G 
 1.30 
 1.40 

724 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 c.  For the sequence determined in part  a, how much would machine B’s idle time be reduced by 
splitting the last two jobs in half?  
 11. Given the operation times provided:
 a.  Develop a job sequence that minimizes idle time at the two work centers. 
 b.  Construct a chart of the activities at the two centers, and determine each one’s idle time, 
 assuming no other activities are involved. 
 12. A shoe repair operation uses a two-step sequence that all jobs in a certain category follow. All jobs 
can be split in half at both stations. For the group of jobs listed,
 a.  Find the sequence that will minimize total completion time. 
 b.  Determine the amount of idle time for workstation B. 
 c.  What jobs are candidates for splitting? Why? If they were split, how much would idle time and 
makespan time be reduced?  
 13. The following schedule was prepared by the production manager of Marymount Metal Shop: 
 Determine a schedule that will result in earliest completion of all jobs on this list. 
 14. The production manager must determine the processing sequence for seven jobs through the 
 grinding and deburring departments. The same sequence will be followed in both departments. 
The manager’s goal is to move the jobs through the two departments as quickly as  possible. 
The foreman of the deburring department wants the SPT rule to be used to minimize the 
 work-in- process inventory in his department. 
 
 
 JOB TIMES (minutes) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 Workstation A 
 27 
 18 
 70 
 26 
 15 
 Workstation B 
 45 
 33 
 30 
 24 
 10 
 
 
 JOB TIMES (minutes) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 E 
 F 
 Center 1 
 20 
 16 
 43 
 60 
 35 
 42 
 Center 2 
 27 
 30 
 51 
 12 
 28 
 24 
 
 Job 
 TIME (hours) 
 Machine A 
 Machine B 
 a 
 16 
 5 
 b 
 3 
 13 
 c 
 9 
 6 
 d 
 8 
 7 
 e 
 2 
 14 
 f 
 12 
 4 
 g 
 18 
 14 
 h 
 20 
 11 
 
 Job 
 CUTTING 
 POLISHING 
 Start 
 Finish 
 Start 
 Finish 
 A 
 0 
 2 
 2 
 5 
 B 
 2 
 6 
 6 
 9 
 C 
 6 
 11 
 11 
 13 
 D 
 11 
 15 
 15 
 20 
 E 
 15 
 17 
 20 
 23 
 F 
 17 
 20 
 23 
 24 
 G 
 20 
 21 
 24 
 28 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
725
 a.  Prepare a schedule using SPT for the grinding department. 
 b.  What is the flow time in the grinding department for the SPT sequence? What is the total time 
needed to process the seven jobs in both the grinding and deburring departments? 
 c.  Determine a sequence that will minimize the total time needed to process the jobs in both 
departments. What flow time will result for the grinding department? 
 d.  Discuss the trade-offs between the two alternative sequencing arrangements. At what point 
would the production manager be indifferent concerning the choice of sequences? 
 15. A foreman has determined processing times at a work center for a set of jobs and now wants to 
sequence them. Given the information shown, do the following:
 a.  Determine the processing sequence using (1) FCFS, (2) SPT, (3) EDD, and (4) CR. For each 
sequence, compute the average job tardiness, the average flow time, and the average number of 
jobs at the work center. The list is in FCFS order. 
 b.  Using the results of your calculations in part  a, show that the ratio of average flow time and the 
average number of jobs measures are equivalent for all four sequencing rules.  
 c.  Determine the processing sequence that would result using the S/O rule. 
 16. Given the information in the following table, determine the processing sequence that would result 
using the S/O rule. 
 17. Given the following information on job times and due dates, determine the optimal processing 
sequence using (1) FCFS, (2) SPT, (3) EDD, and (4) CR. For each method, find the average job 
flow time and the average job tardiness. Jobs are listed in order of arrival. 
 Job 
 Remaining 
Processing 
Time (days) 
 Due 
Date 
 Remaining 
Number of 
Operations 
 a 
 5 
 8 
 2 
 b 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 c 
 9 
 10 
 4 
 d 
 7 
 12 
 3 
 e 
 8 
 10 
 2 
 
 Job 
 PROCESSING TIME 
(hours) 
 Grinding 
 Deburring 
 A 
 3 
 6 
 B 
 2 
 4 
 C 
 1 
 5 
 D 
 4 
 3 
 E 
 9 
 4 
 F 
 8 
 7 
 G 
 6 
 2 
 Job 
 Job Time 
(days) 
 Due 
Date 
 Operations 
Remaining  
 a 
 4.5 
 10 
 3 
 b 
 6.0 
 17 
 4 
 c 
 5.2 
 12 
 3 
 d 
 1.6 
 27 
 5 
 e 
 2.8 
 18 
 3 
 f 
 3.3 
 19 
 1 

726 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling
 18. The Budd Gear Co. specializes in heat-treating gears for automobile companies. At 8:00 a.m., 
when Budd’s shop opened today, five orders (listed in order of arrival) were waiting to be 
processed. 
 a.  If the earliest due date rule is used, what sequence should be used? 
 b.  What will be the average job tardiness? 
 c.  What will be the average number of jobs in the system? 
 d.  Would the SPT rule produce better results in terms of job tardiness? 
 19. The following table contains order-dependent setup times for three jobs. Which processing 
sequence will minimize the total setup time?  
 20. The following table contains order-dependent setup times for three jobs. Which processing 
sequence will minimize the total setup time?  
 21. The following table contains order-dependent setup times for four jobs. For safety reasons, job 
C cannot follow job A, nor can job A follow job C. Determine the processing sequence that will 
minimize the total setup time. ( Hint: There are 12 alternatives.) 
 Job 
 Job Time 
(hours)  
 Due Date 
(hours)  
 a 
 3.5 
 7 
 b 
 2.0 
 6 
 c 
 4.5 
 18 
 d 
 5.0 
 22 
 e 
 2.5 
 4 
 f 
 6.0 
 20 
 Order 
 Order Size 
(units)  
 Per Unit Time in 
Heat Treatment 
(minutes/unit)  
 Due Date 
(min. from now) 
 A 
 16 
 4 
 160 
 B 
 6 
 12 
 200 
 C 
 10 
 3 
 180 
 D 
 8 
 10 
 190 
 E 
 4 
 1 
 220 
 Following Job’s 
Setup Time (hrs.) 
 
 
 Setup 
Time (hrs.) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Preceding 
 Job 
 A 
 2 
 — 
 3 
 5 
 B 
 3 
 8 
 — 
 2 
 C 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 — 
 
 Following Job’s Setup 
Time (hrs.) 
 
 
 Setup 
Time (hrs.) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 Preceding 
 Job 
 A 
 2.4 
 — 
 1.8 
 2.2 
 B 
 3.2 
 0.8 
 — 
 1.4 
 C 
 2.0 
 2.6 
 1.3 
 — 

 
Chapter Sixteen Scheduling 
727
 22. Given this information on planned and actual inputs and outputs for a service center, determine the 
work backlog for each period. The beginning backlog is 12 hours of work. The figures shown are 
standard hours of work. 
 23. Given the following data on inputs and outputs at a work center, determine the cumulative devia-
tion and the backlog for each time period. The beginning backlog is 7.  
 24. Determine the minimum number of workers needed, and a schedule for the following staffing 
requirements, giving workers two consecutive days off per cycle (not including Sunday). 
 25. Determine the minimum number of workers needed, and a schedule for the following staffing 
requirements, giving workers two consecutive days off per cycle (not including Sunday). 
 26. Determine the minimum number of workers needed, and a schedule for the following staffing 
requirements, giving workers two consecutive days off per cycle (not including Sunday). 
 
 Following Job’s 
Setup Time (hrs.) 
 
 
 Setup 
Time (hrs.) 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 D 
 Preceding 
 Job 
 A 
 2 
 — 
 5 
 x 
 4 
 B 
 1 
 7 
 — 
 3 
 2 
 C 
 3 
 x 
 2 
 — 
 2 
 D 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 6 
 — 
 
 PERIOD 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Output 
 Planned 
 200 
 200 
 180 
 190 
 190 
 200 
 
 Actual 
 205 
 194 
 177 
 195 
 193 
 200 
 
 PERIOD 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 Input 
 Planned 
 200 
 200 
 180 
 190 
 190 
 200 
 
 Actual 
 210 
 200 
 179 
 195 
 193 
 194 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Staff needed 
 2 
 3 
 1 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 
 PERIOD 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 Input 
 Planned 
 24 
 24 
 24 
 24 
 20 
 
 Actual 
 25 
 27 
 20 
 22 
 24 
 Output 
 Planned 
 24 
 24 
 24 
 24 
 23 
 
 Actual 
 24 
 22 
 23 
 24 
 24 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Staff needed 
 4 
 4 
 5 
 6 
 7 
 8 
 Day 
 Mon 
 Tue 
 Wed 
 Thu 
 Fri 
 Sat 
 Staff needed 
 3 
 4 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 

728
 It was a little past 9:00 on a Monday morning when Jeff Baker walked 
into your office with a box of donuts. 
 “I’ve been talking with Anne about a problem we have with short-
term capacity in our pad printing operation. You know, that’s where we 
print the logo on the Custom lines of yo-yos. We have received more 
orders than usual for July, and I want to release the orders to pad print-
ing in a way that will enable us to meet our due date commitments in 
the best way possible. Would you have time to look at the order list 
(attached) and see what kind of schedule we should follow to do that? 
By the way, you have established quite a reputation in your short stay 
here. You have a talent for really explaining why your recommendations 
are the best approach in a way that all of us ‘over-the-hill’ managers can 
understand. Please be sure to do that for me, too. I want to understand 
why your recommendation is the best schedule and what the trade-offs 
are for other possible schedules—and none of that philosophical col-
lege mumbo-jumbo. Remember, I came up through the ranks. I don’t 
have one of those sheepskins on my wall,” he says with a laugh. 
 Since your schedule was back to normal after that MRP report you 
did for Anne, you agreed to look at the information. After that compli-
ment, how could you say no? “Try to get back to me within a couple of 
days,” Jeff said as he left your office. 
 After a few minutes with your old operations management text, you 
call the production control office to confirm the pad printing schedule. 
They confirm that pad printing runs one eight-hour shift per day. They 
tell you that due to a make-up day for flooding in June, pad printing will 
be running 23 days in July, beginning Friday, July 1 (they will work three 
Saturdays on July 9, 16, and 23, and take a one-day holiday for July 4). 
You thank them for the information and then you 
begin to develop your plan. 
 Even though Jeff lacks a college degree, from what you have seen, 
he is very sharp. And obviously he knows good work when he sees it 
since he liked, and apparently understood, your past work. You resolve 
to cover all the bases but in a way that is as clear as possible. 
 Note: Setup time is to set up the pad printer at the start of the job. 
Setup includes thoroughly cleaning the printing heads and ink reser-
voirs, installing the new pad(s) and ink supply, and carefully aligning 
the machine. Setup at the beginning of a new day with the same job is 
insignificant. 
 Examine the following rules and write a report to Jeff Baker summa-
rizing your findings and advise him on which rule to use. Rules: FCFS, 
SPT, EDD, and CR. 
 Source: Victor E. Sower, “Hi-Ho, Yo-Yo, Inc.” Copyright © 2006 Victor E. Sower, 
Ph.D, C.D.E. 
 CASE 
 Hi-Ho, Yo-Yo, Inc. 
 Goldratt, Eli, and Jeff Cox.  The Goal: A Process of 
Ongoing Improvement. 3rd ed. Great Barrington, 
MA: North River Press, 2012. 
 Hopp, Wallace J., and Mark L. Spearman.  Factory 
Physics. 3rd ed. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 
2007. 
 Jacobs, F. Robert, William L. Berry, D. Clay Whybark, 
and Thomas E.Vollmann.  Manufacturing Planning 
and Control Systems. 6th ed. New York: Irwin/
McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 Pinedo, Michael.  Planning and Scheduling in Manufac-
turing and Services. New York: Springer, 2005. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
 PAD PRINTING ORDER LIST 
 Job 
 Date Order 
Received  
 Setup 
Time 
 Production 
Time 
 Due 
Date1 
 A 
 6/4 
 2 hrs. 
 6 days 
 11 July 
 B 
 6/7 
 4 hrs. 
 2 days 
 8 July 
 C 
 6/12 
 2 hrs. 
 8 days 
 25 July 
 D 
 6/14 
 4 hrs. 
 3 days 
 19 July 
 E 
 6/15 
 4 hrs. 
 9 days 
 29 July 
1Jobs are due at the beginning of their respective due dates.

This page intentionally left blank

730
 CHAP TE R 
 17  Project Management 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
 17.1 Introduction,  732 
17.2  Project Life Cycle,  732 
17.3  Behavioral Aspects of Project 
Management,  733 
 The Nature of Projects,  734 
 Key Decisions in Project Management,  735 
 The Project Manager,  736 
 Behavioral Issues,  737 
 Project Champions,  737 
 Certification,  738 
 The Pros and Cons of Working on 
Projects,  738 
17.4  Work Breakdown Structure,  739 
 17.5  Planning and Scheduling with Gantt 
Charts,  739 
 17.6  PERT and CPM,  740 
 The Network Diagram,  740 
 Network Conventions,  742 
 17.7  Deterministic Time 
Estimates,  743 
 17.8  A Computing Algorithm,  744 
 Activity-on-Arrow,  744 
 Activity-on-Node,  748 
 Computing Slack Times,  750 
 17.9  Probabilistic Time Estimates,  751 
17.10  Determining Path Probabilities,  754 
17.11  Simulation,  756 
17.12  Budget Control,  757 
17.13  Time–Cost Trade-Offs: Crashing,  757 
17.14  Advantages of Using PERT and 
Potential Sources of Error,  760 
17.15  Critical Chain Project 
Management,  761 
17.16  Other Topics in Project 
Management,  761 
17.17  Project Management Software,  762 
17.18  Operations Strategy,  763 
17.19  Risk Management,  763 
 Cases:  The Case of the Mexican Crazy 
Quilt,  779 
 Time, Please,  781 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO17.1 
Describe the project life cycle. 
 LO17.2 
Discuss the behavioral aspects of projects in terms of project 
personnel and the project manager. 
 LO17.3 
Name the six key decisions in project management. 
 LO17.4 
Explain the nature and importance of a work breakdown 
structure in project management. 
 LO17.5 
Give a general description of PERT/CPM techniques. 
 LO17.6 
Construct simple network diagrams. 
 LO17.7 
Analyze networks with deterministic times. 
 LO17.8 
Analyze networks with probabilistic times. 
 LO17.9 
Describe activity “crashing” and solve typical problems. 
 LO17.10 Discuss the advantages of using PERT and potential sources of 
error. 
 LO17.11 Discuss the key steps in risk management. 

731
 Projects are a unique aspect of business operations that require a special management approach. Unlike many other aspects of 
business, which tend to operate more routinely, projects often have uncertainties and risks that tend to make managing them 
more challenging, such as the Hoover Dam bridge. 
 Examples of projects are many. Some are huge, such as building the space station, rescue and cleanup operations after major 
natural disasters, and hosting the Olympic games. Others are smaller in scope, but still quite involved, such as producing a 
major motion picture, putting on a Broadway play, or producing a music video. They involve a tremendous amount of planning 
and coordinating set design, set building, script writing, camera crews, directors, actors or hosts, costumes, advertising, and 
more to accomplish project objectives while meeting budget and time constraints. 
 Consider the Olympic Games. They involve much more than the festivities, the excitement, national pride, and competition 
among athletes. They all involve a tremendous amount of planning, preparation, and coordinating work that needs to get done 
before and during the games. Athletes’ living quarters and training facilities must be provided, competition schedules must be 
developed, arrangements for televising events must be made, equipment and crews must be coordinated, transportation and 
hotel accommodations must be made, and many other activities that go on behind the scenes must be planned and managed so 
that everything goes off smoothly. 
 The Microsoft Corporation periodically releases new or updated software. Each release is the result of many people working 
countless hours writing code, testing programs, and revising code. Design, production, and marketing efforts also have to be 
coordinated. The reputation and profits of the company are closely related to successful software development. 
 Not all projects are successful, and the consequences of project failure can be costly, and even catastrophic. ERP installation 
projects (see Chapter 12) are expensive and time-consuming, and more than a few companies have terminated their projects 
after spending large sums of money. 
 This chapter introduces the basic concepts of project management. It includes a discussion of some behavioral aspects 
of project management, along with some of the difficulties project managers are apt to encounter. The main portion of 
the chapter is devoted to a description of graphical and computational methods that are used for planning and scheduling 
projects.  

732 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 17.1 INTRODUCTION  
 Managers typically oversee a variety of operations. Some of these involve routine, repeti-
tive activities, but others involve  nonroutine activities. Under the latter heading are  projects :  
unique, one-time operations designed to accomplish a set of objectives in a limited time 
frame. Other examples of projects include constructing a shopping complex, merging two 
companies, putting on a play, and designing and running a political campaign. Examples of 
projects within business organizations include designing new products or services, designing 
advertising campaigns, designing information systems, reengineering a process, designing 
databases, software development, and designing Web pages. 
 Projects may involve considerable cost. Some have a long time horizon, and some involve 
a large number of activities that must be carefully planned and coordinated. Most are expected 
to be completed based on time, cost, and performance targets. To accomplish this, goals must 
be established and priorities set. Tasks must be identified and time estimates made. Resource 
requirements also must be projected and budgets prepared. Once under way, progress must be 
monitored to assure that project goals and objectives will be achieved. 
 The project approach enables an organization to focus attention and concentrate efforts 
on accomplishing a narrow set of performance objectives within a limited time and budget 
framework. This can produce significant benefits compared with other approaches that might 
be considered. Even so, projects present managers with a host of problems that differ in many 
respects from those encountered with more routine activities. The problems of planning and 
coordinating project activities can be formidable for large projects, which typically have thou-
sands of activities that must be carefully planned and monitored if the project is to proceed 
according to schedule and at a reasonable cost. 
 Projects can have strategic importance for organizations. For example, good project man-
agement can be instrumental in successfully implementing an enterprise resource planning 
(ERP) system or converting a traditional operation to a lean operation. And good project man-
agement is very important when virtual teams are used. 
 Table 17.1 provides an overview of project management. 
 17.2 PROJECT LIFE CYCLE 
 The size, length, and scope of projects vary widely according to the nature and purpose of the 
project. Nevertheless, all projects have something in common: They go through a life cycle, 
which typically consists of five phases.
 1. 
Initiating. This begins the process by outlining the expected costs, benefits, and risks 
associated with a project. It includes defining the major project goals and choosing a 
project manager 
 2. 
Planning. This phase provides details on deliverables, the scope of the project, the 
budget, the schedule and milestones, performance objectives, resources needed, a 
quality plan, and a plan for handling risks. The accompanying documents generated 
in the planning phase will be used in the executing and monitoring phases to guide 
activities and monitor progress. Members of the project team are chosen. 
 3. 
Executing. In this phase the actual work of the project is carried out. The project is 
managed as activities are completed, resources are consumed, and milestones are 
reached. Management involves what the Project Management Institute ( www.pmi.org ) 
refers to as the nine management areas: project integration, scope, human resources, 
communications, time, risk, quality, cost, and procurement. 
 4. 
Monitoring and Controlling. This phase occurs at the same time as project execution. 
It involves comparing actual progress with planned progress and undertakes corrective 
action if needed, and monitoring any corrective action to make sure it achieves 
the desired effect. 
 Projects  Unique, one-time 
operations designed to accom-
plish a specific set of objectives 
in a limited time frame.  
 LO17.1 Describe the project 
life cycle.

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
733
 What is project management? A team-based approach for managing projects. 
 How is it different from general operations management? 
 1. Limited time frame. 
 2. Narrow focus, specific objectives. 
 3. Less bureaucratic. 
 Why is it used? 
 1. Special needs that don’t lend themselves to functional management. 
 2. Pressures for new or improved products or services, cost reduction. 
 What are the key metrics? 
 1. Time. 
 2. Cost. 
 3. Performance objectives. 
 What are the key success factors? 
 1. Top-down commitment. 
 2. A respected and capable project manager. 
 3. Enough time to plan. 
 4. Careful tracking and control. 
 5. Good communications. 
 What are the major administrative issues? 
 1. Executive responsibilities:
  a. Project selection. 
 b. Selection of a project manager. 
 c. Organizational structure. (To whom will the project manager report?) 
 2. Organizational alternatives:
 a. Manage within functional unit. 
  b. Assign a coordinator. 
 c. Use a matrix organization with a project leader. 
 What are the main tools? 
 1.  Work breakdown structure.  An initial planning tool that is needed to develop a list of activities, activity 
sequences, and a realistic budget. 
 2.  Network diagram.  A “big picture” visual aid that is used to estimate project duration, identify activities that are 
critical for timely project completion, identify areas where slack time exists, and develop activity schedules.  
 3.  Gantt charts. A visual aid used to plan and monitor individual activities. 
 4.  Risk management. Analyses of potential failures or problems, assessment of their likelihood and conse-
quences, and contingency plans. 
 TABLE 17.1 
 Overview of project management 
 Closing.  This phase ends the project. It involves handing off the project deliverables, 
obtaining customer acceptance, documenting lessons learned, and releasing resources. 
 It should be noted that the phases can overlap, so that one phase may not be fully complete 
before the next phase begins. This can reduce the time necessary to move through the life 
cycle, perhaps generating some competitive advantage and cost saving. Although subsequent 
decisions in an earlier phase may result in waste for some portion of the activity in a following 
phase, careful coordination of activities can minimize that risk. 
 Figure 17.1 illustrates the phases in a project life cycle. 
 17.3 BEHAVIORAL ASPECTS OF 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
 Project management differs from management of more traditional activities mainly because 
of its limited time framework and the unique set of activities involved, which gives rise to a 
host of unique problems. This section describes more fully the nature of projects and their 
behavioral implications. Special attention is given to the role of the project manager. 
 LO17.2  Discuss the behavioral 
aspects of projects in terms 
of project personnel and the 
project manager.

734 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 The Nature of Projects 
 As projects go through their life cycle, a variety of skill requirements are involved. The 
circumstances are analogous to constructing a house. Initially an idea is presented and its 
feasibility is assessed, then plans must be drawn up and approved by the owner and pos-
sibly a town building commission or other regulatory agency. Then a succession of activi-
ties occurs, each with its own skill requirements, starting with the site preparation, then 
laying the foundation, erecting the frame, roofing, constructing exterior walls, wiring and 
plumbing, installing kitchen and bathroom fixtures and appliances, interior finishing work, 
and painting and carpeting work. Similar sequences occur on large construction projects, in 
R&D work, in the aerospace industry, and in virtually every other instance where projects 
are being carried out. 
 Projects typically bring together people with diverse knowledge and skills, most of whom 
remain associated with the project for less than its full life. Some people go from project to 
project as their contributions become needed, and others are “on loan,” either on a full-time 
or part-time basis, from their regular jobs. The latter is usually the case when a special project 
exists within the framework of a more traditional organization. However, some organizations 
are involved with projects on a regular basis; examples include consulting firms, architects, 
writers and publishers, and construction firms. In those organizations, it is not uncommon for 
some individuals to spend virtually all of their time on projects. 
 Some organizations use a  matrix organization  that allows them to integrate the activities of 
a variety of specialists within a functional framework. For instance, they have certain people 
who prepare proposals, others who concentrate exclusively on engineering, others who devote 
their efforts to marketing, and so on. 
 In a matrix organization, functional and project managers share workers and facilities. 
Project managers negotiate with functional managers for people to work on a project. Those 
selected will be temporarily assigned to the project manager. However, they are still respon-
sible to their functional manager. They may work part-time or full-time on the project. When 
their work is done, they return to their functional department. 
 A matrix organization works quite well with people who can function with two managers. 
It can create synergy when people from various functional areas are brought together to work 
on a project. However, some people do not function well under such a structure, and may be 
stressed working in that environment. Matrix organizations typically do not allow long-term 
working relationships to develop. Furthermore, using multiple managers for one employee 
may result in uncertainty regarding employee evaluation and accountability. 
 FIGURE 17.1 
 Project life cycle 
 Source:  Adapted from Clifford F. Gray and 
Erik W. Larson,  Project Management: The 
Managerial Process, 2nd ed., p. 6. Copyright 
© 2003 McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Used 
with permission. 
Initiating
Goals
Speciﬁcations
Feasibility
Tasks
Responsibilities
Schedules
Budgets
Resources
Risks
Stafﬁng
Status reports
Changes
Quality
Manage
Monitor and control
Train customer
Transfer documents
Release resources
Reassign staff
Lessons learned
Level of effort
Planning
Execution and
Monitoring and Controlling
Closing

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
735
 Key Decisions in Project Management 
 Much of the success of projects depends on key managerial decisions over a sequence of steps:
 • Deciding which projects to implement. 
 • Selecting the project manager. 
 • Selecting the project team. 
 • Planning and designing the project. 
 • Managing and controlling project resources. 
 • Deciding if and when a project should be terminated. 
 Deciding Which Projects to Implement.  This involves determining the criteria that 
will be used to decide which projects to pursue. Typical factors include budget, availability 
of appropriate knowledge and skill personnel, and cost–benefit considerations. Of course, 
other factors may override these criteria, factors such as availability of funds, safety issues, 
government-mandated actions, and so on. 
 Selecting the Project Manager.  The project manager is the central person in the project. 
The following section on project managers discusses this topic. 
 Selecting the Project Team.  The team can greatly influence the ultimate success or fail-
ure of a project. Important considerations include not only a person’s knowledge and skill 
base, but also how well the person works with others (particularly those who have already 
been chosen for the project), enthusiasm for the project, other projects the person is involved 
in, and how likely those other projects might be to interfere with work on this project. 
 Planning and Designing the Project.  Project planning and design require decisions 
on project performance goals, a timetable for project completion, the scope of the project, 
what work needs to be done, how it will be done, if some portions will be outsourced, what 
resources will be needed, a budget, and when and how long resources will be needed. 
 Managing and Controlling Project Resources.  This involves managing personnel, 
equipment, and the budget; establishing appropriate metrics for evaluating the project; moni-
toring progress; and taking corrective action when needed. Also necessary are designing an 
 LO17.3  Name the six 
key decisions in project 
management.
 
 The U2 360 Tour was named after the 360-degree staging and audience configuration it used for shows. To accommodate this, the stage 
set made use of a massive four-legged supporting rig that was nicknamed “The Claw.” The tour crew consisted of 137 touring crews 
supplemented by over 120 hired locally. Moving the massive set from venues took as long as 3½ days. First, sound and light equipment 
was packed into the fleet of trucks during the four hours following the concert; the remainder of the time was spent deconstructing the 
steel structures. 

736 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
information system and deciding what project documents should be generated, their contents 
and format, when and by whom they will be needed, and how often they should be updated. 
 Deciding If and When a Project Should Be Terminated.  Sometimes it is better to ter-
minate a project than to invest any more resources. Important considerations here are the like-
lihood of success, termination costs, and whether resources could be better used elsewhere.  
 The Project Manager 
 The project manager has many duties. In the planning stage, the project manager must prepare 
a scope statement that spells out the deliverables and goals, determine required skills and 
resources needed, develop a schedule and budget, and develop plans for managing the scope, 
the schedule, the budget, and quality and risk. 
 The project manager bears the ultimate responsibility for the success or failure of the proj-
ect. He or she must be capable of working through others to accomplish the objectives of the 
project. The project manager is responsible for effectively managing each of the following:
 1. 
The  work, so that all of the necessary activities are accomplished in the desired 
sequence, and performance goals are met. 
 2. 
The  human resources,  so that those working on the project have direction and motivation.  
 3. 
 Communications, so that everybody has the information needed to do the work. 
 4. 
 Quality, so that performance objectives are realized. 
 5. 
 Time, so that the project is completed on schedule. 
 6. 
 Costs, so that the project is completed within budget. 
 7. 
Scope, so the project stays within the prescribed scope, and “scope creep” doesn’t occur 
without commensurate changes to the schedule (if needed) and the budget. 
 Several of these responsibilities are often portrayed in what is known as a “project manage-
ment triangle.” 
 To effectively manage a project, a project manager must employ a certain set 
of skills. The skills include the ability to motivate and direct team members; make 
trade-off decisions; expedite the work when necessary; put out fires; and moni-
tor time, budget, and technical details. For projects that involve fairly well-defined 
work, those skills will often suffice. However, for projects that are less well defined, 
and thus have a higher degree of uncertainty, the project manager also must employ 
strong leadership skills. These include the ability to adapt to changing circum-
stances that may involve changes to project goals, technical requirements, and proj-
ect team composition. As a leader, the project manager not only must be able to deal 
with these issues; he or she also must recognize the need for change, decide what 
changes are necessary, and work to accomplish them. 
 The job of project manager can be both difficult and rewarding. The manager 
must coordinate and motivate people who sometimes owe their allegiance to other 
managers in their functional areas. In addition, the people who work on a project 
frequently possess specialized knowledge and skills that the project manager lacks. 
Nevertheless, the manager is expected to guide and evaluate their efforts. Project managers 
often must function in an environment that is beset with uncertainties. Even so, budgets and 
time constraints are usually imposed, which can create additional pressures on project per-
sonnel. Finally, the project manager may not have the authority needed to accomplish all the 
objectives of the project. Instead, the manager sometimes must rely on persuasion and the 
cooperation of others to realize project goals. 
 Ethical issues  often arise in connection with projects. Examples include the temptation 
to understate costs or to withhold information in order to get a project approved, pressure to 
alter or make misleading statements on status reports, falsifying records, compromising work-
ers’ safety, and approving substandard work. It is the responsibility of managers at all levels 
to maintain and enforce ethical standards. Moreover, employees often take their cue from 
 The Project Management Triangle 
Performance Objectives
Schedule
Quality
Cost

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
737
managers’ behavior, so it is doubly important for managers to model ethical behavior. The 
Project Management Institute (PMI) has a Web site ( www.pmi.org ) that includes a code of 
ethics for project managers, in addition to other useful information about project management. 
 The position of project manager has high visibility. The rewards of the job of project man-
ager come from the creative challenges of the job, the benefits of being associated with a 
successful project (including promotion and monetary compensation), and the personal satis-
faction of seeing it through to its conclusion. 
 Behavioral Issues 
 Project metrics related to cost, schedule, and quality are important indicators of how well a 
project is doing. Behavioral metrics are also important, and should not be overlooked. People 
make the project happen. However, behavioral issues can interfere with the success of a project 
if they are not carefully managed. Decentralized decision making, the stress of achieving project 
milestones on time and within budget, and surprises can contribute to behavioral problems. 
 Because project work is often based on team efforts, workers are usually evaluated on the 
basis of the team’s overall contribution relative to project metrics, and not on an individual 
basis. The team must be able to function as a unit, so interpersonal skills are very important, 
as are coping skills. And conflict resolution can be an important part of a project manager’s 
job. Some problems can be avoided by the project manager by carefully selecting team mem-
bers when possible; leadership; motivation; maintaining an environment of integrity, trust, 
and professionalism; and being supportive of team efforts. 
 Project Champions 
 Some companies make use of   project champions  .  These are people, usually within the com-
pany, who promote and support the project. They can be instrumental in facilitating the work of 
the project manager by “talking up” the project to other managers who might be asked to share 
resources with the project team as well as employees who might be asked to work on parts of the 
project. The work that a project champion does can be critical to the success of a project, so it is 
important for team members to encourage and communicate with the project champion.  
 Project champion  A person 
who promotes and supports a 
project. 
and inexpensively and boasts the advanced com-
munication skills necessary to work closely with 
vendors, project teams and senior management.” 
 Project managers have always had to deal with changing relationships. 
The big change, according to Gispan, is the speed of change, which has 
made the project manager’s job more difficult. “The changes taking place 
now are faster and more dramatic than in the past,” he says. “Customers 
are less inclined to give you money for development work, for example. 
They’d rather save money by using off-the-shelf capabilities. Budgets that 
used to be reasonably substantial and healthy are now tight.” 
 Gispan adds that corporate mergers and consolidations have 
complicated the picture. Project managers must deal with complex, 
often labyrinthine decision-making structures. Getting quick decisions 
requires work and persistence. 
 Further complicating the situation is a high worker attrition rate. “A 
decade ago, the attrition rate was about 3 percent; today it has jumped 
to almost 10 percent,” Gispan explains. “It means project managers 
have to constantly put together new teams.” 
 Bob  Weinstein 
 Not many people can eloquently describe the changing role of project 
managers as well as Jonathan Gispan, who teaches the skill to man-
agers at the Lockheed Martin Corporation division in King of Prussia, 
PA. Gispan spent 38 years of his career working at GE Aerospace as a 
project manager. 
 Project managers have never been more critical, according to this vet-
eran techie. The function’s core responsibilities haven’t changed, but the 
players and playing field are very different than they were five years ago. 
 Gispan views the project manager as the focal point of a complex 
relationship matrix that includes customers, workers, vendors and 
bosses. “Project managers make things happen,” he says. “Not only do 
they manage a project from start to finish, they also manage the people 
who make it happen.” 
 The job requires a jack-of-all-trades who can both understand a 
problem and solve it. “Project managers must successfully manage 
the total lifecycle of a project,” says Gispan. “The job requires a super-
organized person who knows how to get a project completed quickly 
 READING 
 Project Managers Have Never Been More Critical 
m-
th 
(continued)

738 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Certification 
 The Project Management Institute (PMI) administers a globally recognized, examination-
based professional certification program. The certification program maintains ISO 9001 cer-
tification in Quality Management Systems. There are two levels of certification: Associate 
and Project Management Professional. Candidates for the Associate and Professional levels 
must meet specific education and experience requirements and agree to adhere to a code of 
professional conduct. The Project Management Professional must demonstrate an ongoing 
professional commitment to the field of project management by satisfying PMI’s Continuing 
Certification Requirements Program. 1 
 The Pros and Cons of Working on Projects 
 People are selected to work on special projects because the knowledge or abilities they pos-
sess are needed. In some instances, however, their supervisors may be reluctant to allow them 
to interrupt their regular jobs, even on a part-time basis, because it may require training a new 
person to do a job that will be temporary. Moreover, managers don’t want to lose the output of 
good workers. The workers themselves are not always eager to participate in projects because 
it may mean working for two bosses who impose differing demands, it may disrupt friendships 
and daily routines, and it presents the risk of being replaced on the current job. Furthermore, 
there may be fear of being associated with an unsuccessful project because of the adverse effect 
it might have on career advancement. In too many instances, when a major project is phased out 
and the project team disbanded, team members tend to drift away from the organization for lack 
of a new project and the difficulty of returning to former jobs. This tendency is more pronounced 
after lengthy projects and is less likely to occur when a team member works on a part-time basis. 
 In spite of the potential risks, people are attracted by the potential rewards of being involved 
in a project. One is the dynamic environment that surrounds a project, often a marked contrast 
to the staid environment of a routine in which some may feel trapped. Some individuals seem 
to thrive in more dynamic environments; they welcome the challenge of working under pres-
sure and solving new problems. Then, too, projects may present opportunities to meet new 
people and to increase future job opportunities, especially if the project is successful. In addi-
tion, association with a project can be a source of status among fellow workers. Finally, work-
ing on projects frequently inspires a team spirit, increasing morale and motivation to achieve 
successful completion of project goals. 
 1 www.pmi.org .
 Through it all, the project manager must be clear-headed and keep 
a tight rein on projects. It sounds intimidating, yet Gispan sees it as a 
positive. “The current marketplace keeps you on your toes,” he says. 
“Even though everything is changing at what seems like an overwhelm-
ing pace, it is best to view change as a motivator that allows you to 
keep pace with technology and get better at your job. The idea is not 
merely to cope with change but to thrive in it. It is more of an attitude 
than anything else.” 
 What does it take to be a project manager? “You need a good tech-
nical base,” says Karen Nichols, project manager at EWP Engineering, 
Inc., a consulting engineering company in Salt Lake City, UT. “That 
translates to at least five to seven years in the trenches.” 
 That’s for starters. “But you also need to know how the business side 
of the equation works,” says Nichols. “This is tough for some technical 
people because it requires the ability to understand how the two different 
sides of the business mesh. Project managers must also be familiar with 
accounting methods as well as sales and marketing strategies. In short, 
they must know how to manage a project so it makes a profit.” 
 If you think you have what it takes, ask to work with a project man-
ager. “It won’t take you long to find out whether you have an aptitude 
and natural feel for the work,” says Nichols. “Not everyone is happy—or 
capable of—juggling many balls in the air at once.” 
 Once you get your feet wet, you can move up quickly, adds Gis-
pan. “After you’ve proven to management that you’re organized and 
can manage several tasks, it won’t be long before you are managing 
everything associated with a program. Get good at it and you’ll move 
up the ranks from project manager to general manager where you are 
running several company businesses.” 
 And, don’t be confused by job titles. Each company has its own 
unique title for the project manager role. Whatever the title, a project 
manager is easy to spot. “It’s the person who negotiates with all the key 
players and makes things happen,” says Gispan. “Technology compa-
nies would perish without them.” 
 Source: Bob Weinstein, “Project Managers Have Never Been More Critical,” 
 Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, February 18, 1999. Copyright © 1999 
Rochester Democrat and Chronicle. Reprinted by permission. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
739
 17.4 WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE 
       Because large projects usually involve a very large number of activities, planners need some 
way to determine exactly what will need to be done so that they can realistically estimate how 
long it will take to complete the various elements of the project and how much it will cost. 
They often accomplish this by developing a   work breakdown structure (WBS) ,  which is a 
hierarchical listing of what must be done during the project. This methodology establishes a 
logical framework for identifying the required activities for the project (see  Figure 17.2 ). The 
first step in developing the work breakdown structure is to identify the major elements of the 
project. These are the Level 2 boxes in  Figure 17.2 . The next step is to identify the major sup-
porting activities for each of the major elements—the Level 3 boxes. Then, each major support-
ing activity is broken down into a list of the activities that will be needed to accomplish it—the 
Level 4 boxes. (For purposes of illustration, only a portion of the Level 4 boxes are shown.) 
Usually there are many activities in the Level 4 lists. Large projects involve additional levels, but 
 Figure 17.2 gives you some idea of the concept of the work breakdown structure.  
 Developing a good work breakdown structure can require substantial time and effort due 
to the uncertainties associated with a project and/or the size of the project. Typically the por-
tion of time spent on developing the work breakdown structure greatly exceeds the time spent 
on actually developing a project schedule. The importance of a work breakdown structure is 
underscored by the fact that the activity list that results serves as the focal point for planning 
and doing the project. Moreover, the work breakdown structure is the basis for developing 
time and cost estimates. 
 17.5 PLANNING AND SCHEDULING WITH 
GANTT CHARTS 
 The Gantt chart (see Chapter 16) is a popular visual tool for planning and scheduling  simple 
projects. It enables a manager to initially schedule project activities and then to monitor prog-
ress over time by comparing planned progress to actual progress.  Figure 17.3  illustrates a 
Gantt chart for a bank’s plan to establish a new direct marketing department. To prepare the 
chart, the vice president in charge of the project had to first identify the major activities that 
would be required. Next, time estimates for each activity were made, and the sequence of 
activities was determined. Once completed, the chart indicated which activities were to occur, 
their planned duration, and when they were to occur. Then, as the project progressed, the 
manager was able to see which activities were on schedule and which were behind schedule. 
 LO17.4  Explain the nature 
and importance of a work 
breakdown structure in project 
management.
 Work breakdown structure 
(WBS)  A hierarchical listing 
of what must be done during a 
project. 
 FIGURE 17.2 
 Schematic of a work breakdown 
structure  
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Project

740 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
However, Gantt charts fail to reveal certain relationships among activities that can be crucial 
to effective project management. For instance, if one of the early activities in a project suf-
fers a delay, it would be important for the manager to be able to easily determine which later 
activities would result in a delay. Conversely, some activities may safely be delayed without 
affecting the overall project schedule. The Gantt chart does not directly reveal this. On more 
complex projects, it is often used in conjunction with a  network diagram,  defined in the fol-
lowing section, for scheduling purposes. 
 17.6 PERT AND CPM 
 PERT  (program evaluation and review technique) and   CPM  (critical path method) are two of 
the most widely used techniques for planning and coordinating large-scale projects. By using 
PERT or CPM, managers are able to obtain
 1. 
A graphical display of project activities. 
 2. 
An estimate of how long the project will take. 
 3. 
An indication of which activities are the most critical to timely project completion. 
 4. 
An indication of how long any activity can be delayed without delaying the project. 
 Although PERT and CPM were developed independently, they have a great deal in com-
mon. Moreover, many of the initial differences between them have disappeared as users bor-
rowed certain features from one technique for use with the other. For practical purposes, the 
two techniques now are the same; the comments and procedures described will apply to CPM 
analysis as well as to PERT analysis of projects. 
 The Network Diagram 
 One of the main features of PERT and related techniques is their use of a   network  or   pre-
cedence diagram to depict major project activities and their sequential relationships. There 
are two slightly different conventions for constructing these network diagrams. Under one 
convention, the  arrows  designate activities; under the other convention, the  nodes designate 
activities. These conventions are referred to as   activity-on-arrow (AOA)  and   activity-on-
node (AON)   .  Activities  consume resources and/or  time.  The nodes in the AOA approach rep-
resent the activities’ starting and finishing points, which are called   events . Events are points 
 PERT  Program evaluation and 
review technique, for planning 
and coordinating large projects. 
 CPM  Critical path method, for 
planning and coordinating large 
projects. 
 LO17.5 Give a general 
description of PERT/CPM 
techniques.
 Network (precedence) 
diagram    Diagram of project 
activities that shows sequential 
relationships by use of arrows 
and nodes. 
 Activity-on-arrow 
(AOA)  Network diagram con-
vention in which arrows desig-
nate activities.  
 FIGURE 17.3 
 Gantt chart for bank example 
Start
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Locate new
facilities
Activity
Weeks after start
Interview
prospective staff
Hire and
train staff
Select and
order furniture
Remodel and
install phones
Furniture received
and set up
Move in/
startup
Start
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Weeks after start

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
741
in time. Unlike activities, they consume neither resources nor time. The nodes in an AON 
diagram represent activities. 
 Both conventions are illustrated in  Figure 17.4 , using the bank example that was depicted 
in the Gantt chart in  Figure 17.3 . Compare the two. In the AOA diagram, the arrows represent 
activities and they show the sequence in which certain activities must be performed (e.g., Inter-
view precedes Hire and train); in the AON diagram, the arrows show only the sequence in which 
certain activities must be performed while the nodes represent the activities. Activities in AOA 
networks can be referred to in either of two ways. One is by their endpoints (e.g., activity 2-4) 
and the other is by a letter assigned to an arrow (e.g., activity  c ). Both methods are illustrated 
in this chapter. Activities in AON networks are referred to by a letter (or number) assigned to a 
node. Although these two approaches are slightly different, they both show sequential relation-
ships—something Gantt charts don’t. Note that the AON diagram has a starting node, S, which 
is actually not an activity but is added in order to have a single starting node.  
 Despite these differences, the two conventions are remarkably similar, so you should not 
encounter much difficulty in understanding either one. In fact, there are convincing arguments 
for having some familiarity with  both  approaches. Perhaps the most compelling is that both 
approaches are widely used. Moreover, a contractor doing work for the organization may be 
using the other approach, so employees of the organization who deal with the contractor on 
project matters would benefit from knowledge of the other approach. However, any particular 
organization would typically use only one approach, and employees would have to work with 
that approach. 
 Of particular interest to managers are the  paths  in a network diagram. A   path  is a sequence 
of activities that leads from the starting node to the ending node. For example, in the AOA dia-
gram, the sequence 1-2-4-5-6 is a path. In the AON diagram, S-1-2-6-7 is a path. Note that in 
both diagrams there are three paths. One reason for the importance of paths is that they reveal 
 sequential relationships.  The importance of sequential relationships cannot be overstated: If 
one activity in a sequence is delayed (i.e., late) or done incorrectly, the start of all following 
activities on that path will be delayed. 
 Another important aspect of paths is the length of a path: How long will a particular 
sequence of activities take to complete? The length (of time) of any path can be determined by 
summing the expected times of the activities on that path. The path with the longest time is of 
particular interest because it governs project completion time. In other words, expected project 
duration equals the expected time of the longest path. Moreover, if there are any delays along 
the longest path, there will be corresponding delays in project completion time. Attempts to 
shorten project completion must focus on the longest sequence of activities. Because of its 
influence on project completion time, the longest path is referred to as the   critical path , and 
its activities are referred to as   critical activities . 
 Activities  Project steps that 
consume resources and/or time.  
 Activity-on-node 
(AON)  Network diagram con-
vention in which nodes designate 
activities. 
 Events  The starting and finish-
ing of activities, designated by 
nodes in the AOA convention. 
 Path  A sequence of activities 
that leads from the starting node 
to the finishing node. 
 Critical path  The longest path; 
determines expected project 
duration. 
 Critical activities  Activities 
on the critical path.  
 FIGURE 17.4 
 A simple project network diagram 
1
2
Activity-on-arrow
(AOA) diagram
3
5
4
6
Locate
facilities
Interview
Hire and
train
Remodel
Order
furniture
Furniture
setup
Move
in
S
1
3
5
2
4
7
6
Move
in
Hire and
train
Locate
facilities
Order
furniture
Remodel
Interview
Furniture
setup
Activity-on-node
(AON) diagram

742 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Paths that are shorter than the critical path can experience some delays and still not affect 
the overall project completion time as long as the ultimate path time does not exceed the 
length of the critical path. The allowable slippage for any path is called   slack ,  and it reflects 
the difference between the length of a given path and the length of the critical path. The criti-
cal path, then, has zero slack time. 
 Network Conventions 
    Developing and interpreting network diagrams requires some familiarity with networking 
conventions.  Table 17.2  illustrates some of the most basic and most common features of net-
work diagrams. This will provide sufficient background for understanding the basic concepts 
associated with precedence diagrams and allow you to solve typical problems. 
 A special feature that is sometimes used in AOA networks to clarify relationships is a 
 dummy activity.  In order to recognize the need to use a dummy activity using the AOA approach 
when presented with a list of activities and the activities each precedes, examine the “Immedi-
ate Predecessor” list. Look for instances where multiple activities are listed, such as  a,  b  in the 
following list. If  a  or  b  appears separately in the list (as  b  does in the table below), a dummy 
will be needed to clarify the relationship (see the last diagram in  Table 17.2 ). 
 Here are two more AOA conventions:
   For reference purposes, nodes are numbered typically from left to right, with lower num-
bers assigned to preceding nodes and higher numbers to following nodes: 
  Starting and ending arrows are sometimes used during development of a network for 
increased clarity: 
 Slack  Allowable slippage for a 
path; the difference between the 
length of a path and the length of 
the critical path.  
 LO17.6 Construct simple 
network diagrams.
 Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 a 
 — 
 b 
 — 
 c 
 a, b 
 d 
 b 
 
a
c
b
d
e
2
3
4
5
1
End
a
c
b
d
e
2
3
4
5
1
Start

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
743
 TABLE 17.2 
 Network conventions 
a
b
a
b
c
a
c
Dummy
activity
a
b
c
b
c
c
d
a
a
b
b
c
d
AOA
AON
Interpretation
Activities must be completed in sequence: 
first a, then b, and then c.
Both a and b must be completed before c
can start.
Activity a must be completed before b or
c can start.
Both a and b must be completed before c
or d can start.
Use a dummy activity to clarify relationships:
 1. To separate two activities that have the
  same starting and ending nodes.
 2. When activities share some, but not all,
  preceding activities. Here, activity c is
       preceded by activities a and b, while 
       activity d is only preceded by activity b.
(No dummy
needed)
(No dummy
needed)
b
a
c
a
c
a
b
c
c
d
a
b
b
  Given the additional information on the bank network of  Figure 17.4  shown in  Figure 17.5 , 
determine
 a. 
The length of each path. 
 b. 
The critical path. 
 c. 
The expected length of the project. 
 d. 
The amount of slack time for each path. 
 17.7 DETERMINISTIC TIME ESTIMATES 
      The main determinant of the way PERT and CPM networks are analyzed and interpreted is 
whether activity time estimates are  probabilistic  or  deterministic.  If time estimates can be 
made with a high degree of confidence that actual times are fairly certain, we say the esti-
mates are   deterministic .  If actual times are subject to variation, we say the estimates are 
 probabilistic .  Probabilistic time estimates must include an indication of the extent of prob-
able variation. 
 This section describes analysis of networks with deterministic time estimates. A later sec-
tion deals with probabilistic times. 
 One of the best ways to gain an understanding of the nature of network analysis is to con-
sider a simple example. 
 LO17.7  Analyze networks with 
deterministic times.
 Deterministic  Time estimates 
that are fairly certain.  
 Probabilistic  Estimates of 
times that allow for variation. 
E X A M P L E  1

744 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 17.8 A COMPUTING ALGORITHM 
   Many real-life project networks are much larger than the simple network illustrated in the 
 preceding example; they often contain hundreds or even thousands of activities. Because the 
necessary computations can become exceedingly complex and time-consuming, large net-
works are generally analyzed by computer programs instead of manually. Planners use an 
algorithm to develop four pieces of information about the network activities:
   ES, the earliest time activity can start, assuming all preceding activities start as early as 
possible.  
 EF, the earliest time the activity can finish. 
 LS, the latest time the activity can start and not delay the project. 
 LF, the latest time the activity can finish and not delay the project. 
 Once these values have been determined, they can be used to find
 1. 
Expected project duration. 
 2. 
Slack time. 
 3. 
The critical path. 
 Activity-on-Arrow 
 The three examples that follow illustrate how to compute those values using the precedence 
diagram of Example 1. 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
As shown in the following table, the path lengths are 18 weeks, 20 weeks, and 14 
weeks. 
 b. 
Path 1-2-5-6 is the longest path (20 weeks), so it is the critical path. 
   c. The expected length of the project is equal to the length of the critical path (i.e., 20 
weeks). 
 d. 
We find the slack for each path by subtracting its length from the length of the critical 
path, as shown in the last column of the table. ( Note: It is sometimes desirable to 
know the slack time associated with activities. The next section describes a method for 
obtaining those slack times.)
 Path 
 Length (weeks) 
 Slack 
 1-2-4-5-6 
 8    6    3    1    18  20    18    2 
 1-2-5-6 
 8    11    1    20 * 
 20    20    0 
 1-3-5-6 
 4    9    1    14 
 20    14    6 
 *Critical path length. 
 FIGURE 17.5 
 AOA diagram 
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
8 weeks
Locate
1
2
3
4
5
6
6 weeks
Order
furniture
11 weeks
Remodel
3 weeks
Setup
1 week
Move in
9 weeks
Hire and train
4 weeks
Interview

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
745
 E X A M P L E  2 
 S O L U T I O N 
Compute the earliest starting time and earliest finishing time for each activity in the diagram 
shown in  Figure 17.5 . 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Begin by placing brackets at the two ends of each starting activity: 
 
 
 We want to determine and place in the brackets for each activity the earliest starting time, 
ES, and the earliest finishing time, EF, for every activity, and put them in brackets, as follows: 
 
ES
EF
t
 
 Do this for all activities, beginning at the left side of the precedence diagram and moving to 
the right side. 
 Once ES has been determined for each activity, EF can be found by adding the activity 
time,  t, to ES: ES     t     EF. 
 Use an ES of 0 for all starting activities. Thus, activities 1-2 and 1-3 are assigned ES values 
of 0. This permits computation of the EF for each of these activities:
EF
0
8
8 and EF
0
4
4
1-2
1-3






 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
 
 The EF time for an activity becomes the ES time for the next activity to follow it in the 
diagram. Hence, because activity 1-2 has an EF time of 8, both activities 2-4 and 2-5 have ES 
times of 8. Similarly, activity 3-5 has an ES time of 4. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
8
8
4
 
 This permits calculation of the EF times for these activities: EF 2-4       8      6      14; 
EF 2-5     8    11    19; and EF 3-5     4    9    13. 

746 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Computation of earliest starting and finishing times is aided by two simple rules:
 1. 
The earliest finish time for any activity is equal to its earliest start time plus its expected 
duration,  t: 
 EF  ES  t 
 (17–1) 
 2. 
ES for activities at nodes with one entering arrow is equal to EF of the entering 
arrow. ES for activities leaving nodes with multiple entering arrows is equal to the 
largest EF of the entering arrow. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
9
11
6
8
14
8
19
4
13
 
 The ES for activity 4-5 is the EF time of activity 2-4, which is 14. Using this value, we find 
the EF for activity 4-5 is 17; EF 4-5     14    3    17. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
9
11
6
8
14
8
19
4
13
3
14
17
 
 In order to determine the ES for activity 5-6, we must realize that activity 5-6 cannot start 
until  every  activity that precedes it is finished. Therefore, the  largest  of the EF times for the 
three activities that precede activity 5-6 determines ES 5-6 . Hence, the ES for activity 5-6 is 19. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
9
11
6
8
14
8
19
4
13
3
14
17
19
20
1
 
 Then the EF for the last activity, 5-6, is 20; EF 5-6     19    1    20. Note that the latest EF is 
the project duration. Thus, the expected length of the project is 20 weeks. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
747
 Computation of the latest starting and finishing times is aided by the use of two rules:
 1. 
The latest starting time for each activity is equal to its latest finishing time minus its 
expected duration:
 EF  ES  t 
 (17–2) 
 2. 
For nodes with one leaving arrow, LF for arrows entering that node equals the LS of 
the leaving arrow. For nodes with multiple leaving arrows, LF for arrows entering that 
node equals the smallest LS of leaving arrows. 
 Finding ES and EF times involves a  forward pass  through the network; finding LS and LF 
times involves a  backward pass  through the network. Hence, we must begin with the EF of the 
last activity and use that time as the LF for the last activity. Then we obtain the LS for the last 
activity by subtracting its expected duration from its LF. 
 RULES FOR THE COMPUTING 
ALGORITHM 
 ( Note:  For an AON diagram, if a starting node or ending node does not 
have a time associated with it, ignore that node.) 
 Forward Pass 
 For each path, start at the left side of the diagram and work toward 
the right side. 
 For each beginning activity: ES    0. 
 For each activity: ES    Activity time    EF. 
 For the following activity: ES    EF of preceding activity. 
 Note:  If an activity has multiple immediate preceding activities, 
set its ES equal to the largest EF of its immediate predecessors. 
 Backward Pass 
 For each path, start at the right side of the diagram and work toward 
the left side. 
 Use the largest EF as the LF for all ending activities. 
 For each activity: LS    LF    Activity time. 
 For the preceding activity: LF    LS of following activity. 
 Note:  If an activity has multiple immediately following activi-
ties, set the activity’s LF equal to the smallest LS of the following 
activities. 
 E X A M P L E  3 
 S O L U T I O N 
Compute the latest finishing and starting times for the precedence diagram developed in 
Example 2. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 We must add the LS and LF times to the brackets on the diagram. 
 
LS
ES
LF
EF
 
 Begin by setting the LF time of the last activity equal to the EF of that activity. Thus,
 LF5-6  EF5-6  20 weeks 
 Obtain the LS time for activity 5-6 by subtracting the activity time,  t, from the LF time:
 LS5-6  LF5-6  t  20  1  19 
 Mark these values on the diagram: 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
9
11
6
8
14
8
19
4
13
3
14
17
19
19
20
20
1
 

748 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 The LS time of 19 for activity 5-6 now becomes the LF time for each of the activities that 
precedes activity 5-6. This permits determination of the LS times for each of those activities: 
Subtract the activity time from the LF to obtain the LS time for the activity. The LS time for 
activity 3-5 is 19    9    10. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
0
4
9
11
6
8
14
8
8
19
19
10
4
19
13
3
16
14
19
17
19
19
20
20
1
 
 Next, the LS for activity 4-5, which is 16, becomes the LF for activity 2-4, and the LS for 
activity 3-5, which is 10, becomes the LF for activity 1-3. Using these values, you find the LS 
for each of these activities by subtracting the activity time from the LF time. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
8
6
0
10
4
9
11
6
10
8
16
14
8
8
19
19
10
4
19
13
3
16
14
19
17
19
19
20
20
1
 
 The LF for activity 1-2 is the  smaller  of the two LS times of the activities that 1-2 precedes. 
Hence, the LF time for activity 1-2 is 8. The reason you use the smaller time is that activity 1-2 
must finish at a time that permits all following activities to start no later than their LS times. 
 Once you have determined the LF time of activity 1-2, find its LS time by subtracting the 
activity time of 8 from the LF time of 8. Hence, the LS time is 0. 
 
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
4
0
0
8
8
6
0
10
4
9
11
6
10
8
16
14
8
8
19
19
10
4
19
13
3
16
14
19
17
19
19
20
20
1
 
 Activity-on-Node 
 The computing algorithm is performed in essentially the same manner in the AON approach. 
 Figure 17.6  shows the node diagram, and  Figures 17.7A ,  B , and  C  illustrate the computing 
algorithm.      

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
749
 FIGURE 17.6 
 AON diagram 
S
1
3
5
2
4
7
6
8
4
11
6
9
1
3
Move
in
Hire and
train
Locate
facilities
Order
furniture
Remodel
Interview
Estimated
activity completion time
in weeks
Furniture
setup
 FIGURE 17.7A 
 AON diagram with brackets 
added  
S
1
3
5
2
4
7
1
6
9
11
3
6
8
t
4
 FIGURE 17.7B 
 Forward pass 
S
1
3
5
2
4
7
1
19
6
20
9
4
13
11
8
19
3
14
17
6
11
8
14
8
0
8
t
ES
EF
4
0
4

750 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Computing Slack Times 
 The slack time can be computed in either of two ways:
 Slack  LS  ES   or   LF  EF 
 (17–3) 
 The critical path using this computing algorithm is denoted by activities with zero slack 
time. Thus, the table in Example 4 indicates that activities 1-2, 2-5, and 5-6 are all critical 
activities, which agrees with the results of the intuitive approach demonstrated in Example 1. 
 Knowledge of slack times provides managers with information for planning the allocation 
of scarce resources and for directing control efforts toward those activities that might be most 
susceptible to delaying the project. In this regard, it is important to recognize that the activ-
ity slack times are based on the assumption that all of the activities on the same path will be 
started as early as possible and not exceed their expected times. Furthermore, if two activities 
are both on the same path (e.g., activities 2-4 and 4-5 in the preceding example) and have 
the same slack (e.g., two weeks), this will be the  total  slack available to both. In essence, the 
activities have  shared slack. Hence, if the first activity uses all the slack, there will be zero 
slack for all following activities on that same path. 
 FIGURE 17.7C 
 Backward pass 
S
1
3
5
2
4
7
1
19
19
6
20
20
9
10
4
13
19
11
8
8
19
19
3
16
14
17
19
6
10
8
14
16
8
0
0
8
8
t
LS
ES
EF
LF
4
6
0
4
10
 E X A M P L E  4 
 S O L U T I O N 
Compute slack times for the preceding example. 
 Either the starting times or the finishing times can be used. Suppose we choose the starting 
times. Using ES times computed in Example 2 and LS times computed in Example 3, slack 
times are
 Activity 
 LS 
 ES 
 (LS – ES) 
Slack 
 1-2 
 0 
 0 
 0 
 1-3 
 6 
 0 
 6 
 2-4 
 10 
 8 
 2 
 2-5 
 8 
 8 
 0 
 3-5 
 10 
 4 
 6 
 4-5 
 16 
 14 
 2 
 5-6 
 19 
 19 
 0 
 Activities that have a slack of zero are on the critical path. Hence, the critical path is 1-2-5-6. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 As noted earlier, this algorithm lends itself to computerization. A computer printout for 
this problem would appear something like the one shown in  Table 17.3 . 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
751
 17.9 PROBABILISTIC TIME ESTIMATES 
      The preceding discussion assumed that activity times were known and not subject to varia-
tion. While that condition exists in some situations, there are many others where it does not. 
Consequently, those situations require a probabilistic approach. 
 The probabilistic approach involves  three time estimates for each activity instead of one:
 1. 
 Optimistic time:  The length of time required under optimum conditions; represented by  t  o  .  
 2. 
 Pessimistic time:  The length of time required under the worst conditions; represented by  t  p  .  
 3. 
 Most likely time: The most probable amount of time required; represented by  t  m  . 
Managers or others with knowledge about the project can make these time estimates. 
 The  beta distribution is generally used to describe the inherent variability in time esti-
mates (see  Figure 17.8 ). Although there is no real theoretical justification for using the beta 
distribution, it has certain features that make it attractive in practice: The distribution can be 
symmetrical or skewed to either the right or the left according to the nature of a particular 
activity; the mean and variance of the distribution can be readily obtained from the three time 
estimates listed above; and the distribution is unimodal with a high concentration of probabil-
ity surrounding the most likely time estimate. 
 Of special interest in network analysis are the average or expected time for each activity,  t  e  , 
and the variance of each activity time,  
2
   . The expected time of an activity,  t  e  , is a weighted 
average of the three time estimates:
 
4
6
t
t
t
t
e
o
m
p
=
+
+
 
 (17–4) 
 Optimistic time  The length 
of time required under optimal 
conditions. 
 Pessimistic time  The length 
of time required under the worst 
conditions. 
 Most likely time  The most 
probable length of time that will 
be required.  
 Beta distribution  Used to 
describe the inherent variability 
in activity time estimates.  
 
 
 SCHEDULE 
 
 
 
 EARLY 
 LATE 
 
 Activity 
 Time 
 ES 
 EF 
 LS 
 LF 
 Slack 
 1-2 
 8.00 
 0.00 
 8.00 
 0.00 
 8.00 
 0.00 
 1-3 
 4.00 
 0.00 
 4.00 
 6.00 
 10.00 
 6.00 
 2-4 
 6.00 
 8.00 
 14.00 
 10.00 
 16.00 
 2.00 
 2-5 
 11.00 
 8.00 
 19.00 
 8.00 
 19.00 
 0.00 
 3-5 
 9.00 
 4.00 
 13.00 
 10.00 
 19.00 
 6.00 
 4-5 
 3.00 
 14.00 
 17.00 
 16.00 
 19.00 
 2.00 
 5-6 
 1.00 
 19.00 
 20.00 
 19.00 
 20.00 
 0.00 
 THE CRITICAL PATH SEQUENCE IS: 
 
 
 
 
 SNODE 
 FNODE 
 TIME 
 
 
 
 
 1 
 2 
 8.00 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 5 
 11.00 
 
 
 
 
 5 
 6 
 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 20.00 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE 17.3 
 Computer printout 
 LO17.8  Analyze networks with 
probabilistic times.
 FIGURE 17.8 
 A beta distribution is used to 
describe probabilistic time 
estimates  
Activity
start
0 
Optimistic
time
Most likely
time (mode)
Pessimistic
time
te
tp
tm
to

752 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 The expected duration of a path (i.e., the path mean) is equal to the sum of the expected times 
of the activities on that path:
 Path mean
of expected times of activities on the path
∑

 
 (17–5) 
 The standard deviation of each activity’s time is estimated as one-sixth of the difference 
between the pessimistic and optimistic time estimates. (Analogously, nearly all of the area 
under a normal distribution lies within three standard deviations of the mean, which is a range 
of six standard deviations.) We find the variance by squaring the standard deviation. Thus,
 
(
)
6
or
(
)
36
2
2
2
t
t
t
t
p
o
p
o
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥




 
 (17–6) 
 The size of the variance reflects the degree of uncertainty associated with an activity’s 
time: The larger the variance, the greater the uncertainty. 
 It is also desirable to compute the standard deviation of the expected time for  each path. 
We can do this by summing the variances of the activities on a path and then taking the square 
root of that number; that is,
 
(Variances of activities on path)
path
∑


 
 (17–7) 
 Example 5 illustrates these computations. 
 E X A M P L E  5 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 The network diagram for a project is shown in the accompanying figure, with three time esti-
mates for each activity. Activity times are in weeks. Do the following:
 a. 
Compute the expected time for each activity and the expected duration for each path. 
 b. 
Identify the critical path. 
 c. 
Compute the variance of each activity and the variance and standard deviation of each 
path. 
 
3-4-5
d
3-5-7
e
5-7-9
f
2-4-6
b
4-6-8
h
1-3-4
a
2-3-6
g
2-3-5
c
3-4-6
i
Most likely
time
Optimistic
time
Pessimistic
time
AOA diagram
3-4-5
3-5-7
5-7-9
AON diagram
d
e
f
1-3-4
2-4-6
2-3-5
a
b
c
2-3-6
4-6-8
3-4-6
g
h
i
Finish
Start
  

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
753
  Knowledge of the expected path times and their standard deviations enables a manager to 
compute probabilistic estimates of the project completion time, such as these:
 The probability that the project will be completed by a specified time. 
 The probability that the project will take longer than its scheduled completion time. 
 These estimates can be derived from the probability that various paths will be completed 
by the specified time. This involves the use of the normal distribution. Although activity times 
are represented by a beta distribution, the path distribution is represented by a normal distribu-
tion. The central limit theorem tells us that the summing of activity times (random variables) 
results in a normal distribution. This is illustrated in  Figure 17.9 . The rationale for using a 
normal distribution is that sums of random variables (activity times or means) will tend to 
be normally distributed, regardless of the distributions of the variables. The normal tendency 
improves as the number of random variables increases. However, even when the number of 
items being summed is fairly small, the normal approximation provides a reasonable approxi-
mation to the actual distribution. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
 
 
 TIMES 
 
=
+
+
t
t
t
t
e
o
m
p
4
6
 
 
 Path 
 Activity 
 t  o  
 t  m  
 t  p  
 Path Total 
 a-b-c 
 a 
 1 
 3 
 4 
 2.83 
 
 
 b 
 2 
 4 
 6 
 4.00 
 10.00 
 
 c 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 3.17 
 
 d-e-f 
 d 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 4.00 
 
 
 e 
 3 
 5 
 7 
 5.00 
 16.00 
 
 f 
 5 
 7 
 9 
 7.00 
 
 g-h-i 
 g 
 2 
 3 
 6 
 3.33 
 
 
 h 
 4 
 6 
 8 
 6.00 
 13.50 
 
 i 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 4.17 
 
 
 TIMES 
 

)
(
=

t
t
act
p
o
36
2
2
 
 
2path
 
 
    path  
 Path 
 Activity 
 t  o  
 t  m  
 t  p  
 a-b-c 
 a 
 1 
 3 
 4 
 (4    1) 2 /36      9/36 
 
 
 
 b 
 2 
 4 
 6 
 (6    2) 2 /36    16/36 
 34/36    0.944 
 0.97 
 
 c 
 2 
 3 
 5 
 (5    2) 2 /36      9/36 
 
 
 d-e-f 
 d 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 (5    3) 2 /36      4/36 
 
 
 
 e 
 3 
 5 
 7 
 (7    3) 2 /36    16/36 
 36/36    1.00 
 1.00 
 
 f 
 5 
 7 
 9 
 (9    5) 2 /36    16/36 
 
 
 g-h-i 
 g 
 2 
 3 
 6 
 (6    2) 2 /36    16/36 
 
 
 
 h 
 4 
 6 
 8 
 (8    4) 2 /36    16/36 
 41/36    1.139 
 1.07 
 
 i 
 3 
 4 
 6 
 (6    3) 2 /36     9/36 
 
 
   b. The path that has the longest expected duration is the critical path. Because path d-e-f has 
the largest path total, it is the critical path. 
 c. 
 
 FIGURE 17.9 
 Activity distributions and the path distribution 
Normal
Path
Beta
mean
mean
mean
mean
Activity



Beta
Activity
Beta
Activity
}
}
}
}
}
}

754 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 17.10 DETERMINING PATH PROBABILITIES 
 The probability that a given path will be completed in a specified length of time can be deter-
mined using the following formula:
 
Specified time
Path mean
Path standard deviation
z 

 
 (17–8) 
 The resulting value of  z  indicates how many standard deviations of the path distribution 
the specified time is beyond the expected path duration. The more positive the value, the better. 
(A negative value of  z  indicates that the specified time is  earlier  than the expected path duration.) 
Once the value of  z  has been determined, it can be used to obtain the probability that the path will 
be completed by the specified time from Appendix B, Table B. Note that the probability is equal 
to the area under the normal curve to the left of  z, as illustrated in  Figure 17.10 .  
 If the value of  z  is   3.00 or more, the path probability is close to 100 percent (for 
 z       3.00, it is .9987). Hence, it is very likely the activities that make up the path will be 
completed by the specified time. For that reason, a useful rule of thumb is to treat the path 
probability as being equal to 100 percent if the value of  z is   3.00 or more. 
  Rule of thumb: If the value of  z  is 13.00 or more, treat the probability of path completion by the 
specified time as 100 percent. 
 A project is not completed until  all  of its activities have been completed, not only those on 
the critical path. It sometimes happens that another path ends up taking more time to complete 
than the critical path, in which case the project runs longer than expected. Hence, it can be 
risky to focus exclusively on the critical path. Instead, one must consider the possibility that at 
least one other path will delay timely project completion. This requires determining the prob-
ability that  all  paths will finish by a specified time. To do that, find the probability that each 
path will finish by the specified time, and then multiply those probabilities. The result is the 
probability that the  project will be completed by the specified time. 
 It is important to note the assumption of   independence . It is assumed that path duration 
times are independent of each other. In essence, this requires two things: Activity times are 
independent of each other, and each activity is only on one path. For activity times to be inde-
pendent, the time for one must not be a function of the time of another; if two activities were 
always early or late together, they would not be considered independent. The assumption of 
independent  paths  is usually considered to be met if only a  few  activities in a large project 
are on multiple paths. Even then, common sense should govern the decision of whether the 
independence assumption is justified. 
 Independence  Assumption 
that path duration times are 
independent of each other; 
requiring that activity times 
be independent, and that each 
activity is on only one path. 
 FIGURE 17.10 
 The path probability is the 
area under a normal curve 
to the left of  z 
0
Probability
of completing
the path by the
speciﬁed time
Expected 
path duration
Speciﬁed
time
z
 Using the information from Example 5, answer the following questions: 
 a. 
Can the paths be considered independent? Why? 
 b. 
What is the probability that the project can be completed within 17 weeks of its start? 
 c. 
What is the probability that the project will be completed within 15 weeks of its start? 
 d. 
What is the probability that the project will  not be completed within 15 weeks of its start? 
 E X A M P L E  6 
  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
755
 a. 
Yes, the paths can be considered independent, since no activity is on more than one path 
and you have no information suggesting that any activity times are interrelated. 
 b. 
To answer questions of this nature, you must take into account the degree to which the 
path distributions “overlap” the specified completion time. This overlap concept is illus-
trated in the accompanying figure, which shows the three path distributions, each cen-
tered on that path’s expected duration, and the specified completion time of 17 weeks. 
The shaded portion of each distribution corresponds to the probability that the part will be 
completed within the specified time. Observe that paths a-b-c and g-h-i are well enough 
to the left of the specified time, so that it is highly likely that both will be finished by 
week 17, but the critical path overlaps the specified completion time. In such cases, you 
need consider only the distribution of path d-e-f in assessing the probability of comple-
tion by week 17. 
 To find the probability for a path you must first compute the value of  z  using Formula 
17–8 for the path. For example, for path d-e-f, we have
 
17
16
1.00
1.00
z 

 
 
 
 S O L U T I O N 
17
weeks
Path
a-b-c
d-e-f
g-h-i
1.00
10.0
1.00
13.5
16.0
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
 Turning to Appendix B, Table B, with  z       1.00, you will find that the area under the 
curve to the left of  z  is .8413. The computations are summarized in the following table. 
 Note:  If the value of  z  exceeds   3.00, treat the probability of completion as being equal 
to 1.000. 
 Path 
 
=
-
z
17
Expectedpath duration
Path standard deviation
 
 Probability of Completion 
in 17 Weeks 
 a-b-c 
 

 
17
10
0.97
7.22
 
 1.00   
 d-e-f 
 

 
17
16
1.00
1.00
 
 .8413 
 g-h-i 
 

 
17
13.5
1.07
3.27
 
 1.00   

756 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 17.11 SIMULATION  
 We have examined a method for computing the probability that a project would be completed 
in a specified length of time. That discussion assumed that the paths of the project were  inde-
pendent;  that is, the same activities are not on more than one path. If an activity were on 
more than one path and it happened that the completion time for that activity far exceeded its 
expected time, all paths that included that activity would be affected and, hence, their times 
would not be independent. Where activities are on multiple paths, one must consider if the 
 
(Finish by week 17)
(Path a-b-c finish)
(Path d-e-f finish)
1.00
.8413
(Path g-h-i finish)
1.00
.8413
P
P
P
P







 
 c. 
For a specified time of 15 weeks, the  z values are
 
 Path 
 
=
-
z
15
Expectedpath duration
Path standard deviation
 
 Probability of Completion in 
15 Weeks 
 a-b-c 
 

 
15
10.00
.97
5.15  
 1.00 
 d-e-f 
 

 
15
16.00
1.00
1.00
 
 .1587 
 g-h-i 
 

 
15
13.50
1.07
1.40
 
 .9192 
 Paths d-e-f and g-h-i have  z values that are less than   3.00. 
 From Appendix B, Table B, the area to the  left  of  z       1.00 is .1587, and the area 
to the  left  of  z       1.40 is .9192. The path distributions are illustrated in the figure. 
The joint probability of all finishing before week 15 is the product of their probabilities: 
1.00(.1587)(.9192)    .1459. 
 d. 
The probability of not finishing before week 15 is the complement of the probability 
obtained in part  c: 1    .1459    .8541. 
 
15
weeks
Path
a-b-c
d-e-f
g-h-i
1.00
10.0
.9192 
13.5
16.0
Weeks
Weeks
Weeks
.1587

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
757
preceding approach can be used. For instance, if only a few activities are on multiple paths, 
particularly if the paths are  much  shorter than the critical path, that approach may still be 
reasonable. Moreover, for purposes of illustration, as in the text problems and examples, the 
paths are treated as being independent when, in fact, they may not be. 
 In practice, when  dependent  cases occur, project planners often use  simulation.  It amounts 
to a form of repeated sampling wherein many passes are made through the project network. In 
each pass, a randomly selected value for each activity time is made based on the characteristics 
of the activity’s probability distribution (e.g., its mean, standard deviation, and distribution type). 
After each pass, the expected project duration is determined by adding the times along each path 
and designating the time of the longest path as the project duration. After a large number of such 
passes (e.g., several hundred), there is enough information to prepare a frequency distribution of 
the project duration times. Planners can use this distribution to make a probabilistic assessment of 
the actual project duration, allowing for some activities that are on more than one path. Problem 
19 in the simulation supplement to Chapter 18 located on the text Web site illustrates this.  
 17.12 BUDGET CONTROL 
 Budget control is a critical aspect of a project. Costs can exceed budget for a number of reasons, 
and unless corrective action is taken, serious cost overruns can occur, possibly putting the project in 
jeopardy. Cost overruns can occur for various reasons. One possibility is that initial estimates might 
have been overly optimistic. Another is that unforeseen events such as weather or supplier issues, 
work or parts that were substandard and had to be remedied, or some other event added costs. 
 Table 17.4 illustrates the project cost status for a hypothetical project that is in progress. 
For this project, the first three activities have been completed. Activity A was $1,000 under 
budget, Activity B was right at its budgeted amount, and Activity C was over budget by 
$3,500. The remaining activities are incomplete, but each has a projected cost and a projected 
difference. Unless there is a change during the remaining life of the project, the cost overrun 
is projected to be $4,000. The project manager will have to decide if that amount is accept-
able, or whether corrective action should be initiated. Although managers’ intuitive feeling 
may be to focus on the activities that are over budget, they would likely review all activities to 
see where potential savings are possible. Of course, the project cost status would be updated, 
usually on a daily or weekly basis, to keep the project manager informed. 
 17.13 TIME–COST TRADE-OFFS: CRASHING 
      Estimates of activity times for projects usually are made for some given level of resources. 
In many situations, it is possible to reduce the length of a project by injecting additional 
resources. The impetus to shorten projects may reflect efforts to avoid late penalties, to 
 LO17.9  Describe activity 
“crashing” and solve typical 
problems.
 TABLE 17.4 
 Project cost status for 
a hypothetical project 
 Activity 
 Budgeted 
Cost 
 Percent 
Complete  
 Actual or 
Projected 
Cost 
 (Over/Under) 
Actual–Budget  
 A 
 $25,000 
 100% 
 $24,000 
 $1,000 
 B 
 15,000 
 100 
 15,000 
 0 
 C 
 22,000 
 100 
 25,500 
  3,500 
 D 
 10,000 
 75 
 10,500 
  500 
 E 
 30,000 
 50 
 29,000 
 1,000 
 F 
 20,000 
 40 
 22,000 
  2,000 
 G 
 8,000 
 25 
 8,000 
   0 
 
 
 
 
  $4,000 

758 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Workers demolish the south 
side of the Mulholland 
overpass on the 405 freeway 
during the 53-hour total 
freeway closure. The bridge 
was demolished as part of 
a $1 billion project to add 
carpool lanes and to make 
other improvements along the 
route from Orange County to 
San Francisco. 
take advantage of monetary incentives for timely or early completion of a project, or to free 
resources for use on other projects. In new product development, shortening may lead to a 
strategic benefit: beating the competition to the market. In some cases, however, the desire 
to shorten the length of a project merely reflects an attempt to reduce the costs associated 
with running the project, such as facilities and equipment costs, supervision, and labor and 
personnel costs. Managers often have various options at their disposal that will allow them to 
shorten, or   crash , certain activities. Among the most obvious options are the use of additional 
funds to support additional personnel or more efficient equipment, and the relaxing of some 
work specifications. Hence, a project manager may be able to shorten a project by increasing 
 direct  expenses to speed up the project, thereby realizing savings on indirect project costs. 
The goal in evaluating time–cost trade-offs is to identify activities that will reduce the sum of 
the project costs. 
 In order to make a rational decision on which activities, if any, to crash and on the extent of 
crashing desirable, a manager needs certain information:
 1. 
Regular time and crash time estimates for each activity. 
 2. 
Regular cost and crash cost estimates for each activity. 
 3. 
A list of activities that are on the critical path. 
 Activities on the critical path are potential candidates for crashing, because shortening 
noncritical activities would not have an impact on total project duration. From an economic 
standpoint, activities should be crashed according to crashing costs: Crash those with the low-
est crash costs first. Moreover, crashing should continue as long as the cost to crash is less 
than the benefits derived from crashing.  Figure 17.11 illustrates the basic cost relationships. 
 Crashing analysis requires estimates of regular and crash times and costs for each activity, 
path lengths, and identification of critical activities. The general procedure for crashing is
 1. 
Crash the project one period at a time. 
 2. 
Crash the least expensive activity that is on the critical path. 
 3. 
When there are multiple critical paths, find the sum of crashing the least expensive 
activity on each critical path. If two or more critical paths share common activities, 
compare the least expensive cost of crashing a common activity shared by critical paths 
with the sum for the separate critical paths. 
 Crash  Shortening activity 
durations. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
759
 FIGURE 17.11 
 Crashing activities * 
 *Crashing activities reduce indirect project 
costs and increase direct costs; the optimum 
amount of crashing results in minimizing the 
sum of these two types of costs. 
Total
cost
Cumulative
cost of crashing
Expected
project
costs
Shorten
Shorten
CRASH
Shorten
Optimum
Project length
0
Cost
Using the following information, develop the optimal time–cost solution. Project costs are 
$1,000 per day.
 Activity 
 Normal 
Time 
 Crash 
Time 
 Cost per Day to 
Crash 
 a 
  6 
 6 
  — 
 b 
 10 
 8 
 $500 
 c 
  5 
 4 
  300 
 d 
  4 
 1 
  700 
 e 
  9 
 7 
  600 
 f 
  2 
 1 
  800 
4
d
9
e
5
c
10
b
6
a
2
f
 
 E X A M P L E  7 
 S O L U T I O N 
 a. 
Determine which activities are on the critical path, its length, and the length of the other path:
 Path 
 Length 
 a-b-f 
 18 
 c-d-e-f 
 20 (critical path) 
   b. 
Rank the critical path activities in order of lowest crashing cost, and determine the 
 number of days each can be crashed. Note: Available days 5 Normal time  Crash time.
 Activity 
 Cost per Day to Crash 
 Available Days 
 c 
 $300 
 1 
 e 
  600 
 2 
 d 
  700 
 3 
 f 
  800 
 1 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL

760 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
  An important benefit of the sequential crashing procedure just described is that it provides 
the ability to quote different budget costs for different project times. 
 17.14 ADVANTAGES OF USING PERT 
AND POTENTIAL SOURCES OF ERROR 
 PERT and similar project scheduling techniques can provide important services for the proj-
ect manager. Among the most useful features are these:
 1. 
Use of these techniques forces the manager to organize and quantify available informa-
tion and to recognize where additional information is needed. 
 2. 
The techniques provide a graphic display of the project and its major activities. 
 3. 
They identify ( a ) activities that should be closely watched because of the potential for 
delaying the project and ( b ) other activities that have slack time and so can be delayed 
without affecting project completion time. This raises the possibility of reallocating 
resources to shorten the project. 
 LO17.10 Discuss the 
advantages of using PERT and 
potential sources of error.
   c. Begin shortening the project, one day at a time, and check after each reduction to see 
which path is critical. (After a certain point, another path may equal the length of the 
shortened critical path.) Thus:
 (1) Shorten activity  c  one day at a cost of $300. The length of the critical path now 
becomes 19 days. 
 (2) Activity  c  cannot be shortened any more. Shorten activity  e  one day at a cost of 
$600. The length of path c-d-e-f now becomes 18 days, which is the same as the 
length of path a-b-f. 
 (3) The paths are now both critical; further improvements will necessitate shortening 
both paths. 
 
The remaining activities for crashing and their costs are:
 Path 
 Activity 
 Crash Cost (per day) 
 a-b-f 
 a 
 No reduction possible 
 
 b 
 $500 
 
 f 
 800 
 c-d-e-f 
 c 
 No further reduction possible 
 
 d 
 $700 
 
 e 
 600 
 
 f 
 800 
   
At first glance, it would seem that crashing  f  would not be advantageous, because 
it has the highest crashing cost. However,  f is on  both paths, so shortening  f by one 
day would shorten  both  paths (and hence, the project) by one day for a cost of $800. 
The option of shortening the least expensive activity on each path would cost $500 
for  b  and $600 for  e,  or $1,100. Thus shorten  f  by one day. The project duration is 
now 17 days. 
   (4) At this point, no additional improvement is feasible. The cost to crash  b  is $500 and 
the cost to crash  e  is $600, for a total of $1,100, and that would exceed the indirect 
project costs of $1,000 per day. 
 (5) The crashing sequence is summarized below: 
 
 LENGTH AFTER CRASHING  n  DAYS: 
 Path 
  n   0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 a-b-f 
 18 
 18 
 18 
 17 
 c-d-e-f 
 20 
 19 
 18 
 17 
 Activity crashed 
 
 c 
 e 
 f 
 Cost 
 
 $300 
 $600 
 $800 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
761
 No analytical technique is without potential errors. Among the more important sources of 
errors are the following:
 1. 
When developing the project network, managers may unwittingly omit one or more 
important activities. 
 2. 
Precedence relationships may not all be correct as shown. 
 3. 
Time estimates may include a fudge factor; managers may feel uncomfortable about 
making time estimates because they appear to commit themselves to completion within 
a certain time period. 
 4. 
There may be a tendency to focus solely on activities that are on the critical path. As the 
project progresses, other paths may become critical. Furthermore, major risk events may 
not be on the critical path. 
 17.15 CRITICAL CHAIN PROJECT MANAGEMENT  
 Critical chain project management (CCPM) is an approach to project management that includes 
an emphasis on the resources required to execute project tasks. It was developed by Eli Goldratt, 
who also developed the theory of constraints (see Chapter 16). Goldratt identifies certain aspects 
of projects that he believes managers need to be aware of to better manage projects:
 1. 
Time estimates are often pessimistic and with attention can be made more realistic (i.e., 
shortened). 
 2. 
When activities are finished ahead of schedule, that fact may go unreported, so managers 
may be unaware of resources that could potentially be used to shorten the critical path.  
 The critical chain of a project is analogous to the critical path of a network. However, 
the critical chain approach takes into account not only sequential task relationships, but also 
resource constraints that can result in tasks being delayed when they must wait for a resource 
that is being used on another task. 
 A key feature of the critical chain approach is the use of various buffers.  Feeding (time) 
buffers are positioned at points in the network where noncritical sections of the network 
feed into the critical chain path to reduce the risk of delaying critical chain activities. Their 
purpose is to insulate the critical chain from variation in noncritical chains’ activities. Not 
every intersection will require a time buffer; only those sections that have a relatively small 
degree of slack time will provide benefit from a time buffer.  A project (time) buffer  at the 
end of the project is used to reduce the risk that time variations on the critical chain will 
interfere with timely project completion.  Capacity (resource) buffers  are used when multiple 
projects are ongoing to help manage the impact of variation of resource requirements among 
projects. 
 Regular updates of activity status relative to planned completion times can enable the proj-
ect manager to see where actual or potential problems can arise, as well as where buffers can 
be reduced or eliminated, to reconfigure buffers. 
 17.16 OTHER TOPICS IN PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 
 This section touches briefly on several other project management topics, including six-sigma 
projects, virtual project teams, and managing multiple projects. 
 One increasingly popular use of project management is for  six-sigma projects. Although 
six-sigma projects tend to have a narrow focus, they still involve all of the typical elements 
and requirements of general project management. Six-sigma projects are discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 9. 
 As companies globalize operations, they are increasingly using   virtual project teams .  All the 
basic elements of a project are present, but some or all of the team members are geographically 
 Virtual project teams  Some 
or all of the team members are 
geographically separated.  

762 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
separated. Recent advances in communication technology have made this feasible. A key ben-
efit is the ability to tap into human talents and perspectives that would otherwise be difficult 
or impossible to use. A key disadvantage can be the inability to realize synergies that can arise 
from closer contact among team members. Also, there are risks if there are language or cultural 
differences among team members, so communications have to be managed more carefully. 
 The existence of  multiple projects  can create added layers of pressure and complexity 
to project management. Resources often need to be shared across projects, and problems 
on one project may create issues for other projects, and can require reassessing priorities. 
When multiple projects are ongoing within an organization, resources needed for one project 
may be in use on another project, which could delay the project waiting for the resources to 
become available. Hence, it is important for managers to cross-check project schedules to 
avoid such conflicts. Project management software can help avoid conflicts when there are 
shared resources. In a related issue,  project slippage  can occur as a project nears completion 
if resources are transferred to new projects too quickly. 
 17.17 PROJECT MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE 
 Technology has had a number of benefits for project management. Among those benefits are 
the use of computer-aided design (CAD) to produce updated prototypes on construction and 
product-development projects; software such as Lotus Notes to keep team members who are 
in separate locations in close contact; and the ability for remote viewing of projects, allowing 
those in different locations a firsthand view of progress and problems. 
 There are a variety of specialized software programs available to help manage projects. As 
an example, let’s consider Microsoft Project.  2   It can be used to effectively create schedules, 
estimate costs, and track progress. Users can 
 •  Assign resources. Assign resources to tasks and adjust them as necessary. 
 •  Compare project plan versions. Track version changes in project plans. 
 •  Evaluate changes. Evaluate the impact of schedule and resources changes. 
 •  Track performance. Track progress and monitor variances between target and actual 
project goals such as cost, start date, and finish date, and maintain historical records. 
 Microsoft Project facilitates communication by enabling users to share a project plan with 
others in the organization, generate predefined reports, format and print custom reports, and 
easily present project status. 
 Microsoft Project can be customized to accommodate specific needs by allowing choice 
of data to display in a project schedule, the custom fields, and modification of formulas, tool-
bars, and reports. Microsoft Project is an integral part of the Microsoft Office System, making 
it easy to use products like Microsoft Office PowerPoint and Microsoft Office Visio to present 
project status. 
 There are many advantages to using a project management software package. Among them 
are the following:
 • It imposes a methodology and a common project management terminology. 
 • It provides a logical planning structure. 
 • It can enhance communication among team members. 
 • It can flag the occurrence of constraint violations. 
 • It automatically formats reports. 
 • It can generate multiple levels of summary reports and detailed reports. 
 • It enables what-if scenarios. 
 • It can generate various chart types, including basic Gantt charts. 
 2 www.microsoft.com/office/project/prodinfo/standard/overview.mspx . 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
763
 One thing to keep in mind is that project management is more than choosing the right 
software. There is much that a project manager must do. Recall the key decisions that were 
discussed early in the chapter. 
 17.18 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
  Projects can present both strategic opportunities and strategic risks, so it is critical for man-
agement to devote adequate attention and resources to projects. 
 Projects are often used in situations that have some degree of uncertainty, which can result 
in delays, budget overruns, and failure to meet technical requirements. To minimize the 
impact of these possibilities, management must ensure that careful planning, wise selection of 
project managers and team members, and monitoring of the project occur. 
 Computer software and tools such as PERT can greatly assist project management. 
 However, care must be taken to avoid focusing exclusively on the critical path. The obvious 
reason is that as the project progresses, other paths may become critical. But another, less 
obvious, reason is that key risk events may not be on the critical path. Even so, if they occur, 
they can have a major impact on the project. 
 It is not uncommon for projects to fail, either completely or partially. When that happens, 
it can be beneficial to examine the probable reasons for the failure, and decide what possible 
decisions or actions, if any, might have contributed to the failure. These become “lessons 
learned” that may be applicable to future projects to decrease the likelihood of failure. 
 17.19 RISK MANAGEMENT  
   Risks are inherent in projects. They relate to the occurrence of events that can have undesir-
able consequences, such as delays, increased costs, and an inability to meet technical specifi-
cations. In some instances, there is the risk that events will occur that will cause a project to be 
terminated. Although careful planning can reduce risks, no amount of planning can eliminate 
chance events due to unforeseen, or uncontrollable, circumstances. 
 The probability of occurrence of risk events is highest near the beginning of a project and 
lowest near the end. However, the cost associated with risk events tends to be lowest near the 
beginning of a project and highest near the end. (See  Figure 17.12 .) 
 Good risk management entails identifying as many potential risks as possible, analyzing 
and assessing those risks, working to minimize the probability of their occurrence, and estab-
lishing contingency plans (and funds) for dealing with any that do occur. Much of this takes 
 LO17.11  Discuss the key 
steps in risk management.
 FIGURE 17.12 
 Risk event probability and cost 
 Source:  Adapted from Clifford Gray and 
Erik W. Larson,  Project Management: 
The Managerial Process, 4th ed., p. 198. 
Copyright © 2008 McGraw-Hill 
Companies, Inc. Used with permission. 
Project life cycle
Cost to overcome
occurrence of risk event
Probability of occurrence
of a risk event
High
Low

764 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
place before the start of a project, although it is not unusual for this process to be repeated 
during the project as experience grows and new information becomes available. 
 The first step is to identify the risks. Typically, there are numerous sources of risks, although 
the more experience an organization has with a particular type of work, the fewer and more 
identifiable the risks. Everyone associated with the project should have responsibility for the 
task of identifying risks. Brainstorming sessions and questionnaires can be useful in this regard. 
 Once risks have been identified, each risk must be evaluated to determine its probability of 
occurrence and the potential consequences if it does occur. Both quantitative and qualitative 
approaches have merit. Managers and workers can contribute to this effort, and experts might 
be called on. Experience with previous projects can be useful. Many tools might be applied, 
including scenario analysis, simulation, and PERT (described earlier in the chapter). 
 Risk reduction can take a number of forms. Much depends on the nature and scope of a 
project. “Redundant” (backup) systems can sometimes be used to reduce the risk of failure. 
For example, an emergency generator could supply power in the event of an electrical failure. 
Another approach is frequent monitoring of critical project dimensions with the goal of catching 
and eliminating problems in their early stages, before they cause extensive damage. Risks can 
sometimes be transferred, say by outsourcing a particular component of a project. Risk-sharing 
is another possibility. This might involve partnering, which can spread risks among partners; this 
approach may also reduce risk by enlarging the sphere of sources of ideas for reducing the risk. 
 A project leader may have to contend with multiple risks that have different costs and dif-
ferent probabilities of occurring. A simple matrix such as the one illustrated in  Figure 17.13  
can be used to put the risks into perspective. 
 Events in the upper right-hand quadrant (events 3 and 4) have the highest probability of 
occurring, and also high costs. They should be given the greatest attention. Conversely, events 
in the lower left-hand quadrant (events 2 and 5) have relatively low probabilities and low 
costs, so they should be given the least attention. Events in the other two quadrants (events 6 
and 1) should get moderate attention due either to high cost (event 6) or high probability of 
occurrence (event 1).   
 Event 
 Probability 
 Cost 
 1 
 .85 
 $18 
 2 
 .30 
 20 
 3 
 .55 
 68 
 4 
 .85 
 77 
 5 
 .10 
 30 
 6 
 .30 
 87 
 FIGURE 17.13 
 A risk matrix 
1.00
0
0
25
50
75
$100
3
5
6
1
2
4
Probability of occurring
Cost
 Projects are composed of a unique set of activities established to realize a given set of objectives in a 
limited time span. Projects go through a life cycle that involves definition, planning, execution, and 
delivery/termination. The nonroutine nature of project activities places a set of demands on the project 
manager that are different in many respects from those the manager of more routine operations activities 
experiences, both in planning and coordinating the work and in the human problems encountered. Ethi-
cal conduct and risk management are among the key issues project managers must deal with. 
 PERT and CPM are two commonly used techniques for developing and monitoring projects. 
Although each technique was developed independently and for expressly different purposes, time and 
practice have erased most of the original differences, so that now there is little distinction between the 
two. Either provides the manager with a rational approach to project planning and a graphical display 
of project activities. Both depict the sequential relationships that exist among activities and reveal to 
managers which activities must be completed on time to achieve timely project completion. Managers 
can use that information to direct their attention toward the most critical activities. 
 SUMMARY 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
765
 1. 
Projects are unique, limited duration sets of tasks designed to accomplish a set of objectives. 
 2. 
The key project metrics are cost, time, and performance. 
 3. 
 Table 17.1 and  Figure 17.1 provide valuable insights into the nature of projects and project 
management. 
 4. 
The project manager and the project team can be major factors in achieving project goals. 
   5. 
Work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, and precedence diagrams are useful tools for managing 
projects. 
 KEY POINTS 
 activities, 741 
 activity-on-arrow (AOA), 740 
 activity-on-node (AON), 741 
 beta distribution, 751 
 CPM, 740 
 crash, 758 
 critical activities, 741 
 critical path, 741 
 deterministic, 743 
 events, 741 
 independence, 754 
 most likely time, 751
network (precedence) 
diagram, 740 
 optimistic time, 751 
 path, 741 
 PERT, 740 
 pessimistic time, 751 
 precedence diagram, 740 
 probabilistic, 743 
 project champion, 737 
 projects, 732 
 slack, 742 
 virtual project teams, 761 
 work breakdown structure 
(WBS), 739 
 KEY TERMS 
 Two slightly different conventions can be used for constructing a network diagram. One designates 
the arrows as activities; the other designates the nodes as activities. 
 The task of developing and updating project networks quickly becomes complex for projects of even 
moderate size, so computer software is important. Among the advantages of using project management 
software are the provision for a logical planning structure, enhanced communication, and automatically 
formatted charts and reports. 
 In some instances, it may be possible to shorten, or crash, the length of a project by shortening one 
or more of the project activities. Typically, such gains are achieved by the use of additional resources, 
although in some cases, it may be possible to transfer resources among project activities. Generally, 
projects are shortened to the point where the cost of additional reduction would exceed the benefit of 
additional reduction, or to a specified time. 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 The following table contains information related to the major activities of a research project. Use the 
information to do the following:
 a. Draw a precedence diagram using AOA. 
 b. Find the critical path. 
 c. Determine the expected length of the project. 
 Problem 1 
 
Activity  
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 Expected 
Time (days) 
 a 
 — 
 5 
 c 
 a 
 8 
 d 
 c 
 2 
 b 
 a 
 7 
 e 
 — 
 3 
 f 
 e 
 6 
 i 
 b, d 
 10 
 m 
 f, i 
 8 
 g 
 — 
 1 
 h 
 g 
 2 
 k 
 h 
 17 
 end 
 k, m 
 

766 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 a. In constructing networks, these observations can be useful.
  
(1)  Activities with no predecessors are at the beginning (left side) of the network. 
  
(2) Activities with multiple predecessors are located at path intersections. 
  Complete the diagram in sections. Go down the activity list in order to avoid overlooking any 
activities. 
 Solution 
 
e
3
a
5
g
1
b
7
c
8
d
2
h
2
k
17
m
8
i
10
f
6
AOA diagram
g
h
k
S
End
a
c
d
b
i
e
f
m
Yes
No
AON diagram
 Here are some additional hints for constructing a precedence diagram. 
  
 
(1) Use pencil. 
  
 
(2) Start and end with a single node. 
  
 
(3) Avoid having paths cross each other. 
  
 
(4) Have activities go from left to right. 
  
 
(5) Use only one arrow between any pair of nodes. 
 b. and c. 
 Path 
 Length (days) 
 a-c-d-i-m * 
 5    8    2    10    8    33 † 
 a-b-i-m 
 5    7    10    8    30 
 e-f-m 
 3    6    8    17 
 g-h-k 
 1    2    17    20 
 *Critical path. 
† Expected project duration. 
 Using the computing algorithm, determine the slack times for the following AOA diagram. Identify 
the activities that are on the critical path. 
 Problem 2 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
767
 The task of determining ES, EF, LS, and LF times can be greatly simplified by setting up two brackets 
for each activity, as illustrated:  
 Solution 
 
9
4
1
3
2
4
5
5
6
3
2
 
3
4
1
 The bracket at the left of each activity will eventually be filled in with the earliest and latest  start-
ing  times, and the bracket at the right end of each activity will be filled in with the earliest and latest 
finishing times: 
 
LS
ES
LF
EF
 This is accomplished in a two-step process. First, determine the earliest starting times and earliest 
finishing times, working from left to right, as shown in the following diagram. 
 
9
4
1
3
2
4
5
5
6
3
2
4
10
0
4
0
9
9
14
14
17
4
6
ES
EF
 Thus, activity 1-2 can start at 0. With a time of 4, it can finish at 0    4    4. This establishes the 
earliest start for all activities that begin at node 2. Hence, 2-5 and 2-4 can start no earlier than time 4. 
Activity 2-5 has an early finish of 4    6    10, and activity 2-4 has an early finish of 4    2    6. At 
this point, it is impossible to say what the earliest start is for 4-5; that will depend on which activity, 
3-4 or 2-4, has the latest EF. Consequently, it is necessary to compute ES and EF along the lower 
path. Assuming an ES of 0 for activity 1-3, its EF will be 9, so activity 3-4 will have an ES of 9 and 
an EF of 9   5    14. 
 Considering that the two activities entering node 4 have EF times of 6 and 14, the earliest that 
activity 4-5 can start is the  larger of these, which is 14. Hence, activity 4-5 has an ES of 14 and an 
EF of 14    3    17. 
 Now compare the EFs of the activities entering the final node. The larger of these, 17, is the 
expected project duration. 
 The LF and LS times for each activity can now be determined by working backward through the 
network (from right to left). The LF for the two activities entering node 5 is 17—the project dura-
tion. In other words, to finish the project in 17 weeks, these last two activities must both finish by 
that time. 
 In the case of activity 4-5, the LS necessary for an LF of 17 is 17    3    14. This means that both 
activities 2-4 and 3-4 must finish no later than 14. Hence, their LF times are 14. Activity 3-4 has 
an LS time of 14    5    9, making the LF of activity 1-3 equal to 9, and its LS equal to 9    9    0. 

768 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Activity 2-4, with an LF time of 14, has an LS time of 14    2    12. Activity 2-5 has an LF of 
17 and therefore an LS of 17    6    11. Thus, the latest activity 2-5 can start is 11, and the latest 2-4 
can start is 12 in order to finish by week 17. Since activity 1-2 precedes  both  of these activities, it 
can finish no later than the  smaller  of these, which is 11. Hence, activity 1-2 has an LF of 11 and an 
LS of 11    4    7. 
 The ES, EF, LF, and LS times are shown on the following network. 
9
4
1
3
2
4
5
5
6
3
2
11
4
17
10
7
0
11
4
0
0
9
9
9
9
14
14
14
14
17
17
12
4
14
6
LS
LF
 The slack time for any activity is the difference between  either LF and EF  or LS and ES. Thus, 
 Activity 
 LS 
 ES 
 Slack 
 or 
 LF 
 EF 
 Slack 
 1-2 
 7 
 0 
 7 
 
 11 
 4 
 7 
 2-5 
 11 
 4 
 7 
 
 17 
 10 
 7 
 2-4 
 12 
 4 
 8 
 
 14 
 6 
 8 
 1-3 
  0 
 0 
 0 
 
 9 
 9 
 0 
 3-4 
  9 
 9 
 0 
 
 14 
 14 
 0 
 4-5 
 14 
 14 
 0 
 
 17 
 17 
 0 
  The activities with zero slack times indicate the critical path. In this case the critical path is 
1-3-4-5. When working problems of this nature, keep in mind the following:
     •  The ES time for leaving activities of nodes with multiple entering activities is the largest EF of 
the entering activities. 
    •  The LF for an entering activity for nodes with multiple leaving activities is the smallest LS of 
the leaving activities. 
 A path in a network has three activities. Their standard deviations are 1.50, 0.80, and 1.30. Find the 
path standard deviation. 
 Problem 3 
 Standard deviations cannot be added, but variances can be added. Square each standard deviation to 
obtain its variance, and then add the resulting variances to obtain the path variance: 
 Solution 
 Standard Deviation 
 Variance 
 1.50 
 2.25 
 0.80 
 0.64 
 1.30 
 1.69 
 
 4.58 (path variance) 
 The square root of the path variance is the path standard deviation:
4.58
2.14 (path standard deviation)
=
 Expected times in weeks and variances for the major activities of an R&D project are depicted in the 
following table. Determine the probability that project completion time will be
 a. 50 weeks or less. 
 b. More than 50 weeks. 
 Problem 4 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
769
 Path 
 Activity 
 Mean 
 Variance 
 
 A 
 16 
 .69 
 Top 
 B 
 11 
 .69 
 
 C 
 24 
 .11 
 
 D 
  5 
   0 
 Middle 
 E 
 18 
 .25 
 
 F 
 26 
 .11 
 
 D 
  5 
   0 
 Bottom 
 G 
 10 
 .25 
 
 H 
 14 
 .36 
 
 I 
 12 
 .11 
 Compute the mean and standard deviation for each path: 
 Solution 
 Path 
 Expected Time (weeks) 
 Standard Deviation (weeks) 
 Top 
 16    11    24    51 
 
+
+
=
.69
.69
.11
1.22  
 Middle 
 5    18    26    49 
 
+
+
=
.00
.25
.11
.60  
 Bottom 
 5    10    14    12    41 
 
+
+
+
=
.00
.25
.36
.11
.85  
 a. Compute the  z  for each path for the length specified. For any path that has a  z  of   3.00 or more, 
treat its probability of completion before the specified time as 1.00. Use
50
path
path
z
t



 The probability that each path will be completed in 50 weeks or less is shown in the corre-
sponding diagram. (Probabilities are from Appendix B, Table B.) The probability that the project 
will be completed in 50 weeks or less depends on all three paths being completed in that time. 
Because  z  for the bottom path is greater than   3.00, it is treated as having a probability of com-
pletion in 50 weeks of 100 percent. It is less certain that the other two paths will be completed 
in that time. The probability that  both  will not exceed 50 is the  product  of their individual prob-
abilities of completion. Thus, .2061(.9525)(1.00)    .1963. 
   b. The probability that the project  will  exceed 50 weeks is the complement of this number, which is 
1.000    .1963    .8037. (Note that it is  not the product of the path probabilities.) 
 
.2061
–.82
50
0
51
z scale
Weeks
z = 
T = 50 weeks
50 – 51
1.22 
= –.82
z = 50 – 49
.60
= 1.67
z = 50 – 41
.85
= 10.59
0
49
z scale
Weeks
1.67
50
0
41
10.59
50
z scale
Weeks
.9525
100%

770 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Costs for a project are $12,000 per week for as long as the project lasts. The project manager has 
supplied the cost and time information shown. Use the information to
 a. Determine an optimum crashing plan. 
 b. Graph the total costs for the plan. 
 Problem 5 
 Activity 
 Crashing 
Potential 
(weeks)  
 Cost per Week 
to Crash 
 a 
 3 
 $11,000 
 b 
 3 
 3,000 first week, 
 
 
 $4,000 others 
 c 
 2 
 6,000 
 d 
 1 
 1,000 
 e 
 3 
 6,000 
 f 
 1 
 2,000 
 Path 
 Activity 
 Cost per Week to Crash 
 a-b 
 b 
 $ 4,000 
 
 a 
 11,000 
 e-f 
 f 
 2,000 
 
 e 
 6,000 
 Path 
 Duration (weeks) 
 a-b 
 24 (critical path) 
 c-d 
 19 
 e-f 
 23 
 Activity 
 Cost per Week to Crash 
 b 
 $ 3,000 
 a 
 11,000 
13 weeks
c
10 weeks
a
15 weeks
e
6 weeks
d
8 weeks
f
14 weeks
b
 a.  (1) Compute path lengths and identify the critical path: 
 Solution 
  
(2) Rank critical activities according to crash costs: 
 
  Activity b should be shortened one week since it has the lower crashing cost. This would 
reduce indirect costs by $12,000 at a cost of $3,000, for a net savings of $9,000. At this point, 
paths a-b and e-f would both have a length of 23 weeks, so both would be critical. 
  
(3) Rank activities by crashing costs on the two critical paths: 
 
  Choose one activity (the least costly) on each path to crash: b on a-b and f on e-f, for a total 
cost of $4,000    $2,000    $6,000 and a net savings of $12,000    $6,000    $6,000. 
  
(4)  Check to see which path(s) might be critical: a-b and e-f would be 22 weeks in length, and 
c-d would still be 19 weeks. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
771
 Path 
  n      0 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 a-b 
 24 
 23 
 22 
 21 
 c-d 
 19 
 19 
 19 
 19 
 e-f 
 23 
 23 
 22 
 21 
 Activity crashed 
 
 b 
 b,f 
 b,e 
 Crashing costs ($000) 
 
 3 
 6 
 10 
 Path 
 Activity 
 Cost per Week to Crash 
 a-b 
 b 
 $ 4,000 
 
 a 
 11,000 
 e-f 
 e 
 6,000 
 
 f 
 (no further crashing possible) 
 Project 
Length 
 Cumulative 
Weeks 
Shortened  
 Cumulative 
Crashing 
Costs ($000) 
 Indirect 
Costs ($000) 
 Total 
Costs ($000)  
 24 
 0 
 0 
 24(12)    288 
 288 
 23 
 1 
 3 
 23(12)    276 
 279 
 22 
 2 
 3    6    9 
 22(12)    264 
 273 
 21 
 3 
 9    10    19 
 21(12)    252 
 271 
 20 
 4 
 19    17    36 
 20(12)    240 
 276 
290
280
270
260
Project duration (weeks)
Total cost
20
21
22
23
24
276
271
273
279
288
0
Crash
  
(5)  Rank activities on the critical paths: 
 
  Crash b on path a-b and e on e-f for a cost of $4,000    $6,000    $10,000, for a net savings 
of $12,000    $10,000    $2,000. 
  
(6)  At this point, no further improvement is possible: paths a-b and e-f would be 21 weeks in 
length, and one activity from each path would have to be shortened. This would mean activ-
ity a at $11,000 and e at $6,000 for a total of $17,000, which exceeds the $12,000 potential 
savings in costs. 
   b. The following table summarizes the results, showing the length of the project after crashing  n
weeks: 
 A summary of costs for the preceding schedule would look like this: 
 The graph of total costs is as follows: 

772 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 1. A project manager may need two skill sets—those of a manager and those of a leader. Explain. 
 2. Explain the term  project champion and list some ways to keep a champion involved with the project. 
 3. List the steps in risk management. 
  4. Give some examples of ethical issues that may arise on projects. What can a project manager do to 
minimize such issues? 
 5. What are the key advantages of using project management software? 
 6. What is a work breakdown structure, and how is it useful for project planning? 
 7. Identify the term being described for each of the following:
  a. A sequence of activities in a project. 
  b. The longest time sequence of activities in a project. 
  c. Used when two activities have the same starting and finishing points. 
  d. The difference in time length of any path and the critical path. 
  e. The statistical distribution used to describe variability of an activity time. 
  f. The statistical distribution used to describe path variability. 
  g. Shortening an activity by allocating additional resources. 
 8. List the main advantages of PERT. List the main limitations. 
 9. Why might a probabilistic estimate of a project’s completion time based solely on the variance of 
the  critical path be misleading? Under what circumstances would it be acceptable? 
 10. Define each of these terms, and indicate how each is determined.
  a. Expected activity time. 
  b. Variance of an activity time. 
  c. Standard deviation of a path’s time. 
 11. Why might a person wish to be involved with a critical path activity? What are some of the rea-
sons one might have for not wanting this association? 
 12. What are some of the potential benefits of working on a special project in one’s firm? What are 
some of the risks? 
 13. What are some aspects of the project manager’s job that make it more demanding than the job of a 
manager working in a more routine organizational framework? 
 14. What is the main benefit of a project organization over more traditional forms of operations 
management for project work?   
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. Project management techniques have been used successfully for a wide variety of efforts, including 
the many NASA space missions, huge construction projects, implementation of major systems such 
as ERP, production of movies, development of new products and services, theatrical productions, 
and much more. Why not use them for managing the operations function of any business? 
 2. Give three examples of unethical conduct involving projects and the ethical principle each one violates. 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 
 1. For each of the following network diagrams, determine both the critical path and the expected 
project duration. The numbers on the arrows represent expected activity times.
 a. AOA diagram 
 PROBLEMS 
 1. What trade-offs are associated with time and cost estimates for a proposed project? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in assessing the cost of a project? 
 3. Name and explain briefly two ways that technology has had an impact on project management. 
 TAKING STOCK 
 
2
4
7
2
5
8
4
6
9
10
2
11
3
12
1
5
7
9
8
6
10
4
3
5
6

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
773
 
A
B
C
F
E
Start
G
End
D
7
8
3
5
7
6
4
 b. AON diagram 
 c. AOA diagram 
 d. AON diagram 
 
1
14
13
3
10
4
13
15
6
10
3
7
11
14
8
4
7
6
2
5
7
14
8
13
16
1
3
4
12
6
9
10
11
15
 2. Chris received new word processing software for her birthday. She also received a check, with 
which she intends to purchase a new computer. Chris’s college instructor assigned a paper due next 
week. Chris decided that she will prepare the paper on the new computer. She made a list of the 
activities she will need to do and their estimated times.
 a. Arrange the activities into two logical sequences. 
 b.  (1) Construct an AOA network diagram. 
  (2) Construct an AON diagram. 
 c. Determine the critical path and the expected duration time. 
 
2
4
3
5
7
6
1
8
9
18
3
13
10
11
4
5
9
2

774 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 d. What are some possible reasons for the project to take longer than the expected duration? 
 Estimated Time (hrs.) 
 Activity (abbreviation) 
 0.8 
 Install software (Inst) 
 0.4 
 Outline the paper (Out) 
 0.2 
 Submit paper to instructor (Sub) 
 0.6 
 Choose a topic (Ch) 
 0.5 
 Use grammar-checking routine and make corrections (Ck) 
 3.0 
 Write the paper using the word-processing software (Write) 
 2.0 
 Shop for a new computer (Sh) 
 1.0 
 Select and purchase computer (Sel) 
 2.0 
 Do library research on chosen topic (Lib) 
 3. Prepare a Gantt chart for each of the following in the style of the chart shown on p. 739.
 a. The bank location problem (see  Figure 17.4 , p. 741).  Hint: Use the early start (ES) times given 
in  Table 17.3 on p. 751. 
 b. Solved Problem number 2 on pp. 766–768. 
 4.  a.  Develop a list of activities and their immediate predecessors similar to the lists in this problem 
for this diagram:  
 
A
C
B
F
E
 b. Construct an activity-on-arrow precedence diagram for each of the following cases. Note that 
each case requires the use of a dummy activity. 
 c. Construct an AON diagram for each case. 
 (1) Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor 
 (2) Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 A 
 — 
 J 
 — 
 B 
 — 
 K 
 — 
 C 
 — 
 L 
 J 
 D 
 A 
 M 
 L 
 E 
 B 
 N 
 J 
 F 
 B 
 P 
 N 
 G 
 C 
 Q 
 — 
 H 
 F 
 R 
 K 
 I 
 F, G 
 S 
 Q 
 K 
 D, E 
 V 
 R, S, T 
 End 
 H, I, K 
 T 
 Q 
 
 
 W 
 T 
 
 
 End 
 M, P, V, W 
 5. For each of the problems listed, determine the following quantities for each activity: the earliest 
start time, latest start time, earliest finish time, latest finish time, and slack time. List the critical 
activities, and determine the expected duration of the project.
 a. Problem 1 a. 
 b. Problem 1 b. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
775
 6. Reconsider the network diagram of Problem 1 a. Suppose that after 12 weeks, activities 1-2, 1-3, 
and 2-4 have been finished; activity 2-5 is 75 percent finished; and activity 3-6 is half finished. How 
many weeks after the original start time should the project be finished? 
 7. Three recent college graduates have formed a partnership and have opened an advertising firm. 
Their first project consists of activities listed in the following table.
 a. Draw the precedence diagram. 
 b. What is the probability that the project can be completed in 24 days or less? In 21 days or less? 
 c. Suppose it is now the end of the seventh day and that activities A and B have been completed 
while activity D is 50 percent completed. Time estimates for the completion of activity D are 5, 
6, and 7. Activities C and H are ready to begin. Determine the probability of finishing the proj-
ect by day 24 and the probability of finishing by day 21.  
 Activity 
 First Crash 
 Second Crash 
 C 
 $8 
 $10 
 D 
 10 
  11 
 E 
  9 
  10 
 F 
  7 
    9 
 G 
  8 
    9 
 H 
  7 
    8 
 I 
  6 
    8 
 Path 
 Expected Duration 
(weeks) 
 Variance 
 A 
 10 
 1.21 
 B 
  8 
 2.00 
 C 
 12 
 1.00 
 D 
 15 
 2.89 
 E 
 14 
 1.44 
 
 
 TIME IN DAYS 
 Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
  Optimistic  
  Most Likely    Pessimistic  
 A 
 — 
 5 
  6 
  7 
 B 
 — 
 8 
  8 
 11 
 C 
 A 
 6 
  8 
 11 
 D 
 — 
 9 
 12 
 15 
 E 
 C 
 5 
  6 
  9 
 F 
 D 
 5 
   6 
  7 
 G 
 F 
 2 
  3 
  7 
 H 
 B 
 4 
  4 
  5 
 I 
 H 
 5 
  7 
  8 
 End 
 E, G, I 
 
 
 
 d. The partners have decided that shortening the project by two days would be beneficial, as long 
as it doesn’t cost more than about $20,000. They have estimated the daily crashing costs for 
each activity in thousands, as shown in the following table. Which activities should be crashed, 
and what further analysis would they probably want to do? 
 8. The new director of special events at a large university has decided to completely revamp gradu-
ation ceremonies. Toward that end, a PERT chart of the major activities has been developed. The 
chart has five paths with expected completion times and variances as shown in the table. Graduation 
day is 16 weeks from now. Assuming the project begins now, what is the probability that the project 
will be completed before
 a. Graduation time? 
 b. The end of week 15? 
 c. The end of week 13? 

776 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 Path 
 Activity 
 Estimated Time 
(weeks)  
 Standard 
Deviation (wks.) 
 A 
 C 
 4 
 0.70 
 D 
 6 
 0.90 
 B 
 E 
 3 
 0.62 
 F 
 9 
 1.90 
 Path 
 Activity 
 Mean 
 Standard Deviation 
 A 
 C 
 5 
 1.3 
 D 
 4 
 1.0 
 B 
 E 
 8 
 1.6 
 
9-10-12
8-8-8
3
8
5
1
2
5-6-7
4
8-10-14
6
11
7-10-12
7
10-11-12 
9
10
6-6-6
10.5-13-15.5   
5-7-10
14-18-26
13-13-13
10-12-14
11-12-13
 9. Construct a network diagram for the information in the following table. Use either AOA or AON (see 
Example 5 for either type). What is the probability that the project will take more than 10 weeks to 
complete if the activity means and standard deviations are as shown below? Times are in weeks.  
 10. The project described in the following table is scheduled to be completed in 11 weeks. Construct a 
network diagram using AOA or AON (see Example 5 for either type). Then answer the following 
questions:
 a. If you were the manager of this project, would you be concerned? Explain. 
 b. If there is a penalty of $5,000 a week for each week the project is late, what is the probability 
of incurring a penalty of at least $5,000?  
 11. The following precedence diagram reflects three time estimates in weeks for each activity. Determine:
 a. The expected completion time for each path and its variance. 
 b. The probability that the project will require more than 49 weeks. 
 c. The probability that the project can be completed in 46 weeks or less. 
 12. A project manager has compiled a list of major activities that will be required to install a computer 
information system in her firm. The list includes estimated completion times for activities and pre-
cedence relationships. 
 Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 Estimated 
Times (weeks) 
 A  
 — 
 2-4-6 
 D  
 A 
 6-8-10 
 E  
 D 
 7-9-12 
 H  
 E 
 2-3-5 
 F  
 A 
 3-4-8 
 G  
 F 
 5-7-9 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management 
777
 Path 
 Activity 
 Duration (weeks) 
 First Crash 
 Second Crash 
 Top 
 A 
 5 
 $8 
 $10 
 
 B 
 6 
 7 
 9 
 
 C 
 3 
 14 
 15 
 Middle 
 D 
 3 
 9 
 11 
 
 E 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 
 C 
 3 
 14 
 15 
 Bottom 
 F 
 5 
 10 
 15 
 
 G 
 5 
 11 
 13 
 
 H 
 5 
 12 
 14 
 Activity 
 Immediate 
Predecessor  
 Estimated 
Times (weeks) 
 B  
 — 
 2-2-3 
 I  
 B 
 2-3-6 
 J  
 I 
 3-4-5 
 K  
 J 
 4-5-8 
 C  
 — 
 5-8-12 
 M  
 C 
 1-1-1 
 N  
 M 
 6-7-11 
 O  
 N 
 8-9-13 
 End  
 H, G, K, O 
 
 a. Construct a network diagram. You can use either AOA or AON (see Example 5). 
 b. If the project is finished within 26 weeks of its start, the project manager will receive a bonus 
of $1,000; and if the project is finished within 27 weeks of its start, the bonus will be $500. 
Find the probability of each bonus.  
 13. Here is a list of activity times for a project as well as crashing costs for its activities. Determine 
which activities should be crashed and the total cost of crashing if the goal is to shorten the project 
by three weeks as cheaply as possible. First construct a network diagram. You can use either an 
AOA or an AON (see Example 5). 
 14. The project manager of a task force planning the construction of a domed stadium had hoped to be 
able to complete construction prior to the start of the next college football season. After reviewing 
construction time estimates, it now appears that a certain amount of crashing will be needed to 
ensure project completion before the season opener. Given the following time and cost estimates, 
determine a minimum-cost crashing schedule that will shave five weeks off the project length. 
 Note: No activity can be crashed more than two weeks. 
 
 
 
 CRASHING COSTS ($000) 
 Activity 
 Immediate Predecessor 
 Normal Time (weeks)  First Week 
 Second Week 
 A 
 — 
 12 
 $15 
 $20 
 B 
 A 
 14 
  10 
  10 
 C 
 — 
 10 
    5 
    5 
 D 
 C 
 17 
  20 
  21 
 E 
 C 
 18 
  16 
  18 
 F 
 C 
 12 
  12 
  15 
 G 
 D 
 15 
  24 
  24 
 H 
 E 
  8 
 — 
 — 
 I 
 F 
  7 
  30 
 — 
 J 
 I 
 12 
  25 
  25 
 K 
 B 
  9 
  10 
  10 
 M 
 G 
  3 
 — 
 — 
 N 
 H 
 11 
  40 
 — 
 P 
 H, J 
  8 
  20 
  20 
 End 
 K, M, N, P 
 
 
 

778 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
 
 CRASHING COSTS ($000) 
 Activity 
 First Week 
 Second Week 
 Third Week 
 1-2 
 $18 
 $22 
 $ — 
 2-5 
 24 
 25 
 25 
 5-7 
 30 
 30 
 35 
 7-11 
 15 
 20 
 — 
 11-13 
 30 
 33 
 36 
 1-3 
 12 
 24 
 26 
 3-8 
 — 
 — 
 — 
 8-11 
 40 
 40 
 40 
 3-9 
  3 
 10 
 12 
 9-12 
  2 
 7 
 10 
 12-13 
 26 
 — 
 — 
 1-4 
 10 
 15 
 25 
 4-6 
  8 
 13 
 — 
 6-10 
  5 
 12 
 — 
 10-12 
 14 
 15 
 — 
 
 
 
 CRASHING COSTS 
 Activity 
 Immediate Predecessor 
 Normal Time (weeks) 
 1st Week 
 2nd Week 
 K 
 — 
 9 
 $410 
 $415 
 L 
 K 
 7 
 125 
 — 
 N 
 K 
 5 
 45 
 45 
 M 
 L 
 4 
 300 
 350 
 J 
 N 
 6 
 50 
 — 
 Q 
 J, M 
 5 
 200 
 225 
 P 
 Q 
 8 
 — 
 — 
 Y 
 Q 
 7 
 85 
 90 
 Z 
 P 
 6 
 90 
 — 
 End 
 Y, Z 
 
 
 
 
4
1
2
4
5
3
8
6
10
7
9
11
1
12
13
6
7
12
9
5
3
8
12
5
4
8
11
9
 15. A construction project has indirect costs totaling $40,000 per week. Major activities in the project 
and their expected times in weeks are shown in this precedence diagram: 
 Crashing costs for each activity are 
 a. Determine the optimum time–cost crashing plan. 
 b. Plot the total-cost curve that describes the least expensive crashing schedule that will reduce 
the project length by six weeks.  
 16. Chuck’s Custom Boats (CCB) builds luxury yachts to customer order. CCB has landed a contract 
with a mysterious New York lawyer (Mr. T). Relevant data are shown on the next page. The com-
plication is that Mr. T wants delivery in 32 weeks or he will impose a penalty of $375 for each 
week his yacht is late.  Note: No activity can be crashed more than two weeks. 
 Develop a crashing schedule. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
779
 Event 
 Probability 
 Cost ($000) 
 1 
 .25 
 15 
 2 
 .35 
 25 
 3 
 .20 
 55 
 4 
 .80 
 10 
 5 
 .10 
 77 
 6 
 .40 
 55 
 7 
 .60 
 50 
 Event 
 Cost ($000) 
 Probability 
 Equipment breakdown 
 40 
 .20 
 Vendor is late with key segment 
 200 
 .60 
 Subcontractor has labor issues 
 140 
 .30 
 Weather problems 
 15 
 Unknown 
 Funding delays 
 50 
 .40 to .60 
 Testing delays 
 20 
 .40 
 Path 
 Activity 
 Time Estimates 
 A 
 4-5-6 
 Top 
 B 
 7-8-10 
 C 
 3-5-9 
 D 
 7-8-11 
 Bottom 
 E 
 2-3-4 
 F 
 1-4-6 
 17. Given the following table, construct a network diagram, either AOA or AON. Times are in days.
 a. Determine the expected duration of the project. 
 b. Compute the probability that the project will take at least 18 days. 
 18. Create a risk matrix in the style of  Figure 17.13 for this project. Use a vertical scale of $0 to $80. 
Which event should the project manager be most concerned about? 
 19. Create a risk matrix for this project: 
 Explain your reasoning for your placement of the events Weather problems and Funding delays. 
 “The mission of the project which you will head is to get our new Mexi-
can subsidiary ready for take-over by Mexican managers. My hope is 
that you will be able to do this in about two years,” explained Robert 
Linderman, president of Linderman Industries, Inc., to Carl Conway, 
newly appointed manager for “Operation Mexicano.” Conway had been 
hired specifically for this assignment because of his experience in man-
aging large defense projects in the aerospace industry. 
 “The first thing that I will have to do is put a project team together,” 
said Conway. “I imagine that you have in mind my drawing people from 
the functional divisions.” 
 “Yes, I have already sent memoranda to the division managers inform-
ing them that you will be asking for some of their key people to work 
under you for about two years,” said  Linderman. 
“In addition, I have advised them to be prepared to 
process work orders from Operation Mexicano with the personnel and 
equipment of their organizations. Later on in the project’s life, you will 
begin to get Mexican personnel, both managers and technicians, in to 
your organization. These people will have Mexican supervisors, but until 
the mission is accomplished, they also will report to you. I will have to 
admit that you are going to have some complex authority relationships, 
especially as you personally will be responsible to the president of the 
subsidiary, Felix Delgado, as well as to me.” 
 Conway began to make his plans for the project team. The plant 
building was available and empty in Mexico City, and it was important 
 CASE 
 The Case of the Mexican Crazy Quilt 
(continued)

780 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
to get equipment purchased and installed as soon as possible. A plant 
layout would have to be prepared, but before that could be done there 
would have to be a manufacturing plan. Therefore, he needed to recruit 
an industrial engineer, a production planner, and an equipment buyer. 
They, in turn, would have to build their own staffs. 
 He made an appointment with Sam Sargis, corporate manager of 
industrial engineering. “I have had a preliminary talk with Bob Cates 
about his joining Operation Mexicano, and he is quite interested,” Carl 
said. “Will you release him to me?” 
 “Why, I’m grooming Cates to take over my job when I retire,” replied 
Sargis. “He is my best man. Let me pick someone else for you, or better 
still, you just tell me what industrial engineering work you want done, 
and I will have it done for you.” 
 “Sorry, I want Cates,” said Carl firmly. “And besides, you are not due 
to retire for five years. This will be good experience for him.” 
 For production planning, Carl had in mind Bert Mill, an older man 
with extensive experience in managing production operations, but Mill 
rejected his offer. “I talked it over with my wife,” he said, “and we feel 
that at my age I shouldn’t take a chance on not having a job to come 
back to when Operation Mexicano is finished.” 
 Carl next talked to Emil Banowetz, who was assistant to Jim Burke, 
the vice president for manufacturing, and Banowetz decided that he 
would like to join the project team. However, Burke told Conway that if 
Banowetz were forcibly taken away from him, he would give Mr. Linder-
man his resignation, so Carl decided to back down. He finally accepted 
a man that Burke recommended. 
 Filling the equipment buyer’s slot was easy. The director of procure-
ment phoned Carl and said that a senior buyer, Humberto Guzman, had 
requested permission to ask for the assignment, and that he strongly 
recommended him. Guzman has been purchasing agent for a large min-
ing company in Mexico for about 10 years. 
 Carl had about the same experiences in getting the people he 
wanted for the functions of engineering, quality control, cost, marketing, 
and advertising as he did for the first three positions; in other words, 
he won some confrontations with the division managers and lost some. 
For personnel, he got Dr. Juan Perez, who was slated to be person-
nel director of the subsidiary company, to affiliate temporarily with the 
project team. 
 The first brush that Project Mexicano had in getting a functional 
division to do work for it came when Carl’s engineering man, Frank 
Fong, reported to him that the engineering vice president, who was 
formerly Fong’s boss, refused to authorize top priority to the chang-
ing of dimensions in the production drawings to the metric system. 
Carl had to take this issue to Linderman, who ruled in his favor. 
The defeated vice president, of course, did not take kindly to the 
decision. 
 The next incident revolved around Carl’s desire to have a pilot run 
of products made with metric measurements for shipment to Mexico. 
The purpose was to test the market acceptance of the Linderman 
articles. Jim Burke stated flatly that there was no way that his pro-
duction workers could be trained to work with metric drawings. Carl 
quickly saw that this was an issue that he was not going to win, so he 
had his buyer, Guzman, work with the newly appointed manufacturing 
manager for the subsidiary in getting a run of the products subcon-
tracted in Mexico City. 
 Bob Cates made a special trip from Mexico City to present Carl with 
an interesting problem. The Mexican industrial engineer, whom Bob was 
supposed to be training, had his own ideas about plant layout. When 
they differed from Bob’s as they usually did, he would take his com-
plaint directly to Felix Delgado, the president of the Mexican subsidiary. 
Because Delgado’s competence was primarily in finance, he would not 
know how to decide the argument and would simply table it. Carl took 
examples of some of the disagreements to Bob’s former boss, Sam Sar-
gis, who quite unexpectedly ruled against Bob’s proposed methods. Carl 
saw that there was bad feeling by Sargis against Bob for leaving his 
department, which boded ill for Bob’s return. To solve the immediate 
problem, however, Carl asked Dr. Perez to try to reconcile the situation 
in Mexico City. 
 Despite these problems, and many more of a similar nature, Project 
Mexicano was successful, and the transition to Mexican management 
was made in just a little over two years. By a curious twist, through 
Dr. Perez’s intercession Felix Delgado became very impressed by Bob 
Cates and convinced him to accept the job of director of industrial engi-
neering for the Mexican company. Humberto Guzman also stayed on to 
head the procurement operation. 
 Other members of the project team were not so fortunate. Linder-
man Industries was laying off personnel when the project ended, and 
only the project production man was able to get a job in the company 
at as high a level as the one he had when he joined the team. The cost 
expert elected to leave Linderman because he said the glamour of Proj-
ect Mexicano had spoiled him for any routine job. 
 Carl Conway had a difficult decision of his own to make. Robert Lin-
derman said that he was extremely pleased with his performance and 
that something good would open up in the company for him soon. In 
the meantime, there was a staff assignment available for him. Carl had 
seen enough project managers in the aerospace industry who had figu-
ratively rotted on staff assignments when their projects were completed 
to be somewhat wary. 
 Questions 
    1. Was Linderman Industries’ adoption of project organization an 
appropriate one for getting the Mexican subsidiary started? 
   2. In consideration of Robert Linderman’s letting the division managers 
know that the project manager would be asking for some of their 
key people, why would Conway have any difficulty in getting the 
ones he wanted? 
   3. Would you expect that many people would turn down a chance to 
join a project organization, as Bert Mill did? 
   4. Why would Conway take his problem with the engineering vice 
president to Linderman and have it resolved in his favor, yet back 
down in two disputes with the manufacturing vice president? 
   5. What could Linderman Industries have done to assure good jobs for 
the people coming off Project Mexicano, including Carl Conway, the 
project manager? 
 Source: Clayton Reeser and Marvin Loper,  Management: The Key to Organiza-
tional Effectiveness, rev. ed. Copyright © 1978. 

 
Chapter Seventeen Project Management
781
 Chatfield, Carl, and Timothy D. Johnson.  Microsoft 
Project (2013) Step by Step. Redmond, WA: 
Microsoft Press, 2013. 
 Goldratt, Eliyahu.  Critical Chain. Great Barrington, 
MA: North River Press, 1997. 
HBR Guide to Project Management. Watertown, MA: 
Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation, 
2012. 
 Heagney, Joseph.  Fundamentals of Project Management.  
4 th ed. New York: American Management Association, 
2012. 
 Heldman, Kim.  Project Management Jump Start. 3 rd ed. 
New York: Wiley, 2011. 
 Horine, Gregory M.  Project Management: Absolute 
Beginner’s Guide. 3 rd ed. Indianapolis: Que 
Publishing, 2013. 
 Project Management Body of Knowledge, 5 th ed. 
[A Guide to the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge]: PMBOK(R) Guide by Project 
Management Institute. Newtown Square, PA: Proj-
ect Management Institute, 2013. 
 Wysoki, Robert K.  Effective Project Management: 
Traditional, Agile, Extreme. 6 th ed. New York: 
Wiley, 2012. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 
 B. “Smitty” Smith is a project manager for a large consumer electronics 
corporation. Although she has been with the company only four years, she 
has demonstrated an uncanny ability to bring projects in on time, meet 
technical specifications, and be close to budget. Her latest assignment is 
a project that will involve merging two existing technologies. She and her 
team have almost finished developing the proposal that will be presented 
to a management committee for approval. All that remains to be done is 
to develop a time estimate for the project. The team has to construct a 
network diagram for the project. It has three paths. The expected dura-
tions and standard deviations for the paths are listed in the following table.  
 What project durations (in weeks) should Smitty include in the proposal 
for these risks of not delivering the project on time: 5 percent, 10 per-
cent, 15 percent? What are the pros and cons of quoting project times 
aggressively? Conservatively? 
 CASE 
 Time, Please 
 Path 
 Expected Duration 
(weeks) 
 Standard 
Deviation  
 A 
 10 
 4 
 B 
 14 
 2 
 C 
 13 
 2 

782
 CHAP TE R 
 18 
 After completing this chapter, you should be familiar with waiting line 
terminology, be able to solve typical problems using the models presented in 
this chapter, and answer these questions: 
 LO18.1 
What imbalance does the existence of a waiting line reveal? 
 LO18.2 
What causes waiting lines to form, and why is it impossible to 
eliminate them completely? 
 LO18.3 What metrics are used to help managers analyze waiting 
lines? 
 LO18.4 
What very important lesson does the constant service time 
model provide for managers? 
 LO18.5 
What are some psychological approaches to managing waiting 
lines, and why might a manager want to use them?  
 Management of 
Waiting Lines 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
18.1  Why Is There Waiting?  784 
18.2  Managerial Implications of 
Waiting Lines,  785 
18.3  Goal of Waiting-Line 
Management,  785 
18.4  Characteristics of Waiting Lines,  786 
 Population Source,  786 
 Number of Servers (Channels),  787 
 Arrival and Service Patterns,  788 
 Queue Discipline,  789 
18.5  Measures of Waiting-Line 
Performance,  790 
18.6  Queuing Models: Infinite-Source,  790 
 Basic Relationships,  791 
 Single Server, Exponential Service 
Time, M/M/1,  793 
 Single Server, Constant Service 
Time, M/D/1,  794 
 Multiple Servers, M/M/S,  795 
 Cost Analysis,  799 
 Maximum Line Length,  801 
 Multiple Priorities,  802 
 18.7  Queuing Model: Finite-Source,  805 
 18.8  Constraint Management,  810 
 18.9  The Psychology of Waiting,  811 
18.10  Operations Strategy,  812 
 Case: Big Bank,  819 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

783
 The mission of Walt Disney theme parks is to “make people happy,” and the folks at Disney 
World in Orlando are masters at doing that. They realize that waiting in lines at attractions 
does not add to the enjoyment of their customers. They also realize that customers waiting 
in lines are not generating the revenue that they would if they visited restaurants and sou-
venir shops. Hence, they have several reasons for wanting to reduce waiting times. Lately 
they have been using a reservation system called FastPass at some attractions that allow 
customers to reserve visit times instead of having to wait in line. This is a win-win solution: 
Customers are happier because they don’t have to wait in line, and the park’s potential for 
additional revenue is increased. You will learn more about Disney’s approaches to waiting 
lines later in the chapter. 
 Waiting lines occur when there is a temporary imbalance between supply (capacity) and 
demand. Waiting lines add to the cost of operation and they reflect negatively on customer 
service, so it is important to balance the cost of having customers wait with the cost of 
providing service capacity. Customer waiting lines occur when there is too little capacity to 
handle demand, but having more capacity than what is needed to handle demand means that 
there is idle (unproductive) capacity. From a managerial perspective, the key is to determine 
the balance that will provide an adequate level of service at a reasonable cost. 
    Waiting lines abound in all sorts of service systems. They are  non-valued-added occur-
rences. In lean systems, waiting is one of the seven wastes. For customers, having to wait 
for service can range from being acceptable (usually short waits), to being annoying (longer 
waits), to being a matter of life and death (e.g., in emergencies). For businesses, the costs of 
waiting come from lower productivity and competitive disadvantage. For society, the costs 
are wasted resources (e.g., fuel consumption of cars stuck in traffic) and reduced quality of 
life. Hence, it is important for system designers and managers of existing service systems to 
fully appreciate the impact of waiting lines. 
 Designers must weigh the cost of providing a given level of service capacity against the 
potential (implicit) cost of having customers wait for service. This planning and analysis of 
 LO18.1  What imbalance does 
the existence of a waiting line 
reveal?

784 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
service capacity frequently lends itself to   queuing theory, which is a mathematical approach 
to the analysis of waiting lines. Queuing theory is directly applicable to a wide range of 
service operations, including call centers, banks, post offices, restaurants, theme parks, tele-
communications systems, and traffic management. 
 The foundation of modern queuing theory is based on studies about automatic dialing 
equipment made in the early part of the 20th century by Danish telephone engineer A. K. Erlang. 
Prior to World War II, very few attempts were made to apply queuing theory to business prob-
lems. Since that time, queuing theory has been applied to a wide range of problems. 
 The mathematics of queuing can be complex; for that reason, the emphasis here will not be 
on the mathematics but on the concepts that underlie the use of queuing in analyzing waiting-
line problems. We shall rely on the use of formulas and tables for analysis. 
 Waiting lines are commonly found wherever customers arrive  randomly  for services. Some 
examples of waiting lines we encounter in our daily lives include the lines at supermarket 
checkouts, fast-food restaurants, airport ticket counters, theaters, post offices, and toll booths. 
In many situations, the “customers” are not people but orders waiting to be filled, trucks wait-
ing to be unloaded, jobs waiting to be processed, or equipment awaiting repairs. Still other 
examples include ships waiting to dock, planes waiting to land, and cars waiting at a stop sign. 
 One reason that queuing analysis is important is that customers regard waiting negatively. 
Customers may tend to associate this with poor service quality, especially if the wait is long. 
Similarly, in an organizational setting, having work or employees wait is the sort of waste that 
workers in lean systems strive to reduce. 
 The discussion of queuing begins with an examination of what is perhaps the most funda-
mental issue in waiting-line theory: Why is there waiting? 
 18.1 WHY IS THERE WAITING? 
       Many people are surprised to learn that waiting lines tend to form even though a system 
is basically underloaded. For example, a fast-food restaurant may have the capacity to 
handle an average of 200 orders per hour and yet experience waiting lines even though the 
average number of orders is only 150 per hour. The key word is  average.  In reality, customers 
arrive at random intervals rather than at evenly spaced intervals, and some orders take longer 
to fill than others. In other words, both arrivals and service times exhibit a high degree of 
variability. And because services cannot be performed ahead of time and stored until needed, 
the system at times becomes temporarily overloaded, giving rise to waiting lines. However, at 
other times, the system is idle because there are no customers. It follows that in systems where 
variability is minimal or nonexistent (e.g., because arrivals can be scheduled and service time 
is constant), waiting lines do not ordinarily form. JIT/lean systems strive to achieve this. 
 Queuing theory  Mathematical 
approach to the analysis of 
waiting lines. 
 LO18.2 What causes waiting 
lines to form, and why is it 
impossible to eliminate them 
completely?
 Passengers wait to buy tickets 
at Termini train station in 
Rome. As one of the largest 
railway stations in Europe, 
Termini serves over 150 
million passengers each year, 
connecting Rome to most 
of Italy and some European 
destinations. 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
785
 18.2 MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS 
OF WAITING LINES 
  Managers have a number of very good reasons to be concerned with waiting lines. Chief 
among those reasons are the following:
 1. 
The cost to provide waiting space. 
   2. 
A possible loss of business should customers leave the line before being served or refuse 
to wait at all. 
 3. 
A possible loss of goodwill. 
 4. 
A possible reduction in customer satisfaction. 
 5. 
The resulting congestion that may disrupt other business operations and/or customers. 
 18.3 GOAL OF WAITING-LINE MANAGEMENT 
  In a queuing system, customers enter a waiting line of a service facility, receive service when 
their turn comes, and then leave the system. The number of customers in the system (awaiting 
service or being served) will vary randomly over time. The goal of waiting-line management 
is essentially to minimize total costs. There are two basic categories of cost in a queuing situ-
ation: those associated with customers waiting for service and those associated with capacity. 
Thus,
TC
Customer waiting cost
Capacity cost


 
 Capacity costs are the costs of maintaining the ability to provide service. Examples include 
the number of bays at a car wash, the number of checkouts at a supermarket, the number of 
repair people to handle equipment breakdowns, and the number of lanes on a highway. When 
a service facility is idle, capacity is lost since it cannot be stored. The costs of customer wait-
ing include the salaries paid to employees while they wait for service (mechanics waiting 
for tools, the drivers of trucks waiting to unload), the cost of the space for waiting (size of 
doctor’s waiting room, length of driveway at a car wash, fuel consumed by planes waiting to 
land), and any loss of business due to customers refusing to wait and possibly going elsewhere 
in the future. 
 A practical difficulty frequently encountered is pinning down the cost of customer wait-
ing time, especially since major portions of that cost are not a part of accounting data. One 
approach often used is to treat waiting times or line lengths as a policy variable: A manager 
simply specifies an acceptable level of waiting and directs that capacity be established to 
achieve that level. 
 The goal of waiting-line management is to balance the cost of providing a level of service 
capacity with the cost of customers waiting for service.  Figure 18.1  illustrates this concept. 
Note that as capacity increases, its cost increases. For simplicity, the increase is shown as a 
linear relationship. Although a step function is often more appropriate, use of a straight line 
 Source:  ItsaSurvey.com ( www.itsasurvey.com/artman2/
publish/consumers/Americans_Do_Not_Like_
Waiting_in_Line_They_Like_Credit_Cards_for_
Faster_Purchases.shtml ). 
 According to a new Visa survey conducted with 1,000 adults standing in 
lines throughout New York City, most consumers would actually prefer 
to clean their bathroom (42 percent), sit in traffic (20 percent) or go to 
the dentist (18 percent) than stand in line. 
 READING 
 New Yorkers Do Not Like Waiting in Line 
/

786 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Infinite-source situation   
Customer arrivals are 
unrestricted. 
 Finite-source situation  The 
number of potential customers is 
limited. 
does not significantly distort the picture. As capacity increases, the number of customers wait-
ing and the time they wait tend to decrease, thereby decreasing waiting costs. As is typical in 
trade-off relationships, total costs can be represented as a U-shaped curve. The goal of analy-
sis is to identify a level of service capacity that will minimize total cost. (Unlike the situation 
in the inventory EOQ model, the minimum point on the total cost curve is  not  usually where 
the two cost lines intersect.) 
 In situations where those waiting in line are  external  customers (as opposed to employ-
ees), the existence of waiting lines can reflect negatively on an organization’s  quality image. 
Consequently, some organizations are focusing their attention on providing faster service—
speeding up the rate at which service is delivered rather than merely increasing the number 
of servers. The effect of this is to shift the total cost curve downward if the cost of customer 
waiting decreases by more than the cost of the faster service. 
 18.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF WAITING LINES 
  There are numerous queuing models from which an analyst can choose. Naturally, much of 
the success of the analysis will depend on choosing an appropriate model. Model choice is 
affected by the characteristics of the system under investigation. The main characteristics are
 1. 
Population source. 
 2. 
Number of servers (channels). 
 3. 
Arrival and service patterns. 
 4. 
Queue discipline (order of service). 
 Figure 18.2 depicts a simple queuing system. 
 Population Source 
 The approach to use in analyzing a queuing problem depends on whether the potential number 
of customers is limited. There are two possibilities:  infinite-source  and  finite-source popula-
tions. In an   infinite-source situation,  the  potential  number of customers greatly exceeds system 
capacity. Infinite-source situations exist whenever service is  unrestricted.  Examples are super-
markets, drugstores, banks, restaurants, theaters, amusement centers, and toll bridges. Theo-
retically, large numbers of customers from the “calling population” can request service at any 
time. When the potential number of customers is limited, a   finite-source situation exists. An 
example is the repair technician responsible for a certain number of machines in a company. The 
potential number of machines that might need repairs at any one time cannot exceed the number 
of machines assigned to the repairer. Similarly, an operator may be responsible for loading and 
 FIGURE 18.1 
 The goal of waiting-line 
management is to minimize the 
sum of two costs: customer 
waiting costs and service 
capacity costs 
Optimum
Cost
Service capacity
Total cost
Cost of service
capacity
Cost of customers
waiting
0

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
787
unloading a bank of four machines, a nurse may be responsible for answering patient calls for 
a 10-bed ward, a secretary may be responsible for taking dictation from three executives, and a 
company shop may perform repairs as needed on the firm’s 20 trucks.  
 Number of Servers (Channels) 
 The capacity of queuing systems is a function of the capacity of each server and the number 
of servers being used. The terms  server  and   channel  are synonymous, and it is generally 
assumed that each channel can handle one customer at a time. Systems can be either  single- or 
 multiple-channel.  (A group of servers working together as a team, such as a surgical team, 
is treated as a single-channel system.) Examples of single-channel systems are small grocery 
stores with one checkout counter, some theaters, single-bay car washes, and drive-in banks 
with one teller. Multiple-channel systems (those with more than one server) are commonly 
found in banks, at airline ticket counters, at auto service centers, and at gas stations. 
 A related distinction is the number of steps or  phases  in a queuing system. For example, at 
theme parks, people go from one attraction to another. Each attraction constitutes a separate 
phase where queues can (and usually do) form. 
  Figure 18.3  illustrates some of the most common queuing systems. Because it would not 
be possible to cover all of these cases in sufficient detail in the limited amount of space avail-
able here, our discussion will focus on  single-phase systems. 
 Channel  A server in a service 
system. 
 FIGURE 18.2 
 A simple queuing system 
Calling
population
Waiting
line
Arrivals
Service
System
Exit
Processing
order
 FIGURE 18.3 
 Four common variations of 
queuing systems 
Single channel,
single phase
Single channel,
multiple phase
Multiple channel,
single phase
Multiple channel,
multiple phase

788 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Arrival and Service Patterns 
 Waiting lines are a direct result of arrival and service variability. They occur because random, 
highly variable arrival and service patterns cause systems to be temporarily overloaded. In 
many instances, the variabilities can be described by theoretical distributions. In fact, the most 
commonly used models assume that arrival and service  rates  can be described by a Poisson 
distribution or, equivalently, that the interarrival  time  and service  time  can be described by a 
negative exponential distribution.  Figure 18.4 illustrates these distributions. 
 The Poisson distribution often provides a reasonably good description of customer arriv-
als per unit of time (e.g., per hour).  Figure 18.5A  illustrates how Poisson-distributed arrivals 
(e.g., accidents) might occur during a three-day period. In some hours, there are three or four 
arrivals; in other hours one or two arrivals; and in some hours no arrivals. 
 The negative exponential distribution often provides a reasonably good description of cus-
tomer service times (e.g., first aid care for accident victims).  Figure 18.5B  illustrates how 
exponential service times might appear for the customers whose arrivals are illustrated in 
 Figure 18.5A. Note that most service times are very short—some are close to zero—but a few 
require a relatively long service time. That is typical of a negative exponential distribution. 
 Waiting lines are most likely to occur when arrivals are bunched or when service times 
are particularly lengthy, and they are very likely to occur when both factors are present. For 
instance, note the long service time of customer 7 on day 1, in  Figure 18.5B. In  Figure 18.5A , 
the seventh customer arrived just after 10 o’clock and the next two customers arrived shortly 
after that, making it very likely that a waiting line formed. A similar situation occurred 
on  day 3 with the last three customers: The relatively long service time for customer 13 
( Figure 18.5B)  and the short time before the next two arrivals ( Figure 18.5A , day 3) would 
create (or increase the length of) a waiting line. 
 It is interesting to note that the Poisson and negative exponential distributions are alternate 
ways of presenting the same basic information. That is, if service time is exponential, then the 
service rate is Poisson. Similarly, if the customer arrival rate is Poisson, then the interarrival 
time (i.e., the time between arrivals) is exponential. For example, if a service facility can pro-
cess 12 customers per hour (rate), average service time is five minutes. And if the arrival rate 
is 10 per hour, then the average time between arrivals is six minutes. 
 The models described here generally require that arrival and service rates lend themselves 
to description using a Poisson distribution or, equivalently, that interarrival and service times 
lend themselves to description using a negative exponential distribution. In practice, it is nec-
essary to verify that these assumptions are met. Sometimes this is done by collecting data 
and plotting them, although the preferred approach is to use a chi-square goodness-of-fit test 
for that purpose. A discussion of the chi-square test is beyond the scope of this text, but most 
basic statistics textbooks cover the topic. 
 FIGURE 18.4 
 Poisson and negative exponential distributions 
.20
.18
.16
.14
.12
.10
.08
.06
.04
.02
.00
Relative
frequency
1
Customers per time unit
3
6
8
10
0
2
4
5
7
9
11 12
Relative
frequency (%)
Time
Exponential
distribution
(time)
Poisson
distribution
(rate)
0

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
789
 Research has shown that these assumptions are often appropriate for customer arrivals but 
less likely to be appropriate for service. In situations where the assumptions are not reason-
ably satisfied, the alternatives would be to (1) develop a more suitable model, (2) search for a 
better (and usually more complex) existing model, or (3) resort to computer simulation. Each 
of these alternatives requires more effort or cost than the ones presented here. 
 The models in this chapter assume customers are patient, that is, that customers enter the wait-
ing line and remain until they are served. Other possibilities are that (1) waiting customers grow 
impatient and leave the line ( reneging ); (2) customers switch to another line ( jockeying ); or (3) upon 
arriving, customers decide the line is too long and, therefore, do not enter the line ( balking ).  
 Queue Discipline 
 Queue discipline  refers to the order in which customers are processed. All but one of the mod-
els to be described shortly assume that service is provided on a  first-come, first-served basis. 
This is perhaps the most commonly encountered rule. There is first-come service at banks, 
stores, theaters, restaurants, four-way stop signs, registration lines, and so on. Examples of 
 Queue discipline  The order in 
which customers are processed.  
 FIGURE 18.5 
 Poisson arrivals and 
exponential service times 
 A. Customer arrivals 
 B. Service times 
Day 1
18
Arrivals
per day
8
4
3
2
1
12
11
10
9
Day 2
14
8
4
3
2
1
12
11
10
9
Day 3
15
8
4
3
2
1
12
11
10
9
= An arrival
Day 1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Time
0
Time
0
Day 2
Time
0
Day 3
Customer
Customer
Customer

790 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
systems that do not serve on a first-come basis include hospital emergency rooms, rush orders 
in a factory, and mainframe computer processing of jobs. In these and similar situations, cus-
tomers do not all represent the same waiting costs; those with the highest costs (e.g., the most 
seriously ill) are processed first, even though other customers may have arrived earlier.  
 18.5 MEASURES OF WAITING-LINE 
PERFORMANCE 
       The operations manager typically looks at five measures when evaluating existing or proposed 
service systems. They relate to potential customer dissatisfaction and costs:
 1. 
The average number of customers waiting, either in line or in the system. 
 2. 
The average time customers wait, either in line or in the system. 
 3. 
System utilization, which refers to the percentage of capacity utilized. 
 4. 
The implied cost of a given level of capacity and its related waiting line. 
 5. 
The probability that an arrival will have to wait for service. 
 Of these measures, system utilization bears some elaboration. It reflects the extent to which 
the servers are busy rather than idle. On the surface, it might seem that the operations manager 
would want to seek 100 percent utilization. However, as  Figure 18.6 illustrates, increases in 
system utilization are achieved at the expense of increases in both the length of the waiting 
line and the average waiting time. In fact, these values become exceedingly large as utiliza-
tion approaches 100 percent. The implication is that under normal circumstances, 100 percent 
utilization is not a realistic goal. Even if it were, 100 percent utilization of service personnel 
is not good; they need some slack time. Thus, instead, the operations manager should try to 
achieve a system that minimizes the sum of waiting costs and capacity costs. 
 18.6 QUEUING MODELS: INFINITE-SOURCE 
  Many queuing models are available for a manager or analyst to choose from. The discussion 
here includes four of the most basic and most widely used models. The purpose is to provide an 
exposure to a range of models rather than an extensive coverage of the field. All assume a Poisson 
arrival rate. Moreover, the models pertain to a system operating under  steady-state conditions; 
that is, they assume the average arrival and service rates are stable (e.g., the opening rush at a 
store is over). The four models described are
 1. 
Single server, exponential service time. 
 2. 
Single server, constant service time. 
 LO18.3 What metrics are 
used to help managers analyze 
waiting lines?
 FIGURE 18.6 
 The average number waiting 
in line and the average time 
customers wait in line increase 
exponentially as the system 
utilization increases 
0
100%
System utilization
Average number
or time waiting
in line

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
791
 Symbol 
 Represents 
  
 Customer arrival rate 
  
 Service rate per server 
 L  q  
 The average number of customers waiting for service 
 L  s  
 The average number of customers in the system (waiting and/or being served) 
 r 
 The average number of customers being served 
  
 The system utilization 
 W  q  
 The average time customers wait in line 
 W  s  
 The average time customers spend in the system (waiting in line and service time) 
 1/  
 Service time 
 P  o  
 The probability of zero units in the system 
 P  n  
 The probability of  n units in the system 
 M 
 The number of servers 
 L max 
 The maximum expected number waiting in line 
 TABLE 18.1 
 Infinite-source symbols 
 3. 
Multiple servers, exponential service time. 
 4. 
Multiple priority service, exponential service time. 
 Note that the terms “server” and “channel” mean the same thing. To facilitate your use 
of waiting-line models,  Table 18.1  provides a list of the symbols used for the infinite-source 
models. 
 Basic Relationships 
 Certain basic relationships hold for all infinite-source models. Knowledge of these can be 
very helpful in deriving desired performance measures, given a few key values. Here are the 
basic relationships:
 Note: The arrival and service rates, represented by  and M, must be in the same units 
(e.g., customers per hour, customers per minute). 
 System utilization:  This reflects the ratio of demand (as measured by the arrival rate) 
to supply or capacity (as measured by the product of the number of servers,  M,  and the 
service rate,   ).
 
M
 

  
 (18–1) 
 The average number of customers being served: 
 r  
  
 (18–2) 
  For nearly all queuing systems, there is a relationship between the average time a unit 
spends in the system or queue and the average number of units in the system or queue. 
According to Little’s law, for a stable system, the average number of customers in line or 
in the system is equal to the average customer arrival rate multiplied by the average time 
in line or in the system. That is,
 
and
L
W
L
W
s
s
q
q
 
 
 

792 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
  The implications of this are important to analysis of waiting lines. The relationships 
are independent of any probability distribution and require no assumptions about which 
customers arrive or are serviced, or the order in which they are served. It also means that 
knowledge of any two of the three variables can be used to obtain the third variable. For 
example, knowing the arrival rate and the average number in line, one can solve for the 
average waiting time. 
 The average  number  of customers 
 Waiting in line for service:  L  q  [Model dependent. Obtain using a table or formula.]
 In the system (line plus being served): L
L
r
s
q


 
 (18–3) 
 The average  time  customers are 
 Waiting in line: W
L
q
q
   
 (18–4) 
 In the system:
1
W
W
L
s
q
s

     
 (18–5) 
 All infinite-source models require that system utilization be less than 1.0; the models apply 
only to underloaded systems. 
 The average number waiting in line,  L  q  , is a key value because it is a determinant of 
some of the other measures of system performance, such as the average number in the sys-
tem, the average time in line, and the average time in the system. Hence,  L  q   will usually be 
one of the first values you will want to determine in problem solving. 
  Figure 18.7  can help you relate the symbols to the basic relationships in a queuing 
system.  
 FIGURE 18.7 
 Basic relationships 
1
E X A M P L E  1
  Customers arrive at a bakery at an average rate of 18 per hour on weekday mornings. The 
arrival distribution can be described by a Poisson distribution with a mean of 18. Each clerk 
can serve a customer in an average of three minutes; this time can be described by an expo-
nential distribution with a mean of 3.0 minutes.
 a. 
What are the arrival and service  rates? 
 b. 
Compute the average number of customers being served at any time. 
   c. 
Suppose it has been determined that the average number of customers waiting in line is 
8.1. Compute the average number of customers in the system (i.e., waiting in line or being 
served), the average time customers wait in line, and the average time in the system.  
 d. 
Determine the system utilization for  M     1, 2, and 3 servers. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
S O L U T I O N
 a. 
The arrival rate is given in the problem:       18 customers per hour. Change the service 
 time to a comparable hourly rate. Thus, 
  
60 minutes per hour/3 minutes per customer          20 customers per hour 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
793
 b. 
 
18
20
.90 customer.
r  
 

 
 c. 
Given:  L  q      8.1 customers.
 L  s       L  q     r     8.1    .90    9.0 customers
 
8.1
18
.45 hour
W
L
q
q
  

 
 
Waiting in line plus service
1
.45
1
20
.50 hour
W
W
s
q


  


 
 d. 
System utilization is  
.
M
 

  
 For 
1,
18
1(20)
.90
M 
 

 
 
 For 
2,
18
2(20)
.45
M 
 

 
 
 For 
3,
18
3(20)
.30
M 
 

 
 TABLE 18.2 
 Formulas for basic single-server 
model 
 Performance Measure 
 Equation 
 
 Average number in line 
 


   
Lq
(
)
2
 
 (18–6) 
 Probability of zero units in the system 
 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟




P
1
0
 
 (18–7) 
 Probability of  n units in the system 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟



P
P
n
n
0
 (18–8a) 
 Probability of less than  n units in the system 
  
⎛
⎝
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎞
⎠
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟

 


P n
n
1
 
 (18–8b) 
 1 This notation is commonly used to specify waiting-line models. The first symbol refers to arrivals, the second to 
service, and the third to the number of servers. M stands for a rate that can be described by a Poisson distribution or, 
equivalently, a time that can be described by an exponential distribution. Hence, M/M/1 indicates a Poisson arrival 
rate, a Poisson service rate, and one server. The symbol D is used to denote a deterministic (i.e., constant) service 
rate. Thus the notation M/D/1 would indicate the arrival rate is Poisson and the service rate is constant. Finally, the 
notation M/M/S would indicate multiple servers.
 Note that as the system capacity as measured by  M  increases, the system utilization for a 
given arrival rate decreases. 
 Single Server, Exponential Service Time, M/M/1 1  
 The simplest model involves a system that has one server (or a single crew). The queue disci-
pline is first-come, first-served, and it is assumed that the customer arrival rate can be approxi-
mated by a Poisson distribution and service time by a negative exponential distribution. There 
is no limit on length of queue. 
  Table 18.2  lists the formulas for the single-server model, which should be used in conjunction 
with Formulas 18–1 through 18–5.  

794 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 LO18.4 What very important 
lesson does the constant 
service time model provide for 
managers?
   An airline is planning to open a satellite ticket desk in a new shopping plaza, staffed by one 
ticket agent. It is estimated that requests for tickets and information will average 15 per hour, 
and requests will have a Poisson distribution. Service time is assumed to be exponentially dis-
tributed. Previous experience with similar satellite operations suggests that mean service time 
should average about three minutes per request. Determine each of the following:
 a. 
System utilization. 
 b. 
Percentage of time the server (agent) will be idle. 
 c. 
The expected number of customers waiting to be served. 
 d. 
The average time customers will spend in the system. 
 e. 
The probability of zero customers in the system and the probability of four customers in 
the system.    
E X A M P L E  2
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
      15 customers per hour
 
1
Service time
1 customer
3 minutes
60 minutes per hour
20 customers per hour
 

	

 
 a. 
 
15
1(20)
.75
M
 

 

 
 b. 
Percentage idle time    1          1    .75    .25, or 25 percent 
 c. 
 
(
)
15
20(20
15)
2.25 customers
2
2
Lq 

   



 
 d. 
 
1
2.25
15
1
20
.20 hour,
W
L
s
q
    


 or 12 minutes 
 e. 
 
1
1
15
20
.25
and
.25 15
20
.079
0
4
0
4
4
P
P
P ⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟

 
 







  
S O L U T I O N
 Single Server, Constant Service Time, M/D/1 
    As noted previously, waiting lines are a consequence of random, highly variable arrival and 
service rates. If a system can reduce or eliminate the variability of either or both, it can shorten 
waiting lines noticeably. A case in point is a system with constant service time. The effect of a 
constant service time is to cut in half the average number of customers waiting in line:
 
(
)
2
Lq
2


   
 
 (18–9) 
 The average time customers spend waiting in line is also cut in half. Similar improvements can 
be realized by smoothing arrival times (e.g., by use of appointments). Thus, anything a manager 
can do to reduce service time variability will reduce the number waiting and the time waiting. 
  Wanda’s Car Wash & Dry is an automatic, five-minute operation with a single bay. On a typi-
cal Saturday morning, cars arrive at a mean rate of eight per hour, with arrivals tending to 
follow a Poisson distribution. Find
 a. 
The average number of cars in line. 
 b. 
The average time cars spend in line and service. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
E X A M P L E  3

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
795
      8 cars per hour 
      1 per 5 minutes, or 12 per hour 
 a. 
 
2 (
)
8
2(12)(12
8)
.667 car
2
2
Lq 

   



 
 b. 
 
1
.667
8
1
12
.167
W
L
s
q
    


 hour, or 10 minutes 
 Performance Measure 
 Equation 
 
 Average number in line 
 
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟

 


  
L
M
M
P
q
M
(
1)!(
)2
0  
 (18–10) 
 Probability of zero units in the system 
 
∑
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥






 




P
n
M
M
n
M
n
M
!
! 1
0
0
1
1
 
 (18–11) 
 Average waiting time for 
a customer who has
to wait 
 

  
W
M
a
1
 
 (18–12) 
 Probability that an arrival will 
have to wait for service 
 

P
W
W
w
q
a  
 (18–13) 
 TABLE 18.3 
 Multiple-server queuing formulas 
S O L U T I O N
 Multiple Servers, M/M/S 
 A multiple-server system exists whenever two or more servers are working  indepen-
dently  to provide service to customer arrivals. Use of the model involves the following 
assumptions:
 1. 
A Poisson arrival rate and exponential service time. 
 2. 
Servers all work at the same average rate. 
 3. 
Customers form a single waiting line (in order to maintain first-come, first-served 
processing). 
 Formulas for the multiple-server model are listed in  Table 18.3 . Obviously, the multiple-
server formulas are more complex than the single-server formulas, especially the formu-
las for  L  q  and  P 0 . These formulas are shown primarily for completeness; you can actually 
determine their values using  Table 18.4 , which gives values of  L  q   and  P 0  for selected values 
of   /  and  M.  
 To use  Table 18.4 , compute the value of   /   and round according to the number of deci-
mal places given for that ratio in the table. Then simply read the values of  L  q   and  P 0  for the 
appropriate number of channels,  M. For instance, if   /      0.50 and  M     2, the table provides 
a value of 0.033 for  L  q   and a value of .600 for  P 0 . These values can then be used to compute 
other measures of system performance. Note that the formulas in  Table 18.3  and the values 
in  Table 18.4 yield  average  amounts (i.e., expected values). Note also that  Table 18.4  can be 
used for some single-channel problems (i.e.,  M     1) as well. 

796 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 0.15 
 1 
 0.026 
 .850 
 
 2 
 0.001 
 .860 
 0.20 
 1 
 0.050 
 .800 
 
 2 
 0.002 
 .818 
 0.25 
 1 
 0.083 
 .750 
 
 2 
 0.004 
 .778 
 0.30 
 1 
 0.129 
 .700 
 
 2 
 0.007 
 .739 
 0.35 
 1 
 0.188 
 .650 
 
 2 
 0.011 
 .702 
 0.40 
 1 
 0.267 
 .600 
 
 2 
 0.017 
 .667 
 0.45 
 1 
 0.368 
 .550 
 
 2 
 0.024 
 .633 
 
 3 
 0.002 
 .637 
 0.50 
 1 
 0.500 
 .500 
 
 2 
 0.033 
 .600 
 
 3 
 0.003 
 .606 
 0.55 
 1 
 0.672 
 .450 
 
 2 
 0.045 
 .569 
 
 3 
 0.004 
 .576 
 0.60 
 1 
 0.900 
 .400 
 
 2 
 0.059 
 .538 
 
 3 
 0.006 
 .548 
 0.65 
 1 
 1.207 
 .350 
 
 2 
 0.077 
 .509 
 
 3 
 0.008 
 .521 
 0.70 
 1 
 1.633 
 .300 
 
 2 
 0.098 
 .481 
 
 3 
 0.011 
 .495 
 0.75 
 1 
 2.250 
 .250 
 
 2 
 0.123 
 .455 
 
 3 
 0.015 
 .471 
 0.80 
 1 
 3.200 
 .200 
 
 2 
 0.152 
 .429 
 
 3 
 0.019 
 .447 
 0.85 
 1 
 4.817 
 .150 
 
 2 
 0.187 
 .404 
 
 3 
 0.024 
 .425 
 
 4 
 0.003 
 .427 
 0.90 
 1 
 8.100 
 .100 
 
 2 
 0.229 
 .379 
 
 3 
 0.030 
 .403 
 
 4 
 0.004 
 .406 
 0.95 
 1 
 18.050 
 .050 
 
 2 
 0.277 
 .356 
 
 3 
 0.037 
 .383 
 
 4 
 0.005 
 .386 
 1.0 
 2 
 0.333 
 .333 
 
 3 
 0.045 
 .364 
 
 4 
 0.007 
 .367 
 TABLE 18.4 
 Infinite-source values for  L  q  and 
 P 0 given   /  and  M 
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 1.1 
 2 
 0.477 
 .290 
 
 3 
 0.066 
 .327 
 
 4 
 0.011 
 .332 
 1.2 
 2 
 0.675 
 .250 
 
 3 
 0.094 
 .294 
 
 4 
 0.016 
 .300 
 
 5 
 0.003 
 .301 
 1.3 
 2 
 0.951 
 .212 
 
 3 
 0.130 
 .264 
 
 4 
 0.023 
 .271 
 
 5 
 0.004 
 .272 
 1.4 
 2 
 1.345 
 .176 
 
 3 
 0.177 
 .236 
 
 4 
 0.032 
 .245 
 
 5 
 0.006 
 .246 
 1.5 
 2 
 1.929 
 .143 
 
 3 
 0.237 
 .211 
 
 4 
 0.045 
 .221 
 
 5 
 0.009 
 .223 
 1.6 
 2 
 2.844 
 .111 
 
 3 
 0.313 
 .187 
 
 4 
 0.060 
 .199 
 
 5 
 0.012 
 .201 
 1.7 
 2 
 4.426 
 .081 
 
 3 
 0.409 
 .166 
 
 4 
 0.080 
 .180 
 
 5 
 0.017 
 .182 
 1.8 
 2 
 7.674 
 .053 
 
 3 
 0.532 
 .146 
 
 4 
 0.105 
 .162 
 
 5 
 0.023 
 .165 
 1.9 
 2 
 17.587 
 .026 
 
 3 
 0.688 
 .128 
 
 4 
 0.136 
 .145 
 
 5 
 0.030 
 .149 
 
 6 
 0.007 
 .149 
 2.0 
 3 
 0.889 
 .111 
 
 4 
 0.174 
 .130 
 
 5 
 0.040 
 .134 
 
 6 
 0.009 
 .135 
 2.1 
 3 
 1.149 
 .096 
 
 4 
 0.220 
 .117 
 
 5 
 0.052 
 .121 
 
 6 
 0.012 
 .122 
 2.2 
 3 
 1.491 
 .081 
 
 4 
 0.277 
 .105 
 
 5 
 0.066 
 .109 
 
 6 
 0.016 
 .111 
 2.3 
 3 
 1.951 
 .068 
 
 4 
 0.346 
 .093 
 
 5 
 0.084 
 .099 
 
 6 
 0.021 
 .100 
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 2.4 
 3 
 2.589 
 .056 
 
 4 
 0.431 
 .083 
 
 5 
 0.105 
 .089 
 
 6 
 0.027 
 .090 
 
 7 
 0.007 
 .091 
 2.5 
 3 
 3.511 
 .045 
 
 4 
 0.533 
 .074 
 
 5 
 0.130 
 .080 
 
 6 
 0.034 
 .082 
 
 7 
 0.009 
 .082 
 2.6 
 3 
 4.933 
 .035 
 
 4 
 0.658 
 .065 
 
 5 
 0.161 
 .072 
 
 6 
 0.043 
 .074 
 
 7 
 0.011 
 .074 
 2.7 
 3 
 7.354 
 .025 
 
 4 
 0.811 
 .057 
 
 5 
 0.198 
 .065 
 
 6 
 0.053 
 .067 
 
 7 
 0.014 
 .067 
 2.8 
 3 
 12.273 
 .016 
 
 4 
 1.000 
 .050 
 
 5 
 0.241 
 .058 
 
 6 
 0.066 
 .060 
 
 7 
 0.018 
 .061 
 2.9 
 3 
 27.193 
 .008 
 
 4 
 1.234 
 .044 
 
 5 
 0.293 
 .052 
 
 6 
 0.081 
 .054 
 
 7 
 0.023 
 .055 
 3.0 
 4 
 1.528 
 .038 
 
 5 
 0.354 
 .047 
 
 6 
 0.099 
 .049 
 
 7 
 0.028 
 .050 
 
 8 
 0.008 
 .050 
 3.1 
 4 
 1.902 
 .032 
 
 5 
 0.427 
 .042 
 
 6 
 0.120 
 .044 
 
 7 
 0.035 
 .045 
 
 8 
 0.010 
 .045 
 3.2 
 4 
 2.386 
 .027 
 
 5 
 0.513 
 .037 
 
 6 
 0.145 
 .040 
 
 7 
 0.043 
 .040 
 
 8 
 0.012 
 .041 
 3.3 
 4 
 3.027 
 .023 
 
 5 
 0.615 
 .033 
 
 6 
 0.174 
 .036 
 
 7 
 0.052 
 .037 
 
 8 
 0.015 
 .037 
(continued)

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
797
 TABLE 18.4 
(Concluded)
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 3.4 
 4 
 3.906 
 .019 
 
 5 
 0.737 
 .029 
 
 6 
 0.209 
 .032 
 
 7 
 0.063 
 .033 
 
 8 
 0.019 
 .033 
 3.5 
 4 
 5.165 
 .015 
 
 5 
 0.882 
 .026 
 
 6 
 0.248 
 .029 
 
 7 
 0.076 
 .030 
 
 8 
 0.023 
 .030 
 
 9 
 0.007 
 .030 
 3.6 
 4 
 7.090 
 .011 
 
 5 
 1.055 
 .023 
 
 6 
 0.295 
 .026 
 
 7 
 0.019 
 .027 
 
 8 
 0.028 
 .027 
 
 9 
 0.008 
 .027 
 3.7 
 4 
 10.347 
 .008 
 
 5 
 1.265 
 .020 
 
 6 
 0.349 
 .023 
 
 7 
 0.109 
 .024 
 
 8 
 0.034 
 .025 
 
 9 
 0.010 
 .025 
 3.8 
 4 
 16.937 
 .005 
 
 5 
 1.519 
 .017 
 
 6 
 0.412 
 .021 
 
 7 
 0.129 
 .022 
 
 8 
 0.041 
 .022 
 
 9 
 0.013 
 .022 
 3.9 
 4 
 36.859 
 .002 
 
 5 
 1.830 
 .015 
 
 6 
 0.485 
 .019 
 
 7 
 0.153 
 .020 
 
 8 
 0.050 
 .020 
 
 9 
 0.016 
 .020 
 4.0 
 5 
 2.216 
 .013 
 
 6 
 0.570 
 .017 
 
 7 
 0.180 
 .018 
 
 8 
 0.059 
 .018 
 
 9 
 0.019 
 .018 
 4.1 
 5 
 2.703 
 .011 
 
 6 
 0.668 
 .015 
 
 7 
 0.212 
 .016 
 
 8 
 0.070 
 .016 
 
 9 
 0.023 
 .017 
 4.2 
 5 
 3.327 
 .009 
 
 6 
 0.784 
 .013 
 
 7 
 0.248 
 .014 
 
 8 
 0.083 
 .015 
 
 9 
 0.027 
 .015 
 
 10 
 0.009 
 .015 
 4.3 
 5 
 4.149 
 .008 
 
 6 
 0.919 
 .012 
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 4.3 
 7 
 0.289 
 .130 
 
 8 
 0.097 
 .013 
 
 9 
 0.033 
 .014 
 
 10 
 0.011 
 .014 
 4.4 
 5 
 5.268 
 .006 
 
 6 
 1.078 
 .010 
 
 7 
 0.337 
 .012 
 
 8 
 0.114 
 .012 
 
 9 
 0.039 
 .012 
 
 10 
 0.013 
 .012 
 4.5 
 5 
 6.862 
 .005 
 
 6 
 1.265 
 .009 
 
 7 
 0.391 
 .010 
 
 8 
 0.134 
 .011 
 
 9 
 0.046 
 .011 
 
 10 
 0.015 
 .011 
 4.6 
 5 
 9.289 
 .004 
 
 6 
 1.487 
 .008 
 
 7 
 0.453 
 .009 
 
 8 
 0.156 
 .010 
 
 9 
 0.054 
 .010 
 
 10 
 0.018 
 .010 
 4.7 
 5 
 13.382 
 .003 
 
 6 
 1.752 
 .007 
 
 7 
 0.525 
 .008 
 
 8 
 0.181 
 .009 
 
 9 
 0.064 
 .009 
 
 10 
 0.022 
 .009 
 4.8 
 5 
 21.641 
 .002 
 
 6 
 2.071 
 .006 
 
 7 
 0.607 
 .008 
 
 8 
 0.209 
 .008 
 
 9 
 0.074 
 .008 
 
 10 
 0.026 
 .008 
 4.9 
 5 
 46.566 
 .001 
 
 6 
 2.459 
 .005 
 
 7 
 0.702 
 .007 
 
 8 
 0.242 
 .007 
 
 9 
 0.087 
 .007 
 
 10 
 0.031 
 .007 
 
 11 
 0.011 
 .007 
 5.0 
 6 
 2.938 
 .005 
 
 7 
 0.810 
 .006 
 
 8 
 0.279 
 .006 
 
 9 
 0.101 
 .007 
 
 10 
 0.036 
 .007 
 
 11 
 0.013 
 .007 
 5.1 
 6 
 3.536 
 .004 
 
 7 
 0.936 
 .005 
 
 8 
 0.321 
 .006 
 
 9 
 0.117 
 .006 
 
 10 
 0.042 
 .006 
 
 11 
 0.015 
 .006 
    /  
 M 
  L   q  
  P   0  
 5.2 
 6 
 4.301 
 .003 
 
 7 
 1.081 
 .005 
 
 8 
 0.368 
 .005 
 
 9 
 0.135 
 .005 
 
 10 
 0.049 
 .005 
 
 11 
 0.018 
 .006 
 5.3 
 6 
 5.303 
 .003 
 
 7 
 1.249 
 .004 
 
 8 
 0.422 
 .005 
 
 9 
 0.155 
 .005 
 
 10 
 0.057 
 .005 
 
 11 
 0.021 
 .005 
 
 12 
 0.007 
 .005 
 5.4 
 6 
 6.661 
 .002 
 
 7 
 1.444 
 .004 
 
 8 
 0.483 
 .004 
 
 9 
 0.178 
 .004 
 
 10 
 0.066 
 .004 
 
 11 
 0.024 
 .005 
 
 12 
 0.009 
 .005 
 5.5 
 6 
 8.590 
 .002 
 
 7 
 1.674 
 .003 
 
 8 
 0.553 
 .004 
 
 9 
 0.204 
 .004 
 
 10 
 0.077 
 .004 
 
 11 
 0.028 
 .004 
 
 12 
 0.010 
 .004 
 5.6 
 6 
 11.519 
 .001 
 
 7 
 1.944 
 .003 
 
 8 
 0.631 
 .003 
 
 9 
 0.233 
 .004 
 
 10 
 0.088 
 .004 
 
 11 
 0.033 
 .004 
 
 12 
 0.012 
 .004 
 5.7 
 6 
 16.446 
 .001 
 
 7 
 2.264 
 .002 
 
 8 
 0.721 
 .003 
 
 9 
 0.266 
 .003 
 
 10 
 0.102 
 .003 
 
 11 
 0.038 
 .003 
 
 12 
 0.014 
 .003 
 5.8 
 6 
 26.373 
 .001 
 
 7 
 2.648 
 .002 
 
 8 
 0.823 
 .003 
 
 9 
 0.303 
 .003 
 
 10 
 0.116 
 .003 
 
 11 
 0.044 
 .003 
 
 12 
 0.017 
 .003 
 5.9 
 6 
 56.300 
 .000 
 
 7 
 3.113 
 .002 
 
 8 
 0.939 
 .002 
 
 9 
 0.345 
 .003 
 
 10 
 0.133 
 .003 

798 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
  
 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
E X A M P L E  4
Alpha Taxi and Hauling Company 
has seven cabs stationed at the air-
port. The company has determined 
that during the late-evening hours on 
weeknights, customers request cabs 
at a rate that follows the Poisson dis-
tribution with a mean of 6.6 per hour. 
Service time is exponential with a 
mean of 50 minutes per customer. 
Assume that there is one customer 
per cab. Find each of the perfor-
mance measures listed in  Table 18.3  
and the system utilization.
      6.6 per hour  M     7 cabs (servers)
 
1 customer per trip
50 minutes per trip
60 minutes per hour
1.2 customers per hour per cab
 


 
/  5.5 
 From  Table 18.4 with  M     7, 
 L  q        1.674 customers and  P 0     .003
 
1
1
7(1.2)
6.6
.556 hour, or 33.36 minutes
W
M
a 
   


1.674
6.6
.2536 hour, or 15.22 minutes
.2536
.556
.456
W
L
P
W
W
q
q
W
q
a
  




6.6
7(1.2)
.786
M
 

 

 
S O L U T I O N

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
799
   The Excel template also can be used to solve Example 4. After entering       6.6 and       1.2 
at the top of the template, the queuing statistics for 7 servers are shown in the first column of 
the table in the template. The template also provides queuing statistics for 8 through 12 servers 
for comparison, although these are not required for this example. In addition, the template can 
be used to increment   ,   , or the number of servers to further investigate the queuing system. 
 The process also can be worked in reverse; that is, an analyst can determine the capacity 
needed to achieve specified levels of various performance measures. This approach is illus-
trated in the following example. 
  Alpha Taxi and Hauling also plans to have cabs at a new rail station. The expected arrival 
rate is 4.8 customers per hour, and the service rate (including return time to the rail station) is 
expected to be 1.5 per hour. How many cabs will be needed to achieve an average time in line 
of 20 minutes or less? 
E X A M P L E  5
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
      4.8 customers per hour 
      1.5 customers per hour 
 M     ? 
 
4.8
1.5
3.2 customers
r  
 

 
 W  q   (desired)    20 minutes, or .333 hour 
 Using  L  q          	   W  q  , you can solve for  L  q  : 4.8/hour (.333 hour)    1.6 customers. Thus, 
the average number waiting should not exceed 1.6 customers. Referring to  Table 18.4 , with 
 r     3.2,  L  q      2.386 for  M     4, and 0.513 for  M     5. Hence, five cabs will be needed. 
S O L U T I O N
 Finally, note that in a situation where there are multiple servers, each with a separate line 
(e.g., a supermarket), each line would be treated as a single-server system. 
 Cost Analysis 
 The design of a service system often reflects the desire of management to balance the cost of 
capacity with the expected cost of customers waiting in the system. (Note that customer waiting 
cost refers to the costs incurred by the organization due to customer waiting.) For example, in 
designing loading docks for a warehouse, the cost of docks plus loading crews must be balanced 
against the cost of trucks and drivers that will be in the system, both while waiting to be unloaded 
and while actually being unloaded. Similarly, the cost of having a mechanic wait for tools at a tool 
crib must be balanced against the cost of servers at the crib. In cases where the customers are not 
employees (e.g., retail sales), the costs can include lost sales when customers refuse to wait, the 
cost of providing waiting space, and the cost of added congestion (lost business, shoplifting). 
 The optimal capacity (usually in terms of number of channels) is one that minimizes the 
sum of customer waiting costs and capacity or server costs. Thus, the goal is
 Minimize
Total
cost
Customer
waiting cost
Capacity
cost


 
 The simplest approach to a cost analysis involves computing  system costs, that is, comput-
ing the costs for customers in the system and total capacity cost. Capacity cost typically is a 
function of the number of servers. 
 An iterative process is used to identify the capacity size that will minimize total costs. Capac-
ity is incremented one unit at a time (e.g., increase the number of channels by one) and the total 
cost is computed at each increment. Because the total cost curve is U-shaped, usually the total 
cost will initially decrease as capacity is increased, and then it will eventually begin to increase. 
Once it begins to increase, additional increases in capacity will cause it to continue to increase. 
Hence, once that occurs, the optimal capacity size can be readily identified.  Figure 18.8  illustrates 
this approach. Find the total cost for  M     1, then  M     2,  M     3, and continue as long as the total 

800 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
costs continue to decline. However, as soon as the total cost begins to rise, as it does at  M     3 in 
 Figure 18.8 , the search can be stopped. The optimal solution is apparent; it is  M     2. There would 
be no need to continue computing total costs for additional servers because, as you can see, the 
total costs will continue to increase as more servers are added.  Note:  Although in many instances 
the starting point is  M     1, the general rule is to begin at the smallest number of servers for which 
the system is underloaded (i.e., the system utilization is < 1.00).  
 The computation of customer waiting costs is based on the average  number of customers in 
the  system.  This is perhaps not intuitively obvious; instead, it might seem that customer wait-
ing  time  in the system would be more appropriate. However, that approach would pertain to 
only  one  customer—it would not convey information concerning  how many  customers would 
wait that long. Obviously, an average of five customers waiting would involve a lower wait-
ing cost than an average of nine. Therefore, it is necessary to focus on the  number waiting. 
Moreover, if on average two customers are in the system, this is equivalent to having  exactly 
two customers in the system at all times, even though in reality there will be times when zero, 
one, two, three, or more customers are in the system. 
 FIGURE 18.8 
 As the number of servers is 
increased, the optimal number of 
servers becomes apparent when 
the total cost begins to increase 
Total
cost
Total cost
for M  1
M  1
M  2
M  3
M  4
M  5
Number of servers
Lowest
total cost
0
Stop
1
2
3
4
5
 Trucks arrive at a warehouse at a rate of 15 per hour during business hours. Crews can unload 
the trucks at a rate of five per hour. The high unloading rate is due to cargo being container-
ized. Recent changes in wage rates have caused the warehouse manager to reexamine the 
question of how many crews to use. The new rates are: Crew and dock cost is $100 per hour; 
truck and driver cost is $120 per hour.
E X A M P L E  6
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 ( L  q  values are from  Table 18.4 , using  
15
5
3.0.

 

 )
 
 Number of 
Crews (M) 
 Crew and 
Dock Cost 
 
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥

 

L
L
s
q
 
 Average Number in 
System 
  [  L   s        $120] 
 Driver/ Truck 
Cost 
 Total Cost 
 4 
 $400 
 1.528    3.0    4.528 
 $543.36 
 $943.36 
 5 
 500 
 .354    3.0    3.354 
 402.48 
 902.48 (minimum) 
 6 
 600 
 .099    3.0    3.099 
 371.88 
 971.88 
 7 
 700 
 .028    3.0    3.028 
 363.36 
 1,063.36 
 Five crews will minimize the total cost. Because the total cost will continue to increase once the 
minimum is reached, it is not really necessary to compute total costs for crew sizes larger than 
six, because total cost increased as the crew size was increased from five to six, indicating that 
a crew of five is optimal.  
S O L U T I O N

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
801
 One additional point should be made concerning cost analysis. Because both customer wait-
ing costs and capacity costs often reflect estimated amounts, the apparent optimal solution may 
not represent the true optimum. One ramification of this is that when computations are shown 
to the nearest penny, or even the nearest dollar, the total cost figures may seem to imply a higher 
degree of precision than is really justified by the cost estimates. This is compounded by the fact 
that arrival and service rates may either be approximations or not be exactly represented by the 
Poisson/exponential distribution. Another ramification is that if cost estimates can be obtained 
as  ranges  (e.g., customer waiting cost is estimated to range between $40 and $50 per hour), total 
costs should be computed using both ends of the range to see whether the optimal solution is 
affected. If it is, management must decide whether to expend additional effort to obtain more 
precise cost estimates or choose one of the two indicated optimal solutions. Management would 
most likely choose to employ the latter strategy if there were little disparity between total costs 
of various capacity levels close to the indicated optimal solutions.  
 Maximum Line Length 
 Another question that often comes up in capacity planning is the amount of space to allo-
cate for waiting lines. Theoretically, with an infinite population source, the waiting line can 
become infinitely long. This implies that no matter how much space is allocated for a waiting 
line, one can never be completely sure that the space requirements won’t exceed that amount. 
Nonetheless, as a practical matter, one can determine a line length that will not be exceeded a 
specified proportion of the time. For instance, an analyst may wish to know the length of line 
that will probably not be exceeded 98 percent of the time, or perhaps 99 percent of the time, 
and use that number as a planning value. 
 The approximate line length that will satisfy a specified percentage can be determined by 
solving the following equation for  L max :
 
log
log
or ln
ln
max
L
K
K


  
 (18–14) 
where
 
1
Specified
percentage
(1
)
K
Lq


 
 
 The resulting value of  L max  will not usually be an integer. Generally, round  up  to the next 
integer and treat the value as  L max . However, as a practical matter, if the computed value of 
 L max  is less than .10 above the next lower integer, round down. Thus, 15.2 would be rounded 
to 16, but 15.06 would be rounded to 15. 
 Determine the maximum length of a waiting line for specified probabilities of 95 percent and 
98 percent, for a system in which  M     2,       8 per hour, and       5 per hour. 
E X A M P L E  7
 
8
5
1.6
and
8
2(5)
.80
r 

 

 
 From  Table 18.4 ,  L  q      2.844 customers. For 95 percent, using Formula 18–14:
 
1
.95
2.844(1
.80)
.088
ln .088
ln .80
2.4304
.2231
10.89, which rounds to 11
max
K
L





 


 
 For 98 percent:
 





 


1
.98
2.844(1
.80)
.035
ln .035
ln .80
3.352
.2231
15.02, which rounds to 15
max
K
L
 
S O L U T I O N

802 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Multiple Priorities 
 In many queuing systems, processing occurs on a first-come, first-served basis. However, there 
are situations in which that rule is inappropriate. The reason is that the waiting cost or penalty 
incurred is not the same for all customers. In a hospital emergency waiting room, a wide variety of 
injuries and illnesses needs treatment. Some may be minor (e.g., sliver in finger) and others may 
be much more serious, even life-threatening. It is more reasonable to treat the most serious cases 
first, letting the nonserious cases wait until all serious cases have been treated. Similarly, computer 
processing of jobs often follows rules other than first-come, first-served (e.g., shortest job first). In 
such cases, a   multiple-priority model is useful for describing customer waiting times. 
 In these systems, arriving customers are assigned to one of several  priority classes, or 
categories, according to a predetermined assignment method (e.g., in a hospital emergency 
room, heart attacks, serious injuries, and unconscious persons are assigned to the highest pri-
ority class; sprains, minor cuts, bruises, and rashes are assigned to the lowest class; and other 
problems are assigned to one or more intermediate classes). Customers are then processed 
by class, highest class first. Within each class, processing is first-come, first-served. Thus, 
all customers in the highest class would be processed before those in the next lower class, 
then processing would move to that class, and then to the next lower class. Exceptions would 
occur only if a higher-priority customer arrived; that customer would be processed  after the 
customer currently being processed (i.e., service would not be  preemptive ). 
 This model incorporates all of the assumptions of the basic multiple-server model except 
that it uses priority serving instead of first-come, first-served. Arrivals to the system are 
assigned a priority as they arrive (e.g., highest priority    1, next priority class    2, next prior-
ity class    3, and so on). An existing queue might look something like this: 
 Multiple-priority 
model  Customers are processed 
according to some measure of 
importance. 
 
Arrivals
4
3
3
3
2
1
1
Exit
Service
Line
 Within each class, waiting units are processed in the order in which they arrived (i.e., first-
come, first-served). Thus, in this sequence, the first 1 would be processed as soon as a server 
was available. The second 1 would be processed when that server or another one became 
available. If, in the interim, another 1 arrived, it would be next in line  ahead of the first 2. If 
there were no new arrivals, the only 2 would be processed by the next available server. At that 
point, if a new 1 or 2 arrived, it would be processed ahead of the 3s and the 4. Conversely, if a 
new 4 arrived, it would take its place at the end of the line. 
 Obviously, a unit with a low priority could conceivably wait a rather long time for process-
ing. In some cases, units that have waited more than some specified time are reassigned to a 
higher priority. 
  Table 18.5  gives the appropriate formulas for this multiple-channel priority service model. 
However, due to the extent of computations involved, it is best to use the appropriate Excel 
template on the Web site for computations. 
 A machine shop handles tool repairs in a large company. As each job arrives in the shop, it 
is assigned a priority based on urgency of the need for that tool. Requests for repair can be 
described by a Poisson distribution. Arrival rates are:   1     2 per hour,   2     2 per hour, and 
  3     1 per hour. The service rate is one tool per hour for each server, and there are six servers 
in the shop. Determine the following information. 
 a. 
The system utilization. 
 b. 
The average time a tool in each of the priority classes will wait for service. 
 c. 
The average time a tool spends in the system for each priority class. 
 d. 
The average number of tools waiting for repair in each class. 
E X A M P L E  8

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
803
         k      2    2    1    5 customers per hour 
 M     6 servers 
      1 customer per hour 
Using the Excel template, the solution would appear as follows: 
S O L U T I O N
 Performance Measure 
 Formula 
 Formula Number 
 System utilization 
  
 


M
 
 (18–15) 
 Intermediate values (L  q  from  Table 18.4 ) 
  


 
A
Lq
(1
)
 
 (18–16) 
 
  
∑





B
M
k
c
c
k
1
1
 
 (18–17) 
 
 ( B 0     1) 
 
 Average waiting time in 
line for units in  k th 
priority class 
  


W
A B
B
k
k
k
1
·
·
1
 
 (18–18) 
 Average time in the system 
for units in the  k th 
priority class 
  

 
W
Wk
1
 
 (18–19) 
 Average number waiting in 
line for units in the  k th 
priority class 
 L  k         k    	   W  k  
 (18–20) 
 TABLE 18.5 
 Multiple-server priority service 
model 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Revising Priorities.  If any of the waiting times computed in Example 8 is deemed too 
long by management (e.g., a waiting time of .147 hour for tools in the first class might be 
too long), there are several options. One is to increase the number of servers. Another is to 

804 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
attempt to increase the service rate, say, by introducing new methods. If such options are not 
feasible, another approach is to reexamine the membership of each of the priority classifica-
tions because if some repair requests in the first priority class, for example, can be reassigned 
to the second priority class, this will tend to decrease the average waiting times for repair 
jobs in the highest priority classification, simply because the arrival rate of those items will 
be lower. 
 The manager of the repair shop, after consulting with the managers of the departments that 
use the shop’s services, has revised the list of tools that are given the highest priorities. This 
is reflected by revised arrival rates. Suppose that the revised rates are:   1     1.5,   2     2.5, and 
  3 remains unchanged at 1.0. Determine the following information:
 a. 
The system utilization. 
 b. 
The average waiting time for units in each priority class. 
E X A M P L E  9
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
         k      1.5    2.5    1.0    5.0 customers per hour 
 M     6 servers 
      1 customer per hour 
S O L U T I O N
 a. 
As shown in the template, the system utilization is still 0.8333. 
 b. 
W 1     0.1306, W 2     0.3917, W 3     1.7625. 
 Example 9 offers several interesting results. One is that through reduction of the 
arrival rate of the highest priority class, the average waiting time for units in that class 
has decreased. In other words, removing some members of the highest class and placing 
them into the next-lower class reduced the average waiting time for units that remained 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
805
in the highest class. Note that the average waiting time for the second priority class 
also was reduced, even though units were added to that class. Although this may appear 
counterintuitive, it is necessary to recognize that the  total  waiting time (when all arriv-
als are taken into account) will remain unchanged. We can see this by noticing that the 
average  number  waiting (see Example 8, part  d ) is .2938    .8813    1.7625    2.9376. In 
Example 9, using the average waiting times just computed, the average number waiting 
in all three classes is
 
1.5(.1306)
2.5(.3917)
1.0(1.7625)
2.9376
1
3





∑
W
k
k
k
 
 Aside from a slight difference due to rounding, the totals are the same. 
 Another interesting observation is that the average waiting time for customers in 
the third priority class did not change from the preceding example. The reason for this 
is that the  total  arrival rate for the two higher-priority classes did not change, and the 
average arrival rate for this class did not change. Hence, units assigned to the lowest 
class must still contend with a combined arrival rate of 4 for the two higher-priority 
classes.  
 18.7 QUEUING MODEL: FINITE-SOURCE 
 The finite-source model is appropriate for cases in which the calling population is limited 
to a relatively small number of potential calls. For instance, one person may be responsible 
for handling breakdowns on 15 machines; thus, the size of the calling population is 15. 
However, there may be more than one server or channel; for example, due to a backlog of 
machines awaiting repairs, the manager might authorize an additional person to work on 
repairs. 
 As in the infinite-source models, arrival rates are required to be Poisson and service times 
exponential. A major difference between the finite- and infinite-source models is that the 
arrival rate of customers in a finite situation is  affected by  the length of the waiting line; the 
arrival rate decreases as the length of the line increases simply because there is a decreasing 
proportion of the population left to generate calls for service. The limit occurs when  all of 
the population is waiting in line; at that point the arrival rate is zero since no additional units 
can arrive. 
 Because the mathematics of the finite-source model can be complex, analysts often use 
finite-queuing tables in conjunction with simple formulas to analyze these systems.  Table 18.6  
contains a list of the key formulas and definitions. You will find it helpful to study the diagram of 
a cycle that is presented in the table. It can be useful to think of the cycle in terms of a machine 
that is running (first part of the cycle), waiting to be repaired or unloaded (second phase of the 
cycle), or being repaired or unloaded (last phase of the cycle). The cycle then repeats.  
  Table 18.7  is an abbreviated finite-queuing table used to obtain values of  D  and  F.  (Most of 
the formulas require a value for  F. ) In order to use the finite-queuing table, follow this procedure:  
 1. 
Identify the values for
    a.  N, population size. 
 b.  M, number of servers/channels. 
   c.  T, average service time. 
 d.  U, average time between calls for service per customer. 
 2. 
Compute the service factor,  X      T /( T      U ). 
 3. 
Locate the section of the finite-queuing tables for  N. 
   4. 
Using the value of  X  as the point of entry, find the values of  D  and  F  that correspond to  M. 
 5. 
Use the values of  N, M, X, D, and  F as needed to determine the values of the desired 
measures of system performance. 

 Performance 
Measure 
 Formulas 
 Notation † 
 Service factor 


X
T
T
U
 (18 –21)
 D    Probability that a customer will have to wait in line 
 Average number waiting 
 L      N  ( 1     F  ) 
 (18–22) 
 F     Efficiency factor: 1    Percentage waiting in line 
 Average waiting time 





W
L T
U
N
L
T
F
XF
(
)
(1
)
 (18 –23)
 H     Average number of customers being served 
 Average number 
running 
 J       NF ( 1     X  ) 
 (18–24) 
 J      Average number of customers not in line or 
in service 
 Average number 
being served 
 H       FNX 
 (18–25) 
 L      Average number of customers waiting 
for service 
 Number in population 
 N       J      L      H 
 (18–25) 
 M     Number of service channels 
 
 
 N     Number of potential customers 
 
 
 T     Average service time 
 
 
 U      Average time between customer service 
requirements per customer 
 
 
 W     Average time customers wait in line 
 
 
 X     Service factor 
 
 
 
 
 
 *The purpose of this formula is to provide an understanding of  F. Because the value of  F is needed to compute  J, L, and  H, the formulas cannot be used to actually compute  F. The finite 
queuing tables must be used for that purpose. 
 † Adapted from L. G. Peck and R. N. Hazelwood,  Finite Queuing Tables (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1958). Reprinted by permission. 
806 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 TABLE 18.6 
 Finite-source queuing formulas and notation 
J
L
H
U
W
T
Not waiting or
being served
Being
served
Average number:
Average time:
Cycle
J + H
J + L + H
F =
*
Waiting
 N     5 
 T     10 minutes 
 M     1 
 U     70 minutes
 
10
10
70
.125
X
T
T
U





 
S O L U T I O N
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
  One operator loads and unloads a group of five machines. Service time is exponentially distrib-
uted with a mean of 10 minutes per cycle. Machines run for an average of 70 minutes between 
loading and unloading, and this time is also exponential. Find:
 a. 
The average number of machines waiting for the operator. 
 b. 
The expected number of machines running. 
 c. 
Average downtime. 
 d. 
The probability that a machine will not have to wait for service. 
E X A M P L E  1 0

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
807
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 Population 5 
 .012 
 1 
 .060  .999 
 .019 
 1 
 .095  .998 
 .025 
 1 
 .125  .997 
 .030 
 1 
 .149  .996 
 .034 
 1 
 .169  .995 
 .036 
 1 
 .179  .994 
 .040 
 1 
 .199  .993 
 .042 
 1 
 .208  .992 
 .044 
 1 
 .218  .991 
 .046 
 1 
 .228  .990 
 .050 
 1 
 .247  .989 
 .052 
 1 
 .257  .988 
 .054 
 1 
 .266  .987 
 .056 
 2 
 .018  .999 
  
 1 
 .276  .985 
 .058 
 2 
 .019  .999 
  
 1 
 .285  .984 
 .060 
 2 
 .020  .999 
  
 1 
 .295  .983 
 .062 
 2 
 .022  .999 
  
 1 
 .304  .982 
 .064 
 2 
 .023  .999 
  
 1 
 .314  .981 
 .066 
 2 
 .024  .999 
  
 1 
 .323  .979 
 .068 
 2 
 .026  .999 
  
 1 
 .333  .978 
 .070 
 2 
 .027  .999 
  
 1 
 .342  .977 
 .075 
 2 
 .031  .999 
  
 1 
 .365  .973 
 .080 
 2 
 .035  .998 
  
 1 
 .388  .969 
 .085 
 2 
 .040  .998 
  
 1 
 .410  .965 
 .090 
 2 
 .044  .998 
  
 1 
 .432  .960 
 .095 
 2 
 .049  .997 
  
 1 
 .454  .955 
 .100 
 2 
 .054  .997 
  
 1 
 .475  .950 
 .105 
 2 
 .059  .997 
  
 1 
 .496  .945 
 .110 
 2 
 .065  .996 
  
 1 
 .516  .939 
 .115 
 2 
 .017  .995 
  
 1 
 .537  .933 
 .120 
 2 
 .076  .995 
  
 1 
 .556  .927 
 TABLE 18.7 
 Finite-queuing tables 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .125 
 2 
 .082  .994 
 
 1 
 .575  .920 
 .130 
 2 
 .089  .933 
 
 1 
 .594  .914 
 .135 
 2 
 .095  .933 
 
 1 
 .612  .907 
 .140 
 2 
 .102  .992 
 
 1 
 .630  .900 
 .145 
 3 
 .011  .999 
 
 2 
 .109  .991 
 
 1 
 .647  .892 
 .150 
 3 
 .012  .999 
 
 2 
 .115  .990 
 
 1 
 .664  .885 
 .155 
 3 
 .013  .999 
 
 2 
 .123  .989 
 
 1 
 .680  .877 
 .160 
 3 
 .015  .999 
 
 2 
 .130  .988 
 
 1 
 .695  .869 
 .165 
 3 
 .016  .999 
 
 2 
 .137  .987 
 
 1 
 .710  .861 
 .170 
 3 
 .017  .999 
 
 2 
 .145  .985 
 
 1 
 .725  .853 
 .180 
 3 
 .021  .999 
 
 2 
 .161  .983 
 
 1 
 .752  .836 
 .190 
 3 
 .024  .998 
 
 2 
 .117  .980 
 
 1 
 .778  .819 
 .200 
 3 
 .028  .998 
 
 2 
 .194  .976 
 
 1 
 .801  .801 
 .210 
 3 
 .032  .998 
 
 2 
 .211  .973 
 
 1 
 .822  .783 
 .220 
 3 
 .036  .997 
 
 2 
 .229  .969 
 
 1 
 .842  .765 
 .230 
 3 
 .041  .997 
 
 2 
 .247  .965 
 
 1 
 .860  .747 
 .240 
 3 
 .046  .996 
 
 2 
 .265  .960 
 
 1 
 .876  .730 
 .250 
 3 
 .052  .995 
 
 2 
 .284  .955 
 
 1 
 .890  .712 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .260 
 3 
 .058  .994 
 
 2 
 .303  .950 
 
 1 
 .903  .695 
 .270 
 3 
 .064  .994 
 
 2 
 .323  .944 
 
 1 
 .915  .677 
 .280 
 3 
 .071  .993 
 
 2 
 .342  .938 
 
 1 
 .925  .661 
 .290 
 4 
 .007  .999 
 
 3 
 .079  .992 
 
 2 
 .362  .932 
 
 1 
 .934  .644 
 .300 
 4 
 .008  .999 
 
 3 
 .086  .990 
 
 2 
 .382  .926 
 
 1 
 .942  .628 
 .310 
 4 
 .009  .999 
 
 3 
 .094  .989 
 
 2 
 .402  .919 
 
 1 
 .950  .613 
 .320 
 4 
 .010  .999 
 
 3 
 .103  .988 
 
 2 
 .422  .912 
 
 1 
 .956  .597 
 .330 
 4 
 .012  .999 
 
 3 
 .112  .986 
 
 2 
 .442  .904 
 
 1 
 .962  .583 
 .340 
 4 
 .013  .999 
 
 3 
 .121  .985 
 
 2 
 .462  .896 
 
 1 
 .967  .569 
 .360 
 4 
 .017  .998 
 
 3 
 .141  .981 
 
 2 
 .501  .880 
 
 1 
 .975  .542 
 .380 
 4 
 .021  .998 
 
 3 
 .163  .976 
 
 2 
 .540  .863 
 
 1 
 .981  .516 
 .400 
 4 
 .026  .997 
 
 3 
 .186  .972 
 
 2 
 .579  .845 
 
 1 
 .986  .493 
 .420 
 4 
 .031  .997 
 
 3 
 .211  .966 
 
 2 
 .616  .826 
 
 1 
 .989  .471 
 .440 
 4 
 .037  .996 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .440 
 3 
 .238  .960 
 
 2 
 .652  .807 
 
 1 
 .992  .451 
 .460 
 4 
 .045  .995 
 
 3 
 .266  .953 
 
 2 
 .686  .787 
 
 1 
 .994  .432 
 .480 
 4 
 .053  .994 
 
 3 
 .296  .945 
 
 2 
 .719  .767 
 
 1 
 .996  .415 
 .500 
 4 
 .063  .992 
 
 3 
 .327  .936 
 
 2 
 .750  .748 
 
 1 
 .997  .399 
 .520 
 4 
 .073  .991 
 
 3 
 .359  .927 
 
 2 
 .779  .728 
 
 1 
 .998  .384 
 .540 
 4 
 .085  .989 
 
 3 
 .392  .917 
 
 2 
 .806  .708 
 
 1 
 .998  .370 
 .560 
 4 
 .098  .986 
 
 3 
 .426  .906 
 
 2 
 .831  .689 
 
 1 
 .999  .357 
 .580 
 4 
 .113  .984 
 
 3 
 .461  .895 
 
 2 
 .854  .670 
 
 1 
 .999  .345 
 .600 
 4 
 .130  .981 
 
 3 
 .497  .883 
 
 2 
 .875  .652 
 
 1 
 .999  .333 
 .650 
 4 
 .179  .972 
 
 3 
 .588  .850 
 
 2 
 .918  .608 
 
 1 
 .999  .308 
 .700 
 4 
 .240  .960 
 
 3 
 .678  .815 
 
 2 
 .950  .568 
 
 1 
 .999  .286 
 .750 
 4 
 .316  .944 
 
 3 
 .763  .777 
 
 2 
 .972  .532 
 .800 
 4 
 .410  .924 
 
 3 
 .841  .739 
 
 2 
 .987  .500 
(continued)

808 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
TABLE 18.7
(Continued)
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .850 
 4 
 .522  .900 
 
 3 
 .907  .702 
 
 2 
 .995  .470 
 .900 
 4 
 .656  .871 
 
 3 
 .957  .666 
 
 2 
 .998  .444 
 .950 
 4 
 .815  .838 
 
 3 
 .989  .631 
 Population 10 
 .016 
 1 
 .144  .997 
 .019 
 1 
 .170  .996 
 .021 
 1 
 .188  .995 
 .023 
 1 
 .206  .994 
 .025 
 1 
 .224  .993 
 .026 
 1 
 .232  .992 
 .028 
 1 
 .250  .991 
 .030 
 1 
 .268  .990 
 .032 
 2 
 .033  .999 
 
 1 
 .285  .988 
 .034 
 2 
 .037  .999 
 
 1 
 .301  .986 
 .036 
 2 
 .041  .999 
 
 1 
 .320  .984 
 .038 
 2 
 .046  .999 
 
 1 
 .337  .982 
 .040 
 2 
 .050  .999 
 
 1 
 .354  .980 
 .042 
 2 
 .055  .999 
 
 1 
 .371  .978 
 .044 
 2 
 .060  .998 
 
 1 
 .388  .975 
 .046 
 2 
 .065  .998 
 
 1 
 .404  .973 
 .048 
 2 
 .071  .998 
 
 1 
 .421  .970 
 .050 
 2 
 .076  .998 
 
 1 
 .437  .967 
 .052 
 2 
 .082  .997 
 
 1 
 .454  .963 
 .054 
 2 
 .088  .997 
 
 1 
 .470  .960 
 .056 
 2 
 .094  .997 
 
 1 
 .486  .956 
 .058 
 2 
 .100  .996 
 
 1 
 .501  .953 
 .060 
 2 
 .106  .996 
 
 1 
 .517  .949 
 .062 
 2 
 .113  .996 
 
 1 
 .532  .945 
 .064 
 2 
 .119  .995 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .064 
 1 
 .547  .940 
 .066 
 2 
 .126  .995 
 
 1 
 .562  .936 
 .068 
 3 
 .020  .999 
 
 2 
 .133  .994 
 
 1 
 .577  .931 
 .070 
 3 
 .022  .999 
 
 2 
 .140  .994 
 
 1 
 .591  .926 
 .075 
 3 
 .026  .999 
 
 2 
 .158  .992 
 
 1 
 .627  .913 
 .080 
 3 
 .031  .999 
 
 2 
 .177  .990 
 
 1 
 .660  .899 
 .085 
 3 
 .037  .999 
 
 2 
 .196  .988 
 
 1 
 .692  .883 
 .090 
 3 
 .043  .998 
 
 2 
 .216  .986 
 
 1 
 .722  .867 
 .095 
 3 
 .049  .998 
 
 2 
 .237  .984 
 
 1 
 .750  .850 
 .100 
 3 
 .056  .998 
 
 2 
 .258  .981 
 
 1 
 .776  .832 
 .105 
 3 
 .064  .997 
 
 2 
 .279  .978 
 
 1 
 .800  .814 
 .110 
 3 
 .072  .997 
 
 2 
 .301  .974 
 
 1 
 .822  .795 
 .115 
 3 
 .081  .996 
 
 2 
 .324  .971 
 
 1 
 .843  .776 
 .120 
 4 
 .016  .999 
 
 3 
 .090  .995 
 
 2 
 .346  .967 
 
 1 
 .861  .756 
 .125 
 4 
 .019  .999 
 
 3 
 .100  .994 
 
 2 
 .369  .962 
 
 1 
 .878  .737 
 .130 
 4 
 .022  .999 
 
 3 
 .110  .994 
 
 2 
 .392  .958 
 
 1 
 .893  .718 
 .135 
 4 
 .025  .999 
 
 3 
 .121  .993 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .135 
 2 
 .415  .952 
 
 1 
 .907  .699 
 .140 
 4 
 .028  .999 
 
 3 
 .132  .991 
 
 2 
 .437  .947 
 
 1 
 .919  .680 
 .145 
 4 
 .032  .999 
 
 3 
 .144  .990 
 
 2 
 .460  .941 
 
 1 
 .929  .662 
 .150 
 4 
 .036  .998 
 
 3 
 .156  .989 
 
 2 
 .483  .935 
 
 1 
 .939  .644 
 .155 
 4 
 .040  .998 
 
 3 
 .169  .987 
 
 2 
 .505  .928 
 
 1 
 .947  .627 
 .160 
 4 
 .044  .998 
 
 3 
 .182  .986 
 
 2 
 .528  .921 
 
 1 
 .954  .610 
 .165 
 4 
 .049  .997 
 
 3 
 .195  .984 
 
 2 
 .550  .914 
 
 1 
 .961  .594 
 .170 
 4 
 .054  .997 
 
 3 
 .209  .982 
 
 2 
 .571  .906 
 
 1 
 .966  .579 
 .180 
 5 
 .013  .999 
 
 4 
 .066  .996 
 
 3 
 .238  .978 
 
 2 
 .614  .890 
 
 1 
 .975  .890 
 .190 
 5 
 .016  .999 
 
 4 
 .078  .995 
 
 3 
 .269  .973 
 
 2 
 .654  .873 
 
 1 
 .982  .522 
 .200 
 5 
 .020  .999 
 
 4 
 .092  .994 
 
 3 
 .300  .968 
 
 2 
 .692  .854 
 
 1 
 .987  .497 
 .210 
 5 
 .025  .999 
 
 4 
 .108  .992 
 
 3 
 .333  .961 
 
 2 
 .728  .835 
 
 1 
 .990  .474 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .220 
 5 
 .030  .998 
 
 4 
 .124  .990 
 
 3 
 .366  .954 
 
 2 
 .761  .815 
 
 1 
 .993  .453 
 .230 
 5 
 .037  .998 
 
 4 
 .142  .988 
 
 3 
 .400  .947 
 
 2 
 .791  .794 
 
 1 
 .995  .434 
 .240 
 5 
 .044  .997 
 
 4 
 .162  .986 
 
 3 
 .434  .938 
 
 2 
 .819  .774 
 
 1 
 .996  .416 
 .250 
 6 
 .010  .999 
 
 5 
 .052  .997 
 
 4 
 .183  .983 
 
 3 
 .469  .929 
 
 2 
 .844  .753 
 
 1 
 .997  .400 
 .260 
 6 
 .013  .999 
 
 5 
 .060  .996 
 
 4 
 .205  .980 
 
 3 
 .503  .919 
 
 2 
 .866  .732 
 
 1 
 .998  .384 
 .270 
 6 
 .015  .999 
 
 5 
 .070  .995 
 
 4 
 .228  .976 
 
 3 
 .537  .908 
 
 2 
 .886  .712 
 
 1 
 .999  .370 
 .280 
 6 
 .018  .999 
 
 5 
 .081  .994 
 
 4 
 .252  .972 
 
 3 
 .571  .896 
 
 2 
 .903  .692 
 
 1 
 .999  .357 
 .290 
 6 
 .022  .999 
 
 5 
 .093  .993 
 
 4 
 .278  .968 
 
 3 
 .603  .884 
 
 2 
 .918  .672 
 
 1 
 .999  .345 
 .300 
 6 
 .026  .998 
 
 5 
 .106  .991 
 
 4 
 .304  .963 
 
 3 
 .635  .872 
(continued)

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
809
TABLE 18.7
(Concluded)
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .300 
 2 
 .932  .653 
  
 1 
 .999  .333 
 .310 
 6 
 .031  .998 
  
 5 
 .120  .990 
  
 4 
 .331  .957 
  
 3 
 .666  .858 
  
 2 
 .943  .635 
 .320 
 6 
 .036  .998 
  
 5 
 .135  .988 
  
 4 
 .359  .952 
  
 3 
 .695  .845 
  
 2 
 .952  .617 
 .330 
 6 
 .042  .997 
  
 5 
 .151  .986 
  
 4 
 .387  .945 
  
 3 
 .723  .831 
  
 2 
 .961  .600 
 .340 
 7 
 .010  .999 
  
 6 
 .049  .997 
  
 5 
 .168  .983 
  
 4 
 .416  .938 
  
 3 
 .750  .816 
  
 2 
 .968  .584 
 .360 
 7 
 .014  .999 
  
 6 
 .064  .995 
  
 5 
 .205  .978 
  
 4 
 .474  .923 
  
 3 
 .798  .787 
  
 2 
 .978  .553 
 .380 
 7 
 .019  .999 
  
 6 
 .083  .993 
  
 5 
 .247  .971 
  
 4 
 .533  .906 
  
 3 
 .840  .758 
  
 2 
 .986  .525 
 .400 
 7 
 .026  .998 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .400 
 6 
 .105  .991 
 
 5 
 .292  .963 
 
 4 
 .591  .887 
 
 3 
 .875  .728 
 
 2 
 .991  .499 
 .420 
 7 
 .034  .993 
 
 6 
 .130  .987 
 
 5 
 .341  .954 
 
 4 
 .646  .866 
 
 3 
 .905  .700 
 
 2 
 .994  .476 
 .440 
 7 
 .045  .997 
 
 6 
 .160  .984 
 
 5 
 .392  .943 
 
 4 
 .698  .845 
 
 3 
 .928  .672 
 
 2 
 .996  .454 
 .460 
 8 
 .011  .999 
 
 7 
 .058  .995 
 
 6 
 .193  .979 
 
 5 
 .445  .930 
 
 4 
 .747  .822 
 
 3 
 .947  .646 
 
 2 
 .998  .435 
 .480 
 8 
 .015  .999 
 
 7 
 .074  .994 
 
 6 
 .230  .973 
 
 5 
 .499  .916 
 
 4 
 .791  .799 
 
 3 
 .961  .621 
 
 2 
 .998  .417 
 .500 
 8 
 .020  .999 
 
 7 
 .093  .992 
 
 6 
 .271  .966 
 
 5 
 .553  .901 
 
 4 
 .830  .775 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .500 
 3 
 .972  .598 
 
 2 
 .999  .400 
 .520 
 8 
 .026  .998 
 
 7 
 .115  .989 
 
 6 
 .316  .958 
 
 5 
 .606  .884 
 
 4 
 .864  .752 
 
 3 
 .980  .575 
 
 2 
 .999  .385 
 .540 
 8 
 .034  .997 
 
 7 
 .141  .986 
 
 6 
 .363  .949 
 
 5 
 .658  .867 
 
 4 
 .893  .729 
 
 3 
 .986  .555 
 .560 
 8 
 .044  .996 
 
 7 
 .171  .982 
 
 6 
 .413  .939 
 
 5 
 .707  .848 
 
 4 
 .917  .706 
 
 3 
 .991  .535 
 .580 
 8 
 .057  .995 
 
 7 
 .204  .977 
 
 6 
 .465  .927 
 
 5 
 .753  .829 
 
 4 
 .937  .684 
 
 3 
 .994  .517 
 .600 
 9 
 .010  .999 
 
 8 
 .072  .994 
 
 7 
 .242  .972 
 
 6 
 .518  .915 
 
 5 
 .795  .809 
 
 4 
 .953  .663 
 
 3 
 .996  .500 
 .650 
 9 
 .021  .999 
 
 8 
 .123  .988 
 X 
 M 
 D 
 F 
 .650 
 7 
 .353  .954 
 
 6 
 .651  .878 
 
 5 
 .882  .759 
 
 4 
 .980  .614 
 
 3 
 .999  .461 
 .700 
 9 
 .040  .997 
 
 8 
 .200  .979 
 
 7 
 .484  .929 
 
 6 
 .772  .836 
 
 5 
 .940  .711 
 
 4 
 .992  .571 
 .750 
 9 
 .075  .994 
 
 8 
 .307  .965 
 
 7 
 .626  .897 
 
 6 
 .870  .792 
 
 5 
 .975  .666 
 
 4 
 .998  .533 
 .800 
 9 
 .134  .988 
 
 8 
 .446  .944 
 
 7 
 .763  .859 
 
 6 
 .939  .747 
 
 5 
 .991  .625 
 
 4 
 .999  .500 
 .850 
 9 
 .232  .979 
 
 8 
 .611  .916 
 
 7 
 .879  .818 
 
 6 
 .978  .705 
 
 5 
 .998  .588 
 .900 
 9 
 .387  .963 
 
 8 
 .785  .881 
 
 7 
 .957  .777 
 
 6 
 .995  .667 
 .950 
 9 
 .630  .938 
 
 8 
 .934  .841 
 
 7 
 .994  .737 
 Source: L. G. Peck and R. N. Hazelwood,  Finite Queuing Tables (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1958). Reprinted by permission. 
 From  Table 18.7 , with  N     5,  M     1, and  X     .125,  D     .575 and  F     .920. 
 a. 
Average number waiting,  L      N (1     F )    5(1    .920)    .40 machine. 
 b. 
Expected number running,  J      NF (1     X )    5(.920)(1    .125)    4.025 machines. 
 c. 
Downtime    Waiting time    Service time:
 Waiting time,  
(
)
.40(10
70)
5
.40
6.957 minutes
W
L T
U
N
L







 
 Downtime    6.957 minutes    10 minutes    16.957 minutes 
 d. 
 Probability of not waiting
1
Probability of waiting
1
1
.575
.425
D







 

810 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Using the Excel template, the solution to Example 10 would appear as follows:  
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
 Suppose that in Example 10 operators are paid $10 per hour, and machine downtime costs 
$16 per hour. Should the department add another operator if the goal is cost optimization? 
 E X A MP LE 1 1 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Compare the total cost of the present system with the expected total cost of the proposed 
system:
 
 M 
 Average 
Number Down, 
 N         J 
 Average Down 
Cost (per hour), 
  (  N         J ) $16 
 Operator Cost 
(per hour) 
 Total Cost 
(per hour) 
 1 
 .975 
 $15.60 
 $10 
 $25.60 
 2 
 .651 
  10.42 
  20 
  30.42 
 Hence, the present system is superior because its total cost is less than the expected total cost 
using two operators. 
 18.8 CONSTRAINT MANAGEMENT 
  Managers may be able to reduce waiting times by actively managing one or more system 
constraints. Typically, in the short term, the facility size and the number of servers are fixed 
resources. However, some other options might be considered:
 Use temporary workers.  Using temporary or part-time workers during busy periods 
may be possible. Trade-offs might involve training costs, quality issues, and perhaps 
slower service than would be provided by regular workers. 
 Shift demand.  In situations where demand varies by time of day, or time of week, vari-
able pricing strategies can be effective in smoothing demand more evenly on the system. 
Theaters use this option with lower prices to shift demand from busy times to slower 
times. Restaurants offer “early-bird specials” to accomplish this. Some retail businesses 
offer coupons that are valid only for certain (slow) days or times. 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
811
Standardize the service.  We saw the effect of constant service on waiting lines com-
pared to nonconstant service (the number and time in line were cut in half). The more 
service can be standardized, the greater the impact on waiting lines. 
Look for a bottleneck.  One aspect of a process may be largely responsible for a slow 
service rate; improving that aspect of the process might yield a disproportionate increase 
in the service rate. Employees often have insights that can be exploited. 
 18.9 THE PSYCHOLOGY OF WAITING 
       Despite management’s best efforts, in some instances it is not feasible to shorten waiting 
times. Nevertheless, steps can be taken in certain situations that make the situation more 
acceptable to those waiting in line, particularly when the waiting line consists of people. The 
importance of doing so should not be underestimated. 
 Studies have shown a difference—sometimes a remarkable  difference—
between the  actual time customers spend waiting and their  perceived time. 
Several factors can influence the differences. One is the reason for being 
in line (e.g., waiting for police or fire personnel, waiting at the emergency 
room, having other appointments or a plane or train to catch). Aside from 
those situations, where the level of anxiety can make even short waits 
seem long, in many instances management can reduce their customers’ 
perception of the waiting time.  
 If those waiting in line have nothing else to occupy their thoughts, 
they often tend to focus on the fact that they are waiting in line and usu-
ally perceive the waiting time to be longer than the actual waiting time. 
Conversely, if something else occupies them while they wait, their per-
ception of the waiting time is often less than their actual waiting time. 
Examples of distractions include in-flight snacks, meals or videos, and 
magazines and televisions in waiting rooms. Giving customers something 
to do while waiting, such as filling out forms, can make their wait seem 
productive. Of course, some customers provide their own distractions 
(e.g., they talk on their cell phones, text message, or play games on hand-
held electronic devices). Another factor can be the level of comfort avail-
able (e.g., standing versus sitting, waiting outside in the weather versus 
inside or under cover). Also, informing customers how long the wait will 
be can reduce anxiety. For example, call centers sometimes announce the 
expected waiting time before a service representative will be available, 
and restaurants usually are able to tell patrons how long they will wait to 
be seated. 
 Several of these approaches are employed at Disney theme parks, as 
illustrated in the following reading.  
 LO18.5  What are some 
psychological approaches to 
managing waiting lines, and 
why might a manager want 
to use them?
   The Department of Motor Vehicles in Columbia, 
South Carolina, added greeters, placed television 
screens in waiting rooms, and installed 
computerized programs to cut wait times.  
 • Uncertain waits are longer than known, finite waits.  
 • Unexplained waits are longer than explained waits.  
 • Unfair waits are longer than equitable waits. 
 • The more valuable the service, the longer the customer will wait. 
 • Solo waits feel longer than group waits. 
Source: David H. Maister, “The Psychology of Waiting Lines,”  davidmaister.com , 
blog, September 8, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2010. 
 David H. Maister’s classic article on the psychology of waiting included 
these pearls of wisdom about waiting that can serve as a guide to sys-
tem designers and to those operating a system in which waiting lines 
of people occur:
 • Occupied time feels shorter than unoccupied time. 
 • People want to get started. 
 • Anxiety makes waits seem longer. 
 READING 
 David H. Maister on the Psychology of Waiting 
its
its
s.  
s. 

812 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 The implication in these ideas is that imagination and creativity can often play an important 
role in system design and that mathematical approaches are not the only ones worth considering. 
more events, as well as the potential to gener-
ate additional revenue as customers visit food 
concessions and souvenir shops. Another tactic is to sell passes that 
allow customers to enter the park earlier. 
 3.  Keep customers informed.  Signs are clearly posted that give 
approximate waiting times from that point, allowing the customers to 
make a decision of whether to join the line and setting expectations. 
 4.  Exceed expectations.  Waiting times are kept to less than estimated 
times, thereby exceeding customers’ expectations. Also, the event is 
to be worth the wait. 
 5.  Other tactics.  Disney maintains a comfortable waiting environment: 
Waiting lines are often inside, protected from weather conditions. Lines 
are kept moving, giving the impression of making progress. Attendants 
and signs direct customers to sections of the park that are less busy.  
 Source: Based in part on “Queuing Featuring Disney World,” McGraw-Hill 
Video Series. 
 Walt Disney theme parks are leaders in effectively managing waiting 
lines. Disney people present seminars on managing waiting lines. Their 
success can serve as a benchmark and provide valuable insights for a 
wide range of services. 
 Disney’s methods are particularly relevant when circumstances make 
it impossible to quickly add capacity to alleviate waiting times. Here are 
some of the tactics Disney employs to achieve customer satisfaction:
 1.  Provide distractions.  Disney characters may entertain custom-
ers, videos provide safety information and build anticipation for the 
event, vendors move along some lines selling food and drinks, and 
other vendors sell souvenirs. 
 2.  Provide alternatives for those willing to pay a premium. Dis-
ney offers its FastPass system, which allows customers to pay to 
reserve a time when they will be allowed to bypass the regular wait-
ing line, sometimes using a separate entrance. This has the potential 
for increasing customer satisfaction by enabling customers to enjoy 
 READING 
 Managing Waiting Lines at Disney World 
c is to sell passes that
r-
od 
 Analysis of waiting lines can be an important aspect of the design of service systems. Waiting lines have 
a tendency to form in such systems even when, in a macro sense, the system is underloaded. The arrival 
of customers at random times and variability of service times combine to create temporary overloads. 
When this happens, waiting lines appear. By the same token, at other times the servers are idle. 
 A major consideration in the analysis of queuing systems is whether the number of potential cus-
tomers is limited (finite source) or whether entry to the system is unrestricted (infinite source). Five 
basic queuing models are described, four dealing with infinite-source populations and one dealing with 
finite-source populations. In general, the models assume that customer arrival rates can be described 
by a Poisson distribution and that service time can be described by a negative exponential distribution. 
 Choosing the Appropriate Model 
 Infinite-Source Model. Use when entry to the system is unrestricted (open to the public). 
 SUMMARY 
 18.10 OPERATIONS STRATEGY 
 Managers must carefully assess the costs and benefits of various alternatives for capacity of 
service systems. Working to increase the processing rate may be a worthwhile option instead 
of increasing the number of servers. New processing equipment and/or processing methods 
may contribute to this goal. One important factor to consider is the possibility of reducing 
variability in processing times by increasing the degree of standardization of the service being 
provided. In fact, managers of all services would be wise to pursue this goal, not only for 
the benefits of reduced waiting times but also for benefits of standardizing server training 
and hence reducing those costs and times, and the potential for increased quality due to the 
decreased variety in service requirements. 
 Other approaches might involve efforts to shift some arrivals to “off-times” by using res-
ervations systems, “early-bird” specials, senior discounts, or some of the approaches used by 
Disney to manage customer waiting. 
 It is also important to recognize that the models presented in this chapter involve assump-
tions about the probability distributions of arrivals and service that may not be completely 
satisfied in practice. 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
813
 The  basic relationship formulas  can be used with an infinite-source model. There are formulas for 
system utilization, the average number or average time waiting for service, the average number being 
served, and the average number or time in the system. Refer to  Figure 18.7  on p. 792 to help you connect 
with the appropriate formula. The formulas are on p. 792. 
Single-channel model: Use when there is  one server, team, or crew. See p. 793. 
Single-channel, constant service time. See p. 794. 
Multiple-channel model.  Use when there are  two or more  independent servers, teams, or crews. See p. 795. 
Multiple-priority model. Use when service order is based on priority class. See p. 802. 
Finite-Source Model. Use when entry to the system is restricted to system members. See p. 805. 
 1. 
Waiting lines occur because there is an imbalance between supply and demand in service 
systems.  
 2. 
One cause of imbalances is variability in service times and/or customer arrival times. 
   3. 
Two important approaches to managing waiting lines are reducing variability where possible by 
standardizing a process and/or altering the perceived waiting time. 
 KEY POINTS 
 channel, 787 
 finite-source situation, 786 
 infinite-source situation, 786 
 multiple-priority model, 802 
 queue discipline, 789 
 queuing theory, 784 
 KEY TERMS 
 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 Use this approach for infinite-source problems:
 1. Note the number of servers. If there is only one server,  M     1. Use the basic relationship for-
mulas in  Figure 18.7 and the single-server formulas in  Table 18.2 . If service is constant, use 
Formula 18–9 for  L  q  . For  M  > 1, use the basic relationship formulas in  Figure 18.7 , the multiple-
server values in  Table 18.4 for  L  q  and  P 0 , and Formulas 18–12 and 18–13. 
 2. Determine the customer arrival rate and the service rate. If the arrival or service  time is given 
instead of a rate, convert the time to a rate. For example, a service time of 10 minutes would 
convert to a service rate,   , of
  
  [1/(10 minutes/customer)] (60 minutes/hour) 5 6 customers/hour  
 3. If multiple priorities are involved, use the Excel template on the Web site (preferred approach) 
or the formulas in  Table 18.5 . 
 Infinite source.  One of the features of a new machine shop will be a well-stocked tool crib. 
The manager of the shop must decide on the number of attendants needed to staff the crib. 
Attendants will receive $9 per hour in salary and fringe benefits. Mechanics’ time will be worth 
$30 per hour, which includes salary and fringe benefits plus lost work time caused by waiting 
for parts. Based on previous experience, the manager estimates requests for parts will average 
18 per hour with a service capacity of 20 requests per hour per attendant. How many atten-
dants should be on duty if the manager is willing to assume that arrival and service rates will 
be Poisson-distributed? (Assume the number of mechanics is very large, so an infinite-source 
model is appropriate.) 
 Problem 1 
      18 per hour 
      20 per hour 
 The solution requires a trial-and-error approach that reveals the total cost of feasible alternatives 
(i.e., a utilization less than 100 percent) and selection of the lowest-cost alternative. Note that the 
total-cost curve will always be U-shaped; increase the number of servers until the total cost shows 
an increase over the previous value. The optimum will be the number of servers that produced the 
previous total cost value. Thus, 
 Solution 

814 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Hence, two servers will produce the lowest total cost. 
 Number of 
Servers,  M 
  L  q *  
 
 
 
L
L
q
s
 
 $9 M 
 Server Cost 
(per hour) 
  $30 L  s  
Mechanic Cost 
(per hour) 
 Total Cost 
(per hour) 
 1  .............
 8.1 
 8.1    0.9    9.0 
 $ 9 
 $270 
 $279 
 2  .............
 0.229 
 0.229    0.9    1.129 
 $18 
 $ 33.87 
 $ 52 † 
 3  ............. 
 0.03 
 0.03    0.9    0.93 
 $27 
 $ 27.9 
 $ 55 † 
 * L  q  from  Table 18.4 , with  r       /      18/20    .9. 
 † Rounded. 
Total
cost
0
1
2
3
Number of servers
$279
$52
$55
Infinite source. The following is a list of service times for three different operations: 
 Problem 2 
 Operation 
 Service Time 
 A 
 8 minutes 
 B 
 1.2 hours 
 C 
 2 days 
 a. Determine the service rate for each operation. 
 b. Would the calculated rates be different if these were interarrival times rather than service times? 
 a. The service rate is the reciprocal of service time. Thus, the rates are
 A: 1/8 customer per minute    .125 customer per minute, or .125/min  	  60 min/hr    
7.5 customers per hour 
 B: 1/1.2 customer per hour    .833 customer per hour 
 C: 1/2 customer per day    .50 customer per day 
 b. No. In either case, the rate is simply the reciprocal of the time. 
 Solution 
Finite source.  A group of 10 machines is loaded and unloaded by one of three servers. The machines 
run for an average of six minutes per cycle, and average time to unload and reload is nine minutes. 
Each time can be described by an exponential distribution. While running, the machines produce 
at a rate that would yield 16 units per hour if they did not have to pause to wait for a server and be 
loaded and unloaded. What is the average hourly output of each machine when waiting and serving 
are taken into account? 
 Problem 3 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
815
 T      9 minutes
 
6 minutes;
9
9
6
.60
U
x
T
T
U






 
 M     3 servers; from  Table 18.7 ,  F     .500 
 N      10 machines 
 a. Compute the average number of machines running:
 
(1
)
10(.500)(.40)
2
J
NF
X




 
 b. Determine the percentage of machines running, and multiply by output while running:
 




(16 per hour)
2
10
(16 per hour)
units per hour per machine
J
N
 Solution 
 1. In what kinds of situations is queuing analysis most appropriate? 
 2. Why do waiting lines form even though a service system is underloaded? 
 3. What are the most common measures of system performance in a queuing analysis? 
 4. What effect would decreasing arrival and service variability have on the effective capacity of a 
system? 
 5. What approaches do supermarkets use to offset variations in customer traffic intensity? 
 6. Contrast  finite and  infinite population sources. 
 7. Under what circumstances would a multiple-priority waiting system be appropriate? 
 8. In a multiple-channel system, what is the rationale for having customers wait in a single line, as 
is now being done in many banks and post offices, rather than multiple lines? ( Hint: The average 
waiting time is unaffected.) 
 9. What happens to the length of a waiting line in a highly variable (queuing) setting if a manager 
attempts to achieve a high percentage of capacity utilization? 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. What general trade-offs are involved in waiting line decisions? 
 2. Who needs to be involved in assessing the cost of customers waiting for service if the customers are 
(a) the general public and (b) employees of the organization? 
 3. How has technology had an impact on analyzing waiting line systems? How has technology 
improved waiting line performance? 
 TAKING STOCK 
 1. What benefits do psychological approaches to waiting lines have over other approaches? 
 2. Consider this situation: A manager is contemplating making changes to a single-server system that 
is expected to double the service rate, and still have just one server.
 a. Would you (intuitively) think that doubling the service rate of a single-server system would cut 
the average waiting time in line in half? 
 b. For the sake of analysis, suppose the current system has an arrival rate of 8 customers per hour 
and a service rate of 10 customers per hour. If the service rate is doubled, what impact will that 
have on the average number waiting in line? 
 c. What are some managerial implications of your analysis? 
 3. There are certain instances where pooling of operations can be desirable. For example, a large 
factory may have two or more locations where mechanics can obtain special tools or equipment 
they occasionally need. The separate locations mean less travel time for workers, but sometimes 
there will be a waiting line at one location while servers are idle at another location. What factors 
should an analysis of this sort of situation take into account in deciding on whether to keep separate 
locations or pool servers and equipment at one central location? 
 CRITICAL 
THINKING 
EXERCISES 

816 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 1.  a.        3 customers/hour
            5 customers/hour 
       M     1 
 1) What is the system utilization? 
 2) What is the average number of customers waiting for service? 
 3) What is the average time customers wait in line for service? 
 b. Repair calls are handled by one repairman at a photocopy shop. Repair time, including travel 
time, is exponentially distributed, with a mean of two hours per call. Requests for copier repairs 
come in at a mean rate of three per eight-hour day (assume Poisson). Determine:
 1) The average number of customers awaiting repairs. 
 2) System utilization. 
 3) The amount of time during an eight-hour day that the repairman is not out on a call. 
 4) The probability of two or more customers in the system. 
 c. An average of 18 customers arrive at a service center each hour. There are two servers on duty, 
and each server can process 12 customers per hour.
 1) What is the system utilization? 
 2) What is the average number of customers in the system (waiting plus being served)? 
 3) What is the average time customers wait in line for service? 
 4) What is the average waiting time for customers who actually have to wait? 
 2. A vending machine dispenses hot chocolate or coffee. Service time is 30 seconds per cup and 
is constant. Customers arrive at a mean rate of 80 per hour, and this rate is Poisson-distributed. 
Determine:
 a. The average number of customers waiting in line. 
 b. The average time customers spend in the system. 
 c. The average number in the system. 
 3. Many of a bank’s customers use its automatic teller machine to transact business after normal 
banking hours. During the early evening hours in the summer months, customers arrive at a certain 
location at the rate of one every other minute. This can be modeled using a Poisson distribution. 
Each customer spends an average of 90 seconds completing his or her transactions. Transaction 
time is exponentially distributed. Determine:
 a. The average time customers spend at the machine, including waiting in line and completing 
transactions. 
 b. The probability that a customer will not have to wait upon arriving at the automatic teller 
machine. 
 c. The average number waiting to use the machine. 
 4. The following information pertains to telephone calls to a motel switchboard on a typical Tuesday. 
 PROBLEMS 
 Period 
 Incoming Rate 
(calls per 
minute) 
 Service Rate 
(calls per minute 
per operator) 
 Number 
of 
Operators  
 Morning 
 1.8 
 1.5 
 2 
 Afternoon 
 2.2 
 1.0 
 3 
 Evening 
 1.4 
 0.7 
 3 
 4. The owner of Eat Now Restaurant implemented an expanded menu early last year. The menu was a 
success, drawing many more customers, who seemed to like the increased variety of menu choices 
over that of the previous menu. But good news soon became bad news as long waiting lines began 
to deter customers, and business dropped off. Because of space and other limitations, there didn’t 
seem to be any viable options to consider. Then a customer mentioned a technique called mass 
customization that was being used in the company he worked for. He said it really streamlined 
processing, and maybe it could work for the restaurant. 
 Describe how that approach might work at the restaurant and why that could be expected to 
reduce waiting times. What costs would be involved in transitioning to such a system? What other 
approaches could be used to reduce waiting times? 
 5. Describe two examples of unethical behavior related to waiting line management, and state which 
ethical principles they violate. 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
817
 a. Determine the average time callers wait to have their calls answered for each period and the 
probability that a caller will have to wait for each period. 
 b. For each case in the previous problem, determine the maximum line length for a probability of 
96 percent. 
  5. A small town with one hospital has two ambulances to supply ambulance service. Requests for 
ambulances during nonholiday weekends average .45 per hour and tend to be Poisson-distributed. 
Travel and assistance time averages two hours per call and follows an exponential distribution. 
Find:
 a. System utilization. 
 b. The average number of customers waiting. 
 c. The average time customers wait for an ambulance. 
 d. The probability that  both ambulances will be busy when a call comes in. 
  6. Trucks are required to pass through a weighing station so that they can be checked for weight vio-
lations. Trucks arrive at the station at the rate of 40 an hour between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. Cur-
rently two inspectors are on duty during those hours, each of whom can inspect 25 trucks an hour.
 a. How many trucks would you expect to see at the weighing station, including those being 
inspected? 
 b. If a truck was just arriving at the station, about how many minutes could the driver expect to 
be at the station? 
 c. What is the probability that both inspectors would be busy at the same time? 
 d. How many minutes, on average, would a truck that is not immediately inspected have to wait? 
 e. What condition would exist if there was only one inspector? 
 f. What is the maximum line length for a probability of .97? 
  7. The manager of a regional warehouse must decide on the number of loading docks to request for 
a new facility in order to minimize the sum of dock costs and driver-truck costs. The manager has 
learned that each driver-truck combination represents a cost of $300 per day and that each dock 
plus loading crew represents a cost of $1,100 per day.
 a. How many docks should be requested if trucks arrive at the rate of three per day, each dock 
can handle five trucks per day, and both rates are Poisson? 
 b. An employee has proposed adding new equipment that would speed up the loading rate to 
6 trucks per day. The equipment would cost $100 per day for each dock. Should the manager 
invest in the new equipment? 
  8. The parts department of a large automobile dealership has a counter used exclusively for mechanics’ 
requests for parts. The time between requests can be modeled by a negative exponential distribution 
that has a mean of five minutes. A clerk can handle requests at a rate of 15 per hour, and this can be 
modeled by a Poisson distribution that has a mean of 15. Suppose there are two clerks at the counter.
 a. On average, how many mechanics would be at the counter, including those being served? 
 b. What is the probability that a mechanic would have to wait for service? 
 c. If a mechanic has to wait, how long would the average wait be? 
 d. What percentage of time are the clerks idle? 
 e. If clerks represent a cost of $20 per hour and mechanics a cost of $30 per hour, what number 
of clerks would be optimal in terms of minimizing total cost?  
  9. One field representative services five customers for a computer manufacturer. Customers request 
assistance at an average (Poisson-distributed) rate of once every four working days. The field rep-
resentative can handle an average (Poisson-distributed) of one call per day. Determine:
 a. The expected number of customers waiting. 
 b. The average length of time customers must wait from the initial request for service until the 
service has been completed. 
 c. The percentage of time the service rep will be idle. 
 d. By how much would your answer to part  a be reduced if a second field rep were added? 
 10. Two operators handle adjustments for a group of 10 machines. Adjustment time is exponentially dis-
tributed and has a mean of 14 minutes per machine. The machines operate for an average of 86 min-
utes between adjustments. While running, each machine can turn out 50 pieces per hour. Find:
 a. The probability that a machine will have to wait for an adjustment. 
 b. The average number of machines waiting for adjustment. 
 c. The average number of machines being serviced. 
 d. The expected hourly output of each machine, taking adjustments into account. 
 e. Machine downtime represents a cost of $70 per hour; operator cost (including salary and 
fringe benefits) is $15 per hour. What is the optimum number of operators? 

818 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
 Class 
 Arrivals per Hour 
 1 
 2 
 2 
 4 
 3 
 3 
 4 
 2 
 11. One operator services a bank of five machines. Machine running time and service time are both 
exponential. Machines run for an average of 90 minutes between service requirements, and ser-
vice time averages 35 minutes. The operator receives $20 per hour in salary and fringe benefits, 
and machine downtime costs $70 per hour per machine.
 a. If each machine produces 60 pieces per hour while running, find the average hourly output of 
each machine, when waiting and service times are taken into account. 
 b. Determine the optimum number of operators. 
 12. A milling department has 10 machines. Each operates an average of eight hours before requir-
ing adjustment, which takes an average of two hours. While running, each machine can produce 
40 pieces an hour.
 a. With one adjuster, what is the net average hourly output per machine? 
 b. If machine downtime cost is $80 per hour and adjuster cost is $30 per hour, how many adjust-
ers would be optimal?  
 13. Trucks arrive at the loading dock of a wholesale grocer at the rate of 1.2 per hour. A single crew 
consisting of two workers can load a truck in about 30 minutes. Crew members receive $10 per 
hour in wages and fringe benefits, and trucks and drivers reflect an hourly cost of $60. The man-
ager is thinking of adding another member to the crew. The service rate would then be 2.4 trucks 
per hour. Assume rates are Poisson.
 a. Would the third crew member be economical? 
 b. Would a fourth member be justifiable if the resulting service capacity were 2.6 trucks per 
hour? 
 14. Customers arriving at a service center are assigned to one of three categories, with category 1 
given the highest priority. Records indicate that an average of nine customers arrive per hour and 
that  one-third are assigned to each category. There are two servers, and each can process custom-
ers at the rate of five per hour. Arrival and service rates can be described by Poisson distributions.
 a. What is the utilization rate for this system? 
 b. Determine the average waiting time for units in each class. 
 c. Find the average number of customers in each class that are waiting for service. 
 15. A manager must determine requirements for waiting space for customers. A priority system is 
used to process customers, who are assigned to one of two classes when they enter the processing 
center. The highest-priority class has an arrival rate of four per hour; the other class has an arrival 
rate of two per hour. Both can be described as Poisson-distributed. There are two servers, and 
each can process customers in an average of 15 minutes.
 a. What is the system utilization? 
 b. Determine the number of customers of each class that are waiting for service. 
 c. Determine the average waiting time for each class. 
 d. If the manager could alter the assignment rules so that arrival rates of the two classes were 
both 3/hour, what would be the revised average waiting time for each priority class? 
 16. A priority waiting system assigns arriving customers to one of four classes. Arrival rates (Poisson) 
of the classes are shown in the following table: 
 Five servers process the customers, and each can handle three customers per hour.
 a. What is the system utilization? 
 b. What is the average wait for service by customers in the various classes? How many are waiting 
in each class, on average?  
 c. If the arrival rate of the second priority class could be reduced to three units per hour by shift-
ing some arrivals into the third priority class, how would your answers to part  b change? 
 d. What observations can you make based on your answers to part  c? 

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
819
 17. Referring to Problem 16, suppose that each server could handle four customers per hour. Answer 
the questions posed in the problem. Explain why the impact of reassigning customers is much less 
than in Problem 16. 
 18. During the morning hours at a catalog sales department, telephone calls come in at the rate 
 (Poisson) of 40 per hour. Calls that cannot be answered immediately are put on hold. The system 
can handle eight callers on hold. If additional calls come in, they receive a busy signal. The three 
customer service representatives who answer the calls spend an average of three minutes with a 
customer.
 a. What is the probability that a caller will get a busy signal? ( Hint: Solve for log  K or ln  K using 
trial and error.) 
 b. What is the probability that a customer will be put on hold? 
 The operations manager of a soon-to-open branch of a large bank is in 
the process of configuring teller operations. Currently some branches 
have a separate teller line for customers who have a single transac-
tion, while other branches don’t have separate lines. The manager 
wants to avoid complaints about long waits that have been received 
at some branches. Because the demographics differ from location to 
location, a system that works at one branch won’t necessarily work 
at another. 
 The manager has obtained data on processing times from the bank’s 
home office and is ready to explore different options for configuring 
operations. (Fortunately she has her textbook and CD from when she 
took an operations management course at a nearby university.) 
 An average of 80 customers are processed during the noon hour. 
The average processing time for customers with a single transaction 
is 90 seconds, while the processing time for customers with multiple 
transactions is 4 minutes. Sixty percent of the cus-
tomers are expected to have multiple transactions. 
 One time that will get special attention is the noon hour on Friday. 
The plan is to have five tellers available. Under consideration are the 
following options:
    a. Have one waiting line and have the first person in line go to the 
next available teller. 
 b. Have two waiting lines: one teller for customers who have a 
single transaction and four tellers who would handle customers 
who have multiple transactions. 
 Questions 
 If you were the manager, which option would you select? Why? Explain 
the disparity between the results for the two options. What assumptions 
did you make in your analysis? 
 CASE 
 Big Bank 
giving the green light to longer traffic signals. 
Through the 1970s, the typical wait at a red light 
was 45 seconds or so. The wait started growing in the 1980s and 1990s. 
Today, 90-second spans aren’t uncommon, and some are inching near 
the three-minute mark. Many of these long lights are their longest only 
at rush hour, but that’s little solace to impatient travelers. 
 Law-abiding drivers stuck at the two-minute-36-second red light at 
the corner of DuPont Parkway and Frenchtown Road south of Wilming-
ton, Del., take coffee breaks, work on crossword puzzles and, now and 
then, do some automotive hugging. 
 “You see couples getting a little more amorous than you’d expect 
at a traffic light,” says Paul Rada, manager of the nearby Quality Inn. 
“You’ve got to do something.” Mr. Rada himself has read the comics 
and eaten his lunch sitting at the light, he says. The truly desperate will 
 Anna Wilde  Mathews 
 At the corner of Fairfax County Parkway and Fair Lakes Parkway, drivers 
see red. 
 More than four minutes of it. 
 Hanging over this crowded intersection in northern Virginia’s boom-
ing suburbs is one of the longest stoplights in the country. Washington-
bound commuters curse it. Highflying tech executives making their way 
to appointments feel grounded. Prepared motorists bring breakfast to 
nibble while they wait. Occasionally, a gaggle of geese waddles across 
the road to a nearby pond, slowing things even more. 
 “You come out here sometimes, and it brings tears to your eyes, 
it’s so bad,” says Jeris J. White, the state transportation manager and 
former professional-football player who tackles traffic delays here. 
 Spread of Red  
 It’s happening everywhere—red lights are get-
ting longer. And longer. Cities and towns are quietly, albeit reluctantly, 
 READING 
 Stopped at a Light? Why Not Read This, You May Have Time 
the 1980s and 1990s
s.
ht 
(continued)

820 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines
yadda, yadda, yadda.” Las Vegas has a red light that stretches to two 
minutes and 45 seconds, although Mr. DeCamp says he tried to keep it 
from getting any longer. “I wasn’t proud of it,” he says. “I preferred not 
to advertise it.” 
 In Northern Virginia, Mr. White, who played cornerback for nine years 
for the Washington Redskins and other teams, has gone from stopping 
opposing teams to trying to get vehicles moving. He looks more like a 
referee on a recent weekday evening as he stands at the Fairfax County 
intersection, stopwatch in hand, timing a seemingly endless procession 
of glowing headlights and taillights. 
 “This is brutal,” he says, peering down a line of vehicles that 
stretches down Fair Lakes Parkway to the horizon, waiting for the light 
to change. One white sedan waits four minutes and 41 seconds to make 
a left turn; Mr. White explains why: Southbound traffic on the seven-
lane Fairfax County Parkway hasn’t eased enough to trigger a change in 
the computer-controlled light. The light is set to switch automatically 
only when traffic thins on that road, which typically carries a heavier 
load than the intersecting one. 
 “You see any end in sight?” he asks. There is none, for now. 
 The crossroads appears deceptively rural, with trees and grass at 
each corner and the nearby pond. But it rests amid gleaming new con-
dominiums, a shopping mall and an office park, and the roads are lined 
with signs urging drivers to stop and see the latest housing develop-
ments under construction. 
 Standing on one corner, Mr. White offers running sports-style com-
mentary on the traffic flow, groaning occasionally at a bad move. “The 
truck is going to run the red!” he shouts. “The truck ran the red!” 
 A Long Red 
 He varies the light cycles at different times of the day, and uses the 
longest cycles only during peak rush-hour traffic. But at those times, he 
says, he has little choice but to keep the Fair Lakes Parkway red light so 
as to prevent miles-long backups on the Fairfax County Parkway. 
 Suddenly, Fair Lakes seems to be clearing up. Cars flow smoothly 
through the intersection and, by the time the light changes to red, none 
are left waiting. “This is beautiful!” Mr. White cheers. “We cleared the 
whole side street out. If it’s still that way at 6:30 or so, we can open 
the champagne.” 
 But Mr. White thinks the light still is too long, and he hopes to do 
something about it. As part of a computer-plotted plan to smooth traffic 
flows through 76 local intersections, the longest possible red light here 
will drop from four minutes and 47 seconds to three minutes and 15 
seconds. 
 It’ll still be one of the longest reds anywhere, and Mr. White can’t be 
sure the change will stick. “The goal is to move the traffic,” he says. “If 
it doesn’t hold up, we’ll change it” back. 
 Source: Anna Wilde Mathews, “Stopped at a Light?”  The Wall Street Journal, 
June 13, 2000, pp. A1 & A12. Copyright © 2000 Dow Jones & Co. Used with 
permission. 
“jump out of cars and hit the pedestrian button,” hoping it will trigger a 
light change, adds Larry Koczak, a local mail carrier. 
 Reasons for the lengthening lights vary: More traffic. Wider streets. 
More lanes dedicated to left turns. And disagreement among traf-
fic engineers who feel just as stuck as the drivers who endure these 
lights. “It’s crept up gradually,” says Scott Wainwright, a Montgomery 
County, Md., official who chairs a national engineering committee on 
traffic signals. 
 Longer red lights are intended to help keep busy intersections clear 
of anything approaching gridlock. In part, that’s because several sec-
onds go to waste every time traffic has to start again when red turns 
to green.  
 Yielding to Temptation 
 But longer lights can encourage antsy drivers to race through yellow 
lights and run reds, causing accidents and pileups that, in addition to 
risking injury and death, clog traffic even more. Each year, more than 
1.8 million crashes occur at intersections, killing more than 7,800 peo-
ple, the Federal Highway Administration says. 
 The federal government has launched a special “Stop Red Light 
Running” initiative, and localities are cracking down with hidden cam-
eras that snap automatic pictures of scofflaws. For safety’s sake, many 
cities have built more time into stoplight cycles so, for a few seconds, 
lights at all sides of a given intersection are red—an “all-red” delay 
designed to clear stragglers and minimize collisions. 
 All-reds are a source of controversy among traffic engineers. Peter 
Parsonson, professor of civil engineering at Georgia Tech in Atlanta, 
says they add an extra margin of safety. But at Marquette University 
in Milwaukee, David Kuemmel, who is in the department of civil and 
environmental engineering, argues that the all-red sequence is being 
used “indiscriminately.” 
 The way to stop frustrated drivers from going through lights is not to 
make them wait longer, Mr. Kuemmel says. “That’s a pet peeve of mine. 
It’s an incentive for motorists to run the red light.” The disagreements 
are further complicated by the lack of conclusive research on the link 
between light length and crashes. 
 Many roads are sprouting more left-turn-only lanes, with their own 
green-arrow turn indicators to keep vehicles that want to turn from 
backing up forever. But that stretches the light-cycle length. And with 
extra lanes making streets wider, pedestrians need more time to cross, 
requiring longer greens to accommodate them. 
 Even in Las Vegas 
 “In the old days, when you had two-lane roads, things were different,” 
says Gerry de Camp, a transportation consultant and former manager 
of the Las Vegas area computer traffic system. Now, he says, “you can 
have a three-lane left turn, plus a bus lane, and a 12-foot shoulder, 
(concluded)

 
Chapter Eighteen Management of Waiting Lines 
821
 Anderson, David R., Dennis J. Sweeney, Thomas 
A. Williams, Jeffrey D. Camm, and Skip Martin.  
An Introduction to Management Science: Quantitative 
Approaches to Decision Making. Revised Thirteenth 
Edition. Mason, OH: South-Western, 2012. 
 Buffa, Elwood.  Operations Management. 3rd ed. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1972. 
 Griffin, W.  Queuing: Basic Theory and Applications. 
Columbus, OH: Grid Publishing, 1978. 
 Hillier, Frederick S. and Mark S. Hillier.  Introduction to 
Management Science: A Modeling and Case Studies 
Approach with Spreadsheets. 5th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2014. 
 Ragsdale, Cliff T.  Spreadsheet Modeling and 
Decision Analysis. 6th ed. Mason, OH: 
South-Western, 2011. 
 Stevenson, William J., and Ceyhun Ozgur.  Introduction 
to Management Science with Spreadsheets. 
New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2006. 
 Taylor, Bernard.  Introduction to Management Science. 
11th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall, 2013. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

822
 CHAP TE R 
 19  Linear Programming 
 CHAPTER OUTLINE 
19.1  Introduction,  823 
19.2  Linear Programming Models,  824 
 Model Formulation,  825 
19.3  Graphical Linear Programming,  826 
 Outline of Graphical Procedure,  826 
 Plotting Constraints,  828 
 Identifying the Feasible Solution Space,  831 
 Plotting the Objective Function Line,  831 
 Redundant Constraints,  834 
 Solutions and Corner Points,  835 
 Minimization,  835 
 Slack and Surplus,  837 
19.4  The Simplex Method,  838 
19.5  Computer Solutions,  838 
 Solving LP Models Using MS Excel,  838 
19.6  Sensitivity Analysis,  841 
 Objective Function Coefficient 
Changes,  841 
 Changes in the Right-Hand-Side (RHS) 
Value of a Constraint,  842 
 Case: Son, Ltd.,  851 
 Custom Cabinets, Inc.,  852 
 After completing this chapter, you should be able to: 
 LO19.1 
Describe the type of problem that would lend itself to solution 
using linear programming. 
 LO19.2 
Formulate a linear programming model from a description of a 
problem. 
 LO19.3 
Solve simple linear programming problems using the graphical 
method. 
 LO19.4 
Interpret computer solutions of linear programming problems. 
 LO19.5 
Do sensitivity analysis on the solution of a linear programming 
problem. 
 LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

823
 Linear programming is a powerful quantitative tool used by operations managers and other managers to obtain optimal solu-
tions to problems that involve restrictions or limitations, such as budgets and available materials, labor, and machine time. 
These problems are referred to as  constrained optimization  problems. There are numerous examples of linear programming 
applications to such problems, including
 • Establishing locations for emergency equipment and personnel that will minimize response time. 
 • Determining optimal schedules for airlines for planes, pilots, and ground personnel. 
 • Developing financial plans. 
 • Determining optimal blends of animal feed mixes. 
 • Determining optimal diet plans. 
 • Identifying the best set of worker–job assignments. 
 • Developing optimal production schedules. 
 • Developing shipping plans that will minimize shipping costs. 
 • Identifying the optimal mix of products in a factory. 
 • Performing production and service planning. 
 19.1 INTRODUCTION  
 Linear programming (LP) techniques consist of a sequence of steps that will lead to an optimal solution to linear-constrained 
problems, if an optimum exists. There are a number of different linear programming techniques; some are special-purpose 
(i.e., used to find solutions for specific types of problems) and others are more general in scope. This chapter covers the two 
general-purpose solution techniques: graphical linear programming and computer solutions. Graphical linear programming 
provides a visual portrayal of many of the important concepts of linear programming. However, it is limited to problems with 
only two variables. In practice, computers are used to obtain solutions for problems, some of which involve a large number 
of variables. 

824 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 19.2 LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS 
Linear programming models are mathematical representations of constrained optimi-
zation problems. These models have certain characteristics in common. Knowledge of 
these characteristics enables us to recognize problems that can be solved using linear 
programming. In addition, it also can help us formulate LP models. The characteristics 
can be grouped into two categories: components and assumptions. First, let’s consider the 
components. 
 Four components provide the structure of a linear programming model:
 1. 
Objective function. 
 2. 
Decision variables. 
 3. 
Constraints. 
 4. 
Parameters. 
 Linear programming algorithms require that a single goal or  objective,  such as the 
maximization of profits, be specified. The two general types of objectives are maximiza-
tion and minimization. A maximization objective might involve profits, revenues, effi-
ciency, or rate of return. Conversely, a minimization objective might involve cost, time, 
distance traveled, or scrap. The    objective function    is a mathematical expression that can 
be used to determine the total profit (or cost, etc., depending on the objective) for a given 
solution. 
 Decision variables   represent choices available to the decision maker in terms of amounts 
of either inputs or outputs. For example, some problems require choosing a combination of 
inputs to minimize total costs, while others require selecting a combination of outputs to 
maximize profits or revenues. 
 Constraints  are limitations that restrict the alternatives available to decision makers. The 
three types of constraints are less than or equal to (), greater than or equal to (  ), and sim-
ply equal to (  ). A  constraint implies an upper limit on the amount of some scarce resource 
(e.g., machine hours, labor hours, materials) available for use. A     constraint specifies a 
minimum that must be achieved in the final solution (e.g., must contain at least 10 percent 
real fruit juice, must get at least 30 MPG on the highway). The    constraint is more restric-
tive in the sense that it specifies  exactly  what a decision variable should equal (e.g., make 200 
units of product A). A linear programming model can consist of one or more constraints. The 
constraints of a given problem define the set of all feasible combinations of decision vari-
ables; this set is referred to as the   feasible solution space .  Linear programming algorithms 
are designed to search the feasible solution space for the combination of decision variables 
that will yield an optimum in terms of the objective function. 
 An LP model consists of a mathematical statement of the objective and a mathematical 
statement of each constraint. These statements consist of symbols (e.g.,  x 1 ,  x 2 ) that represent 
the decision variables and numerical values, called   parameters . The parameters are fixed 
values; the model is solved  given those values. 
 Example 1 illustrates an LP model. 
e cel
x
mhhe.com/stevenson12e
SCREENCAM TUTORIAL
 Objective function  Math-
ematical statement of profit (or 
cost, etc.) for a given solution. 
 Decision variables  Amounts 
of either inputs or outputs. 
 Constraints  Limitations that 
restrict the available alternatives. 
 Feasible solution space  The 
set of all feasible combinations 
of decision variables as defined 
by the constraints.  
 Parameters  Numerical 
constants. 
 LO19.1 Describe the type 
of problem that would lend 
itself to solution using linear 
programming.
Here is an LP model of a situation that involves the production of three possible products, 
each of which will yield a certain profit per unit, and each requires a certain use of two 
resources that are in limited supply: labor and materials. The objective is to determine how 
much of each product to make to achieve the greatest possible profit while satisfying all 
constraints. 
Decision
variables
Quantity of product 1 to produce
Quantity of product 2 to produce
Quantity of product 3 to produce
Maximize
5
8
4
(profit)
(Objective function)
1
2
3
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
⎧
⎨⎪
⎩⎪





 
E X A M P L E  1

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
825
 Subject to
 
Labor
2
4
8
250 hours
Material
7
6
5
100 pounds
(Constraints)
Product 1
10 units
,
,
0
(Nonnegativity constraints)
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x








 
 First, the model lists and defines the decision variables. These typically represent  quanti-
ties. In this case, they are quantities of three different products that might be produced. 
 Next, the model states the objective function. It includes every decision variable in the model 
and the contribution (profit per unit) of each decision variable. Thus, product  x 1  has a profit of 
$5 per unit. The profit from product  x 1 for a given solution will be 5 times the value of  x 1 speci-
fied by the solution; the total profit from all products will be the sum of the individual product 
profits. Thus, if  x 1     10,  x 2     0, and  x 3     6, the value of the objective function would be
 5(10)
8(0)
4(6)
74



 
 The objective function is followed by a list (in no particular order) of three constraints. 
Each constraint has a right-hand-side numerical value (e.g., the labor constraint has a right-
hand-side value of 250) that indicates the amount of the constraint and a relation sign that 
indicates whether that amount is a maximum (), a minimum (  ), or an equality (  ). The 
left-hand side of each constraint consists of the variables subject to that particular constraint 
and a coefficient for each variable that indicates how much of the right-hand-side quantity  one 
unit  of the decision variable represents. For instance, for the labor constraint, one unit of  x 1 
will require two hours of labor. The sum of the values on the left-hand side of each constraint 
represents the amount of that constraint used by a solution. Thus, if  x 1     10,  x 2     0, and 
 x 3     6, the amount of labor used would be
 2(10)
4(0)
8(6)
68 hours



 
 Because this amount does not exceed the quantity on the right-hand side of the constraint, 
it is said to be  feasible. 
 Note that the third constraint refers to only a single variable;  x 1  must be at least 10 units. Its 
implied coefficient is 1, although that is not shown. 
 Finally, there are the nonnegativity constraints. These are listed on a single line; they reflect 
the condition that no decision variable is allowed to have a negative value. 
 In order for LP models to be used effectively, certain  assumptions must be satisfied:
 1. 
 Linearity:  The impact of decision variables is linear in constraints and the objective 
function.  
 2. 
 Divisibility: Noninteger values of decision variables are acceptable. 
 3. 
 Certainty: Values of parameters are known and constant. 
 4. 
 Nonnegativity: Negative values of decision variables are unacceptable. 
 LO19.2  Formulate a linear 
programming model from a 
description of a problem.
 Model Formulation 
    An understanding of the components of linear programming models is necessary for model 
formulation. This helps provide organization to the process of assembling information about 
a problem into a model. 
 Naturally, it is important to obtain valid information on what constraints are appropriate, as 
well as on what values of the parameters are appropriate. If this is not done, the usefulness of 
the model will be questionable. Consequently, in some instances, considerable effort must be 
expended to obtain that information. 
 In formulating a model, use the format illustrated in Example 1. Begin by identifying the 
decision variables. Very often, decision variables are “the quantity of” something, such as 

826 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 x 1     the quantity of product 1. Generally, decision variables have profits, costs, times, or a 
similar measure of value associated with them. Knowing this can help you identify the deci-
sion variables in a problem. 
 Constraints are restrictions or requirements on one or more decision variables, and they 
refer to available amounts of resources such as labor, material, or machine time, or to minimal 
requirements, such as “Make at least 10 units of product 1.” It can be helpful to give a name 
to each constraint, such as “labor” or “material 1.” Let’s consider some of the different kinds 
of constraints you will encounter. 
   1. A constraint that refers to one or more decision variables. This is the most common kind 
of constraint. The constraints in Example 1 are of this type. 
 2. A constraint that specifies a ratio. For example, “The ratio of  x 1 to  x 2 must be at least 3 
to 2.” To formulate this, begin by setting up the following ratio:
 
3
2
1
2
x
x

 
 Then, cross multiply, obtaining
 2
3
1
2
x
x

 
 This is not yet in a suitable form because all variables in a constraint must be on the left-hand 
side of the inequality (or equality) sign, leaving only a constant on the right-hand side. To 
achieve this, we must subtract the variable amount that is on the right side from both sides. 
That yields
 2
3
0
1
2
x
x


 
 (Note that the direction of the inequality remains the same.) 
  3. A constraint that specifies a percentage for one or more variables relative to one or more 
other variables. For example, “ x 1  cannot be more than 20 percent of the mix.” Suppose that 
the mix consists of variables  x 1 ,  x 2 , and  x 3 . In mathematical terms, this would be
 
.20(
)
1
1
2
3
x
x
x
x



 
 As always, all variables must appear on the left-hand side of the relationship. To accomplish 
that, we can expand the right-hand side, and then subtract the result from both sides. Expand-
ing yields
 
.20
.20
.20
1
1
2
3
x
x
x
x



 
 Subtracting yields
 .80
.20
.20
0
1
2
3
x
x
x



 
 Once you have formulated a model, the next task is to solve it. The following sections 
describe two approaches to problem solution: graphical solutions and computer solutions. 
 19.3 GRAPHICAL LINEAR PROGRAMMING 
 Graphical linear programming  is a method for finding optimal solutions to two-variable 
problems. This section describes that approach. 
 Outline of Graphical Procedure 
 The graphical method of linear programming plots the constraints on a graph and identifies an 
area that satisfies all of the constraints. The area is referred to as the  feasible solution space. 
Next, the objective function is plotted and used to identify the optimal point in the feasible 
solution space. The coordinates of the point can sometimes be read directly from the graph, 
although generally an algebraic determination of the coordinates of the point is necessary. 
 Graphical linear program-
ming  Graphical method for 
finding optimal solutions to 
two-variable problems. 
 LO19.3 Solve simple linear 
programming problems using 
the graphical method.

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
827
 The general procedure followed in the graphical approach is as follows:
 1. 
Set up the objective function and the constraints in mathematical format. 
 2. 
Plot the constraints. 
 3. 
Identify the feasible solution space. 
 4. 
Plot the objective function. 
 5. 
Determine the optimum solution. 
 The technique can best be illustrated through solution of a typical problem. Consider the 
problem described in Example 2. 
 General description:  A firm that assembles computers and computer equipment is about 
to start production of two new types of microcomputers. Each type will require assembly 
time, inspection time, and storage space. The amounts of each of these resources that can be 
devoted to the production of the microcomputers is limited. The manager of the firm would 
like to determine the quantity of each microcomputer to produce in order to maximize the 
profit generated by sales of these microcomputers. 
 Additional information:  In order to develop a suitable model of the problem, the manager 
has met with design and production personnel. As a result of those meetings, the manager has 
obtained the following information: 
 
 Type 1 
 Type 2 
 Profit per unit 
 $60 
 $50 
 Assembly time per unit 
 4 hours 
 10 hours 
 Inspection time per unit 
 2 hours 
 1 hour 
 Storage space per unit 
 3 cubic feet 
 3 cubic feet 
 The manager also has acquired information on the availability of company resources. 
These (daily) amounts are as follows: 
 Resource 
 Amount Available 
 Assembly time 
 100 hours 
 Inspection time 
 22 hours 
 Storage space 
 39 cubic feet 
 The manager met with the firm’s marketing manager and learned that demand for the 
microcomputers was such that whatever combination of these two types of microcomputers is 
produced, all of the output can be sold. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 In terms of meeting the assumptions, it would appear that the relationships are  linear: The 
contribution to profit per unit of each type of computer and the time and storage space per 
unit of each type of computer are the same regardless of the quantity produced. Therefore, the 
total impact of each type of computer on the profit and each constraint is a linear function of 
the quantity of that variable. There may be a question of  divisibility  because, presumably, only 
whole units of computers will be sold. However, because this is a recurring process (i.e., the 
computers will be produced daily; a noninteger solution such as 3.5 computers per day will 
result in 7 computers every other day), this does not seem to pose a problem. The question of 
 certainty cannot be explored here; in practice, the manager could be questioned to determine 
if there are any other possible constraints and whether the values shown for assembly times, 
and so forth, are known with certainty. For the purposes of discussion, we will assume cer-
tainty. Last, the assumption of  nonnegativity  seems justified; negative values for production 
quantities would not make sense. 
 Because we have concluded that linear programming is appropriate, let us now turn our 
attention to constructing a model of the microcomputer problem. First, we must define the 

828 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
decision variables. Based on the statement “The manager . . . would like to determine the 
quantity of each microcomputer to produce,” the decision variables are the quantities of each 
type of computer. Thus,
 
quantity of type 1 to produce
quantity of type 2 to produce
1
2
x
x


 
 Next, we can formulate the objective function. The profit per unit of type 1 is listed as $60, 
and the profit per unit of type 2 is listed as $50, so the appropriate objective function is
 Maximize
60
50
1
2
Z
x
x


 
where  Z  is the value of the objective function, given values of  x 1  and  x 2 . Theoretically, a math-
ematical function requires such a variable for completeness. However, in practice, the objec-
tive function often is written without the  Z,  as sort of a shorthand version. (That approach is 
underscored by the fact that computer input does not call for  Z:  It is understood. The output of 
a computerized model does include a  Z, though.) 
 Now for the constraints. There are three resources with limited availability: assembly time, 
inspection time, and storage space. The fact that availability is limited means that these con-
straints will all be   constraints. Suppose we begin with the assembly constraint. The type 1 
microcomputer requires 4 hours of assembly time per unit, whereas the type 2 microcomputer 
requires 10 hours of assembly time per unit. Therefore, with a limit of 100 hours available, the 
assembly constraint is
 4
10
100 hours
1
2
x
x


 
 Similarly, each unit of type 1 requires 2 hours of inspection time, and each unit of type 2 
requires 1 hour of inspection time. With 22 hours available, the inspection constraint is
 2
1
22
1
2
x
x


 
 ( Note:  The coefficient of 1 for  x 2  need not be shown. Thus, an alternative form for this con-
straint is 2 x 1      x 2   22.) The storage constraint is determined in a similar manner:
 3
3
39
1
2
x
x


 
 There are no other system or individual constraints. The nonnegativity constraints are
 
,
0
1
2
x x

 
 In summary, the mathematical model of the microcomputer problem is
 
quantity of type 1 to produce
quantity of type 2 to produce
1
2
x
x


Maximize
60
50
1
2
x
x

 
 Subject to
 
Assembly
4
10
100 hours
Inspection
2
1
22 hours
Storage
3
3
39 cubic feet
,
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x







 
The next step is to plot the constraints. 
 Plotting Constraints 
 Begin by placing the nonnegativity constraints on a graph, as in  Figure 19.1 . The procedure 
for plotting the other constraints is simple: 
 1. 
Replace the inequality sign with an equal sign. This transforms the constraint into an 
 equation of a straight line. 
 2. 
Determine where the line intersects each axis.

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
829
 a. To find where it crosses the  x 2 axis, set  x 1 equal to zero and solve the equation for the 
value of  x 2 . 
 b. To find where it crosses the  x 1 axis, set  x 2 equal to zero and solve the equation for the 
value of  x 1 . 
 3. 
Mark these intersections on the axes, and connect them with a straight line. ( Note: If a 
constraint has only one variable, it will be a vertical line on a graph if the variable is  x 1 , 
or a horizontal line if the variable is  x 2 .) 
 4. Indicate by shading (or by arrows at the ends of the constraint line) whether the 
inequality is greater than or less than. (A general rule to determine which side of the 
line satisfies the inequality is to pick a point that is not on the line, such as 0,0, solve 
the equation using these values, and see whether it is greater than or less than the 
constraint amount.)  
 5. 
Repeat steps 1–4 for each constraint. 
 Consider the assembly time constraint:
 4
10
100
1
2
x
x


 
 Removing the inequality portion of the constraint produces this straight line:
 4
10
100
1
2
x
x


 
 Next, identify the points where the line intersects each axis, as step 2 describes. Thus with 
 x 2     0, we find
 4
10(0)
100
1x 

 
 Solving, we find that 4 x 1     100, so  x 1     25 when  x 2     0. Similarly, we can solve the equation 
for  x 2 when  x 1     0:
 4(0)
10
100
2
x


 
 Solving for  x 2 , we find  x 2     10 when  x 1     0. 
 Thus, we have two points:  x 1     0,  x 2     10, and  x 1     25,  x 2     0. We can now add this line 
to our graph of the nonnegativity constraints by connecting these two points (see  Figure 19.2 ).  
 Next we must determine which side of the line represents points that are less than 100. To 
do this, we can select a test point that is not on the line, and we can substitute the  x 1  and  x 2 val-
ues of that point into the left-hand side of the equation of the line. If the result is less than 100, 
this tells us that all points on that side of the line are less than the value of the line (e.g., 100). 
Conversely, if the result is greater than 100, this indicates that the other side of the line repre-
sents the set of points that will yield values that are less than 100. A relatively simple test point 
to use is the origin (i.e.,  x 1     0,  x 2     0). Substituting these values into the equation yields
 4(0)
10(0)
0


 
 FIGURE 19.1 
 Graph showing the nonnegativity 
constraints  
Nonnegativity
constraints
Area of
feasibility
Quantity of type 2
Quantity of type 1
0
= 0
x2 
= 0
x1 
x1
x2

830 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 Obviously this is less than 100. Hence, the side of the line closest to the origin represents the 
“less than” area (i.e., the feasible region). 
 The feasible region for this constraint and the nonnegativity constraints then becomes the 
shaded portion shown in  Figure 19.3 .  
 For the sake of illustration, suppose we try one other point, say  x 1     10,  x 2     10. Substitut-
ing these values into the assembly constraint yields
 4(10)
10(10)
140


 
 Clearly this is greater than 100. Therefore, all points on this side of the line are greater than 
100 (see  Figure 19.4 ). 
 Continuing with the problem, we can add the two remaining constraints to the graph. For 
the inspection constraint:
 1. 
Convert the constraint into the equation of a straight line by replacing the inequality 
sign with an equality sign:
 2
1
22
becomes
2
1
22
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x




 
 2. 
Set  x 1 equal to zero and solve for  x 2 :
 2(0)
1
22
2
x


 
 Solving, we find  x 2     22. Thus, the line will intersect the  x 2 axis at 22. 
 3. 
Next, set  x 2 equal to zero and solve for  x 1 :
 2
1(0)
22
1x 

 
 Solving, we find  x 1     11. Thus, the other end of the line will intersect the  x 1 axis at 11. 
 4. 
Add the line to the graph (see  Figure 19.5 ). 
 Note that the area of feasibility for this constraint is below the line ( Figure 19.5 ). Again the 
area of feasibility at this point is shaded in for illustration, although when graphing problems, 
it is more practical to refrain from shading in the feasible region until all constraint lines have 
been drawn. However, because constraints are plotted one at a time, using a small arrow at the 
end of each constraint to indicate the direction of feasibility can be helpful. 
 The storage constraint is handled in the same manner:
 1. 
Convert it into an equality:
 3
3
39
1
2
x
x


 
 2. 
Set  x 1 equal to zero and solve for  x 2 :
 3(0)
3
39
2
x


 
 FIGURE 19.3 
 The feasible region, given the first constraint 
and the nonnegativity constraints 
25
x1
0
10
x2
Assembly time
Feasible
region
 FIGURE 19.2 
 Plot of the first constraint 
(assembly time) 
25
x1
0
10
x2
+ 10    = 100
x1
x2
4

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
831
 Solving,  x 2     13. Thus,  x 2     13 when  x 1     0. 
 3. 
Set  x 2 equal to zero and solve for  x 1 :
 3
3(0)
39
1x 

 
 Solving,  x 1     13. Thus,  x 1     13 when  x 2     0. 
 4. 
Add the line to the graph (see  Figure 19.6 ). 
 Identifying the Feasible Solution Space 
 The feasible solution space is the set of all points that satisfies  all  constraints. (Recall that the 
 x 1  and  x 2  axes form nonnegativity constraints.) The heavily shaded area shown in  Figure 19.6  
is the feasible solution space for our problem. 
 The next step is to determine which point in the feasible solution space will produce 
the optimal value of the objective function. This determination is made using the objective 
function.  
 Plotting the Objective Function Line 
 Plotting an objective function line involves the same logic as plotting a constraint line: Deter-
mine where the line intersects each axis. Recall that the objective function for the microcom-
puter problem is
 60
50
1
2
x
x

 
 FIGURE 19.4   The point (10, 10) is above the 
constraint line 
25
x1
0
10
10
x2
+ 10    = 100
x1
x2
4
• (10,10)
 FIGURE 19.5   Partially completed graph, showing the assembly, 
inspection, and nonnegativity constraints 
25
x1
0
10
22
11
x2
Inspection
Assembly
Feasible for inspection
but not for assembly
Feasible for
both assembly
and inspection
Feasible for assembly
but not for inspection
 FIGURE 19.6 
 Completed graph of the 
microcomputer problem showing 
all constraints and the feasible 
solution space 
25
x1
0
10
22
11
13
13
x2
Inspection
Storage
Feasible
solution
space
Assembly

832 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 This is not an equation because it does not include an equal sign. We can get around this by 
simply setting it equal to some quantity. Any quantity will do, although one that is evenly 
divisible by both coefficients is desirable. 
 Suppose we decide to set the objective function equal to 300. That is,
 60
50
300
1
2
x
x


 
 We can now plot the line on our graph. As before, we can determine the  x 1  and  x 2 intercepts 
of the line by setting one of the two variables equal to zero, solving for the other, and then 
reversing the process. Thus, with  x 1     0, we have
 60(0)
50
300
2
x


 
 Solving, we find  x 2     6. Similarly, with  x 2     0, we have
 60
50(0)
300
1x 

 
 Solving, we find  x 1     5. This line is plotted in  Figure 19.7 . 
 The profit line can be interpreted in the following way: It is an  isoprofit line; every point 
on the line (i.e., every combination of  x 1  and  x 2  that lies on the line) will provide a profit of 
$300. We can see from the graph many combinations that are both on the $300 profit line and 
within the feasible solution space. In fact, considering noninteger as well as integer solutions, 
the possibilities are infinite. 
 Suppose we now consider another line, say the $600 line. To do this, we set the objective 
function equal to this amount. Thus,
 60
50
600
1
2
x
x


 
 Solving for the  x 1 and  x 2 intercepts yields these two points:
 
intercept
intercept
10
0
0
12
1
2
1
1
2
2
x
x
x
x
x
x




 
 This line is plotted in  Figure  19.8 , along with the previous $300 line for purposes of 
comparison.  
 Two things are evident in  Figure 19.8  regarding the profit lines. One is that the $600 line 
is  farther from the origin than the $300 line; the other is that the two lines are  parallel. The 
lines are parallel because they both have the same slope. The slope is not affected by the right 
side of the equation. Rather, it is determined solely by the coefficients 60 and 50. It would be 
 FIGURE 19.7   Microcomputer problem with $300 profit 
line added 
25
x1
0
10
22
11
5
6
13
13
x2
Inspection
Storage
Profit = $300
Assembly
 FIGURE 19.8   Microcomputer problem with profit 
lines of $300 and $600 
25
x1
0
10
12
22
11
10
5
6
13
13
x2
Inspection
Storage
Profit = $300
Profit = $600
Assembly

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
833
correct to conclude that regardless of the quantity we select for the value of the objective func-
tion, the resulting line will be parallel to these two lines. Moreover, if the amount is greater 
than 600, the line will be even farther away from the origin than the $600 line. If the value 
is less than 300, the line will be closer to the origin than the $300 line. And if the value is 
between 300 and 600, the line will fall between the $300 and $600 lines. This knowledge will 
help in determining the optimal solution. 
 Consider a third line, one with the profit equal to $900.  Figure 19.9  shows that line along 
with the previous two profit lines. As expected, it is parallel to the other two, and even far-
ther away from the origin. However, the line does not touch the feasible solution space at 
all.  Consequently, there is no feasible combination of  x 1  and  x 2  that will yield that amount of 
profit. Evidently, the maximum possible profit is an amount between $600 and $900, which 
we can see by referring to  Figure 19.9 . We could continue to select profit lines in this manner, 
and eventually, we could determine an amount that would yield the greatest profit. However, 
there is a much simpler alternative. We can plot just one line, say the $300 line. We know that 
all other lines will be parallel to it. Consequently, by moving this one line parallel to itself we 
can “test” other profit lines. We also know that as we move away from the origin, the profits 
get larger. What we want to know is how far the line can be moved out from the origin and 
still be touching the feasible solution space, and the values of the decision variables at that 
point of greatest profit (i.e., the optimal solution). Locate this point on the graph by placing a 
straight edge along the $300 line (or any other convenient line) and sliding it away from the 
origin, being careful to keep it parallel to the line. This approach is illustrated in  Figure 19.10 .   
 Once we have determined where the optimal solution is in the feasible solution space, we 
must determine the values of the decision variables at that point. Then, we can use that infor-
mation to compute the profit for that combination. 
 Note that the optimal solution is at the intersection of the inspection boundary and the stor-
age boundary (see  Figure 19.10 ). In other words, the optimal combination of  x 1  and  x 2 must 
satisfy both boundary (equality) conditions. We can determine those values by solving the 
two equations  simultaneously. The equations are
 Inspection
2
1
22
Storage
3
3
39
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x




 
 The idea behind solving two  simultaneous equations  is to algebraically eliminate one of the 
unknown variables (i.e., to obtain an equation with a single unknown). This can be accom-
plished by multiplying the constants of one of the equations by a fixed amount and then 
adding (or subtracting) the modified equation from the other. (Occasionally, it is easier to 
multiply each equation by a fixed quantity.) For example, we can eliminate  x 2  by multiplying 
 FIGURE 19.9   Microcomputer problem with profit 
lines of $300, $600, and $900 
25
x1
0
10
12
22
18
11
10
5
6
13 15
13
x2
Inspection
Storage
$300
$600
$900
Assembly
 FIGURE 19.10   Finding the optimal solution to the 
microcomputer problem 
25
x1
0
10
22
11
5
6
13
13
x2
Inspection
$300
Assembly
Storage
(last line)
Optimal
solution

834 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
the inspection equation by 3 and then subtracting the storage equation from the modified 
inspection equation. Thus,
 3(2
1
22)
becomes
6
3
66
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x




 
 Subtracting the storage equation from this produces
 
6
3
66
(3
3
39)
3
0
27
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
+
=
+
=
+
=

 
 Solving the resulting equation yields  x 1     9. The value of  x 2  can be found by substituting 
 x 1     9 into either of the original equations or the modified inspection equation. Suppose we 
use the original inspection equation. We have
 2(9)
1
22
2
x


 
 Solving, we find  x 2     4. 
 Hence, the optimal solution to the microcomputer problem is to produce nine type 1 com-
puters and four type 2 computers per day. We can substitute these values into the objective 
function to find the optimal profit:
 $60(9)
$50(4)
$740


 
 Hence, the last line—the one that would last touch the feasible solution space as we moved away 
from the origin parallel to the $300 profit line—would be the line where profit equaled $740. 
 In this problem, the optimal values for both decision variables are integers. This will not 
always be the case; one or both of the decision variables may turn out to be noninteger. In 
some situations noninteger values would be of little consequence. This would be true if the 
decision variables were measured on a continuous scale, such as the amount of water, sand, 
sugar, fuel oil, time, or distance needed for optimality, or if the contribution per unit (profit, 
cost, etc.) were small, as with the number of nails or ball bearings to make. In some cases, 
the answer would simply be rounded down (maximization problems) or up (minimization 
problems) with very little impact on the objective function. Here, we assume that noninteger 
answers are acceptable as such. 
 Let’s review the procedure for finding the optimal solution using the objective function 
approach:
 1. 
Graph the constraints. 
 2. 
Identify the feasible solution space. 
 3. 
Set the objective function equal to some amount that is divisible by each of the objec-
tive function coefficients. This will yield integer values for the  x 1 and  x 2 intercepts and 
simplify plotting the line. Often, the product of the two objective function coefficients 
provides a satisfactory line. Ideally, the line will cross the feasible solution space close 
to the optimal point, and it will not be necessary to slide a straight edge because the 
optimal solution can be readily identified visually. 
 4. 
After identifying the optimal point, determine which two constraints intersect there. 
Solve their equations simultaneously to obtain the values of the decision variables at the 
optimum.  
 5. 
Substitute the values obtained in the previous step into the objective function to deter-
mine the value of the objective function at the optimum. 
 Redundant Constraints 
 In some cases, a constraint does not form a unique boundary of the feasible solution space. 
Such a constraint is called a   redundant constraint.    Two such constraints are illustrated in 
 Figure 19.11 . Note that a constraint is redundant if it meets the following test: Its removal 
would not alter the feasible solution space. 
 Redundant constraint  
A constraint that does not form a 
unique boundary of the feasible 
solution space. 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
835
 When a problem has a redundant constraint, at least one of the other constraints in the 
problem is more restrictive than the redundant constraint. 
 Solutions and Corner Points 
 The feasible solution space in graphical linear programming is typically a polygon. More-
over, the solution to any problem will always be at a corner point (intersection of constraints) 
of the polygon. It is possible to determine the coordinates of each corner point of the fea-
sible solution space, and use those values to compute the value of the objective function at 
those points. Because the solution is always at a corner point, comparing the values of the 
objective function at the corner points and identifying the best one (e.g., the maximum value) 
is another way to identify the optimal corner point. Using the graphical approach, it is much 
easier to plot the objective function and use that to identify the optimal corner point. How-
ever, for problems that have more than two decision variables, and the graphical method isn’t 
appropriate, the “enumeration” approach is used to find the optimal solution. 
 With the   enumeration approach , the coordinates of each corner point are determined, and 
then each set of coordinates is substituted into the objective function to determine its value at 
that corner point. After all corner points have been evaluated, the one with the maximum or 
minimum value (depending on whether the objective is to maximize or minimize) is identified 
as the optimal solution. 
 Thus, in the microcomputer problem, the corner points are  x 1     0,  x 2     10,  x 1     11,  x 2     0 
(by inspection; see  Figure 19.10 ), and  x 1     9,  x 2     4 and  x 1     5,  x 2     8 (using simultaneous 
equations, as illustrated on pages 833–834). Substituting into the objective function, the values 
are $500 for (0,10); $740 for (9,4); $660 for (11,0), and $700 for (5,8). Because (9,4) yields the 
highest value, that corner point is the optimal solution. 
 In some instances, the objective function will be  parallel  to one of the constraint lines that 
forms a  boundary of the feasible solution space.  When this happens,  every  combination of  x 1 
and  x 2 on the segment of the constraint that touches the feasible solution space represents an 
optimal solution. Hence, there are multiple optimal solutions to the problem. Even in such a 
case, the solution will also be a corner point—in fact, the solution will be at  two  corner points: 
those at the ends of the segment that touches the feasible solution space.  Figure 19.12 illus-
trates an objective function line that is parallel to a constraint line. 
 Minimization 
 Graphical minimization problems are quite similar to maximization problems. There are, how-
ever, two important differences. One is that at least one of the constraints must be of the   or 
   variety. This causes the feasible solution space to be away from the origin. The other differ-
ence is that the optimal point is the one closest to the origin. We find the optimal corner point by 
sliding the objective function (which is an  isocost  line)  toward  the origin instead of away from it. 
 Enumeration approach  
Substituting the coordinates of 
each corner point into the objec-
tive function to determine which 
corner point is optimal.  
 FIGURE 19.11 
 Examples of redundant 
constraints  
30
x1
0
20
25
10
x2
+    = 20
x1
x2
   = 25
x2
2
 +  3    = 60
x1
x2
2
Redundant
Feasible
solution
space

836 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 FIGURE 19.12 
 Some LP problems have multiple 
optimal solutions 
x1
0
x2
Objective function
Optimal line
segment
 Solve the following problem using graphical linear programming.
 
Minimize
8
12
Subject to
5
2
20
4
3
24
2
,
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
Z
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x








 
 E X A M P L E  3 
  S O L U T I O N 
 1. 
Plot the constraints (shown in  Figure 19.13 ). 
  
a. Change constraints to equalities. 
  
b. For each constraint, set  x 1     0 and solve for  x 2 , then set  x 2     0 and solve for  x 1 . 
  
c.  Graph each constraint. Note that  x 2     2 is a horizontal line parallel to the  x 1 axis and 
2 units above it. 
 2. 
Shade the feasible solution space (see  Figure 19.13 ). 
 3. 
Plot the objective function.
     
a.  Select a value for the objective function that causes it to cross the feasible solution 
space. Try 8    12    96; 8 x 1     12 x 2     96 (acceptable). 
  
b. Graph the line (see  Figure 19.14 ).   
   4. 
Slide the objective function toward the origin, being careful to keep it parallel to the 
original line. 
   5. The optimum (last feasible point) is shown in  Figure 19.14 . The  x 2  coordinate ( x 2     2) 
can be determined by inspection of the graph. Note that the optimum point is at the inter-
section of the line  x 2     2 and the line 4 x 1     3 x 2     24. Substituting the value of  x 2     2 
into the latter equation will yield the value of  x 1 at the intersection:
 4
3(2)
24
4.5
1
1
x
x



 
 Thus, the optimum is  x 1     4.5 units and  x 2     2. 
 6. 
Compute the minimum cost:
 8
12
8(4.5)
12(2)
60
1
2
x
x




 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
837
 Slack and Surplus 
 If a constraint forms the optimal corner point of the feasible solution space, it is called a 
 binding constraint .  In effect, it limits the value of the objective function; if the constraint 
could be relaxed (less restrictive), an improved solution would be possible. For constraints 
that are not binding, making them less restrictive will have no impact on the solution. 
 If the optimal values of the decision variables are substituted into the left-hand side of 
a binding constraint, the resulting value will exactly equal the right-hand value of the con-
straint. However, there will be a difference with a nonbinding constraint. If the left-hand side 
is greater than the right-hand side, we say that there is   surplus ;  if the left-hand side is less 
than the right-hand side, we say that there is   slack .  Slack can only occur in a   constraint; 
it is the amount by which the left-hand side is less than the right-hand side when the optimal 
values of the decision variables are substituted into the left-hand side. And surplus can only 
occur in a     constraint; it is the amount by which the left-hand side exceeds the right-hand 
side of the constraint when the optimal values of the decision variables are substituted into 
the left-hand side. 
 For example, suppose the optimal values for a problem are  x 1     10 and  x 2     20. If one of 
the constraints is
 3
2
100
1
2
x
x


 
 substituting the optimal values into the left-hand side yields
 3(10)
2(20)
70


 
 Because the constraint is , the difference between the values of 100 and 70 (i.e., 30) is  slack. 
Suppose the optimal values had been  x 1     20 and  x 2     20. Substituting these values into the 
left-hand side of the constraint would yield 3(20)    2(20)    100. Because the left-hand side 
equals the right-hand side, this is a binding constraint; slack is equal to zero. 
 Now consider this constraint:
 4
50
1
2
x
x


 
 Suppose the optimal values are  x 1     10 and  x 2     15; substituting into the left-hand side yields
 4(10)
15
55


 
 Because this is a     constraint, the difference between the left- and right-hand-side values is 
 surplus.  If the optimal values had been  x 1     12 and  x 2     2, substitution would result in the 
 Binding constraint  A con-
straint that forms the optimal 
corner point of the feasible 
solution space.  
 Surplus  When the values of 
decision variables are substituted 
into a     constraint, the amount 
by which the resulting value 
exceeds the right-hand-side 
value. 
 Slack  When the values of 
decision variables are substituted 
into a ≤  constraint, the amount 
by which the resulting value 
is less than the right-hand-side 
value. 
 FIGURE 19.13   The constraints define the feasible 
solution space 
2
4
6
8
10
12
x1
0
2
4
6
8
x2
14
10
12
Feasible
solution
space
 5    + 2     = 20  
x  2 
x        
1
 4    + 3    = 24  
x2 
= 2
x2 
x1
 FIGURE 19.14   The optimum is the last point the objective function 
touches as it is moved toward the origin 
2
4
6
8
10
12
x1
0
2
4
6
8
x2
14
10
12
 8    + 12     = $96  
x2 
x1
Optimum
Objective
function

838 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
left-hand side being equal to 50. Hence, the constraint would be a binding constraint, and 
there would be no surplus (i.e., surplus would be zero). 
 19.4 THE SIMPLEX METHOD 
 The  simplex  method is a general-purpose linear programming algorithm widely used to solve 
large-scale problems. Although it lacks the intuitive appeal of the graphical approach, its abil-
ity to handle problems with more than two decision variables makes it extremely valuable for 
solving problems often encountered in operations management. 
 Although manual solution of linear programming problems using simplex can yield a 
number of insights into how solutions are derived, space limitations preclude describing it 
here. However, it is available on the Web site that accompanies this book. The discussion here 
will focus on computer solutions. 
19.5 COMPUTER SOLUTIONS  
    The microcomputer problem will be used to illustrate computer solutions. We repeat it here for 
ease of reference.
Maximize
60
50
where
the number of type 1 computers
the number of type 2 computers
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x



 
 Subject to
Assembly
4
10
100 hours
Inspection
2
1
22 hours
Storage
3
3
39 cubic feet
,
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x







 Solving LP Models Using MS Excel 
  Solutions to linear programming models can be obtained from spreadsheet software such as 
Microsoft’s Excel. Excel has a routine called Solver that performs the necessary calculations. 
 To use Solver:
   1. First, enter the problem in a worksheet, as shown in  Figure 19.15 . What is not obvious 
from the figure is the need to enter a formula for each cell where there is a zero (Solver auto-
matically inserts the zero after you input the formula). The formulas are for the value of the 
objective function and the constraints, in the appropriate cells. Before you enter the formulas, 
designate the cells where you want the optimal values of  x 1  and  x 2 . Here, cells D4 and E4 are 
used. To enter a formula, click on the cell that the formula will pertain to, and then enter the 
formula, starting with an equal sign. We want the optimal value of the objective function to 
appear in cell G4. For G4, enter the formula 
60*D4  50*E4 
 The constraint formulas, using cells C7, C8, and C9, are
 for C7:       4*D4   10*E4 
 for C8:       2*D4   1*E4 
 for C9:       3*D4   3*E4 
  2. Now, to access Solver in Excel 2010 or 2007, click  D ata at the top of the worksheet, and 
in that ribbon, click on  S olver in the Analysis group. In Excel 2010 the Solver menu will appear 
as illustrated in  Figure 19.16 . If it does not appear there, it must be enabled using the Add-ins 
menu. Begin by setting the Objective (i.e., indicating the cell where you want the optimal value 
of the objective function to appear). Note, if the activated cell is the cell designated for the 
value of Z when you click on  S olver, Solver will automatically set that cell as the Objective.  
 Simplex  A linear programming 
algorithm that can solve prob-
lems having more than two deci-
sion variables.  
 LO19.4 Interpret computer 
solutions of linear program-
ming problems.
  SCREEN C AM TUTORIAL 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
839
 Select the  M ax radio button if it isn’t already selected. The Changing Variable Cells are 
the cells where you want the optimal values of the decision variables to appear. Here, they are 
cells D4 and E4. We indicate this by the range D4:E4 (Solver will add the $ signs). 
 Finally, add the constraints by clicking on  A dd . . . When that menu appears, for each 
constraint, enter the cell that contains the formula for the left-hand side of the constraint, 
then select the appropriate inequality sign, and then enter the right-hand-side amount of 
the cell that has the right-hand-side amount. Here the right-hand-side amounts are used. 
After you have entered each constraint, either click on  A dd to add another constraint or 
click on OK to return to the Solver menu. ( Note:  Constraints can be entered in any order, 
and if cells are used for the right-hand side, then constraints with the same inequality 
could be grouped.) For the nonnegativity constraints simply check the checkbox to Make 
Unconstrained Variables Non-Negative. Also select Simplex LP as the Solving Method. 
Click on Solve.  
 FIGURE 19.15 
 MS Excel worksheet for 
microcomputer problem 
 FIGURE 19.16 
 MS Excel Solver parameters for 
microcomputer problem 

840 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
  3. The Solver Results menu will then appear, indicating that a solution has been found, or 
that an error has occurred. If there has been an error, go back to the Solver Parameters menu 
and check to see that your constraints refer to the correct changing cells, and that the inequal-
ity directions are correct. Make the corrections and click on  S olve. 
 Assuming everything is correct, in the Solver Results menu, in the Reports box, highlight 
both Answer and Sensitivity, and then click OK. 
  4. Solver will incorporate the optimal values of the decision variables and the objec-
tive function in your original layout on your worksheet (see  Figure 19.17 ). We can see that 
the optimal values are type 1    9 units and type 2    4 units, and the total profit is 740. 
The answer report will also show the optimal values of the decision variables (middle part 
of   Figure 19.18 ), and some information on the constraints (lower part of  Figure 19.18 ). Of 
 particular interest here is the indication of which constraints have slack and how much slack. 
 FIGURE 19.17 
 MS Excel worksheet solution for 
microcomputer problem 
 FIGURE 19.18 
 MS Excel Answer Report for 
microcomputer problem 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
841
We can see that the constraint entered in cell C7 (assembly) has a slack of 24, and that the 
constraints entered in cells C8 (inspection) and C9 (storage) have slack equal to zero, indicat-
ing that they are binding constraints.         
 19.6 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
 Sensitivity analysis   is a means of assessing the impact of potential changes to the param-
eters (the numerical values) of an LP model. Such changes may occur due to forces beyond a 
manager’s control, or a manager may be contemplating making the changes, say, to increase 
profits or reduce costs. 
 There are three types of potential changes:
 1. 
Objective function coefficients. 
 2. 
Right-hand values of constraints. 
 3. 
Constraint coefficients. 
 We will consider the first two of these here. We begin with changes to objective function 
coefficients. 
 Objective Function Coefficient Changes 
 A change in the value of an objective function coefficient can cause a change in the optimal 
solution of a problem. In a graphical solution, this would mean a change to another corner 
point of the feasible solution space. However, not every change in the value of an objective 
function coefficient will lead to a changed solution; generally there is a  range of values 
for which the optimal values of the decision variables will not change.  For example, in the 
microcomputer problem, if the profit on type 1 computers increased from $60 per unit to, 
say, $65 per unit, the optimal solution would still be to produce nine units of type 1 and four 
units of type 2 computers. Similarly, if the profit per unit on type 1 computers decreased 
from $60 to, say, $58, producing nine of type 1 and four of type 2 would still be optimal. 
These sorts of changes are not uncommon; they may be the result of such things as price 
changes in raw materials, price discounts, cost reductions in production, and so on. Obvi-
ously, when a change does occur in the value of an objective function coefficient, it can be 
helpful for a manager to know if that change will affect the optimal values of the decision 
variables. The manager can quickly determine this by referring to that coefficient’s   range of 
optimality ,  which is the range in possible values of that objective function coefficient over 
which the optimal values of the decision variables will not change. Before we see how to 
determine the range, consider the implication of the range. The range of optimality for the 
type 1 coefficient in the microcomputer problem is 50 to 100. That means that as long as the 
coefficient’s value is in that range, the optimal values will be nine units of type 1 and four 
units of type 2. Conversely,  if a change extends beyond the range of optimality, the solution 
will change.  
 Similarly, suppose instead that the coefficient (unit profit) of type 2 computers was to 
change. Its range of optimality is 30 to 60. As long as the change doesn’t take it outside of this 
range, nine and four will still be the optimal values. Note, however, even for changes that are 
 within  the range of optimality, the optimal value of the objective function  will  change. If the 
type 1 coefficient increased from $60 to $61, and nine units of type 1 is still optimum, profit 
would increase by $9: nine units times $1 per unit. Thus, for a change that is within the range 
of optimality, a revised value of the objective function must be determined. 
 Now let’s see how we can determine the range of optimality using computer output. 
 Using MS Excel.  There is a table for the Changing Cells (see  Figure 19.19 ). It shows 
the value of the objective function that was used in the problem for each type of computer 
(i.e., 60 and 50), and the allowable increase and allowable decrease for each coefficient. By 
subtracting the allowable decrease from the original value of the coefficient, and adding the 
 Sensitivity analysis  Assessing 
the impact of potential changes 
to the numerical values of an 
LP model. 
 Range of optimality  Range 
of values over which the solu-
tion quantities of all the decision 
variables remain the same. 
 LO19.5  Do sensitivity analysis 
on the solution to a linear 
programming problem.
 SCREEN C AM TUTORIAL 

842 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
allowable increase to the original value of the coefficient, we obtain the range of optimality 
for each coefficient. Thus, we find for type 1: 
 60
10
50
and
60
40
100




 
 Hence, the range for the type 1 coefficient is 50 to 100. For type 2:
 50
20
30
and
50
10
60




 
 Hence the range for the type 2 coefficient is 30 to 60. 
 In this example, both of the decision variables are  basic  (i.e., nonzero). However, in other 
problems, one or more decision variables may be  nonbasic  (i.e., have an optimal value of 
zero). In such instances, unless the value of that variable’s objective function coefficient 
increases by more than its  reduced cost,  it won’t come into solution (i.e., become a basic 
variable). Hence, the range of optimality (sometimes referred to as the  range of insignifi-
cance ) for a nonbasic variable is from negative infinity to the sum of its current value and its 
reduced cost. 
 Now let’s see how we can handle multiple changes to objective function coefficients, that 
is, a change in more than one coefficient. To do this, divide each coefficient’s change by the 
allowable change in the same direction. Thus, if the change is a decrease, divide that amount 
by the allowable decrease. Treat all resulting fractions as positive. Sum the fractions. If the 
sum does not exceed 1.00, then multiple changes are within the range of optimality and will 
not result in any change to the optimal values of the decision variables. 
 Changes in the Right-Hand-Side (RHS) Value 
of a Constraint 
 In considering right-hand-side (RHS) changes, it is important to know if a particular  constraint 
is binding on a solution. A constraint is binding if substituting the values of the decision vari-
ables of that solution into the left-hand side of the constraint results in a value that is equal 
to the RHS value. In other words, that constraint stops the objective function from achieving 
a better value (e.g., a greater profit or a lower cost). Each constraint has a corresponding 
 shadow price ,  which is a marginal value that indicates the amount by which the value of the 
objective function would change if there were a one-unit change in the RHS value of that 
constraint. If a constraint is nonbinding, its shadow price is zero, meaning that increasing 
 Shadow price  Amount by 
which the value of the objec-
tive function would change with 
a one-unit change in the RHS 
value of a constraint. 
 FIGURE 19.19 
 MS Excel sensitivity report for 
microcomputer problem 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
843
or decreasing its RHS value by one unit will have no impact on the value of the objective 
function. Nonbinding constraints have either slack (if the constraint is ) or surplus (if the 
constraint is    ). Suppose a constraint has 10 units of slack in the optimal solution, which 
means 10 units that are unused. If we were to increase or decrease the constraint’s RHS value 
by one unit, the only effect would be to increase or decrease its slack by one unit. But there 
is no profit associated with slack, so the value of the objective function wouldn’t change. On 
the other hand, if the change is to the RHS value of a binding constraint, then the optimal 
value of the objective function would change. Any change in a binding constraint will cause 
the optimal values of the decision variables to change, and hence, cause the value of the 
objective function to change. For example, in the microcomputer problem, the inspection 
constraint is a binding constraint; it has a shadow price of 10. That means if there was one 
hour less of inspection time, total profit would decrease by $10, or if there was one more hour 
of inspection time available, total profit would increase by $10. In general, multiplying the 
amount of change in the RHS value of a constraint by the constraint’s shadow price will indi-
cate the change’s impact on the optimal value of the objective function. However, this is only 
true over a limited range called the   range of feasibility .  In this range, the value of the shadow 
price remains constant. Hence, as long as a change in the RHS value of a constraint is within 
its range of feasibility, the shadow price will remain the same, and one can readily determine 
the impact on the objective function. 
 Let’s see how to determine the range of feasibility from computer output. 
 Using MS Excel.  In the sensitivity report there is a table labeled “Constraints” (see 
 Figure 19.19 ). The table shows the shadow price for each constraint, its RHS value, and the 
allowable increase and allowable decrease. Adding the allowable increase to the RHS value 
and subtracting the allowable decrease will produce the range of feasibility for that constraint. 
For example, for the inspection constraint, the range would be
 22
4
26;
22
4
18




 
 Hence, the range of feasibility for inspection is 18 to 26 hours. Similarly, for the storage con-
straint, the range is
 39
6
33
to
39
4.5
43.5




 
 The range for the assembly constraint is a little different; the assembly constraint is non-
binding (note the shadow price of 0) while the other two are binding (note their nonzero 
shadow prices). The assembly constraint has a slack of 24 (the difference between its RHS 
value of 100 and its final value of 76). With its slack of 24, its RHS value could be decreased 
by as much as 24 (to 76) before it would become binding. Conversely, increasing its right-
hand side will only produce more slack. Thus, no amount of increase in the RHS value will 
make it binding, so there is no upper limit on the allowable increase. Excel indicates this by 
the large value (1E    30) shown for the allowable increase. So its range of feasibility has a 
lower limit of 76 and no upper limit. 
 If there are changes to more than one constraint’s RHS value, analyze these in the same 
way as multiple changes to objective function coefficients. That is, if the change is an increase, 
divide that amount by that constraint’s allowable increase; if the change is a decrease, divide 
the decrease by the allowable decrease. Treat all resulting fractions as positives. Sum the frac-
tions. As long as the sum does not exceed 1.00, the changes are within the range of feasibility 
for multiple changes, and the shadow prices won’t change. 
  Table 19.1  summarizes the impacts of changes that fall within either the range of optimal-
ity or the range of feasibility. 
 Now let’s consider what happens if a change goes beyond a particular range. In a situation 
involving the range of optimality, a change in an objective function that is beyond the range 
of optimality will result in a new solution. Hence, it will be necessary to recompute the solu-
tion. For a situation involving the range of feasibility, there are two cases to consider. The first 
case would be increasing the RHS value of a  constraint to beyond the upper limit of its 
 Range of feasibility  Range 
of values for the RHS of a con-
straint over which the shadow 
price remains the same.  

 SOLVED PROBLEMS 
 A small construction firm specializes in building and selling single-family homes. The firm offers 
two basic types of houses, model A and model B. Model A houses require 4,000 labor hours, 2 tons 
of stone, and 2,000 board feet of lumber. Model B houses require 10,000 labor hours, 3 tons of stone, 
and 2,000 board feet of lumber. Due to long lead times for ordering supplies and the scarcity of 
skilled and semiskilled workers in the area, the firm will be forced to rely on its present resources for 
the upcoming building season. It has 400,000 hours of labor, 150 tons of stone, and 200,000 board 
 Problem 1 
844 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
range of feasibility. This would produce slack equal to the amount by which the upper limit is 
exceeded. Hence, if the upper limit is 200, and the increase is 220, the result is that the con-
straint has a slack of 20. Similarly, for a     constraint, going below its lower bound creates a 
surplus for that constraint. The second case for each of these would be exceeding the opposite 
limit (the lower bound for a   constraint, or the upper bound for a     constraint). In either 
instance, a new solution would have to be generated. 
 Changes to objective function coefficients that are within the range of optimality 
 Component 
 Result 
 Values of decision variables 
 No change 
 Value of objective function 
 Will change 
 Changes to RHS values of constraints that are within the range of feasibility 
 Component 
 Result 
 Value of shadow price 
 No change 
 List of basic variables 
 No change 
 Values of basic variables 
 Will change 
 Value of objective function 
 Will change 
 TABLE 19.1 
 Summary of the impact of 
changes within their respective 
ranges 
 Linear programming is a powerful tool used for constrained optimization situations. Components of LP 
problems include an objective function, decision variables, constraints, and numerical values (parameters) 
of the objective function and constraints. 
 The size of real-life problems and the burden of manual solution make computer solutions the practi-
cal way to solve real-life problems. Even so, much insight can be gained through the study of simple, 
two-variable problems and graphical solutions. 
 SUMMARY 
 1. 
Optimizing techniques such as linear programming help business organizations make the best use 
of limited resources such as materials, time, and energy, to maximize profits or to minimize costs. 
 2. 
As with all techniques, it is important to confirm that the underlying assumptions on which the 
technique is based are reasonably satisfied by the model in order to achieve valid results. 
   3. 
Although the graphical technique has limited use due to the fact that it can only handle two-vari-
able problems, it is very useful in conveying many of the important concepts associated with linear 
programming techniques.  
 KEY POINTS 
 binding constraint, 837 
 constraints, 824 
 decision variables, 824 
 enumeration approach, 835 
 feasible solution 
space, 824 
 graphical linear 
programming, 826 
 objective function, 824 
 parameters, 824 
 range of feasibility, 843 
 range of optimality, 841 
 redundant constraint, 834 
 sensitivity analysis, 841 
 shadow price, 842 
 simplex, 838 
 slack, 837 
 surplus, 837 
 KEY TERMS 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
845
feet of lumber. What mix of model A and B houses should the firm construct if model A yields a 
profit of $3,000 per unit and model B yields $6,000 per unit? Assume that the firm will be able to sell 
all the units it builds. 
 1. Formulate the objective function and constraints: 1 
 Maximize
3,000
6,000
Z
A
B


 
  
Subject to
 
Labor
Stone
Lumber
4,000
2
2,000
10,000
3
2,000
,
400,000 labor hours
150 tons
200,000 board feet
0
A
A
A
B
B
B
A B







 
 2. Graph the constraints and objective function, and identify the optimum corner point (see graph). 
Note that the lumber constraint is  redundant: It does not form a boundary of the feasible solu-
tion space. 
 Solution 
1 For the sake of consistency, we will assign to the horizontal axis the first decision variable mentioned in the 
problem. In this case, variable  A will be represented on the horizontal axis and variable  B on the vertical axis. 
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Number of units of model A
Number of units of model B
Redundant
Lumber
Optimum
Labor
Stone
 3. Determine the optimal quantities of models A and B, and compute the resulting profit. Because 
the optimum point is at the intersection of the stone and labor constraints, solve those two equa-
tions for their common point:
Labor 4,000
10,000
400,000
2,000
(Stone 2
3
150)
4,000
100,000
25
A
B
A
B
B
B








 
 Substitute  B     25 in one of the equations, and solve for  A: 
 2
3(25)
150
37.5
3,000(37.5)
6,000(25)
262,500
A
A
Z






 
 4. We could have used the enumeration approach to find the optimal corner point. The corner 
points and the value of the objective function at each corner point are:
A     0,  B     40 (found by inspection);  Z     3,000(0)    6,000(40)    240,000 
 A     37.5,  B     25 (found using simultaneous equations);  Z     262,500 (see step 3) 
A     75,  B     0 (found by inspection);  Z     3,000(75)    6,000(0)    225,000 
 The best value of  Z is 262,500 (because this is a maximization problem), so that indicates that 
the optimal corner point is  A     37.5,  B     25. 

846 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 This LP model was solved by computer:
 Maximize 15
20
14
1
2
3
x
x
x


 
 where 
 x 1     quantity of product 1 
 
 x 2     quantity of product 2 
 
 x 3     quantity of product 3 
 Subject to
 
Labor
Material
Machine
5
6
4
10
8
5
4
2
5
,
,
210 hours
200 pounds
170 minutes
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x










 
 The following information was obtained from the output. The ranges were also computed based on 
the output, and they are shown as well. 
 Problem 2 
 TOTAL PROFIT    548.00 
 Variable 
 Value 
 Reduced Cost 
 Range of Optimality 
 Product 1 
 0 
 10.6 
 unlimited to 25.60 
 Product 2 
 5 
 0 
 9.40 to 22.40 
 Product 3 
 32 
 0 
 12.50 to 50.00 
 Constraint 
 Slack 
 Shadow Price 
 Range of Feasibility 
 Labor 
 52 
 0.0 
 158.00 to unlimited 
 Material 
 0 
 2.4 
 170.00 to 270.91 
 Machine 
 0 
 0.4 
 50.00 to 200.00 
 a. Which decision variables are basic (i.e., in solution)? 
   b. By how much would the profit per unit of product 1 have to increase in order for it to have a non-
zero value (i.e., for it to become a basic variable)? 
   c. If the profit per unit of product 2 increased by $2 to $22, would the optimal production quantities 
of products 2 and 3 change? Would the optimal value of the objective function change? 
   d. If the available amount of labor decreased by 12 hours, would that cause a change in the optimal val-
ues of the decision variables or the optimal value of the objective function? Would anything change? 
   e. If the available amount of material increased by 10 pounds to 210 pounds, how would that affect 
the optimal value of the objective function? 
   f. If profit per unit on product 2 increased by $1 and profit per unit on product 3 decreased by $.50, 
would that fall within the range of multiple changes? Would the values of the decision variables 
change? What would be the revised value of the objective function? 
    a. Products 2 and 3 are in solution (i.e., have nonzero values); the optimal value of product 2 is 5 
units, and the optimal value of product 3 is 32 units. 
 b. The amount of increase would have to equal its  reduced cost of $10.60. 
   c. No, because the change would be within its range of optimality, which has an upper limit of 
$22.40. The objective function value would increase by an amount equal to the quantity of prod-
uct 2 and its increased unit profit. Hence, it would increase by 5($2)    $10 to $558. 
   d. Labor has a slack of 52 hours. Consequently, the only effect would be to decrease the slack to 40 hours.  
 e. The change is within the range of feasibility. The objective function value will increase by the 
amount of change multiplied by material’s shadow price of $2.40. Hence, the objective function 
value would increase by 10($2.40)    $24.00. ( Note:  If the change had been a  decrease  of 10 
pounds, which is also within the range of feasibility, the value of the objective function would 
have  decreased by this amount.) 
   f. To determine if the changes are within the range for multiple changes, we first compute the ratio 
of the amount of each change to the end of the range  in the same direction.  For product 2, it is 
$1/$2.40    .417; for product 3, it is   $.50/    $1.50    .333. Next, we compute the sum of these 
ratios: .417    .333    .750. Because this does not exceed 1.00, we conclude that these changes are 
within the range. This means that the optimal values of the decision variables will not change. We 
can compute the change to the value of the objective function by multiplying each product’s optimal 
quantity by its changed profit per unit: 5($1)    32(  $.50)      $11. Hence, with these changes, the 
value of the objective function would decrease by $11; its new value would be $548    $11    $537.  
 Solution 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
847
 1. For which decision environment is linear programming most suited? 
 2. What is meant by the term  feasible solution space? What determines this region? 
 3. Explain the term  redundant constraint. 
 4. What is an isocost line? An isoprofit line? 
 5. What does sliding an objective function line toward the origin represent? Away from the origin? 
 6. Briefly explain these terms:
 a. Basic variable. 
 b. Shadow price. 
 c. Range of feasibility. 
 d. Range of optimality. 
 DISCUSSION 
AND REVIEW 
QUESTIONS 
 1. Solve these problems using graphical linear programming and answer the questions that follow. Use 
simultaneous equations to determine the optimal values of the decision variables.
 a. Maximize    Z     4 x 1     3 x 2 
  Subject to
 
Material
Labor
6
4
4
8
,
48 lb
80 hr
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x





 
 b. Maximize    Z     2 x 1     10 x 2 
 Subject to
 
Durability
Strength
Time
10
4
1
6
1
2
,
40 wk
24 psi
14 hr
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x







 
 c. Maximize    Z     6 A     3 B (revenue) 
 Subject to
 
A
A
A
B
B
B
A B
Material
Machinery
Labor
20
25
20
6
20
30
,
600 lb
1,000 hr
1,200 hr
0







 
 (1)  What are the optimal values of the decision variables and  Z? 
 (2)  Do any constraints have (nonzero) slack? If yes, which one(s) and how much slack does each 
have? 
 (3)  Do any constraints have (nonzero) surplus? If yes, which one(s) and how much surplus does 
each have? 
 (4)  Are any constraints redundant? If yes, which one(s)? Explain briefly. 
 2. Solve these problems using graphical linear programming and then answer the questions that fol-
low. Use simultaneous equations to determine the optimal values of the decision variables.
 a. Minimize    Z     1.80 S     2.20 T 
 Subject to
 
Potassium
Carbohydrate
Protein
5
8
15
6
4
12
,
200 gr
240 gr
180 gr
10 gr
0
T
S
T
S
T
S
T
T
S T
 
 






 
 b. Minimize    Z     2 x 1     3 x 2 
 Subject to
 
D
E
F
4
2
2
6
1
2
,
20
18
12
0
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x







 
 (1) What are the optimal values of the decision variables and  Z? 
 (2) Do any constraints have (nonzero) slack? If yes, which one(s) and how much slack does each have? 
 (3)  Do any constraints have (nonzero) surplus? If yes, which one(s) and how much surplus does 
each have?  
 (4)  Are any constraints redundant? If yes, which one(s)? Explain briefly. 
 PROBLEMS 

848 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 3. An appliance manufacturer produces two models of microwave ovens: H and W. Both models 
require fabrication and assembly work; each H uses four hours of fabrication and two hours of 
assembly, and each W uses two hours of fabrication and six hours of assembly. There are 600 fabri-
cation hours available this week and 480 hours of assembly. Each H contributes $40 to profits, and 
each W contributes $30 to profits. What quantities of H and W will maximize profits?
 a. Use the objective function approach. 
 b. Use the enumeration approach. 
 4. A small candy shop is preparing for the holiday season. The owner must decide how many bags of 
deluxe mix and how many bags of standard mix of Peanut/Raisin Delite to put up. The deluxe mix 
has 2⁄3 pound raisins and 1⁄3 pound peanuts, and the standard mix has ½ pound raisins and ½ pound 
peanuts per bag. The shop has 90 pounds of raisins and 60 pounds of peanuts to work with. 
  
   Peanuts cost $.60 per pound and raisins cost $1.50 per pound. The deluxe mix will sell for 
$2.90 for a one-pound bag, and the standard mix will sell for $2.55 for a one-pound bag. The 
owner  estimates that no more than 110 bags of one type can be sold.
 a. If the goal is to maximize profits, how many bags of each type should be prepared? 
 b. What is the expected profit? 
 5. A retired couple supplement their income by making fruit pies, which they sell to a local grocery 
store. During the month of September, they produce apple and grape pies. The apple pies are sold 
for $1.50 to the grocer, and the grape pies are sold for $1.20. The couple is able to sell all of the 
pies they produce owing to their high quality. They use fresh ingredients. Flour and sugar are pur-
chased once each month. For the month of September, they have 1,200 cups of sugar and 2,100 
cups of flour. Each apple pie requires 1½ cups of sugar and 3 cups of flour, and each grape pie 
requires 2 cups of sugar and 3 cups of flour.
 a. Determine the number of grape and the number of apple pies that will maximize revenues if the 
couple working together can make an apple pie in six minutes and a grape pie in three minutes. 
They plan to work no more than 60 hours. 
 b. Determine the amounts of sugar, flour, and time that will be unused. 
 6. Solve each of these problems by computer and obtain the optimal values of the decision variables 
and the objective function.
 a. Maximize   4 x 1     2 x 2     5 x 3 
  Subject to
 
1
2
1
1
4
2
3
3
 1
,
,
25
40
30
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x










 
 b. Maximize   10 x 1     6 x 2     3 x 3 
  Subject to
 
1
1
2
2
1
4
1
2
3
,
,
25
40
40
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x










 
 7. For Problem 6 a, determine the following:
 a. The range of feasibility for each constraint. 
 b. The range of optimality for the coefficients of the objective function. 
 8. For Problem 6 b: 
 a. Find the range of feasibility for each constraint, and interpret your answers. 
 b. Determine the range of optimality for each coefficient of the objective function. Interpret your 
results. 
 9. A small firm makes three similar products, which all follow the same three-step process, consisting of 
milling, inspection, and drilling. Product A requires 12 minutes of milling, 5 minutes for inspection, 
and 10 minutes of drilling per unit; product B requires 10 minutes of milling, 4 minutes for inspec-
tion, and 8 minutes of drilling per unit; and product C requires 8 minutes of milling, 4 minutes for 
inspection, and 16 minutes of drilling. The department has 20 hours available during the next period 
for milling, 15 hours for inspection, and 24 hours for drilling. Product A contributes $2.40 per unit to 
profit, product B contributes $2.50 per unit, and product C contributes $3.00 per unit. Determine the 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
849
 
 Product 
 Retail Price per Quart 
 Orange juice 
 $1.00 
 Grapefruit juice 
    .90 
 Pineapple juice 
    .80 
 All-in-One 
  1.10 
 
 
 
 TIME PER UNIT (MINUTES) 
 Item 
 Profit/Unit 
 Cutting 
 Gluing 
 Finishing 
 Chopping board 
 $2 
 1.4 
  5 
 12 
 Knife holder 
 $6 
 0.8 
 13 
  3 
contributes $300 per unit. Determine the optimal mix of products in terms of maximizing contribution 
to profits for the period. Then, find the range of optimality for the profit coefficient of each variable.  
 10. Formulate and then solve a linear programming model of this problem, to determine how many 
containers of each product to produce tomorrow to maximize profits. The company makes four 
juice products using orange, grapefruit, and pineapple juice. 
 The All-in-One juice has equal parts of orange, grapefruit, and pineapple juice. Each product is 
produced in a one-quart size (there are four quarts in a gallon). On hand are 400 gallons of orange 
juice, 300 gallons of grapefruit juice, and 200 gallons of pineapple juice. The cost per gallon is 
$2.00 for orange juice, $1.60 for grapefruit juice, and $1.40 for pineapple juice. 
  
  In addition, the manager wants grapefruit juice to be used for no more than 30 percent of the 
number of containers produced. She wants the ratio of the number of containers of orange juice to 
the number of containers of pineapple juice to be at least 7 to 5. 
 11. A wood products firm uses available time at the end of each week to make goods for stock. 
Currently, two products on the list of items are produced for stock: a chopping board and a knife 
holder. Both items require three operations: cutting, gluing, and finishing. The manager of the firm 
has collected the following data on these products: 
 The manager has also determined that, during each week, 56 minutes are available for cutting, 650 
minutes are available for gluing, and 360 minutes are available for finishing.
 a. Determine the optimal quantities of the decision variables if the goal is to maximize profit. 
 b. Which resources are not completely used by your solution? How much of each resource is 
unused? 
 12. The manager of the deli section of a grocery superstore has just learned that the department has 
112 pounds of mayonnaise, of which 70 pounds is approaching its expiration date and must be 
used. To use up the mayonnaise, the manager has decided to prepare two items: a ham spread and 
a deli spread. Each pan of the ham spread will require 1.4 pounds of mayonnaise, and each pan 
of the deli spread will require 1.0 pound. The manager has received an order for 10 pans of ham 
spread and 8 pans of the deli spread. In addition, the manager has decided to have at least 10 pans 
of each spread available for sale. Both spreads will cost $3 per pan to make, but ham spread sells 
for $5 per pan and deli spread sells for $7 per pan.
 a. Determine the solution that will minimize cost. 
 b. Determine the solution that will maximize profit. 
 13. A manager wants to know how many units of each product to produce on a daily basis in order to 
achieve the highest contribution to profit. Production requirements for the products are shown in 
the following table. 
 Product 
 Material 1 
(pounds)  
 Material 2 
(pounds)  
 Labor 
(hours)  
 A 
 2 
 3 
 3.2 
 B 
 1 
 5 
 1.5 
 C 
 6 
 — 
 2.0 
 Material 1 costs $5 a pound, material 2 costs $4 a pound, and labor costs $10 an hour. Product A 
sells for $80 a unit, product B sells for $90 a unit, and product C sells for $70 a unit. Available 
resources each day are 200 pounds of material 1; 300 pounds of material 2; and 150 hours of labor. 

850 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
  The manager must satisfy certain output requirements: The output of product A should not be 
more than one-third of the total number of units produced; the ratio of units of product A to units 
of product B should be 3 to 2; and there is a standing order for 5 units of product A each day. For-
mulate a linear programming model for this problem, and then solve. 
 14. A chocolate maker has contracted to operate a small candy counter in a fashionable store. To start 
with, the selection of offerings will be intentionally limited. The counter will offer a regular mix of 
candy made up of equal parts of cashews, raisins, caramels, and chocolates, and a deluxe mix that is 
one-half cashews and one-half chocolates, which will be sold in one-pound boxes. In addition, the 
candy counter will offer individual one-pound boxes of cashews, raisins, caramels, and chocolates. 
  A major attraction of the candy counter is that all candies are made fresh at the counter. How-
ever, storage space for supplies and ingredients is limited. Bins are available that can hold the 
amounts shown in the table: 
 Ingredient 
 Capacity 
(pounds per day) 
 Cashews 
 120 
 Raisins 
 200 
 Caramels 
 100 
 Chocolates 
 160 
 In order to present a good image and to encourage purchases, the counter will make at least 20 
boxes of each type of product each day. Any leftover boxes at the end of the day will be removed 
and given to a nearby nursing home for goodwill. 
  The profit per box for the various items has been determined as follows: 
 Item 
 Profit per Box 
 Regular 
 $.80 
 Deluxe 
 .90 
 Cashews 
 .70 
 Raisins 
 .60 
 Caramels 
 .50 
 Chocolates 
 .75 
 a. Formulate the LP model. 
 b. Solve for the optimal values of the decision variables and the maximum profit. 
 15. Given this linear programming model, solve the model and then answer the questions that follow. 
 Maximize  12 x 1     18 x 2     15 x 3  where  x 1     the quantity of product 1 to make, etc. 
 Subject to
 
Machine
5
4
3
160 minutes
Labor
4
10
4
288 hours
Materials
2
2
4
200 pounds
Product 2
16 units
,
,
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
2
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
  
+  
  
+  
  
+  
            
                








 
 a. Are any constraints binding? If so, which one(s)? 
 b. If the profit on product 3 were changed to $22 a unit, what would the values of the decision 
variables be? The objective function? Explain. 
 c. If the profit on product 1 were changed to $22 a unit, what would the values of the decision 
variables be? The objective function? Explain. 
 d. If 10 hours less of labor time were available, what would the values of the decision variables 
be? The objective function? Explain. 
 e. If the manager decided that as many as 20 units of product 2 could be produced (instead of 16), 
how much additional profit would be generated? 
 f. If profit per unit on each product increased by $1, would the optimal values of the decision 
variables change? Explain. What would the optimal value of the objective function be? 

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
851
 16. A garden store prepares various grades of pine bark for mulch: nuggets ( x 1 ), mini-nuggets ( x 2 ), 
and chips ( x 3 ). The process requires pine bark, machine time, labor time, and storage space. The 
following model has been developed. 
 Maximize  9 x 1     9 x 2     6 x 3 (profit) 
 Subject to
Bark
5
6
3
600 pounds
Machine
2
4
5
600 minutes
Labor
2
4
3
480 hours
Storage
1
1
1
150 bags
,
,
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
+
            
+
           
+
           
           
    
           










 a. What is the marginal value of a pound of pine bark? Over what range is this price value appropriate?  
 b. What is the maximum price the store would be justified in paying for additional pine bark? 
 c. What is the marginal value of labor? Over what range is this value in effect? 
 d. The manager obtained additional machine time through better scheduling. How much addi-
tional machine time can be effectively used for this operation? Why? 
 e. If the manager can obtain  either additional pine bark or additional storage space, which one 
should she choose and how much (assuming additional quantities cost the same as usual)? 
 f. If a change in the chip operation increased the profit on chips from $6 per bag to $7 per bag, 
would the optimal quantities change? Would the value of the objective function change? If so, 
what would the new value(s) be? 
 g. If profits on chips increased to $7 per bag and profits on nuggets decreased by $.60, would the 
optimal quantities change? Would the value of the objective function change? If so, what would 
the new value(s) be? 
 h. If the amount of pine bark available decreased by 15 pounds, machine time decreased by 
27 minutes, and storage capacity increased by five bags, would this fall in the range of feasibil-
ity for multiple changes? If so, what would the value of the objective function be? 
 Son, Ltd. 
 CASE 
 Son, Ltd., manufactures a variety of chemical products used by photo-
processors. Son was recently bought out by a conglomerate, and man-
agers of the two organizations have been working together to improve 
the efficiency of Son’s operations. 
 Managers have been asked to adhere to weekly operating budgets 
and to develop operating plans using quantitative methods whenever 
possible. The manager of one department has been given a weekly 
operating budget of $11,980 for production of three chemical products, 
which for convenience shall be referred to as Q, R, and W. The budget is 
intended to pay for direct labor and materials. Processing requirements 
for the three products, on a per-unit basis, are shown in the table. 
 The company has a contractual obligation for 85 units of product 
R  per week. 
 Material A costs $4 per pound, as does material B. Labor costs 
$8  an hour. 
 Product Q sells for $122 a unit, product R sells for $115 a unit, and 
product W sells for $76 a unit. 
 The manager is considering a number of different proposals regard-
ing the quantity of each product to produce. The manager is primarily 
interested in maximizing contribution. Moreover, the manager wants to 
know how much labor will be needed, as well as 
the amount of each material to purchase. 
 Questions 
 Prepare a report that addresses the following issues:
    1. The optimal quantities of products and the necessary quantities of 
labor and materials. 
 2. One proposal is to make equal amounts of the products. What 
amount of each will maximize contribution, and what quantities of 
labor and materials will be needed? How much less will total contri-
bution be if this proposal is adopted?  
   3. How would you formulate the constraint for material A if it was 
determined that there is a 5 percent waste factor for material A and 
equal quantities of each product are required?  
 Product 
 Labor 
(hours) 
 Material A 
(pounds)  
 Material B 
(pounds) 
 Q 
 5 
 2 
 1 
 R 
 4 
 2 
 — 
 W 
 2 
 ½ 
 2 

852 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming
 Custom Cabinets, Inc. (CCI), manufactures two major lines of kitchen 
and bathroom cabinets. The SemiCustom Line consists of cabinets that 
are variations on a standard design. These cabinets are made to order. 
The StandardLine is a lower-priced line of cabinets that use standard-
ized designs and materials. StandardLine cabinets are made to stock. 
The company has been in business for many years and has consistently 
performed well financially. 
 It was obvious that something big was up as the management staff 
began to gather for a meeting called by CCI General Manager John Flem-
ing. There was little of the usual light banter, and more significantly, there 
were no coffee and donuts. The CCI culture celebrates even small achieve-
ments with coffee and donuts. Their absence was not a good omen. 
 John began rather somberly. “As you know we are almost two 
months into our second fiscal quarter. Frankly, the financial results 
don’t look very good. You are aware, I’m sure, of how the stock market 
has been punishing companies that fail to at least meet their sales and 
profit targets. We are in danger of having to announce that we met our 
sales goals but fell short of our profit goals. This will be a real jolt to 
our shareholders, and since, except for the interns, we are all in the 
company’s stock purchase plan, that means it will hurt us, too. We only 
have one month to turn this around. We don’t want to take any shortcut 
approaches to meeting our goals—we want the results to reflect the 
real results of our operation. 
 The headquarters brass talked with a consultant who analyzed 
our records. Her opinion is that we need to address operations effi-
ciency. In her words, we have to learn to get more out of our existing 
resources. She leaves the details to us to figure out. Our biggest per-
sonnel resource to assign to this problem is our group of management 
interns from Nearby University. I’ve talked to the interns and alerted 
them that for the next month or so they are to work directly with Bill 
Chavez, our Operations Manager, on this project. The goal is to be sure 
that we get the maximum bang for our resource buck during the next 
month’s operations. We have to get the most profit possible to make the 
quarter’s results look at least respectable. Needless to say, I want each 
of you to give the intern group your fullest cooperation.” 
 Now you understand why the interns were invited to the staff meet-
ing. You’ve just been on board for a few weeks and have just begun to 
understand the company’s operations. That means the boss can’t be 
looking to you for engineering solutions. Your expertise is operations 
management, not engineering. 
 As the meeting broke up, Bill Chavez asked you (the interns) to stay 
for a follow-up meeting with him. “I’ve been very impressed with the 
work that you have done in your short time with CCI. You obviously get 
an excellent education at Nearby U. I asked Tom to assign you to me 
because I think you are our best hope of pulling out some really good 
profit numbers. You don’t have any preconceived 
ideas about what will and will not work, so I expect 
you to come up with ideas that are more innovative than the old hands. 
 “I spent most of the morning with the other department heads 
gathering information that I think you might need (that information is 
enclosed with this case). If you need additional information send me an 
e-mail or stop in my office. If I can get the information you need, I will do 
so. We’re counting on you. Don’t let us down. I’ll let you guys figure out 
when and where to meet. Needless to say you have full access to all our 
computer resources should you need them. 
 “There are a few things you need to keep in mind. Our SemiCustom 
Line is hot because of our excellent customer service. We never fail to 
deliver a SemiCustom unit on time. We also need to meet our customer 
orders on the StandardLine units, but we can cut the stockage levels 
if necessary. We can’t, however, exceed the stockage levels. Making 
excess inventory is no way to be more efficient. If necessary, we could 
work 10 percent overtime in assembly and 5 percent overtime in fin-
ishing. Each overtime hour will add $5.00 per hour to our labor cost. 
I’ve checked with all our suppliers. We can get up to 50,000 additional 
board-feet of wood by paying a $0.50 per board-foot upcharge and 
10,000 additional square feet of laminate for an upcharge of $0.15 per 
square foot. There is no reasonable prospect of obtaining more of the 
other materials at any price. Because of the way our profit center is set 
up, we get credit for building to the authorized stockage level as if it 
were a final sale.” 
 As you were leaving the meeting, Barbara Wilson invited you to 
the break room for a cup of coffee. Barbara is the Lead Production 
Scheduler and has worked for Custom Cabinets for a long time. You 
have been told that she knows everything about how things work here 
and is a good person to know. “I heard about your assignment,” she 
began. “Let me tell you some things about your boss, Bill Chavez. He 
is a great guy to work for and he really knows his stuff. He is not one 
of the college guys who act as if they know everything—no offense. 
He worked his way up. He is very intelligent, but doesn’t have the 
educational background that you do. In the past, new college gradu-
ates have made some mistakes in writing reports for Bill. He likes for 
everything in the report to be written in words he can understand. He 
likes you to include computer printouts in an appendix to the report 
(he likes to see all the backup detail), but wants you to explain in the 
body of the report why they are necessary and what they mean. If he 
doesn’t understand what you are recommending and why, he won’t 
ask questions. He will just discard the report, and that will be the last 
assignment you will ever do for him. I figured that the least I could do 
would be to buy you a cup of coffee and try to help you get off to a 
good start on this project.”  
 CASE 
 Custom Cabinets, Inc. © 
(continued)

 
Chapter Nineteen Linear Programming 
853
 Questions 
 1. Should there be additional overtime, and if so, how much? 
 2. Should additional laminate be purchased, and if so, how much? 
 3. Should additional wood be purchased, and if so, how much? 
   4. What is the maximum profit that can be achieved by purchasing 
additional wood? 
 ENCLOSURE A 
 BILLS OF MATERIALS AND LABOR 
 Wood 
bd.-ft. 
 Trim 
lin. ft. 
 Granite 
sq. ft. 
 Solid 
Surface 
sq. ft. 
 Laminate 
sq. ft. 
 Assbly. 
Labor 
hrs. 
 Finish 
Labor 
hrs. 
 SemiCustom Line 
 SC-A  125 
 27 
 175 
 0 
 0 
 37 
 7 
 SC-B  160 
 42 
 243 
 0 
 0 
 57 
 12 
 SC-C  140 
 35 
 0 
 160 
 0 
 30 
 5 
 SC-D  200 
 52 
 0 
 140 
 0 
 35 
 7 
 StandardLine 
 S-10 
 60 
 21 
 0 
 112 
 0 
 21 
 3 
 S-20 
 110 
 28 
 0 
 0 
 135 
 25 
 5 
 S-30 
 200 
 50 
 0 
 0 
 254 
 30 
 7 
 S-40 
 180 
 43 
 0 
 0 
 176 
 27 
 5 
 Available 
 400,000 
 140,000  45,000 
 150,000  400,000 
 100,000  25,000 
 ENCLOSURE B 
 ORDERS AND PROFITS 
 
 Profit/Unit 
@ Standard 
 Customer Orders 
Next Month 
 Build-to-Stock 
Authorization 
Next Month 
 SemiCustom Line 
 SC-A 
 $325 
 117 
 0 
 SC-B 
 $575 
 92 
 0 
 SC-C 
 $257 
 130 
 0 
 SC-D 
 $275 
 150 
 0 
 StandardLine 
 S-10 
 $175 
 475 
 400 
 S-20 
 $210 
 363 
 350 
 S-30 
 $260 
 510 
 450 
 S-40 
 $230 
 412 
 475 
 Source: © Victor E. Sower, 2006. 
 Anderson, David R., Dennis J. Sweeney, Thomas A. 
Williams, Jeffrey D. Camm, and Skip Martin.  An 
Introduction to Management Science: Quantitative 
Approaches to Decision Making. Revised Thirteenth 
Edition. Mason, OH: South-Western, 2012. 
 Hillier, Frederick S., and Mark S. Hillier.  Introduction 
to Management Science: A Modeling and Case 
Studies Approach with Spreadsheets, 5/e New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2014. 
 Ragsdale, Cliff T.  Spreadsheet Modeling and Decision 
Analysis. 6th ed. Mason, OH: South-Western, 2011. 
 Stevenson, W. J., and Ceyhun Ozgur.  Introduction to 
Management Science with Spreadsheets. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 2006. 
 Taylor, Bernard.  Introduction to Management Science. 
11th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice 
Hall, 2013. 
 SELECTED 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
AND FURTHER 
READINGS 

854
 APPENDIX 
 Answers to Selected 
Problems 
 Chapter 2: Competitiveness, Strategy, and Productivity 
 1.  Anniversary  5  37.5 meals per worker. 
   Wedding  5  40 meals per worker. 
 2. Smaller crew sizes had the higher productivity. 
 3.  Week 1: 3.03. 
   Week 2: 2.99. 
   Week 3: 2.89. 
   Week 4: 2.84. 
 4.  a. Before: Labor productivity  5  16 carts per worker per hour. 
 
  After: Labor productivity  5  21 carts per worker per hour. 
 
b. Before: Multifactor productivity  5  .89 cart per dollar. 
 
  After: Multifactor productivity  5  .93 cart per dollar. 
 5. 11.1%. 
 6. 4.44%. 
 8. Current: $5; A  5  $6.30; B  5  $6.71 
 Chapter 3: Forecasting 
 1. a. blueberry  5  33, cinnamon  5  35, cupcakes  5  47. 
 
b. Demand did not exceed supply. 
 2. b. (1) 20, (2) 19, (3) 20.4, (4) 19.26, (5) 20.86. 
  3.  a. 88.16 percent. 
 
b. 88.54 percent. 
  4. a. 22. 
b. 20.75. 
c. 20.72. 
 5. a. Increasing by 15,000 bottles per year. 
 
b. 170 (i.e., 170,000 bottles). 
 6. 500  2  20 t. 
 7. a.  Ft   5  208.44  1  19.00 t. b. 588.44, 607.44. c. Week 31.13. 
 9. a.  Ft   5  195.47  1  7.00 t. 
b. 307.22.
 
  F 16   5  307.47  F 18   5  321.47 
 
  F 17   5  314.17  F 19   5  328.47 
 12.  Q 1 : 127.6;  Q 2 : 143.5;  Q 3 : 105;  Q 4 : 273.65;  Q 1   5  275. 
 14. a. Fri.  5  0.756, Sat.  5  1.341, Sun.  5  0.874. 
 
b. Fri.  5  0.756, Sat.  5  1.341, Sun.  5  0.874. 
 16.  Day 
 a. Relative 
 b. Relative 
 
  1 . . . . . 
 0.901 
 0.887 
 
  2 . . . . . 
 0.838 
 0.831 
 
  3 . . . . . 
 0.884 
 0.876 
 
  4 . . . . . 
 1.020 
 1.022 
 
  5 . . . . . 
 1.430 
 1.438 
 
  6 . . . . . 
 1.480 
 1.483 
 
  7 . . . . . 
 0.450 
 0.464 
 18. b.  Jan. . . . . . 
 800 
 
 
 Feb. . . . . . 
 810 
 
 
 Mar. . . . . . 
 900 
 
 
 Apr. . . . . . 
 810 
 22.  a. 
 
 MSE 
 MAD 
 b. MAPE 1   5  .36% 
   
 
 
 
 
 MAPE 2   5  .46% 
 
 
 Forecast 1 . . . . 
  10.44 
  2.8 
 
 
 Forecast 2 . . . . 
  42.44 
  3.6 
 
 
 Naive . . . . . . . . 
 156  
 10.7 
 23. b. $847,000. 
 24. b. $17.90. 
 25. b.  2 0.985. 
 26. b.  Y   5  66.44  1  .58 x. 
 
d. 90.22. 
 27.  a.  r   5   1 .96. 
 
b.  Y   5   2 0.672  1  6.158 x. 
 
c. About 12 mowers. 
 28. a.  MAD 5  5 5.
 
  MAD 6  5 5.9. 
 
  MAD 7  5 4.73. 
 
  MAD 8  5 3.911. 
 
 MAD 9  5 4.238.
etc.
 30. a.  Initial MAD  5  4.727. The tracking signal for month 15 is 4.088, 
so at that point, the forecast would be suspect. 
  b.    errors   5    2 1,    errors 2    5   345. Control limits: 0   6   12.38 
(in limits). Plot reveals cycles in errors. 
 Chapter 4 Supplement: Reliability 
 1. a. .81. 
b. .9801. 
c. .9783. 
 2. .9033. 
 3. .9726. 
 4. .93. 
 5. a. .9315. 
b. .9953. 
c. .994. 
 6. a. .7876. 
b. 0.8664, Component 4. 
c. 0.8681, Component 4.
 7. a. Plan 2 (.9934). 
 8. a. .0020. 
b. .0023. 
 9. .996. 
 10. .995. 
 11. .006. 
 12.  a.  (1) .2725. 
b.  (1) .6671. 
 
  (2) .2019. 
 
 (2) .3935. 
 
  (3) .1353. 
 
 (3) .1813. 
 
 c.  (1) 21 months. 
 (3) 90 months. 
 
  (2) 57 months. 
 (4) 138 months. 
 13. a. .6321. 
b. Three months or 90 days. 
 14. a. .3012. 
b. .1813. 
c. .5175. 
 15. a. .2231. 
b. .8647. 
  c. .0878. 
d. .0302. 
 16. a. .2266. 
b. .4400. 
c. .3830. 
 17.  a.  (1) .9772. 
b. Approximately zero.
   (2)  .5000. 
   (3) .0013. 
 18. a. 4.97 years. 
b. 5.18 years. 
 19. a. .93. 
b. .98. 
 
b. TS 5  5 1.40.
 
  TS 6  5  2 0.17. 
 
  TS 7  5  2 0.63. 
 
  TS 8  5  2 0.26. 
 
  TS 9  5  2 1.42.
 etc. 
A 

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
855
 5. Subcontract: $1.23. 
   Expand: $1.57. 
   Build: $1.35. 
 6. a. Relocate. 
 
b. Renew. 
 
c. Relocate. 
 
d. Relocate. 
 7. a. Renew. 
 
b. EVPI  5  $1,575,000. 
 
c. Yes. 
 9. a. Build large: $53.6 million. 
 
b. Build small: $42 million. 
 
c. $12.4. 
 
d. Build small for  P (high) , .721. 
 
  Build large for  P (high) . .721.  
 10. Buy two ($113.5). 
 11. A: 49. 
 12.  b. maximin: small. 
 
  maximax: large. 
 
  Laplace: large. 
 
  minimax regret: large. 
 13. a. New staff. 
 
b. Redesign. 
 
c. New staff. 
 
d. New staff or redesign. 
 16.  b. Alternative C. 
 
c.  P (2) . .625. 
 
d.  P (1) , .375.  
 17.  b. Alternative B. 
 
c.  P (2) , .444. 
 
d.  P (1) . .556.  
 Chapter 6: Process Selection and Facility Layout 
 1. a. Minimum is 2.4 minutes, maximum is 18 minutes. 
 
b. 25 units to 187.5 units. 
c. Eight. 
 
d. 3.6 minutes. 
e.  (1) 50 units. 
 
   
 (2) 30 units. 
 2.  a.  Station 
 Tasks 
 Time 
 
 1 
 a 
 1.4 
 
 2 
 b, e 
 1.3 
 
 3 
 d, c, f 
 1.8 
 
 4 
 g, h 
 1.5 
 3. a.  Station 
 Tasks 
 Time 
 
 1 
 f, a, g 
 14 
 
 2 
 d, b, c 
 13 
 
 3 
 e, h 
 13 
 
 4 
 i 
 5 
 4. a.  (3) 11.54%. (4) 323 copiers per day. 
 
b.  (1) 2.3 minutes. 
(3) 182.6 copiers per day. 
 
 (4) 91.3 copiers units per day. 
 5.  b. 2 minutes. 
 
c. Three stations. 
 6.  c.  (1) 11.1%. 
 (2) 11.1%. 
 7.  b. CT  5  .84 min. or 50.4 sec. 
 
c.  n   5  3.83 (round to 4) stations. 
 Chapter 5: Strategic Capacity Planning for Products and Services 
 1. a. Utilization  5  70%. 
 
  Efficiency  5  87.5%. 
 
b. Utilization  5  67%. 
 
  Efficiency  5  80%. 
 2. 20 jobs per week. 
 3. a. 46,000 units. 
 
b. (1) $3,000. (2) $8,200. 
 
c. 126,000 units. 
 
d. 25,556 units. 
 4. a. A: 8,000 units. 
 b. 10,000 units. 
 
  B: 7,500 units. 
 
c. A: $20,000. 
 
  B: $18,000. 
 5. a. 39,683 units. 
b. $1.71 (rounded up). 
 6. a. A: $82. 
 
  B: $92. 
 
  C: $100. 
 
c. A: 0 to less than 178. 
 
  B: Never. 
 
  C: 178  1  . 
 
d. 1/3 day, 2/3 evening. 
   7. Vendor best for  Q  < 63,333. For larger quantities, produce in-house 
at $4 per unit. 
 8. a. Vendor B best for 10,000 and 20,000. 
 9. 3 cells. 
 11. a. Buy 2 Bs.  
b. Buy 2 Bs. 
 12. a. one:  Q   5  80. two:  Q   5  152. 
 14. a. 11 units/hr. 
 16. 50 units/hr. 
 17. a. 15 units/hr. 
b. 23 units/hr. 
 18. 8 years. 
 Chapter 5 Supplement: Decision Theory 
 1. a. Expand (80). 
 
b. Do nothing (50). 
 
c. Indifferent between do nothing and subcontract (55). 
 
d. Subcontract (10). 
 2. a. Expand (62). 
c. $9 (000). 
 3. Do nothing:  P (high) , .50. 
   Subcontract: .50 ,  P (high) , .67. 
   Expand:  P (high) . .67. 
 4.  a.
 
2
1
Build small
Build large
Demand low (.4)
Demand high (.6)
Demand low (.4)
Demand high (.6)
Maintain
Expand
$400,000 (1)
$  50,000 (2)
$450,000 (3)
$–10,000 (4)
$800,000 (5)  
 
b. $164,000.  
 
c. Large 0 to .46. 
 Small .46 to 1.00. 

856 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems
 13. a. 12%. 
 
b. 163 observations. 
 15. 377 observations. 
 Chapter 7 Supplement: Learning Curves 
 1. a. 178.8 hours. 
 
b. 1,121.4 hours. 
 
c. 2,914.8 hours. 
 2. a. 41.47 hours. 
 
b. 60.55 hours. 
 
c. 72.20 hours. 
 3. a. 56.928 days. 
 
b. 42.288 days. 
 
c. 37.512 days. 
 5. a.  P   5  85 percent. 
 
b. 26.21 minutes. 
 6. 87.9 minutes. 
 7. 201.26 hours. 
 8. a. 11.35 hours. 
 
b. 13.05 hours. 
 
c. 13.12 hours. 
 9. a. $80.31. 
 
b. 10 units. 
 10. B and C. 
 12. 30.82 hours. 
 13. No. 
 14. 18.76 hours. 
 15. Art: 20; Sherry: 4; Dave: 10. 
 16. 7 repetitions. 
 17. Beverly: 6; Max: 23; Antonio: 4. 
 19. 8.232 hours. 
 Chapter 8: Location Planning and Analysis 
 1. Kansas City: $256,000. 
 2. a. A: 16,854; B: 17,416; C: 17,753. 
 
b. C: $14,670. 
 3. a. 120 units. 
b. A: 0 to 119; B: 121 1  . 
 4. a. B: 0 to 33; C: 34 to 400; A: 401 1  . 
 5. C ($270,000). 
 6. Biloxi ($160,000). 
 7. a. (1) outside; (2) city. 
b. 230 cars. 
 9. A. 
 11. a. B  5  C > A. 
 
b. B > C > A. 
 12. (5,4) is optimal. 
 13. (6,7). 
 14. (5.97, 5.95). 
 15. (3.24, 2.30). 
 Chapter 9: Management of Quality 
 2.  
Res.
Com.
10
3
Noisy
7
2
Failed
5
7
Odor
3
4
Warm
 10. 
 
 11.
 
 13. 
 
 14.  a. 
  
TC  5  $14,150.
 
 16. A: 3; B: 5; C: 1; D: 4; E: 6; F: 2. 
 17. A:1; B:3; C:7; D:10; E:9; F:8; G:6; H:4; I:5; J:2. 
 Chapter 7: Work Design and Measurement 
 1. 15.08 minutes. 
 2. a. 1.2 minutes. 
 
b. 1.14 minutes. 
 
c. 1.27 minutes. 
 3.  Element 
 OT 
 NT 
 ST 
 
 1  . . . . . . . 
 0.46 
 0.414 
 0.476 
 
 2  . . . . . . .  1.505 
 1.280 
 1.472 
 
 3  . . . . . . . 
 0.83 
 0.913 
 1.050 
 
 4  . . . . . . . 
 1.16 
 1.160 
 1.334 
 4.   Element 
 Average 
 
 1  . . . . . . . . . 
 4.1 
 
 2  . . . . . . . . . 
 1.5 
 
 3  . . . . . . . . . 
 3.3 
 
 4  . . . . . . . . . 
 2.8 
 7. 5.85 minutes. 
 8. 7.125 minutes. 
 11. 57 observations. 
 12. 37 cycles. 
O
A
O
O
O
O
O
X
O
O
O
X
A
O
A
2
1
3
4
5
6
6
2
3
8
7
1
5
4
5
2
9
7
4
6
3
1
8
D
#3
A
#1
B
#4
C
#2

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
857
 19. Med:  z   5   1 0.9177. 
   U/D:  z   5   1 0.5561. 
 20.  b. 4.5, .192. 
 
c. 4.5, .086. 
 
d. 4.242 to 4.758. 
 
f. None. 
 21.  a. 1.11. 
b. No. 
 22. Process 005 is capable. 
 24.  C  pk  :  H   5  .94,  K   5  1.00,  T   5  1.33. 
 26. Melissa. 
 27. a. 2.506. 
 
b.  C  pk    5  1.41. 
 
c. .987 ounces. 
 Chapter 10 Supplement: Acceptance Sampling 
 1. a. (1) Yes. (2) Yes. 
b. .0067. 
 2. b. .0390. 
 3. c. .0024. 
 5.  a. 0.16. 
 
b. 2. 
 
c.  (1) Accept. 
 
  (2) .0362. 
 
  (3) .9638. 
 
  (4)  p (Type I)  5  .0362. 
 
 
  p (Type II)  5  0. 
 Chapter 11: Aggregate Planning and Master Scheduling 
 1.  b. $95,500. 
 2. $57,000. 
 3. $69,000. 
 4. $69,750. 
 7.  a. $31,250. 
 
b. $31,310. 
 8. a. $350,800. 
 
b. $356,200. 
 
c. $353,700. 
 10.  B: $14,340. 
   C: $14,370. 
 11. $13,475. 
 12. $13,885. 
 13. $4,970. 
 15. $124,960. 
 16. $126,650; additional cost: $1,920. 
 Chapter 12: MRP and ERP 
 1. F  5  2, G  5  1, H  5  1, J  5  6, D  5  10, L  5  2, A  5  4. 
 2. a. E  5  138. 
 
b. Week 5. 
 3. a. 360. 
 
b. Day 1 (now). 
 Chapter 10: Quality Control 
 1. a. .0124. 
 
b. 24.40 ounces and 24.60 ounces. 
 2. a. LCL: 0.996 liter. 
b. Not in control. 
 
  UCL: 1.004 liters. 
 3. a. Mean: LCL is 3.019, UCL is 3.181. 
b. Yes. 
 
  Range: LCL is 0.1845, UCL is 0.7155. 
 4.  Mean:  LCL is 78.88 cm. 
   
 UCL is 81.04 cm. 
   Range:  LCL is 0 cm. 
   
 UCL is 3.95 cm. 
   Process in control. 
 5.  a. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 
 .020 
 .010 
 .025 
 .045 
 
b. 2.5 percent.
 
c. Mean  5  .025, standard deviation  5  .011. 
 
d. LCL  5  .0011, UCL  5  .0489. 
 
e. .0456. 
 
f. Yes. 
 
g. Mean  5  .02, standard deviation  5  .01. 
 
h. LCL  5  0, UCL  5  .04. 
 6. LCL: 0. 
   UCL: .0234. 
   Sample #10 is outside of the UCL. 
 7. Yes, UCL  5  16.266, LCL  5  0. 
 8. Yes, UCL  5  5.17, LCL  5  0. 
 9. No, UCL  5  .10, LCL  5  .01. Yes. 
 10. 20 pieces. 
   11. One in 30 is “out.” Tolerances seem to be met. Approximately 97% 
will be acceptable. 
 12. a. LCL: 3.73. 
 
  UCL: 3.97. 
 
  Out of control. 
 
b. Random variations. 
 13.  
NUMBER OF RUNS                
 
 
 Test 
 Observed 
 Expected 
 
 Standard 
 
 
 
Deviation 
 z 
 Conclude 
 a.  Med . . . 
 18 
 14 
 2.50 
 1.6 
 Random 
 
 U/D. . . . 
 17 
 17 
 2.07 
 0 
 Random 
 b.  Med. . . . 
 8 
 14 
 2.50 
 2 2.40 
 Nonrandom 
 
 U/D. . . . 
 22 
 17 
 2.07 
 2.41 
 Nonrandom 
 14.  a. Random because both z values are within  6  2 
 
b. Nonrandom because z value for U/D is less than -1.96. 
 
c. Med:  z   5  1.11. 
 
  U/D:  z   5  0.68. 
 
d. Med:  z   5   2 1.11. 
 
  U/D:  z   5   2 1.36. 
 15. Med:  z   5   2 2.34. 
   U/D:  z   5   2 1.45. 
 16. 200 pieces. 
 18.  a. 566 units. 
 
b. 62 units. 
 
c. $1,160. 

858 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems
Week
Master
Quantity
Beg. Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
80
Schedule
E
LT  2
Beg. Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
80
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
80
Planned-order receipts
80
Planned-order releases
80
B (2)
LT  2
Beg. Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
60
60
60
60
60
20
20
100
120
160
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
120
J (4) and J (3)
LT  1
Beg. Inv.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Gross requirements
240
30
30
30
160
20
20
20
50
80
50
50
460
180
480
480
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
180
480
 4. a. 

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
859
b. 
Week
Quantity
4
5
6
70
Master
Schedule 
for: E
Beg. Inv.
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
4
0
0
0
0
5
6
70
70
70
70
E
LT  2
Lot size: Lot-for-Lot
B (2)
Beg. Inv.
Gross requirements
60
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
4
5
6
180
40
40
140
120
LT  2
Lot size: Multiples of 120
J (4) and J (3)
Beg. Inv.
Gross requirements
50
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
4
5
6
210
210
30
260
80
80
LT  1
Lot size: Multiples of 30
Scheduled Receipts (Week 4)  Original amount of 30 180  210
Original on hand amounts (Week 6):       B  20 & J  50
Revised on hand amounts (Week 6):       B  40 & J  80
There will be an additional 20 units of B & 30 units of J on hand.
Notes:

860 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems
 6. 
Day
Master
Quantity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
150
100
200
Schedule
Table
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
150
100
200
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
150
150
100
100
200
Planned-order receipts
200
Planned-order releases
200
150
100
Wood Sections (2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
400
400
100
100
100
100
100
400
300
300
300
200
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
400
400
Braces (3)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
450
600
450
600
60
60
60
240
450
240
300
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
600
450
240
Legs (4)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
600
800
600
800
120
120
120
280
600
800
280
400
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
800
880
Beg. Inv.
Beg. Inv.
Beg. Inv.
Beg. Inv.
60
Beg. Inv.
120
600

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
861
 10. Order 160 units of subassembly G in week 2. 
 11. a. Master Schedule for E.
Week number
Quantity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
120
8
Item: E    LT  1 week
Gross requirements
120
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
120
120
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
120
Item: I (2)    LT  1 week     
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
40
40
40
200
200
240
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
200
8
Item: N (4)    LT  2 weeks     
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
100
100
100
700
700
800
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
700
8
Item: V    LT  2 weeks     
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Gross requirements
190
190
200
10
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
190
8

862 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems
 13. c. Master Schedule for golf carts.
 15.  Labor: 
 53.3% 
 106.7% 
 80% 
 93.3% 
   Machine: 
 60% 
 120% 
 90% 
 105% 
 Chapter 13: Inventory Management 
 1.  a.  Item 
 Category  
 b. 180 units. 
 1 
  
 B 
  
 2 
  
 B 
 3 
  
 C 
 4 
  
 C 
 5 
  
 C 
 6 
  
 A 
 7 
  
 C 
 2.  a.   Item 
 Category 
 K34  
 C 
 K35  
 A 
 K36  
 B 
 M10 
 C 
 M20 
 C 
 Z45  
 A 
 F14  
 B 
 F95  
 A 
 F99  
 C 
   D45      
B   
   D48      
C   
   D52    
  C   
   D57      
B   
 N08 
 C 
 P05  
 B 
 P09  
 C 
Week number
Quantity
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
100
100
100
8
9
Item: Golf cart    LT  1 week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
Item: Bases    LT  1 week
Gross requirements
Scheduled receipts
Projected on hand
Net requirements
Planned-order receipts
Planned-order releases
100
100
50
100
50
50
20
20
20
20
0
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
30
30
50
0
50
100
100
   b.  Item 
 Category 
 4021 
 A 
 9402 
 C 
 4066 
 B 
 6500 
 C 
 9280 
 C 
 4050 
 C 
 6850 
 B 
 3010 
 C 
 4400 
 B 
 
c. A: 11%, 55.26%. 
 
 B: 33%, 28.95%. 
 
 C: 56%, 15.79%. 
 3.  a. 18 bags. 
b. 9 bags. 
   c. 67.5. 
d. $1,350 
   e. Increase by $78.71 
 4. a. 204 packages. 
 
b. $6,118.82. 
 
c. Yes. 
 
d. No; TC  5  $6,120; only save $1.18. 
 5. a. $105.29. 
 6. $364. 
 7. a. 1–6: 74 units; 7–12: 91 units. 
 
b. EOQ requirement. 
 
c. 1–6: 50 units; 7–12: 100 units. 
 8. a. $1.32. 
 
b. $54.20. 
 9. a. 4,812. 
 
b. 15.59 (approx. 16). 
 
c. .96. 
 10. a. 10,328 bags. 
 
b. 3,098 bags. 
 
c. 10.33 days. 
 
d. 7.75 (approx. 8). 
 
e. $774.50. 
 11. a. 1,414 units. 
b. 7.07 days. 
  c. 424 units. 
d. No. 
  f. Approximately 54 units, $168. 

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
863
 12. a. 37.5 batches. 
 
b. 1,000 units. 
 
c. 625 units. 
 
d. No. 
 13. a. 5,000 boxes. 
 
b. 3.6 orders. 
 14. a. 600 stones. 
 
b. 600 stones. 
 
c. 150 stones on hand. 
 15. Indifferent between 495 and 1,000 pulleys. 
 16. A, 500 units. 
 18. 6,600 feet. 
 19. a. 370 units. 
 
b. 70 units. 
 
c. Both smaller. 
 20. a. 91 pounds. 
 
b. ROP  5  691 pounds. 
 
c. 50%. 
 21. a. 8.39 gallons. 
 
b. 34 gallons, .1423. 
 
c. risk  5  .2981. 
 22. 70.14 gallons. 
 23. .1093. 
 24. ROP  5  70.14. 
 25. a. 400 gallons. 
 
b. 45.02 gallons. 
 26. a. 72 boxes. 
 
b. .0023. 
 
c. .0228. 
 27. 749 pounds. 
 28. a. 134 rolls. 
 
b. About 36 rolls. 
 29. b. 14 cases. 
 30. 97.26% 
 31.  Cycle 
 Order Quantity 
 1  
 
 623 
 2  
 
 657 
 3  
 
 562 
 32. a. P34: ROP = 132 units on hand. 
 
  P35:   ROP = 153 units on hand. 
 
b. 306 units. 
 
c. 334 units. 
 34. 25 dozen. 
 35. a. Nine spares. 
b.  C  s   ≤ $10.47. 
 36. 78.9 pounds. 
 37. $4.89 per quart. 
 38. Five cakes. 
 39. 421.5 pounds. 
 40. a. $0.53 to $1.76. 
 
c. $56.67 to $190.00. 
 41. 3 spares. 
 42. 2 cakes. 
 43. 16 tickets. 
 Chapter 14: JIT and Lean Operations 
 1. 3. 
 7. 1.35 minutes. 
 2. 3. 
 8. 6.50 minutes. 
 3. 3. 
 9. 4 minutes. 
 4. 3 cycles. 
 5. 2 cycles:
 
 Cycle 
 
  1 
 2 
 A 
 11  11 
 B 
  6 
 6 
 C 
  2 
 2 
 D 
  9 
 9 
 E 
  4 
 4 
  Chapter 14 Supplement: Maintenance 
 1. Expected recalibration cost  5  $925 a month. 
   Use the service contract. 
 2. Expected repair cost  5  $456 a month. 
   Option #1: $500. 
   Option #2: $566. 
 3.              Equipment    
   Ratio    
   Interval (days) 
 A201 
 .1304 
 17.76 
 B400 
 .0571 
 25.26 
 C850 
 .1104 
 35.12 
 Chapter 15: Supply Chain Management 
 1. Use 2-day freight. 
 2. Use 6-day. 
 3. Ship 2-day using A. 
 Chapter 16: Scheduling 
 1. 1-A, 2-B, 3-C, TC  5  15. 
 2. 1-B, 2-C, 3-A, TC  5  21. 
 3. 1-A, 2-E, 3-D, 4-B, 5-C; or 1-A, 2-D, 3-E, 4-B, 5-C. 
 4. 1-B, 2-C, 3-D, 4-A, TC  5  26. 
 5. a. 1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D, 5-E. 
 
b. 1-E, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D, 5-A. 
 6.  b.   
 FCFS 
 SPT 
 EDD 
 CR 
 Av. flow time. . . . . . 
 26.5 
 19.75 
 21 
 24.75 
 Av. job tardiness. . . . . . 
 11   
 6 
 6 
 9.25 
 Av. no. of jobs. . . . . . 
 2.86 
 2.14 
 2.27 
 2.68 
 7. FCFS: a-b-c-d-e. 
   SPT: c-b-a-e-d. 
   EDD: a-b-c-e-d. 
   CR: a-b-c-e-d (or a-b-e-c-d).
 
       
 FCFS 
 SPT 
 EDD 
 CR 
 Av. flow time. . . . . . 
 17.40 
 14.80 
 16.80 
 16.80 
 Av. job tardiness. . . . . . 
 5.20 
 5.40 
 4.60 
 4.60 
 Av. no. of jobs. . . . . . 
 2.72 
 2.31 
 2.63 
 2.63 
 9. B-A-G-E-F-D-C. 
 10. a. e-b-g-h-d-c-a-f. 
 
c. 2 hours. 
 11. a. B-A-C-E-F-D. 
 12. a. b-a-c-d-e. 
 
b. 37 minutes. 
 
c. both reduced by 15 minutes. 

864 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems
 8. a. .6881. 
 
b. .3978. 
 
c. .0203. 
 9. .3479. 
 10.  b. .52. 
 11.  b. .030. 
 
c. .2085. 
 12.   
 
Standard
  Path 
 Mean 
 Deviation 
 a-d-e-h. . . . . .   24.34 
 1.354 
 a-f-g. . . . . . 
  15.50 
 1.258 
 b-i-j-k. . . . . . 
  14.83 
 1.014 
 c-m-n-o. . . . . .  26.17 
 1.658 
   27 weeks: .6742; 26 weeks: .4099. 
 14. Crash schedule (1 week each): C, C, F, F, E, P. 
 15. a. Crash four weeks: 
 
  (1) 7-11, (2) 1-2, (3) 7-11 and 6-10, (4) 11-13 and 4-6. 
 17. a. 18.5 days. 
 
b. .67. 
 Chapter 18: Management of Waiting Lines 
 1. a.  1) .60 
 
 2) .90 customer 
 
 3) .30 hr. 
   b. 1) 2.25 customers. 
 
 2) .75. 
 
 3) Two hours. 
 
 4) .5625. 
 
c.  1) .75 
 
 2) 3.429 customers 
 
 3) .107 hr. 
 2. a. 0.67 customer. 
 
b. One minute. 
 
c. 1.33 customers. 
 3. a. 6 minutes. 
 
b. 0.25. 
 
c. 2.25 customers. 
 4. a. Morning: 0.375 minute; .45. 
 
  Afternoon: 0.678 minute; .54. 
 
  Evening: 0.635 minute; .44. 
 
b. M: 4; A: 8; E: 5. 
 5. a. .45. 
 
b. .229. 
 
c. .509 hour. 
 
d. .28. 
 6. a. 4.444 trucks. 
 
b. 6.67 minutes. 
 
c. .711. 
 
d. 6 minutes. 
 
e. The system would be overloaded. 
 
f. 13.186. 
 7. a. One dock. 
 
b. No. 
 13. G-A-E-D-B-C-F (or G-E-A-D-B-C-F). 
 14. a., b. Grinding flow time is 93 hours. Total time is 37 hours.
 
c. Grinding flow time is 107 hours. Total time is 35 hours. 
 15.  a.  
 FCFS 
 SPT 
 EDD 
 CR 
 Av. flow time. . . . . . 
 15.25 
 11.12 
 15.60 
 15.60 
 Av. job tardiness. . . . . . 
 1.7 
 2.33 
 0.55 
 0.55 
 Av. no. of jobs. . . . . . 
 3.91 
 2.85 
 4.00 
 4.00 
 
c. a-c-b-e-d-f. 
 16. b-c-e-a-d. 
 19. A-B-C. 
 20. C-B-A. 
 21. B-C-D-A. 
 Chapter 17: Project Management 
 1. a. 1-3-6-9-11-12: 31. 
 
b. 1-2-5-7-8-9: 55. 
 
c. 1-2-5-12-16: 44. 
 4.  a.  Activity 
 Immed. Pred. 
 A  
 – 
 B  
 – 
 C  
 A 
 D  
 A,B 
 E  
 C 
 5. a. Summary:
 Activity 
 ES 
 EF 
 LF 
 LS 
 Slack 
 1-2. . . . . .   
 0 
 4 
 11 
 7 
 7 
 2-4. . . . . .   
 4 
 13 
 21 
 12 
 8 
 4-7. . . . . .    13 
 18 
 26 
 21 
 8 
 7-10. . . . . .  18 
 20 
 28 
 26 
 8 
 10-12. . . . . .  21 
 24 
 31 
 28 
 7 
 2-5. . . . . .   
 4 
 12 
 19 
 11 
 7 
 5-8. . . . . .    12 
 19 
 26 
 19 
 7 
 8-10. . . . . .  19 
 21 
 28 
 26 
 7 
 1-3. . . . . .   
 0 
 10 
 10 
 0 
 0 
 3-6. . . . . .    10 
 16 
 16 
 10 
 0 
 6-9. . . . . .    16 
 20 
 20 
 16 
 0 
 9-11. . . . . .  20 
 25 
 25 
 20 
 0 
 11-12. . . . . .  25 
 31 
 31 
 25 
 0 
 
b. Summary:
 Activity 
 ES 
 EF 
 LF 
 LS 
 Slack 
 1. . . . . .  
 
0 
 5 
 5 
 0 
 0 
 2. . . . . . 
 
 5 
 23 
 23 
 5 
 0 
 3. . . . . . 
 
 5 
 18 
 33 
 20 
 15 
 4. . . . . . 
  23 
 26 
 40 
 37 
 14 
 5. . . . . . 
  23 
 33 
 33 
 23 
 0 
 6. . . . . . 
  33 
 37 
 44 
 40 
 7 
 7. . . . . . 
  33 
 44 
 44 
 33 
 0 
 8. . . . . . 
  44 
 53 
 53 
 44 
 0 
 9. . . . . . 
  53 
 55 
 55 
 53 
 0 
 6. 30 weeks. 
 7.  b 24 days: .9686; 21 days: .2350. 
 
c. 24 days: .9328; 21 days: .0186. 
 
d. Crash activities F, C, and G one day each. 

 
Appendix A Answers to Selected Problems 
865
 
c. (1)  A   5  24,  B   5  20,  Z   5  $204. 
 
 (2) Yes. Labor, 120 hr. 
 
 (3) No. 
 
 (4) No. 
 2. a.  S   5  8,  T   5  20,  Z   5  $58.40. 
  b.  (1)  x 1   5  4.2,  x 2   5  1.6,  Z   5  13.2. 
 
 (2) Yes.  F   5  4.6. 
 
 (3) No. 
 
 (4) No. 
 3.  H   5  132 units,  W   5  36 units, Profit  5  $6,360. 
 4. Deluxe  5  90 bags, Standard  5  60 bags, Profit  5  $243. 
   5. 500 apple, 200 grape, Revenue  5  $990. Fifty cups of sugar will be 
unused. 
 6. a.  x 1   5  4,  x 2   5  0,  x 3   5  18. 
 
   s 1   5  3,  s 2   5  0,  s 3   5  0. 
 
   Z   5  106. 
 
b.  x 1   5  15,  x 2   5  10,  x 3   5  0. 
 
   s 1   5  0,  s 2   5  0,  s 3   5  5. 
 
   Z   5  210. 
 9.  A   5  0,  B   5  80,  C   5  50. 
   Z   5  350. 
   C  A  (insignificance): $ 2 ` to $3.04. 
   C  B  (optimality): $1.95 to $3.75. 
   C  C  (optimality): $2.00 to $5.00. 
 11. a. board  5  0, holder  5  50. 
 
b. Cutting  5  16 minutes, gluing  5  0 minutes, 
finishing  5  210 minutes. 
 12. a. Ham  5  37.14, deli  5  18, cost  5  $165.42. 
 
b. Ham  5  20, deli  5  84, profit  5  $376. 
 14.  Z   5  $433. 
 15. a. Machine and materials are binding. 
 
b. No change. 
 
c. No change. 
 
d. Only s 2 would change. It would be 46. 
 
e. None. 
 
f. Yes; $844. 
 16. a. $1.50; range is 550 to 750. 
 
b. $1.50/pound. 
 
c. $0; range 375 to infinity. 
 
d. None. 
 
e. 150 pounds of pine bark. 
 
f. Optimal quantities would not change; Z would increase by $75. 
 
g. No, Yes, $1,155. 
 
h. No. 
 8. a. 0.952 mechanic. 
 
b. 0.228. 
 
c. 0.056 hr. 
 
d. 0.60. 
 
e. Two. 
 9. a. 0.995 customer. 
 
b. 2.24 days. 
 
c. 19.9 percent. 
 
d. 0.875 customer. 
 10. a. .437. 
 
b. 0.53 machine. 
 
c. 1.33 machines. 
 
d. 40.72 pieces. 
 
e. Three. 
 11. a. 28.56 pieces. 
 
b. Two. 
 12. a. 15.9 pieces. 
 
b. Three. 
 13. Three. 
 14. a. .90. 
 
b.  W 1   5  .12 hour. 
 
 W 2   5  .3045 hour. 
 
   W 3   5  2.13 hours. 
 
c.  L 1   5  .365. 
 
   L 2   5  .914. 
 
   L 3   5  6.395. 
 15. a. .75. 
 
b.  L 1   5  .643. 
 
 L 2   5  1.286. 
 18. a. approx. 0.0116. 
 
b. approx. 0.433. 
 Chapter 19: Linear Programming 
 1. a.  (1)  x 1   5  2,  x 2   5  9,  Z   5  35. 
 
 (2) No. 
 
 (3) No. 
 
 (4) No. 
 
b.  (1)  x 1   5  1.5,  x 2   5  6.25,  Z   5  65.5. 
 
 (2) No. 
 
 (3) Yes,  S has surplus of 15. 
 
 (4) No. 

This page intentionally left blank

867
 APPENDIX 
 A. Areas under the normal curve, 0 to  z, page 867 
 B. Areas under the standardized normal curve
  1. From  2 ` to  2 z, page 868 
  2. From  2 ` to  1 z, page 869 
 C. Cumulative Poisson probabilities, page 870 
 Tables 
B 
 Table A Areas under the normal curve, 0 to z  
0
z
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
0.0
.0000
.0040
.0080
.0120
.0160
.0199
.0239
.0279
.0319
.0359
0.1
.0398
.0438
.0478
.0517
.0557
.0596
.0636
.0675
.0714
.0753
0.2
.0793
.0832
.0871
.0910
.0948
.0987
.1026
.1064
.1103
.1141
0.3
.1179
.1217
.1255
.1293
.1331
.1368
.1406
.1443
.1480
.1517
0.4
.1554
.1591
.1628
.1664
.1700
.1736
.1772
.1808
.1844
.1879
0.5
.1915
.1950
.1985
.2019
.2054
.2088
.2123
.2157
.2190
.2224
0.6
.2257
.2291
.2324
.2357
.2389
.2422
.2454
.2486
.2517
.2549
0.7
.2580
.2611
.2642
.2673
.2703
.2734
.2764
.2794
.2823
.2852
0.8
.2881
.2910
.2939
.2967
.2995
.3023
.3051
.3078
.3106
.3133
0.9
.3159
.3186
.3212
.3238
.3264
.3289
.3315
.3340
.3365
.3389
1.0
.3413
.3438
.3461
.3485
.3508
.3531
.3554
.3577
.3599
.3621
1.1
.3643
.3665
.3686
.3708
.3729
.3749
.3770
.3790
.3810
.3830
1.2
.3849
.3869
.3888
.3907
.3925
.3944
.3962
.3980
.3997
.4015
1.3
.4032
.4049
.4066
.4082
.4099
.4115
.4131
.4147
.4162
.4177
1.4
.4192
.4207
.4222
.4236
.4251
.4265
.4279
.4292
.4306
.4319
1.5
.4332
.4345
.4357
.4370
.4382
.4394
.4406
.4418
.4429
.4441
1.6
.4452
.4463
.4474
.4484
.4495
.4505
.4515
.4525
.4535
.4545
1.7
.4554
.4564
.4573
.4582
.4591
.4599
.4608
.4616
.4625
.4633
1.8
.4641
.4649
.4656
.4664
.4671
.4678
.4686
.4693
.4699
.4706
1.9
.4713
.4719
.4726
.4732
.4738
.4744
.4750
.4756
.4761
.4767
2.0
.4772
.4778
.4783
.4788
.4793
.4798
.4803
.4808
.4812
.4817
2.1
.4821
.4826
.4830
.4834
.4838
.4842
.4846
.4850
.4854
.4857
2.2
.4861
.4864
.4868
.4871
.4875
.4878
.4881
.4884
.4887
.4890
2.3
.4893
.4896
.4898
.4901
.4904
.4906
.4909
.4911
.4913
.4916
2.4
.4918
.4920
.4922
.4925
.4927
.4929
.4931
.4932
.4934
.4936
2.5
.4938
.4940
.4941
.4943
.4945
.4946
.4948
.4949
.4951
.4952
2.6
.4953
.4955
.4956
.4957
.4959
.4960
.4961
.4962
.4963
.4964
2.7
.4965
.4966
.4967
.4968
.4969
.4970
.4971
.4972
.4973
.4974
2.8
.4974
.4975
.4976
.4977
.4977
.4978
.4979
.4979
.4980
.4981
2.9
.4981
.4982
.4982
.4983
.4984
.4984
.4985
.4985
.4986
.4986
3.0
.4987
.4987
.4987
.4988
.4988
.4989
.4989
.4989
.4990
.4990

868 
Appendix B Tables
0
–z
 Table B 
1. Areas under the 
standardized normal 
curve, from  2 ` to  2 z  
.09
.08
.07
.06
.05
.04
.03
.02
.01
.00
z
.0002
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
.0003
23.4
.0003
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0004
.0005
.0005
.0005
23.3
.0005
.0005
.0005
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0006
.0007
.0007
23.2
.0007
.0007
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0008
.0009
.0009
.0009
.0010
23.1
.0010
.0010
.0011
.0011
.0011
.0012
.0012
.0013
.0013
.0013
23.0
.0014
.0014
.0015
.0015
.0016
.0016
.0017
.0018
.0018
.0019
22.9
.0019
.0020
.0021
.0021
.0022
.0023
.0023
.0024
.0025
.0026
22.8
.0026
.0027
.0028
.0029
.0030
.0031
.0032
.0033
.0034
.0035
22.7
.0036
.0037
.0038
.0039
.0040
.0041
.0043
.0044
.0045
.0047
22.6
.0048
.0049
.0051
.0052
.0054
.0055
.0057
.0059
.0060
.0062
22.5
.0064
.0066
.0068
.0069
.0071
.0073
.0075
.0078
.0080
.0082
22.4
.0084
.0087
.0089
.0091
.0094
.0096
.0099
.0102
.0104
.0107
22.3
.0110
.0113
.0116
.0119
.0122
.0125
.0129
.0132
.0136
.0139
22.2
.0143
.0146
.0150
.0154
.0158
.0162
.0166
.0170
.0174
.0179
22.1
.0183
.0188
.0192
.0197
.0202
.0207
.0212
.0217
.0222
.0228
22.0
.0233
.0239
.0244
.0250
.0256
.0262
.0268
.0274
.0281
.0287
21.9
.0294
.0301
.0307
.0314
.0322
.0329
.0336
.0344
.0351
.0359
21.8
.0367
.0375
.0384
.0392
.0401
.0409
.0418
.0427
.0436
.0446
21.7
.0455
.0465
.0475
.0485
.0495
.0505
.0516
.0526
.0537
.0548
21.6
.0559
.0571
.0582
.0594
.0606
.0618
.0630
.0643
.0655
.0668
21.5
.0681
.0694
.0708
.0721
.0735
.0749
.0764
.0778
.0793
.0808
21.4
.0823
.0838
.0853
.0869
.0885
.0901
.0918
.0934
.0951
.0968
21.3
.0985
.1003
.1020
.1038
.1056
.1075
.1093
.1112
.1131
.1151
21.2
.1170
.1190
.1210
.1230
.1251
.1271
.1292
.1314
.1335
.1357
21.1
.1379
.1401
.1423
.1446
.1469
.1492
.1515
.1539
.1562
.1587
21.0
.1611
.1635
.1660
.1685
.1711
.1736
.1762
.1788
.1814
.1841
20.9
.1867
.1894
.1922
.1949
.1977
.2005
.2033
.2061
.2090
.2119
20.8
.2148
.2177
.2206
.2236
.2266
.2296
.2327
.2358
.2389
.2420
20.7
.2451
.2483
.2514
.2546
.2578
.2611
.2643
.2676
.2709
.2743
20.6
.2776
.2810
.2843
.2877
.2912
.2946
.2981
.3015
.3050
.3085
20.5
.3121
.3156
.3192
.3228
.3264
.3300
.3336
.3372
.3409
.3446
20.4
.3483
.3520
.3557
.3594
.3632
.3669
.3707
.3745
.3783
.3821
20.3
.3859
.3897
.3936
.3974
.4013
.4052
.4090
.4129
.4168
.4207
20.2
.4247
.4286
.4325
.4364
.4404
.4443
.4483
.4522
.4562
.4602
20.1
.4641
.4681
.4721
.4761
.4801
.4840
.4880
.4920
.4960
.5000
20.0

 
Appendix B Tables 
869
 Table B 
2. Areas under the 
standardized normal 
curve, from  2 ` to  1 z  
0
z
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
 .0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
 .1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
 .2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
 .3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
 .4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
 .5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
 .6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
 .7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7703
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
 .8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
 .9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
.9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
.9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
.9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
.9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
.9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
.9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
.9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
.9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
.9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
.9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9922
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
.9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
.9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
.9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
.9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
.9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
.9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
.9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
.9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
.9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9998

870 
Appendix B Tables
 Table C 
Cumulative Poisson probabilities  
c
0
x
P(x)
P(x    c) = 
x = c 
x = 0
µ x • e–µ
x !
m\x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.05
.951
.999
1.000
0.10
.905
.995
1.000
0.15
.861
.990
.999
1.000
0.20
.819
.982
.999
1.000
0.25
.779
.974
.998
1.000
0.30
.741
.963
.996
1.000
0.35
.705
.951
.994
1.000
0.40
.670
.938
.992
.999
1.000
0.45
.638
.925
.989
.999
1.000
0.50
.607
.910
.986
.998
1.000
0.55
.577
.894
.982
.998
1.000
0.60
.549
.878
.977
.997
1.000
0.65
.522
.861
.972
.996
.999
1.000
0.70
.497
.844
.966
.994
.999
1.000
0.75
.472
.827
.960
.993
.999
1.000
0.80
.449
.809
.953
.991
.999
1.000
0.85
.427
.791
.945
.989
.998
1.000
0.90
.407
.772
.937
.987
.998
1.000
0.95
.387
.754
.929
.984
.997
1.000
1.0
.368
.736
.920
.981
.996
.999
1.000
1.1
.333
.699
.900
.974
.995
.999
1.000
1.2
.301
.663
.880
.966
.992
.998
1.000
1.3
.273
.627
.857
.957
.989
.998
1.000
1.4
.247
.592
.833
.946
.986
.997
.999
1.000
1.5
.223
.558
.809
.934
.981
.996
.999
1.000
1.6
.202
.525
.783
.921
.976
.994
.999
1.000
1.7
.183
.493
.757
.907
.970
.992
.998
1.000
1.8
.165
.463
.731
.891
.964
.990
.997
.999
1.000
1.9
.150
.434
.704
.875
.956
.987
.997
.999
1.000
2.0
.135
.406
.677
.857
.947
.983
.995
.999
1.000
2.2
.111
.355
.623
.819
.928
.975
.993
.998
1.000
2.4
.091
.308
.570
.779
.904
.964
.988
.997
.999
1.000
2.6
.074
.267
.518
.736
.877
.951
.983
.995
.999
1.000
2.8
.061
.231
.470
.692
.848
.935
.976
.992
.998
.999

m\x
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
3.0
.050
.199
.423
.647
.815
.916
.966
.988
.996
.999
1.000
3.2
.041
.171
.380
.603
.781
.895
.955
.983
.994
.998
1.000
3.4
.033
.147
.340
.558
.744
.871
.942
.977
.992
.997
.999
1.000
3.6
.027
.126
.303
.515
.706
.844
.927
.969
.988
.996
.999
1.000
3.8
.022
.107
.269
.474
.668
.816
.909
.960
.984
.994
.998
.999
1.000
4.0
.018
.092
.238
.433
.629
.785
.889
.949
.979
.992
.997
.999
1.000
4.2
.015
.078
.210
.395
.590
.753
.868
.936
.972
.989
.996
.999
1.000
4.4
.012
.066
.185
.359
.551
.720
.844
.921
.964
.985
.994
.998
.999
1.000
4.6
.010
.056
.163
.326
.513
.686
.818
.905
.955
.980
.992
.997
.999
1.000
4.8
.008
.048
.143
.294
.476
.651
.791
.887
.944
.975
.990
.996
.999
1.000
5.0
.007
.040
.125
.265
.441
.616
.762
.867
.932
.968
.986
.995
.998
.999
1.000
5.2
.006
.034
.109
.238
.406
.581
.732
.845
.918
.960
.982
.993
.997
.999
1.000
5.4
.005
.029
.095
.213
.373
.546
.702
.822
.903
.951
.978
.990
.996
.999
1.000
5.6
.004
.024
.082
.191
.342
.512
.670
.797
.886
.941
.972
.988
.995
.998
.999
1.000
5.8
.003
.021
.072
.170
.313
.478
.638
.771
.867
.929
.965
.984
.993
.997
.999
1.000
6.0
.003
.017
.062
.151
.285
.446
.606
.744
.847
.916
.957
.980
.991
.996
.999
.999
1.000
6.2
.002
.015
.054
.134
.259
.414
.574
.716
.826
.902
.949
.975
.989
.995
.998
.999
1.000
6.4
.002
.012
.046
.119
.235
.384
.542
.687
.803
.886
.939
.969
.986
.994
.997
.999
1.000
6.6
.001
.010
.040
.105
.213
.355
.511
.658
.780
.869
.927
.963
.982
.992
.997
.999
.999
1.000
6.8
.001
.009
.034
.093
.192
.327
.480
.628
.755
.850
.915
.955
.978
.990
.996
.998
.999
1.000
7.0
.001
.007
.030
.082
.173
.301
.450
.599
.729
.830
.901
.947
.973
.987
.994
.998
.999
1.000
7.2
.001
.006
.025
.072
.156
.276
.420
.569
.703
.810
.887
.937
.967
.984
.993
.997
.999
.999
1.000
7.4
.001
.005
.022
.063
.140
.253
.392
.539
.676
.788
.871
.926
.961
.980
.991
.996
.998
.999
1.000
7.6
.001
.004
.019
.055
.125
.231
.365
.510
.648
.765
.854
.915
.954
.976
.989
.995
.998
.999
1.000
7.8
.000
.004
.016
.048
.112
.210
.338
.481
.620
.741
.835
.902
.945
.971
.986
.993
.997
.999
1.000
8.0
.000
.003
.014
.042
.100
.191
.313
.453
.593
.717
.816
.888
.936
.966
.983
.992
.996
.998
.999
1.000
8.2
.000
.003
.012
.037
.089
.174
.290
.425
.566
.692
.796
.873
.926
.960
.979
.990
.995
.998
.999
1.000
8.4
.000
.002
.010
.032
.079
.157
.267
.400
.537
.666
.774
.857
.915
.952
.975
.987
.994
.997
.999
1.000
8.6
.000
.002
.009
.030
.070
.142
.246
.373
.509
.640
.752
.849
.909
.949
.973
.986
.993
.997
.999
1.000
8.8
.000
.002
.007
.024
.062
.128
.226
.348
.482
.614
.729
.822
.889
.935
.964
.981
.990
.995
.998
.999
1.000
9.0
.000
.001
.006
.021
.055
.116
.207
.324
.456
.587
.706
.803
.876
.926
.959
.978
.989
.995
.998
.999
1.000
9.5
.000
.001
.004
.015
.040
.089
.165
.269
.392
.522
.645
.752
.836
.898
.940
.967
.982
.991
.996
.998
.999
Table C (concluded)
871

872
  The normal distribution is a theoretical distribution that approximates many real-life phenomena. It is widely 
used in many disciplines, including operations management. Consequently, having the ability to work with 
normal distributions is a skill that will serve you well. 
 The normal curve is symmetrical and bell-shaped, as illustrated in  Figure C.1 . Although the theoretical 
distribution extends in both directions, to plus or minus infi nity, most of the distribution lies close to its mean, 
so values of a variable that is normally distributed will occur relatively close to the distribution mean. 
 Working with the 
Normal Distribution 
C 
 APPENDIX 
 FIGURE C.1  The normal distribution 
Mean
 
 z Values 
  It is customary to refer to a value of a normally distributed random variable in terms of the number of standard 
deviations the value is from the mean of the distribution. This is known as its  z  value, or  z  score. In  Figure C.2  
you can see the normal distribution in terms of some selected  z  values. This particular distribution is referred 
to as the standard normal distribution. Notice that the  z  values to the left of (i.e., below) the mean are negative. 
Thus, a  z value of  2 1.25 refers to a value that is 1.25 standard deviations below the distribution mean. 
 FIGURE C.2  The standard normal distribution with selected 
values of  z 
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
y
z
  When working with a variable that is normally distributed, it is often necessary to convert an actual value of 
the variable to a  z value. The  z value can be computed using the following formula:
 
z
x

 

 
where  x 5 A specified value of a variable 
 m 5 The distribution mean 
 s 5 The distribution standard deviation 

 
Appendix C  Working with the Normal Distribution 
873
 A normal distribution has a mean of 20 and a standard deviation of 2. What is the  z value of 17.5? 
 E X A M P L E  1 
 x 5 17.5 
 m 5 20 
 s 5 2 
 Using the formula for  z, we fi nd:
 
z
x
z

 



 
17.5
20
2
1.25 
 S O L U T I O N 
 z Values and Probabilities 
 Once the  z  value is known, it can be used to obtain various probabilities by referring to a table of the 
normal distribution, such as the probability that a value will occur by chance that is greater than, or 
less than, that value. Note that the probability of  exactly  that value is zero, because there are an infinite 
number of values that could occur, so the probability of specifying in advance that any one particular 
value will occur is essentially equal to zero.  z values can also be used to find the probability that a value 
will occur that is between  6 z.  Two such cases are shown in  Figure C.3 . Note that the total area under-
neath the curve represents 100 percent of the probability, so knowing that the probability that a value 
will occur that is within the range, say, of  z   5   6 2 is .9544, we can say that the probability that a value 
will occur that is outside of the range (e.g., either less than  z   5   2 2 or greater than  z   5   1 2) is equal to 
1.0000  2  .9544  5  .0456. 
 FIGURE C.3  Areas under the normal curve between  z   5   6 2 s 
and  z   5   6 3 s 
σ=Standard
deviation
Mean
95.44%
99.74%
-3σ
-2σ
+2σ
+3σ
 
 Tables of the Normal Distribution 
  Virtually all applications of the normal distribution involve working with a table of normal distribution 
probabilities. Tables make the process of obtaining probabilities and  z  values quite simple. This book has 
two slightly different normal distribution tables. Appendix B Table A has values for the right half of the 
distribution for the area under the curve (note the fi gure at the top of the table), which is the probability 
from the mean of the distribution ( z   5  0) to any other value of  z,  up to  z   5   1 3.09. Statistics books always 
have this version of the table, so you may already be familiar with it. A second table of normal probabilities 
is presented in Appendix B Tables B1 and B2. They show the area under the curve from negative infi nity to 
any point  z  (see the fi gure at the top of the table), up to  z   5   1 3.49. In both tables, the values of  z  are shown 
in two parts. The integer and fi rst decimal are shown along the side of the table, while the second decimal 
is shown across the top. 

874 
Appendix C  Working with the Normal Distribution 
 Using Appendix B Table B.2, fi nd the area under the curve to the left of  z   5  1.12. 
 E X A M P L E  2 
 S O L U T I O N 
 
1.12 becomes 1.1
.02
1.12
z 
 
 Find the row where  z   5  1.1 down the left-hand side of the table. Find the .02 column across the top of the table. 
The probability is at the intersection of the 1.1 row and the .02 column.
z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
 .0
.5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
 .1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
 .2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
 .3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
 .4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
 .5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
 .6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
 .7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7703
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
 .8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
 .9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8830
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9279
.9292
.9306
.9319
 Note:  You will fi nd versions of both tables at the very end of the book for easy reference. The last table repeats 
Appendix B Table A. The other table repeats Appendix B Table B.2., the positive values of  z.  For problems that 
involve negative values of  z, refer to the portion of Appendix B Table B.1. on p. 868. 
 Finding a Probability of Observing a Value That Is Within     z of the Mean or Outside of     z 
 Use Appendix B Table A for this type of problem: 
 E X A M P L E  3 
 Find the area under the curve that is  within two standard deviations of the mean. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 What the problems is asking for: 
 
z = 0
z = –2
z = +2
 
 Appendix B Table A provides the right half of the area: 

 
Appendix C  Working with the Normal Distribution 
875
 = 0
z = +2
 
 To fi nd the total area between  6   z   5  2, double the amount in the right half: 2(.4772)  5  .9544. 
 The shaded area is 
.4772 
 E X A M P L E  4 
 Find the area under the curve that is  outside of two standard deviations from the mean. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 What the problem is asking for: 
 
z = +2
z = –2
0
 
 Appendix B Table A provides the right half of the area between the mean and  z   5   1 2. To fi nd the area in the 
right tail, subtract the amount between the mean and  z   5   1 2 from .5000: 
 = 0
z = +2
 
 The same amount will be in each tail, so the total area in both tails is 2(.0228)  5  .0456. 
 
.0228
.0228
−2
0
+2
 
 Another way to arrive at the same answer is to note that the area  within  two standard deviations of the mean is 
.9544, as shown previously, so the area outside of that is 1.0000  2  .9544  5  .0456. 
 Area under the right side of the curve: 
         .5000 
 Subtract the area from  z   5  0 to  z   5   1 2.00: 
 2 .4772 
 The area to the right of  z   5   1 2.00 is:   
                      .0228    
 Finding an Area (Probability) That Is to the Left or to the Right of  z 
  Use Appendix B Table B.2 for this type of problem (e.g., “What is the probability that the time will not exceed 
22 weeks?”). 
 E X A M P L E  5 
 A normal distribution has a mean of 20 and a standard deviation of 1.0. Find the probabilities:
 a. A value that is 22 or less. 
 b. A value that is 22 or more.
P(x ≤ 22)
P(x ≥ 22)

876 
Appendix C  Working with the Normal Distribution 
 First, determine the value of  z for 22:
 
z
x

 



 
22
20
1
2.00  
 a. From Appendix B Table B, the area (probability) to the left of  z   5   1 2.00 is .9772. 
   b. Because the total area under the curve is 100 percent, or 1.0000, the area to the right of  z   5   1 2.00 is 
simply 1.0000  2  .9772  5  .0228. 
 S O L U T I O N 
 Points to Remember 
 1. The area under a normal curve represents probability. 
 2. The area under the curve is 100 percent, or 1.0000. 
 3. The area on either side of the mean is equal to half of the total, which is 50 percent, or .5000. 
   4. The curve extends to  6   infinity, but 99.74 percent of the values will occur within  6 3 standard deviations of 
the mean. 
   5. It is best to use Appendix B Table A for problems involving  6 z  (i.e., Chapters 7 and 10), and to use Appen-
dix B Table B for problems involving one-sided probabilities such as the probability that  x  will be no more 
than a given (i.e., Chapters 4S, 13, and 17). 
 6. The probability of an exact value (e.g., 22 in Example 5) is zero. Therefore,  P ( x # 22)  5   P ( x , 22). 
 Test Yourself 
     1. Suppose a normal distribution has a mean of 40 and a standard deviation of 5. Find the value of  z  for each of 
these values:
 
a. 48 
b. 30 
 
c. 34 
d. 52.5 
 2. Using Appendix B Table A, find the area between  6 z when  z is:
 
a. 1.00 
b. 1.96 
 
c. 2.10 
d. 2.50 
 3. Find the probability of observing a value that is beyond  6 z when  z is:
 
a. 1.00 
b. 1.80 
 
c. 1.88 
d. 2.54 
 4. Use the appropriate Appendix B Table to find the probability of a value that does not exceed a  z value of:
 
a. .40 
b. 1.27 
 
c.  2 1.32 
d. 2.75 
 5. Find the probability of observing a value that is more than a  z value of:
 
a. .77 
b. 1.65 
 
c.  2 1.32 
d. 2.75 
 Answers 
 1.  a.  1 1.60 
b.  2 2.00 
 
c.  2 1.20 
d.  1 2.50 
 2.  a. .6826 
b. .9500 
 
c. .9642 
d. .9876 
 3.  a. .3174 
b. .0718 
 
c. .0602 
d. .0110 
 4.  a. .6554 
b. .8980 
 
c. .0934 
d. .9970 
 5.  a. .2206 
b. .0495 
 
c. .9066 
d. .0030 

877
 Chapter 1 
 Page 3: Michie Turpin/Piedmont Healthcare; p. 8: 
Courtesy of NCR; p. 14: Doug Letterman/Creative 
 Commons; p. 15: Courtesy of Trek Bicycle Corporation; 
p. 22: © Rykoff Collection/Corbis; p. 28: Photo by Getty 
Images for Puma; p. 29: Photo by Mario Tama/Getty 
Images; p. 31: Courtesy of Marks & Spencer; p. 34-35 
(all): Courtesy of Wegmans Food Markets, Inc. 
 Chapter 2 
 Page 41: Peter Charlesworth/LightRocket via Getty 
Images; p. 43: Terry Vine/Blend Images/Getty Images 
RF; p. 44: Uwe Zucchi/AFP/Getty Images; p. 51: The 
McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Christopher Kerrigan, 
photographer; p. 55: Courtesy of Apple Inc.; p. 57: 
Courtesy of Hyundai Motor Group. 
 Chapter 3 
 Page 75: Photodisc/Getty Images RF; p. 76: Peter 
 Cosgrove/AP Images; p. 96 (left): © Dynamic  Graphics 
Group/PunchStock RF; p. 96 (right): © The Toro 
 Company. All rights reserved; p. 105: © Andrew 
McLachlan/All Canada Photos/Corbis. 
 Chapter 4 
 Page 135: General Motors LLC, used with permission 
GM Media Archive/Steve Fecht, photographer; p. 138: 
Courtesy of Dutch Boy; p. 140: Courtesy of Pinnacle 
Foods Corporation; p. 142: Bloomberg via Getty Images; 
p. 146: James F. Quinn KRT/Newscom; p. 148: © Jack 
Star/Photolink/Getty Images RF; p. 150 (left): Courtesy 
of Technogym; p. 150 (right): Courtesy of Hettich/Rehau. 
Design by Dmitriy Sergeev; p. 153: Liu Zheng/Color-
ChinaPhoto/AP Images; p. 161: © Iain Masterton/Alamy.  
 Chapter 5 
 Page 185 (left): Mark Peterson/Redux; p. 185 (right): 
Grant Faint/Getty Images; p. 187: Thomas Coex/APF/
Getty Images; p. 190 (left): © Mark Richards/PhotoEdit; 
p. 190 (right): © Brand X Pictures/PunchStock RF; 
p. 198 (both): © Royalty-Free/Corbis. 
 Chapter 6 
 Page 237: © Jeff Gilbert/Alamy; p. 239 (top-left, bottom-
right): © Royalty-Free/Corbis; p. 239 (top-right): 
© Don Tremain/Getty Images RF; p. 239 (bottom-left): 
 Photo Credits 
© Keith Dannemiller/Corbis; p. 247: © Brand X Pictures/
PunchStock RF; p. 248: © Franck Robichon/epa/Corbis; 
p. 249: Bill Pugliano/Getty Images; p. 252: Floto 1 War-
ner/OTTO; p. 255: Courtesy of Cunard Line; p. 259: 
©Reuters/Corbis; p. 261 (left): Oleksiy Maksymenko/
Getty Images; p. 261 (right): PhotoInc/Getty Images RF.  
 Chapter 7 
 Page 289: Getty Images RF; p. 290: Courtesy of Human-
tech Inc.; p. 292: John Harrelson/Getty Images for NAS-
CAR; p. 297: Google and the Google logo are registered 
trademarks of Google Inc., used with permission; p. 300 
(both): Courtesy of Peak Ergonomics  www.Healthy-
WorkSolutions.com . 
 Chapter 8 
 Page 337: © Tom Salyer/Alamy; p. 338: U.S. Coast 
Guard photo by Petty Officer 2nd Class Jetta H. Disco; 
p. 341: © Richard J Greenman/Alamy; p. 343: William 
Cho/Creative Commons; p. 348: © McGraw-Hill Com-
panies/Jill Braaten, photographer. 
 Chapter 9 
 Page 367: Thomas Samson/AFP/Getty Images; p. 370: 
Richard Drew/AP Images; p. 375: John Zich/Bloomberg 
via Getty Images; p. 381: NIST public domain; p. 383: 
Jay Mallin/Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 386: Paul 
Sakuma/AP Images; p. 399: Ryan Anson/ Bloomberg 
via Getty Images. 
 Chapter 10 
 Page 411: Gabriela Maj/Bloomberg via Getty Images; 
p. 413: Tim Boyle/Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 416: 
Jay Reeves/AP Images; p. 417: © Chang W. Lee/The 
New York Times/Redux; p. 419: © Omron Electronics 
LLC; p. 426: © Jim Richardson/Corbis; p. 436: 
© Royalty-Free/Corbis; p. 441: Corbis Super RF/Alamy. 
 Chapter 11 
 Page 457: © 2013 Nikon UK Ltd.; p. 458: Courtesy of 
Toyota Motor Corporation, U.S.A., Inc.; p. 464: Scott 
Sady/AP Images; p. 476: © Chuck Pefley/Alamy. 
 Chapter 12 
 Page 495: © Tesla Motors; p. 500: Courtesy of VX 
 Corporation; p. 542: Courtesy of L. & J.G. Stickley. 
 Chapter 13 
 Page 547: Kris Tripplaar/Sipa USA/Newscom; p. 549: 
Courtesy of Motorola; p. 552: DreamPictures/Shannon 
Faulk/Getty Images RF; p. 554: 2007 Getty Images RF. 
 Chapter 14 
 Page 605: Lennox McLendon/AP Images; p. 608: 
Courtesy of Ford Motor Company; p. 613: © Alexandra 
Boulat/VII/Corbis; p. 615: Marcos Issa/Bloomberg 
via Getty Images; p. 617: General Motors LLC, used 
with permission GM Media Archive; p. 621 (both): 
Tri State Industries, footage courtesy of Mac Lean 
Media, Inc.; p. 631: Image courtesy of CareFusion. All 
rights reserved. Pyxis ProcedureStation is a registered 
trademark of CareFusion Corporation or one of its 
subsidiaries.  
 Chapter 15 
 Page 649: © Mick Tsikas/Reuters/Corbis; p. 652: Scott 
Bauer/USDA; p. 654: Danish Siddiqui/Reuters/Landov; 
p. 665: © Jim Hansen Photography; p. 671: Mike Kane/
Bloomberg via Getty Images; p. 674: Steven Puetzer / 
Getty Images RF; p. 680: Mark Richards/PhotoEdit. 
 Chapter 16 
 Page 689: U. Baumgarten via Getty Images; p. 691: 
Courtesy Rexam PLC; p. 710: Alex Maclean/Getty 
Images; p. 713: Mark Wilson/Getty Images. 
 Chapter 17 
 Page 731: Jamey Stillings; p. 735 (left): Kevin Mazur/
WireImage; p. 735 (right): Matt Kent/Redferns; p. 758: 
David McNew/Getty Images. 
 Chapter 18 
 Page 783: Jeff Greenberg/Photoedit; p. 784: Andreas 
Solaro/Getty Images; p. 798: Stephen Chernin/Getty 
Images; p. 811: Beth S. Parks/AP Images. 
 Chapter 19 
 Page 823: Jon Feingersh/Getty Images RF. 

878
 Abt Electronics,  375 
 Allen-Bradley,  248 
 Allied Signal,  391 
 Amazon,  44–45, 47, 464, 664, 680 
 American Airlines,  713 
 American Express,  399 
 Apple,  47, 55, 246, 344, 349 
 Arrow Electronics,  384 
 AT&T,  344, 399 
 Barnesandnoble.com,  664 
 Bayer,  340 
 Bell Atlantic,  26, 344 
 Bell Telephone Labs,  23, 369 
 Best Buy,  145 
 BMW,  270, 340 
 Boeing,  142, 638, 671 
 Boston Market,  49 
 Burger King,  47, 53, 251, 459 
 Canon,  399 
 Coach,  47 
 Coca-Cola,  47, 341 
 Compaq Computer,  46 
 Crown Audio,  380 
 Cummins Engine,  399 
 CVS,  677 
 Dell Computers,  49, 152, 246 
 Deloitte,  345, 654 
 Digital Equipment Corp.,  344 
 Domino’s Pizza,  47, 631 
 DuPont,  677 
 Ernst & Young LLP,  617 
 EWP Engineering, Inc.,  738 
 Express Mail,  47, 631 
 Federated Department Stores,  664 
 FedEx,  47, 631, 664, 665 
 Fingerhut,  664–665 
 Firestone Tire & Rubber,  141 
 Florida Power and Light,  381, 399 
 Ford Motor Company,  139, 141, 249, 629, 677 
 Foxconn,  246 
 Gap,  26, 75 
 GE Aerospace,  737 
 General Electric,  391 
 General Mills,  612, 677 
 General Motors,  141, 548, 606, 615, 617 
 Globe Metallurgical,  381 
 Google,  47 
 Hershey Foods,  399 
 Hewlett-Packard,  46, 139, 152, 162, 246, 399 
 H&M,  26 
 Hoechst,  340 
 Home Depot,  75 
 Honeywell,  391 
 Humantech Inc.,  290 
 Hyundai Motor Company,  57, 378 
 IBM,  47, 139, 144, 663, 666 
 JCPenney,  75 
 John Deere,  607 
 Kraft Foods,  145, 146 
 Leap Technologies,  391–392 
 Lego,  151 
 Lexus,  47 
 L.L. Bean,  386, 399 
 Lockheed Martin Corporation,  737 
 Macy’s,  26 
 Maria’s Market,  148–149 
 Martin Company,  369 
 Mattel Inc.,  383, 417 
 McDonald’s,  47, 49, 51, 143, 251, 259, 271, 426, 459 
 MCI Communications Corp.,  344 
 Mercedes,  340 
 Microsoft,  44, 187, 368, 731, 762 
 Milliken & Company,  381 
 Morton Salt,  242–243 
 Motorola,  381, 390, 391, 438, 549, 617 
 NestléUSA,  669 
 Nike,  44 
 Nissan,  340 
 Nordstrom,  47 
 NUMMI,  606 
 Omron Electronics,  419 
 One-Hour Photo,  47 
 PepsiCo,  47 
 Pier One,  665 
 Procter & Gamble,  399, 677 
 Puma,  28 
 Rexam,  691 
 Sherwin-Williams,  138 
 Siemens,  340 
 Solectron,  190 
 Company Index

 
Company Index 
879
 Sony,  47 
 Southwest Airlines,  47 
 Steelcase, Inc.,  136 
 Stryker Howmedica,  62 
 Sysco,  652–653 
 Target,  553 
 3M,  47, 655 
 Toshiba,  139 
 Toyota,  47, 368, 371, 399, 413, 605, 606, 607, 608, 613, 627 
 Toys “R” Us,  664 
 Trek Bicycle,  15 
 TriState Industries,  621 
 Union Carbide,  26 
 UPS,  47, 664 
 Verizon,  44 
 Vlasic,  140–141 
 VX Corporation,  500 
 Walmart,  46, 47, 342, 364, 553, 665 
 Walt Disney,  44 
 Wegmans Food Markets,  33–35, 47, 649, 673–674 
 Wendy’s,  459 
 Western Electric,  23 
 Xerox Corporation,  147, 381, 386, 399, 617 
 Zappos.com,  44 
 Zara,  26 

880
 Subject Index
 American Society for Quality (ASQ),  12, 368, 369 
 Analysis 
 capability,  436–437 
 cost-profit-volume,  353–354 
 cost-volume,  202–205 
 feasibility,  159 
 financial,  205–206 
 job,  299–303 
 methods,  299–303 
 multiple regression,  106 
 Pareto,  392, 395 
 process,  26 
 sensitivity,  224–225, 841–844 
 supplier,  667 
 SWOT,  47 
 value,  145, 147 
 waiting line,  206 
 Analytics,  19 
 Anderson, David R.,  235, 821, 853 
 Andon,  618 
 Anticipation stocks,  549 
 APICS,  12, 556 
 Applied research,  139 
 Appointment systems,  712 
 Appraisal costs,  378 
 Armony, Mor,  462 
 Armstrong, Larry,  378 
 Arrival patterns,  788–789 
 Assemble-to-order (ATO),  671 
 Assembly diagram,  497–498 
 Assembly line,  15 , 22–23, 240,  251 
 Assembly time chart,  500–501 
 Assignable variation,  13 , 418 
 Assignment model,  697– 700 
 Associative forecasting techniques,  82, 100–106 
 Associative model,  82 
 Atkinson, Roy,  368 
 Attributes,  422, 427 – 429 
 Audits, of suppliers,  667 
 Automation 
 advantages,  245 
 computer-aided manufacturing (CAM),  247 
 computer-integrated manufacturing,  248 
 defined,  245 
 disadvantages,  246 
 fixed,  246 
 flexible,  247–248, 258 
 location decisions and,  342 
 numerically controlled (N/C),  247 
 programmable,  246 
 robots,  247 
 in services,  261–262 
 Autonomation,  607 , 613 
 Availability,  177– 178 , 188 
 Note: Boldface entries indicate key terms and the page numbers 
where they are defined; page numbers followed by n refer to notes. 
 A-B-C approach,  554– 556 
 Acar, Yavuc,  133 
 Acceptance sampling, 258, 412;  see also Quality control 
 Accidents, causes of,  295–296 
 Accounting 
 costs,  618 
 forecasting and,  76 
 function of,  11, 660 
 Accuracy, in forecasting,  76, 79–82 
 Activities,  740 –741 
 Activity-based costing,  618 
 Activity-on-arrow (AOA),  740– 743 , 744–748 
 Activity-on-node (AON),  741– 743 , 748–750 
 Actual output,  188–189 
 Actual time,  811 
 Adams, Bob,  299 
 Additive model,  96–97 
 Advertising and promotion,  42, 462 
 Aft, Larry,  324 
 Aggregate measures,  59 
 Aggregate planning, 456–493;  see also Inventory management 
 concept of aggregation,  459–460 
 defined,  457 
 demand and supply,  461–465 
 disaggregating the plan,  477 
 goal of,  457 
 inputs to,  461, 480 
 linear programming,  472–474 
 master scheduling,  459, 477–482, 496–497 
 mathematical techniques,  472–475 
 need for,  460 
 outputs,  480–482 
 overview of,  460–461 
 planning levels,  458 
 in services,  475–477 
 simulation models,  475 
 summary of,  483 
 supply chain,  461 
 techniques for,  468–475 
 trial-and-error techniques,  468–472 
 uneven demand, strategies for meeting,  465–467 
 variations,  460 
 Agile manufacturing,  54 
 Agility,  26– 27 , 54 
 Algorithm, use in PERT,  744–751 
 Allison-Koerber, Deborah,  111 
 Allowance factor, in time studies,  309–310 
 Allspaw, John,  215 
 Alpha risk,  421 
 American Production and Inventory Control 
Society (APICS),  12, 556 

 
Subject Index 
881
 Break-even point (BEP),  202 
 Breakdown maintenance,  641 
 Breakdown programs,  644 
 Bribery,  342 
 Brice, Virginia,  91n 
 Bricks and mortar company,  665 
 Bridger, R. S.,  324 
 Budget control,  757 
 Budgeting,  10 
 Buffa, Elwood,  821 
 Buffers, inventory,  549–550, 670 
 Bullwhip effect,  670 
 Burrows, Robert P.,  492 
 Business organizations 
 functions within,  4, 10–11 
 trends,  24–27 
 Business plan,  459 
 Business process management (BPM),  13 
 Business processes,  12–14 
 Business-to-business (B2B) commerce,  665–666 
 Butman, John,  408 
 Byrne, Robert F.,  133 
 C-chart,  429– 430 
 C-kanban,  621 
 CAD,  160–161, 762 
 Caldwell, Philip,  608 
 Calkins, Patricia,  147 
 CAM,  247 
 Camm, Jeffrey D.,  235, 821, 853 
 Capability analysis,  436–437 
 Capability index,  437– 438 
 Capacity,  13 , 185 
 Capacity buffers,  761 
 Capacity chunks,  198 
 Capacity costs,  785–786 
 Capacity cushion,  192 
 Capacity disposal strategies,  207 
 Capacity planning, 184–215;  see also Aggregate planning 
 airline industry,  14 
 constraint management,  201, 810–811 
 cost-volume analysis,  202–205 
 defining and measuring,  188–189 
 determining requirements,  193–194 
 developing strategies,  196–200 
 evaluating alternatives,  201–206 
 factors affecting,  189–191 
 forecasting,  192–194 
 goal of,  185 
 importance of,  187 
 long term,  193, 194 
 make or buy,  195–196 
 planning service capacity,  194–195 
 rough-cut,  479 
 short term,  193 
 steps in the process,  192 
 strategy formulation,  191–192 
 volatility of demand,  194–195 
 Capacity requirements planning,  513– 516 
 Capacity utilization,  189 
 Capital productivity,  58 
 Available-to-promise (ATP) inventory,  480 
 Average, moving,  86–89, 98 
 Averaging techniques,  86–91 
 Avoidance,  680 
 Awad, Elias M.,  302 
 Awards, for quality,  370, 380–381 
 Baatz, E.,  518 
 Bacal, Robert,  293n 
 Back orders,  462 
 Back-shore,  654 
 Backflushing,  510 
 Backward scheduling,  695 
 Balance delay,  265 
 Balanced Scorecard (BSC),  54–56 
 Balanced systems,  614–615 
 Balancing transactions,  625 
 Baldrige, Malcolm,  381 
 Baldrige Award,  377 , 381 
 Balking,  789 
 Ballou, Ronald H.,  364 
 Bar coding,  441, 552–553 
 Bartlett, Christopher A.,  51n 
 Basic research,  139 
 Batch processing,  239 
 Bateman, Nicola,  639 
 Behavioral approach 
 to job design,  291 
 to project management,  733–738 
 Behavioral school,  289 
 Benchmarking,  386 , 399 –400 
 Benton, W. C.,  687 
 Berry, Julie,  598 
 Berry, Leonard L.,  373n, 374n 
 Berry, William L.,  215, 492, 544, 608, 639, 728 
 Best practices, of design,  137–138 
 Besterfield, Dale H.,  408, 454 
 Besterfield, Glen,  408 
 Besterfield-Micha, Carol,  408 
 Besterfield-Sacre, Mary,  408 
 Beta distribution,  751 
 Bias,  108, 431 – 432 
 Bill of materials (BOM),  497– 500 , 510 
 Billington, C.,  681n 
 Binding constraints,  837 
 Black, Cherie,  632 
 Black belts,  390 
 Blanchard, David,  687 
 Blanket purchase orders,  662 
 Blueprint, for services,  164–165 
 BOM,  497–500, 510 
 Bonomo, Charles,  133 
 Bonus,  297 
 Bottleneck operation,  197– 198 , 206, 269, 710–711 
 Bounded rationality,  218 
 Bowen, H. Kent,  639 
 Bowersox, Donald J.,  687 
 Bowie, Norman E.,  38 
 Brainstorming,  398 
 Branding,  7 
 Brassard, Michael,  408 

882 
Subject Index
 Changes,  508 
 Channel,  787 
 Chase demand strategy,  465– 467 
 Chatfield, Carl,  781 
 Cheaper by the Dozen,  23 
 Check sheet,  392 
 Chi-square goodness-of-fit test,  788 
 Chopra, Sunil,  687 
 CIM,  248 
 Classification systems,  554–556 
 Click and brick companies,  665, 679 
 Clicks-and-mortar,  679 
 Climate, impact on location decisions,  347 
 Closed-loop MRP,  512 
 Closed-loop supply chain,  681 
 Closeness ratings,  273–274 
 Closs, David J.,  687 
 Clustering,  351 
 Coburn, Larry,  380 
 Collaborative planning, forecasting, 
and replenishment (CPFR),   669 
 Column reduction,  697 
 Combination layouts,  255 
 Common Good Principle,  29 
 Common variability,  417 
 Community factors, in location decisions,  347–348 
 Compensation,  296–299 
 Competition, time-based,  459 
 Competitive edge,  46 
 Competitiveness,  42– 43 
 Component commonality,  162 
 Computer-aided design (CAD),  160– 161 , 762 
 Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM),  247 
 Computer applications 
 CAD,  160–161, 762 
 CIM,  248 
 e-business,  24–25, 31, 663–666 
 e-commerce,  24, 521 
 e-procurement,  24, 666 
 EDI,  666 
 ERP,  516–523, 629 
 for forecasting,  112 
 GIS,  350–351 
 linear programming,  838–841 
 Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM),  248 
 Computer viruses,  61 
 Computerized numerical control (CNC),  247 
 Computing algorithm,  744–751 
 Concurrent engineering,  160, 610 
 Condit, Donald,  598 
 Conformance, quality of,  375–376 
 Constant lead time,  574 
 Constant service time,  794–795 
 Constant work-in-process (CONWIP),  623–624 
 Constrained optimization,  823 
 Constraint management,  201, 810–811 
 Constraints 
 binding,  837 
 categories of,  201 
 defined,  201,  824 
 plotting,  828–831 
 Carbon footprint,  27, 244 
 Carbone, James,  666 
 Carrying costs,  553, 557–561 
 Cascio, Wayne,  324 
 Cases 
 An American Tragedy: How a Good Company Died,  66–67 
 Big Bank,  819 
 B&L Inc.,  686–687 
 The Case of the Mexican Crazy Quilt,  779–780 
 Chick-n-Gravy Dinner Line,  405–406 
 Custom Cabinets, Inc©,  852–853 
 DMD Enterprises,  541 
 Eight Glasses a Day (EGAD),  492 
 Farmers Restaurant,  599 
 Grill Rite,  598 
 Harvey Industries,  596–598 
 Hazel,  37–38 
 Hazel Revisited,  69 
 Hello, Walmart?,  364 
 Hi-Ho Yo-Yo, Inc.,  728 
 Highline Financial Services, Ltd.,  133 
 Home-Style Cookies,  67–68 
 Level Operations,  637 
 Making Hotplates,  323 
 MasterTag,  685–686 
 M&L Manufacturing,  132 
 Outsourcing of Hospital Services,  215 
 Product Recall,  335 
 Promotional Novelties,  540 
 Son, Ltd.,  851 
 Tiger Tools,  454 
 Time, Please,  781 
 Tip Top Markets,  406–407 
 Toys, Inc.,  453 
 UPD Manufacturing,  596 
 “Your Garden Gloves,”  69 
 Cash flow,  205 
 Causal variables,  82 
 Cause-and-effect diagrams,  371 , 396 –397 
 Cecere, Lora,  492 
 Cell,  256 
 Cellular layouts, 256–258;  see also Facilities layout 
 Cellular production,  256 
 Center of gravity method,  356– 358 
 Centered moving average,  98 
 Central limit theorem,  418 
 Central tendency,  422 
 Centralized distribution,  339 
 Centralized inspection,  416–417 
 Centralized inventory management,  669 
 Centralized purchasing,  662 
 Certainty,  218– 219 
 Certification 
 of employees,  12 
 of project managers,  738 
 of quality,  381–383 
 of suppliers,  624, 668 
 Chalice, Robert,  639 
 Change, technological,  48, 60 
 Change transactions,  626 
 Changeover time,  53, 612–613 

 
Subject Index 
883
 ordering,  554, 557–561 
 overhead,  618 
 prevention,  379 
 processing,  200 
 quality,  371, 378–380, 440 
 rework,  380 
 setup,  554, 692 
 shortage,  554, 576 
 total,  353–354 
 transportation,  272–273, 340, 341, 343, 345, 346, 682 
 variable,  202, 353–354 
 Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals,  12 
 Council on Competitiveness,  345 
 Counting systems, for inventory,  551–553 
 Country identification, location decisions and,  345–346 
 Cox, Jeff,  728 
 C p ,  437–439 
 CPFR,  669 
 C pk ,  439 
 CPM (Critical path method), 19,  740– 743;  see also PERT 
(Program evaluation and review technique) 
 CR (critical ratio),  700 
 Cradle-to-grave assessment,  144 
 Craft production,  21 
 Crandall, Robert L.,  713, 716 
 Crash 
 defined,  758 
 project management and,  757–760 
 Creeping featurism,  143 
 Critical activities,  741 
 Critical chain project management (CCPM),  761 
 Critical path,  741 
 Critical path method (CPM),  19, 740–743 
 Critical ratio (CR),  700 
 Crosby, Philip B.,  371, 379 
 Cross-docking,  581 , 682 
 Cross training,  270, 617 
 CRP,  513–516 
 Culture, impact on design,  143 
 Cumulative lead time,  497 
 Currency,  346 
 Customer satisfaction,  26, 385, 550 
 Customization 
 degree of,  20 
 mass,  151–153, 240 
 Cycle,  84– 85 , 100, 431 
 Cycle counting,  556 
 Cycle stock,  557 
 Cycle time,  263– 264 , 623 
 Cyclical scheduling,  714–715 
 Danner, David L.,  324 
 Darnell, Michele,  140 
 Databases,  49–50 
 Davis, Mark M.,  170 
 Davis, Stanley B.,  408 
 De Meirleir, Marcel,  364 
 DeCarlo, Neil,  408 
 Decentralized distribution,  339 
 Decentralized inventory management,  670 
Constraints—Cont.
 redundant,  834–835 
 theory of,  710–711 
 Construction costs,  200 
 Consumer price index (CPI),  104 
 Consumer surveys, used to forecast,  83 
 Consumer’s risk,  422 
 Continuous improvement,  385, 617–618;  see also Quality 
 Continuous processing,  240 
 Continuous review system,  551 
 Continuous stocking levels,  577–578 
 Contractors, independent,  464 
 Contracts, long term,  668 
 Contribution margin,  202 
 Control,  5, 16 
 Control charts 
 attributes,  422, 427–429 
 defined,  106,  396, 420 
 errors,  421–422 
 forecasting and,  106–110 
 mean,  422–424 
 nonrandom patterns,  431 
 process,  419–422 
 range,  424–427 
 run tests,  431–435 
 for variables,  422–427 
 when to use,  430–431 
 Control limits,  420 –421, 435 
 Control process,  419–422 
 Conversion process,  5–6 
 Conveyance kanban,  621 
 Convis, Gary,  639 
 CONWIP,  623–624 
 Cooper, M. Bixby,  687 
 Corbett, James J.,  653n 
 Core competencies,  46 
 Corner points,  835 
 Corrective action,  5 
 Correlation,  104 
 Cost accounting,  618 
 Cost analysis,  799–801 
 Cost-profit-volume analysis,  353–354 
 Cost reduction,  42 
 Cost-volume analysis,  202–205 
 Costs 
 activity based,  618 
 appraisal,  378 
 capacity,  785–786 
 carrying,  553, 557–561 
 construction,  200 
 distribution,  200 
 ERP,  519–520 
 excess,  576 
 failure,  379 
 fixed,  195, 200, 202, 353–354 
 holding,  553, 677 
 inspection,  413 
 maintenance,  641 
 of nonconformance,  371 
 opportunity,  462 

884 
Subject Index
 computer-aided design,  160–161, 762 
 concurrent engineering,  160, 610 
 cultural issues,  143 
 degree of newness,  155 
 elements of,  610–611 
 ethical issues,  141–142 
 global,  143–144 
 human factors,  142–143 
 idea generation,  139 
 Kano model,  158–159 
 legal issues,  141–142 
 life cycles;  see Life cycles 
 mass customization,  151–153 
 phases,  149–150, 159 
 production,  160–162 
 production requirements,  161–162 
 products versus services,  163–164 
 quality,  375–376 
 quality function deployment,  155–157 
 reasons for,  137 
 recycling,  146–149 
 redesign,  137–138 
 reliability,  153–154 
 remanufacturing,  145–146 
 research and development,  139 
 reverse engineering,  139 
 robust design,  154 
 services,  162–166 
 standardization,  61, 151, 610 
 sustainability,  144–149 
 technology changes,  137 
 value analysis,  145, 147 
 Design and engineering function,  661 
 Design capacity,  188– 189 
 Design for assembly (DFA),  162 
 Design for disassembly (DFD),  146 
 Design for manufacture and assembly (DFMA),  137 
 Design for manufacturing (DFM),  162 
 Design for recycling (DFR),  147 
 Design of experiments,  154 
 Design review,  159 
 Deterministic,  743– 744 
 Dettmer, H. William,  201n 
 Dewhurst, Nicholas P.,  137–138 
 Differentiation 
 delayed,  152, 682 
 as a strategy,  44 
 Diffusion models,  91 
 Dimensions of quality,  372–374 
 Direct numerical control (DNC),  247 
 Disaggregation,  477 
 Discounts, quantity,  550, 564–568 
 Discrete stocking levels,  578–580 
 Diseconomies of scale,  199– 200 
 Disintermediation,  682 
 Distribution, centralized versus decentralized,  339 
 Distribution costs,  200 
 Distribution decisions,  33 
 Distribution function,  16 
 Distribution requirements planning (DRP),  515– 516 
 Decentralized purchasing,  662 
 Decision making 
 capacity planning;  see Capacity planning 
 causes of poor,  217–218 
 under certainty,  218–219 
 decision areas,  52 
 decision trees,  221–223 
 design and operating decisions,  15–16, 32 
 establishing priorities,  20 
 ethics and,  29–30 
 expected value of perfect information,  223–224 
 hierarchical organizations,  45 
 location,  33 
 models,  18–19, 23 
 quantitative approaches,  19, 23 
 under risk,  220–221 
 sensitivity analysis,  224–225, 841–844 
 strategic,  32 
 systems approach,  20 
 trade-offs,  19 
 under uncertainty,  218–220 
 Decision Sciences Institute,  12 
 Decision table,  579 
 Decision theory, 206, 216–217, 712;  see also Decision making 
 Decision trees,  221– 223 
 Decision variables,  824– 825 
 Decline phase,  149–150, 197 
 Decoupling,  549–550 
 Defects, zero,  369, 371 
 Define, measure, analyze, improve, and control (DMAIC),  390–391 
 Delayed differentiation,  152, 682 
 Delivery time,  53 
 Dell, Michael,  50 
 Delphi method,  83– 84 
 Demand 
 aggregate planning,  461–465 
 common patterns,  192 
 dependent,  495 
 fluctuations in,  198–199 
 forecasting of,  553 
 independent,  495 
 lumpy,  681–682 
 meeting uneven,  465–467 
 new,  463 
 seasonal,  193, 198–199 
 variations in,  460 
 volatility of,  194–195 
 Demand chain,  651 
 Demand fence,  513 
 Deming, W. Edwards,  24, 368, 370, 381 
 Deming Prize,  370, 381 
 Deming wheel,  388 
 Dependent demand,  495 
 Depth skills,  299 
 Design, of products and services,  134–170 
 activities and responsibilities,  136 
 availability,  188 
 best practices,  137–138 
 capacity;  see Capacity planning 
 component commonality,  162 

 
Subject Index 
885
 Environmental scanning,  47 –48 
 EOQ;  see Economic order quantity (EOQ) 
 Eppinger, Steven D.,  170 
 Equivalent current value,  206 
 Equivalent interest rate,  206 
 Ergonomics,  293– 294 
 Erlang, A. K.,  784 
 ERP,  516–523, 629 
 Error,  80– 82 , 106–110, 421–422 
 Esain, Ann,  639 
 Ethical framework,  30 
 Ethics 
 codes for,  29 
 decision making,  29–30 
 defined,  29 
 design issues,  141–142 
 global,  342 
 location decisions and,  348 
 project management,  736–737 
 purchasing,  662–663 
 quality,  380 
 and supply chains,  657 
 working conditions,  296 
 Ethisphere Institute,  30 
 European Quality Award,  381 
 Evans, James R.,  373n 
 Event-response capability,  655 
 Events,  741 
 Exception reports,  508 
 Excess capacity,  13 
 Excess cost,  576 
 Exchange rate risks,  346 
 Executive opinions, used to forecast,  83 
 Expand-early strategy,  207 
 Expected monetary value (EMV) criterion,  220– 221 
 Expected value of perfect information (EVPI),  223– 224 
 Experiments, design of,  154 
 Explanatory variables,  82 
 Explicit services,  162 
 Exponential service time,  793–794 
 Exponential smoothing,  89– 91 
 Exporting,  658 
 External failures,  379 
 Eyring, Veronika,  653n 
 Fabrication,  15 
 Facilities layout;  see also Process selection and design 
 capacity,  190 
 cellular layouts,  256–258 
 combination layouts,  255 
 fixed position,  254–255 
 flexible-manufacturing systems,  248, 258 
 information requirements,  272 
 line balancing 
 cycle time,  263–264 
 defined,  262 
 flow systems,  691–692 
 guidelines for,  266–267 
 JIT,  614–615 
 mixed model line,  270 
 parallel workstations,  269–270 
 Division of labor,  23 
 DMAIC,  390–391 
 Dodge, H. F.,  23, 369 
 Double smoothing,  95 
 Downsizing,  26 
 DRP,  515 
 Drum-buffer-rope technique,  710 
 Due date, rule for sequencing,  700 
 Dummy activity,  742 
 Dunn, Brian,  145 
 Dynamic line balancing,  270 
 E-business,  24– 25 , 31,  663 –666 
 E-commerce,  24, 521 
 E-procurement,  24, 666 
 Earliest due date (EDD),  700 
 Ease of use,  376 
 Economic indicators,  103–104 
 Economic lot sizes,  550 
 Economic order quantity (EOQ) 
 basic model,  557–561 
 defined,  557 
 economic production quantity,  561–564 
 fixed-order-interval model,  573–576 
 in MRP,  509 
 quantity discounts,  550, 564–568 
 reorder points,  569–573 
 single-period model,  576–580 
 versus small lot sizes,  611–612 
 Economic production quantity (EPQ),  561–564 
 Economies of scale,  21 , 199 –200 
 EDD (earliest due date),  700 
 EDI,  666 
 Effective capacity,  188– 189 
 Efficiency,  20, 62, 189 
 Efficiency school,  289 
 Eidam, Michael,  378 
 80/20 rule,  395 
 El-Haik, Basem,  408, 639 
 Electronic commerce,  24, 521 
 Electronic data interchange (EDI),  666 
 Electronic junk,  145 
 Emerson, Harrington,  22 
 Employment,  8, 16–17 
 Empowerment,  386, 399 
 End-of-life (EOL) programs,  144 
 Energy productivity,  58 
 Engineer-to-order (ETO),  671 
 Engineering 
 concurrent,  160, 610 
 reverse,  139 
 Engineering changes,  611, 626 
 Enterprise resource planning (ERP),  516– 523, 629, 656–657;  see 
also Material requirements planning (MRP) 
 Enumeration approach,  835 
 Environment 
 end-of-life programs,  144 
 ISO 14000,  144, 382 
 recycling,  146–149 
 sustainability,  28–29, 46, 144–149, 244, 653 
 Environmental Protection Agency,  141 

886 
Subject Index
 Following capacity strategy,  191 
 Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO),  29 
 Food and Drug Administration,  141 
 Foolproofing,  385 
 Ford, Henry,  22–23, 607 
 Forecasting,  74 – 133 
 accuracy of,  76, 79–82 
 airline industry,  14 
 approaches to,  82, 115 
 associative techniques,  82, 100–106 
 capacity requirements,  192–194 
 choosing a technique,  110–111 
 common features,  77–78 
 computers in,  112 
 defined,  75 
 Delphi method,  83–84 
 demand,  553 
 diffusion models,  91 
 elements of good,  78 
 errors,  80–82, 106–110 
 focus,  91 
 formulas used in,  115–116 
 importance of,  75 
 monitoring,  106–110 
 qualitative methods,  82–84 
 quantitative methods,  82 
 steps in the process,  79 
 supply chain,  78–79 
 technology,  84 
 time series data, based on 
 averaging,  86–91, 98–100 
 cycles,  84–85, 100 
 defined,  82 
 exponential smoothing,  89–91 
 irregular variations,  84–85 
 naive method,  84–85 
 random variations,  84–85 
 seasonality,  84–85, 95–100, 193, 198–199 
 trend,  84–85, 91–94 
 trend-adjusted exponential smoothing,  95 
 uses of data,  76–77 
 using information,  112 
 Foreign locations, 340–342;  see also International business 
 Foroohar, Rana,  17 
 Forward scheduling,  695 
 Foster, Nicole,  685 
 14 Toyota Way Principles,  384 
 Francis, Richard L.,  287 
 Freivalds, Andris,  324 
 Friedman, Norm,  215 
 From-to charts,  272 
 Frozen,  479, 513 
 Fulfillment, of orders,  671–672 
 Functional strategies,  45 
 Gantt, Henry,  22, 693 
 Gantt charts,  22 , 693 –694, 739–740 
 Gardner, Everette S. Jr.,  133 
 Garvin, David A.,  372n, 408 
 Gatekeeping,  680 
 Gauging systems,  21 
 precedence diagram,  264, 740–743 
 measuring effectiveness,  271–272 
 need for planning,  250 
 objectives of,  250 
 problems with poor,  250 
 process layouts,  253–254, 271–275 
 product layouts,  250–253, 262–270 
 service layouts,  258–262 
 transportation issues,  272–273 
 u-shaped layouts,  252–253 
 Facilities location;  see Location planning 
 Factor rating,  355– 356 
 Fail-safing,  385, 616 
 Failure,  153, 379 
 Failure costs,  379 
 Fairness Principle,  29 
 Fazel, Farzaneh,  387n 
 FCFS (first come, first served),  700, 789–790 
 Feasibility, range of,  843 
 Feasibility analysis,  159 
 Feasible solution space,  824– 826 , 831 
 Federal Reserve Board,  103 
 Feedback,  5, 16 
 Feeding buffers,  761 
 Feigenbaum, Armand,  371 
 Fences, time,  479 
 Fill rate,  573, 679 
 Finance function,  4, 10, 76 
 Financial analysis,  205–206 
 Finite element analysis (FEA),  161 
 Finite loading,  695 
 Finite-source situation 
 defined,  786 
 queuing models,  805–810 
 Finucane, James,  344 
 First come, first served rule,  700, 789–790 
 Fishbone diagram,  371, 396 
 Fitness,  141 
 Fitness-for-use,  370, 372 
 Fitzgerald, Kevin R.,  659 
 Fitzsimmons, James A.,  38, 162n, 170 
 Fitzsimmons, Mona J.,  38, 162n, 170 
 Five forces model,  48 
 5W2H approach,  628 
 Fixed automation,  246 
 Fixed costs,  195, 200, 202, 353–354 
 Fixed-order-interval model,  573– 576 
 Fixed-period ordering,  509–510 
 Fixed-position layout,  254– 255;  see also Facilities layout 
 Flattening, of the organization,  26–27 
 Flexibility,  42, 196, 207 
 Flexible manufacturing system (FMS),  248, 258 
 Flexible system,  609, 614 
 Flow management,  652 
 Flow process chart,  301– 302 
 Flow-shop scheduling,  690– 692 
 Flow system,  690– 692 
 Flowchart,  392 
 Flynn, Anna E.,  687 
 FMS,  248, 258 
 Focus forecasting,  91 

 
Subject Index 
887
 Group technology,  257– 258 , 613 
 Growth phase,  149–150, 196–197 
 Growth strategies,  49 
 Guide, V. Daniel,  687 
 Guinipero, Larry,  687 
 Gunther, Neil J.,  215 
 Gupta, Praveen,  408 
 Gygi, Craig,  408 
 Hackett, Gregory P.,  492 
 Hall, Robert W.,  646 
 Hammer, Michael,  73 
 Handfield, Robert B.,  687 
 Hanke, John,  133 
 Hard data,  82 
 Hariharn, Arun,  639 
 Harrington, Jim,  408 
 Harris, F. W.,  23 
 Heagney, Joseph,  781 
 Hedging,  550 
 Heijunka,  607 
 Heineke, Janelle,  170 
 Heldman, Kim,  781 
 Hertzberg, Frederick,  23 
 Heuristic rule,  264 
 Hierarchical organizations,  45–46 
 High technology, 25, 245;  see also Technology 
 High volume systems, scheduling in,  690–692 
 Hill, Terry,  73 
 Hillier, Frederick S.,  821, 853 
 Hillier, Mark S.,  821, 853 
 Hiring, of workers,  463 
 Histogram,  392 
 Hoerl, Roger W.,  408 
 Holding costs,  553, 677 
 Holland, Max,  66 
 Hopp, Wallace J.,  133, 544, 603, 639, 728 
 Horine, Gregory M.,  781 
 Horizontal loading,  291 
 Horizontal skills,  299 
 Hospital layouts,  261 
 Hourly based pay systems,  296 
 House of quality,  156–157 
 Housekeeping,  626 
 Howe, Tom,  415–416 
 Howley, Lauraine,  62 
 Human relations movement,  23 
 Human resources, 11, 77;  see also Personnel issues 
 Hungarian method,  697– 700 
 Huse, Edgar F.,  323 
 Idle time,  265–266 
 Ihlwan, Moon,  378 
 Illumination, working conditions and,  294–295 
 Imai, Masaaki,  610n 
 Implicit services,  162 
 Implied warranties,  141 
 Importing,  658 
 Incentive plans,  61, 296–299 
 Independence,  754 
 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT),  25, 340 
 General-purpose plant strategy,  350 
 Geographical information system (GIS),  350– 351 
 Ghoshal, Sumantra,  51n 
 Gilbreth, Frank,  22, 23, 293, 303, 304 
 Gilbreth, Lillian,  23, 293, 304 
 Gilmore, James,  170 
 Gispan, Jonathan,  737–738 
 Global priority rules,  700 
 Global product design,  143–144 
 Global strategy,  50–51 
 Global supply chains,  25, 31, 656 
 Global warming,  27, 144, 146 
 Globalization, 25;  see also International business 
 benefits,  340–341 
 country identification,  345–346 
 disadvantages,  341 
 location decisions,  340–342 
 risks,  341–342 
 strategy,  50–51 
 Go, no-go gauge,  431 
 Goals 
 capacity planning,  185 
 defined,  44 
 of JIT,  609–610 
 waiting line management,  785–786 
 Goetsch, David L.,  408 
 Goldratt, Eliyahu M.,  201, 215, 710n, 728, 761, 781 
 Gonzalez, Adrian,  677 
 Goods 
 defined,  3 
 versus services operations,  7–9, 15 
 Goods-services continuum,  6 
 Google,  297 
 Gorman, Michael E.,  170 
 Grant, Eugene L.,  425 
 Graphical linear programming 
 defined,  826 
 feasible solution space,  824–826, 831 
 minimization,  824, 835–837 
 objective function,  824–825 
 objective function coefficient change,  841–842 
 objective function line,  831–834 
 plotting constraints,  828–831 
 procedures,  826–828 
 redundant constraints,  834–835 
 slack and surplus,  837–838 
 solutions and corner points,  835 
 Graphs, used in aggregate planning,  468–472 
 Gravity method, center of,  356–358 
 Gray, Clifford F.,  734, 763 
 Green, Erin H.,  653n 
 Green belts,  390 
 Green initiatives,  28 
 Griebenow, Allan,  676 
 Griffin, W.,  821 
 Grimshaw, David J.,  364 
 Groover, Mikell P.,  170, 258, 270n, 287, 324 
 Gross requirements,  501– 502 
 Group incentive plans,  298 

888 
Subject Index
 pipeline,  550 
 turnover of,  551 
 vendor-managed,  633, 670–671 
 work-in process,  548, 615, 623–624 
 Inventory management,  546–603 
 ABC approach,  554–556 
 bar coding,  441, 552–553 
 bullwhip effect,  670 
 carrying costs,  553, 557–561 
 centralized,  670 
 counting systems,  551–553 
 cycle counting,  556 
 demand forecasts,  553 
 economic order quantity (EOQ) 
 basic model,  557–561 
 defined,  557 
 economic production quantity,  561–564 
 fixed-order-interval model,  573–576 
 in MRP,  509 
 quantity discounts,  550, 564–568 
 reorder points,  569–573 
 single-period model,  576–580 
 versus small lot sizes,  611–612 
 80/20 rule,  395 
 formulas,  582 
 importance of,  32, 548–549 
 lead time information,  553, 574 
 lean operations,  615–616 
 objectives of,  550–551 
 ordering costs,  554, 557–561 
 perpetual system,  551–552, 569 
 requirements for effective,  551–556 
 RFID,  553, 674–676 
 safety stock,  508–509, 550, 557, 569–570 
 service levels,  570 
 stocking levels,  577–580 
 stockouts,  550, 569–570 
 two-bin system,  552, 623 
 Inventory models,  19 
 Inventory records,  500 
 Inventory turnover,  551 
 Inventory velocity,  670 
 Irregular variation,  84– 85 
 Ishikawa, Kaoru,  371 
 Ishikawa diagram,  396 
 ISO 9000,  381 –382, 668 
 ISO 9001,  738 
 ISO 14000,  144 , 382 
 ISO 24700,  382 
 Jaber, Mohamed Y.,  335 
 Jacobs, F. Robert,  215, 492, 544, 639, 728 
 Japanese manufacturers, influence of,  24 
 Japp, Len, Jr.,  416 
 Jidoka,  607, 613 
 Jimenez, Alicia,  416 
 JIT,  348, 605, 628 
 JIT II,  633 
 Job analysis,  299–303 
 Job descriptions,  12 
 Independent contractors,  464 
 Independent demand,  495 
 Independent events,  172 
 Indexes,  97, 103–104 
 Indicators, economic,  103–104 
 Indifference point,  203 
 Individual incentive plans,  297 
 Industrial engineering function,  16 
 Industrial Revolution,  21, 368 
 Infinite loading,  695 
 Infinite source models 
 basic relationships,  791–793 
 four models,  790–791 
 multiple priorities,  802–805 
 multiple servers,  795–799 
 single server,  793–795 
 Infinite source situation,  786 
 Information technology, 25;  see also Technology 
 Information velocity,  679 
 Innovating,  27 
 Innovation, technological,  244 
 Input/output (I/O) control,  696– 697 
 Inputs 
 aggregate planning,  461, 480 
 MRP,  497–500 
 operations management,  5–7 
 Inspection, 258,  412– 417;  see also Quality control 
 Institute for Operations Research and the 
Management Sciences,   12 
 Institute for Supply Management (ISM),  12 
 Institute of Industrial Engineers,  12 
 Interchangeable parts,  22, 151 
 Intermediate plans,  458–459 
 Intermediate-volume systems, scheduling in,  692–693 
 Intermittent processing,  253 
 Internal failures,  379 
 Internal rate of return (IRR),  206 
 International business;  see also Globalization 
 country identification,  345–346 
 design issues,  143–144 
 GATT,  25, 340 
 global strategy,  50–51 
 location decisions,  340–342 
 NAFTA,  25, 340 
 trade agreements,  340 
 International Ergonomics Association,  293 
 International Organization for Standardization,  381–383 
 Internet;  see also Technology 
 benefits of,  61 
 clicks-or-bricks model,  665, 679 
 e-business,  24–25, 31, 663–666 
 e-commerce,  24, 521 
 e-procurement,  24, 666 
 Introduction phase,  196 
 Intuitive rules,  264 
 Inventory 
 available-to-promise,  480 
 defined,  547 
 finished goods,  463–464 
 functions of,  549–550 

 
Subject Index 
889
 Layout of facilities;  see Facilities layout 
 Lead time 
 constant,  574 
 cumulative,  497 
 defined,  10,  553 
 stacked,  497 
 Leadership,  618 
 Leading capacity strategy,  191 
 Leading variable,  100 
 Lean operations,  604 – 639 
 benefits and risks of,  581, 607 
 characteristics of,  606 
 defined,  605 
 ERP,  516–523, 629 
 inventory control,  615–616 
 JIT,  348, 605, 628 
 JIT II,  633 
 kanban,  607, 621–623 
 level loading,  619–620 
 limited work-in-process,  623–624 
 line balancing;  see Line balancing 
 lot sizes;  see Lot sizing 
 manufacturing cells,  613 
 manufacturing planning and control,  618–626 
 versus MRP,  622–623 
 obstacles,  629–630 
 overview of,  634 
 personnel/organizational elements,  616–618 
 preventive maintenance,  251, 626, 641–644 
 process design,  611–616 
 product design,  610–611 
 production flexibility,  614 
 pull systems,  620–621 
 quality improvement,  613 
 services,  630–633 
 setup time reduction,  612–613, 692 
 six sigma,  26, 390–392, 438, 628, 761 
 supporting goals,  609–610 
 Toyota approach,  607–609 
 versus traditional,  626 
 transitioning to,  629–630 
 value stream mapping,  627–628 
 vendor relationships,  624–625 
 visual systems,  621–623 
 Lean process design,  244 
 Lean production,  26–27, 291 
 Lean supply chains,  659 
 Lean systems,  26– 27 
 Learning curves 
 applications of,  329–330 
 concept of,  325–329 
 limitations of,  331–332 
 Least squares line,  101 
 Leavenworth, Richard,  425 
 Lee, Hau L.,  681n, 687 
 Leenders, Michiel R.,  687 
 Legal function,  11 
   Legal issues  
 design of products/services,  141–142 
 product liability,  141, 377 
 Job design, 289–294;  see also Work design 
 behavioral approaches,  291 
 compensation,  296–299 
 defined,  289 
 ergonomics,  293–294 
 human relations movement,  23 
 methods analysis,  299–303 
 motion study,  22, 303–305 
 motivation,  23, 291–292 
 specialization,  290–291 
 teams,  292–293 
 working conditions,  294–296 
 Job enlargement,  291 
 Job enrichment,  291 
 Job flow time,  701 
 Job lateness,  701 
 Job rotation,  291 
 Job shop,  238–239 
 Job shop scheduling 
 defined,  693 
 loading,  693–700 
 sequence dependent setup times,  709 
 sequencing,  700–706 
 two work centers, sequencing through,  707–709 
 Job splitting,  707 
 Job time,  700 
 Jockeying,  789 
 Johnson, P. Fraser,  687 
 Johnson, S. M.,  707n 
 Johnson, Timothy D.,  781 
 Johnson’s rule,  707 
 Jones, Daniel T.,  38, 606, 639 
 Judgmental forecasts,  82 
 Juran, Joseph M.,  24, 370–371, 379 
 Just-in-time (JIT), 348,  605, 628;  see also Lean Operations 
 Kaizen,  371 , 385,  607, 610 
 Kaminsky, Philip,  664, 687 
 Kanban,  607, 621– 623 
 Kano, Noriaki,  158 
 Kano model,  158–159 
 Kaplan, Robert,  54n 
 Kasibhatla, Prasad,  653n 
 Keating, Barry,  133 
 Kelly, John,  143 
 Kenney, Brad,  368, 380 
 Kiley, David,  374 
 Knod, Edward M., Jr.,  614 
 Knowledge-based pay,  296 , 299 
 Koch, Christopher,  518, 521 
 Kowalski, Bill,  391–392 
 La Piana, David,  215 
 Labor factors, impact on location decisions,  345, 347 
 Labor productivity,  58 
 Labor turnover,  61 
 Laplace,  219 
 Larson, Erik W.,  734, 763 
 Lauer, Axel,  653n 
 Layoffs,  61, 463 

890 
Subject Index
 evaluating location alternatives 
 center of gravity method,  356–358 
 factor rating,  355–356 
 locational cost-profit-volume analysis,  353–354 
 transportation model,  354–355, 472–474 
 factors affecting 
 community considerations,  347–348 
 multiple plant,  349–350 
 regional,  346–347 
 site-related factors,  348–349 
 global locations,  340–342 
 importance of,  42, 338 
 location options,  339–340 
 objectives of,  339 
 procedures for,  342–343 
 service and retail locations,  351–352 
 supply chain considerations,  339 
 Locational cost-profit-volume analysis,  353– 354 
 Logistical transactions,  625 
 Logistics,  650,  672– 678;  see also Transportation 
 Long-range plans,  458 
 Long-term capacity needs,  193, 194 
 Long-term contracts,  668 
 Long-term forecasts,  76 
 Lot-for-lot ordering,  502–505, 509 
 Lot sizing 
 economic,  550 
 versus EOQ,  611–612 
 large versus small,  681–682 
 MRP,  509–510 
 small,  611–612 
 Love, Stephen,  514 
 Lovelock, Christopher H.,  170 
 Low cost strategies,  44 
 Low-level coding,  500 
 Low-volume system 
 loading,  693–700 
 sequence dependent setup times,  709 
 sequencing,  700–706 
 two work centers, sequencing through,  707–709 
 Lower control limits (LCL),  107, 421 
 Lubbers, Sarah,  599 
 Lumpy demand,  681–682 
 M/D/1,  794–795 
 M/M/1,  793–794 
 M/M/S,  795–799 
 MacDonald, Jim,  138 
 Machine productivity,  58 
 Machine shop,  253 
 MAD,  81–82 
 Maintenance 
 breakdown,  641 
 costs,  641 
 defined,  640 
 predictive,  643 
 preventive,  251, 626, 641–644 
 replacement,  644–645 
 responsibility of,  16 
 total productive,  643 
 UCC,  141 
 warranties,  141 
 Level capacity strategy,  465– 467 
 Level loading,  619–620 
 Lewis, Michael,  73 
 Liability,  141, 377 
 Liebhaber, Richard,  344 
 Life cycle analysis,  144 
 Life cycles 
 decline phase,  149–150, 197 
 growth phase,  196–197 
 introductory phase,  196 
 maturity phase,  149–150, 197 
 product,  240 
 project,  732–734 
 Liker, Jeffrey K,  384n, 639 
 Limited work-in-process,  623–624 
 Lindsay, W. M.,  373n 
 Line balancing 
 cycle time,  263–264, 623 
 defined,  262 
 flow systems,  691–692 
 guidelines for,  266–267 
 mixed model line,  270 
 parallel workstations,  269–270 
 precedence diagram,  264, 740–743 
 takt time and,  614–615 
 Linear programming,  822–853 
 aggregate planning,  472–474 
 assignment method,  697–700 
 components,  824 
 computer solutions,  838–841 
 graphical linear programming 
 defined,  826 
 feasible solution space,  824–826, 831 
 minimization,  824, 835–837 
 objective function,  824–825 
 objective function coefficient change,  841–842 
 objective function line,  831–834 
 plotting constraints,  828–831 
 procedures,  826–828 
 redundant constraints,  834–835 
 slack and surplus,  837–838 
 solutions and corner points,  835 
 models,  824–826 
 sensitivity analysis,  841–844 
 simplex method,  838 
 transportation model,  354–355, 472–474 
 uses for,  19 
 Linear regression, simple,  101–105 
 Linear trend equation,  92 
 Liquid,  479 
 Little’s Law,  550, 623 , 791 
 Load charts,  694 
 Load reports,  514– 515 
 Loading,  693– 700 
 Local priority rules,  700 
 Location planning,  336–365 
 decision making,  33 
 ethics and,  348 

 
Subject Index 
891
 bill of materials,  497–500, 510 
 capacity requirements planning,  513–516 
 closed loop,  512 
 defined,  495 
 DRP,  515–516 
 ERP,  516–523, 629 
 inputs,  497–500 
 inventory records,  500 
 versus kanban,  622–623 
 lot sizing,  509–510 
 master schedule,  459, 477–482, 496–497 
 MRP II,  511–512 
 outputs,  507–508 
 overview of,  495–496 
 processing,  500–507 
 safety stock,  508–509, 550, 569–570 
 in services,  510 
 updating the system,  505–507 
 Materials handling,  254 
 Mathematical decision making models,  18, 23 
 Mathematical techniques, for aggregate planning,  472–475 
 Mather, D.,  646 
 Mathews, Anna Wilde,  819–820 
 Matrix organization,  734 
 Maturity stage,  149–150, 197 
 Maximax,  219 
 Maximin,  219 
 Maximum line length,  801 
 Mayo, Elton,  23 
 McGinnis, Leon F., Jr.,  287 
 McGregor, Douglas,  23 
 McNulty, Steven,  140–141 
 Mean,  13 
 Mean absolute deviation (MAD),  81– 82 
 Mean absolute percent error (MAPE),  81– 82 
 Mean control charts,  422– 424 
 Mean squared error (MSE),  81– 82 
 Mean time between failures (MTBF),  173– 177 
 Measured daywork systems,  296 
 Measurement, of capacity,  188–189 
 Meczkowski, Frank,  140 
 Meeker, David G.,  137 
 Meidl, Peter,  687 
 Mentzer, John T.,  364 
 Merchantability,  141 
 Mergers and acquisitions,  46 
 Methods analysis,  299– 303 
 Methods Engineering Council,  311 
 Methods-time measurement (MTM),  311 
 Meyers, Fred E.,  287, 324 
 Microfactory,  348 
 Micromotion study,  304 
 Miller, Jeffrey G.,  625n 
 Mills, Karen,  612 
 Minimax regret,  219 
 Minimization,  824, 835–837 
 MIS,  11, 77 
 Mission,  44 
 Mission statement,  44 
 Mitchell, Mike,  669 
 Mitchell, William E.,  384 
 Maister, David H.,  811 
 Make or buy,  195–196 
 Make-to-order (MTO),  671 
 Make-to-stock (MTS),  671 
 Makespan,  701 
 Management compensation,  299 
 Management information systems (MIS),  11, 77 
 Management science techniques,  23 
 Mann, David,  639 
 Mann, Lawrence, Jr.,  646 
 Manufacturability,  10 , 136,  162 
 Manufacturing 
 agile,  54 
 craft production,  21 
 employment,  8, 16–17 
 Japanese influence on,  24 
 lean;  see Lean operations 
 mass production,  22 
 versus service,  7–9 
 Manufacturing at Warp Speed,  201 
 Manufacturing cells,  613 
 Manufacturing planning and control,  618–626 
 Manufacturing resources planning (MRP II),  511– 512 
 Manufacturing systems 
 assembly lines,  15, 22–23, 240, 251 
 automation systems,  245–249 
 cellular,  256–258 
 computer-aided,  246–247 
 computer-integrated,  248 
 designing for,  160–162 
 flexible,  248, 258 
 JIT,  348, 605, 628 
 job shop,  238–239 
 line balancing;  see Line balancing 
 multiple plant location,  349–350 
 robots,  247 
 sustainable production,  244 
 MAPE,  81–82 
 Mapping, value stream,  627–628 
 Markels, Alex,  344 
 Market area plant strategy,  349–350 
 Market test,  159 
 Marketing 
 advertising and promotion,  42 
 forecasting,  77 
 function of,  4, 10 
 influence on competitiveness,  42 
 order qualifiers/winners,  48 
 Markets, location decisions and,  346–347 
 Markula Center for Applied Ethics,  29–30 
 Martin, R. Kipp,  235 
 Martin, Skip,  821, 853 
 Maslow, Abraham,  23 
 Mass customization,  151 – 153 , 152, 240 
 Mass production,  22 
 Massey, Lynn,  639 
 Master production schedule (MPS),  477, 496 – 497 
 Master schedule,  459 , 477–482,  496 –497 
 Material and Information Flow Mapping,  627 
 Material requirements planning (MRP),  494 – 512 
 benefits and requirements,  510–511 

892 
Subject Index
 National Institute of Standards,  377 
 National Institute of Standards and Technology,  381 
 Near-sourcing,  659 
 Negative exponential distribution,  788 
 Negotiated purchasing,  329 
 Net-change system,  506 
 Net requirements,  501– 502 
 Netting,  502 
 Network configuration,  659 
 Network conventions,  742–743 
 Network (precedence) diagram,  740– 743 
 Newness, degree of,  155 
 Newsboy problem,  576 
 Nichols, Ernest L., Jr.,  687 
 Nichols, Karen,  738 
 Niebel, Benjamin W.,  295, 301, 304, 305, 310, 324 
 Noise and vibrations, working conditions and,  295 
 Nolden, Carol,  646 
 Nonlinear regression analysis,  106 
 Nonmanufactured goods,  7 
 Nonrandom patterns,  431 
 Nonrandom variation,  418 
 Nonrepetitive processing,  253–254 
 Normal distribution,  14, 418–419 
 Normal operating conditions,  153 
 Normal time, in work measurement,  308–309 
 North American Free Trade Agreement,  25, 340 
 Northwest corner,  355 
 Norton, David,  54n 
 Numerically controlled (N/C) machines,  247 
 Objective function,  824– 825 , 831–834, 841–842 
 Objectives 
 facilities layout,  250 
 inventory management,  550–551 
 location decisions,  339 
 scheduling,  690 
 Observed time, in work measurement,  308 
 Occupational Health and Safety Administration,  141 
 Occupational health care,  295 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act,  296 
 Office layouts,  261 
 Offshoring,  384 
 Ohno, Taiichi,  371, 605 
 On-site inspection,  416–417 
 OPEC,  369 
 Operational decisions,  16, 32 
 Operational processes,  12 
 Operations management 
 careers in,  11–12 
 decision making and,  15–16, 17–20, 45 
 defined,  4 
 evolution of,  21–24 
 function,  4, 16, 660 
 goods versus services,  7–9, 15 
 influence on competitiveness,  42–43 
 interface with other functions,  11, 16 
 Japanese influence on,  24 
 key issues,  27–33 
 role of managers,  16 
 scope of,  14–16 
 Mitra, Amitava,  454 
 Mixed model line,  270 
 Mixed-model sequencing,  619–620 
 Mobach, Mark P.,  287 
 Models 
 additive,  96–97 
 associative,  82 
 benefits of using,  18 
 decision making,  18–19, 23 
 defined,  18 
 finite source,  805–810 
 infinite source;  see Infinite source models 
 inventory,  19 
 Kano,  158–159 
 limitations of,  18–19 
 linear programming,  824–826 
 mathematical,  18, 23 
 multiple-priority,  802–805 
 multiplicative,  96–97 
 physical,  18 
 project,  19 
 quantitative,  19, 23 
 schematic,  18 
 simulation,  475 
 single-period,  576–580 
 statistical,  19, 23 
 transportation,  354–355, 472–474 
 Modular design,  152– 153 , 610 
 Monczka, Robert,  687 
 Monden, Yasuhiro,  639 
 Monk, Ellen,  544 
 Montgomery, Douglas C.,  454 
 Most likely time,  751 
 Motion study,  22 , 303 –305 
 Motion study principles,  303– 304 
 Motivation,  23, 291–292 
 Moving assembly line,  22 
 Moving average,  86– 89 , 98 
 MPS,  477, 496–497 
 MRP;  see Material requirements planning (MRP) 
 MRP II,  511–512 
 MSE,  81–82 
 Muda,  607 
 Muller, Max,  603 
 Multifactor productivity,  57–59 
 Multiple break-even points,  204 
 Multiple-channel servers,  787 
 Multiple plant location strategies,  349–350 
 Multiple-priority model,  802– 805 
 Multiple regression analysis,  106 
 Multiple resources scheduling,  715 
 Multiple servers,  795–799 
 Multiple-source purchasing,  624 
 Multiplicative model,  96–97 
 Mundel, Marvin E.,  324 
 Muther, Richard,  273n 
 Muther grid,  274 
 NAFTA,  25, 340 
 Naive forecasts,  84– 85 
 National Association of Purchasing Management,  662 

 
Subject Index 
893
 Overhead costs,  618 
 Overtime,  463–464 
 Ozgur, Ceyhun,  235, 821, 853 
 P-chart,  427– 429 
 P-kanban,  621 
 Packaging,  145–146, 148–149 
 Papadellis, Randy,  669 
 Parallel workstations,  269–270 
 Parameter design,  154 
 Parameters,  824 
 Parasuraman, A.,  373n, 374n 
 Pareto, Vilfredo,  392 
 Pareto analysis,  392, 395 
 Pareto phenomenon,  20 
 Part families,  256, 257–258 
 Part-period model,  510 
 Part time workers,  464 
 Partial productivity,  57–58 
 Partnerships,  668–669 
 Patents,  8 
 Path,  741 
 Path probabilities, determining,  754–756 
 Patterson, James,  687 
 Pay systems,  296–299 
 Payback,  206 
 Payoff table,  217 
 PDSA,  388–389, 711 
 Pegging,  505 
 Perceived time,  811 
 Performance-control reports,  508 
 Performance metrics,  19 
 benchmarking,  386, 399–400 
 importance of,  678–679 
 key measures,  679 
 waiting lines,  790 
 Periodic maintenance,  642 
 Periodic orders,  550 
 Periodic system,  551 
 Perpetual inventory system,  551– 552 , 569 
 Personnel issues 
 hiring,  463 
 human resources function,  11, 77 
 independent contractors,  464 
 job descriptions,  12 
 layoffs,  61, 463 
 in lean operations,  616–618 
 part time workers,  464 
 salaries/wages,  296–299 
 PERT (Program evaluation and review 
technique),  19 , 740 –743, 760–761 
 Pessimistic time,  751 
 Pexton, Carolyn,  408 
 Physical decision making models,  18 
 Physical inventory count,  551 
 Piasecki, David J.,  603 
 Pick, James B.,  364 
 Picking system,  259 
 PIMS,  49–50 
 Pine, B. Joseph,  170 
 Pinedo, M.,  728 
Operations management—Cont.
 service operations,  7–9 
 transformation process,  5–7 
 trends in,  24–27 
 Operations strategy,  26 , 47,  51 –54 
 Operations Tour 
 Boeing,  638 
 Bruegger’s Bagel Bakery,  600 
 High Acres Landfill,  170 
 Morton Salt,  242–243 
 PSC, Inc.,  601–603 
 Stickley Furniture,  541–544 
 U.S. Postal Service,  70–72 
 Wegmans Food Markets,  33–35 
 Wegmans’ Shipping System,  673–674 
 Opinions, forecasts based on,  83 
 Opportunity costs,  462 
 Opportunity losses,  220 
 Optimistic time,  751 
 Optimization, constrained,  823 
 Order cycles,  550 
 Order fulfillment,  671– 672 
 Order qualifiers,  48 
 Order releases,  508 
 Order winners,  48 
 Ordering costs,  554, 557 – 561 
 Orders 
 back,  462 
 duplicate,  462 
 fixed-period,  509–510 
 process,  662 
 Organizational strategies,  44–46, 54 
 Organizations 
 accounting function,  11 
 centralization of,  662 
 competitiveness and,  42–43 
 finance function,  4, 10, 76 
 flattening,  26–27 
 hierarchical,  45–46 
 marketing function,  4, 10 
 matrix,  734 
 missions of,  44 
 reasons for failure,  43 
 OSHA,  296 
 Ouchi, William,  23 
 Output 
 actual,  188–189 
 examples of,  5–7 
 master scheduling process,  480–482 
 MRP,  507–508 
 tangible,  7 
 Output-based (incentive) system,  296– 298 
 Output constraints,  266–267 
 Outsourcing 
 defined,  31 
 of logistics,  677–678 
 make or buy,  195–196 
 quality issues,  384 
 reasons for,  49, 61, 137–138 
 risks of,  195, 384, 653–654 
 sustainability and,  28 

894 
Subject Index
 process types,  238–242 
 technology,  244–249 
 Process specifications,  159 
 Process technology,  25, 245 
 Process variability,  417 – 418 , 436 
 Process variation,  13–14 
 Process yield,  60 
 Processing costs,  200 
 Processing time,  53 
 Procurement, 660–663;  see also Purchasing 
 Producer’s risk,  422 
 Product and service technology,  25 
 Product bundle,  162 
 Product design;  see Design, of products and services 
 Product layout,  250– 253, 262–270;  see also Facilities layout 
 Product liability,  141, 377 
 Product mix,  194 
 Product or service profiling,  244 
 Product packages,  6 
 Product plant strategy,  349 
 Product specifications,  159 
 Product structure tree,  497– 498 
 Production and Operations Management 
Society (POMS),   12 
 Production flexibility,  614 
 Production kanban,  621 
 Production line,  15 , 22–23, 240,  251 
 Production quantity,  561–564 
 Production requirements,  161–162 
 Production systems 
 craft,  21 
 lean,  26–27, 291 
 maintenance of,  640–642 
 mass,  22 
 Productivity 
 computing,  57–59 
 cost and,  42 
 defined,  56 
 factors affecting,  60–61 
 growth,  56 
 human resources movement,  23 
 improving,  53, 61–62 
 measuring,  8 
 quality and,  378 
 service sector,  59–60 
 Professional societies,  11–12 
 Profiling, product or service,  244 
 Profit Impact of Market Strategy (PIMS),  49–50 
 Profits,  7 
 Program evaluation and review technique 
(PERT),  19, 740–743, 760–761 
 Programmable automation,  246 
 Project,  241 
 Project buffer,  761 
 Project champion,  737 
 Project life cycle,  732–734 
 Project management, 730–781;  see also Scheduling 
 behavioral aspects,  733–738 
 budget control,  757 
 certification,  738 
 computing algorithm,  744–751 
 Pingho, LeRoy,  344 
 Pinto, J. A.,  287 
 Pipeline inventories,  550 
 Pipes, Kerry,  352 
 Pisano, Gary,  17 
 Plambeck, Erica L.,  462 
 Plan-do-study-act (PDSA) cycle,  388– 389 , 711 
 Planned-order receipts,  501 –502 
 Planned-order releases,  502 
 Planned orders,  508 
 Planning fence,  513 
 Planning horizon,  460 
 Planning reports,  508 
 Planning time,  53 
 Plant layout;  see Facilities layout 
 Plant locations;  see Location planning 
 Plotting constraints,  828–831 
 Point-of-sale (POS) systems,  552 
 Poisson distribution,  193, 429–430, 788–789 
 Poka-yoke,  385 , 616 
 Population source,  786–787 
 Porter, Michael,  48n, 73 
 Postponement,  152 
 Powell, David,  352 
 Precedence diagram,  264, 740 – 743 
 Predetermined time standards,  311– 312 
 Predictive maintenance,  643 
 Predictor variables,  101 
 Present value (PV),  205– 206 
 Prevention costs,  379 
 Preventive maintenance,  251 , 626,  641– 644 
 Pricing 
 competitiveness and,  42 
 demand and,  462 
 hedging,  550 
 shadow,  842 
 transfer rules,  345 
 Primary reports,  508 
 Principles of Scientific Management,  22 
 Priorities, establishment of,  20 
 Priority rules,  700– 701 
 Probabilistic time estimates,  743, 751 – 753 
 Probability distribution,  193 
 Problem solving, 388–392;  see also Decision making 
 Process,  12 
 Process analysis,  26 
 Process batch,  711 
 Process capability,  436– 440 
 Process charts,  301–302 
 Process control,  412 
 Process design,  611–616 
 Process distribution,  418 
 Process improvement,  26 , 389 –392, 628 
 Process layouts,  253– 254, 271–275;  
see also Facilities layout 
 Process management,  12–14 
 Process plant strategy, location decisions and,  350 
 Process selection and design;  see also Capacity planning; 
Facilities layout 
 automation;  see Automation 
 defined,  237–238 

 
Subject Index 
895
 dimensions of,  372–374 
 ethics and,  380 
 evolution of,  368–369 
 gurus of,  369–371 
 ISO,  381–382, 668, 738 
 problem solving,  388–392 
 process improvement,  389–392 
 responsibility for,  376–377 
 of services,  8, 15, 43, 373–374 
 supply chain,  383–384 
 tools 
 benchmarking,  386, 399–400 
 brainstorming,  398 
 cause-and-effect diagrams,  371, 396–397 
 check sheets,  392 
 control charts;  see Control charts 
 flowcharts,  392 
 graphical,  397–398 
 histograms,  392 
 pareto analysis,  395 
 quality circles,  371, 398–399 
 run charts,  397 
 scatter diagrams,  395–396 
 zero defects,  369, 371 
 Quality at the source,  386, 412 , 417, 607 
 Quality-based strategy,  53 
 Quality circles,  371 , 398 –399 
 Quality control,  410 – 455 
 acceptance sampling,  258, 412 
 airline industry,  15 
 autonomation,  613 
 continuous improvement,  385, 617–618 
 defined,  411 
 fail-safing,  385, 616 
 formulas,  442–443 
 inspection,  258, 412–417 
 Kaizen,  371, 385, 607, 610 
 lean operations and,  609, 611 
 process capability,  436–440 
 six sigma,  26, 390–392, 438, 628, 761 
 statistical process control;  see Statistical process control (SPC) 
 TQM,  26, 384–388 
 Quality function deployment (QFD),  155– 157 
 Quality of conformance,  375– 376 , 417 
 Quality of design,  375 
 Quality of work life,  294–299 
 Quality transactions,  625 
 Quantitative approach 
 to decision making,  19, 23 
 to forecasting,  82 
 Quantity discounts,  550 , 564 –568 
 Queue discipline,  789– 790 
 Queuing techniques,  19 
 Queuing theory,  784 
 Quick response,  42 
 R-charts,  424–427 
 Radford, G. S.,  368 
 Radio frequency identification (RFID),  245 , 553,  674 –676 
 Ragsdale, Cliff T.,  821, 853 
Project management—Cont.
 crashing,  757–760 
 critical chain,  761 
 determining path probabilities,  754–756 
 deterministic time estimates,  743–744 
 ethics of,  736–737 
 Gantt charts,  22, 693–694, 739–740 
 key decisions,  735–736 
 life cycle,  732–734 
 models,  19 
 multiple projects,  762 
 network diagram,  740–743 
 overview of,  733 
 PERT and CPM,  19, 740–743, 760–761 
 probabilistic time estimates,  743, 751–753 
 project champions,  737 
 project manager role,  736–737 
 risk management,  763–764 
 simulation,  756–757 
 six sigma,  761 
 slack time,  463–464, 742, 750 
 software,  762–763 
 sources of error,  760–761 
 virtual teams,  143, 761–762 
 work breakdown structure,  739 
 Project Management Institute (PMI),  12, 732, 737, 738 
 Project management triangle,  736 
 Project manager, role of,  736–737 
 Project slippage,  762 
 Projected on hand,  501– 502 
 Projects,  732, 734 
 Promotion,  42, 462 
 Prototype development,  159 
 Public relations function,  11 
 Pull systems,  620– 621 
 Purchase cost,  553 
 Purchase orders, blanket,  662 
 Purchasing 
 centralized versus decentralized,  662 
 e-procurement,  24, 666 
 ethics,  662–663 
 importance of,  659 
 interfaces,  661 
 in a JIT system,  624–625 
 multiple source,  624 
 negotiated,  329 
 responsibility of,  16, 32 
 Purchasing cycle,  661– 662 
 Push systems,  620– 621 
 QFD,  155–157 
 Qualitative approaches, to forecasting,  82–84 
 Quality, 366–409;  see also Quality control 
 awards for,  370, 377, 380–381 
 benefits of good,  377 
 certification for,  381–383 
 consequences of poor,  377–378 
 cost of,  371, 378–380, 440 
 defined,  367 
 determinants of,  375–376 

896 
Subject Index
 Productivity Gains Curb Inflation,  53 
 Productivity Improvement,  62 
 Project Managers Have Never Been More Critical,  737–738 
 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) Tags,  553 
 Recycle City: Maria’s Market,  148–149 
 Rework and Morale,  380 
 RFID Tags: Keeping the Shelves Stocked,  675 
 Rise of the 3PL,  677–678 
 A Safe Hospital Room of the Future,  260 
 Servicing Passenger Planes,  713 
 Site Selection Grows Up,  352 
 The Sounds of Quality,  374 
 Springdale Farm,  675 
 Stopped at a Light? Why Not Read This, 
You May Have Time,  819–820 
 The Top ERP Mistakes,  522–523 
 Toyota Recalls,  608 
 Universities Embrace Sustainability,  28 
 Veggie Tales,  652–653 
 Vlasic on a Roll with Huge Pickle Slices,  140–141 
 What Keeps Six Sigma Practitioners Up at Night?,  391–392 
 Whatever Happened to Quality?,  368 
 Why Manufacturing Matters,  17 
 Why Productivity Matters,  59 
 Xerox Diverts Billion Pounds of Waste,  147 
 Receiving function,  661 
 Record keeping,  581 
 Recycling,  146– 149 
 Reddy, Ram,  114 
 Redesign of products, 137–138;  see also Design, 
of products and services  
 Reduce,  145 
 Reduced transaction processing,  625–626 
 Redundant constraints,  834– 835 
 Redundant systems,  764 
 Reengineering,  638 
 Regenerative system,  506 
 Regional factors, location decisions and,  346–347 
 Regression,  101 
 Regret (opportunity loss),  220 
 Reich, Robert,  617 
 Relative costs,  700 
 Reliability,  153– 154 , 171 –183 
 Remanufacturing,  145– 146 
 Reneging,  789 
 Reorder point (ROP),  569– 573 
 Repetitive processing,  240, 250–253 
 Replacement maintenance,  644–645 
 Requisition,  661 
 Research and development (R&D),  139 
 Reservation systems,  712 
 Resiliency,  655 
 Response time,  53, 683 
 Responsive strategies,  659 
 Responsiveness,  44 
 Restaurant layouts,  261 
 Retail sector 
 layout,  259 
 location planning,  351–352 
 Return on investment (ROI),  548 
 Rajan, Murli,  400 
 Random number table,  314– 315 
 Random variation,  417 
 Random variations,  13 , 84 –85 
 Range control chart,  424– 427 
 Range of feasibility,  843 
 Range of insignificance,  842 
 Range of optimality,  841 
 Raw materials, location decisions and,  346 
 Reactive planning strategies,  467 
 Readings 
 $$$,  548 
 The ABCs of ERP,  518–521 
 Active RFID vs Passive RFID,  676 
 Agility Creates a Competitive Edge,  26 
 AMAZON Tops in Customer Service,  45 
 Analytics,  19 
 At 3M, a Long Road Became a Shorter Road,  655 
 Bar Codes Might Cut Drug Errors in Hospitals,  441 
 Benchmarking Corporate Web Sites of Fortune 500 
Companies,  400 
 Best Buy Wants Your Junk,  145 
 BMW’s Strategy: Flexibility,  270 
 To Build a Better Hospital, Virginia Mason Takes lessons From 
Toyota Plants,  632 
 The Challenges of Managing Services,  166 
 Choosing Incentive Plans,  298–299 
 Clicks or Bricks, or Both?,  679 
 David H. Maister on the Psychology of Waiting,  811 
 Design as a Business Strategy,  136 
 Desperately Seeking E-Fulfillment,  665 
 Diet and the Environment: Vegetarian vs Nonvegetarian,  29 
 Do You Want Pickled Beets with That?,  143 
 Duplicate Orders Can Lead to Excess Capacity,  462 
 Dutch Boy Brushes Up Its Paints,  138 
 Dutch Tomato Growers’ Productivity Advantage,  60 
 E-Procurement at IBM,  666 
 Excess Capacity Can Be Bad News!,  186 
 Foxconn Shifts Its Focus to Automation,  246 
 Gazing at the Crystal Ball,  113–114 
 General Mills Turns to NASCAR to Reduce Changeover 
Time,  612 
 High Forecasts Can Be Bad News,  80 
 Hyundai: Kissing Clunkers Goodbye,  378 
 IBM’s Supply Chain Social Responsibility,  663 
 Improving Quality and Reducing Risk in Offshoring,  384 
 In the Chips at Jays,  415–416 
 Innovative MCI Unit Finds Culture Shock in Colorado 
Springs,  344 
 Kraft Foods’ Recipe for Sustainability,  146 
 Lego A/S in the Pink,  151 
 Managing Waiting Lines at Disney World,  812 
 My Compliments to the Chef, er, Buyer,  196 
 Nearby Suppliers Match Ford’s Mix,  629 
 NestléUSA and Ocean Spray Form Strategic Operations 
Alliance,  669 
 New Yorkers Do Not Like Waiting in Line,  785 
 “People” Firms Boost Profits, Study Shows,  617 
 Product Redesign, Not Offshoring, Holds Cost Advantage 
for U.S. Manufacturers,  137–138 

 
Subject Index 
897
 appointment system,  712 
 assignment model,  697–700 
 backward,  695 
 benefits,  689 
 cyclical,  714–715 
 defined,  689 
 flow-shop,  690–692 
 forward,  695 
 Gantt charts,  22, 693–694, 739–740 
 high-volume systems,  690–692 
 Hungarian method,  697–700 
 intermediate volume systems,  692–693 
 job shops/low-volume system 
 loading,  693–700 
 sequence dependent setup times,  709 
 sequencing,  700–706 
 two work centers, sequencing through,  707–709 
 master,  459, 477–482, 496–497 
 multiple resources,  715 
 objectives of,  690 
 problems with,  691, 709–710 
 reservation system,  712 
 service systems,  711–715 
 theory of constraints,  710–711, 761 
 time fences,  479, 513 
 workforce,  714 
 yield management,  26, 77, 477, 712–713 
 Schematic decision making models,  18 
 Scherkenbach, W. W.,  408 
 Schiller, Zachary,  66 
 Schonberger, Richard J.,  614 
 Schragenheim, Eli,  201n 
 Science of management,  21 
 Scientific management,  21–23, 289, 293, 368 
 SCOR®,  678 
 Scrap rates,  61 
 Seasonal demand patterns,  193, 198–199 
 Seasonal indexes,  97 
 Seasonal inventories,  549 
 Seasonal relative,  97– 100 
 Seasonal variations,  95, 193 
 Seasonality,  84– 85 , 95–100 
 Sebastianelli, Rose,  400 
 Secondary reports,  508 
 Self-directed teams,  292– 293 
 Sensitivity analysis,  224– 225 , 841 –844 
 Sequence dependent setup times,  709 
 Sequencing,  700– 706 
 Sequential relationships,  741 
 Servers, numbers of,  787 
 Service,  162 
 Service blueprint,  164– 165 
 Service delivery system,  162 
 Service design, 162–166;  see also Design, of products and services 
 Service layouts,  258–262 
 Service level,  570 
 Service package,  162 
 Service patterns,  788–789 
 Service profiling,  244 
 Serviceability,  136 
 Services 
 Return on quality,  379 
 Returns, management of,  679–681 
 Reuse,  145–146 
 Revenue management,  26 
 Reverse engineering,  139 
 Reverse logistics,  680 
 Rework costs,  380 
 RFID,  245, 553, 674–676 
 Rich, Nick,  639 
 Right-hand side (RHS) change,  842–844 
 Right-sized equipment,  257 
 Rights Principle,  29 
 Risk 
 decision making under,  220–221 
 defined,  218 
 globalization,  341–342 
 of lean systems,  607 
 management of,  27, 654–656, 763–764 
 of outsourcing,  195, 384, 653–654 
 Ritter, Diane,  408 
 Robinson, Alan,  628 
 Robot,  247 
 Robust design,  154 
 Rodrigues, Jorge Nascimento,  610n 
 ROI,  548 
 Rolling horizon,  506 
 Rolling planning horizon,  460 
 Romig, H. G.,  23, 369 
 Roos, Daniel,  38, 606, 639 
 Rother, Mike,  627n, 639 
 Rough-cut capacity planning,  479 
 Row reduction,  697 
 Roy, David M.,  408, 639 
 Run,  432 
 Run chart,  397 
 Run size, of jobs,  692 
 Run tests,  432– 435 
 Rusche, Chris,  599 
 Rush,  700 
 S/O (Slack per operation) rule,  700 
 Sabolik, Jerome,  344 
 Safety,  61, 295–296 
 Safety stock,  508 – 509 , 550,  557,  569– 570 
 Salaries/wages,  296–299 
 Salegna, Gary,  387n 
 Sales and operations planning,  457– 458;  see also Aggregate 
planning 
 Sales systems, point-of,  552 
 Salesforce opinions, used to forecast,  83 
 Salvendy, Gavriel,  324 
 Sampling, 312–316;  see also Acceptance sampling 
 Sampling distribution,  418– 419 
 Sampling theory,  23 
 Samuel, Donna,  639 
 Scanning, environmental,  47–48 
 Scatter diagrams,  395– 396 
 Schedule chart,  694 –695 
 Scheduled receipts,  501– 502 
 Scheduling,  688 – 729 
 airline industry,  15 

898 
Subject Index
 Small Business Administration,  658 
 SMED,  257, 612–613 
 Smith, Adam,  23 
 Smith, Bernard T.,  91n 
 Smoothing, exponential,  89–91 
 Snee, Ronald D.,  408 
 Soft information,  82 
 Sole source suppliers,  624 
 Solutions and corner points,  835 
 Sourcing, strategic,  678 
 Sower, Victor E.,  728 
 S&P 500 Index,  377 
 SPC;  see Statistical process control (SPC) 
 Spear, Steven,  639 
 Spearman, Mark L.,  133, 544, 603, 639, 728 
 Special variation,  418 
 Specialization,  290– 291 
 Specifications,  159 , 435 
 Spence, Randy,  140 
 Spreadsheets, used in aggregate planning,  468–472 
 SPT (shortest processing time),  700 
 Stacked lead time,  497 
 Stahl, Robert A.,  492 
 Standard deviation,  13 
 Standard elemental times,  311 
 Standard error of estimate,  103 
 Standard parts,  610 
 Standard time,  306, 309 
 Standardization,  22 – 23 , 61,  151, 610 
 Stanley, Linda L.,  38 
 Stanton, Steven,  73 
 Static sequencing,  701 
 Statistical models,  19, 23 
 Statistical process control (SPC),  417 – 435 
 control charts 
 attributes,  422, 427–429 
 defined,  106, 396, 420 
 errors,  421–422 
 forecasting,  106–110 
 mean,  422–424 
 nonrandom patterns,  431 
 process,  419–422 
 range,  424–427 
 run tests,  431–435 
 for variables,  422–427 
 when to use,  430–431 
 control process,  419–422 
 defined,  417 
 process variability,  417–418, 436 
 Statistical quality control,  369 
 Statistical sampling theory,  23 
 Steinberg, Neil,  415–416 
 Step costs,  204 
 Stephens, Matthew P.,  287 
 Steppingstone,  355 
 Stevenson, William J.,  235, 408, 821, 853 
 Stewart, J. R.,  324 
 Stocking levels,  577–580 
 Stockouts,  550, 569–570 
 Stoecker, Dean,  352 
 Stopwatch time study,  306– 311 , 316 
 aggregate planning,  475–477 
 airline industry,  14–15 
 capacity planning,  194–195 
 defined,  3 
 designing for,  162–166 
 employment in,  8, 16–17 
 ERP,  522 
 facilities layout,  258–262 
 inspection points,  414–415 
 in lean operations,  630–633 
 location planning,  351–352 
 versus manufacturing,  7–9 
 measuring productivity in,  8 
 MRP,  510 
 operations activities,  14–15 
 productivity,  59–60 
 quality of,  8, 15, 43, 373–374 
 scheduling of,  711–715 
 SERVQUAL,  374 
 Setup costs,  554, 692 
 Setup time 
 reduction of,  612–613, 692 
 sequence dependent,  709 
 Shadow price,  842 
 Shewhart, Walter,  23, 369–370, 420 
 Shewhart cycle,  388 
 Shih, Willy,  17 
 Shingo, Shigeo,  371, 605, 612, 616, 639 
 Shipping, evaluating alternatives,  676–677 
 Shook, John,  627n, 639 
 Short-range plans,  458 
 Short-term capacity needs,  193 
 Short-term forecasts,  76 
 Shortage costs,  554, 576 
 Shortest processing time (SPT),  700 
 Silverstein, Judith,  665 
 Simchi-Levi, David,  664, 687 
 Simchi-Levi, Edith,  664, 687 
 Simo chart,  304–305 
 Simple average method,  99–100 
 Simple linear regression,  101–105 
 Simplex method,  838 
 Simulation,  206, 756–757 
 Simulation models,  475 
 Simultaneous chart,  304–305 
 Simultaneous development,  160 
 Single-channel servers,  787 
 Single-minute exchange of die (SMED),  257 , 612 –613 
 Single-period model,  576– 580 
 Single server 
 constant service time,  794–795 
 exponential service time,  793–794 
 Site related location factors,  348–349 
 Six sigma,  26 , 390 –392, 438, 628, 761 
 Slack,  742, 837– 838 
 Slack, Nigel,  73 
 Slack per operation rule,  700 
 Slack time,  463–464, 750 
 Slater, Derek,  518 
 Slushy,  479 
 Small business,  657–658, 683 

 
Subject Index 
899
 Supply chain management, 648–687;  see also Purchasing 
 challenges,  681–683 
 creating effective,  678–683 
 defined,  650 
 e-business,  24–25, 31, 663–666 
 electronic data interchange,  666 
 elements of,  32–33 
 ERP and,  656–657 
 ethics and;  see Ethics 
 global,  25, 31 
 goals of,  651 
 importance of,  31–32 
 location planning,  339 
 logistics,  650, 672–678 
 management responsibilities,  658–660 
 outsourcing;  see Outsourcing 
 purchasing and,  659–663 
 requirements for success,  679 
 reverse logistics,  680 
 RFID,  553, 674–676 
 risk management,  654–656 
 small business,  657–658, 683 
 strategy alignment,  659 
 supplier management,  667–669 
 tactical and operational responsibilities,  659–660 
 trends,  653–656 
 value chains,  651 
 Supply Chain Operations Reference,  678 
 Supply chain visibility,  655 
 Supporting processes,  12 
 Surplus,  837– 838 
 Surveys, consumer,  83 
 Sustainability,  28– 29 , 46, 50, 144–149, 653 
 Sustainable production,  244 
 Swank, Cynthia Karen,  639 
 Sweeney, Dennis J.,  235, 821, 853 
 SWOT analysis,  47 
 System,  20 
 System design, 16;  see also Process selection and design 
 System nervousness,  513 
 System operation,  16 
 System utilization,  790 
 Systems approach, to decision making,  20 
 Tactical decisions,  16 
 Tactics,  45 
 Taghizadegan, Salman,  639 
 Taguchi, Genichi,  154, 371, 440 
 Taguchi cost function,  440 
 Taguchi loss function,  371 
 Takt  time,  614– 615 
 Tamimi, Nabil,  400 
 Tangible output,  7 
 Tariffs,  25 
 Taxes, impact on location decisions,  347 
 Taylor, Bernard W.,  235, 821, 853 
 Taylor, Frederick Winslow,  21–23, 289, 293, 306, 368 
 Teams 
 benefits of,  293 
 forms of,  292 
 Storage,  615–616 
 Storage layouts,  259 
 Straight piecework,  297 
 Strategic buffering,  670 
 Strategic decisions,  32 
 Strategic partnering,  669 
 Strategic sourcing,  678 
 Strategies 
 Balanced Scorecard,  54–56 
 comparison of,  52 
 defined,  44 
 examples of,  46, 47 
 external factors,  48 
 formulation of,  46–50 
 functional,  45 
 global,  50–51 
 goals,  44 
 growth,  49 
 implications of,  54 
 internal factors,  48–49 
 mission,  44 
 near-sourcing,  659 
 operations,  26, 47, 51–54 
 organizational,  44–46, 54 
 quality-based,  53 
 reasons for failure,  49 
 responsive,  659 
 supply chain,  50 
 sustainability,  50 
 technology changes and,  48, 60 
 time-based,  53–54 
 Strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT),  47 
 Structural variation,  13 
 Subcontracting,  465 
 Suboptimization,  218 
 Substitutability, of parts,  162 
 Summers, Donna,  389, 408, 454 
 Supplier code of conduct,  668 
 Supplier forums,  668 
 Supplier-managed inventory,  633, 670–671 
 Supplier relationship management,  668 
 Suppliers 
 analysis of,  667 
 audits,  667 
 certification of,  624, 668 
 JIT systems,  624–625 
 management of,  667–669 
 partnerships with,  668–669 
 quality and,  386 
 relationships with,  624–625, 668 
 selection of,  661, 667 
 sole source,  624 
 tiers of,  624–625 
 world class,  668 
 Supply chain 
 capacity planning and,  191 
 closed loop,  681 
 defined,  4,  649 
 global,  25, 31, 656 
 quality and,  383–384 

900 
Subject Index
 Tracking capacity strategy,  191 
 Tracking signal,  108– 110 
 Trade agreements,  340 
 Trade-offs,  19, 681–682 
 Traffic management,  674 
 Training,  270, 617 
 Transaction processing, reduction of,  625–626 
 Transfer batch,  711 
 Transfer pricing rules,  345 
 Transformation process,  5–7 
 Transportation 
 costs,  272–273, 340, 341, 343, 345, 346, 682 
 cross-docking,  682 
 facilities layout,  272–273 
 logistics,  650, 672–678 
 model,  354–355, 472–474 
 Trend,  84– 85 , 91–94 
 Trend-adjusted exponential smoothing,  95 
 Trend patterns,  431 
 Trial-and-error techniques,  468–472 
 Trusko, Brett,  408 
 Trust, in management,  291–292 
 Turnover 
 of inventory,  551 
 of labor,  61 
 Two-bin system,  552, 623 
 Two work centers, sequencing jobs 
through,  707–709 
 Type I error,  421– 422 
 Type II error,  421– 422 
 U-shape layouts,  252–253 
 UCC,  141 
 Ulrich, Karl T.,  170 
 Uncertainty,  218– 219 , 683 
 Uneven demand, meeting,  465–467 
 Uniform Commercial Code,  141 
 U.S. China Trade Relations Act,  340 
 Universal Product Code (UPC),  552 
 Upper control limits (UCL),  107, 421 
 Upper-management processes,  12 
 Utilitarian Principle,  29 
 Utilization, capacity,  189 
 Value-added,  7 
 Value analysis,  145, 147 
 Value chains,  651 
 Value stream mapping,  627– 628 
 Van Wassenhove, Luk N.,  687 
 Vaporware,  142 
 Variability,  417–418, 436, 683 
 Variable costs,  202, 353–354 
 Variable demand,  574 
 Variables 
 causal,  82 
 charts for,  422–427 
 decision,  824–825 
 defined,  422 
 explanatory,  82 
 keys to success,  293 
 problem solving and,  386 
 for process improvement,  606 
 self-managed/directed,  292–293 
 virtual,  143, 761–762 
 Technological innovation,  244 
 Technology;  see also Internet 
 changes in,  48, 60 
 defined,  25,  244 
 forecasting,  84 
 management of,  25 
 product design,  137 
 productivity improvements and,  60 
 Temperature and humidity,  294 
 Temporary workers,  810 
 Teplitz, Charles T.,  335 
 Terrorism,  342 
 Theory of constraints,  710 –711, 761 
 The Theory of Constraints,  201 
 Theory X, Y, Z,  23 
 Therbligs,  304 
 Third-party logistics,  677– 678 
 Three-sigma,  438 
 Throughput,  711 
 Time-based competition,  459 
 Time-based strategy,  53– 54 
 Time-based system,  296– 298 
 Time buckets,  497, 500 
 Time estimates 
 deterministic,  743 
 probabilistic,  743, 751–753 
 Time fences,  479, 513 
 Time horizon,  79 
 Time-ordered plot,  420 
 Time-phased requirements,  500 
 Time reduction,  26, 53–54 
 Time series,  84 
 Time series data, forecasting using 
 averaging,  86–91, 98–100 
 cycles,  100 
 defined,  82 
 exponential smoothing,  89–91 
 seasonality,  95–100, 193, 198–199 
 trend,  91–94 
 trend-adjusted exponential smoothing,  95 
 Time-series forecasts,  82 
 Time studies,  306–311, 316 
 Time-to-market,  42 
 Time value of money,  206 
 Timing,  194 
 Tippett, L. H. C.,  23 
 Tolerances,  435 
 Total-cost curve,  564–568 
 Total productive maintenance,  643 
 Total quality management (TQM), 26, 384–388,  385; 
 see also Quality 
 Toyoda, Eiji,  608 
 Toyota approach,  607–609 
 Toyota Production System (TPS),  607, 632 

 
Subject Index 
901
 Werbach, Adam,  73 
 Wheeler, John,  273n 
 White, John A.,  287 
 White noise,  86 
 Whitney, Eli,  22 
 Whybark, D. Clay,  215, 492, 544, 608, 639, 728 
 Wichern, Dean,  133 
 Wiesenborn, Gary,  344 
 Wilkerson, Ella Mae,  141 
 Williams, Bruce,  408 
 Williams, Thomas A.,  235, 821, 853 
 Wilson, J. Holton,  111, 133 
 Winebrake, James J.,  653n 
 Wisner, Joel D.,  38 
 Wolverson, Roya,  26 
 Womack, James P.,  38, 606, 639 
 Woolsey, Gene,  548 
 Work breakdown structure (WBS),  739 
 Work breaks,  295 
 Work design,  288–324 
 behavioral approaches,  291 
 compensation,  296–299 
 ergonomics,  293–294 
 human relations movement,  23 
 methods analysis,  299–303 
 motion study,  22, 303–305 
 motivation,  23, 291–292 
 specialization,  290–291 
 teams;  see Teams 
 working conditions,  294–296 
 Work-in-process inventory,  548, 615, 623–624 
 Work measurement;  see also Job design 
 defined,  305 
 predetermined time standards,  311–312 
 standard elemental times,  311 
 standard time,  306, 309 
 stopwatch time study,  306–311 
 Work sampling,  312– 316 
 Work system design;  see Job design 
 Worker fatigue,  23 
 Worker-machine chart,  302– 303 
 Workers, as assets,  616 
 Workforce scheduling,  714 
 Working conditions,  294–296 
 Workstation,  269 – 270 , 700 
 World class suppliers,  668 
 World Trade organization,  340 
 Wyosoki, Robert K.,  781 
 x-bar chart,  422–424 
 Yield management,  26 , 77,  477, 712 –713 
 Zeithaml, Valarie A.,  373n, 374n 
 Zero defects,  369, 371 
 Zijlstra, Emma,  287 
 Zucco, James,  344 
 leading,  100 
 predictor,  101 
 Variations 
 assignable,  13, 418 
 in demand,  460 
 irregular,  84–85 
 nonrandom,  418 
 process,  13–14 
 random,  13, 84–85, 417 
 seasonal,  84–85, 95–100, 193 
 Velocity,  670, 679 
 Vendor analysis,  667 
 Vendor-managed inventory (VMI),  633 , 670 –671 
 Ventilation,  294 
 Vertical loading,  291 
 Vertical skills,  299 
 Vicente, Kim,  170 
 Virtual project teams,  143 , 761 –762 
 Virtue Principal,  29 
 Visual inspection,  258 
 Visual systems,  621–623 
 Vogel’s approximation method,  355 
 Volatility, of demand,  194–195 
 Vollman, Thomas E.,  492, 544, 608, 625n, 639, 707n, 728 
 Wages/salaries,  296–299 
 Wagner, Brett,  544 
 Wagner-Whitin model,  510 
 Wait-and-see strategy,  207 
 Waiting lines,  782–821 
 analysis of,  206 
 arrival and service patterns,  788–789 
 characteristics of,  786–790 
 constraint management,  810–811 
 cost analysis,  799–801 
 finite-source models,  805–810 
 goals of management,  785–786 
 infinite source models 
 basic relationships,  791–793 
 four models,  790–791 
 multiple priorities,  802–805 
 multiple servers,  795–799 
 single server,  793–795 
 managerial implications,  785 
 maximum line length,  801 
 performance measures,  790 
 psychology of,  811–812 
 queue discipline,  789–790 
 queuing theory,  784 
 reasons for,  784 
 Wallace, Thomas F.,  492 
 Warehousing,  259 
 Warranties, implied,  141 
 Waste, in JIT,  609–610 
 The Wealth of Nations,  23 
 Webster, Scott,  687 
 Weighted average,  88– 89 
 Weightman, Clive,  522–523 
 Weinstein, Bob,  737–738 

902
Notes

903
Notes

904
Notes

