A Conversation with 
Cory Doctorow and Tim O’Reilly
Opportunities and 
Challenges in the IoT
Tim O’Reilly
& Cory Doctorow

“The future has a funny way of 
sneaking up on you. You don’t 
notice it until you’re soaking in it. 
That was the feeling 
at O’Reilly’s Solid 
Conference.”
 — Wired
The traditional boundaries between hardware and software are falling. It’s a perfect storm of 
opportunity for a software-enhanced, networked physical world. The new products and services 
created from the melding of software, hardware, and data are built by people who work across 
disciplines and industries. A vibrant new community is emerging, made up of business and 
industry leaders, software developers, hardware engineers, designers, investors, startup founders, 
academics, artists, and policy makers—many of whom have never come together before. They 
gather at Solid to be inspired, to make connections and launch conversations, and to plug into 
the future for a few days. Will you be a part of it?
Find out more at solidcon.com
THE INTERNET OF THINGS
©2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. D0330
Save 25%
use code SLD25

Tim O’Reilly and Cory Doctorow
Opportunities and
Challenges in the IoT
A Conversation with Tim O’Reilly
and Cory Doctorow

978-1-491-93412-8
[LSI]
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT
by Tim O’Reilly and Cory Doctorow
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editors: Troy Mott and Nan Barber
Interior Designer: David Futato
Transcriber: Troy Mott
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
May 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-06-10: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Opportunities and
Challenges in the IoT, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT: A Conversation with Tim
O’Reilly and Cory Doctorow. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Rethinking Industries with IoT                                                         1
Providing Human Superpowers                                                        5
Working Together Efficiently                                                             6
Public Sector IoT                                                                                  7
Win in the Marketplace                                                                      9
Doing the Right Thing                                                                      10
iii


Opportunities and Challenges in
the IoT: A Conversation with Tim
O’Reilly and Cory Doctorow
The following document is adapted from the Previous IoT Profile Epi‐
sode address by Tim O’Reilly and Cory Doctorow. Follow along with
their discussion to learn about many IoT opportunities and challenges.
The video covers an hour-long Google Hangout on Air between Tim
and Cory that covers how privacy and security are transforming IoT.
This adaptation begins over halfway into their discussion when they
bring in questions from Twitter.
Highlights
• Using IoT to rethink industries.
• IoT provides us with superpowers.
• Creating more efficient ways of working together.
• IoT in the public sector.
• Do the right thing in the marketplace.
 
Rethinking Industries with IoT
Tim:
I’m looking at a question from @leahthehunter. She says, “Which
company’s new technologies are the most profoundly impacting
1

how the Internet of Things evolves, and how will the IoT evolve in
the next five years, beyond just more sensors?”
Cory:
Tim, that feels like a question for you. You have your finger more on
the pulse of this.
Tim:
Sure, I can answer some of this. I think the biggest mistake that peo‐
ple make with the Internet of Things is in thinking that it is only
about devices. Sure, there are sexy devices: your Nest thermostat and
your Internet-connected drone. People say they are awesome. And
yes there are things like smart TVs. But, the biggest impact to me
seems to be when you start thinking about how things like sensors
and devices change the way you actually do things.
When I first started talking about Uber as an Internet of Things
company everyone looked at me like I had two heads. It is made
possible by mobile Internet-connected sensors. The fact that they
are in a smartphone doesn’t change anything. Let’s conduct a
thought experiment. If there was a special device that lets you call a
car, everyone would say, “Yes, it is the Internet of Things.” If the car
was a self-driving car, then everyone would say it is the Internet of
Things. But, the fact is, it is made possible by mobile sensors. 
So, there is going to be a lot of opportunity just by using phones
with all of the sensors in them. We see that with Apple’s HealthKit.
Sure, some of it will be adding new sensors, but what is interesting
to me is if you take Uber as a model Internet of Things company
and use that as your icon instead of say, Nest. You might say,
“Oh, wait a minute.”  What is really happening here is, once you
have connectivity and sensors out in the world, you can actually
completely rethink an entire industry. And that is why Uber is so
completely disruptive. 
2 
| 
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT

Let’s take a look at what the analogy might be in healthcare. Think of
a home healthcare worker wearing an augmented reality headset,
who can be beaming back images to a doctor if they need additional
consultation. They can be summoned by sensors on an elderly
patient who has failed to do their normal movement pattern. You
can say, “We can completely reinvent healthcare.”
In fact, there is a company called Chen Med in Florida that I heard
about from Todd Park. Because of the way they have now changed
Medicare reimbursements, they can actually keep part of the savings
if you save money. These guys have actually done concierge medi‐
cine for the sickest patients. These are people who were showing up
at the emergency room multiple times a month. And, Chen Med is
saying, it is cheaper to send someone to the patient’s house to make
sure they are taking their medications. They actually get to keep part
of this savings. And, that is actually an Internet of Things play. Peo‐
ple are using sensors and data. And in this case it may not be full
IoT, but let’s change the business model. 
Let’s think about the Internet-connected washing machines. You
may think naively about them. Perhaps you say, “Why do I care
about my washing machine being connected?" Well, not when you
are home, Amazon Dash not withstanding, but if you are in an
apartment building or you are a college student in a college dorm,
an Internet-connected washing machine totally changes the way you
think about doing laundry. You don’t have to trudge down there
with all of your dirty laundry only to find out that all of the
machines are full. You don’t trudge down there to find out your
laundry still has 10 minutes before it is done. All of these things sud‐
denly make sense in the right context. 
Rethinking Industries with IoT 
| 
3

Figure 1-1. Internet-connected washing machine
For me the biggest opportunities with the Internet of Things are not
new devices and new sensors, but rethinking what you do in a way
that you can do it more powerfully. This creates user value and user
experience because we now have connected sensors.
4 
| 
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT

Providing Human Superpowers
Cory:
I’m really interested in the idea of treating human beings as things
that are good at sensing and not things that are there to be sensed. 
Tim:
That is great, I like that.
Cory:
Yes, one of our Internet of Things models is perceived from the idea
that a human emits a beacon and it can gather as much information
as possible, often in a rather adversarial way about that human, and
then makes predictions about what that human wants. And then
you are alerted. 
What if instead, you had a device, or a device ecosystem, that didn’t
share your information with anyone else, that gathered information
that you gave voluntarily because it was just for your own benefit. It
is myware and not spyware. And then as you use this myware
through the world, other things can emit information about them‐
selves, and your device takes them in. They could look at your very
intimate, not for sharing preferences, and present you with
options, rather than treating you as a kind of ambulatory wallet. If
you think about every offer from every business that you might pass
today, it adds up to a gigabyte or two. We can handle that in our
sleep. Why are we trying to tailor what information comes to you?
Why aren’t they all promiscuously broadcasting? You receive them,
and you filter them at your end using your device that can keep your
secrets for you.
Tim:
I think the purpose of the Internet of Things is to give humans
superpowers. If you think about it, GPS is a new sense. It is an aug‐
mentation of human beings. It is true that the Australian Aborigines
had the songlines and they knew how to get around. But for a long
time modern humans have not really had that superpower, but now
we do. And I think we are going to see more and more of that. 
Providing Human Superpowers 
| 
5

Figure 1-2. Using GPS
I look at projects such as HoloLens, and other augmented reality
platforms. We are heading in the direction of The Matrix. I want to
download some new skill and I’m going to have this on-the-spot
augmentation. 
Working Together Efficiently
Cory:
Let’s take a look at the original superpower like the one that defines
our species. The first superhuman thing we ever did was work with
other people in cooperative ways. What two people can do translates
what one person can do into what is superhuman. And economists
like Ronald Coase have written at length how the major project of
our species has been how to figure out more efficient ways of work‐
ing together. We have corporations, we have mobile phones, we have
churches, we have terrorist organizations, and we have govern‐
ments. All of these are ways to make us superhuman, and more
cheaply for certain purposes. 
And where the Internet of Things and where actuators are really
interesting is when you start to think about really low-cost collabo‐
ration in the physical world enabled by sensors. So, in Bruce Ster‐
ling’s novel Distraction, which is a very prescient book, he has this
scene where people collaboratively build a hotel. They start with this
huge pile of bricks, like when you shake out the Lego box and you
get the huge pile of everything that goes into your project. They get
everything that goes into the hotel and they walk over to a cinder‐
block and they slap a little kind of sticky to it and it immediately
starts talking. “Hi, I’m a cornerstone. Walk me three feet to the left,
walk me one foot to the right, set me down. Find the trowel, find the
6 
| 
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT

cement.” And it senses and helps you, and you collaboratively work
on the hotel as long as you want. Then you walk away from it, and
the next person who wants to make the hotel, can pick up any piece,
slap a rice-sized actuator sensor onto it, and it tells you where to put
that piece down.
Figure 1-3. A Lego pile
Tim:
Well, we are seeing something like that with augmented reality in
certain kinds of situations. DAQRI is a company that has an aug‐
mented reality headset for neurospace workers, for complex
mechanical work. They use a heads-up display for help with what
they are working on. A worker with less skill can look at something
because it is automatically providing background or context infor‐
mation. So, it is pretty interesting.
Public Sector IoT
I have another question here on Twitter. This is from Nicholas Toll‐
ervey @ntoll. “Given slow government bureaucracy, how do you
effect change to introduce Internet of Things innovation in the pub‐
lic sector?”
Public Sector IoT 
| 
7

Cory:
So, this is getting back to Lessig’s model of markets, code, law, and
norms. In America, not only is Congress very slow, it actually has
stopped making laws that aren’t just partisan gamesmanship. The
amazing thing about the cellphone unlocking law is not that they
passed a cellphone unlocking law, but that they passed any law at all.
Tim:
Laughing.
Cory:
You know we have this long history of using courts as a legislature’s
second recourse, but that is something that civil liberties and the
impact that litigation has done for a long time. This is not just
because Congress and lawmakers are sometimes dysfunctional, but
also because you sometimes see legislative bodies passing laws that
are politically attractive.
Tim:
Yeah.
Cory:
But these laws obviously don’t pass constitutional muster. The idea
is that we get to make this law that says everybody that disagrees
with us is against the law. And then someone goes to court and gets
that law overturned and then they go to their base and shrug, saying
“We tried but the activist judges voided our crazy law that said
everyone has to have the Ten Commandments tattooed to their
forehead.” They made our law go away, even though we knew it
would be a good idea.
But also with markets, these things all work together. You talked
about the VCR before and one of the untold pieces of the VCR story
is that over the eight years that the VCR was litigated, people kept
making VCRs, even though the legal status of them was uncertain.
8 
| 
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT

IoT privacy and security
Be sure to listen to the first half of this hour-long Hang‐
out between Tim and Cory to learn more about privacy
and security in the IoT, and the example that the VCR
provides to help illuminate these topics.
By the time the Supreme Court finally ruled on the VCR, there were
six million VCRs in American living rooms, and all of those judges
drove past video rental stores to get to court. And courts are conse‐
quentialists. They pay attention to the law, but they also pay atten‐
tion to what their decisions will do to the world. For a judge to sit
there and bang the gavel and say six million households now have to
get rid of a piece of major entertainment technology in their living
rooms because after eight years they decided that it is finally illegal,
that is hard for them to do.
Win in the Marketplace
So, one of the things that will help litigation as to how this stuff
should work is technologies that do the right thing. Technologies
that go ahead and security audit the Internet of Things, even though
you have to jailbreak it to do it. Or offer third-party patches. Or pri‐
vacy enhancements. I mean my favorite third-party tool for Android
is the Cyanogen module that lets me lie to my location sensor. I can
download an app that doesn’t need my location, but requires it in
order to run. I can tell my operating system to lie about where I am
so the app still runs, but it doesn’t know where I am.
If companies still go on doing the right thing, when we get to that
highest court and we are being heard, we will be able to use the fact
that the markets marched on to do better.
Tim:
That is a really good point and it really does illustrate an important
point that doing can sometimes be more important than activism.
Making something that actually works differently in the world and
succeeds can be a very powerful force for change. And that is really
an appeal to the entrepreneurs out there: if you have an idea that
people are doing it wrong, do it right and try and win in the market‐
place, because you’ve actually persuaded people. I look at that in
what we’ve done at O’Reilly Media and what others have done
Win in the Marketplace 
| 
9

around DRM for publishing. We were a lonely voice at first, but now
more and more publishers have ended up joining the DRM-free
bandwagon, because there is enough evidence that it works. That it
is no longer an issue.
Figure 1-4. Promoting DRM-free media
Cory:
I think that is very true. I know that from my discussions with pub‐
lishers that are DRM-free, the fact that you went DRM-free was a
huge piece of their calculus.  It was really a force for good in the
world, Tim.
Tim:
Yes, and as we became a distribution company for other publishers,
we said we will only distribute your content if it is DRM-free. There
was actually an economic incentive for them to join.
Doing the Right Thing
Tim:
The point is, we can make social change for the good by our busi‐
ness practices, and that is something that is going well beyond the
Internet of Things. I think there is an obligation for every company
to think about how it creates value for society and not just for itself.
And, we’ve kind of lost that sense. And there are so many issues,
such as a new event I’m working on that we haven’t announced yet
around jobs and the future of the economy in the face of technology.
It’s not inevitable that companies must maximize their profits and
10 
| 
Opportunities and Challenges in the IoT

screw their customers and screw the public. That is a choice. And it
is a moral choice. And not only that, it is not the most effective
choice. It is short-term profit optimization, but long-term destruc‐
tion of the ecosystem and the world we live in. You see that choice
all throughout our society, and I think we as entrepreneurs can
make other choices, and must make other choices. 
 
Doing the Right Thing 
| 
11

