Chapter 1
Introductory Chapter: The Path to the Future
Pedro Pinho
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.70216
1. Introduction
The idea to use light for communication purposes was envisioned many years ago. However, 
the origins of optical communications trace back to 1966 when Charles Kao suggested the pos-
sibility that low‐loss optical fibers could be competitive with coaxial cable and metal wave-
guides for telecommunication applications. However, it was not until 1970 when Corning 
Glass Works announced an optical fiber loss less than the benchmark level of 10 dB/km that 
commercial applications began to be realized. Quickly, the purifying process was refined, 
and in the late 1980s, optical fibers with an attenuation of 0.2 dB/km were manufactured and 
commercialized. Surely, our society was shaped by the concepts developed by Charles Kao in 
the 1960s. In recognition of his pioneering work, in 2009, Charles Kao was awarded the Nobel 
Prize in Physics along with Willard S. Boyle and George E. Smith.
What followed from 1970 to the first decade of twenty‐first century was an extraordinary race 
that has led to an enormous increase in both the maximum transmission capacities and the 
transmission distances, and, therefore, to the contents delivered. Nowadays, in addition to 
the voice, data, and video, it is common talk references to global internet video, virtual real-
ity, augmented reality, and gaming highlights. All of these applications will be a reality in 
the next years and will be supported by an optimized optical network. However, this race for 
ever better performance does not stop here. In the upcoming years, developments in several 
areas of optical communication from hardware, software (algorithms), signal processing to 
networks and emerging technologies [2] will be the target of much attention from academia 
and industry.

2. Challenges and Opportunities for the next years
The optical hardware is related to the need for low losses, low dispersion, high speed, and 
high capacity. So, in this topic, it is possible to cover the following areas:
•	 New optical fibers for next generation optical networks;
•	 Optical amplification and regeneration;
•	 Spatial multiplexing;
•	 Coherent transceivers.
In relation to the software and signal processing, the main objective is to improve encoding 
of digital data onto lightwaves and to recover the information reliably at the receiver with the 
maximum efficiency. Examples of some topics related to this thematic are as follows:
•	 New modulation formats;
•	 Digital signal processing;
•	 Optical signal processing;
•	 Nonlinear channel modeling and mitigation and forward error correction (FEC).
Then follows the block of networks, where the main objective is to improve the number of 
point‐to‐point links between two extremes in different types of networks: core, metropolitan, 
access, and data center networks. Topics under development in this area are as follows:
•	 Long‐haul networks;
•	 Access networks;
•	 Optical communications for data centers.
Finally, the last block is related to some emerging technologies, which are in intense research 
and possibly will be certain in the next future. Here, the features are as follows:
•	 Optical integration and silicon photonics;
•	 Optical wireless communication;
•	 Quantum communication.
3. The Zettabyte Era
In conclusion, from the first generation of optical systems to the most current, communica-
tion based on optical fibers has revolutionized the way people and the world are related. 
This evolution is constant and will continue to respond to people’s increasing demand for 
data rates. The great development of the Internet era is also due to the evolution of the opti-
cal networks. The annual IP traffic is now measured in Exabyte. In order to understand this 
Optical Communication Technology
2

growth, Figure 1 shows the past, present, and the predicted global Internet traffic according 
to Cisco’s statistics [1, 2].
The bandwidth requirements are the cause for the rapid growth of Internet traffic over 
the past decade, and that growth has been exponential. We can expect that the bandwidth 
requirements in the second decade of this century will be ranging from 100 Mbps to 1 Gbps 
for residential access users, 10–40 Gbps for the majority of business users, and 100 Gbps to 1 
Tbps for some institutions, such as government agencies or major research labs.
4. Conclusion
This book aims to introduce and treat one of the emerging technologies in the field of opti-
cal communications: optical wireless communication. This technology is a dynamic area of 
research and development because a growing demand by the end users for bandwidth in 
mobile communications to support broadband wireless services such as high definition TV 
mobile video, video conference high speed Internet access, and so on. As the global demand 
for bandwidth continues to increase, and the conventional radio frequency (RF) cellular 
microwave technologies have limitations in terms of bandwidth and spectrum, this solution 
based on optical wireless communication is one of the most promising alternative technolo-
gies for indoor and outdoor scenarios.
Another subject of interest in this book is related to optical hardware (lasers, modulators,
optical amplifiers, and optical receivers), in order to improve the performance of microwave 
photonic links.
1E+00 
1E+01 
1E+02 
1E+03 
1E+04 
1E+05 
1E+06 
1E+07 
1E+08 
1E+09 
1992 
1997 
2002 
2007 
2014 
2019 
Traﬃc [Tbyte] 
Trillions 
Year
Figure 1. IP traffic: past, present, and future [2].
Introductory Chapter: The Path to the Future
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.70216
3

Author details
Pedro Pinho
Address all correspondence to: ppinho@deetc.isel.pt
ISEL—Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
References
[1]	 Cisco.The Zettabyte Era: Trends and Analysis. White Paper, June 2017
[2]	 Agrell E, et al. Roadmap of optical communications. Journal of Optic. 2016;18:063002 (40 
pp). DOI: 10.1088/2040‐8978/18/6/063002
Optical Communication Technology
4

Chapter 2
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless
Communication Technologies
Isiaka Alimi, Ali Shahpari, Artur Sousa,
Ricardo Ferreira, Paulo Monteiro and
António Teixeira
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
Abstract
In this chapter, we present various opportunities of using optical wireless communication
(OWC) technologies in each sector of optical communication networks. Moreover, chal-
lenges of optical wireless network implementations are investigated. We characterized the
optical wireless communication channel through the channel measurements and present
different models for the OWC link performance evaluations. In addition, we present some
technologies for the OWC performance enhancement in order to address the last-mile
transmission bottleneck of the system efficiently. The technologies can be of great help in
alleviating the stringent requirement by the cloud radio access network (C-RAN)
backhaul/fronthaul as well as in the evolution toward an efficient backhaul/fronthaul for
the 5G network. Furthermore, we present a proof-of-concept experiment in order to
demonstrate and evaluate high capacity/flexible coherent PON and OWC links for differ-
ent network configurations in the terrestrial links. To achieve this, we employ advanced
modulation format and digital signal processing (DSP) techniques in the offline and real-
time mode of the operation. The proposed configuration has the capability to support
different applications, services, and multiple operators over a shared optical fiber infra-
structure.
Keywords: atmospheric turbulence, bit error rate (BER) performance, channel charac-
terization, ergodic capacity, free-space optical (FSO) communication, relay-assisted
transmission, RF/FSO technology, scintillation index
1. Introduction
The Internet is experiencing high growth with varieties of bandwidth-intensive mobile applica-
tions on an unprecedented scale. One of the potential reasons for the growth is the Internet of
Things (IoT) technologies that have brought exceptional revolutions into the number of devices

in the network. Conceptually, IoT entails ubiquitous existence of a variety of things such as
mobile phones, sensors, actuators, and radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags. These entities
are capable of interacting with each other as well as cooperating with their neighbors in order to
accomplish common goals via unique addressing scheme [1]. It is envisaged that by the year
2020, billions of devices with an average of six to seven devices per person will be connected to
the Internet [2]. The fifth generation (5G) wireless communication systems in which millimeter-
wave (mm-wave) and massive multiple-input multiple-output (M-MIMO) antenna technologies
are expected to be integrated are the promising solutions for supporting the huge amount of
anticipated devices. However, the radio-frequency (RF)-based wireless mobile technologies
transmission speeds are limited by the available RF spectrum in the regulated RF spectrum. This
is due to various innovative wireless technologies and standards like WiMAX (IEEE 802.16),
UWB (IEEE 802.15), Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11), iBurst (IEEE 802.20), the cellular-based 3G and 4G [3].
Moreover, because of various advanced technologies being employed in the optical communica-
tions, there have been considerable advancements in the optical system capacity, network reach,
and number of supported users. For example, the optical-fiber-based broadband network archi-
tectures like fiber to the home (FTTH) and fiber to the building (FTTB) present commercial
solutions to the communication barriers by progressively rendering services closer to the cus-
tomers via the passive optical network (PON) technologies such as gigabit PON (GPON),
10Gbps PON (XG-PON), and Ethernet PON (EPON). Currently, one of the major challenges is
the capability to support various service requirements so as to achieve elastic and ubiquitous
connections [4]. Consequently, convergence of wireless and optical networks is highly essential
for cost-effective and pervasive network penetration for the next-generation network (NGN).
The convergence will help in exploiting the mobility benefit offered by the wireless connectivity
and the inherent bandwidth provided by the optical systems. This will help in achieving the
anticipated capacity and energy-efficiency objectives of the NGNs [3]. Furthermore, optical
wireless communication (OWC) system is one of attractive broadband access technologies that
offer high speed as well as improved capacity. Consequently, the OWC can attend to the
bandwidth requirements of different services and applications of the NGNs at relatively low
cost [3, 5].
The OWC can be an alternative and/or complementary technology for the current wireless RF
solutions. For instance, OWC operating at 350–1550 nm wavelength band can offer high data
rate of about 30 Gb/s data rate. This advantage makes it an attractive solution for addressing
the prevailing “last mile” and “last-leg” problems in the access network. Furthermore, in
mobile communication, resources re-use is an important requirement in order to enhance the
network coverage and capacity. OWC technology is able to meet this requirement with the aid
of spatial diversity [5, 6]. OWC link can be of different configurations such as
1.
Directed line of sight (LOS)
2.
Nondirected LOS
3.
Diffuse
4.
Quasidiffuse
5.
Multispot LOS
Optical Communication Technology
6

Out of these configurations, the LOS links have the highest data rates, lowest bit error rate
(BER) performance, and less complex protocol. These features make LOS link the extensively
employed configuration in the outdoor applications. Nevertheless, the major deficiencies of the
LOS link are lack of mobility and susceptibility to blockage. The diffuse and nondirected LOS
configurations, on the other hand, give better mobility advantages and are less susceptible to
shading. However, noise, path loss, and multipath-induced dispersion relatively hinder their
achievable data rate for high-speed links. Intensity modulation/direct detection (IM/DD) is the
most widely used scheme in OWC systems. Furthermore, coherent scheme can also be
employed to enhance channel usage. Implementation of coherent scheme relatively improves
system performance at the expense of increased system complexity. This can be attributed to
the fact that, precise wave-front matching between the incoming signal and the local oscillator
(LO) is required to guarantee efficient coherent reception. Furthermore, DD application is
uncomplicated as just low-cost transceiver devices are required without the necessity for the
intricate high-frequency circuit designs relative to coherent systems [5, 6].
1.1. Block diagram of OWC system
A terrestrial OWC system consists of the transmitter, channel, and receiver. Figure 1 illustrates
a schematic of a terrestrial OWC system. The source at the transmitter generates information
waveforms which are modulated onto an optical carrier. The optical field produced is then
radiated over the atmospheric channel to the destination. The optically collected field at the
receiver is then transformed to an electrical current. The detected electrical current is processed
in order to recover the original transmitted information [8]. However, the received information
may not be an exact replica of the original transmitted information because of the transmission
loss experienced over the channel by the signal. This factor significantly limits the performance
of wireless communications systems.
Figure 1. Block diagram of a terrestrial OWC system.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
7

The transmission loss is mainly due to the resultant effects of scattering and absorption which
are being introduced by the molecular constituents and aerosols along the transmission path.
Therefore, scattering and wavelength-dependent absorption are the key components of atmo-
spheric attenuation. Since absorption is a function of wavelength and wavelength selective,
there are a range of wavelength windows that experience comparatively minimal absorptions.
These transmittance windows in the absorption spectra of the atmospheric molecules are as
shown in Figure 2.
In general, the wavelength ranges of 780–850 nm and 1520–1600 nm commonly used in the
current OWC equipment are located in the atmospheric transmission windows where molec-
ular absorption is negligible. This helps in mitigating the atmospheric absorption losses.
Furthermore, certain wavelength windows that are located in the region of four specific
wavelengths such as 850, 1060, 1250, and 1550 nm normally experience an attenuation of less
than 0.2 dB/km. It is worth noting that the 850- and 1550-nm transmission windows coincide
with the standard transmission windows of fiber communication systems. For this reason,
majority of commercial OWC systems operate at these two windows in order to encourage
the use of the available off-the-shelf components. Also, wavelengths like 10 μm and ultraviolet
(UV) have also been considered for OWC systems. The 10-μm wavelength has better fog
transmission characteristics, whereas the UV wavelength is more robust against impairment
such as pointing errors and beam blockage. Also, the UV wavelength is less susceptible to solar
and other background interferences [8].
Furthermore, it is worth noting that 1520–1600-nm wavelengths are compatible with erbium-
doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) technology. This is highly essential in order to achieve high-
power and high-data rate systems. Moreover, 1520–1600-nm wavelengths enable transmission
of about 50–65 times more average output power than can be transmitted at 780–850 nm for a
Figure 2. Atmospheric transmittance window with absorption contribution (adapted from Ref. [7]).
Optical Communication Technology
8

specified eye safety classification. This can be attributed to the low transmission of the human
eye at these wavelengths [9].
1.2. Safety and regulations
One of the key factors for laser transmitter design is the safety issue. The infrared (IR) light
sources can be likely safety threats to human if they are operated inappropriately. Also,
exposure to certain optical beams may injure human skin and eye. However, the likely harm
to the eye is comparatively more severe due to the eyes’ ability to focus and concentrate optical
energy. For instance, the eye can focus wavelength range of 0.4–1.4 μm on the retina with
enough intensity to damage it; however, other wavelengths can to be absorbed by the front
part of the eye before being focused on the retina. It should be noted that laser that is deemed
to be “eye-safe” is also “skin-safe” [5, 9].
Moreover, it has been shown that the absorption coefficient at the front part of the eye is
considerably greater for longer wavelengths (>1400 nm). Consequently, the permissible aver-
age transmission power for lasers operating at 1550 nm is relatively higher. Therefore, they are
usually employed for longer transmission range [5, 9].
Figure 3 depicts the absorption of the eye at different wavelengths. At 700–1000-nm spectral
range, the cost of optical sources and detectors are relatively low; however, the eye safety
regulations are mainly strict. The maximum permissible exposure (MPE) at 900 nm wave-
length is ~143 mW/sr. On the other hand, at longer wavelengths (≥1500 nm), the eye safety
regulations are relatively less stringent; however, devices operating in these wavelengths are
comparatively expensive. The guidelines on the safety of optical beams have been specified by
several international standard organizations such as [5, 9]
Figure 3. Response of the human eye at different wavelengths.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
9

1.
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
2.
Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH)
3.
European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC)
4.
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
5.
Laser Institute of America (LIA)
The aforementioned organizations have established mechanisms for categorizing lasers in
accordance with their type and power. Generally, the classification is based on four groups
which are Class 1 through Class 4. Comparatively, Class 1 is the least powerful whereas Class 4
is the most powerful. Also, each of the classes is specified by the accessible emission limits
(AELs) metric. The AEL is determined by the optical source wavelength, the emitter geometry,
and the source intensity [5, 9]. Consequently, the AEL varies from one OWC category to
another. In the subsequent section, we present the major OWC categories.
2. OWC system classification
There have been growing research interests in the OWC system as a viable solution to attend to
the NGN requirements in cost-effective ways. The two generic groups of OWC are indoor and
outdoor optical wireless communications. The unlimited bandwidth offered by the OWC can
be attributed to different bands such as IR, visible (VL), and UV being employed for commu-
nication purposes. Figure 4 shows the electromagnetic spectrum for different applications.
Furthermore, the spectrum illustrates the frequency and wavelength ranges being occupied
by the bands in OWC. The indoor OWC employs IR or VL light for an in-building wireless
solution. It is of high importance especially in scenarios in which the probability of offering
network connectivity through physical wired connections is challenging. Moreover, the indoor
OWC systems can be categorized into four broad configurations such as tracked, diffused,
nondirected LOS, and directed line of sight (LOS). Furthermore, the outdoor OWC employs
optical carrier for transporting information from one point to another over an unguided
channel that could be an atmosphere or a free space. So, this OWC technology is also known
as a free-space optical (FSO) communication system. The FSO communication systems operate
Figure 4. Electromagnetic spectrum.
Optical Communication Technology
10

at the near IR frequencies and are classified into terrestrial and space optical links. These
consist of building-to-building, satellite-to-ground, ground-to-satellite, satellite-to-satellite,
and satellite-to-airborne platforms (unmanned aerial vehicles [UAVs] or balloons) [10]. The
tree diagram in Figure 5 shows the OWC system classification.
2.1. Underwater optical wireless communications (UOWCs)
The underwater wireless communications are a process of transmitting data in unguided
water environments via wireless carriers such as acoustic wave, RF wave, and optical wave.
Compared to the RF or acoustic alternatives, UOWC offers higher data rate and transmission
bandwidth. Basically, the UOWC uses optical wave as wireless carrier for an unguided data
transmission. The UOWC systems are applicable in disaster precaution, offshore exploration,
environmental monitoring, as well as military operations. Nevertheless, UOWC systems are
susceptible to absorption and scattering which are normally created by the underwater chan-
nels. These conditions lead to severe attenuation of optical wave and eventually hindered the
system performance. Different viable techniques have been presented in the literature to attend
to the associated technical challenges of a UOWC. One of such is an underwater wireless
sensor network (UWSN). Figure 6 depicts a UWSN with aerospace and terrestrial communi-
cations.
The major entities in the UWSN are distributed nodes such as relay buoys, seabed sensors,
autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs), and remotely operated underwater vehicles
(ROVs). The network entities are capable of performing tasks like processing, sensing, and
communication in order to sustain collaborative monitoring of the underwater environment.
The acquired data by the sensors that are located at the seabed are transmitted through
acoustic/optical links to the AUVs and ROVs which in turn relay the signal to the ships,
communication buoys, and other underwater vehicles. Furthermore, the onshore data center
that is above the sea surface then processes the data and communicates with the satellite and
the ships via RF/FSO links [11].
Figure 5. Optical wireless communication system classification (adapted from Ref. [10]).
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
11

2.1.1. UOWC link configuration
The four categories of UOWC based on the link configurations of the UWSN’s nodes are as
follows:
1.
Point-to-point line-of-sight (PTP-LOS) configuration
The PTP-LOS arrangement is the widely adopted link configuration in the UOWC. In this
configuration, the receiver detects the light beam in the direct path to the transmitter. Due
to the fact that light sources like lasers are generally used in the PTP-LOS-based systems,
precise pointing between the transceiver is essential. Hence, the requirement limits the
performance of UOWC systems in turbulent water environments. Also, this can even be
more stringent when the transmitter and the receiver of the underwater vehicles are not
stationary [11].
2.
Diffused LOS (D-LOS) configuration
Unlike the PTP-LOS scheme that employs light sources with narrow divergence angle, the
D-LOS is a point-to-multipoint (PTMP) configuration that uses diffused light. The light
sources like high-power light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that have large divergence angle are
used for the UOWC transmission from one node to multiple nodes. The broadcast nature
of this configuration helps in relaxing the requirement for precise pointing. Nonetheless,
the scheme is prone to aquatic attenuation which is as a result of the large interaction area
with the water. Consequently, this limits D-LOS application to comparatively short dis-
tances and lower data rate communications [11].
Figure 6. UWSN with aerospace and terrestrial communication.
Optical Communication Technology
12

3.
Retroreflector-based LOS (R-LOS) configuration
The R-LOS configuration is a special form of PTP-LOS scheme. The R-LOS scheme is
appropriate for duplex UOWC systems in which the sensor nodes are expected to have
low form factors and consume less power. Due to the fact that there is no laser or other
light sources in the retroreflector end, its power consumption, weight, and volume are
significantly reduced. However, the R-LOS performance is limited by the backscatter of
the transmitted optical signal that may interfere with the reflected signal [11].
4.
Non-line-of-sight (NLOS) configuration
Another category of UOWC that does not require alignment restriction of LOS is NLOS
configuration. The concept of this configuration is that the transmitter launches the beam
of light to the sea surface in such a way that the angle of incidence is greater than the
critical angle. This ensures that the light beam experiences a total internal reflection. In this
scheme, the receiver is directed toward the sea surface in a direction approximately
parallel to the reflected light for appropriate signal reception. However, signal dispersion
may occur due to the random sea surface slopes (i.e., induced by wind or other turbulence
sources) that may reflect the light back to the transmitter [11].
2.1.2. Advantages and challenges of UOWC
The three means of realizing an underwater wireless communication for UWSNs are acoustics,
RF, and optics [11]. We compare all schemes so as to point out some salient features and
advantages of UOWC:
1.
Acoustic communication
Acoustic communication is the widely employed method in the underwater wireless
communication due to the fact that it is the most viable means of realizing the longest
underwater link range. However, the frequency range of operation of acoustic communi-
cation is limited (between tens of hertz and hundreds of kilohertz). So, comparatively, this
results in low transmission rate in the order of Kbps. Furthermore, the speed of sound
wave in the fresh water is about 481 m/s at 2C and in the salt water it is about 1500 m/s
(1500.235 m/s at 1 MPa, 10C and 3% salinity). These comparative slow propagation
speeds make acoustic links prone to serious communication delay. Consequently, acoustic
communication cannot be employed in applications that require large volume of data
transmission in real time. Additionally, acoustic technology not only impacts marine life
but also involves the use of costly, bulky, and energy-consuming transceivers [11].
2.
RF communication
There are two main advantages of underwater RF communication. In relation to other
UWC methods, the RF wave can achieve a smooth transition through the air/water
interface. The feature enables a cross-boundary communication that unifies both terres-
trial and underwater RF communication systems. It is remarkable that underwater RF
communication is the method that is most tolerant to the water turbulence and turbidity.
Nevertheless, the method is limited by the associated short link range. Likewise, the
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
13

underwater RF methods are cost-ineffective due to the required high energy-consuming
transceivers, costly and huge transmission antenna [11].
3.
Optical communication
The outstanding technical merits of UOWC are the lowest link delay, highest communica-
tion security, highest transmission rate, and lowest implementation costs compared to
other methods. The comparative high-speed benefit of UOWC makes it a promising
candidate for real-time applications like underwater video transmission. In UOWC sys-
tems, LOS configuration is normally employed in the transmission. This helps in
preventing eavesdroppers, and hence improves communication security. Besides, UOWC
is the most cost-effective and energy efficient means of underwater wireless communica-
tion. This can be attributed to the comparatively small, low-energy consuming, and low-
cost optical transceivers which are normally employed. This aids in system scalability and
large-scale commercialization of UOWC [11]. However, UOWC also has certain associ-
ated challenges, which makes its realization highly demanding. The key challenges of
UOWC are enumerated as follows:
a.
Poor system performance
When light propagates in water, the photon interacts with the water molecules as
well as other particulate matters inside the water. The interaction results in absorp-
tion and scattering which attenuate the transmitted optical signal and eventually
bring about multipath fading. Consequently, in turbid water environment, UOWC
experiences poor BER performance over just a few hundred meters link distance.
Furthermore, the presence of matters like chlorophyll and other colored dissolved
organic material (CDOM) leads to an increase in the turbidity of the water. So, they
reduce the propagation distance of the transmitted optical signal. Besides, since the
concentration of CDOM varies with ocean depth variations, the associated light
attenuation coefficients also change. This anomaly results in an increase in the system
complexity [11, 12].
b.
Intermittent connection
In practice, owing to the narrow divergence feature of blue/green lasers or LEDs, they
are usually employed as the light sources in UOWC systems. Therefore, the narrow
feature demands a precise alignment between the optical transceivers. However,
there is high tendency for intermittent misalignment of optical transceivers because
of the turbulence in the underwater environment. Hence, sporadic movements of the
sea surface will bring about severe connectivity loss [11, 12].
c.
Energy constraint and system reliability
Factors such as the pressure, temperature, flow, and salinity of the seawater have
high impact on the performance and lifetime of UOWC devices. Furthermore, UOWC
devices are susceptible to failures due to corrosion and fouling. So, reliable underwa-
ter devices are required for effective communications. Also, due to the fact that
exploitation of solar energy is extremely difficult and UOWC devices are expected to
Optical Communication Technology
14

experience extended operation time, then, reliability of the batteries and power con-
sumption efficiency of device are essential in a UOWC environment [11, 12].
2.2. Visible light communication (VLC) systems
The current enhancement of LED chip design with swift nanosecond-switching times and
extensive deployment of LEDs for energy efficiency paves the way for visible light communi-
cation (VLC) system [13, 14]. So, the VLC system has become an attractive technology for
addressing challenges such as energy efficiency, bandwidth limitation, electromagnetic radia-
tion, and safety in wireless communications [15, 16]. The VLC system operates in the wave-
length range of ~390–750 nm. Table 1 shows the seven colors with specific frequency and
wavelength for visible spectrum. Figure 7 illustrates VLC system implementation. The concur-
rent support for communication and illumination by the VLC offers the following advantages
over the RF communications.
Color
Wavelength (nm)
Frequency (THz)
Violet
440–405
680–740
Indigo
455–440
660–680
Blue
475–455
630–660
Green
560–475
535–630
Yellow
585–560
515–535
Orange
605–585
495–515
Red
685–605
435–495
Adapted from Ref. [17].
Table 1. Visible spectrum colors.
Figure 7. Visible light communication system.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
15

2.2.1. Huge bandwidth
It exhibit almost unlimited and unlicensed bandwidth which approximately ranges from 380
to 780 nm. Therefore, VLC has 350 THz that can support multi-gigabit-per-second data rates
with LED arrays in a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) configuration [14]. This makes
VLC a good alternative to the indoor IR that operates at 780–950 nm for the access technolo-
gies [6].
2.2.2. Low power consumption
VLC provides both communication and lighting, giving Gbps data rates with only unsophis-
ticated LEDs and photodetectors (PDs) that consume low power compared to costly RF
alternatives that demand high power consumption for sampling, processing, and transmitting
Gbps data [14].
2.2.3. Low cost
The required optical components such as LEDs and photodetectors are inexpensive, compact,
lightweight, amenable to dense integration, and have very long lifespan [13]. Moreover, with
large unlicensed optical spectrum as well as much lower power-per-bit cost compared to the
RF communications, VLC is relatively cheaper.
2.2.4. No health concerns
VLC does not generate radiation that leads to public health concern. Besides, it lowers the
carbon dioxide emission owing to the little extra power consumption for communication
purposes [18].
2.2.5. Ubiquitous computing
Due to the fact that there are various luminous devices like traffic signs, commercial displays,
indoor/outdoor lamps, TVs, car headlights/taillights, and so on being used everywhere, VLC
can be employed for a wide range of network connectivity [19].
2.2.6. Inherent security
VLC offers comparatively higher security due to the fact that it is highly intricate for a network
intruder that is outside to pick up the signal [14].
2.2.7. Indoor localization
The existing RF-based global positioning system (GPS) gives inadequate or no network cover-
age in the indoor and underground (e.g., tunnel) environment. This is as a result of high
attenuation, multipath, and the safety regulation. These factors lead to an accuracy of only up
to a few meters for the RF-based GPS. The VLC-based indoor positioning can be employed to
attend to the issues in the enclosed environments. So, the VLC-based indoor navigation
services offer very high accuracy to within a few centimeters. In essence, VLC offers good
Optical Communication Technology
16

indoor localization system using the white LEDs. Furthermore, LEDs give better light source
that is more than 400 lux. This is sufficient for high-speed data transmission compared to the
incandescent and fluorescent sources. Moreover, LEDs have longer lifespan that results in
ecological and financial benefits [6].
In addition, VLC is an alternative technology in sensitive or hazardous environments like
airplanes, hospitals, and industrial gas production plants where the employment of RF tech-
nology is not permitted. The worldwide research community through bodies like the Wireless
World Research Forum, the IEEE standardization body, the VLC consortium, the UK research
council, and the European OMEGA project has embraced the indoor short-range VLC as a
promising scheme because of the associated excellent attributes [6].
However, simultaneous employment of light sources for the data communication as well as
illumination causes certain challenges that require consideration for VLC system imple-
mentations to be viable. Flicker mitigation and dimming support are the two major challenges
of visible light spectrum [14, 20]. In the contemporary lighting systems, the light sources are
equipped with dimming control functionality that enables the users to control the average
brightness of light sources to their preferred level. Flicker is the variation in the brightness of
light perceived by the human naked eye. Flicker is as a result of continuous switching on and
off of the light source during data transmission. It is essential to mitigate any possible flicker
because it can instigate negative/harmful physiological changes in humans. Flicker can be
prevented by making the changes in brightness be within the maximum flickering time period
(MFTP). The MFTP is the maximum time period within which the light intensity can be
changed without any perception by the human eye [14]. Also, various modulation formats
have been recommended for VLC in view of dimming control and flicker mitigation. For
instance, the IEEE 802.15.7 standard proposes variable pulse position modulation (VPPM) for
VLC system because of its notable ability to control dimming. It integrates the pulse position
modulation (PPM) and pulse width modulation (PWM) in order to support communication
with dimming control [14, 20]. Furthermore, other challenges are high path losses, multipath-
induced intersymbol interference (ISI), artificial light-induced interference, and blocking.
Moreover, LED electro-optic response nonlinearity has to be taken into consideration [6].
2.3. Wireless body area network (WBAN)
Wireless body area network (WBAN) is a system that comprises a set of miniaturized low-
power, lightweight sensor nodes, which form wireless sensor networks (WSNs). Figure 8
shows a WBAN system for medical monitoring. With the help of the sensor nodes, WBANs
have emerged as an attractive alternative to the conventional wired medical network. Also,
there has been noteworthy increase in the WBAN systems because of the IEEE 802.15.6
standard that regulates their commercial applications. Furthermore, there is an obligation on
2.36–2.40-GHz frequency band as a medical-only WBAN band by the Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC). The restriction is purposely for service provisions for the indoor
health-care facilities as well as for supporting the patients’ health-care information and man-
agement [21, 22]. Furthermore, the constraint is also to guarantee high quality of service for the
health information transmission.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
17

The distributed sensors in the WBAN can be implanted in or on the human body in order to
monitor physiological parameters in real time. The implanted sensors that are wirelessly
connected to the outside network through a central unit collect different vital health informa-
tion. The monitored physiological data include electromyogram (EMG), electroencephalogram
(EEG), electrocardiogram (ECG), temperature, heart rate, blood pressure (BP), and glucose
level [22]. The ZigBee, Bluetooth, as well as the current Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) are
contending for market share of wireless health devices. Their major appealing advantages are
low power consumption and the added mobility [23]. Health devices that employ these
technologies are operating in the industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) radio bands. High
emissions from these devices can create electromagnetic interference (EMI) and eventually
disrupt communication. Similarly, there are security issues concerning data transmission for
patient monitoring which are susceptible to hacking [23].
Furthermore, it should be noted that the existing WBANs that use ultra-wide band (UWB)
transmissions are RF based. However, their implementation in the hospitals and medical
facilities where RF-based system deployment is restricted or prohibited can be challenging.
This is due to the potential effects of EMI from various RF transceivers on medical devices. The
EMI effects can lead to medical equipment malfunction. Also, RF wave propagation on and/or
in the human body is highly complex to examine. Consequently, to address these challenges
OWC can be employed as an alternative solution [24].
The ECG signal and patient information can be transmitted concurrently with the help of VLC
technology. Moreover, certain medical equipment like the one for the cardiac stress test (or
cardiac diagnostic test) can be improved on by incorporating LEDs on the sensor units. This
implementation will help in minimizing the large amount of cables (e.g., electrodes) that are
normally required. Besides, VLC employment is greener (green communication and network-
ing), safer, more secure in RF-restricted/prohibited hospitals and medical facilities [23]. Fur-
thermore, it is worth noting that the current advancements in the organic LED (OLED)
technology enable the integration of VLC transceivers into wearable gadgets and clothing [24].
Figure 8. Wireless body area network.
Optical Communication Technology
18

2.4. Optical space communications
An effective communication links between satellites enable better flexibility, extended cover-
age, and improved connectivity to be achieved in satellite systems. This is applicable in
interorbit links between satellites in low earth orbit (LEO) and geostationary orbit (GEO).
Furthermore, intersatellite links between satellites in the same GEO or LEO orbit are other
scenarios for application. Also, the satellite system connectivity can be enhanced by exploiting
the free-space links between satellites. This will result in an improved capacity for telecommu-
nication systems. Moreover, the capability to relay data from the earth observation satellite to
the ground through a GEO relay satellite enables real-time data flow and minimizes the
number of ground stations required for service delivery in the system [25].
Generally, the space link implementation can be realized at microwave, millimetric, and optical
frequencies. Also, all technologies require the communication beam that emanates from the
transmitting terminal to be pointed toward the receiving terminal with sufficient accuracy.
This is necessary in order to meet the required link power budget. Table 2 presents typical
antenna gains and beamwidths for intersatellite link technologies [25].
It should be noted that out of the technologies, optical frequency offers an exceptionally high
antenna gain for comparatively small antenna size. Therefore, optical links provide significant
advantages such as low mass, low power consumption, and reduced size. As demonstrated
in [26], the optical antenna diameter may be relatively smaller than that of RF by a factor of 13.
Also, its mass and power can be half of that for RF systems. Table 3 compares different
communication technologies in terms of mass, power, and antenna diameter. An architecture
that depicts ground-to-satellite optical links that are connected to satellite network and then
satellite-to-ground optical links is illustrated in Figure 9. The salient features of optical links
enable small terminals that can be easily accommodated on the satellite [25]. Also, optical
space-based communication offers high-data rate, large capacity, minimized interference risk
with other communication systems, and efficient utilization of frequency resources [10, 26].
Nevertheless, the space FSO communications are susceptible to atmospheric effects which
make the channel a random function of space and time. Consequently, the uplink/downlink
transmissions suffer from losses such as atmospheric scintillation, beam divergence, absorp-
tion, scattering, misalignment, cloud blockage, background noise and angle-of-arrival fluctua-
tions. It should be noted that the losses confronted by the beam in the FSO uplink transmission
Band
Parameters
Frequency
Antenna diameter (m)
Antenna gain (dBi)
3 dB beamwidth degrees
S-band
2 GHz
2
30
5.25
Ka-band
26 GHz
2
52
0.40
Millimeter
60 GHz
1
53
0.35
Optical
0.36 PHz
0.07
108
6.7104
Adapted from Ref. [25].
Table 2. Intersatellite link technologies comparison.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
19

are very large compared to downlink transmission. Furthermore, the intersatellite FSO links
are insusceptible to weather conditions due to the fact that the satellite orbits are at a consid-
erable distance over the atmosphere [10]. However, the associated narrow optical beamwidths
Figure 9. Space optical communication.
Link
Frequency band
Optical
Ka
Millimeter
Antenna
diameter
Mass
Power
Antenna
diameter
Mass
Power
Antenna
diameter
Mass
Power
GEO-LEO
10.2 cm
(1.0)
65.3 kg
(1.0)
93.8 W
(1.0)
2.2 m
(21.6)
152.8 kg
(2.3)
213.9 W
(2.3)
1.9 m
(18.6)
131.9 kg
(2.0)
184.7 W
(2.0)
GEO-GEO
13.5 cm
(1.0)
86.4 kg
(1.0)
124.2 W
(1.0)
2.1 m
(15.6)
145.8 kg
(1.7)
204.2 W
(1.6)
1.8 m
(13.3)
125.0 kg
(1.4)
175.0 W
(1.4)
LEO-LEO
3.6 cm
(1.0)
23.0 kg
(1.0)
33.1 W
(1.0)
0.8 m
(22.2)
55.6 kg
(2.4)
77.8 W
(2.3)
0.7 m
(19.4)
48.6 kg
(2.1)
68.1 W
(2.1)
Adapted from Ref. [26].
Table 3. Comparison of different technologies with transmit power of 10, 50, and 20 W for optical-, Ka-, and millimeter-
band systems, respectively.
Optical Communication Technology
20

bring about stringent pointing, acquisition, and tracking (PAT) requirements for optical sys-
tems. This can also be attributed to different relative velocity of the satellite. So, a compact low-
mass PAT system is required to address PAT requirements [26].
2.5. Terrestrial free-space optical (FSO) communications
There have been much more research effort in terrestrial FSO partly because of some successful
field trials and commercial deployments [27–31]. Figure 10 shows a scenario for FSO system
deployment as a universal platform for a nippy as well as an efficient ubiquitous wireless
service provision for the future broadband access networks. The significant attentions being
attracted by the FSO systems are primarily due to their inherent advantages such as cost-
effectiveness, lower power consumption (high-energy-efficiency-green communication), ease
of deployment, higher bandwidth/capacity, more compact/low-mass equipment, reduced
time-to-market, immunity to EMI, high degree of security against eavesdropping, license-free
operation, as well as better protection against interferences, compared with the traditional RF
communication systems [32, 33]. These salient features make FSO communication systems
very appealing for a variety of applications in disaster recovery, radio astronomy, remote-
Figure 10. A scenario for OWC system deployment for access networks.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
21

Figure 11. Atmospheric turbulence mitigation techniques (adapted from Ref. [10]).
Optical Communication Technology
22

sensing/surveillance/monitoring, metropolitan area network extension, high-definition TV
transmission, sharing of medical imaging in real time, and fronthaul and backhaul for wireless
cellular networks [3, 8]. Moreover, apart from being used for establishing terrestrial links, they
are applicable for launching high-speed interplanetary space links such as intersatellite/deep
space and ground-to-satellite/satellite-to-ground links [10].
In spite of the advantages of FSO communication and diverse application, its extensive use is
hindered by some challenges in real-life scenarios. For instance, the FSO links are susceptible
to scattering caused by adverse weather conditions like snow, rain, and fog [8, 33]. Moreover,
building sway caused by factors such as thermal expansion, wind loads, and weak earth-
quakes also impairs the FSO link performance [33]. Also, atmospheric turbulence-induced
fading has been recognized as the main contributor of the FSO link impairment [33, 34].
Consequently, the system performance is impeded as a result of atmospheric effects which
cause loss of spatial coherence, beam spreading, and temporal irradiance fluctuation known as
scintillation or fading [8, 35]. Scintillation manifests as temporal and spatial variation in the
light intensity along the transmission path. This is due to the random changes in the refractive
index which is as a result of the inhomogeneities in the air temperature and pressure [8, 32].
For these reasons, the dispersive nature of the link needs considerable attention when model-
ing an FSO system. This will help in supporting the stringent requirements of various
bandwidth-intensive mobile applications of the NGNs [3]. The FSO link impairment model-
ings are discussed in Section 3. The tree diagram in Figure 11 presents different atmospheric
turbulence mitigation techniques.
3. Optical system and channel model
Assuming a practical FSO link with intensity-modulation/direct-detection (IM/DD) using
OOK modulation, the data are modulated onto the instantaneous intensity of an optical beam
at the transmitter. The optical power emanated from the transmit aperture into the free space is
assumed to be affected by factors such as misalignment fading (pointing errors), atmospheric
turbulence-induced fading, and background noise or ambient noise before reaching the receive
aperture. These factors lead to the signal intensity fluctuation. Consequently, the subsequent
received electrical signal, r, at the receive aperture can be modeled as [3, 35–37]
r ¼ ηehx þ n,
ð1Þ
where x ∈{0,1} denotes the transmitted information bit, ηe is the effective photoelectric conver-
sion ratio of the receiver, n is additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with zero mean and
variance, σ2
n ¼ N0=2;N0 is a one-sided noise power spectral density in watts/Hz, and h = hℓhahp
represents the irradiance that influences the channel state. The channel irradiance in Eq. (1) is a
product of the deterministic path loss, hℓ: the random attenuation (i.e., atmospheric
turbulence-induced fading), ha, as well as the random attenuation (due to geometric spread
and pointing errors), hp. The ha and hp are random variables with probability density functions
(pdfs) f haðhaÞ and f hpðhpÞ, respectively.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
23

3.1. Atmospheric attenuation
When an optical beam passes through the atmosphere, it experiences atmospheric loss. The
attenuation suffered by the signal power according to the exponential Beers-Lambert law is
given by [36–38]
hℓðλ, zÞ ¼ Pðλ, zÞ
Pðλ, 0Þ ¼ exp ðσðλÞzÞ
ð2Þ
where hℓ(λ, z) denotes the loss that is a function of propagation path of length z at wavelength λ,
P(λ, z) and P(λ, 0) are the signal power and the emitted power at distance z, respectively. The
attenuation coefficient or the total extinction coefficient, σ(λ) per unit of length, is given by [36]
σðλÞ ¼ αmðλÞ þ αaðλÞ þ βmðλÞ þ βaðλÞ,
ð3Þ
where αm,a represent molecular and aerosol absorption coefficients, respectively, and βm,a
denote molecular and aerosol scattering coefficients, respectively.
The attenuation hℓis assumed to be a constant scaling factor over a long time period, so, there
is no haphazard behavior. Moreover, it is subject to the distribution and size of the scattering
particles as well as the wavelength employed. It can be expressed in terms of visibility, which
can be measured directly from the atmosphere. Empirically, attenuation can be defined in
terms of visibility as [36]
σðλÞ ¼ 3:912
V
λ
550

q
,
ð4Þ
where V is the visibility (in kilometers) and q is a parameter that depends on the particle size
distribution in the atmosphere expressed by the Kruse model as [36]
q ¼
1:6
V > 50 km
1:3
6 km < V < 50 km
0:585V1=3
V < 6 km
8
>
<
>
:
ð5Þ
Furthermore, Kim presents an extended model in order to achieve a better accuracy at lower
visibility scenarios. The Kim model is expressed as [36]
q ¼
1:6
V > 50 km
1:3
6 km < V < 50 km
0:16V þ 0:34
1 km < V < 6 km
V  0:5
0:5 km < V < 1 km
0
V < 0:5 km
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
ð6Þ
3.2. Pointing error or misalignment fading
An FSO link is an LOS communication with narrow optical beamwidth that brings stringent
pointing accuracy requirements for efficient performance and reliability of optical systems.
Optical Communication Technology
24

Pointing errors and signal fading normally occur at the receiver because of the wind loads and
thermal expansions that lead to random building sways. Assuming a Gaussian spatial intensity
profile of beam waist wz at the receiver plane, located at distance z away from the transmitter.
Also, suppose a circular aperture of radius r, the collected power fraction owing to the geometric
spread with radial displacement α, from the detector origin can be approximated as the Gaussian
form [37, 38]
hpðαÞ ≈A0 exp
 2α2
w2
zeq
 
!
ð7Þ
where w2
zeq ¼ w2
z
ﬃﬃﬃﬃπ
p erfðυÞ=2υ exp ðυ2Þ, υ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃπ
p r=
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
wz, A0 ¼ ½erfðυÞ2, wzeq is the equivalent
beamwidth, and erf ðÞ denotes the error function given by [39]
erfðxÞ ¼ ð2=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃπ
p Þ
ðx
0
eu2du
ð8Þ
If we assume that the elevation and the horizontal sway are independent and identical Gauss-
ian distributions, then the radial displacement, α, follows a Rayleigh distribution. Then, the
f hpðhpÞ can be defined as [37, 38]
f hpðhpÞ ¼ γ2
Aγ2
0
hγ21
p
,
0 ≤hp ≤A0
ð9Þ
where γ ¼ wzeq=2σs represents the ratio between the equivalent beam radius and the standard
deviation (jitter) of the pointing error displacement at the receiver and σ2
s is the jitter variance
at the receiver.
3.3. Atmospheric turbulence
The intensity fluctuation over the FSO channel has been defined by several statistical models in
the literature for different turbulence regimes. One of such model is the log-normal (LN)
distribution that has been extensively employed because of its significant match with the
experimental measurements. This is discussed further in Section 6. Some of other widely
employed models are gamma-gamma (ΓΓ), negative exponential, K distribution, and I-K
distribution. However, in this work, we focus on the LN, ΓΓ, and generic Málaga (M)-distribu-
tion models.
3.3.1. Log-normal distribution (LN)
In general, the LN model is only suitable for weak turbulence conditions and for link range
that is less than 100 m [40]. So, the intensity fluctuation pdf for the weak turbulence modeled
by the LN distribution is given by [3, 35]
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
25

f haðhaÞ ¼
1
2ha
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2πσ2
x
p
exp
 ðlnðhaÞ þ 2σxÞ2
8σ2
x
 
!
,
ð10Þ
where σ2
x ¼ σ2
l =4 represents the log-amplitude variance defined for plane wave and spherical
waves, respectively as [3, 35]
σ2
xjplane ¼ 0:307C2
nk7=6L11=6,
ð11Þ
σ2
xjspherical ¼ 0:124C2
nk7=6L11=6,
ð12Þ
σ2
l jplane ¼ 1:23C2
nk7=6L11=6,
ð13Þ
σ2
l jspherical ¼ 0:50C2
nk7=6L11=6,
ð14Þ
where σ2
l is the log-irradiance variance, k = 2π/λ represents the optical wave number, L denotes
the distance, and C2
n is the altitude-dependent index of refraction structure parameter. The C2
n
is a main parameter for distinguishing the amount of refractive index fluctuation in the
atmospheric turbulence. It is a function of the atmospheric altitude, wavelength, and temper-
ature. There are a number of C2
n profile models being proposed in the literature; however, the
extensively used one in terms of altitude is the Hufnagle-Valley model given by [3, 5, 35, 39]
C2
nðhÞ ¼ 0:00594ðvw=27Þ2ð105hÞ10 exp ðh=1000Þ þ 2:7  1016 exp ðh=1500Þ þ ^A exp ðh=100Þ,
ð15Þ
where h signifies the altitude in meters (m) and ^A represents the nominal value of C2
nð0Þ at the
ground level in m2/3. The value of C2
n for the FSO links near the ground level is approximately
1.7  1014m2/3 and 8.41014m2/3 during the daytime and at the night, respectively. Gener-
ally, C2
n ranges from 1013m2/3 for the strong turbulence to 1017m2/3 for the weak turbu-
lence. Its typical average value is 1015m2/3 [5, 39]. The vw denotes the root mean square (rms)
wind speed (pseudowind) in meters per second (m/s) with the most usual value of 21 m/s, but
it can be described by [39]
w ¼
1
15  103
ð20103
5103 V2ðhÞdh
"
#1=2
,
ð16Þ
where V(h) is normally defined by the Bufton wind model that can be expressed as [39]
VðhÞ ¼ ωsh þ Vg þ 30 exp  h  9400
4800

2
"
#
ð17Þ
where Vg denotes the ground wind speed and ωs signifies the slew rate that is related to the
satellite movement regarding the observer on the ground.
Optical Communication Technology
26

We substitute different values of the log-irradiance variance, that is, σ2
l ∈(0.01, 0.1, 0.4, 0.9) in
Eq. (11) into Eq. (10) in order to estimate the intensity fluctuation pdf for the LN distribution. The
LN pdf plot can be easily achieved by using a linear scale; however, we also present results of a
logarithmic scale implementation. This is to ensure uniformity in this chapter because we are
going to use the logarithmic scale to present experimental results of irradiance fluctuation in
Section 6. Moreover, logarithmic scale has the ability to respond to skewness toward the large
values. So, it is more appropriate for illustrating how the measured samples would fit with the
distributions at their tails. Figure 12 shows the LN pdf for different values of log-irradiance
variance. In Figure 12a, linear scale is employed whereas in Figure 12b we use logarithmic scale.
It is crystal clear that detailed insight of the tails of the plots is presented in Figure 12b. Further-
more, it should be noted that as the value of σ2
l increases, the distribution is getting more and
more tilted. This signifies the magnitude of the irradiance fluctuation of the system.
3.3.2. Gamma-gamma (ΓΓ) distribution
In most cases, in the strong turbulence regimes in which the LN distribution characterization is
not valid, the ΓΓ distribution is normally employed in modeling the scintillation effects. Also,
the ΓΓ model can be used in characterizing the fading gains from the weak to the strong
turbulence scenarios. The pdf of ha using the ΓΓ distribution is given by [3, 5, 35, 39]
f haðhaÞ ¼ 2ðαβÞðαþβÞ=2
ΓðαÞΓðβÞ ðhaÞ
ðαþβÞ
2 1Kαβð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
αβha
p
Þ,
ð18Þ
where Γ() represents the gamma function, Kν() is the modified Bessel function of the second
kind of order ν, α and β are the effective number of large-scale and small-scale eddies of the
scattering process, respectively. The parameters α and β are defined, respectively, for the plane
wave as [3, 5, 35, 39]
α ¼
exp
0:49σ2
R
ð1 þ 1:11σ12=5
R
Þ7=6
 
!
 1
"
#1
,
ð19Þ
β ¼
exp
0:51σ2
R
ð1 þ 0:69σ12=5
R
Þ5=6
 
!
 1
"
#1
,
ð20Þ
Figure 12. Log-normal pdf for different values of log-irradiance variance using (a) linear scale and (b) logarithmic scale.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
27

and for the spherical wave, they can be expressed as [35]
α ¼
exp
0:49σ2
R
ð1 þ 0:18d2 þ 0:56σ12=5
R
Þ7=6
 
!
 1
"
#1
,
ð21Þ
β ¼
exp
0:51σ2
Rð1 þ 0:69σ12=5
R
Þ5=6
ð1 þ 0:9d2 þ 0:62d2σ12=5
R
Þ5=6
 
!
 1
"
#1
,
ð22Þ
where d ≜ðkD2=4LÞ1=2, D represents the diameter of the receiver aperture, and σ2
R denotes the
Rytov variance which is a metric for the strength of the turbulence fluctuations. The σ2
R is
defined for the plane and the spherical waves, respectively, as [5, 35, 39]
σ2
Rjplane ¼ 1:23 C2
n k7=6 L11=6,
ð23Þ
σ2
Rjspherical ¼ 0:492 C2
n k7=6 L11=6,
ð24Þ
Apart from different values of σ2
l being employed, that is, σ2
l ∈(4.0, 1.5, 0.5), we substitute
different values of the effective number of large- and small-scale eddies of the scattering process,
that is, α and β ) α ∈(4.3, 4.1, 6.0) and β ∈(1.3, 2.0, 4.4) in Eq. (19) and Eq. (20) into Eq. (18) to
estimate the ΓΓ pdf. The results of both linear and logarithmic scales are depicted in Figure 13.
Figure 13 shows turbulence regimes that correspond to the weak, moderate, and strong atmo-
spheric scenarios. The results show that an increase in the turbulence from the weak regime to
the strong regime leads to corresponding increase in the distribution spreading.
The normalized variance of the irradiance also known as the scintillation index (σ2
N) can be
expressed in terms of σ2
x and eddies of the scattering process (α and β), respectively, as [35, 39]
σ2
N ≜〈h2
a〉 〈ha〉2
〈ha〉2
ð25Þ
¼ 〈h2
a〉
〈ha〉2  1
ð26Þ
¼ expð4σ2
xÞ  1
ð27Þ
¼ 1=α þ 1=β þ 1=ðαβÞ:
ð28Þ
3.3.3. Málaga (M)-distribution
The M-distribution is a generic model that is appropriate for defining the entire turbulent
regimes. Table 4 shows the means of generating the existing atmospheric turbulence models
from the M-distribution model [41]. The M-distributed fading model is based on components
such as UL, UC
S, and UG
S which represent the line-of-sight (LOS) component, the scattered
component by the eddies on the propagation axis that is coupled to the LOS contribution,
and the scattered component to the receiver by the off-axis eddies, respectively. The average
power of the LOS component as well as that of the total scatter components are Ω ¼ E½jULj2
Optical Communication Technology
28

and 2b0 ¼ E½jUC
Sj2 þ jUG
S j2, respectively. In addition, the average power of the coupled-to-LOS
scattering component and that of the scattering component received by off-axis eddies are
E½jUC
Sj2 ¼ 2ρb0 and E½jUG
S j2 ¼ ð1  ρÞ2b0, respectively. The parameter 0 ≤ρ ≤1 represents the
amount of scattering power coupled to the LOS component [41, 42]. The pdf of the optical
channel gain ha for the M-distribution can be written as [41, 42]
f haðhaÞ ¼ A
X
β
k¼1
akh
αþk
2 1
a
Kαk
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
αβha
μβ þ Ω
0
s
 
!
ð29Þ
where μ ¼ E½jUC
Sj2 ¼ ð1  ρÞ2b0, Ω
0 ¼ Ω þ 2ρb0 þ 2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ρb0Ω
p
cosðϕA  ϕBÞ, ϕA and ϕB repre-
sent the deterministic phases of the LOS and the coupled-to-LOS component, respectively; α
denotes a positive parameter that depends on the effective number of large-scale cells of the
Distribution model
Generation
ρ
Var½jULj
Var½G
X
Ω0
Var½X
γ
Ω
α
β
Rice-Nakagami
0
0
Gamma
0
0
Homodyned K (HK)
0
0
γ
Gamma-gamma
1
1
0
Shadowed-Rician
0
Log-normal
0
0
! 0
K
0
0
Exponential
0
0
0
! ∞
Gamma-Rician
! ∞
Adapted from Ref. [41].
Table 4. Approximations required for generating different distribution models from M-distribution model.
Figure 13. Gamma-gamma pdf for weak-strong turbulence regimes using (a) linear scale and (b) logarithmic scale.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
29

scattering process, β is a natural number which represents the amount of fading parameter,
Kv() represents the modified Bessel function of the second kind with order v, A and ak can be
expressed, respectively, as [41, 42]
A ≜
2α
α
2
μ1þα
2ΓðαÞ
μβ
μβ þ Ω
0
 
!βþα
2
ð30Þ
ak ≜
β
1
k
1

 ðμβ þ Ω
0Þ1k
2
ðk  1Þ!
Ω
0
μ
 
!k1 α
β
 k
2
ð31Þ
3.4. Combined attenuation statistics
The pdf of h = hℓhahp that constitutes the aforementioned factors of the propagation channel
can be defined as [37, 38]
f hðh; wzÞ ¼
ð
f hjhaðhjhaÞf haðhaÞdha
ð32Þ
where f hjhaðhjhaÞ is the conditional probability given a turbulence state ha and its distribution
can be written as [37, 38]
f hjhaðhjhaÞ ¼
1
hahℓ
f hp
h
hahℓ


¼
γ2
Aγ2
0 hahℓ
h
hahℓ

γ21
,
0 ≤h ≤A0hahℓ:
ð33Þ
Therefore, fh(h; wz) can be written as [37]
f hðh; wzÞ ¼
γ2
ðA0hℓÞγ2 hγ21
ð∞
h=A0hℓ
hγ2
a
f haðhaÞdha:
ð34Þ
4. Performance analysis
4.1. BER
The channel state distribution fh(h; wz) can be calculated by employing an appropriate model
for atmospheric turbulence regimes in Eq. (25) as follows:
1.
For a weak turbulence ðσ2
R < 0:3Þ
In this regime, f haðhaÞ follows LN distribution, so, fh(h; wz) can be expressed as [37]
f hðh; wzÞ ¼
γ2
2ðA0hℓÞγ2 hγ21  erfc
ln
h
A0hℓ


þ μ
ﬃﬃﬃ
8
p
σx
0
@
1
Ae

2σ2
xγ2ð1þγ2Þ

:
ð35Þ
2.
For a strong turbulence
This regime is characterized by the ΓΓ distribution, so, fh(h; wz) can be written as [37, 38]
Optical Communication Technology
30

f hðh; wzÞ ¼
2γ2ðαβÞðαþβÞ=2
ðA0hℓÞγ2ΓðαÞΓðβÞ
hγ21 
ð∞
h=A0hℓ
hðαþβÞ=21γ2
a
Kαβð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
αβ ha
p
Þdha:
ð36Þ
where KνðÞ can be expressed in terms of the Meijer’s G-function Gm,n
p,q ½ as [35]
KνðxÞ ¼ 1
2 G2;0
0;2
x2
4

ðν=2Þ,ðν=2Þ:

"
ð37Þ
So, from Eq. (28), Kαβð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
αβha
p
Þ can be expressed as [35]
Kαβð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
αβha
p
Þ ¼
1
2
 
G2;0
0;2 αβha

αβ
2 , βα
2

#
,
"
ð38Þ
Therefore, fh(h) can be written as [38]
f hðhÞ ¼
αβγ2
A0hlΓðαÞΓðβÞ
αβh
A0hl

ðαþβ=2Þ1
 G3;0
1;3
αβ
A0hl h 1  αþβ
2 þ γ2
 αþβ
2
þ γ2, αβ
2 , βα
2

#
:
"
ð39Þ
The average BER, P(e), in terms of Ph(h) can be expressed as [38]
PðeÞ ¼
ð∞
0
PðejhÞf hðhÞdh:
ð40Þ
Figure 14 shows the average BER in terms of the average SNR for BPSK over different values
of turbulence strength. In this analysis, only the atmospheric turbulence effect is assumed
Figure 14. Average BER versus SNR for BPSK under different turbulence conditions.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
31

when Eq. (40) is considered. The atmospheric turbulence parameters α∈(4.34, 4.05, 5.98,
204.64), β ∈(1.31, 1.98, 4.40, 196.03), and σ2
l ∈(4.00, 1.50, 0.50, 0.01), which represent weak to
strong turbulence conditions, are employed in order to estimate the system BER perfor-
mance. It is observed that the SNR required to achieve a specific BER increases with an
increase in the atmospheric turbulence strength. For instance to achieve a BER of 106 in a
channel with σ2
l ¼ 0:01, the required SNR is about 18 dB; however, for fading strength of
σ2
l ¼ 0:50, the required SNR increases to 28 dB. Furthermore, at this BER, for σ2
l ¼ 0:01 and
σ2
l ¼ 0:50 additional 2 and 12 dB, respectively, are required compared to the ideal channel in
which there is no turbulence. This shows that the BER increases as turbulence strength
becomes stronger.
4.2. Ergodic channel capacity
The channel capacity is one of the main performance metrics in the design of FSO systems that
needs significant attention. The capacity of a multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) FSO
system with M lasers and N photodetectors in bits/s/Hz can be expressed as [34]
C ¼ log2 det IM þ γinst
M R


h
i
,
ð41Þ
where R ¼
HH† if N < M
H†H if N ≤M

, H denotes an N  M channel state matrix, ()† corresponds to the
Hermitian transpose, IM is an M  M identity matrix, and γinst ¼ η2
eh2=N0 denotes the instan-
taneous electrical SNR whose average ξa ¼ η2
eE〈h〉2=N0.
It is worth noting that there are a number of viable approaches for the estimation of ergodic
capacity of the MIMO FSO link. One of such is the numerical integration approach.
4.2.1. Numerical integration approach
The ergodic capacity, Cerg, of MIMO FSO link can be defined by the expected value of the
instantaneous mutual information C, between the transmit and receive apertures. Hence, the
Cerg of FSO system is a random variable and a function of SNR. The Cerg can be expressed
as [34, 35, 43]
Cerg ≜E〈C〉¼
ð∞
0
log2ð1 þ γinstÞf γinstðγinstÞdγinst,
ð42Þ
where EðÞ denotes the expectation operator and f γinstðγinstÞ is the pdf of γinst.
It should be noted that most of the models for ergodic capacity evaluation are based on
numerical integration. However, integration-based approach requires comparatively more
computational time. This is even more challenging in the strong turbulence regimes analysis.
This consequence can be attributed to the Bessel function that is usually expressed in terms
of the Meijer’s G-function for easier evaluation [34]. In Refs. [34] and [35], computational-
efficient approaches are presented in order to reduce the associated high computational time
Optical Communication Technology
32

of the integration-based approach. This enables faster performance evaluation over a wide
range of SNR.
4.2.2. Power series approach
Considering the power series representation, the ergodic channel capacity can be expressed
as [35]
〈C〉¼ f ðXÞ ¼ ψAða0 þ a1X þ a2X 2 þ a3X 3Þ,
ð43Þ
where ψ ¼ π=4 and A ¼ minfM, Ng represent the minimum number of transmit or receive
apertures, X ¼ k1γ, k1 is a coefficient whose value is one and the unit is in b/s/Hz, and an
represents the coefficient of the nth term given by [35]
a0 ¼ 0:13πk1R,
ð44Þ
a1 ¼ 0:66R,
ð45Þ
a2 ¼ 1:45  103R,
ð46Þ
a3 ¼  1:73  105R,
ð47Þ
where R ¼ πexp ðσ2
R  σ2
NÞ.
4.2.3. Spatial interpolation lookup approach
The spatial approach is based on B-spline and Barycentric Lagrange interpolation lookup table
(B2LUT). With the B-spline interpolated LUT, the capacity of MIMO FSO system can be
expressed as [34]
C

SNRjðM,N,σ2
NÞ

¼
X
m1
t¼1
X
m2
r¼1
X
m3
p¼1
ωðSNRjσ2
NIp, ⋯, IpþhÞ
 ψðSNRjNDr, ⋯, DrþℓÞφðSNRjMSt, ⋯, StþsÞMt,r,p,
ð48Þ
where I ¼ ðIp, ⋯, IpþhÞ, D ¼ ðDr, ⋯, DrþℓÞ, and S ¼ ðSt, ⋯, StþsÞ are the knot sequences,
ðMt,r,p : t ¼ 1;⋯, m1; r ¼ 1;⋯, m2; p ¼ 1;⋯, m3Þ are coefficients array, and ωðÞ, ψðÞ, φðÞ are the
univariate piecewise B-spline for M, N, and σ2
N, respectively.
Another main figure of merit for characterizing the communication link performance is the
achievable average (ergodic) channel capacity. Figure 15 shows the average channel capacity
of FSO link as a function of average electrical SNR for different values of turbulence strength.
The atmospheric turbulence parameters σ2
N ∈
(0.0120, 0.1486, 0.2078) result in C2
N ∈
(6:03  1016m2=3; 7:62  1015m2=3; 1:09  1014m2=3), which correspond to the weak, mod-
erate, and strong turbulence conditions, respectively. Moreover, the capacity of the
nonturbulent channel condition (no fading) is presented for benchmarking. Obviously, the
ergodic capacity of FSO link significantly depends on the atmospheric turbulence strength.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
33

Comparatively, the ergodic channel capacity for weak turbulence condition is considerably
more than in the cases of moderate and strong turbulence conditions. Moreover, the channel
condition with no fading offers the highest capacity. This shows that the atmospheric
turbulence-induced fading results in severe impairment on the FSO link performance. This
can eventually result in recurrent link failures. Consequently, optical wireless technologies are
not as reliable as the conventional optical fiber technologies. In order to address the challenges,
innovative technologies can be employed to enhance the system performance.
5. Technologies for performance enhancement
FSO is a promising optical technology that can be employed for different application. How-
ever, the tradeoff between the required high data rates and the limitations of atmospheric
channel is the major challenge for reliable implementation of FSO technologies in the access
networks [35]. Therefore, the problems inhibit the FSO system from being an effective and
reliable standalone fronthaul technology. In this section, schemes like hybrid RF/FSO and
relay-assisted transmission technologies that can be implemented to enhance the performance
of FSO technology in the access networks are presented.
5.1. Hybrid RF/FSO technology
It should be noted that RF wireless technologies that operate above approximately 10-GHz
frequencies are adversely affected by rain, whereas fog has insignificant effect on them. On the
other hand, FSO systems are highly susceptible to fog, whereas the effect of rain on them is
negligible. Therefore, it is of high importance to improve the link reliability to alleviate the
adverse effects of the meteorological and weather conditions. An attractive way of addressing
Figure 15. Average channel capacity of FSO link versus average electrical SNR.
Optical Communication Technology
34

the challenge is a simultaneous employment of an RF link and the FSO link for transmission. It
is remarkable that fog and rain rarely occur concurrently in nature. Consequently, the two
links can function in a complementary way. This concept influences the hybrid RF/FSO
scheme. The RF/FSO is a hybrid scheme that combines the benefits of the inherent high
transmission capacity of optical technologies and the ease of deployment of wireless links.
Moreover, the idea of hybrid RF/FSO system is to concurrently attend to the related drawbacks
and take advantages of both technologies. This will help in the reliable transmission of hetero-
geneous wireless services [8, 24].
In a hybrid RF/FSO technology, there are two parallel links between the transmitter and the
receiver. Moreover, subject to deployment scenario and application, both parallel links of the
hybrid technology have the capability to transmit data. Nevertheless, based on the weather
conditions as well as the EMI levels, either of the links can be used for data transmission [44].
For instance, under adverse atmospheric condition (i.e., fog), the hybrid RF/FSO scheme
ensures that the RF link serves as a back-up in case of FSO link outage. However, the resultant
data rate of the RF link is less than that of the actual FSO link [8, 24]
5.2. Relay-assisted FSO transmission
A realistic approach for turbulence-induced fading mitigation is spatial diversity technique. In
this technique, multiple transmit/receive apertures are employed in order to create and exploit
additional degrees of freedom in the spatial domain. The spatial diversity is an appealing
technique for fading mitigation because of its typical redundancy. However, the utilization of
multiple apertures presents different challenges such as an increase in the system complexity
as well as cost. In addition, the distance between the apertures has to be large enough in order
to inhibit detrimental effects of spatial correlation. A simplified way of implementing spatial
diversity is the dual-hop relaying which has been considerably employed in the RF communi-
cation systems. The dual-hop relaying implementation helps substantially in extending the
network coverage area as well as improving the quality of the receive signal [45].
Furthermore, the concept of relay-assisted transmission is based on creating a virtual multiple-
aperture system in order to realize advantages of MIMO techniques. This is achieved by
exploiting both RF and FSO characteristics in order to have an efficient system in a real-life
situation. Additionally, a relay-assisted transmission is also known as a mixed RF/FSO dual-
hop communication scheme. The dual-hop entails the links from the source to the relay which
are RF links and the links between the relay and the destination which are FSO links. In
essence, RF transmission is utilized at one hop and FSO transmission is employed at the other.
It is remarkable that, in principle, the mixed RF/FSO dual-hop relay scheme is comparatively
different from the hybrid RF/FSO technology. In the latter, parallel RF and FSO links are
normally used for the same path [45]. Furthermore, in the mixed RF/FSO dual-hop scheme,
the main purpose of the FSO link is to enable the RF users to communicate with the backbone
network. This helps bridging the connectivity gap between the backbone and the last-mile
access networks [42, 46].
The mixed RF/FSO dual-hop model efficiently addresses the last-mile transmission bottleneck
of the system. This is achieved by enabling multiplexing of multiple users with RF capabilities
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
35

as well as their aggregation in a particular high-speed FSO link so as to exploit the inherent
optical capacity [42, 45]. Moreover, this implementation stalls any form of interference due to
the fact that RF and FSO operate on completely different frequency bands. Therefore, the
mixed RF/FSO dual-hop model offers better performance compared to the traditional RF/RF
transmission system [45, 46]. In a mixed RF/FSO system, the source comprises multiple RF
users, each equipped with an antenna. Furthermore, at the destination, there is an FSO detec-
tor that is equipped with an aperture. In addition, the source and the destination are connected
by a relay that is usually mounted on a high platform. The relay node performs RF to FSO
conversion. Also, the relay has a receive antenna and a transmit aperture that are assigned for
the RF signal reception and optical signal transmission, respectively.
6. Channel measurement and characterization
In this section, the performance of an FSO link subjected to a real atmospheric turbulence
condition is investigated experimentally. The σ2
N is measured from the channel samples
obtained so as to determine the degree of atmospheric turbulence and the subsequent effects
on the FSO link quality. Furthermore, the C2
n can be calculated as explained in Section 3.
6.1. Experimental setup
The experimental setup shown in Figure 16 is employed in the channel measurement. The
setup consists of a point-to-point FSO link that is based on IM/DD technique. The pattern
generator uses a pseudorandom binary sequence (PRBS) of length 223 – 1 bits to generate a 10-
Gb/s non-return-to-zero (NRZ) signal. Also, the produced electrical signal is then injected into
a JDSU Integrated Laser Mach Zehnder (ILMZ) drives at 1548.51-nm wavelength. A standard
single-mode fiber (SSMF) is used to convey the optical output signal launched from the laser to
a 3-mm diameter collimator. The optical power at the input of collimator is set to 0 dBm. The
collimated laser beam is subsequently transmitted over the FSO channel with a round trip
length of 54 m. Figure 16 inset depicts an outdoor FSO setup employed in the measurement.
The overall transmission distance is achieved when the optical signal from collimator 1 passes
Figure 16. Experimental setup. The inset presents the picture of outdoor FSO setup, ILMZ: Integrated Laser Mach
Zehnder.
Optical Communication Technology
36

through the FSO channel to the mirror with a beam diameter of about 2 cm located at the other
side of the link that is 27 m long, and then reflected back to the collimator 2 at the receiver with
approximately its initial diameter. The collimator is made of a concave mirror, in order to
lessen beam scattering and considerably maximize the power transfer. The converged received
optical signal at the receiver then focuses on the laser collimator which is coupled to the
photodetector by the SSMF. The resulting optical signal is then converted into electrical signal
using a 10-Gb/s PIN photodiode. The PIN is followed by a real-time sampling oscilloscope
(Tektronix: DPO72004B) with a sample rate of 50 GS/s.
6.2. Experimental results
The results of FSO channel samples collected from November 9 to 20, 2015, for characterization
are presented. The data obtained on November 12, 2015, at 01:45 pm and 09:30 pm are
analyzed in this work. The recorded weather conditions are as follows:
1.
Scenario 1: 01:45 pm
Temperature, 22C; wind, 6 mph; humidity, 69%; pressure, 1031 mb; visibility, 10 km;
precipitation, 0 mm; and rain rate, 0%.
2.
Scenario 2: 09:30 pm
Temperature, 17C; wind, 4 mph; humidity, 80%; pressure, 1030 mb; visibility, 9 km;
precipitation, 0 mm; and rain rate, 0%.
The FSO channel measurement is realized by injecting an unmodulated optical wave that
emanates from the laser into the FSO channel. The FSO channel brings about a path loss with
Figure 17. Histogram of normalized irradiance with log-normal and gamma-gamma fits under different scintillation
index values.
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
37

a mean value of 9 dB, for the setup and the atmospheric conditions. Using statistical means, the
resultant signal detected and received by the real-time oscilloscope is analyzed offline using
MATLAB®.
The characterization of the refractive-index structure parameter C2
n is achieved by fitting the
nearest LN and the ΓΓ pdf curves to the pdf of the received data. The fittings are presented in
Figure 17. The scintillation index σ2
N is measured for the two scenarios considered. The values
obtained are 0.0135 and 0.2078 for 09:30 pm and 01:45 pm, respectively. For the first scenario with
σ2
N ¼ 0:0135, the LN and the ΓΓ fit very well with the measured channel samples σ2
N. However,
when σ2
N ¼ 0:2078, the LN fitting is loose and unable to give an accurate result for the fading
model, whereas the ΓΓ fitting still maintains a relatively better result for the fading model. This
result shows that the LN model is unsuitable for the strong atmospheric fading characterization.
Furthermore, the estimated values of the refractive-index structure parameters, C2
n, are
6:7807  1016m2=3 (σ2
N ¼ 0:0135) and 1:0864  1014m2=3 (σ2
N ¼ 0:2078). Therefore, the first
(σ2
N ¼ 0:2078) and the second (σ2
N ¼ 0:0135) scenarios correspond to the strong and weak
turbulence regimes, respectively.
7. Real-time coherent PON OWC based on dual polarization for the mobile
backhaul/fronthaul
In this section, proof-of-concept gigabit-capable long-reach coherent PON and OWC systems
with the ability to support different applications over a shared optical fiber infrastructure are
experimentally implemented. This is in an effort to demonstrate the FSO application in certain
areas in the mobile cellular systems in which physical connections by means of optical fiber
cables are impractical or in rural area that lacks fiber infrastructure. Moreover, this is achieved
by a reconfigurable real-time DSP reception of a dual-polarization-quadrature phase shift
keying (DP-QPSK) signal over the SSMF and FSO systems. It is worth noting that the system
is validated by a commercial field-programmable gate array (FPGA) in order to have an open
system whose components and protocols conform to standards independent of a particular
equipment vendor. In this analysis, we study signal transmission and reception over 100 km of
SSMF as well as over a hybrid 100 km of SSMF plus a 54-m outdoor FSO link. We are able to
establish the lowest sampling rate that is necessary for digital coherent PON by employing
four 1.25 Gsa/s ADCs with an electrical front-end receiver that offers just 1-GHz analog
bandwidth. This is realized by implementing a phase and polarization diversity coherent
receiver in conjunction with the DP-QPSK modulation formats. This technique is of high
importance in order to relax the required electrical digital units at the optical network unit
(ONU) toward the RF rates. This scheme also helps in realizing the anticipated data rate for the
next-generation coherent optical access networks for the 5G Mobile wireless networks.
7.1. Experimental setup
The experimental setup depicted in Figure 18a is used to validate the performance of a PON
system with hybrid fiber and FSO link using DP signals. It is worth mentioning that only the
Optical Communication Technology
38

receiver DSP of the setup is estimated in real time. At the OLT, the light from an external cavity
laser (ECL) (<100 kHz linewidth) is injected into an IQ modulator (IQM). The wavelength λ is
centered at ~1549 nm. The IQM is driven by a 65-Gsa/s arbitrary waveform generator (AWG)
that generates 625 Mbaud signals from a 212 – 1 pseudo random bit sequence (PRBS). The
subsequent signal is then digitally filtered using a raised-cosine (RC) filter with a 0.1-roll-off
factor and 32-taps FIR resolution in addition to a simple 3-taps FIR pre-emphasis subsystem.
The employed modulation format is the differential DP-QPSK, providing 2.5 Gb/s per end
user. The obtained spectrum is shown in Figure 18b.
In an effort to emulate the DP system, this signal is divided into two using an optical splitter.
Then, we applied a delay of 12 symbols to one of them for an effective decorrelation purposes.
Afterward, both polarized signals are multiplexed orthogonally once again using a polariza-
tion beam combiner (PBC). This implementation results in dual polarization of the signal. The
optical power is managed using variable optical attenuators (VOAs). This subsequent signal is
then propagated over 100 km of an SSMF and 54-m FSO. At the receiver side, the signal is
coherently detected using a 490 optical hybrid by means of a free-running ECL LO with
about 100-kHz linewidth tuned to the center channel, λ. The optical signal is converted to the
electrical domain using four balanced detectors (BDs) and then amplified by transimpedance
amplifiers (TIAs). This results in the in-phase and quadrature components of each polarization.
It is worth noting that only an output of the TIA is used. The signal is then filtered using a 1-
GHz low-pass filter and sampled by four 8-bit 1.25 Gsa/s ADCs. The digitalized signal is
conveyed to a Virtex-7 FPGA, where the entire post-detection 8-bit DSP in real time is
implemented. The applied DSP is based on [47]. The bit-error rate (BER) is calculated in real
time by bit error counting, averaged between the two polarizations.
In addition, we consider the possibility of an outdoor FSO communication link as part of the
system. The employed FSO link setup in this study is similar to that in Figure 16 that we have
Figure 18. (a) Experimental setup for 20625 Mbaud DP-QPSK signal; (b) Overall spectrum (PBS: polarization beam
splitter; BPD: balanced photodetector; CoRX: coherent receiver).
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
39

discussed in Section 6. The outdoor FSO link experiences a total loss of ~8–9 dBm. At the
collimator, the received signal is guided to an integrated phase- and polarization-diverse
coherent receiver.
7.2. Experimental results
Figure 19 illustrates receiver sensitivity in terms of BER measured for the DP-QPSK signal. The
figure presents results for the back-to-back (B2B) and 100 km of fiber scenarios as well as 100-
km plus 54-m FSO. The considered BER limit of 3.8103 corresponds to the 7% hard-decision
forward error correction (HD-FEC). As shown in Figure 19, there is no significant penalty
between 100 and 100-km plus FSO in real-time results.
8. Conclusions
In this chapter, we have presented various opportunities of using optical wireless communica-
tion technology for addressing the last-mile transmission bottleneck of the fixed/mobile net-
work. We have also discussed various challenges of the OWC and presented different
solutions in order to make OWC an efficient technology. In the proof-of-concept experiment,
we study the transmission capabilities of a PON based on DP signal in terms of receiver
sensitivity. This is implemented with the real-time ONU receiver that is emulated by a com-
mercial FPGA. This helps in facilitating an open system and hence enables interoperability,
portability, and open software standards. The transmissions over 100 km of SSMF as well as
over a hybrid 100 km of SSMF plus a 54-m outdoor FSO link are successfully realized consid-
ering 625 Mbaud DP-QPSK channel.
Figure 19. Receiver sensitivity in terms of BER measured for DP-QPSK signals.
Optical Communication Technology
40

Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the European Structural Investment Funds (ESIF), through the
Operational Competitiveness and Internationalization Programme (COMPETE 2020) under
FutPON project [Nr. 003145 (POCI-01 -0247-FEDER-003145)]. Also, it is funded by the Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia under the grants PD/BD/52590/2014 and FRH/BPD/110889/2015.
Author details
Isiaka Alimi*, Ali Shahpari, Artur Sousa, Ricardo Ferreira, Paulo Monteiro and
António Teixeira
*Address all correspondence to: iaalimi@ua.pt
Instituto de Telecomunicações, Department of Electronics, Telecommunications and
Informatics, Universidade de Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal
References
[1] Yu C, Yu L, Wu Y, He Y, Lu Q. Uplink scheduling and link adaptation for narrowband
internet of things systems. IEEE Access, 2017;5:1724–1734
[2] Ejaz W, Anpalagan A, Imran MA, Jo M, Naeem M, Qaisar SB, Wang W. Internet of things
(IoT) in 5G wireless communications. IEEE Access. 2016;4:10310–10314
[3] Alimi I, Shahpari A, Ribeiro V, Kumar N, Monteiro P, Teixeira A. Optical wireless communi-
cation for future broadband access networks. In: 2016 21st European Conference on Net-
works and Optical Communications (NOC); IEEE; Lisbon, Portugal. Jun 2016. pp. 124–128
[4] Parca G, Tavares A, Shahpari A, Teixeira A, Carrozzo V, Beleffi GT. FSO for broadband
multi service delivery in future networks. In: 2013 2nd International Workshop on Optical
Wireless Communications (IWOW); IEEE; Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Oct 2013. pp. 67–70
[5] Ghassemlooy Z, Popoola W, Rajbhandari S. Optical wireless Communications: System
and Channel Modelling with MATLAB®. Taylor & Francis; London, New York: 2012
[6] Ghassemlooy Z, Amon S, Uysal M, Xu Z, Cheng J. Emerging optical wireless communications-
advances and challenges. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. Sep 2015;33
(9):1738–1749
[7] Alkholidi AG, Altowij KS. Free Space Optical Communications—Theory and Practices,
Contemporary Issues in Wireless Communications. InTech; 2014. pp. 159–212
[8] Khalighi MA, Uysal M. Survey on free space optical communication: A communication
theory perspective. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 2014;16(4):2231–2258
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
41

[9] Bloom S, Korevaar E, Schuster J, Willebrand H. Understanding the performance of free-
space optics [Invited]. Journal of Optical Network. Jun 2003;2(6):178–200
[10] Kaushal H, Kaddoum G. Optical communication in space: Challenges and mitigation
techniques. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 2017;19(1)57–96
[11] Zeng Z, Fu S, Zhang H, Dong Y, Cheng J. A survey of underwater optical wireless
communications. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials. 2017;19(1):204–238
[12] Pompili D, Akyildiz IF. Overview of networking protocols for underwater wireless com-
munications. IEEE Communications Magazine. Jan 2009;47(1):97–102
[13] Sevincer A, Bhattarai A, Bilgi M, Yuksel M, Pala N. FIGHTNETs: Smart FIGHTing and
mobile optical wireless NETworks—A survey. IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials.
Fourth 2013;15(4):1620–1641
[14] Rajagopal S, Roberts RD, Pirn SK. IEEE 802.15.7 visible light communication: Modulation
schemes and dimming support. IEEE Communications Magazine. Mar 2012;50(3):72–82
[15] Ying K, Yu Z, Baxley RJ, Qian H, Chang GK, Zhou GT. Nonlinear distortion mitigation in
visible light communications. IEEE Wireless Communications. Apr 2015;22(2):36–45
[16] Yang F, Gao J. Dimming control scheme with high power and spectrum efficiency for
visible light communications. IEEE Photonics Journal. Feb 2017;9(1):1–12
[17] Pinterest. Color wavelength frequency. Feb 2017. [Online]. Available from: https://www.
pinterest.com/pin/408983209884752740/.
[18] Wang M, Wu J, Yu W, Wang H, Fi J, Shi J, Fuo C. Efficient coding modulation and
seamless rate adaptation for visible light communications. IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions. Apr 2015;22(2):86–93
[19] ANDY. Visible Light Communication—VLC & PUREVLC™. February 2017 [Online]. Avail-
able from: http://andy96877.blogspot.pt/p/visible-light-communication-vlc-is-data.html
[20] Jan SU, Fee YD, Koo I. Comparative analysis of DIPPM scheme for visible light commu-
nications. In: 2015 International Conference on Emerging Technologies (ICET); IEEE;
Peshawar, Pakistan. Dec 2015. pp. 1–5
[21] Tsouri GR, Zambito SR, Venkataraman J. On the benefits of creeping wave antennas in
reducing interference between neighboring wireless body area networks. IEEE Transac-
tions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems. Feb 2017;11(1):153–160
[22] Zhang R, Moungla H, Yu J, Mehaoua A. Medium access for concurrent traffic in wireless
body area networks: Protocol design and analysis. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Tech-
nology. Mar 2017;66(3):2586–2599
[23] Cahyadi WA, Jeong TI, Kim YH, Chung YH, Adiono T. Patient monitoring using visible
light uplink data transmission. In: 2015 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal
Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS); IEEE; Nusa Dua, Indonesia. Nov
2015. pp. 431–434
Optical Communication Technology
42

[24] Uysal M, Capsoni C, Ghassemlooy Z, Boucouvalas A, Udvary E. Optical wireless com-
munications: An emerging technology. Signals and Communication Technology. Springer
International Publishing; Switzerland: 2016
[25] Baister G, Gatenby PV. Pointing, acquisition and tracking for optical space communica-
tions. Electronics Communication Engineering Journal. Dec 1994;6(6):271–280
[26] Toyoshima M. Trends in satellite communications and the role of optical free-space
communications [Invited]. Journal of Optical Networking. Jun 2005;4(6):300–311
[27] D’Amico M, Feva A, Micheli B. Free-space optics communication systems: First results
from a pilot field-trial in the surrounding area of Milan, Italy. IEEE Microwave and Wireless
Components Letters. Aug 2003;13(8)505–307
[28] Song D-Y, Hurh Y-S, Cho J-W, Lim J-H, Fee D-W, Fee J-S, Chung Y. 4  10 Gb/s terrestrial
optical free space transmission over 1.2 km using an EDFA preamplifier with 100 GHz
channel spacing. Optics Express. Oct 2000;7(8):280–284
[29] Carlson RT, Paciorek S. Environmental Qualification and Field Test Results for the
SONAbeam™155 and 622. Technical Report, fSONA Communications Corp. 2017;
http://www.fsona.com/tech/white_papers/tech_qual-test.pdf
[30] Bandera P. Defining a Common Standard for Evaluating and Comparing Free-Space
Optical Products. Technical Report, fSONA Communications Corp. 2017; http://www.
fsona.com/tech/white_papers/WHTPAP-Generalized_Link_Margin.pdf
[31] LightPointe. Ultra-Low Latency Point-to-Point Wireless Bridge. White Paper, [Online]. Avail-
able from: http://nebula.wsimg.com/793e82b2beac48cb90c347bd86776d12?AccessKeyId=C1
431E109BF92B03DF85&disposition=0&alloworigin=1.
[32] Wang Z, Zhong WD, Fu S, Fin C. Performance comparison of different modulation
formats over free-space optical (FSO) turbulence links with space diversity reception
technique. IEEE Photonics Journal. Dec 2009;l(6):277–285
[33] Navidpour SM, Uysal M, Kavehrad M. BER performance of free-space optical transmis-
sion with spatial diversity. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications. Aug 2007;6
(8):2813–2819
[34] Alimi IA, Abdalla AM, Rodriguez J, Monteiro PP, Teixeira AF. Spatial interpolated
lookup tables (FUTs) models for ergodic capacity of MIMO FSO systems. IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters. Apr 2017;29(7)583–586
[35] Alimi I, Shahpari A, Ribeiro V, Sousa A, Monteiro P, Teixeira A. Channel characterization
and empirical model for ergodic capacity of free-space optical communication link.
Optics Communications. 2017;390:123–129
[36] Naboulsi MA, Sizun H, de Fornel F. Fog attenuation prediction for optical and infrared
waves. Optical Engineering. 2004;43(2):519–329
[37] Farid AA, Hranilovic S. Outage capacity optimization for free-space optical links with
pointing errors. Journal of Lightwave Technology. Jul 2007;25(7):1702–1710
Challenges and Opportunities of Optical Wireless Communication Technologies
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69113
43

[38] Sandalidis HG, Tsiftsis TA, Karagiannidis GK. Optical wireless communications with het-
erodyne detection over turbulence channels with pointing errors. Journal of Lightwave
Technology. Oct 2009;27(20):4440–4445
[39] Andrews FC, Phillips RF. Laser Beam Propagation through Random Media. Press Mono-
graphs. SPIE Press; Bellingham, Washington USA. 2005
[40] Kiasaleh K. Performance of APD-based, PPM free-space optical communication systems in
atmospheric turbulence. IEEE Transactions on Communications. Sep 2005;53(9):1455–1461
[41] Jurado-Navas A, Garrido-Balsells JM, Paris JF, Puerta-Notario A. A Unifying Statistical
Model for Atmospheric Optical Scintillation. InTech; Rijeka, Croatia. 2011. pp. 181–206
[42] Yang F, Hasna MO, Gao X. Performance of mixed RF/FSO with variable gain over
generalized atmospheric channels. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication.
Sep 2015;33(9):1913–1924
[43] Peppas KP, Stassinakis AN, Topalis GK, Nistazakis HE, Tombras GS. Average capacity of
optical wireless communication systems over I-K atmospheric turbulence channels. IEEE/
OSA Journal of Optical Communications and Networking. Dec 2012;4(12):1026–1032
[44] Dahrouj H, Douik A, Rayal F, Al-Naffouri TY, Alouini MS. Cost-effective hybrid RF/FSO
backhaul solution for next generation wireless systems. IEEE Wireless Communications.
Oct 2015;22(5):98–104
[45] Zhang J, Dai F, Zhang Y, Wang Z. Unified performance analysis of mixed radio
frequency/free-space optical dual-hop transmission systems. Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology. Jun 2015;33(11):2286–2293
[46] Ansari IS, Yilmaz F, Alouini MS. Impact of pointing errors on the performance of mixed RF/
FSO dual-hop transmission systems. IEEE Wireless Communications Letters. Jun 2013;2(3)
551–354
[47] Ferreira RM, Shahpari A, Reis JD, Teixeira AF. Coherent UDWDM-PON with dual-
polarization transceivers in real-time. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. Jun 2017;29
(11):909–912
Optical Communication Technology
44

Chapter 3
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical
Communication
Waleed Tariq Sethi, Hamsakutty Vettikalladi,
Habib Fathallah and Mohamed Himdi
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
Abstract
Dielectric resonator antennas (DRA) are ceramic based materials that are nonmetallic in
nature. They offer high permitivity values (εr: 10-100). DRAs’ have made their mark in
various applications specially in the microwave and millimeter wave (MMW) spectrum,
and are making encouraging progress in the THz band, because of their low conduction
losses and higher radiation efficiencies compared to their metallic counterparts. With the
advancements in nano fabrication, metallic antennas designed in the THz band have
taken an interest. These antennas are termed as optical antennas or nantennas. Optical
antennas work by receiving the incident electromagnetic wave or light and focusing it
on a certain point or hot spot. Since most of the antennas are metallic based with Noble
metals as radiators, the conducting losses are huge. One solution that we offer in this
work is to integrate the nantennas with DRs. Two different DR based designs, one
triangular and other hexagonal, are presented. Both the antennas operate in the optical
C-band window (1550 nm). We design, perform numerical analysis, simulate, and
optimize the proposed DR nantennas. We also consider array synthesis of the proposed
nantennas in evaluating how much directive the nantennas are for use in nano network
applications.
Keywords: dielectric resonator (DR), optical nanoantenna, hexagonal DR nantenna,
triangular nantenna, optical communication C-window
1. Introduction
Over the last few years, with the introduction of various portable and wireless handheld devices,
a surge in mobile and internet data traffic has been observed. This drastic increase is also effected

by the way our society creates, shares and consumes information on a regular basis. These
abundant data and information sharing also demand for increase in delivery time. High data
rate communication with compact size of device is the new norm in technology. Researchers and
industry are working at a fast pace to fulfil their consumers demands. It is estimated that
wireless data rates are getting doubled every year and are quickly approaching the provided
capacity of the wired communication systems [1–5]. Following this trend, systems working at
higher data rates are needed. Although millimetre waves and 60 GHz radio [6–9] currently
provide a solution and are being implemented in 5G applications, still researchers have to think
ahead of time. The electromagnetic spectrum has a lot of bands to offer in terms of wide
bandwidth. One section of the spectrum that has not been explored completely in the Terahertz
(THz) band can offer communication in the Terabit-per-second (Tbps) domain. These (Tbps)
links can be realised over the next 10 years. Terahertz band communication [10–14] is intended
as a key wireless technology to satisfy this growing demand of bandwidth-hungry devices with
requirements of higher data rates. Since THz band is in the early exploring phase, a lot of
revisions and new standards have to be designed for the systems operating at these higher bands
of the electromagnetic spectrum (ultraviolet band-infrared band). Special considerations have to
be made in the design of transmission and receiving portion of the THz system [15].
Antenna is an important component of any wireless system. For the antenna to be designed at this
higher end of the spectrum (THz band), special tools are needed from its realisation to character-
isation. The antennas designed at this spectrum are termed as optical nanoantennas [16]. Optical
nanoantennas work on the operating principle that the electromagnetic (EM) wave or the light
wave received can be controlled or placed into localised energy spots pertaining to the design of
the nanoantenna. This property of the optical nanoantennas have gained immense interest from
the research point of view as it can be applied to various fields of applications, such as spectros-
copy, sensing, photodetection, metasurfaces, medicine, photovoltaics and energy-harvesting
applications[17–20]. With the advancements in nanotechnology fabrication, the nanoantennas
designed at THz band can be realised. Nanotechnology is a fast-growing research area that
marked use of machines that can fabricate nanocomponents. It is considered as an enabling
technology for a set of applications in biomedical, environmental and military fields as shown in
Figure 1. Being inherently simple and performing primitive operations only, nanomachines in
isolation are not expected to manage advanced tasks. To enable more complex applications such
as intra-body drug delivery or cooperative environment sensing, the exchange of information and
commands between networking entities and/or external controller is required. The need for
coordination and information sharing naturally leads towards the concept of nanonetworks. One
promising way to enable networking capabilities is to use wireless communications between
nanomachines [21] made possible with optical nanoantennas fabricated on these machines.
Optical nanoantennas present some similarities with their radio frequency (RF) counterparts,
yet there still exists some major difference. The main challenge arises from the fabrication
tolerances at nanoscales and from the drastic deviation of metals from perfect conductors to
lossy plasmonic materials at optical frequencies [22]. This is usually described as the well-
known dispersive plasmonic effects and results in a significant decrease of radiation efficiency
caused by conduction losses. These losses can be theoretically explained via different models at
Optical Communication Technology
46

specific frequencies with mostly known models such as Drude and Lorrentz model [23, 24]. One
solution that is proposed in this chapter to cope with these metallic losses at high frequencies and
to fully utilise the properties of metallic nanostructures is to design resonators or absorbers made
with dielectric-based materials such as ceramics.
The idea of using antennas based on dielectric resonators (DR) was first proposed by Long
et al. in 1983 [25], and since then the research into this novel idea is steadily increasing among
the antenna researchers. The operation of DRAs as radiators exploit the ‘radiation losses’ of
dielectric resonators made of moderate to high relative permittivity (5 < εr < 100) when excited
in their lower order resonant modes in an open environment. Over the years, various aspects
of DR antennas have been published and designs patented [26, 27]. Most notable publications
are seen at the antennas operating as filters and circuits integrators at the microwave regime due
to their compact size and high resistibility to losses. One striking feature of DR resonators is that
they are immune to ohmic losses, which drastically appear at higher frequencies (bands above
millimetre waves till far infrared), making them suitable candidates for optical nanoantennas.
DRs are very efficient radiators compared to metallic antennas even at higher frequencies [28]. In
this context, the work presented in this chapter focuses on integrating the resilient DR with
metallic nanoelements for operating at THz band. The losses incurred due to appearing of
Figure 1. Applications for terahertz band (nanoscale antennas) [15].
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
47

plasmonics inside the metal elements are subsided with the integration of various DR-shaped
resonating elements. The results presented in the later sections validate the selection of DR as a
suitable candidate and replacement to traditional metallic resonators working at higher THz
band.
2. State-of-the-art antennas
Optical nanoantennas are an attractive area for research in the field of optics and
nanophotonics. With the advent of nanofabrication machines, the antennas designed at the
lower RF and microwave millimetre wave (MMW) domains can now be scaled up to the THz
domain. Thus, some of the properties and analysis obtained for antenna designs at the lower
band can be applied to higher bands. To study the effects and analyse the current distributions
on the optical nanoantennas, a new branch of physics emerged known as nanophotonics.
Nanophotonics studies the transmission and reception of optical signals by submicron and
even nanometre-sized objects. For nanooptics, it is important to efficiently detect and direct the
transmitting signals for optical information between nanoelements. The sources and detectors
of radiation in nanooptics are nanoelements themselves, their clusters and even individual
molecules (atoms, ions). Nano objects functioning as antennas must exhibit high radiation
efficiency and directivity [29, 30]. Most of the nanoantennas existing in the literature are based
on plasmonic metallic structures (Figure 2). In Ref. [31], dipole nanoantennas exhibit the
electric field localisation at certain spots, whereas the bowtie nanoantennas presented in Ref.
[32] present broadband characteristics; and in Ref. [33], Yagi-Uda displays high directive
nature which can be useful for nanonetwork communication among nanoscaled devices.
Similarly in Refs. [34, 35], plasmonic nanoantennas provide enhanced and controllable light-
matter interactions and strong coupling between far-field radiation and localised sources at the
nanoscale. In Refs. [36, 37], magneto-plasmonic response of the nanoantennas is observed
when ferromagnetic metals are driven not only by light but also by external magnetic fields.
The authors observed that the magneto-plasmonic nanoantennas enhance the magneto-optical
effects, which introduces additional degrees of freedom in the control of light at the nanoscale.
However, regardless of various advantages of plasmonic nanoantennas associated with their
small size and strong localisation of the electric field, such nanoantennas have large dissipative
losses resulting in low radiation efficiency.
To alleviate this conduction loss phenomenon, we propose a combination of DR and plasmonic
metallic-based optical nanoantennas. Literature review shows some of the existing designs
that perform well when working with DRs. Since DR offers high dielectric constant and
refractive index values of the materials, the losses are minimised and subsided when inte-
grated or placed with metallic resonators. In rest of the sections, we detail the proposed DR-
based nanoantenna designs with simulated results. The enhancement in the directivity of the
nanoantenna is also discussed by implementing an array structure of 1  2 ETDRNA elements.
Also, the tunability of the nanoantenna array is discussed. Finally, the chapter ends with the
conclusion section discussing the presented results based on selected DR design geometries.
Optical Communication Technology
48

Although we know that realization of any device is the ultimate proof of its operation, but at
these very high THz frequencies it is difficult to have them fabricated as per limitations in
fabrication resources. Secondly, our proposed designs are very small in dimensions (as will be
discussed in later sections) to be realized currently with the exiting nano fabrication tools.
Therefore we present the simulated designs using two different DR based resonators that we
think will be viable candidates for designers and researchers who are in need of antenna
designs having minimum losses and better radiation characteristics in the optical communica-
tion C-band at 1550 nm.
3. Equilateral triangular dielectric resonator nantenna
In this section, we present the simulated design and analysis of an equilateral triangular
dielectric resonator nantenna (ETDRNA). The proposed nantenna is composed of a multilayer
‘Ag-SiO2-Ag’ structure with noble metal silver (Ag) working as a feed transmission line. The
dielectric triangular is made of silicon (Si) material and is excited via coupling mechanism
from the feed line. The antenna yields a wide impedance bandwidth of 2.58% (192.3–197.3
THz) with a high directive radiation pattern of 8.6 dBi at 193.5 THz (1550 nm) with an end-fire
radiation pattern.
Figure 2. Different types of plasmonic nanoantennas: (a) complex connection, (b) bowtie, (c) dipole nanowires, (d) spiral
sensor, (e) bowtie sensors and (f) rectangular patches [38].
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
49

3.1. Antenna geometry
Figure 3 shows the configuration (cross-sectional and front view) of the proposed equilateral
triangular dielectric resonator nantenna (ETDRNA). The nanoantenna is designed to operate
as a receiving antenna that can capture energy from the free space. The operating band of
interest lies in the standard optical communication band at a wavelength of 1550 nm, which
corresponds to central frequency of 193.5 THz. From the geometric configuration presented in
Figure 3, the design follows a basic multilayer substrate approach. A silicon substrate (Si)
having an oxide layer (O2) is sandwiched between two conducting materials layers. The SiO2
substrate has properties of thickness of h1 = 0.150 μm, εr = 2.09 and loss tangent tan δ = 0 [39].
The partial conducting material below the substrate acts as a ground plane. Its dimensions and
Figure 3. Antenna geometry of proposed nantenna design based on equilateral triangular DR (ETDRNA): (a) cross-
sectional view; (b) front view.
Optical Communication Technology
50

thickness are Wg  Lg having a thickness of t = 0.010 μm. The nanoantenna is fed via a feed line
placed on the top side of the substrate. It has geometric dimensions and thickness of Wf  Lf; h2
= 0.025 μm. The ground and the nanostrip are made up of noble metal silver (Ag). The
dimensions of the substrate are taken as W  L = 5  5 μm2. The resonator, made from (Si),
placed on top of the feed line is made from dielectric material. It has the shape of an equilateral
triangle with properties as εr = 11.9 and estimated loss tangent tan δ = 0.003 at 100 THz [40].
The nanoantenna is excited and matched considering 50 Ω impedance source. In order to
control the matching at the central frequency of 193.5 THz and to achieve a wide bandwidth
with acceptable radiation patterns, the same (SiO2) substrate material with thickness h3 = 0.015
μm has been introduced between the equilateral triangle and the nanostrip. The dimensions of
the equilateral triangular dielectric are calculated from Eq. (1) [41, 42].
f mnl ¼
c
2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
εr
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
4
3a

2
þ
p
h
 2
s
2
4
3
5
1=2
ð1Þ
where ‘a’ is the side length of the equilateral triangular DRA, εr is the dielectric constant of the
DRA, ‘h’ is two times the height of the triangular DRA to account for the image effect of the
ground plane and p = 1 for the fundamental mode [42]. For a low-profile triangular DRA, we
have a >> h, and therefore Eq. (2) demonstrates that the frequency is predominantly deter-
mined by the height of the DRA:
f r ¼
c
4h
ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
εr
p
ð2Þ
where h and εr are the height and dielectric constant of triangular DRA.
Metals working in the optical regime are faced with another loss. This loss appears as negative
permittivity, therefore complex permittivity εAg of the metals, in our case silver (Ag), is calcu-
lated from Eq. (3) explained by the Drude model which is based upon kinetic theory of electron
gas in solids [39]:
εAg ¼ εo
ε∝
f p2
½f ðf þ iγÞ
(
)
¼ 129:17 þ j3:28:
ð3Þ
where εo = 8.85  1012 [F/m], ε∝= 5, plasmonic frequency fp = 1.41e16 rad/s, f = central
frequency and collision frequency γ= 2.98e13. The plasmonic frequency, which appears after
the photon and free electron gas collision, defines the collective motion of the electrons and can
be expressed as follows:
f p ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ne2=ε0m
p
ð4Þ
where n is electron concentration, e is the free electron charge (1.6  1019 C), ε0 is the free
space (vacuum) permittivity (8.854  1012 F/m) and m is the electron effective mass. From
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
51

Eq. (4), the behaviour of arriving EM wave to the metal can be deduced. For f < fp corresponds
to and exponential decay field, EM wave will be reflected back and will not propagate through
the metal. On the other hand, if f > fp, the EM wave will behave as a travelling wave and will
pass through the metals. Similarly, the collision or damping factor describes the losses within
the metal and can be expressed as:
γ ¼ e
µm
ð5Þ
where μ is mobility of free carriers. The proposed model has taken into account the conductive
and dielectric losses and has been simulated in commercially available EM simulator CST
MWS 2014 based on FIT numerical technique using optical template.
3.2. Design simulation and optimisation
To get an understanding on the working principle of the proposed ETDRNA, various param-
eters of the nanoantenna were extensively optimised. In order to study the effects of the
antenna performance in terms of bandwidth and directivity, the following parameters were
observed and analysed.
a.
Nanostrip feed: The nanostrip feed line placed on top of the SiO2 substrate was optimised
in terms of its length and width. The traditional empirical formulas [43] were used as a
starting point for the nanostrip design. The nanostrip acts like a coupling resonator that
excites the triangular dielectric place on an upper SiO2 substrate with height h3.Traditionally
at RF frequencies, the length of the transmission lines are characterised to the wavelengths
(λ) of incoming and outgoing radiations. However, working at the optical frequencies, the
incident waves reflect less and penetrate more in to the substrate passing through the metal
atoms. This phenomenon is known as plasmonic affect, and it gives rise to free plasmonic
gaseous atoms. To deal with this new phenomenon at optical frequencies, we use shorter
effective wavelength (λeff) compared to traditional wavelengths (λ), which depends on
material characteristics given by Eq. (6) for length of a transmission line [44]:
mλef f
2
¼ LðλoÞ
ð6Þ
where Eq. (6) shows the relationship between the free space wavelength (λo) and the
effective wavelength (λeff) and the order of resonance (m). Here, effective wavelength is
given by:
λef f ¼ λo
nef f
ð7Þ
Typical values of neff has been measured to be in the range of 1.5–3 [45]. In our case for the
silver nanostrip feed line, we use neff = 2.8 which resulted the minimum resonating length
of to be 0.27 µm. The length Lf of the nanostrip was optimised from 0.1 to 0.27 µm with the
best optimised value producing required resonance at 193.5 THz was at Lf = 0.186 µm as
shown in Figure 4a. The effect of the width ‘Wf’ of the nanostrip was also examined by
Optical Communication Technology
52

extensive parametric studies. Initial values were taken from the empirical formulas [43]
and optimisation was done from 0.02 to 0.28 µm. Figure 4b shows the best optimised
value achieved at resonance of 22 dB with Wf = 0.067 µm.
b.
Partial ground plane: The ground plane plays an important role in controlling the band-
width and radiation characteristics of any designed antenna. At the nanoscale geometry,
we simulated and observed its parameters effect on our nanoantennas resonance behav-
iour. We started off initially with a finite ground plane that achieved a good radiation
pattern with an acceptable bandwidth. The ground plane was then optimised and a
partial section of it was used with optimised dimensions Lg  Wg = 0.5 µm  2 µm.
Figure 5a and b shows the effects of varying the ground plane in terms of its length and
width. The optimised results produce a wide impedance bandwidth of 2.5% (192.3–197.3
THz) at a centre frequency of 193.5 THz. This makes our proposed nanoantenna covers all
the standard optical transmission widow (C-band), with a directivity of 8.6 dB.
c.
Height of triangular DR: Since the height of the triangular DR predominately determines
the resonance frequency as according to Eq. (2), the height h of the DR was optimised from
0.1 to 0.5 µm. Figure 6 shows the best optimised value of h = 0.3 µm having a resonance at
23 dB.
d.
Rotation of triangular DR: In order to study the effects of bandwidth, frequency shift and
directivity of the nanoantenna design, the proposed silicon-based triangular DR was
rotated on its axis. The rotation was from 0 to 360 with an angular spacing of 40.
Figure 7 shows the angular rotation of the triangular DR. The tip of the triangle was
initially aligned at 0 shown in green colour. The DR was then rotated along the counter-
clockwise direction with varying angles. It was observed that with the rotation of the DR,
the bandwidth remained the same at 2.5% but the resonant frequency shifted to other
bands (200–205 THz) in the frequency range from (180–220 THz) as shown in Figure 8a.
Since the triangle is an equilateral one, the angular rotation produces the same shifts at
Figure 4. Optimized parameters: (a) length of feed line; (b) width of feed line.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
53

other angles, that is, the shift will be the same at (0 = 120 = 240 = 360) as shown in
Figure 8b. The directivity was also affected with the rotation of the triangle as shown in
Figure 8b. It is clear that the effect of the rotation of the triangular DR lowers the
directivity to nearly 3 dBi.
Figure 5. Optimized parameters: (a) length of ground plane; (b) width of ground plane.
Figure 6. Optimized parameters: height of triangular DR.
Optical Communication Technology
54

Figure 7. Angular rotation of triangular DR.
Figure 8. Optimized parameters: (a) effect of angular rotation of resonant frequency; (b) effect of angular rotation on
directivity.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
55

After extensive optimisation of stated parameters above and analysing the results achieved
from these optimisations, the best geometric parameters that achieve an impedance bandwidth
of 2.5% (192.3–197.3 THz) and a directivity of 8.6 dB are listed in Table 1. It is also observed
that the simple ETDRNA structure can act as a tunable resonator when rotated around its axis
resulting in usage of applications that work in the wavelengths in the range of (1463–1500 nm).
The proposed design, if facility exists, can be fabricated via the known techniques involved in
nanofabrication technology, that is, e-beam lithography, photolithography and chemical
vapour deposition. In our case, the fabrication will follow a bottom-up approach where the
SiO2 substrate will have silver deposited on its surface.
Parameters
Value (µm)
Feed length Lf
0.186
Feed width Wf
0.067
Ground length Lg
2.5
Ground width Wg
2
Height of triangular DR h
0.2
Area of triangular side a
1
Rotation angle θ
00
Table 1. Optimised parameters of ETDRN.
Figure 9. Simulated return loss and directivity of ETDRNA.
Optical Communication Technology
56

3.3. Results and discussion
In this section, we present the simulation results. Figure 9 shows the return loss (S11) and
directivity of the proposed ETDRNA. The three-dimensional (3D) radiation patterns of the
nanoantenna at 192, 193.5 and 197 THz are shown in Figure 10(a–c). The maximum dip of 22
dB is achieved from the resonance of the nanoantenna at the central frequency of 1936.5 THz.
The nanoantenna covers some part of the S-band while most part is covered for the C-band
optical communication window. 3D radiation patterns provide the proof of the ETDRNA
radiating in end-fire pattern. At present, the nanofabrication technology is limited and the
proposed design is a theoretical one, yet we believe that our contribution in the fast-growing
field of nantennas, with the proposed ETDRNA design, will prove itself to be a promising
candidate for next-generation energy harvesting and green sustainable solution applications
based on nanotechnology designs.
4. Hexagonal dielectric resonator nantenna
In this section, we present another nantenna design based on dielectric resonator material. The
shape of this DR is in hexagonal form with the material chosen as silicon (Si). The proposed
design works as a loading element. The structure is again in multilayer form having (SiO2)
sandwiched between two silver (Ag) sheets. The radiating element is an equal-sided
hexagonal-shaped (Si) dielectric loaded material. The whole nantenna structure is excited via
a nanostrip transmission line made from a noble silver metal (Ag) whose conductive proper-
ties are calculated using the Drude model. The antenna achieves an impedance bandwidth of
3.7% (190.9–198.1 THz) with a directivity of 8.6 dBi at the frequency of interest. The obtained
results make the proposed nantenna a possible solution for future nanophotonics and nano-
scale communication devices.
4.1. Antenna geometry
In this section, we present another dielectric resonator (DR) design that takes the shape of a
hexagon. The proposed nanoantenna works utilised the loading properties of ceramic dielectric
Figure 10. 3D end-fire radiation pattern at: (a) 192 THz, (b) 193.5 THz, (c) 197 THz.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
57

silicon and is termed as hexagonal dielectric loaded nantenna (HDLN). It is also designed to
operate at the central frequency of 193.5 THz which corresponds to a wavelength of 1550 nm.
The cross-sectional and front view of the proposed HDLN is in Figure 11(a) and (b). The design is
based on a multilayer structure with (SiO2) substrate sandwiched between two noble metals each
made from silver (Ag). The properties of substrate are: thickness of h1 = 0.150 μm, εr = 2.1 and loss
tangent tan δ = 0.003 at f = 100 THz [39]. The ground layer, made from silver, below the substrate
has partial form with properties as thickness of t = 0.010 μm and dimensions Lg  Wg = 1.95  2
μm. The feeding line is a nano silver strip on top of the substrate with parameters: thickness h2 =
0.025 μm, Wf = 0.067 μm and Lf = 0.186 μm. The substrate dimensions are taken as Ws  Ls = 5  5
μm2. The hexagonal dielectric is made of (Si), with εr = 11.9 and estimated loss tangent, tan δ =
0.0025. To achieve a further increase in the bandwidth with minimum resonance losses, a small
substrate with thickness h3 = 0.015 μm made from (SiO2) has been introduced between the
hexagon and the nanostrip. The dimensions of hexagonal dielectric are calculated from Eq. (8)
[43] by inscribing the hexagon inside a circle and equating the areas of both designs, thus giving
an optimised equal side lengths of hexagon as s = 1 μm and thickness (λg/4 < h < λg/2) h = 0.377μm;
πa2
e ¼ 3
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
2
s2
ð8Þ
where ae = area of the circle and s = side of the hexagon. Since at optical frequencies, metals
appear with a negative permittivity; therefore, complex permittivity ‘εAg’ of silver (Ag) calcu-
lated from Eq. (9) was explained by the Drude model [39]:
εAg ¼ εo
ε∝
f p2
½f ðf þ iγÞ
(
)
¼ 128 þ j3:28
ð9Þ
where εo = 8.85  1012 [F/m], ε∝= 5, plasmonic frequency fp = 2175 THz, f = central frequency
and collision frequency γ = 4.35 THz. Figure 11(b) illustrates the antenna operating in the
transmitting (Tx) mode by means of propagation vector orientation (k). The magnetic and
electric field distributions of the hexagonal dielectric and nanostrip waveguide, along with
the wave propagation in the y-axis, are also shown. Optical nantennas can be excited with a
few known techniques ; (1) coupling of light using the so called nanotapers [46–47] since nano
antennas cannot handle much power because of their small footprints, this makes them ideal
candidates for being excited by micro lasers such as micro disks and photonic crystal lasers
and (2) by reducing the reflection induced power loss by using slot dielectric waveguides [48].
4.2. Design simulation and optimisation
In this section, we make use of the optimisation techniques available to us from the simulator.
We investigate the performance of each parameter involved in the design geometry of the
proposed nanoantenna as shown in Figure 11. In order to study the impact on the antenna
performance in terms of bandwidth, the following parameters have been studied and
analysed.
Optical Communication Technology
58

a.
Nanostrip feed: Properties of conducting materials change when working at optical
frequencies. The silver nanostrip line used to feed the nanoantenna was analysed in terms
of Drude model. The nanostrip acts like a coupling resonator that excites the hexagonal
dielectric, placed on an upper SiO2 substrate with height h3. Traditionally at RF frequen-
cies, the length of the transmission lines is characterised to the wavelengths (λ) of incom-
ing and outgoing radiations. However, working at the optical frequencies most of the
incident light is transparent through the metals. This gives rise to plasmonic-free elec-
trons, thus the feed line is analysed considering shorter effective wavelength (λeff), which
depends on the material properties [44], refractive indexes and Eqs. (6) and (7). In our
simulations, the optimised dimensions of the feed line produced values of length Lf to be
0.27 μm. The length Lf of the nanostrip stub was optimised from 0.1 to 0.27 μm with the
best optimised value producing required resonance at 193.5 THz was at Lf = 0.186 μm as
shown in Figure 12(a). Similarly, the width ‘Wf’ of the nanostrip was also examined and
optimisation was done from 0.02 to 0.28 μm. Figure 12(b) shows the best optimised value
achieved at resonance of 22 dB with Wf = 0.067 μm.
Figure 11. Geometry of hexagonal dielectric loaded nantenna (HDLN): (a) cross-sectional view; (b) front view with field
vectors.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
59

b.
Partial ground plane: The effect of the ground plane was studied and its optimisation
gave dimewnsions of Lg  Wg = 1.95 μm  2 μm. Figure 13(a) and (b) shows the effects of
varying the partial ground plane in terms of its length and width. The optimised results
produce a wide impedance bandwidth of 3.7% (190.9–198.1 THz) at a centre frequency of
193.5 THz, covering all of the standard optical transmission widow (C-band).
c.
Height of hexagonal DR: The wide impedance bandwidth achieved is also affected by the
height of the hexagonal DR. The height h of the DR was optimised within the range (λg/4 < h <
λg/2)[3].Figure 14 showsthebestoptimisedvalueofh =0.37 μmhavinga resonanceat23 dB.
4.3. Results and discussion
To compare the properties and results of our proposed HDLN nanoantenna, we first simulated
a hexagonal dielectric resonator antenna at the lower frequency band [41]. Observations were
Figure 12. Optimized parameters: (a) length of feed line; (b) width of feed line.
Figure 13. Optimized parameters: (a) length of ground plane; (b) width of ground plane.
Optical Communication Technology
60

made in terms of plane-wave propagation in the transmission lines to the radiating structures
of the two antennas with results shown in Figure 15(a) and (b), respectively. From Figure 15
(a), it can be observed that the E-field propagation or the power propagation in the transmis-
sion line is following the fringing effects in order to radiate the hexagonal structure operating
in the microwave domain. Whereas the proposed nantenna structure depicted in Figure 15(b)
shows the E-field propagation in the nanotransmission line follows a travelling wave effect. It
is also observed that the hexagonal DR elements for both the cases exhibit different properties.
At the microwave domain, the hexagonal DR as shown in Figure 15(a) works as a resonator,
Figure 14. Optimised parameters: height of hexagonal DR.
Figure 15. E-field propagation: (a) fringing effects at lower frequency; (b) travelling wave effect at THz spectrum.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
61

whereas the DR at the nanoscale structure shown in Figure 15(b) exhibits loading properties
which benefit the nantenna to operate as a lens and thus achieve more directivity.
The return loss (S11) and directivity of the proposed HDLN with respective wavelength and
directivity axis is shown in Figure 16. After extensive optimisation, the nantenna achieves an
impedance bandwidth of 3.7% (190.9–198.1 THz) with a directivity of 8.6 dBi, making it useful
for nanoscale fabrication due to its robustness against fabrication tolerances.
Typically, the modes of hexagonal DR [49] are derived from the cylindrical dielectric resonator,
which has three distinct types: TE (TE to z), TM (TM to z) and hybrid modes. The TE and TM
modes are asymmetrical and have no azimuthal variation. On the other hand, fields produced
by hybrid modes are azimuthally dependent. Hybrid mode is further divided into two sub-
groups of HE and EH. The modes generated by the hexagonal dielectric nantenna are
represented in terms of magnitude of electric field distribution on its surface as shown in
Figure 17, at the centre frequency of 193.5 THz. The mode analysis was done via EM simulator
CST MWS.
From the infinite modes available [50], in our simulation as shown in Figure 17, we observed
the nano hexagonal dielectric antenna producing HE20δ mode between the achieved wide
impedance band. The subscript in the modes represents the variation of fields along azimuthal,
radial and z-direction of the cylindrical axis. It is observed from the figure that the magnitude
of electric field variation is produced on the azimuthal direction with no variation in the radial
direction, thus giving a mode excited at HE20δ. Also, the intensity is highest at the azimuthal
Figure 16. Simulated return loss and directivity of proposed HDLN.
Optical Communication Technology
62

plane resulting in a radiation pattern towards the end-fire direction. The 3D radiation patterns
of the nanoantenna at 191, 193.5 and 198 THz are shown in Figure 18(a–c). The directivity of
the antenna at the centre frequency is 8.6 dBi.
Keeping
in
mind
the
state-of-the-art
nantenna
designs
and
limited
availability
of
nanofabrication equipment and facilities worldwide, we believe our proposed theoretical
HDLN design will prove itself to be a promising communication device for applications based
on nanotechnology.
Figure 17. E-field distribution as shown via the magnitude at 193.5 THz with HE20δ mode.
Figure 18. 3D radiation pattern: (a) 191 THz, (b) 193.5 THz and (c) 198 THz.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
63

5. Array synthesis
In this section, we present the array synthesis done on one of the two proposed nantenna
designs based on DR element. The ETDRNA was opted for array optimisation. The ETDRNA
was fed via a 1  2 corporate feed network working at optical C-band (1.55 μm). Numerical
results prove that the proposed nantenna exhibits a directivity of 9.57 dB with an impedance
bandwidth of 2.58% (189–194 THz) covering the standard optical C-band transmission win-
dow. Furthermore, by selecting the appropriate orientation of the triangular dielectric resona-
tors, the proposed nantenna structure can be tuned to operate at the higher or lower optical
bands offering a threshold value of directivity and bandwidth Δf. By tuning the nantenna, they
achieve an increase in bandwidth of 4.96% (185.1–194.7 THz) and directivity also improves to
9.7 dB. The wideband and directive properties make the proposed nantenna attractive for a
wide range of applications including broadband nanophotonics, optical sensing, optical imag-
ing and energy-harvesting applications.
5.1. Antenna array geometry
An array of 1  2 configuration for the ETDRNA is presented. The front and side view is
shown in Figure 19. The geometry of the proposed nanoantenna utilised the same parameters
as the proposed ETRDN in Section 3. The gap between the elements to counter mutual
Figure 19. Geometry of proposed 1  2 array: (a) front view; (b) side view.
Optical Communication Technology
64

coupling is around (λeff/2) at the central frequency of 193.5 THz. The dimensions of the single
element equilateral triangle dielectric based on frequency dependence can be calculated from
Eqs. (1) and (2) previously presented in Section 3.
In order to increase the directivity of the proposed nantenna, arrays with a corporate feed
network has been utilised for best power transfer from the source to the radiating
ETDRNA. Figure 19(b) shows the corporate feed network along with appropriate feed line
(50 and 70 Ω) markings. The optimised width of the 70 Ω feed line is 0.045 μm, whereas the
length is 0.76 μm. For the 50 Ω feed line, the width and length are Wf and Lf, respectively.
The shaded region in black shows the partial ground and feed lines to be on the backside of
the substrate. The optimum distance between the triangular plasmonic resonators achieve
minimal mutual coupling at 0.7 μm centre to centre. The properties of the noble metals are
explained as per Drude Model used throughout the sections for the proposed nantenna
designs.
5.2. Results and discussion
In this section, we investigate the proposed nanoantenna arrays results in terms of two impor-
tant features: (1) directivity improvement and (2) tunability. Directivity is very important
because it measures the power density the antenna radiates in the direction of its strongest
emission versus the power density radiated by an ideal isotropic radiator (which emits uni-
formly in all directions) radiating the same total power, and on the other hand tunability is an
attractive feature as it makes antenna operational in various frequency bands simultaneously
as well as resonating at its centre frequency. In fact, during our performance analysis, we
learned the importance of the angle of rotation between the triangular structure and the feed
line direction. In the following paragraph and the next section, we first address the perfor-
mance study when this angle is zero and then investigate the importance of this when different
angles are introduced.
The simulated return loss (S11) and directivity of the proposed 1  2 nanoantenna array
are presented in Figure 20. The proposed nantenna achieves an impedance bandwidth of
2.58% with S11 < 10 dB (189–194 THz) at a centre frequency of 193.5 THz (1550 nm) with
a dip at 15 dB. The antenna covers all the portion of the standard C-band transmission
window in optical domain and can be used for relevant optical applications in
nanonetworks and high-speed optical data transfer. The 3D radiation plot of the nantenna
resonating at 193.5 THz is shown in Figure 21. The directivity of the nantenna is 9.57 dBi,
0.97 dB improvement compared to the single element ETDRNA discussed in Section 3.
CST MWS studio has been used to acquire the optimised results with verification done by
another EM simulator HFSS. Examining the plot in Figure 21 reveals the E-field component
having main lobe direction at 45, side lobe levels at 4.1 dB and beam width of 20.1.
Similarly, the H-field component in Figure 21 has main lobe direction of 180, side lobe levels
of 1.5 dB and beam width of 127.2. Although the nantenna achieved a directive nature, the
losses associated with high side lobe levels are to be expected due to substrate selection and
working at higher THz frequencies.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
65

Figure 20. Return loss and directivity of 12 ETDRNA array.
Figure 21. 3D radiation pattern at 193.5 THz.
Optical Communication Technology
66

5.3. Tunability of proposed 1  2 ETDRNA array
Achieving an antenna design for a specific frequency band (wide, notch or filter) with tunable
(or changeable) centre frequency is an important challenge task. Our proposed nantenna array
structure achieves this task and offers a large flexibility to the antenna in terms of operating
frequency for a wide range of applications. Various parameters and design strategies such as
loading slots, lumped components, switches, diodes and capacitors are introduced in order to
achieve this feature. Although we have utilised a corporate feed network and the antenna
geometry is based on nanoscale dimensions, which means more parametric study, but our
simple and featured equilateral shape of the DR elements enable us to make natural yet simple
tunability. Figure 22 shows the rotation angles of the two equilateral triangular DR elements
(T1 and T2). Since it is an equilateral triangle, the rotation angles were swept from (180 to
180) with a step size of 10. The rotation angle is defined as counterclockwise movement from
the bottom tip of the triangle. We apply three scenarios of rotations: (1) rotate T1 while T2 is
fixed (Figure 22a), (2) fix T1 and rotate T2 (Figure 22b) and (3) simultaneously rotate T1 and T2
in the same counterclockwise direction (Figure 22c). In all the three scenarios, as shown in
Figure 22, the simulation of rotation was done for the whole 360 but only five rotating angles
Figure 22. Rotation scenario of triangular DRs for spectral shifts: (a) rotate triangle T1 (left); (b) rotate triangle T2 (right)
and (c) rotate both T1 and T2 simultaneously  90.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
67

Figure 23. Return loss and directivity as per rotation: (a) T1 rotated; (b) T2 rotated and (c) both T1 and T2 simultaneously
rotated.
Figure 24. 3D radiation pattern of directivity at 193.5 THz after appropriate selection of DR triangular angles (90 and 90).
Figure 25. Effect of tunability on directivity and fractional bandwidth.
Optical Communication Technology
68

have been shown, that is, 0, +60, +90, 60, 90, for purpose of simplicity. For our case of
centre frequency at 193.5 THz, the best resonance with improved bandwidth of 4.96% (185.1–
194.7 THz) and a directivity (9.7 dBi) is achieved when we opted to select the angles of T1 and
T2 to be 90 and 90, respectively. Figure 23 displays the results in terms of s-parameters and
directivity for rotation of triangles T1 and T2.
Figure 24, details of the E-field (yz-axis), shows main lobe at a direction of 45, side lobe levels
of 4.5 dB and beam width of 19, whereas the H-field (xz-axis) has a main lobe direction of
115, side lobe levels of 2.6 dB and beam width of 99.8 with a lot of losses in terms of high
side lobe levels at a higher frequency. Figure 25 shows the tunability effects of simulataneous
rotation of triangular DRs in terms of the minimum and maximum values achieved for
directivity and also the bandwidth difference Δf at 10 dB resonance in the frequency band
(185–195 THz). The minimum directivity achieved is 7.15 dB and the maximum achieved is
9.71 dB when the triangles are tuned. Similary, the difference of bandwidth Δf ranges from a
minimum to maximum of 4 to 9 THz, respectively.
6. Conclusion
In this chapter, we proposed two new optical nanoantenna designs working at centre fre-
quency of 193.5 THz (1550 nm wavelength). We made use of dielectric resonators, which are
ceramic based having very high dielectric permittivity, to assist the metallic designs mostly
utilised in making plasmonic nanoantennas. Dielectric resonator (DR)-based antennas have
made their mark and importance of antennas designed at the RF and MMW spectrum. Due to
their unique feature of minimum surface loss and high radiation efficiency, they are considered
nominal candidate to be used at higher spectrum bands, that is, THz.
Keeping with the offered characteristics of DR, we suggested two nanoantenna designs with
triangular- and hexagonal-shaped DR materials. Both the designs are based on multilayer tech-
nology where the ground and transmission lines are made from noble metal silver. The proper-
ties of silver at optical domain are discussed and defined on the basis of Drude Model. The first
design ETDRNA achieved an impedance bandwidth of 2.58% (192.3–197.3 THz), whereas the
second nanoantenna design with hexagonal-shaped DR, HDLN, offered an impedance band-
width of 3.7% (190.9–198.1 THz). Both the nanoantennas achieved high directivity of 8.6 dBi with
end-fire radiation pattern. Array synthesis was also performed in order to compare and observe
how much improvement is possible. The 12 ETDRNA achieved an improvement of 0.97 dB
compared to the original directivity. Also the array antenna offers tunability in simple manner,
compared to other methods discussed, making the proposed nanoantenna adaptable to many
other optical frequency bands of interest for various optical communications.
Acknowledgements
This research work was supported by King Saud University, Deanship of Scientific Research
and College of Engineering Center.
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
69

Author details
Waleed Tariq Sethi1,2*, Hamsakutty Vettikalladi3, Habib Fathallah2 and Mohamed Himdi1
*Address all correspondence to: wsethi@ksu.edu.sa
1 Institute of Electronics and Telecommunications of Rennes University (IETR), University of
Rennes, France
2 KACST Technology Innovation Center in Radio Frequency and Photonics for the e-Society
(RFTONICS), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
3 Electrical Engineering Department, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
References
[1] Cherry S. Edholm’s law of bandwidth. IEEE Spectrum. 2004;41(7):58–60
[2] Li QC, Niu H, Papathanassiou AT, Wu G. 5G network capacity: Key elements and
technologies. IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine. 2014;9(1):71–78
[3] Stephan J, Brau M, Corre Y, Lostanlen Y. On the Effect of Realistic Traffic Demand Rise on
LTE-A HetNet Performance. 2014 IEEE 80th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2014-
Fall). Vancouver, BC; 2014. pp. 1–5
[4] Gregori M, Gómez-Vilardebó J, Matamoros J, Gündüz D. Wireless content caching for
small cell and D2D networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications.
2016;34(5):1222–1234
[5] Mustafa IB, Uddin M, Nadeem T. Understanding The Intermittent Traffic Pattern Of
HTTP Video Streaming Over Wireless Networks. 2016 14th International Symposium on
Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) (2016):
n. pag. Web. 6 March 2017
[6] TU/e to develop 5G technology with European grant [Internet]. Available from: https://
www.tue.nl/en/university/news-and-press/news/13-05-2016tueto-develop-5g-
technology-with-european-grant/
[7] Valdes-Garcia A, Yong SK, Xia P. 60Ghz Technology For Gbps Wlan And Wpan. 1st ed.
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley; 2013
[8] Chester E. 4.6Gbps Wi-Fi: How 60Ghz Wireless Works—And Should You Use It? Ars
Technica. N.p., 2017. Web. 6 March 2017
[9] Researchers Demonstrate World’s First 5G, 100 To 200 Meter Communication Link Up To
2 Gbps”. Phys.org. N.p., 2017. Web. 6 March 2017
Optical Communication Technology
70

[10] Kürner T, Priebe S. Towards THz communications-status in research, standardization
and regulation. Journal of Infrared, Millimeter, and Terahertz Waves. 2014;35(1):53–
62
[11] Nagatsuma T, Ducournau G, Renaud CC. Advances in terahertz communications accel-
erated by photonics. Nature Photonics. 2016;10(6):371–379
[12] Petrov V, Pyattaev A, Moltchanov D, Koucheryavy Y. Terahertz band communications:
Applications, research challenges, and standardization activities. Lisbon: 2016 8th Inter-
national Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Work-
shops (ICUMT); 2016. pp. 183–190
[13] Lukasz L, Brzozowski M, Kraemer R. Data Link Layer Considerations for Future 100
Gbps Terahertz Band Transceivers. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing.
Vol. 2017. Article ID 3560521, 11 pages, 2017
[14] Yilmaz T, Akan OB. On the use of low terahertz band for 5G indoor mobile networks.
Computers and Electrical Engineering. 2015;48:164–173
[15] Akyildiz IF, Jornet JM, Han C. Terahertz band: Next frontier for wireless communica-
tions. Physics Communications. 2014;12:16–32. DOI: 10.1016/j.phycom.2014.01.006 ()
[16] Obayya S, Areed NFF, Hameed MFO, Hussein M. Optical nano-antennas for energy
harvesting. In: Innovative Materials and Systems for Energy Harvesting Applications.
Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global; 2015. p. 26
[17] Yang Y, Li Q, Qiu M. Broadband nanophotonic wireless links and networks using on-chip
integrated plasmonic antennas. Scientific Reports. 2016;6:19490. DOI: 10.1038/srep19490
[18] Yousefi L, Foster AC. Waveguide-fed optical hybrid plasmonic patch nano-antenna.
Optics Express. 2012;20(16):18326–18335
[19] Hong SG, et al. Bioinspired optical antennas: Gold plant viruses. Light: Science & Appli-
cations. 2015;4:267–272
[20] Horiuchi N. Optical antennas: Reconfigurable resonance. Nature Photonics. 2016;10(5):
2680–2685
[21] Jornet JM, Akyildiz AF. Channel modeling and capacity analysis for electromagnetic
wireless nanonetworks in the terahertz band. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations. 2011;10(10):3211–3221
[22] Novotny L, van Hulst N. Antennas for light. Nature Photonics. 2011;5:83–90
[23] Palik ED. Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids. New York: Academic Press; 1998
[24] Johnson PB, Christy RW. Optical constants of the noble metals. Physical review B, APS
Physics. 1972;6(12):5056–5070
[25] Petosa A, Ittipiboon A. Dielectric resonator antennas: A historical review and the current
state of the art. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine. 2010;52:91–116
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
71

[26] Luk KM, Leung KW, editors. Dielectric Resonator Antennas. Baldock, England: Research
Studies Press; 2003
[27] Petosa A. Dielectric Resonator Antenna Handbook. Norwood, MA: Artech House; 2007
[28] Keyrouz and Caratelli D. Dielectric resonator antennas: Basic concepts, design guidelines,
and recent developments at millimeter-wave frequencies. International Journal of Anten-
nas and Propagation. 2016;10:0–20
[29] Belov PA, et al. Superdirective all-dielectric nanoantennas: Theory and experiment. IOP
Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering. 2014;67:012008–012013
[30] Devi I, et al. Modeling and design of all-dielectric cylindrical nanoantennas. Journal of
Nanophotonics. 2016;10(4):046011–046011
[31] Andryieuski A, Malureanu R, Biagi G, Holmgaard T, Lavrinenko A. Compact dipole
nanoantenna coupler to plasmonic slot waveguide. Optics Letters. 2012;37:1124–1126
[32] Suh JY, Huntington MD, Kim CH, Zhou W, Wasielewski WR, Odom TW. Extraordinary
nonlinear absorption in 3d bowtie nanoantennas. Nano Letters. 2012;12:269–274
[33] Maksymov IS, Miroshnichenko AE, Kivshar YS. Actively tunable bistable optical yagi-
uda nanoantenna. Optics Express. 2012;20:8929–8938
[34] Patel SK, Argyropoulos C. Plasmonic nanoantennas: Enhancing light-matter interactions
at the nanoscale. EPJ Applied Metamaterials. 2015;2:03140–03174
[35] Giannini V, et al. Plasmonic nanoantennas: Fundamentals and their use in controlling the
radiative properties of nanoemitters. Chemical Reviews. 2011;111(6): 3888–3912
[36] Wu CH, et al. Multimodal magneto-plasmonic nanoclusters for biomedical applications.
Advanced Functional Materials. 2014;24(43):6862–6871
[37] Maksymov IS. Magneto-plasmonic nanoantennas: Basics and applications. Reviews in
Physics. 2016;1:36–51
[38] Professor Nicholas Fang’s Research Group @ MIT. Web.mit.edu. N.p., 2017. Web. 6 March
2017
[39] Johnson PB, Christy RW. Optical constants of the noble metals. Physical Review B. 1972;6
(12):4370–4379
[40] Sinha R, Karabiyik M, Al-Amin C, Vabbina PK, Guney DO, Pala N. Tunable room
temperature THz sources based on nonlinear mixing in a hybrid optical and THz micro-
ring resonator. Scientific Reports. 2015;5:9422
[41] Lo HY, Leung KW, Luk KM, Yung EKN. Lowprofile equilateral-triangular dielectric
resonator antenna of very high permittivity. Electronics Letters. 1999;35(25):2164–2166
[42] Kishk AA. A triangular dielectric resonator antenna excited by a coaxial probe. Micro-
wave and Optical Technology Letters. 2001;30(5):340–341
Optical Communication Technology
72

[43] Balanis C. Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design. New York, NY,USA: John Wiley &
Sons; 2005
[44] Olmon RL, Raschke MB. Antenna-load interactions at optical frequencies: Impedance
matching to quantum systems. Nanotechnology. 2012;23(44):444001
[45] Neubrech F, et al. Resonances of individual lithographic gold nanowires in the infrared.
Applied Physics Letters. 2008;93(16)163105
[46] Hattori HT, Li Z, Liu D, Rukhlenko ID, Premaratne M. Coupling of light from microdisk
lasers into plasmonic nanoantennas. Optics Express. 2009;17(23):20878–20884
[47] Li Z, Hattori HT, Fu L, Tan HH, Jagadish C. Merging photonic wire lasers and
nanoantennas. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2011;29(18):2690–2697
[48] Hattori HT, Li Z, Liu D. Driving plasmonic nanoantennas with triangular lasers and slot
waveguides. Applied Optics. 2011;50(16):2391–2400
[49] Hamsakutty V, Mathew KT. Hexagonal dielectric resonator antenna: A novel DR antenna
for wireless communication [Ph.D. thesis]. Department of Electronics, Cochin University
of Science and Technology, Dyuhti, India, 2007.
[50] Mongia RK, Bhartia P. Dielectric resonator antennas: A review and general design rela-
tions for resonant frequency and bandwidth. International Journal of Microwave and
Millimeter-Wave Computer-Aided Engineering. 1994;4(3):230–247
Dielectric Resonator Nantennas for Optical Communication
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69064
73


Chapter 4
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL)
Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical
Injection
Yossef Ben Ezra and Boris I. Lembrikov
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
Abstract
Quantum dot (QD) laser devices can be successfully used in optical communications
due to their unique properties caused by the carrier localization in three dimensions. In
particular, quantum dot-in-a-well (QDWELL) lasers are characterized by an extremely
low threshold current density and the high modulation frequency. However, their oper-
ation rate is limited by the strongly nonlinear electron and hole scattering rates in and
out of QD. We investigated theoretically the nonlinear optical phenomena in QDWELL
lasers and amplifiers under the optical injection. We have shown that the synchroniza-
tion of the carrier dynamics in QD and quantum well (QW) caused by the optical
injection improves the QDWELL laser performance and, in particular, enhances the
relaxation oscillation (RO) frequency. As a result, the QDWELL laser performance in
the analogous optical link (AOL) is significantly improving. The optical injection also
improves the performance of the QDWELL-based semiconductor optical amplifiers
(SOA).
Keywords: quantum dot (QD), quantum well (QW), laser, semiconductor optical ampli-
fier (SOA), optical communications
1. Introduction
Advanced high-capacity communication systems are necessary for different applications, such
as medical diagnosis, traffic safety, Internet, data services, etc. [1]. These new applications
generate a giant data traffic which requires the time sensitive analysis and data processing at
high-performance computing infrastructures (HPC) and the data storage, transport, and
exchange in datacenters (DC) [1]. Recently, all-optical architecture of DC has been proposed.

It is based on the switching of all data in the optical domain [1]. This approach requires the
development of new photonic devices [1]. One of the most efficient technologies for the
realization of such devices is Silicon Photonics. Silicon Photonics can resolve the so-called
bandwidth bottleneck by the integration of photonic integrated circuits (PIC) and electronic
integrated circuits [1]. The active components such as lasers are made of the III-V composi-
tions. There are two techniques of the III-V laser integration with PIC: (i) the III-V laser die can
be butt-coupled to the silicon photonic chip using active alignment and (ii) III-V materials are
wafer bonded to the silicon photonic chip in order to fabricate lasers lithographically aligned to
the silicon waveguide circuit [1].
A generic optical communication system consists of an optical transmitter, optical communi-
cation channel, and an optical receiver [2]. A block diagram of such a system is shown in
Figure 1 [2].
The information highways providing these services are based on optical fibers [1]. Typically,
silica optical fibers are used as the communication channel due to their low losses of about
0.2 dB/km [2]. In such a case, the losses are 20 dB after the propagation distance of 100 km, and
the optical power decrease by 100 times defines the amplifier spacing in the long-haul light-
wave systems [2, 3]. In long-haul networks extended over thousands of kilometers fiber losses
are compensated by using a chain of amplifiers boosting the signal power periodically to its
original value [1, 2]. Erbium-doped fiber amplifiers (EDFA) are widely used in optical commu-
nication systems due to their compatibility with transmission fibers, energy efficiency, and low
cost [1, 2]. Raman amplifier operation is based on the stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) in
silica fibers [2]. The advantages of the Raman amplifiers are the using of the fiber itself as an
active medium and the large bandwidth [2]. However, the Raman amplifiers require a com-
paratively large pumping power [2].
The optical communication system performance is limited by the fiber dispersion leading to the
optical pulse broadening with propagation through the channel [2, 3]. As a result, the original
signal recovery with the high enough accuracy may be impossible [2]. The dispersion influence is
strongly manifested in multimode fibers (MMFs) where different fiber modes propagate with
different velocities. For this reason, optical communication systems are mainly based on single-
mode fibers (SMFs) [2]. In such a case, the intermodal dispersion vanishes because the pulse
energy is carried by a single mode [2]. The main types of the SMF dispersion are as follows: (i)
group velocity dispersion (GVD) is caused by group velocity vg frequency dependence (chro-
matic dispersion); (ii) material dispersion is caused by the silica refractive index n dependence on
the optical frequency; (iii) waveguide dispersion is defined by the following parameters: the fiber
Figure 1. A block diagram of a generic optical communication system.
Optical Communication Technology
76

core radius r0, the fiber core refractive index n1 and the cladding refractive index n2; and (iv)
polarization-mode dispersion (PMD) is caused by a modal birefringence [2, 3]. SMF material
dispersion is small enough, and it actually limits the optical communication system bit rate
and transmission distance under the condition that other types of dispersion are mitigated [2].
Optical transmitter converts the electrical signal into the optical signal and launches it into the
optical fiber [2]. An optical transmitter consists of an optical source, a modulator, and a
channel coupler [2]. An optical source is usually a semiconductor laser or light-emitting diode
(LED) compatible with the optical communication channel [2]. In LED, population inversion is
not realized, and the light is generated through spontaneous emission caused by the radiative
recombination of electron-hole pairs in the active layer [2]. In semiconductor lasers, the stimu-
lated emission of light is the dominating operation mechanism [2, 4]. For this reason, the LED
radiation is rather weak as compared to the semiconductor laser light. The typical values of the
launched power are less than 100 μW (10 dBm) for LED and about 1 mW (10 dBm) for
semiconductor lasers [2]. The optical signal is generated by the direct or external modulation of
the optical carrier wave radiated by a semiconductor laser [2]. Generally, time, quadrature,
polarization, and frequency are widely used in optical networking technologies for complex
quadrature modulation formats, polarization multiplexing, digital pulse shaping, and coherent
detection [1]. Recently, space as a physical dimension for modulation and multiplexing in
communication systems attracted interest for fiber capacity scaling [1]. Space-division multi-
plexing (SDM) uses multiplicity of space channels, or spatial parallelism, in order to increase
capacity of the optical communication system [1]. For instance, fiber bundles 10  10 Gb/s or
4  25 Gb/s can be used for the implementation of 100 Gb/s commercial client interfaces [1].
In the case of the direct modulation, the semiconductor laser is biased near the threshold and
driven by the electrical sinusoidal signal for analog modulation or electrical signal bit stream for
digital modulation [2]. In the case of the external modulation, two types of the external modulators
are mainly used: the Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM) and the electro absorption modulator
(EAM) [2, 4]. The channel coupler is a microlens focusing the optical signal onto the optical fiber
entrance plane [2]. The bit rate of optical transmitters is limited by electronic components [2].
An optical receiver converts the optical signal into the electrical domain and recovers the
transmitted data [2, 4]. The structure of the optical receiver depends on the modulation format.
Consider first the on-off keying (OOK) modulation, where an electrical binary stream modu-
lates the optical carrier intensity inside an optical transmitter [2, 4]. In such a case, the directly
modulated optical signal after the propagation through the optical fiber is converted in the
receiver directly into the original digital signal in the electrical domain [2]. The main compo-
nent of the receiver is a semiconductor photodetector (PD) converting light into electrical
signal through the photoelectric effect [2]. Such a communication system is intensity modula-
tion with direct detection (IM/DD) system [2]. PD should possess high sensitivity, fast
response, low noise, low cost, and high reliability [2]. Generally, the transmission quality is
characterized by the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) given by SNR ¼ 20log10 Amax=AN
ð
Þ dB,
where Amax and AN are the maximum amplitude of the given analog signal and the root mean
square (RMS) noise amplitude of the analog signal, respectively [2]. The total noise is a
stochastic process consisting of a number of components such as mode partition noise (MSN),
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
77

laser intensity noise, modal noise, shot noise, thermal noise, dark current noise, amplified
spontaneous emission (ASE), and crosstalk noise [4]. The shot noise and thermal noise are the
two fundamental noise mechanisms responsible for the current fluctuations in optical
receivers [2]. The detailed analysis of the different types of noise may be found in Refs. [2–4].
Here, we should note that the thermal noise limits PD performance in practice, whereas the
shot noise determines a fundamental limit of PD operation [2]. For instance, in the shot-noise
limit, SNR ¼ 20 dB can be realized for PD quantum efficiency close to unity and a number of
photons Np ¼ 100 in the input optical signal [2].
Unlike the IM/DD system, the performance of the system with a coherent detection technique
is limited by the shot-noise alone [2, 4, 5]. Another important advantage of the coherent
detection is the possibility of the detection of signals with advanced modulated formats such
as frequency-shift keying (FSK), binary phase-shift keying (PSK), quadrature PSK, and 16-
quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) allowing bit rates of 50, 100, and 200 Gb/s [1, 2, 4].
In the case of the coherent detection, the input optical signal with the optical carrier frequency
ω0 is mixed with the continuous wave (CW) optical signal generated at the receiver by a
narrow linewidth laser called the local oscillator (LO) with the frequency ωLO [2]. The output
contains the signal with the intermediate frequency ωIF ¼ ω0  ωLO ≪ω0 which falls on PD [2].
There are two types of the coherent detection technique: (i) a homodyne detection when
ω0 ¼ ωLO ; ωIF ¼ 0; (ii) a heterodyne detection when ω0 6¼ ωLO [2, 4]. In the latter case, the
detection of the optical signal is carried out in two stages: first, the carrier frequency ω0 is
converted to the intermediate frequency ωIF usually belonging to the radio frequency (RF)
range; then, the RF signal is down converted to the modulating signal bit stream [2, 4].
Optical signal processing in optical communication systems is based on the linear and
nonlinear optical techniques used for the manipulation and processing of digital, analogue,
and quantum information [1]. Ultrafast optical nonlinearities provide an operation rate advan-
tage as compared to the electronic techniques for switching, regeneration, wavelength conver-
sion, performance monitoring, and analog digital conversion (ADC) [1]. In particular,
semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOAs) can be used in such applications due to their high
operation rate and strong nonlinearity [1–3].
The brief review of the optical communication systems clearly shows that a semiconductor
laser is a key component of both the transmitter and receiver. Evidently, for the highly efficient
applications in optical communication systems, semiconductor laser performance should be
characterized by low-threshold current, high-speed direct modulation, ultrashort optical pulse
generation, narrow spectral linewidth, broad modulation bandwidth, comparatively high
optical output power, low relative intensity noise (RIN), low cost, and low electrical power
consumption [2, 6]. The objective of this chapter is the investigation of the optical injection
influence on the performance of the novel semiconductor laser based on quantum dots (QD) in
a quantum well (QW) structure. The number of publications concerning semiconductor lasers
in general and QD lasers in particular is enormous and hardly observable. For this reason, in
Section 2, we briefly discuss the structure, operation principle, and basic characteristics of a
semiconductor laser widely used in optical communication systems. In Section 3, the funda-
mentals of a QD in QW (QDWELL) laser and SOA are discussed. The original theoretical
Optical Communication Technology
78

results related to the dynamics and performance of the optically injected QDWELL lasers and
SOA are presented in Section 4. The conclusions are presented in Section 5.
2. Structure and operation principle of a semiconductor laser
Semiconductor laser is an electrically pumped p-i-n diode [6]. In the forward-biased diode,
electrons in the conduction band and holes in the valence band are injected into the active layer
placed between the p-type and n-type cladding layers [2, 6]. The structure of an edge-emitting
semiconductor laser is shown schematically in Figure 2 [2].
The cladding layers are made of the semiconductor material with the bandgap Eg2 larger than
the active layer bandgap Eg1 [2, 6]. Such a structure consisting of the p-n junctions made of
semiconductor materials with different bandgaps is called a heterostructure [2, 7]. As a result,
the electrons and holes are confined in the active layer.
The AlxGa1-xAs/GaAs/AlxGa1-xAs heterostructure is shown in Figure 3 [6]. The concentration of
donors ND and acceptors NA in the n-type and p-type regions, respectively, should satisfy the
condition that the separation EFC  EFV between the electron Fermi energy level EFC and the hole
Fermi energy level EFV is larger than the bandgap energy Eg [2]. Recombination of the electron-
hole pair in the presence of the optical field results in the photon stimulated emission [2, 6].
Figure 2. Edge-emitting semiconductor laser.
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
79

Usually, the active layer has a larger refractive index than the cladding layers providing also the
confinement of the photons generated in the active layer [2]. When the injected carrier density in
the active layer becomes larger than a critical value, the population inversion occurs and the
active region manifests an optical gain [2]. Input signal intensity Pin in such a case is amplified,
and the output signal intensity Pout has the form [2]
Figure 3. The energy bands of the semiconductor laser based on the AlxGa1-xAs/GaAs/AlxGa1-xAs heterostructure.
Optical Communication Technology
80

Pout L
ð Þ ¼ Pin 0
ð Þ exp gL
ð
Þ
(1)
where g is the power gain coefficient and L is the active layer length. Usually, the laser
dimensions are less than 1 mm in all three directions which result in compact design [2]. The
gain is negative g < 0 for the injected carrier density N below the population inversion value.
The gain becomes positive and increases with the increase of the injected carrier density N. The
peak gain gp is given by the approximate empirical relationship [2].
gp N
ð
Þ ¼ σg N  NT
ð
Þ
(2)
where σg is the gain cross section or the differential gain and NT is the transparency value of
the carrier density. For InGaAsP lasers, the typical values of these parameters are following:
σg ≈2  3
ð
Þ  1016 cm2, NT ≈1  1:5
ð
Þ  1018 cm3 [2]. Eq. (2) can be used in the high-gain
region where gp >100 cm1 [2]. The laser operation also requires an optical feedback provided
by placing the gain medium into a Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity formed in our case by the two
cleaved laser facets serving as mirrors [2]. In such a case, a critical value of the gain gcr is given
by [2]
gcr ¼ αint þ 1
2L ln
1
R1R2


(3)
where αint is the coefficient of the internal losses caused by free carrier absorption and interface
scattering and R1,2 are the facet reflectivities. In the laser FP cavity, only the longitudinal
modes can exist determined by the condition [2]
2βL ¼ mπ; β ¼ 2πνnmode
c
; ν ¼ νm ¼
mc
2nmodeL ; m ¼ 1, 2, …
(4)
where β, nmode , and c are the mode propagation constant, the mode refractive index, and the
free space light velocity, respectively. Eq. (4) shows that the laser frequency ν corresponds to
the discrete spectrum of the laser longitudinal modes. A semiconductor laser radiation typi-
cally consists of several longitudinal modes with a gain spectrum bandwidth of about
10 THz [2]. The dominant mode is the one with gain closest to the peak gain gp [2]. The optical
modes penetrate into the cladding layers due to the boundary conditions for the optical mode
electric and magnetic field while the gain takes place only in the active layer. Hence, the
confinement factor of the active layer Γ ¼ g=gm is introduced which is typically less than 0.4
[2]. Here, gm is the so-called material gain. The modes propagate inside the optical fiber with
different speeds because of GVD as it was mentioned above. Consequently, the multimode
semiconductor lasers are limiting the optical communication operation rate [2].
There exist single-mode semiconductor lasers emitting light mainly in a single longitudinal
mode such as distributed feedback (DFB) lasers, coupled-cavity lasers, tunable lasers, and
vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSEL) [2]. The detailed analysis of structure and
operation principles of these lasers can be found in Ref. [2] and references therein. Here, we
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
81

only briefly discuss the peculiarities of these lasers following Ref. [2]. DFB laser has a built-in
periodic grating with the period d0 which results in refraction index periodicity. Consequently,
the waves propagating in the forward and backward directions in the cavity are coupling, and
the Bragg diffraction occurs. The feedback in such a case is distributed throughout the laser
cavity length. The coupling occurs only for the modes with the Bragg wavelength λB satisfying
the Bragg condition d0 ¼ λB=2nmode
ð
Þm, m ¼ 1, 2, 3, … [2]. This condition provides the mode
selectivity of the DFB lasers. The strongest coupling between the forward and backward
propagating modes occurs for m ¼ 1 [2].
In a coupled-cavity semiconductor laser, single-mode operation is realized by coupling the
laser cavity to an external cavity. The in-phase feedback occurs only for the laser modes with a
wavelength which almost coincides with a certain longitudinal mode of the external cavity [2].
The effective reflectivity of the laser facet close to the external cavity depends on the wave-
length, and the losses of certain modes sharply decrease. The longitudinal mode which simul-
taneously has the highest gain and the lowest cavity loss becomes the dominant mode [2].
A tunable semiconductor laser typically consists of three sections: the active section, the phase-
control section, and the Bragg section [2]. Each one of these sections is biased independently by
injecting different currents in a following way: the current injected into the Bragg section
changes the Bragg wavelength λB through carrier induced variations in the refractive index n;
the current injected into the phase-control section changes the feedback phase through carrier
induced variations in the refractive index of this section [2]. As a result, the laser wavelength
can be tuned over the range of 10–15 nm by controlling the injection current in the phase-
control and the Bragg sections [2].
VCSEL emits light in a direction perpendicular to the active layer plane and operates in a
single longitudinal mode regime due to the small cavity length of about 1 μm in a wide range
of wavelengths of about 650–1600 nm [2]. The emitted light has a form of a circular beam
which can be inserted into SMF with high efficiency [2].
The dynamics of the single-mode semiconductor laser is described by the following rate
equations for the number of electrons N and photons P in the active layer [2].
dP
dt ¼ GP þ Rsp  P
τp
(5)
dN
dt ¼ I
q  N
τc
þ GP
(6)
where I is the injection current, q is the electron charge, G ¼ Γvgσg=V


N  N0
ð
Þ is net rate of
the stimulated emission, V is the active layer volume, N0 ¼ NTV, vg is the light group velocity,
Rsp is the spontaneous emission rate, and τp are
τc are the photon and carrier lifetime,
respectively. The threshold current Ith for the laser generation regime obtained from the
steady-state solution of Eqs. (5) and (6) has the form [2].
Ith ¼ q
τc
N0 þ
V
GNτp


;
GN ¼ Γvgσg
V
(7)
Optical Communication Technology
82

The direct modulation of the laser emission can be realized if the injection current includes a
time-dependent component. In the case of a sinusoidal modulation, the modulation frequency
ωm is limited by the relaxation oscillation (RO) frequency ΩR given by [2]
ΩR ¼
GGNPb  ΓP  ΓN
ð
Þ2
4
"
#1=2
(8)
where Pb is the steady-state photon number, ΓP ¼ Rsp=Pb


þ εNLGPb; ΓN ¼ τ1
c
þ GNPb,
εNL is a nonlinear gain parameter, and ΓR ¼ ΓN þ ΓP
ð
Þ=2 is a damping rate of the relaxation
oscillations. The efficiency of the laser modulation is significantly reduced for ωm > ΩR [2]. The
3 dB modulation bandwidth f 3dB of the semiconductor laser is also determined by the RO
frequency ΩR. For ΩR ≫ΓR, it has the form f 3dB ≈
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
ΩR


=2π [2].
Consider now QW semiconductor lasers based on a heterostructure shown in Figure 3. If the
thickness of the active layer dz is less than approximately 10 nm, the confined electrons and
holes exhibit quantum effects, and such a heterostructure is called a single QW [6, 7]. In such a
case, the De Broglie electron wavelength λ ¼ h=p in a semiconductor is close to the active layer
thickness [7]. Here, h, p are the Planck constant and electron momentum, respectively. The
charge carriers in a QW laser are localized in the z direction perpendicular to the active layer
plane and represent a two-dimensional (2D) electron and hole gas [6]. The solution of the
Schrödinger equation for carriers in QW produces discrete states of energy En in the z direction
perpendicular to the QW plane and a continuous range of allowed energies in the QW
plane [7]. The electron energy Ee in a QW is given by [6, 7]
Ee ¼ En þ
ħ2 k2
x þ k2
y


2m∗
e
(9)
where ħ ¼ h=2π, m∗
e is the electron effective mass, and kx,y are the electron continuous momen-
tum components in the QW plane [6, 7]. Similar expression can be written for the hole energy
in QW. The threshold current in a 2D structure reduces significantly as compared to the bulk
semiconductor laser [6]. The electronic and optical properties of a semiconductor laser strongly
depend on the carrier density of states (DOS) ρe,h Ee,h
ð
Þ.The electron DOS in a QW with ne
energy levels has the form [6, 7]
ρe Ee
ð
Þ ¼
X
ne
m∗
e
πħ2u Ee  En
ð
Þ; u x
ð Þ ¼
1, x > 0
0, x < 0
	
(10)
Similar expression can be written for the hole DOS. It is seen from Eq. (10) that carrier DOS in
QW does not depend on the energy. The static and dynamic properties of the QW semicon-
ductor laser can be described by the rate equations for the carrier density in QW NW and in a
separate confinement heterostructure (SCH) layer NB, and the photon density in the cavity P
given by [8]
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
83

dNB
dt ¼
I
qVSCH
 NB
τr
 NB
τnb
þ NWVW
τeVSCH
(11)
dNW
dt
¼ NBVSCH
τrVW
 NW
τn
 NW
τnr
 NW
τe
 vgG NW
ð
ÞP
1 þ εP
(12)
dP
dt ¼ ΓvgG NW
ð
ÞP
1 þ εP
 P
τp
þ ΓβSp
NW
τn
(13)
where τn, τnr, τnb, τr, and τe are the radiative recombination lifetime in QW, the nonradiative
recombination lifetime in QW, the total recombination lifetime in the SCH region, the carrier
transport time across the SCH to QW active region, and the carrier thermionic emission time
from QW into the barrier and SCH layers, respectively; βSp is the spontaneous emission
feedback factor, G NW
ð
Þ is the carrier density dependent gain, ε is the intrinsic gain compres-
sion factor, and VW and VSCH are the QW and SCH volumes, respectively. The rate equations
for QW laser (11)–(13) are different from the bulk laser Eqs. (5) and (6). The additional Eq. (11)
includes the effects of the carrier transport in SCH region typically used in QW lasers for the
carrier and optical confinement [6, 8].
3. Structure and theoretical model of a quantum dot-in-a-well (QDWELL)
laser and SOA
QD is a nanostructure where the electron and hole motion is confined in three dimensions
reducing the degrees of freedom to zero [7, 9]. The III-V QDs are grown epitaxially on a
semiconductor substrate [9]. The spontaneous formation of 3D islands during strained layer
epitaxial growth is known as the Stranski-Krastanov process [9]. A continuous film of a QW
thickness beneath the QD is called the wetting layer (WL) [9, 10]. In QD, carriers occupy a finite
number of energy levels defined by the solution of the Schrödinger equation for a 3D potential
separating the inside of QD from the outside [7]. Typically, the spherical and pyramidal QD
models are used [7]. The pyramidal model is more realistic since the QD grown by means of
the Stranski-Krastanov technology have approximately pyramidal form [9]. In such a case, the
Schrödinger equation for QD can be solved numerically [7, 9]. Carrier DOS in QD is a
δ function for each energy level [7]. QD has a lateral size of approximately 15–18 nm, a height
of about 4–5 nm, and contains several hundreds of thousands of atoms [9, 10]. The QD density
per unit area in each layer is about 1010  1011 cm2 [9, 10]. QD lasers exhibit extremely low
threshold current due to the 3D carrier confinement [9, 10]. The spectral bandwidth of QD
lasers is broader than the one of the QW lasers due to the inhomogeneous spectral broadening
caused by QD size variations that exhibit a Gaussian size distribution and consequently a
nearly Gaussian distribution of the emitted light frequencies [9]. Semiconductor lasers based
on self-organized InGaN, InAs, InGaAlP, and In(Ga)As QD are promising candidates for
applications in optical communication systems because of their low threshold current, high
temperature stability, fast carrier dynamics, and the possibility of the light emission from
ultraviolet to the far infrared spectral regime [9–13]. Typically, the active area of a QDWELL
Optical Communication Technology
84

laser consists of several QW layers each one of a height of 4 nm with the embedded 3D
confined QD having an average size of approximately 4 nm  18 nm  18 nm [10]. An electric
current is injected into the QW layers which form the carrier reservoir (WL) where the carrier-
carrier scattering leads to a filling or depletion of the confined QD levels [10]. The energy band
structure of a QDWELL laser is shown in Figure 4. Inside the QD, the lower level or the
ground state (GS) and several higher levels or excited states (ES) for electrons and holes may
exist [11]. We discuss the QDWELL laser model with the GS and one ES where the emission
occurs form GS [10]. In QDWELL lasers, the Coulomb interaction is the essential mechanism of
the carrier-carrier scattering for high carrier densities in WL [10].
The turn-on dynamics, the small signal and large signal responses of a QDWELL laser have
been studied theoretically and experimentally in the fundamental works of Lüdge, Schöll and
co-workers [10, 13–18].
It has been shown that the complicated carrier dynamics in a QDWELL laser is determined by
the nonradiative carrier-carrier scattering processes between the QD and the QW [17]. The
Figure 4. The energy band structure of a QDWELL laser.
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
85

corresponding scattering rates Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h
of electrons (e) and holes (h) for scattering in
and out of the QD are strongly nonlinear and depend on the electron and hole occupation
probabilities in the confined QD levels ρe, ρh and the electron and hole densities in the QW we,
wh [13–18]. The electron and hole scattering times are given by, respectively, τe ¼ Sin
e þ Sout
e

1
and τh ¼ Sin
h þ Sout
h

1 [14, 16, 18]. The carrier relaxation processes in QD states are much
faster than the capture processes from the QW into the QD at high carrier densities in the QW
WL, and the influence of the higher QD levels can be adiabatically eliminated [17].
The nonlinearity of the scattering rates Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h
and the separate dynamics of holes
and electrons are essential for the QDWELL laser dynamics adequate description [16]. The
electron and hole dynamics in the QDWELL laser is desynchronized due to different effective
masses and different energy separation between 2D WL band edge and confined QD level [16].
The QD hole density is changing more slowly as compared to the electron density [16].
Desynchronized carrier dynamics results in the deterioration of the laser performance both in
the small-signal and in the large-signal regimes [15, 17]. In particular, the QDWELL laser
modulation frequency is limited by the RO frequency of 7 GHz [17]. The relatively slow carrier
scattering processes from 2D WL carrier reservoir into confined QD levels are responsible for
the high damping of the turn-on process and the flat modulation response curve of QDWELL
lasers [10]. Usually, the modulation frequency can be increased by increasing the injection
current, but in our case, the injection current increase results in the device heating and the
further reduction of the RO frequency [17].
The modulation characteristics of semiconductor lasers can be improved by the optical injec-
tion locking (OIL) [19]. OIL of semiconductor lasers provides a single-mode regime and near-
single-sideband modulation, strongly enhances the RO frequency and bandwidth, reduces
nonlinearity, reduces RIN, reduces chirp, and increases link gain [19]. The directly modulated
OIL transmission-style system combining the master laser and the slave QDWELL laser in the
transmission style is shown in Figure 5 [19].
In the transmission-style system, the injected light from the master laser enters one slave
QDWELL laser facet and output is taken from the other facet [19]. The direct modulation signal
is applied to the QDWELL slave laser. An isolator prevents light coupling back to the master
laser. A polarization controller (PC) is used to match the overlap of master and QDWELL slave
laser polarizations. The master laser light coherently combines with the QDWELL slave laser
Figure 5. Directly modulated OIL system.
Optical Communication Technology
86

light changing its internal field [19]. The slave laser radiation wavelength tends to the master
laser radiation wavelength until the both wavelengths become equal locking the master laser
light frequency and phase [19].
The dynamics of the optically injected QDWELL laser has been studied theoretically by using
the Lüdge-Schöll (LS) rate equations for the photon density per unit area nph and the phase Φ
of the slave QDWELL laser radiation, the QD electron and hole occupation probabilities ρe, ρh,
and the electron and hole densities in the QW we, wh [20].
dnph
dt ¼ nph 2 ~WZQD
a
ρe þ ρh  1


 2κ


þ
βSp
A 2ZQD
a
Rsp ρe, ρh


þ 2K
τin
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
nphn0
ph
q
cos Φ  2πΔνinjt


(14)
dΦ
dt ¼ α
2 2 ~W ρe þ ρh  1


 2κ


þ 2K
τin
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
n0
ph
nph
s
sin Φ  2πΔνinjt


(15)
dρe,h
dt
¼  ~WA ρe þ ρh  1


nph  Rsp ρe, ρh


þ Sin
e,h we, wh
ð
Þ 1  ρe,h


 Sout
e,h we, wh
ð
Þρe,h
(16)
dwe,h
dt
¼ j
q  2NQD Sin
e,h we, wh
ð
Þ 1  ρe,h


 Sout
e,h we, wh
ð
Þρe,h
h
i
 ~Rsp
(17)
Here, A is the in-plane area of the QW, νL and νinj are the close frequencies of the QDWELL
laser and the injected light, respectively, K ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Tinjninj=n0
ph
q
is the injection strength, Tinj is the
transmission coefficient of the cavity mirror, ninj is the injected photon density in the QDWELL
laser active region, and n0
ph is the steady-state photon density without injection; Δνinj ¼ νinj  νL
is the input detuning, ZQD
a
¼ aLANQD
a
is the number of active QDs inside the waveguide, aL is a
number of self-organized QD layers, NQD
a
is the density per unit area of the active QD of a
lasing subgroup, NQD is the density per unit area of all QDs; 2κ are the optical intensity losses;
~W, and W are the Einstein coefficients for the coherent and incoherent interaction of the QD
with all resonator modes, respectively; α is the linewidth enhancement factor (LEF), βSp is the
spontaneous emission factor, Rsp ρe, ρh


, and ~Rsp are the spontaneous emission rates in QD and
QW, respectively; τin is the time of one round trip of the light in the cavity of length L. We do
not present here the complicated explicit expressions of the scattering rates Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h
which can be found in Ref. [20]. It has been shown that the QDWELL laser’s dynamic proper-
ties under optical injection are strongly influenced by the Coulomb scattering processes which
can be taken into account by using the microscopically calculated carrier lifetimes τe,h [20]. The
nonlinear dynamics of the optically injected QDWELL laser is determined by the injection
strength and the input detuning [20]. The frequency-locking range depends on the pump
current. The photon density as well as the electron and hole densities in QD and QW increase
with increasing the pump current which results in the change of scattering rates and the
QDWELL turn-on behavior [20]. The QDWELL laser under the optical injection manifests
complex oscillatory dynamics for a comparatively large detuning Δνinj [20]. The large regions
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
87

of stable CW operation occur for the short carrier lifetimes of about 10 ps typical for strongly
damped relaxation oscillations [20].
Under certain conditions, QDWELL laser can operate as a SOA for high-speed applications [9].
Generally, SOA is the LED amplifying the input optical signal. SOAs are divided into two
groups depending on their structure: (i) traveling wave amplifiers (TWA) and (ii) FP cavity
amplifiers [9]. The block diagram of the TWA QDWELL SOA is shown in Figure 6.
SOA attracted a wide interest for applications in optical communication systems due to their
small size, high gain, strong nonlinearity, and the possibility of on-chip optoelectronic integra-
tion [2, 9]. QD SOAs are particularly promising candidates for the amplification of ultrafast
pulses in the relatively broad spectral range due to their ultrafast carrier dynamics and inho-
mogeneous spectral broadening [9]. The SOA dynamics is described by the carrier rate equa-
tions, equation for the time-dependent SOA gain and the equations for the slowly varying
envelopes (SVE) of the optical pulses [2, 9].
The system of rate equations (14)–(16) should be modified for the case of a TWA QDWELL SOA.
Eq. (17) for the electron and hole densities in the QW we, wh does not change. The modified
equations for the pumping and signal photon densities per unit area nph,p,s, phases Φp,s, and the
QD electron and hole occupation probabilities ρe, ρh in QDWELL SOA have the form [20–23].
∂nph,p,s z, τ
ð
Þ
∂z
¼
gmod p,s  2κ


nph,p,s z, τ
ð
Þ
(18a)
∂Φp,s
∂z
¼  α
2 gmod p,s
(18b)
dρe,h
dt
¼ ~WA ρe þ ρh  1


nph,p þ nph,s


 Rsp ρe, ρh


þ Sin
e,h we, wh
ð
Þ 1  ρe,h


 Sout
e,h we, wh
ð
Þρe,h
(19)
where τ ¼ t  z=vg, and gmodp,s is the modal gain [22].
Figure 6. The block diagram of TWA QDWELL SOA.
Optical Communication Technology
88

gmod ¼ 2Γ
rQD
NQD
ð
dωiF ωi
ð
Þσi ω0
ð
Þ ρe þ ρh  1


(20)
Here, rQD is the mean size of QD, σi ω0
ð
Þ is the cross section of interaction of photons of
frequency ω0 with carriers in QD at the transition frequency ωi:
σi ω0
ð
Þ ¼
σres
1 þ ωi  ω0
ð
Þ2T2
2
(21)
where σres is the resonant cross section, T2 ¼ 2γ1
hom is the dephasing time, and γhom is the
homogeneous full width of half maximum (FWHM). The distribution function F ωi
ð
Þ of the
transition frequency in the QD ensemble describes the inhomogeneous broadening caused by
the QD size variation. It is assumed to be Gaussian and has the form [22]
F ωi
ð
Þ ¼
1
Δω
ﬃﬃﬃﬃπ
p
exp  ωi  ω
ð
Þ2
Δω
ð
Þ2
"
#
(22)
where ω is the average transition frequency, Δω ¼ γinhomð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ln2
p
Þ2, and γinhom is the inhomo-
geneous FWHM.
QD SOA can be used for the ultrafast and distortion-free amplification at pulse repetition rates
of 20, 40, and 80 GHz with pulse durations of 710, 1.9, and 2.2 ps, respectively [9]. It should be
noted that the amplification without patterning effect in QD SOA can be achieved at much
lower pump current densities than in QW SOA [22].
4. Optical synchronization of a QDWELL laser dynamics and its
influence on QDWELL laser and SOA performance
We investigated theoretically the optical synchronization of the carrier dynamics in the optically
injected QDWELL laser and SOA and its influence on the QDWELL laser and SOA perfor-
mance [23–27]. We solved numerically the LS equations (14)–(17) for the optically injected
QDWELL laser [24–26] and Eqs. (17)–(22) for the QDWELL SOA [23, 27] using the typical values
of QDWELL parameters and explicit expressions for the carrier scattering rates Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h
[17, 20]. We used the MATLAB environment for the numerical simulations. We obtained a large
number of the simulation results for the QW and QD carrier dynamics, QDWELL laser and SOA
output signal eye diagrams, QD electron and hole phase trajectories, constellations for the
QDWELL laser output 4-quadrature amplitude (4-QAM) modulation signal, QDWELL SOA
gain wavelength and power dependence, QDWELL SOA chirp and extinction ratio (ER) depen-
dence on the detuning between the pump and signal waves. They can be found in Refs. [23–27].
In this section, we summarize the main results and present the figures that demonstrate the
influence of the optical injection on the QDWELL laser and QDWELL SOA performance.
It has been shown that the sufficiently strong optical injection leads to the synchronization of
the electron and hole dynamics in QD [24]. In the transient turn-on regime, the bias current
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
89

and the optical output pulses are strongly synchronized in the case of a comparatively high
optical injection power of several milliwatts and the moderate bias current density j ¼ 3jth,
where jth ≈6:7A=m2 is the threshold current density of the QDWELL laser [24]. In such a case,
ρe þ ρh < 1, and the term describing the inversion of the two-level system with electrons and
holes is negative:
ρe þ ρh  1


< 0. It is seen from Eqs. (14)–(16) that the optically induced
transitions in QD are dominant, and the QD electron and hole occupation probabilities ρe, ρh
increase. Their increase is limited by the condition ρe þ ρh ¼ 1. Then, the first term in Eqs. (14)–(16)
vanishes, and the QD carrier dynamics is determined by the spontaneous transition rate
Rsp ρe, ρh


and essentially different carrier scattering rates Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h
in and out of QD.
The photons are mainly absorbed as it is shown in Eq. (14). In the case of a low level of optical
injection less than 1 mW, large bias current density j ¼ 6jth and a significant detuning
Δνinj ¼ 5GHz close to the RO frequency of 7 GHz electron occupation probability ρe strongly
oscillates while the QD hole and QW carrier dynamics remains stable.
The large-signal response of the QDWELL laser is important for digital communication sys-
tems. In the case without the optical injection, the QDWELL laser large-signal dynamics is
determined by the QW carrier densities we, wh and their lifetime [17]. The sufficiently strong
optical injection of the master laser is inserted instead of a large bias current provides a large
enough QD carrier density [24]. In such a case, a device heating by the bias current does not
occur. The radiative transition rates in QD are determined by the optical injection power and
the frequency detuning Δνinj between the master and slave lasers [24]. The fast stimulated
transitions in QD are dominant, and the increase of the optical injection power results in the
stronger electron and hole dynamics synchronization. The QW carrier density is varying
weakly. In the case of the electrical pseudorandom binary sequence (PRBS) input signal, the
modulation frequency may be increased up to 30 GHz due to the enhanced RO frequency [24].
The boundaries of the stable OIL regime are determined by the following condition [28]
K Einj
E0
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1 þ α2
p
≤2πΔνinj ≤K Einj
E0
(23)
where E0 and Einj are the slave and master laser field amplitudes, respectively. The instability
occurs and the QDWELL output signal manifests strong oscillations in the case of the large
detuning, low bias current density j ¼ 2jth, and low optical injection level [25]. The eye dia-
grams of the QDWELL under strong optical injection power Pinj > 1mW start to deteriorate at
the repetition frequency of 30 GHz [24, 25].
The directly modulated QDWELL laser can be introduced into an analogous optical link
(AOL) in the framework of ultra wideband (UWB) radio-over-fiber (UROOF) technol-
ogy [26, 29, 30]. The UWB high-speed AOL shown in Figure 7 consists of electrical/optical
(E/O) converter, a standard SMF (SSMF) optical fiber, and optical/electrical (O/E) converter [30].
We solved numerically Eqs. (14)–(19) for the AOL based on the optically injected QDWELL
laser and standard SMF (SSMF) [26]. We considered the small UWB signal with the modula-
tion frequency of 60 GHz, the zero detuning Δνinj ¼ 0 between the master laser and the
QDWELL slave laser radiation, the 4-quadrature amplitude modulation (4-QAM) format, and
Optical Communication Technology
90

128 subcarriers with a 500 MHz bandwidth, and the direct bias current density j¼ 2jth. The
dynamics of QD and QW carriers under the strong optical injection of about 1 mW is synchro-
nized, which results in the improvement of the AOL performance.
The calculated constellation of the output 4-QAM modulation signal under the strong optical
injection of about 1 mW is shown in Figure 8.
Figure 7. UWB analogous optical link (AOL) with the optically injected QDWELL laser (see Figure 5).
Figure 8. The calculated constellation of the output 4-QAM modulation signal for the modulation frequency 60 GHz,
zero detuning, and the optical injection power of 1 mW.
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
91

The constellation shown in Figure 8 is practically identical with the constellation of the input
signal unlike the case without the optical injection [26]. The AOL error vector magnitude
(EVM) dependence on the distance for the optical injection power of 103 and 1 mW is
presented in Figure 9.
It is shown in Figure 9 that in the case of the strong optical injection, the AOL EVM decreases
significantly due to the enhancement of the QDWELL laser modulation frequency [26].
The spectrum of the detected UWB signal for the modulation frequency of 60 GHz, zero
detuning between the master and the slave lasers, high optical injection power of 1 mW, and
the propagation distance of 50 km is shown in Figure 10 [26].
Consider now the influence of the optical pumping on the QDWELL SOA performance [23, 27].
We investigated the copropagating pumping and signal optical waves characterized by the
optical power Pp,s and the wavelengths λp,s, respectively [23]. Eqs. (17)–(22) have been solved
numerically for the pulse regime and the large PRBS signal response [23]. The central pumping
and signal wavelengths are λp ¼ 1:25 μm and λs ¼ 1:35 μm, respectively, and the optical
pumping power is Pp ¼ 2, 5, 10 mW [23]. The interaction of the pumping and signal wave
in a QDWELL SOA results in the nonlinear optical phenomenon of the cross-gain modulation
(XGM) [31]. During the XGM process, the strong modulated pumping wave imposes the
modulation on the weak CW signal wave [31]. In such a case, SOA is acting as a wavelength
converter (WC) transposing information at one wavelength to the signal at another wave-
length [31]. In the case of a QDWELL SOA, the strong pumping wave at the same time
synchronizes the QD and QW carrier dynamics. Indeed, when the pumping power
Pp ¼ 1 μW is small compared to the signal power Ps ¼ 1 mW, the electron and hole dynamics
in QD is desynchronized, the gain recovery time is determined by the carrier scattering rates
Figure 9. The calculated AOL EVM dependence on the distance for the low optical injection power of 103 mW (the
upper curve) and for the high optical injection power of 1 mW (the lower curve).
Optical Communication Technology
92

Sin
e , Sout
e , Sin
h , Sout
h , and the gain recovery process is slow [23]. In the opposite case of the strong
pumping power of about 1 mW, the QD electron and hole dynamics is synchronized, the QD
carrier occupation probabilities remain practically constant, and the gain recovery time
decreases. The oscillation period of the QD carrier occupation probabilities ρe, ρh is determined
by the optically enhanced gain recovery time [23]. The signal wave gain decreases with the
increase of the pumping wave power due to XGM and the gain saturation at a large optical
power. The bias current density influence on the gain is weak because of the weak connection
between QW carrier reservoir and QD during the XGM process [23]. Under the strong optical
of 1 mW and the low bias current density of 2jth , the QDWELL SOA performance improves.
The eye diagram of the QDWELL SOA in such a regime is shown in Figure 11.
Figure 11 shows that the pattern effect in the eye diagram vanishes up to the repetition
frequency of 140 Gb/s. The output signal optical power and chirp time dependence are shown
in Figure 12. It is shown in Figure 12 that due to the carrier dynamics synchronization pro-
vides the XGM process without the pattern effect, and the chirp reduces to about 5GHz and
becomes symmetric [23, 27].
Figure 10. The calculated spectrum of the detected UWB signal after the propagation over the distance of 50 km for the
modulation frequency of 60 GHz, zero detuning, and high optical injection power of 1 mW.
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
93

The strong optical pumping wave of several milliwatts during the XGM process may enhance
the QDWELL SOA bandwidth up to 100 nm for a central wavelength of 1350 nm [27]. We
investigated the ER dependence on the XGM detuning for the signal wave wavelength
Figure 11. The output signal eye diagram for the signal power of 1 mW, optical pumping power of 2 mW, the bias current
density of 2jth , and modulation bit rate of 140 GB/s.
Figure 12. The optical power (the upper box) and the chirp (the lower box) of the output signal.
Optical Communication Technology
94

λs ¼ 1:35μm and optical power Ps ¼ 1 mW, and the CW pumping wave power Pp of 0.1 and
0.01 mW [27]. The simulation results are shown in Figure 13.
ER reduces with the increase of the CW pumping wave power Pp as it is shown in Figure 13.
5. Conclusions
QW and QD semiconductor lasers and SOA are promising candidates for applications in
modern optical communication systems due to their comparatively low threshold current,
high operation rate, high modulation bandwidth, low chirp, patterning-free operation, and
stability with respect to temperature variations. These QW and QD advantages are mainly
caused by the one-dimensional (1D) carrier localization in QW and three-dimensional carrier
localization in QD. QDWELL lasers are based on the number of QW layers with the embedded
QD. In such a case, 2D electron and hole gas also exists in a QW carrier reservoir, i.e., WL.
QDWELL lasers are characterized by the lowest possible threshold current and fast QD carrier
dynamics due to the 3D localization of electrons and holes in QD. However, the carrier
dynamics in QW and QD is desynchronized due to the strong nonlinear carrier scattering rates
for the electron and hole transitions in and out of QD. As a result, the modulation frequency of
QDWELL lasers is limited by a comparatively low RO frequency of about 7 GHz. The modu-
lation frequency can be enhanced by an increase of the injection current. But the increase of the
injection current leads to the QDWELL laser heating and significant performance deterioration.
Figure 13. ER dependence on the XGM detuning for the signal wave wavelength λs ¼ 1:35 μm, the signal wave optical
power Ps ¼ 1 mW, the bias current density of 2jth , and the CW pumping wave power Pp of 0.1 mW (the lower curve), 0.01 mW
(the upper curve).
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
95

The modulation frequency and operation rate of semiconductor lasers and SOA can be
improved by OIL using the master laser for the optical injection of the slave laser. We solved
numerically the system of LS rate equations for QDWELL laser including the optical injection,
the explicit expressions for the nonlinear carrier scattering rates, and the inhomogeneous
spectral broadening specific for QD. The simulation results show that the carrier dynamics in
QW and QD is synchronized by the sufficiently strong optical injection power Pinj > 1 mW
since the fast stimulated transitions become dominant. As a result, the modulation frequency
increases up to 30 GHz when the QDWELL output signal eye diagrams start to deteriorate.
The high level of the carrier density in QD is provided by the optical injection, and the
influence of the bias current is negligible. The strong bias current is not necessary, and the
device heating and degradation are avoided. The optical injection process strongly depends on
the frequency detuning between the master laser and the QDWELL slave laser. For the low
optical injection power and the large detuning of about 10 GHz, the instability occurs accom-
panied by the strong oscillations of the QDWELL laser output signal. We solved the LS rate
equations for AOL based on the optically injected QDWELL laser in the direct modulation
regime for the optical injection power of 1 mW, zero detuning, 4-QAM modulation format, and
128 subcarriers with a 500 MHz bandwidth. In such a case, AOL manifests high performance
up to the modulation frequency of 60 GHz.
TWA QDWELL LED with an input optical signal operates as a QDWELL SOA. QDWELL SOA
is described by the modified system of rate equations including the equations for the pumping
and signal wave photon densities. In such a case, the sufficiently strong pumping wave
simultaneously plays a role of the optical injection and synchronizes the carrier dynamics in
QW and QD. The nonlinear optical processes of XGM and XPM occur in a QDWELL SOA.
QDWELL SOA performance is improved, the fast gain recovery takes place, the gain band-
width is enhanced, ER and chirp decreases.
Author details
Yossef Ben Ezra1,2 and Boris I. Lembrikov1*
*Address all correspondence to: borisle@hit.ac.il
1 Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, Holon Institute of Technology (HIT),
Holon, Israel
2 MER Cellos, Holon, Israel
References
[1] Agrell E, Karlsson M, Chraplyvy AR, et al. Roadmap of optical communications. Journal
of Optics. 2016;18(6):1-40. DOI: 10.1088/2040-8978/18/6/063002
Optical Communication Technology
96

[2] Agrawal GP. Fiber-optic Communication Systems. 4th ed. New York: Wiley; 2010. ISBN:
978-0-470-50511-3
[3] Agrawal GP. Nonlinear Fiber Optics. 5th ed. New York: Academic Press; 2013. ISBN: 978-
0-12397-023-7
[4] Shieh W, Djordjevic I. Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing for Optical Commu-
nications. London: Academic Press Elsevier; 2010. ISBN: 978-0-12-374879-9
[5] Ip E, Pak Tao Lau A, Barros DJF, Kahn JM. Coherent detection in optical fiber systems.
Optics Express. 2008;16:753-791. ISSN: 1094-4087
[6] Zhao B, Yariv A. Quantum well semiconductor lasers. In: Kapon E, editor. Semiconductor
Lasers I. Fundamentals. New York: Academic Press; 1999. pp. 1-121. ISBN: 0-12-397630-8
[7] Harrison P. Quantum Wells, Wires and Dots. Chichester, England: Wiley; 2005. p. 482.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-01079-2
[8] Nagarajan R, Bowers JE. High-Speed lasers. In: Kapon E, editor. Semiconductor Lasers I
Fundamentals. New York: Academic Press; 1999. pp. 177-290. ISBN: 0-12-397630-8
[9] Rafailov EU, Cataluna MA, Avrutin EA. Ultrafast Lasers Based on Quantum Dot Struc-
tures. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH; 2011. p. 250. ISBN: 978-3-527-40928-0
[10] Lüdge K. Modeling Quantum-Dot-Based devices. In: Lüdge K, editor. Nonlinear Laser
Dynamics. Weinheim, Germany: Wiley-VCH; 2012. pp. 1-33. ISBN: 978-0-470-85619-2
[11] Ustinov VM, Zhukov AE, Egorov AY, Maleev NA. Quantum Dot Lasers. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2003. ISBN: 0 19 852679 2
[12] Ledentsov NN, Bimberg D, Alferov ZI. Progress in epitaxial growth and performance of
quantum dot and quantum wire lasers. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2008;26:1540-
1555. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2008.923645
[13] Coleman JJ, Young JD, Garg A. Semiconductor quantum dot lasers: A tutorial. Journal of
Lightwave Technology. 2011;29:499-5102011. DOI: 10.1109/JLT.2010.2098849
[14] Malić E, Bormann MJP, Hövel P, Kuntz M, Bimberg D, Knorr A, Schöll E. Coulomb damped
relaxation oscillations in semiconductor quantum dot lasers. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics. 2007;13:1242-1247. DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2007.905148
[15] Lüdge K, Bormann MJP, Malić E, Hövel P, Kuntz M, Bimberg D, Knorr A, Schöll E. Turn-
on dynamics and modulation response in semiconductor quantum dot lasers. Physical
Review B. 2008;78:035316-1-035316-11. DOI: 10.103/PhysRevB.78.035316
[16] Lüdge K, Schöll E. Quantum-dot lasers—Desynchronized nonlinear dynamics of elec-
trons and holes. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics. 2009;45:1396-1403. DOI: 10.1109/
JQE.2009.2028159
[17] Lüdge K, Aust R, Fiol G, Stubenrauch M, Arsenijević D, Bimberg D, Schöll E. Large-
signal response of semiconductor quantum-dot lasers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Elec-
tronics. 2010;46:1755-1762. DOI: 10.1109/JQE.2010.2066959
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
97

[18] Lüdge K, Schöll E. Nonlinear dynamics of doped semiconductor quantum dot lasers. The
European Physics Journal D. 2010;58:167-174. DOI: 10.1140/epjd/e2010-00041-8
[19] Lau EK, Wong LJ, Wu MC. Enhanced modulation characteristics of injection-locked
lasers: A tutorial. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics. 2009;15:618-
633. DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2009.2014779
[20] Pausch J, Otto C, Tylaite E, Majer N, Schöll E, Lüdge K. Optically injected quantum dot
lasers: Impact of nonlinear carrier lifetimes on frequency-locking dynamics. New Journal
of Physics. 2012;14:1-20. DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/14/053018
[21] Agrawal GP, Olsson NA. Self-phase modulation and spectral broadening of optical
pulses in semiconductor optical amplifiers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics.
1989;25:2297-2306. DOI: 0018-9197/89/1100-2297
[22] Uskov AV, Berg TW, Mork J. Theory of pulse-train amplification without patterning
effects in quantum-dot semiconductor optical amplifiers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Elec-
tronics. 2004;40:306-320. DOI: 10.1109/JQE.2003.82032
[23] Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. Semiconductor optical amplifier based on a quantum Dot-in-a-
Well (QDWELL) structure under optical pumping. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics.
2014;50:340-347. DOI: 10.1109/JQE.20142308393
[24] Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. Synchronized carrier dynamics in quantum Dot-in-a-Well
(QDWELL) laser under an optical injection. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics. 2013;19:1-8. DOI: 10.1109/JSTQE.2013.2246770
[25] Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) laser dynamics under
optical injection. Optical and Quantum Electronics. 2014;46:1239-1245. DOI: 10.1007/s1
1082-013-9829-3
[26] Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. UWB system optical link based on a Quantum-Dot-in-a-Well
(QDWELL) laser. Optical and Quantum Electronics. 2015;47:1527-1533. DOI: 10.1007/s1
1082-015-0154-x
[27] Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. Investigation of a cross-gain modulation (XGM) in a semicon-
ductor optical amplifier (SOA) based on a quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) structure.
IET Optoelectronics. 2015;9:43-51. DOI: 10.1049/iet-opt.2014.0061
[28] Chang-Hasnain CJ, Zhao X. Ultrahigh-speed laser modulation by injection locking. In:
Kaminov IP, Li T, Willner AE, editors. Optical Fiber Telecommunications. V A. Compo-
nents and Subsystems. London: Elsevier Academic Press; 2008. pp. 145-182. ISBN: 978-0-
12-374171-4
[29] Ran M., Ben Ezra Y., Lembrikov B. I. Ultra-wideband radio-over-optical fibre technologies.
In: Kraemer R, Katz M., editors. Short-Range Wireless Communications: Emerging Tech-
nologies and Applications. Harvard: Wiley; 2009. pp. 271-327. ISBN: 978-0-470-69995-9
Optical Communication Technology
98

[30] Ran M, Ben Ezra Y, Lembrikov BI. High performance analog optical links based on
quantum dot devices for UWB signal transmission. In: Lembrikov BI, editor. Ultra Wide-
band. Croatia: InTechOpen; 2010. pp. 75-96. ISBN: 978-953-307-139-8
[31] Connely MJ. Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers. London: Kluwer; 2002. p. 169. ISBN: 0-
7923-7657-9
Improvement of the Quantum Dot-in-a-Well (QDWELL) Laser and Amplifier Performance under the Optical Injection
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69946
99


Chapter 5
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for
Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
Benjamin Dingel, Nicholas Madamopoulos and
Andru Prescod
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
Abstract
This chapter, first, presents the motivation behind the need for adaptive, highly linear
electro-optic modulators and an overview of the different optical linearization approaches
of electro-optic modulators. Then, the figures of merits in terms of linearity performance
are described and analyzed. Next, the chapter focuses on one excellent linearization
approach called interferometric modulator with phase-modulating and cavity-modulating
components (IMPACC). Here, we model IMPACC by simulating each of the key building
blocks separately before putting them together as IMPACC modulator. This adaptive
IMPACC design is compared to typical Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) based modu-
lators, and ring-assisted Mach-Zenhder interferometer (RAMZI) modulators. Theoretical
analysis and results show that the IMPACC provides both superior linearity performance
and unique adaptive feature that can be used to compensate for manufacturing tolerances,
thus, providing extra flexibility in terms of device manufacturability as well as system
integration.
Keywords: linear optical intensity modulator, spurious free dynamic range, bandwidth,
Mach Zehnder interferometer (MZI) modulator, resonator-assisted Mach Zehnder inter-
ferometer (RAMZI), interferometric modulator with phase-modulating and cavity-
modulating components (IMPACC), broadband communication
1. Introduction
1.1. Technology trends in microwave photonic links (MPLs)
The current state of microwave photonic links (MPLs) is in the midst of transformation toward
more dynamic and flexible MPLs, in response to three major on-going technical shifts, as
depicted in Figure 1. The first technical shift is an outgrowth of the concept of software-defined

networks (SDN) or software-defined radio (SDR) [1–6]. SDN/SDR is going to be investigated,
demonstrated, and applied by the microwave photonics community from many different
fronts. These include (i) architecture level for future networking needs, (ii) link level to support
flexible optical transport layer needs, and even (iii) module level that requires programmable
functions that are accessible by direct software control. This shift is driven further by ever
expanding applications of MPLs in various “bandwidth-hungry” communication fields like
cellular [7] and optical wireless [8], besides the traditional applications of cable television
(CATV) [9], subcarrier multiplexing (SCM) optical communication systems [10–12], defense
and military [13–16]. The overall goal is toward some form of software-defined MPLs.
Figure 2 shows one potential MPL in the context of a bigger configuration defined by SDN—a
generic analog optical link, which we will refer to as SD-MPL. It consists of (i) a reconfigurable
intensity-modulated direct-detection (IM-DD) link architecture, (ii) control plane, and (iii)
network controller. The reconfigurable IM-DD comprises of three modules, namely (1) tunable
transmitter, (2) fiber, and (3) receiver. The transmitter module consists of a tunable CW laser
source, intensity modulator, RF driver, and RF amplifier, whereas the receiver module could
be made up of fiber amplifier and photodetectors for a simple case, and might include DSP
module with analog-to-digital converter (ADC) for a more sophisticated/advanced case.
Within the context of SDN, the control plane assembles, enables, and coordinates all pertinent
control signals coming from and through the transmitter and receiver modules. Then, the
network controller accesses the control plane through OpenFlow interface [5, 17–20] to config-
ure the transmitter and receiver modules. For this generic architecture to function back to
traditional, standalone MPLs, the network controller and control plane can be removed and
Figure 1. Technology shifts with SDN, integrated microwave photonic (IMWP) and function-transformable photonic
devices are generating changes in the architecture, transport and module levels in the traditional fiber-optic links and
systems.
Optical Communication Technology
102

the individual control signals are now transferred to the transmitter and receiver modules
of the MPLs.
The second technical shift is the rapid growth of the field integrated microwave photonics (IMWP)
[21–23], which used to be a niche research area some three decades ago. Today, IMWP aims to
miniaturize key photonic components, which are essential in the MPLs, by using the emerging
photonic integrated circuits (PICs) [23–26] technology to the level that would be comparable
to the performance of state-of-the-art microwave components and systems [21]. Clearly, the
rapid developments and advances [22, 23–26] in fabrication technologies re-enforce more
advanced IMWP devices and support the prospect of future software-defined MPLs.
1.2. Device programmability
The third technical shift is happening at the module level with the development of optical
programmable devices and components. These programmable devices and components can
have the traditional features of reconfigurability, tunability, or selectability. There are growing
number of reports and demonstrations of so-called microwave photonics processors [27–33].
Another implementation of these devices is based on the concept of a photonic field-
programmable gate array (FPGA) or “Photonics FPGA”. It is the analogous version of the elec-
tronic FPGA, which is an integrated circuit designed to be configured by a customer or a designer
after manufacturing. “Photonic FPGA” is geared toward arbitrary function generation or function
programmability in miniaturized form, which is essential in the full implementation of SDN. This
technology is still in the early stages of development, but the growing numbers of demonstrations
of on-chip optical processing have been reported and they look promising [27–40].
Figure 2. A generic software defined IM-DD-based MPLs in context of a bigger configuration defined by SDN.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
103

1.3. Linearity
However, to really support the march toward future IMWP-assisted, software-defined MPLs,
it is imperative that these new photonic components not only have inherent programmable
features that can be accessed by software control, but also superior linearity characteristics. Note
that microwave photonic links, in its basic form, is essentially a linearization engineering
challenge. Regardless of whether we are talking about current MPLs or the future SD-MPLs,
the core requirement of the links is still the same—high linearity links! Superior device’s linearity
translates to high overall link performance. The combination of superior linearity and program-
mability features in key photonics devices would lead to adaptive, highly linearity SD-MPLs.
1.4. Intensity-modulated direct detection (IM-DD) link and figure of merits
One of the most dominant optical transport schemes in MPLs is the intensity modulated direct
detection (IM-DD) because of its simplicity and low cost. IM-DD scheme is shown in the upper
portion of Figure 2. In its basic form, it consists of a RF data signal, laser source (either in the
form of (i) directly modulated laser or (ii) externally modulated laser, using a combination of
CW laser transmitter and optical modulator), optical fibers, optical and electrical amplifiers,
and photodetector.
For most low-bandwidth (<1 GHz) applications, the directly modulated laser is used as a laser
source for economic reason. However, for applications that require higher linearity, larger link
gain and wider bandwidth (e.g., 1–60 GHz), the use of an externally modulated laser is the
most viable and common approach. It offers the best approach toward achieving higher link
linearity compared with directly modulated lasers since CW lasers with very low RIN noise
are commercially available. Furthermore, the high output power of a laser can act “as an
indirect RF power booster” for the RF input signal to provide a positive gain rather than a
negative gain (or equivalent loss) [41]. This important feature adds advantage to the link using
an external modulator compared with a directly modulated laser. From this point forward of this
book chapter, when we talk about the links or MPLs, we will specifically mean only externally modu-
lated links.
The quality of the overall links performance is largely measured by four important figures-
of-merit [42], namely: (1) its dynamic range in terms of the spurious-free-dynamic-range
(SFDR), (2) link gain (G), (3) noise figure (NF), and (4) bandwidth. The link gain (G)
describes the relationship of the RF input signal power to RF output signal power of the
IM-DD link, whereas the noise figure (NF) defines the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) degrada-
tion in the link. The SFDR depicts the RF signal power range that can be accommodated by
the link, taking into account the effects of noise and nonlinear distortions. It represents the
highest signal to noise ratio when the intermodulation signal power is equal to the noise
floor. Thus, it combines noise and linearity performance of the link. More detailed technical
discussions on these figures-of-merit are found in references [14–16, 43].
The nonlinearities in any part of the links (such as laser, modulator, fiber, photodetector,
amplifier, etc.) translate directly to signal noise and distortion. Nonlinear performance at the
fiber occurs when the optical powers of the signals are high enough; hence, this is usually
Optical Communication Technology
104

mitigated by proper engineering of the optical signal powers to avoid fiber-based nonlinearity.
Similarly, detector nonlinearity is mitigated by proper optical power engineering so that the
optical power impinging on the photodetector is within the linear response of the photodetec-
tor. The nonlinearity of the modulator affects the distortion and dynamic range of fiber optic
links. From among these factors, the distortion produced by the external optical modulators
has the most negative impact on the overall performance of the link. More specifically, the
inherent nonlinear transfer function of the external intensity modulator is the dominant limi-
tation in the performance of MPLs.
1.5. Adaptive linearized intensity modulator
As mentioned earlier, the major source of distortion in IMDD links is the nonlinearity of the
intensity modulator. The quest to develop high linearity external modulator with wide band-
width at low cost has been an on-going challenge for decades.
Besides linearity, other key and important attributes of an external intensity modulator
include, (1) low half-wave (Vπ) voltage, (2) low insertion loss (IL), (3) high bandwidth (BW)
capability, (4) low-cost, and (5) low complexity design. The low Vπ voltage is related to the
slope of the transfer function of the modulator. In general, the steeper the slope of the transfer
function of the modulator, the smaller the Vπ voltage. The immediate impact is an increase of
the link gain (G). A modulator with low Vπ voltage, as well as low insertion loss, is very
attractive since it lowers the necessary input power level of the link and increases gain. Thus,
low Vπ and low IL lead to higher dynamic range, and low noise figure (NF), while large
bandwidth capability makes it better for high-end applications. Minimal complexity and low
cost are interlinked and can open the use of high bandwidth MPLs applicable to more com-
mercial applications.
Lastly, any linearized modulator must also have a high tolerance to changes in the RF power
level, bias drifts, optical wavelength drifts, etc. This requirement calls for modulator with
adaptive capability to provide better maintenance and stable operation of the overall MPLs.
Thus, the focus of this book chapter is two-fold. First, it provides a comprehensive overview of
the different linearization approaches that have been proposed and implemented to obtain a
highly linear external intensity modulator. Second, it reviews a special type of intensity mod-
ulator called interferometric modulator with phase-modulating and cavity-modulating com-
ponents (IMPACC) that is not only highly linear but also adaptive. These combined features,
as far as we know, are not available with any previously reported intensity modulators.
1.6. Objectives and organization
This chapter of the book is organized as follows. First, we give a brief outline of the different
linearization technologies used for intensity modulator in Section 2. After a broad overview,
we introduce the different optical approaches in linearizing the modulators. Then, we focus on
one particular subgrouping known as MZI-based linearized modulator. In Section 3, we
present a special type of MZI-based linearized modulator called IMPACC. IMPACC provides
both superior linearity and unique adaptive feature. Here, we discuss its basic principle,
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
105

configuration, and modeling. The comparison and discussion of the original IMPACC and
ring-assisted Mach-Zenhder interferometer (RAMZI) modulator are also presented. In Section
4, we provide and analyze IMPACC and RAMZI’s respective performances before giving our
conclusion in Section 5.
2. Survey of linear intensity modulators
In this section, we discuss the different linear intensity modulators. Before presenting these
modulators, we first discuss an important figure-of-merit called spurious free dynamic range
(SFDR) which quantifies the linearity of a given link. In Section 2.1, we discuss its derivation
using a 2-tone test and graphically describe its significance. In Section 2.2, we provide an
overview of the different general techniques to linearize intensity modulators before focusing
on one general approach called optical linearization in Section 2.3. Optical linearization has
many implementation flavors depending on the particular optical structure used for the modu-
lator. In Section 2.4, we narrow down to a subgroup known as MZI-based modulator because of
its popularity and mature technology. Within this subgroup, there are different configurations
that have been proposed and implemented, and we spotlight one configuration called IMPACC.
2.1. Measure of linearity: SFDR
A 2-tone frequency test is typically used to evaluate SFDR of the link. Figure 3(a) shows a
typical IM-DD based MPL consisting of a laser, external modulator RF signal amplifier, optical
fiber, photodetector, and RF output amplifier. Note that when the focus of the link is to
establish the performance of the external modulator, the common practice is to consider only
the intrinsic MPLs. Here, the calculation of dynamic range does not contain the effects of the
optical fiber, electrical amplifiers, and optical amplifier, if present.
In Figure 3(a), RF input signal with two closely spaced RF frequencies, f1 and f2, of equal-
power levels, are simultaneously injected into a nonlinear external optical modulator. The
nonlinear interaction between these two signals will create new output frequencies, as shown
in the bottom portion of Figure 3(a). Thus, the detected RF output signal will contain two
fundamental frequencies, (e.g., f1 and f2) together with the second-order IMD output frequen-
cies, (e.g., f1 + f2 and f2 f1), second-order harmonics, (e.g., 2f1 and 2f2), and third-order IMD
outputs (e.g., 2f1  f2 and 2f2  f1). Other higher order harmonics and IMD effects (e.g., fourth,
fifth, etc.) can also be present, but their effects are generally small and can be filtered out. The
second-order SFDR is only important for systems whose bandwidth is more than one octave
because the second-order intermodulation products will fall outside the passband of a
suboctave system. However, the most important and often most difficult to filter out are the
third-order effects which occur very close to the fundamental frequencies within the system
bandwidth of interest as shown in Figure 3(a).
Instead of giving the mathematical derivation of SFDR and other relevant parameters or merits,
we present a graphical treatment in the discussion of SFDR [16]. For detailed mathematical
derivation, we direct readers to relevant references [14–16]. Figure 3(b) depicts the output RF
Optical Communication Technology
106

signal power versus the RF input power of the different frequency signals generated by the
nonlinear interaction within the nonlinear external modulator. This single plot also demon-
strates the relationships of the different parameters which we summarize below:
•
PONF, BN, PON, and PIN: PONF refers to the output noise floor, which is the minimum
discernable signal, whereas BN is the background noise or thermal noise limit and equal
to 174 dBm/Hz at a temperature of 25C. Pin is the RF input signal power and Pout is the
RF output signal power.
•
Link Gain, G: The MPL gain, in dB, is defined as the difference of the power at the output
of the MPL, Pout, to the available power of the input, Pin [16]:
G ¼ Pout  Pin
ð1Þ
Figure 3. (a) Typical IMDD fiber optic link with input and output RF spectrum; (b) output RF power versus input RF
power, showing the important MPL RF parameters/figures of merit, (A) fundamental curve with slope of 1, (B) second-
order harmonics and intermodulation terms with slope of 2, (C) third-order intermodulation terms with slope of 3, (D)
fifth-order intermodulation terms, with nonlinear slope and not the same slope in the entire frequency range, typical slope
at the linear portion is 5 and corresponding SFDR calculations; (c) details of inset of (b) with the definition of the 1-dB
compression point, and the IPn, with n = 2, 3, 5.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
107

We should note here that G is typically referred to as small signal gain, because only in the
small-signal regime, the gain is independent of input signal power. That is, for any input
power, the associated output power is G dB units higher than the input power. Hence, a
straight line is obtained. However, as we continue to increase the modulation power (Pin),
the straight gain line begins to saturate, until a maximum output power is reached and
then starts curving downwards. Beyond this, any increase in the input power leads to
lower output power. We should note that G is not necessarily positive. We use it here in its
general form, where positive G means increase in the output power, whereas, negative G
means reduction in the optical power or loss.
•
Different Signal Slope Lines: The fundamental curve, third-order IMD curve, and fifth-
order IMD curve have a slope of 1, slope of 3, and slope of 5 in the linear region,
respectively. Note that oftentimes at the fifth-order IMD, the slope is not necessarily the
same throughout the entire frequency band, but it can change from slope 3 to slope 5
[16, 44]. Figure 3(b) shows the associated slope lines marked as A (fundamental curve
with slope of 1), B (second-order harmonics and intermodulation terms with slope of 2), C
(third-order intermodulation terms with slope of 3), and D (fifth-order intermodulation
terms, with nonlinear slope and not the same slope in the entire frequency range, typical
slope at the linear portion is 5.
•
Noise figure (NF):
is defined as the 10 log(F), where F is the noise factor of the MPL and defined as the
quotient of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the input to that at the output, taken for a
thermal-noise-limited input at Ts or –174 dBm. Typically this is described by the following
equation [16, 43]:
NF½dB  10 logðFÞ ¼ 174 þ Nout½dBm=Hz  G½dB;
ð2Þ
•
Spurious free dynamic range (SFDR): Graphically, the SFDR is the difference measured
from the corresponding point on the fundamental curve to the associated point in the
intermodulation distortion (IMD) curve, where IMD intersects or equals the PONF. Physi-
cally, this means that this is the area for which any IMD terms are just below the noise
floor and cannot be “seen” by the system. This approach determines the SFDR value, as
discussed by Bridges et al. [45]. Mathematically, SFDR is defined as [45]:
SFDR ¼ 2
3

OIP3  PON  10log10ðBÞ

ð3Þ
for a system limited by third-order IMD, where OIP3 is the output power at the third-
order intercept point and B is the system bandwidth (with units Hz). It is simply two-
thirds the difference between the largest distortion-less signal that can be input into the
system and the smallest detectable signal in the system. The lower end of this range (the
minimum discernable signal) is the sum of the output noise floor (PONF) and the system
bandwidth, B. The measurement bandwidth is assumed to be 1 Hz. In this case, the units
Optical Communication Technology
108

of SFDR are dB/Hz2/3. However, in the case of more linear systems that are limited by
fifth-order IMD, SFDR is mathematically defined as [45]:
SFDR ¼ 4
5

OIP5  PON  10log10ðBÞ

ð4Þ
where OIP5 is the output power at the fifth-order intercept point. And, the units of SFDR
for a system limited by fifth-order IMD are dB/Hz4/5. These respective SFDRs for the third-
order and fifth-order are labeled as SFDR3 and SFDR5, respectively in Figure 3(b).
•
1-dB Compression point: This is the point at which the small signal gain (e.g., straight
extended line in Figure 3(b)) is 1-dB higher than the actual gain curve. This point signifies
the end of the linear regime. A closer look of 1-dB Compression point is depicted in
Figure 3(c).
•
Compression dynamic range (CDR): is the difference between the output power at the
1-dB compression point (expressed in dBm) to the smallest such input power (e.g., noise
floor).
•
IPn–nth-order intercept point: If we extend the linear slope of the fundamental and the
nth-IMD curve, then these lines intersect at a point. We called this point the nth-order
intercept point (e.g., IP3 if the IMD is the third-order IMD curve, IP5 if the IMD is the fifth-
order IMD curve). The point is defined by the input intercept power (IIPn) and the output
intercept power (OIPn). These points are depicted in Figure 3(c).
Note that in some new modulator designs, the fifth-order IMD curves are not always straight
lines with a constant slope, but have a slight deviation from a straight line just above the noise
floor. This is clearly seen in Figure 3(b), in the circled region just below the output system noise
level (PONF—output noise floor), where the slope of an IMD curve increases beyond 5. Since
the nonlinearity in the IMD curve is not taken into account in Eqs. (3) and (4), the graphical
approach is best suited to be used in calculating the SFDR for the new modulator. In this
approach, the SFDR is simply defined as the difference between the fundamental and inter-
modulation output powers at the input power location where the IMD curve intersects the
output noise floor (PONF).
2.2. Different linearization approaches
Figure 4 summarizes the three general approaches used to linearize a generic external
intensity modulator based on the physical mechanism used, namely: (1) electrical, (2) optical,
and (3) digital (post detection). The electrical and digital linearization approaches can further
be subdivided into smaller categories (as in the case of optical linearization) but we will
not review this in much detail here, however more detailed information can be found
in [13, 21–22, 41, 46–55].
Briefly speaking, the electrical linearization approach employs different techniques [46–49]
such as: (i) RF predistortion, (ii) RF Feed-forward, (iii) combined RF Feed-forward and
predistortion, and (iv) others. These techniques generate circuits with either (a) inverse function
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
109

(ArcSin) of the modulator to predistort the RF signal before it is injected into the modulator, or
(b) split a portion of the RF signal, amplify, reverse its sign, and add it to delayed original RF
signal. The overall goal is to cancel or eliminate the original distorted components in the RF
signal. These techniques are generally simple and inexpensive but they are limited by the
frequency bandwidth of the electrical circuits [51, 53].
On the other hand, a digital linearization approach is based on the application of digital signal
processing, DSP [50, 52, 54] techniques to post-detected output signal. The digital approach is
very promising because of its flexibility and future growth of DSP. However, its practical
usefulness will depend on the progress and development in analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) and digital-to-analog converter (DAC) technologies. Unfortunately, ADC is limited by
the sampling rate of <10 G/sample at this time [55]. Although there are ADC/DAC technology
with >10 G/sample rates, they are usually for instrument purposes [55] and not for field
deployment.
In contrast to electrical and digital linearization approaches, optical linearization is free from
circuit frequency modulation limitation and does not utilize ADC/DAC technologies. For these
reasons, we focus on the optical linearization approach in this chapter.
2.3. Optical linearization
As shown in Figure 4, the optical linearization approach can be subdivided further into 5
subgroupings, depending on the key optical structure of the modulator namely; (1) electroab-
sorption (EA) modulator [56–58], (2) directional coupler (DC) modulator [59–62], (3) all-optical-
based approach [63–65], (4) ring resonator modulator [66–72], and (5) Mach-Zenhder interfer-
ometer (MZI)-based modulator [73–109]. These different modulators have been implemented
and produced different varying degrees of linearity performance. From among these general
configurations, the MZI-based modulator is the most well understood, most developed and
popular optical structure in the technical community. Hence, we concentrate on the optical
linearization approach with a focus on MZI-based linearized modulator.
Figure 4. General classification of the different linearity approaches proposed/implemented in fiber-optics links.
Optical Communication Technology
110

2.4. MZI-based linearized modulator
Technically speaking, the MZI-based modulator is the most well-studied type of modulator. A
typical nonlinearized MZI modulator has a SFDR value of around 90–112 dB-Hz2/3. In the last
decade, a wide range of linearization approaches has been proposed and implemented to
improve the standard MZI modulator to have 120–130 dB-Hz2/3 SFDR range using different
configurations [74–76, 78–79, 81–84]. Recently, the goal is to push the SFDR further toward >130
dB-Hz4/5. Nevertheless, most of them include complex designs and low modulation bandwidth.
Figure 5 shows these different types of MZI-based linearized electro-optic modulators, which
can be divided into four groups depending on the actual implementations. The first group can be
called dual-signal MZI-based modulator design [74–75, 83–84]. It comprises of one modulator
but with two optical signals injected into the device, as depicted in Figure 5(a). The two input
signal amplitudes and phases must be properly matched with predetermined values of the RF
amplitude phase signal. These two injected optical signals could be implemented using (i) two
polarizations [74–75], (ii) two wavelengths [84], or (iii) bidirectional signals [83]. The major
advantage of this family of modulators is the relative simplicity and low cost. Its disadvantages
are design inflexibility, nonoptimum performance, and tight tolerance requirements.
Figure 5. Different types of linear optical modulators based on MZI together with their respective implementation
configurations for (a) dual-signal MZI modulator, (b) cascaded modulator, (c) RAMZI, and (d) IMPACC.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
111

The second group can be referred to as cascaded modulator design which consists of two or
more standard MZI modulators connected in series [76, 78–79, 80–82] or in parallel [100, 109]
arrangements as illustrated in Figure 5(b). It is a generalization of the principle used in the first
group. Its major drawbacks are the tight manufacturing tolerance requirements, higher optical
loss, higher cost, due to use of multiple modulators, and complicated compensation arrange-
ment.
The third group is generally designated as RAMZI modulators [87–88, 97–99], which has received
increased interest in recent years. Some implementations are shown in Figure 5(c). The RAMZI
uses ring resonator(s) (RRs) instead of the standard phase modulator (PM) which is coupled
in the arm(s) of the MZI. This design gives higher SFDR performance but often at higher
manufacturing complexity, limited RF bandwidth range, and stricter transmission coefficient
control requirement.
The fourth and last group of optically linearized MZI-based modulators was introduced by
our group [89, 93–94, 96, 101–105, 107–108]. This modulator design is a family of modulators
which we referred to as IMPACC. There are numerous configurations and variations within
the family of IMPACC designs [93]. Two of these implementations are shown in Figure 5(d).
One of these specific structures of IMPACC is discussed in more details in Section 3 and its
performance in Section 4.
3. Design and modeling of IMPACC
This section discusses the basic principle, configuration, and modeling of IMPACC. In Section
3.1, we present an overview of IMPACC configuration. For both educational as well as clarity
purposes, we identify the different elements of IMPACC and discuss them separately in
Section 3.2. Lastly, we bring all these elements together to come out with IMPACC modulator.
While this section gives the basic principle of IMPACC, Section 4 presents its performance.
3.1. Configuration of IMPACC
The configuration of our modulator, known as IMPACC, is shown in Figure 6. IMPACC
comprises of a MZI configuration, in which one of its arms (e.g., lower) has an active microring
resonator (MRR) modulator, whereas the other arm (upper) has an active phase modulator
(PM). It uses the standard PM as the phase modulating component and the MRR as the cavity
modulating component within a MZI structure [89, 93–94, 96, 101–108]. The exact positions of
the PM and MRR relative to one another offer some variations of the implementation, as
shown in Figure 5(d).
Interestingly, the IMPACC configuration can be seen as a generalization of both MZI modula-
tor and RAMZI. First, the normal combination of MZI structure and active PM in one of the
arm of MZI leads to a typical single-electrode MZ modulator. Second, the typical combination of
a MZI structure and an active MRR modulator in one of its arms results in a single-electrode
RAMZI modulator [88, 91–92, 98]. When MRR and PM are present in MZI’s arms, then this
configuration becomes IMPACC.
Optical Communication Technology
112

Another important aspect of IMPACC is that the RF power signal is split between the MRR
and PM by the RF power splitter (PS) with a power split ratio of F:(1F). This is a critical aspect
in the operation of the IMPACC where PM and MRR are driven by the same frequency RF
signal, but with different RF power, controlled by the power split ratio (F) using a variable or
fixed RF power splitter (PS). Furthermore, the portions of the RF signals directed to MRR and
PM electrodes are also delayed by an amount ξMRR and ξPM, respectively. These external
control parameters from PS are not only instrumental in providing superior linear perfor-
mance but also have key roles in delivering the unique adaptive mode of IMPACC. This
adaptive feature is not available with any known modulators, as far as we know.
The input and output optical splitters (OS and OC) in the MZI configurations are generally
assumed to have a (50:50) split so that the optical signal is divided equally into two portions.
However, in this chapter of the book, we generalize this condition by taking OS and OC to
have arbitrary optical power split ratios namely, POS:1POS and POC:1POC. This condition
allows us to investigate the effect of unbalanced power split ratio of OS and OC on the
performance of IMPACC.
3.2. Elements of IMPACC
The details of the design of IMPACC have been previously described [77, 89, 93–94, 101–108].
Structurally speaking, IMPACC comprises of four important building blocks namely; (1) Mach
Zehnder interferometer (MZI), (2) phase modulator (PM), (3) microring resonator (MRR)
modulator, and (4) RF power splitter. In order to appreciate its rich properties, we will first
briefly discuss the fundamentals of each of the four important constituents namely; (i) PM, (ii)
MZM, (iii) RR, and (iv) RAMZI, before they are combined and operated under certain condi-
tions to create IMPACC.
Figure 6. Basic configuration of IMPACC.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
113

3.2.1. Phase modulator (PM)
The basic principle of phase modulators is based on the Pockels or linear electro-optic
effect [73]. Depending on the material used, the specific axes orientations and the relative
alignment of the incoming polarization to the index ellipsoid of the material used, the net
effect is the refractive index modulation based on the external applied field. There are two
typical configurations, the longitudinal electro-optic modulation and the transverse electro-
optic modulation. In the first case, the electric field of the modulating field is parallel to the
direction of the optical beam propagation (except near the edges of the electrodes). In the
second case, the electric field of the modulating field is perpendicular to the direction of the
optical beam propagation. This second case offers refractive index changes induced by the
external electric field E that are proportional to the field E. Hence, the electrically induced
phase change (or retardation) for the optical beam through the material is proportional to the
product EL, where L is the length of the optical beam and electric field interaction and E=V/d is
the applied field, with V the applied voltage at the electrodes, which have a separation of d.
The net effect is that the ratio L/d can be engineered large enough to provide devices which
require low driving voltages.
Referring to Figure 7, an incident beam propagating along the y-direction, with polarization
along the z-axis (typical case for LiNbO3 based electro-optic devices), will experience an
electrically induced phase change, ϕpm of [73]:
φPM ¼ 2π
λ neL  π
λ n3
er33
L
d V ¼ φ0  Δφ;
ð5Þ
where r33 is the electro-optic coefficients implicated in this crystal case and orientation [73], λ is
the wavelength of the optical beam, ne is the extraordinary index of refraction seen by the
optical beam along this polarization orientation, L is the length of the crystal (or the interaction
length of the optical and electric fields), and d is the separation of the electrodes. Note that the
total phase change consists of two terms. The first one (e.g., φ0) is the natural propagation
phase change, whereas, the second term (Δφ) is the electrically induced phase change. Because
of the natural birefringence term, a phase compensator is required to adjust the phase until the
total phase retardation in the absence of the electric field is an odd multiple of π/2. The half
wave voltage for this case is [73]:
Vπ ¼ d
L
λ
n3
er33
ð6Þ
If the applied voltage V is sinusoidal V = Vm sin(ωm t), where ωm is the modulation frequency
and Vm is the applied magnitude of the voltage, then the transmitted beam will be phase
modulated which can be expressed as [73]:
Eðy,tÞ ¼ A exp ½ jðωt  ky  φ0 þ δ sin ωmtÞ
ð7Þ
where A is the constant amplitude, and the modulation index δ is given as [73]
Optical Communication Technology
114

δ ¼ π L
d
n3
er33
λ
Vm ¼ π Vm
Vπ
ð8Þ
We should note here that the phase modulator in a photonic integrated waveguide circuit is
slightly different as it has to be modified to accommodate a substrate structure and the
electrodes. A typical, but not the only, configuration is shown in Figure 7(b) and (c). The
optical waveguide is placed at the center of the gap between the two electrodes. In the optical
waveguide, the direction of the field of the applied electric field is parallel to the substrate
surface along the z-axis. The induced refractive index change Δnz changes the phase in the way
similar to Eq. 5.
3.2.2. Mach-Zehnder modulator (MZM)
A typical external modulator is usually in the form of an integrated optical modulator, which
includes a waveguide MZI structure that is fabricated on a slab of lithium niobate (LiNbO3). To
ensure that light is channeled through the waveguide, the area is typically doped with impu-
rities in order to increase the index of refraction.
Figure 8 shows a typical MZI modulator configuration where the incident light is split by a
Y-branch optical splitrer (OS) into the two arms of the interferometer structure. The light
traversing the first arm is modulated by a RF signal. As described in the previous section, the
applied electric signal induces a change in the index of refraction of the first waveguide and
hence the optical signal experiences a phase shift as it propagates through the waveguide. The
magnitude of the phase delay is proportional to the applied voltage and is given by [14]:
ΔθPM ¼ π V
Vπ
;
ð9Þ
where V is the voltage applied to the modulator and Vπ is the half-wave voltage that when
applied, causes a phase shift of π. The second portion of the splitted optical signal propagates
into the second arm without RF modulation. Then, the two optical signals are recombined at
the output by a Y-branch optical combiner (OC). This recombination can be either constructive
Figure 7. (a) Bulk electro-optic phase modulator, (b) photonic integrated waveguide electro-optic phase modulator in
perspective view, (c) waveguide electro-optic phase modulator in cross-section view.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
115

or destructive depending on the relative phase difference of the two components of the
interfering optical signals. Since the phase of one arm can be controlled by the applied electric
signal, the output signal can be modulated. The transfer function of the MZI modulator is
given by [73]:
TMZIðVÞ ¼ 1
2 1 þ cos
π V
Vπ
þ θ




;
ð10Þ
where θ is the bias phase.
3.2.3. Single microring resonator (MRR)
The basic formulation for the physics of microring resonators (MRR) has been extensively
discussed [85–86, 90]. We follow this analysis, in which an MRR has a total circumference
length equal to dMRR is coupled to a bus waveguide as shown in Figure 9(a). The MRR round
trip phase is given as θMRR = ω·n0·dMRR/c, where n0 is the index of refraction of the material, α is
the loss factor of the MRR waveguide, and c is the velocity of the light.
In Figure 9(a), the electric fields E1, E’1, E2, and E’2 are related by the matrix equation which
describes their interactions as [91]:
E2
E0
2
 
!
¼
τ
iκ
iκ
τ
 
!
E1
E0
1
 
!
ð11Þ
where τ is the transmission coupling coefficient of the coupler between the bus waveguide and
the MRR while κ is the associated cross coupling coefficient of the coupler. We assume that
only a single mode of the MRR is excited, and the coupler is lossless, so that τ2 + κ2 = 1.
The output electric field E2, after one round trip, can be expressed as [91]:
E2 ¼ τE1  iκE0
1 ¼ τE1  ðiκÞαeiθMRRE0
2 ¼ τE1  ðiκÞ2αeiθMRRE1 ¼ ðτ  κ2αeiθMRRÞE1
ð12Þ
Figure 8. (a) Integrated electro-optic modulation using waveguide Mach-Zehnder Interferometer (MZI) structure, and (b)
typical transfer function of a MZI.
Optical Communication Technology
116

Here, α is the RR waveguide loss factor (α = 1 indicates that the RR is lossless).
After two roundtrips, we have [91]:
E2 ¼ ðτ  κ2αeiθMRR E1  κ2τα2ei2θMRRÞE1
ð13Þ
Repeating this circulation around the MRR n times, output electric field E2 leads to [91]:
E2 ¼
τ  κ2X
∞
n¼1
τn1 αeiθMRR

	n
"
#
E1
ð14Þ
And finally, after infinite roundtrips, we have got the output electric field E2 as [91]:
E2 ¼ τ  αeiθMRR
1  ταeiθMRR E1
ð15Þ
Thus, its corresponding normalized transmission transfer function TMRR(θ) under steady-state
condition is given by [91]:
TMRRðθÞ ¼ E2
E1










2
¼ 1 
ð1  α2Þð1  τ2Þ
ð1  ατÞ2 þ 4ατ sin 2ðθMRR=2Þ
ð16Þ
Accordingly, the corresponding phase response, ΘMRR and group-delay (GD) [95] response of
MRR can be derived as [110, 111]:
ΘMRR ¼ π þ θMRR þ arctan
τ sin ðθMRRÞ
α  τ cos ðθMRRÞ


þ arctan
ατ sin ðθMRRÞ
1  ατ cos ðθMRRÞ


ð17Þ
GD ¼  d
dω ΘMRR
½

ð18Þ
Eqs. (14) and (16) will be handy in the analysis of the new modulator that we discuss in
Section 4.
Figure 9. Microring Resonator (MRR) with one bus waveguide, (a) top view showing the field amplitudes at the input
and output of the coupling region, (b) perspective view of the MRR with RF electrode.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
117

(A).Passive (steady-state) operation
The relationship between the magnitude of the bus waveguide-to-MRR transmission coupling
coefficient (τ) and the RR waveguide loss factor (α) defines the three different coupling condi-
tions of MRR [73, 85, 91, 110–112]. Figure 10(a) shows the typical MRR while Figure 10(b)
depicts its three different operating coupling conditions known as (1) critical-coupled (CC) when
α = τ, (2) over-coupled (OC) when α>τ, and (3) under-coupled (UC) when α<τ. Their respective
intensity and phase responses are shown in Figures 10(b) and (c), respectively. One notable
observation in Figure 10(b) is that the intensity output becomes zero at resonance frequency
(normalized frequency Ω = 0) under CC condition. In comparison, the respective dip intensity
outputs of OC MRR and UC MRR are always higher than zero. The second significant observa-
tion is found in Figure 10(c) where the phase response of UC MRR is “opposite in direction”
compared with phase responses of both OC MRR and CC MRR. This is significant and is used in
many group-delay/chromatic dispersion mitigation approaches. Recall that if waveguide
lossfactor α = 1, then MRR is ideally lossless and becomes an all-pass filter or phase only filter.
(B). Dynamic operation
If a voltage V, is applied to an electro-optic (EO) MRR, a corresponding round-trip phase shift
θMRR induced in the ring resonator is then given as [73]:
θMRR ¼ θ0 þ Δβ  dMRR;
ð19Þ
where θ0 = ωn dMRR/c is the static MRR phase response, and
Δβ ¼ πn3
0rΓV
λg
:
ð20Þ
Figure 10. (a)The three different operating coupling conditions of MRR under critical-coupling (CC) at α = τ, over-
coupling (OC) at α > τ, and under-coupling (UC) at α < τ conditions, (b) normalized intensity response for the three
operation conditions, and (c) their respective phase responses for the three operation conditions.
Optical Communication Technology
118

The parameter Δβ is responsible for the dynamic phase change due to applied voltage. Here, r
is the electro-optic coefficient of the waveguide, λ is the incident light wavelength, g is the
electrode gap and Γ is the overlap integral.
For a sinusoidal voltage, V=V0 sin ωmt applied to the MRR, then using the same approach that
was used to derive Eq. (14), the output amplitude, Eout(t) is given by [77] :
EoutðtÞ ¼
τ  κ2X
∞
n¼1
τn1αn exp i

nθMRR þ δn sin ðωmt  nφÞ

h
i
"
#
EinðtÞ
ð21Þ
where φ = ωm/FSR with ωm being the modulation frequency and FSR is the free spectral range
of MRR, n is the number of round trip around the ring, and δn is the modulation index. The
modulation index depends on the electrode structure. For a lumped electrode, the modulation
index is [91–92]:
δn sin ðωmt  nφÞ ¼
ðnL
0
Δβ sin ωm t þ n0
c z


 nφ
h
i
dz ¼ ΔβdMRR
sin ðnφ=2Þ
φ=2
sin ðωmt  nφÞ
ð22Þ
For a traveling wave electrode, the modulation index is given by [91–92]:
δn sin ðωmt  nφÞ ¼
X
n1
k¼0
ðnL
0
Δβ sin ωm ðt þ ktrÞ  Δn
c z


 nφ


dz
¼ ΔβdMRR
sin ðψ=2Þ
ψ=2
sin ðnφ=2Þ
sin ðφ=2Þ sin
ωmt  ψ
2  n þ 1
2
φ


ð23Þ
Where tr = n0L/c is the optical round-trip time and ψ = ωm·Δn·dMRR/c is the velocity matching
factor. Here, Δn = nm – n0, where nm is the microwave effective index and n0 is the optical
index.
3.2.4. RAMZI
Figure 11(a) illustrates a RAMZI configuration where MRR is coupled to a MZI in one of its
arms. We assumed that the OS and OC of the MZI have balanced (50:50) power split ratios.
Then, the transfer function of RAMZI is given as [66–67, 91–92, 98]:
TSS
RAMZIðθÞ ¼ 1
2
1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p ja θMRR
ð
ÞjeiArg½aðθMRRÞ þ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p eiφMZI












2
;
ð24Þ
where α(θMRR) is the complex amplitude transfer function of the MRR under steady-state (SS)
condition, which is given by Eq. (14) or (15), the phase response of MRR, ΘMRR = Arg[α(θMRR)]
is given by Eq. (17), and φMZI is the DC phase bias between the two arms of the MZI. In
Eq. (24), we assumed that the nominal MZI-arm lengths L1 and L2 are equal, except for the
length due to DC phase bias. If the MRR is lossless (α = 1), τ ¼ 2 
ﬃﬃﬃ
3
p
and φMZI = π/2, then
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
119

RAMZI becomes linearized around θ = π, which is off-resonance for the MRR [66–67, 91–92,
98]. Figure 11(b) shows the typical linearized transfer function of RAMZI in comparison to
standard MZI output intensity profile.
On the other hand, under dynamic state (DS) where a modulating sinusoidal RF voltage V is
applied to MRR electrode, the corresponding transfer function of RAMZI is given as [91]:
TDS
RAMZIðθÞ ¼ 1
2



 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p jaðθMRRÞjexp
h
i

arg½aðθMRRÞþkn0L2
i
þ 1ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p exp
h
iðkn0L1 þθbiasÞ
i


2
;
ð25Þ
where α(θMRR) is given by Eq. (21), θbias is the phase bias of MZI and [91]
θMRR ¼ nðkn0dMRRÞ þ ΔβdMRR
sin ðnφ=2Þ
sin ðφ=2Þ sin
ωmt  ðn þ 1Þφ
2


:
ð26Þ
for a lumped electrode case. The dynamic performance of RAMZI will be shown in Section 4
together with IMPACC performance side-by-side for clear comparison.
3.3. IMPACC
As described briefly in Section 3.1, IMPACC is a generalization of standard MZI modulator
and RAMZI. Figure 12(a) shows the IMPACC configuration (a) together with its linearized
transfer function (b) under its steady-state condition. Here, we assume that both OS and OC
have 50:50 optical power split ratios, although later we will relax this restriction and consider
arbitrary optical power split ratios namely, POS:(1POS) and POC:(1POC).
Structurally speaking, IMPACC is very much like the RAMZI configuration except for two big
differences. First, the passive path-difference, ΔL of the MZI in the RAMZI modulator is now
replaced by an active phase modulator (PM) element. Second, the total RF signal driving the
electrode in MRR for RAMZI is now split into two portions, by a ratio of F:(1F), and drives
both the electrodes of MRR and PM elements of IMPACC. The two split RF signals are also
Figure 11. (a)Schematic of RAMZI, and (b) typical transfer function of a RAMZI under steady state condition in
comparison with standard MZI.
Optical Communication Technology
120

delayed by an amount ξMRR and ξPM, respectively. The external control of the RF power split
ratio F:(1F) adds a degree of freedom in the design and serves to drive both the PM and MRR
under specific power ratios. The corresponding linearized transfer function of IMPACC under
its steady-state condition is shown in Figure 12(b). Here, we assume that both OS and OC have
50:50 optical power split ratios although later in Section 3.3.1, we will relax this restriction
by taking optical power split ratios namely, POC:(1POC) to have 50:50 split while OS has
arbitrary split of POS:(1POS).
3.3.1. Transfer function
The dynamic transfer function of IMPACC, TDS
IMPACC(θ) is given as [104]:
TDS
IMPACCðθÞ ¼ 1
2



ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pMRR
p
ja θMRR
ð
Þj exp i arg a θMRR
ð
Þ
½
 þ kn0L2
ð
Þ
½

þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ppm
p
exp i ϕB þ kn0L1 þ θpm

	




2
ð27Þ
where
aðθMRRÞ ¼ τ  κ2X∞
l¼1 τn1αn exp ½iθMRR
ð28Þ
θMRR ¼nðkn0dmrrÞþ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1F
p
ΔβdMRR þ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1F
p
ΔβdMRR
sinðnφ=2Þ
sinðφ=2Þ sin
ωmtþξmrr ðnþ1Þφ
2


ð29Þ
and
θpm ¼ kn0dpm þ
ﬃﬃﬃ
F
p
Δβdpm þ
ﬃﬃﬃ
F
p
Δβdpm sin ðωmt þ ξpm  φÞ
ð30Þ
The parameters pMRR and pPM are the input optical power split ratio coefficients of the input
optical splitter (OS) for the MRR and the PM arms, respectively. Note that pMRR = 1  POS,
pPM = POS, where POS was defined in Section 3.3. Also, here we assumed that OC has 50:50
Figure 12. (a) IMPACC configuration, and (b) its transfer function in comparison with standard MZI.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
121

power coupling ratio. The parameters θpm and arg[a(θMRR)] are the phase responses of the
PM and MRR respectively, while the parameters dPM and dMRR are the lengths of the PM and
MRR, respectively with n being the number of times the beam propagates inside the MRR,
ωm is the modulation frequency, φ = ωm/FSR, ϕB is MZI optical bias phase, ξMRR and ξPM, are
the RF signal phase biases injected to the MRR and PM electrodes, respectively, and Δβ is
given by Eq. (20). We assume negligible microwave loss and no velocity mismatch.
Unlike RAMZI, IMPACC has an external control of either the RF power split ratio or the RF
bias. As we will show in the next section, while both of these modulator designs can result in
high SFDR performance, IMPACC has an additional and unique property—an adaptive,
inherent compensation capability that can be used to maintain its high SFDR under three
nonideal parameter conditions namely: (1) increasing MRR waveguide loss factor, (2) unfavor-
able MRR coupling operating conditions, and (3) unbalanced input power split ratios of either
the optical splitter, OS or optical combiner, OC. This adaptive property provides an additional
level of design flexibility and can greatly simplify the overall operation of high-performing
modulator.
4. Performance of IMPACC
This section provides details of the linearity performance of IMPACC in terms of SFDR, and
compares it with RAMZI and standard MZI modulators. Unlike RAMZI and MZI modulators,
IMPACC modulator has two different operational modes, namely: (i) the typical basic mode,
and (ii) the unique adaptive mode. As far as we know, IMPACC is the only intensity modula-
tor that has an adaptive mode. In Section 4.1, we focus on its basic operating mode, whereas in
Section 4.2 we discuss the adaptive mode.
4.1. Basic operating mode of IMPACC
In the basic mode, IMPACC operates under fixed, predetermined parameter conditions aimed
to optimize its performance. This mode of operation is typical in all intensity modulators.
Here, we investigate the effects of the different parameter variations (from these optimum
conditions) on IMPACC’s SFDR performance, as well as its bandwidth capability, to assess its
performance limits. These parameters include (i) MRR loss factor α, (ii) τ and α that define the
CC, UC, and OC conditions, and (iii) unbalanced power split ratio (e.g., Pos:(1Pos)) of optical
splitters (OS). We also compare IMPACC performance with RAMZI and standard MZI modu-
lators.
4.1.1. Effect of ring resonator’s loss on SFDR
Any MRR waveguide has an intrinsic loss, (expressed as loss factor, α in Section 3). Here, we
assess its effect on both IMPACC and RAMZI’s SFDR performance [104]. Figure 13(a) shows the
respective SFDRs of both IMPACC and RAMZI under two conditions; (a) an ideal lossless MRR
waveguide (e.g., α = 1.0), and (b) lossy case (e.g., α = 0.8). Note that parameter τ is chosen for both
IMPACC and RAMZI to get their respective highest SFDR values. We choose to use τ = 0.6355 for
Optical Communication Technology
122

IMPACC and the ideal value of τ = 0.2679 for RAMZI. Furthermore, the modulation frequency,
ωm is set to 1 Hz, while the power split ratios of OS and OC are assumed both balanced (50:50).
Here, we see that IMPACC has an SFDR value of 132.9 dB under lossless condition (labeled as A)
that reduces drastically to 113.3 dB (labeled as C) when loss is introduced. A similar pattern is
observed for the RAMZI case, where its SFDR value deteriorates from 129.4 dB for lossless case
(labeled as B) to 109.0 dB for lossy case (labeled as D).
Figure 13(b) summarizes the full effect of MRR loss factor α on the SFDR of both IMPACC and
RAMZI when the value of α is allowed to vary from 1 to 0.8. We have the following three
observations. First, the respective SFDR performances of IMPACC and RAMZI are affected
drastically and negatively by the decreasing value of the MRR loss. It is clear from Figure 13(b)
that the MRR loss value must be minimized within a < 0.99 to obtain the higher than 126 dB-Hz
SFDR performance. Second, IMPACC always outperforms RAMZI. It exhibits a consistently
higher SFDR value (e.g., more than 1 dB) compared than RAMZI for the range a = 1 to a = 0.85.
Third, at the range of a = 0.85 – 0.80, the SFDR performance of RAMZI degrades more than
three times compared with IMPACC. The comparative SDFR difference between IMPACC and
RAMZI increases from 1.2 dB when a = 0.85 – 4.3 dB with a = 0.8. This implies that IMPACC
has a higher parameter tolerance to MRR loss variation especially at higher loss condition.
4.1.2. Effect of OC, UC, and CC operating conditions on SFDR
The SFDR performance of any MRR-based devices, including IMPACC and RAMZI, depends
highly on the relative ratio between the MRR coupling coefficient strength (τ) and intrinsic loss
factor (a) As mentioned in Section 3, there are three MRR regions of operation namely; (i) over-
coupling (OC) condition, when a > τ, (ii) critical coupling (CC) when a = τ, and (iii) under-
coupling (UC) when a < τ.
Here, we selected the three regions with the following parameters; (i) OC condition (τ = 0.6364,
α = 0.7364), (ii) CC condition (τ = 0.6364 and α = 0.6364), and (iii) UC condition (τ = 0.6364 and
Figure 13. (a) Effect of MRR waveguide loss, α on the SFDRs of IMPACC and RAMZI for ωm = 1Hz (F, ξPM are fixed), (A)
IMPACC with α = 1, (B) RAMZI with α = 1, (C)IMPACC with α = 0.8, (D) RAMZI with α = 0.8; (b) effect of different values
of MRR loss factor on the SFDR values for IMPACC and RAMZI.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
123

α = 0.5364). Note again that we choose τ = 0.6364 for IMPACC and the ideal value of τ = 0.2679
for RAMZI. Furthermore in order to simplify the analysis and gain better understanding of the
different parameter effects, we assumed an ideal, balanced 50/50 power split ratio for both the
input optical splitters (OS) and output optical combiner (OC). The effect on nonideal 50:50 split
ratio of OS will be discussed in the next section. Moreover, we assumed that IMPACC and
RAMZI are driven at one of its resonant modulation frequency of 23 GHz.
Briefly speaking, the SFDR performance of both IMPACC and RAMZI under OC condition is
shown in Figure 14(a). IMPACC has superior linearity with SFDR =130 dB which is far better
than RAMZI (e.g., 110 dB). This superior SFDR value is maintained (e.g., 129.7 dB) under CC
condition as shown in Figure 14(b). Lastly, the SFDR performance of both IMPACC and
RAMZI under UC condition is also shown in Figure 14(c). Under UC condition, both IMPACC
and RAMZI are no better than the typical nonlinearized MZI modulator having SFDR value in
the range of 110–113 dB. However, we can state that IMPACC’s SFDR value (e.g., 113 dB) is
still 3 dB higher when compared with RAMZI (e.g., 110 dB). Thus, the takeaway from Figure 14
is that the huge SFDR advantage of IMPACC to RAMZI exists only when MRR is operated
either in OC or CC condition.
4.1.3. Effect of unbalanced optical coupler on SFDR
This section studies the effect on nonideal, unbalanced split ratios of the optical splitter (OS) or
optical combiner (OC) on the SFDR performance of IMPACC for three different MRR operat-
ing conditions (OC, UC, CC) [110]. To simplify the analysis, we limit our study to unbalanced
OS by maintaining OC to have 50:50 power split ratio. Note that we use the same parameters
as found in Section 4.1.2 with τ = 0.6364 for IMPACC and the ideal value of τ = 0.2679 for
RAMZI.
4.1.3.1. Over-coupled (OC) IMPACC
Figure 15(a) shows the effect of the unbalanced power split ratio (e.g., 55:45) of OS on SFDR
performance of IMPACC. The SFDR value drops by 6 dB from 130 dB-Hz under balanced
condition to 124 dB-Hz under unbalanced case. Figure 15(b) depicts the SFDR performance for
Figure 14. SFDR performance at (a) over-coupling, (b) critical-coupling and (c) under-coupling condition for 23 GHz
modulation frequency (analysis assumes a resolution BW of 1 Hz).
Optical Communication Technology
124

various split ratios. It is plotted as a function of the offset from the ideal optical splitter
balanced condition (0 deviation corresponds to an ideal power split ratio of 50:50) to a very
unbalanced condition (e.g., 0.20 corresponds to power split ratio of 70:30 and 0.20 corre-
sponds to power split ratio of 30:70). One conclusion from Figure 15(b) is that in order to
maintain a SFDR value of above 124 dB-Hz, we need to ensure that the OS power split ratio
deviation should be no greater than  0.08 or no more than 58:42 or 42:58 power split ratio.
Note that the results of Figure 15(b) were obtained without changing any external IMPACC
parameters (e.g., RF power split ratio-F or the RF phase bias-ξPM) except the coupling ratio OS.
4.1.3.2. Critical-coupled (CC) and under-coupled (UC) IMPACC
Figure 16 shows IMPACC’s SFDR performance under (a) CC and (b) UC conditions for
balanced (i.e., 50:50) and unbalanced (e.g., 55:45) cases. We see that the SFDR value of the OC
condition degrades by 11 dB from balanced case of 129 dB-Hz to 118 dB-Hz for unbalanced
case. Compared with the OC case (Figure 15a) where the SFDR drops only by 6 dB, the CC
condition implies higher sensitivity to OS split ratio deviation. On the other hand, Figure 16(b)
illustrates that OS split ratio deviation has no effect in the balanced or unbalanced cases for UC
condition. However, IMPACC has only low SFDR value of 113dB-Hz.
4.1.4. SFDR versus modulation bandwidth response of IMPACC
We know that the modulation bandwidth of all ring resonator based modulators, such as
RAMZI and IMPACC is typically limited by the MRR’s free-spectral range (FSR) [91, 102,
104–105]. Here, we describe the SFDR-vs-modulation bandwidth capability of both IMPACC
and RAMZI, and assess their respective performance limits. We evaluate the SFDR-vs-modu-
lation bandwidth under lossless case (A), and under the three MRR operating conditions (B).
4.1.4.1. MRR lossless case (OC Condition)
Here, we assume that the loss factor a in the MRR waveguide, for both the IMPACC and the
RAMZI, is lossless or equal to 1. Although, this is not a realistic case, it is done to focus on the
Figure 15. (a) SFDR degradation due to particular unbalanced optical power splitter (55:45) when MRR is operated under
over-coupling condition, (b) SFDR performance for different unbalanced optical power split ratios.
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
125

bandwidth capability and understand its performance limits. Later in the next subsection, we
consider the effect of MRR loss. Here, we use τ = 0.208 for IMPACC, τ = 0.268 (or τ = 00.2679)
for RAMZI [90–91, 95, 104], MRR RF phase bias ξMRR = 0, and a PM RF bias control sensitivity
ξPM of 0.2 [105]. The two τ values have been selected such that they provide maximum SFDR
value for each case.
First, Figure 17(a) shows the SFDR-vs-Modulation frequency of IMPACC (blue line), RAMZI
(red line), and MZI modulator (green line) for modulation frequencies up to 75 GHz. IMPACC
has an increasingly higher SFDR, (e.g., 3.7 dB to 13.7 dB) compared with RAMZI and standard
MZI modulators for these increasing resonant frequencies. It is important to note that the
resonance enhancement in IMPACC is accomplished without resorting to a smaller ring size.
Smaller ring size not only makes the fabrication more challenging, but would also introduce
larger resonator waveguide losses.
Next, we identify two frequency regions of operation: (i) the resonance region at around ~23 GHz
(shown in Figure 17(b) and ~70GHz (shown in Figure 17(c)), and (ii) the non-resonance region at
around 56 GHz (shown in Figure 17(d)) [105]. The resonance region is defined as the region
where the SFDR is greater than that obtained from an ideal MZI, which has a relative flat
response as a function of frequency. These resonant regions occur at multiples of the FSR of the
modulator (e.g., 23.3 GHz, 69.9 GHz).
As shown in Figure 17(a), IMPACC provides an increasingly higher SFDR, (e.g., 3.7 dB to 13.7
dB) compared with RAMZI and MZI at these resonant frequency regions. Figures 17(b) and (c)
depict the respective IMPACC’s SFDR performance when the central RF modulation frequen-
cies are set to 23 GHz and 69.9 GHz, respectively. We note that the modulation linewidth
around the central frequency 23 GHz is wider compared with case of central frequency of 69.9
GHz. On the other hand, in the non-resonance region, (defined as the region between the
resonance regions), the SFDR is typically less than that obtained from the ideal MZI as shown
Figure 16. SFDR of IMPACC at over-coupling condition (a), and under-coupling condition (b) for both unbalanced and
balanced scenarios (modulation frequency 23 GHz, ξPM = 1.3893π, F = 0.2008).
Optical Communication Technology
126

in Figure 17(d). However, the IMPACC still shows an improved SFDR performance by 0.5 to
2.0 dB compared to RAMZI.
4.1.4.2. MRR lossy cases (OC, CC and UC Conditions)
Figure 18 depicts the SFDR performance of both IMPACC and RAMZI under over-coupled
(OC), critical-coupled (CC), and under-coupled (UC) conditions. Figure 18(a) shows the OC
IMPACC (τ = 0.6364, α = 0.7364) and OC RAMZI (τ = 0.2679, α = 1) as a function of the RF
modulation frequency. As we have described earlier, in the regions close to the resonance peak
(e.g., ~23 GHz), IMPACC clearly outperforms RAMZI, which operates under ideal condition
by 10–20 dB.
The case of CC IMPACC is shown in Figure 18(b). IMPACC also outperforms RAMZI within
or in the resonant peak regions. Outside the resonant regions, both IMPACC and RAMZI have
nearly the same performance. Lastly, Figure 18(c) shows IMPACC performance versus RAMZI
in the case of UC condition at the same resonance region as above (e.g., modulation frequency
~23 GHz). In regions close to the resonance peak, the IMPACC still outperforms the ideal over-
coupled RAMZI, but now the maximum difference is much smaller (e.g., ~4 dB). We note that
Figure 17. (a) Frequency response for the IMPACC, RAMZI, and MZI, (b) resonant region around a central modulation
frequency of 23.3 GHz, (c) resonant region around a central modulation frequency of 70 GHz, (d) non-resonance region
around 58 GHz. (analysis assumes a 1 Hz resolution bandwidth).
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
127

in all these situations, we did not optimize the performance of IMPACC by changing its external
parameters (e.g., F or ξPM).
4.2. Adaptive operating mode of IMPACC
IMPACC’s adaptive operating mode is all about using dynamically the two built-in, adjustable,
and externally controllable two parameters to maintain IMPACC’s 130 dB SFDR performance
under unfavorable parameter conditions such as: (i) intrinsic RR loss, (ii) parameter variation of τ
value, and (iii) unbalanced OS power split ratio. The unavoidable parameter variations can be
due to (a) environmental temperature change, (b) device aging, and (c) fabrication tolerance and
errors. The externally controllable parameters used for mitigation purposes are the RF power
split ratio F, and the RF phase shift, ξPM. Here, we set the other RF phase shift, ξMRR equal to 0,
for simplicity. Using again these two external parameters, we show that IMPACC can also extend
its SFDR-vs-modulation bandwidth capability beyond that of RAMZI [91, 106–108, 110]. Overall,
the adaptive mode of IMPACC allows the link design to be flexible with excellent results.
4.2.1. Extending parameter tolerance to ring resonator loss
The ability to adjust the control parameters F and ξPM can be exploited to compensate for the
negative effect of loss factorα of MRR. In Section 4.1.1, we showed that the SFDR performance
of both IMPACC and RAMZI can deteriorate by as much as ~20 dB when the RR loss factor
(e.g., α< 1) increases. This effect is reproduced in Figure 19(a) for IMPACC and RAMZI with
fixed F values. Figure 19(a) also shows the SFDR performance for IMPACC with dynamic or
adaptive F parameter value. The two cases with fixed F parameter value are similar to the one
shown in Figure 13(b) and discussed in Section 4.1.1.
The result of this adaptive mode is to maintain the SFDR value to higher than 130 dB by
dynamically changing the required F value as a function of the MRR loss factorα as shown in
Figure 19(b). It shows the range of required changes in the value of F to achieve the SFDR
performance shown in Figure 19(a). This unique ability of IMPACC overcomes the negative
effect of the intrinsic insertion loss due to MRR. This feature is not feasible in RAMZI or any
Figure 18. (a) SFDR comparison of IMPACC and RAMZI at (a) over-coupled condition, (b) critical-coupling condition,
and (c) under-coupling condition for modulation frequency 23 GHz, ξPM = 1.3893π, F = 0.2008.
Optical Communication Technology
128

previously reported linear intensity modulators. It makes the link design and engineering
more flexible.
4.2.2. Extending parameter tolerance to unbalanced split ratio of OS
4.2.2.1. Over-coupled (OC) IMPACC and critically-coupled (CC) IMPACC
In this section, we highlight IMPACC’s ability to compensate the negative effect due to unbal-
anced optical splitter performance [110, 113]. Figure 20(a) shows the SFDR performance of OC
IMPACC (τ = 0.6364, α = 0.7364) for unbalanced OS (55:45; green line), balanced (50:50;
uncompensated; red line), and unbalanced (55:45; blue line) but compensated by adjusting
the F parameter.
This is emphasized in Figure 20(a) where the original drop of 6 dB in the SFDR performance,
when the optical splitter is nonideal (55:45), can be compensated to return to SFDR value equal
to 129 dB by adjusting the external parameters, F and ξPM to 0.2003 and 1.307π, respectively.
Figure 19. (a) IMPACC compensates for MRR intrinsic losses to obtain SFDR values above 130 dB, (b) RF power split
ratio adjustments required to achieve high SFDR (e.g., >130 dB) performance under MRR with exhibited insertion losses.
Figure 20. SFDR comparison of (a) over-coupled and (b) critical-coupling condition for RAMZI and IMPACC for both
unbalanced and balanced scenarios (modulation frequency 23 GHz, ξPM = 1.3893π, F = 0.2008).
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
129

Hence, clearly, IMPACC’s inherent compensation capability is quite effective and able to
overcome this limitation. Figure 20(b) depicts the SFDR performance of IMPACC at a power
balanced for the case of CC condition (i.e., 50:50), unbalanced condition (e.g., 55:45) without
compensation and with compensation for the case of CC condition. In the unbalanced condi-
tion, the SFDR drops 11 dB from 129 to 118 dB. Nevertheless, IMPACC’s inherent compensa-
tion capability enables one to increase the SFDR back up to 129 dB for the unbalanced (55:45)
case under CC by adjusting the F and ξPM parameters.
4.2.2.2. Under-coupled (UC) IMPACC
In UC condition, the inherent compensation capability of IMPACC is severely limited and
cannot increase the SFDR of IMPACC for the unbalanced case. Adjusting the external param-
eters,F or ξPM do not improve the SFDR value. Similar to previous Section 4.1.3, we observed
that the IMPACC SFDR performance (e.g., 111 dB) is still higher than that of RAMZI (e.g., 108
dB) but the difference is noticeably smaller compared with the over- and critical-coupled
conditions with SFDR of around 129–130 dB.
4.2.3. Extending SFDR versus modulation bandwidth response
As discussed earlier in Section 4.1.3, all ring resonator based modulators (e.g., RAMZI and
IMPACC) are limited by the FSR of the ring resonator [88, 91–92, 94,102,104–108]. This is
graphically represented by the narrow Lorentzian shape of its SDFR profile as depicted in
Figures 17 and 18. This limitation is troublesome, especially for wideband RF link applica-
tions. Fortunately, the IMPACC has significant advantage compared with RAMZI and other
linear modulators that relaxes this built-in RF modulation bandwidth limitation due to MRR.
IMPACC can broaden the SFDR profile at its peak value by dynamically adjusting both F and
ξPM for any given modulation frequency band. Figure 21 shows this remarkable feature for a
frequency of operation from 16 GHz to 20 GHz, where the IMPACC can maintain a SFDR of
>130 dB. For the results presented in Figure 21, we have used λ = 1550 nm and τ = 0.208, and
both the RF phase, ξPM and power split, F parameters were changed in other to maintain the
Figure 21. Changing the power split ratio F:(1F) and RF bias, phase ξPM, of RF signal can achieve a flat SFDR response
over a range of ~20% of around a central frequency (λ = 1550 nm).
Optical Communication Technology
130

high SFDR. We are not aware of any MRR-based modulator designs that can accomplish such
a dynamically adjustable wide frequency response using externally controlled parameter.
5. Conclusion
In summary, electro-optic modulators are critical part of optical communications. They will con-
tinue to play an important role in fiber optic links. However, an essential requirement is that they
have linear response with a high dynamic range of input RF powers of multiple tones. We have
shown that IMPACC can operate with highly linear response with peak SFDR value of 132 dB.
Another important requirement in the link design is the inherent versatility of the device or
link to compensate for unexpected changes or unavoidable parameter variations due to envi-
ronmental temperature change, device aging, and fabrication errors. In this regard, IMPACC
has a unique place among previously reported linear intensity modulators since it is the only
linear modulator design, as far as we know, that has an inherent compensation capability. We
demonstrated this inherent feature by compensating various nonideal and often detrimental
effects in the modulator from RR waveguide loss and unbalanced optical inputs to various
coupling conditions that could lower manufacturing tolerance and degrade linearity perfor-
mance if not mitigated. The ability to maintain high SFDR (e.g., >130 dB) under these condi-
tions makes IMPACC a viable candidate for many high-bandwidth RF FO-link applications,
and well positioned as ideal linear intensity modulator for software-defined MPLs
Acknowledgements
NM would like to thank partial support from the European Committee under program
FP7-MC-CIG 333829.
Author details
Benjamin Dingel1,2*, Nicholas Madamopoulos3,4 and Andru Prescod5
*Address all correspondence to: bbdingel@stny.rr.com
1 Nasfine Photonics Inc., Painted Post, NY, USA
2 Ateneo Innovation Center, Ateneo De Manila University, Quezon City, Philippines
3 Department of Aeronautical Science, Hellenic Air Force Academy, Dekeleia, Greece
4 Department of Electrical Engineering, The City College of City University of New York, USA
5 ManTech International Corporation, Arlington, VA, USA
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
131

References
[1] Elbers J-P, Autenrieth A. From static to software-defined optical networks. In: 16th Inter-
national Conference on Optical Network Design and Modeling (ONDM), 2012. IEEE; 2012
[2] Gringeri S, Bitar N, Xia TJ. Extending software defined network principles to include
optical transport. IEEE Communications Magazine. 2013;51(3):32–40
[3] Amaya N, et al. Software defined networking (SDN) over space division multiplexing
(SDM) optical networks: Features, benefits and experimental demonstration. Optics
Express. 2014;22(3):3638–3647
[4] Chen X, Zhang Y. Intelligence on optical transport SDN. International Journal of Com-
puter and Communication Engineering. 2015;4(1):5
[5] Kreutz D, et al. Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey. Proceedings of
the IEEE. 2015;103(1):14–76
[6] Thyagaturu AS, et al. Software defined optical networks (SDONs): A comprehensive
survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 2016;18(4):2738–2786
[7] Lannoo B. Radio-over-fibre for ultra-small 5G cells. In: 17th International Conference on
Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON). 2015. pp. 1–4. DOI: 10.1109/ICTON.2015.
7193591
[8] Waterhouse R, Novack D. Realizing 5G: Microwave photonics for 5G mobile wireless
systems. IEEE Microwave Magazine. 2015;16(8):84–92
[9] Way WI. Broadband Hybrid Fiber/Coax Access System Technologies. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press; 1998
[10] Al-Raweshidy H, Komaki S, editors. Radio over Fiber Technologies for Mobile Commu-
nications Networks. Norwood, MA: Artech House; 2002
[11] Llorente R, Beltrán M. Radio-over-fibre Techniques and Performance. Rijeka, Croatia:
INTECH Open Access Publisher; 2010
[12] Liu C, et al. Key microwave-photonics technologies for next-generation cloud-based
radio access networks. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2014;32(20):3452–3460
[13] Ackerman E, Cox III C, Riza N, editors. Analog Fiber Optic Links. SPIE Milestone Series.
Vol. MS-149; 1998
[14] Chang W, editor. RF Photonics Technologies in Optical Fiber Links. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press; 2002
[15] Vilcot A, Cabon B, Chazelas J, editors. Microwave Photonics from Components to
Applications. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2003
[16] Cox III CH. Analog Optical Links: Theory and Practice. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press; 2004
Optical Communication Technology
132

[17] Ji PN. Software defined optical network. In: 11th International Conference on Optical
Communications and Networks (ICOCN), 2012. IEEE; 2012
[18] Channegowda M, et al. Experimental demonstration of an OpenFlow based software-
defined optical network employing packet, fixed and flexible DWDM grid technologies
on an international multi-domain test bed. Optics Express. 2013;21(5):5487–5498
[19] Simeonidou D, Nejabati R, Channegowda MP. Software defined optical networks tech-
nology and infrastructure: Enabling software-defined optical network operations. In:
Optical Fiber Communication Conference and Exposition and the National Fiber Optic
Engineers Conference (OFC/NFOEC); 2013. IEEE; 2013
[20] ONF Solution Brief. OpenFlow-enable Transport SDN. May 2014
[21] Capmany J, Novak D. Microwave photonics combines two worlds. Nature Photonics.
2007;1(6):319–330
[22] Marpaung D, et al. Integrated microwave photonics. Laser & Photonics Reviews. 2013;7
(4):506–538
[23] Capmany J, Munoz P. Integrated microwave photonics for radio access networks. Jour-
nal of Lightwave Technology. 2014;32(16):2849–2861
[24] Guan B, et al. CMOS compatible reconfigurable silicon photonic lattice filters using
cascaded unit cells for RF-photonic processing. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quan-
tum Electronics. 2014;20(4):359–368
[25] Iezekiel S, et al. RF engineering meets optoelectronics: Progress in integrated microwave
photonics. IEEE Microwave Magazine. 2015;16(8):28–45
[26] Bowers JE. Integrated microwave photonics. In: 2015 International Topical Meeting on
Microwave Photonics (MWP). IEEE; 2015
[27] Xu X, Bosisio RG, Wu K. Analysis and implementation of six-port software-defined
radio receiver platform. IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques.
2006;54(7):2937–2943
[28] Ibrahim S, et al. Demonstration of a fast-reconfigurable silicon CMOS optical lattice
filter. Optics Express. 2011;19(14):13245–13256
[29] Pérez D, Gasulla I, Capmany J. Software-defined reconfigurable microwave photonics
processor. Optics Express. 2015;23(11):14640–14654
[30] Zhuang L, et al. Programmable photonic signal processor chip for radiofrequency appli-
cations. Optica. 2015;2(10):854–859
[31] Pérez D, et al. Reconfigurable lattice mesh designs for programmable photonic pro-
cessors. Optics Express. 2016;24(11):12093–12106
[32] Wei W, et al. Software-defined microwave photonic filter with high reconfigurable
resolution. Scientific Reports. 2016;6
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
133

[33] Capmany J, Gasulla I, Pérez D. Microwave photonics: The programmable processor.
Nature Photonics. 2016;10(1):6–8
[34] Khan MH, et al. Ultrabroad-bandwidth arbitrary radiofrequency waveform genera-
tion with a silicon photonic chip-based spectral shaper. Nature Photonics. 2010;4(2):
117–122
[35] Burla M, et al. Integrated waveguide Bragg gratings for microwave photonics signal
processing. Optics Express. 2013;21(21):25120–25147
[36] Pant R, et al. On-chip stimulated Brillouin scattering for microwave signal processing
and generation. Laser & Photonics Reviews. 2014;8(5):653–666
[37] Shin H, et al. Control of coherent information via on-chip photonic–phononic emitter–
receivers. Nature Communications. 2015;6. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7472
[38] Wang J, et al. Reconfigurable radio-frequency arbitrary waveforms synthesized in a
silicon photonic chip. Nature Communications 2015;6. DOI:10.1038/ncomms6957
[39] Liu W, et al. A fully reconfigurable photonic integrated signal processor. Nature Pho-
tonics. 2016;10(3):190–195
[40] Wang J, Long Y. A Chip-Scale Microwave Photonic Signal Processing. Rijeka, Croatia:
INTECH Open Access Publisher; 2017
[41] Cox CH, et al. Limits on the performance of RF-over-fiber links and their impact on
device design. IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques. 2006;54(2):
906–920
[42] Iezekiel S, editor. Microwave Photonics: Devices and Applications. Chichester, West
Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2009
[43] Urick Jr VJ, Mckinney JD, Williams KJ. Fundamentals of microwave photonics. In:
Chang K, editor. Wiley Series in Microwave and Optical Engineering. Hoboken, New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2015
[44] Urick VJ, Diehl JF, Draa MN, McKinney JD, Williams KJ. Wideband analog photonic
links: Some performance limits and considerations for multi-octave implementations.
In: Nelson RL, Prather DW, Schuetz C, editors. Proceedings of the SPIE, RF and Milli-
meter-Wave Photonics II; 2012. Vol. 8259:825904
[45] Bridges W, Shaffner J. Distortion in linearized electrooptic modulators. IEEE Transac-
tions on Microwave Theory and Techniques. 1995;43(9):2184–2197. DOI: 10.1109/
22.414563
[46] Ridder RM, Korotky S. Feedforward compensation of integrated optic modulator dis-
tortion. In Proceedings of the Technical Digest Optical Fiber Communications Confer-
ence, San Francisco, CA; 1990
[47] Chiu Y, et al. Broad-band electronic linearizer for externally modulated analog fiber-
optic links. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. 1999;11(1):48–50
Optical Communication Technology
134

[48] Sadhwani R, Basak J, Jalali B. Adaptive electronic linearization of fiber optic links. In:
Optical Fiber Communication Conference. Optical Society of America; 2003
[49] Sadhwani R, Jalali B. Adaptive CMOS predistortion linearizer for fiber-optic links.
Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2003;21(12):3180–3193
[50] Killey RI, et al. Electronic dispersion compensation by signal predistortion using digital
processing and a dual-drive Mach-Zehnder modulator. IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters. 2005;17(3):714–716
[51] Säckinger E. Broadband Circuits for Optical Fiber Communication. John Wiley & Sons;
2005
[52] Moon H, Sedaghat R. FPGA-based adaptive digital predistortion for radio-over-fiber
links. Microprocessors and Microsystems. 2006;30(3):145–154
[53] Lee T-K, et al. Theoretical analysis and realization of optoelectrical predistortion optical
transmitter for the simultaneous suppression of IM3 and IM5 signal. Optics Communi-
cations. 2012;285(10):2697–2701
[54] Lam D, et al. Digital broadband linearization of optical links. Optics Letters. 2013;38
(4):446–448
[55] Schmidta C, Kottkea C, Jungnickela V, Freunda R. High-speed digital-to-analog con-
verter concepts. In: Proceedings of the SPIE; 2017, January, Vol. 10130, pp. 101300N-1
[56] Lee G-W, Han S-K. Linear dual electroabsorption modulator for analog optical trans-
mission. Microwave and Optical Technology Letters. 1999;22(6):369–373
[57] Betts GE, et al Gain limit in analog links using electroabsorption modulators. IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters. 2006;18(19):2065–2067
[58] Xie XB, et al. Analysis of linearity of highly saturated electroabsorption modulator link
due to photocurrent feedback effect. Optics Express. 2007;15(14):8713–8718
[59] Kogelnik H, Schmidt RV. Switched directional couplers with alternating Δβ. IEEE Jour-
nal of Quantum Electronics. 1976;12:396–401
[60] Thaniyavarn S. Modified 12 directional coupler waveguide modulator. Electronics
Letters. 1986;22:941–942
[61] Tavlykaev RF, Ramaswamy RV. Highly linear Y-fed directional coupler modulator with
low intermodulation distortion. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 1999;17:282–291
[62] Zhang X, et al. Highly linear broadband optical modulator based on electro-optic poly-
mer. IEEE Photonics Journal. 2012;4(6):2214–2228
[63] Li J, et al. Optical sideband processing approach for highly linear phase-modulation/
direct-detection microwave photonics link. IEEE Photonics Journal. 2014;6(5):1–10
[64] Zheng X-P, et al. All-optical signal processing for linearity enhancement of Mach–
Zehnder modulators. Chinese Science Bulletin. 2014;59(22):2655–2660
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
135

[65] Chen J, Zhu D, Pan S. Linearized phase-modulated analog photonic link based on
optical carrier band processing. In: 25th Wireless and Optical Communication Confer-
ence (WOCC); 2016. IEEE; 2016
[66] Tazawa H, Steier W. Linearity of ring resonator-based electro-optic polymer modulator.
Electronics Letters. 2005;41(23):1297–1298
[67] Tazawa H, Steier WH. Analysis of ring resonator-based traveling-wave modulators.
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. 2006;18(1):211–213
[68] Song M, Zhang L, Beausoleil RG, Willner AE. Nonlinear distortion in a silicon
microring-based electro-optic modulator for analog optical links. IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics. 2010;16(1):185–191
[69] Fegadolli W, Oliveira JEB, Almeida VR. Highly linear electro-optic modulator based on
ring resonator. Microwave Optics Technology Letters. 2011;53(10):2375–2378
[70] Ayazi A, Baehr-Jones T, Liu Y, Lim AE-J, Hochberg M. Linearity of silicon ring modula-
tors for analog optical links. Optics Express. 2012;20(12):13115–13122
[71] Chen L, Chen J, Nagy J, Reano RM. Highly linear ring modulator from hybrid silicon
and lithium niobate. Optics Express. 2015;23(10):13255–13264
[72] Hosseinzadeh A, Middlebrook CT. Highly linear dual ring resonator modulator for
wide bandwidth microwave photonic links. Optics Express. 2016;24(24):27268–2727924
[73] Yariv A, Yeh P. Optical Waves in Crystals-Propagation and Control of Laser radiation.
New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons; 1984
[74] Johnson LM, Roussell HV. Reduction of intermodulation distortion in interferometric
optical modulators. Optics Letters. 1988;13(10):928–930
[75] Johnson LM, Roussell HV. Linearization of an interferometric modulator at microwave
frequencies by polarization mixing. IEEE Photo Technology Letters. 1990;2(11):810–811
[76] Djupsjobacka A. A linearization concept for integrated-optic modulators. Photonics
Technology Letters. 1992;4(8):869–871
[77] Ho KP, Kahn JM. Optical frequency comb generator using phase modulation in ampli-
fied circulating loop. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. 1993;5(6):721–725
[78] Betts GE, O’Donnell FJ. Optical analog link using a linearized modulator. In: IEEE LEOS
Annual Meeting, 31 Oct.–3 Nov. 1994; Vol. 2, pp. 278–279
[79] Betts GE. Linearized modulator for suboctave-bandpass optical analog links. IEEE
Transactions Microwave Theory Technology. 1994;42(12):2642–2649
[80] Sabido DJM, Tabara M, Fong TK, Lu CL, Kazovsky LG. Improving the dynamic range of
a coherent AM analog optical link using a cascaded linearized modulator. IEEE Photon-
ics Technology Letters. 1995; 7(7):813–815
[81] Burns WK. Linearized optical modulator with fifth order correction. IEEE Journal of
Lightwave Technology. 1995;13(8):1724–1727
Optical Communication Technology
136

[82] Betts GE, O’Donnell FJ. Microwave analog optical links using suboctave linearized
modulators. Photonics Technology Letters. 1996;9(8):1273–1275
[83] Loayssa A, Alonso M, Benito D, Garde MJ. Linearization of electro-optic modulators at
millimeter-wave frequencies. In: Proceedings of the LEOS ’99 - 12th Annual Meeting. 8–
11 November 1999; Vol. 1, pp. 275–276
[84] Ackerman EI. Broad-band linearization of a Mach-Zehnder electro-optic modulator.
IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques. 1999;47(12):2271–2279
[85] Yariv A. Universal relations for coupling of optical power between microresonators and
dielectric waveguides. Electronics Letters. 2000;36:321–322
[86] Okamoto K. Fundamentals of Optical Waveguides. Burlington, MA: Academic Press;
2000
[87] Rengand N, Shpantzer I, Achiam Y, Kaplan A, Greenbalatt A, Harston G, Cho PS.
Military Communications Conference. IEEE MILCOM 2003. 13–16 Oct. 2003;2:1208
[88] Xie X, Khurgin J, Kang J, Chow FS. Linearized Mach-Zehnder intensity modulator. IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters 2003;15(4):531–533
[89] Dingel B. Ultra-linear, broadband optical modulator for high performance analog fiber
link system. In: IEEE International Topical Meeting on Microwave Photonics 2004
(MWP’04); 4–6 Oct. 2004. pp. 241–244
[90] Schwelb O. Transmission, group delay, and dispersion in single-ring optical resonators
and add/drop filters – A tutorial overview. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2004;22:
1380–1394
[91] Tazawa H. Ring resonator based electro-optic polymer modulators for microwave pho-
tonics applications [Ph.D. thesis]. Los Angeles, CA: University Southern California; 2005
[92] Tazawa H, Steier W. Bandwidth of linearized ring resonator assisted Mach-Zehnder
modulator. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. 2005;17(9):1851–1853
[93] Dingel B. Linear optical modulator. US Patent 6943931, Sept. 2005
[94] Dingel BB, Madabhushi R, Madamopoulos N. Super-linear optical modulator technolo-
gies for optical broadband access network: Development and potential. In: SPIE Pro-
ceeding 6012, Optical Transmission Systems and Equipment for WDM Networking IV,
October 2005; paper No. 32, Boston
[95] Chen WY, Van V, Herman WN, Ho PT. Periodic microring lattice as a bandstop filter.
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters. 2006;18(19):2041–2043
[96] Madamopoulos N, Dingel B. Performance analysis of the ultra-linear optical intensity
modulator. In: Proceedings of the SPIE 6390, Optical Transmission Systems and Equip-
ment for Networking V, October 2006; paper No. 15, Boston
[97] Van V, Herman W, Ho PT. Linearized microring-loaded mach-zehnder modulator with
RF gain. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2006;24(4):1850–1854
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
137

[98] Tazawa H, Kuo YH, Dunayevskiy I, Luo J, Jen A, Fetterman H, Steier W. Ring resonator-
based electrooptic polymer traveling-wave modulator. IEEE Journal of Lightwave Tech-
nology. 2006;24(9):3514–3519
[99] Oliveira JEB, Sakamoto BFR, dos Santos Fegadolli W. Similarities between birefringent
gires tournois interferometer and double ring assisted Mach Zehnder. In: European
Microwave Conference, Munich; 9–12 Oct 2007. pp. 1330–1333
[100] Zhu G, Liu W, Fetterman HR. A broadband linearized coherent analog fiber-optic link
employing dual parallel Mach–Zehnder modulators. IEEE Photonics Technology Let-
ters. 2009:21(21):1627–1629
[101] Prescod A, Dingel B, Madamopoulos N. Super-linear modulator with extended band-
width capability for broadband access applications. In: Proceedings of the SPIE OPTO
2009, Vol. 7234, San Jose, CA; Jan. 24–29, 2009
[102] Prescod A, Dingel BB, Madamopoulos N. Traveling wave optical modulator with high
dynamic range (<<130 dB) at large modulation frequencies. In: Proceedings 2009 IEEE
Sarnoff Symposium, Session: Optical Communications and Networking, Princeton, NJ;
March 30–April 1, 2009. pp. 1–5
[103] Prescod A, Dingel B, Madamopoulos N. An ultra-linear modulator with inherent SFDR
compensation capability. In Proceedings of the OSA Integrated Photonics Research,
Silicon and Nano Photonics (IPR), July 27, 2010, Monterey, California, USA
[104] Prescod A, Dingel BB, Madamopoulos N, Madabhushi R. Effect of ring resonator wave-
guide loss on SFDR performance of highly linear optical modulators under suboctave
operation. Photonics Technology Letters. 2010;22(17):1297–1299
[105] Dingel B, Prescod A, Madamopoulos N. Inherent RF linearized bandwidth broadening
capability of an ultra-linear optical modulator. In: Proceedings of the SPIE 7958, Broadband
Access Communication Technologies IV; January 2011; paper 7958–3, San Francisco, CA
[106] Dingel B, Madamopoulos N, Prescod A, Madabhushi R. Analytical model, analysis and
parameter optimization of a super linear electro-optic modulator (SFDR > 130 dB).
Optics Communications. 2011;284(24):5578–5587
[107] Madamopoulos N, Dingel B, Prescod A. Interferometric modulator with phase-modu-
lating and cavity-modulating components (IMPACC) for high linearity microwave
applications. In Proceedings of the ICPS 2013, The International Conference on Photon-
ics Solutions, Pattaya City, Thailand, May 26–28, 2013 (Co-sponsored by OSA, SPIE,
IEEE)
[108] Madamopoulos N, Dingel BB, Prescod A. Review and challenges of high frequency
cavity-assisted electro-optic modulators. In: Wireless Optical Communication Confer-
ence, WOCC 2014, Newark, NJ, USA; 2014
[109] Jiang W, et al. A linearization analog photonic link with high third-order intermodula-
tion distortion suppression based on dual-parallel Mach–Zehnder modulator. IEEE
Photonics Journal. 2015;7(3):1–8
Optical Communication Technology
138

[110] Dingel B, Madamopoulos N, Prescod A, Madabhushi R. Power balancing effect on the
performance of IMPACC modulator under critical coupling (CC), over coupling (OC),
and under coupling (UC) conditions at high frequency. Proceedings of the SPIE Broad-
band Access Communication Technologies. 2012;VI:828208
[111] Ye B, Dingel BB, Cui W. Minimalist-design, high-functionality, micro-ring resonator-
based optical filter with narrow linewidth and low group delay using Looped Back
Over- and Under-coupled Resonator (LOBOUR). Proceedings of the SPIE. Broadband
Access Communication Technologies VII. 2013;8645:86450T
[112] Dingel B, Ye B, Cui W, Madamopoulos N. High-performance, minimalist-design,
microring resonator-based optical filter with reduced low group delay and simplified
center-wavelength control. International Conference on Photonics Solutions 2013. Thai-
land; 2013
[113] Dingel B, Prescod A, Madamopoulos N, Madabhushi R. Performance of ring resonator-
based linear optical modulator (IMPACC) under critical coupling (CC), over coupling
(OC), and under coupling (UC) conditions. In: IEEE Photonics Annual Society Meeting;
2011
Adaptive High Linearity Intensity Modulator for Advanced Microwave Photonic Links
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69262
139


Chapter 6
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS
Technologies for Optical Communications
Edward M.D. Fisher
Additional information is available at the end of the chapter
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
Abstract
As optical communications may soon supplement Wi-Fi technologies, a concept known 
as visible light communications (VLC), low-cost receivers must provide extreme sensitiv-
ity to alleviate attenuation factors and overall power usage within communications link 
budgets. We present circuits with an advantage over conventional optical receivers, in 
that gain can be applied within the photodiode thus reducing the need for amplification 
circuits. To achieve this, single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) can be implemented 
in complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technologies and have already 
been investigated in several topologies for VLC. The digital nature of SPADs removes 
the design effort used for low-noise, high-gain but high-bandwidth analogue circuits. We 
therefore present one of these circuit topologies, along with some common design and 
performance metrics. SPAD receivers are however not yet mature prompting research to 
take low-level parameters up to the communications level.
Keywords: single-photon, avalanche, diodes, visible, light, communications, receivers
1. Introduction
Optical technologies are routinely used in inter-continental communications, where both 
data rates and transmission lengths are high, or in fast networking applications such as data 
centres [1, 2]. At the opposite end of the distance scale, interconnects in microelectronics are 
moving towards photonics. This is due to the bandwidth restrictions of metals on silicon ICs.
By using free-space links for personal computing, optical communication may offer an alter-
native to wireless standards, i.e. visible-light communications (VLC) applications [3, 4]. The 
radio spectrum is becoming increasingly crowded, with the UK’s frequency allocation tables 

(UKFAT) showing severe restrictions on wireless bandwidth, especially as 4G mobile internet 
is expanded towards 5G. Ultimately, the radio spectrum is limited at the high-GHz and low-
THz bands by atmospheric attenuation, principally the molecular resonances of water and oxy-
gen. There can be no doubt that as a mature technology, optical communication has become 
ubiquitous and is growing as bandwidth demands rise [5]. However, with that ubiquity and 
growth, the total electrical power, and indeed the materials and complexity of systems, is also 
increasing at an extraordinary annual rate.
The design of optical communication systems is highly application dependant [1, 2, 6]. The 
high-speed, long-distance intercontinental links can use complex, power-hungry and expen-
sive transmitters (Tx) and receivers (Rx). This is principally as the energy per bit (J/b) and 
cost per bit ($/b) can be kept low through long-term installations with high throughput and 
multiple end-users. As a direct comparison, hardware for applications such as VLC to mobile 
phones and personal computers, must be simple, low-power and cheap [3, 4]. This is especially 
true as smart-phones or personal computers imply a single end-user and a bandwidth low 
enough for simple or minimal forward error correction (FEC) schemes. It also implies battery 
operation with an expectation of long battery life and short product lifetimes (e.g. the 2-year 
average for mobiles). In terms of costs, VLC transmitters and receivers must: (i) be comparable
to other system level components, i.e. memory, processor or display, and (ii) be suitable for 
high volume production, i.e. > 100,000 units.
1.1. Basic receiver operations and research directions
Taking a high-level approach, all optical communication receivers must perform eight basic 
operations [1, 2, 6]:
1.	 Convert incoming optical signals into an electrical signal, usually electrical current.
2.	 Amplify and convert the current signal into a form that can be processed easily.
3.	 Equalize and/or modify the signal to increase bandwidth or remove unwanted artefacts.
4.	 Demodulate the incoming signal, depending on its transmission modulation.
5.	 Sample the processed signal to recover the transmitted digital bit stream.
6.	 Output the signal in a form suitable for the end-user’s application.
7.	 Optionally recover the clock embedded within the data stream, and
8.	 Optionally perform error correction tasks.
The role of the receiver front-end covers only tasks #1 to #6, however as part of the sam-
pling operation many receivers also perform a clock and data recovery (CDR) operation 
[1], i.e. task #7. As error correction (task #8) requires a memory buffer, such tasks are sepa-
rated from a receiver front-end and incorporated within encoding and protocol specific 
units within the overall system. The above front-end and back-end split can be viewed 
conveniently with respect to Ethernet technologies. The front-end Tx/Rx is often denoted 
Optical Communication Technology
142

as the ‘PHY’ as it relates to physical transmission and reception, it is also viewed as the
physical layer in the Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) model. At the back-end, a Medium 
Access Controller (MAC) is used to implement the OSI data link layer, and contains both 
(i) transmit and receive buffers and (ii) framing, addressing and protocol level functions. 
Within the optical communication physical layer community, there are a number of key 
performance metrics that are driving innovation and the exploration of the current limit-
ing factors [1, 2, 6]. These overall performance metrics are given below with current areas 
of innovation.
•	 Demand for increased bandwidth and transmission speeds
○
○Increase in bits per symbol through increased modulation complexity
○
○Increase in channels per physical link though multiplexing in the time, frequency, phase or wave-
length domains
○
○Increased use of channel equalization techniques at both Tx and Rx
•	 Reduction in energy usage and increased energy efficiency
○
○Decrease in the energy per bit
○
○Trends towards quantum limited transmission (minimum optical power)
○
○Increased transmission spectral efficiency for given real-world channel
○
○Increased receiver sensitivity through (i) low-noise amplification, or (ii) optical and/or electrical 
coherent reception either homodyne or heterodyne detection
•	 Decreased manufacture and design costs, and
○
○Increased Tx or Rx levels of CMOS integration, i.e. single-chip solutions
○
○Decreased use of rare earth or high-cost materials
○
○Minimization of bulky (for a particular CMOS node) analogue circuitry
○
○Decreased design costs through Tx/Rx standardization
•	 Decrease in bit errors and noise immunity
○
○Increased optical Tx extinction ratio
○
○Decreasing Tx and Rx electrical noise
○
○Decrease in inter-symbol interference
1.2. Key receiver performance metrics
Before discussing the target application, a number of key receiver performance metrics 
need to be defined. These are (i) basic parameters at the communications level and (ii) mea-
surements that can be made to assess the quality of a receiver, or its fitness for a particular 
application.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
143

1.2.1. The data rate
The data-rate, RD, measured in bits per second (b/s) is a measure of the serialized data through-
put. As technology progresses, the throughput that is required at personal, commercial, national 
and international levels is increasing [5]. The data rate is intrinsically linked to the transmitter, 
channel and receiver bandwidth, BW, as each must pass all required frequency components in 
order to allow accurate, low-error decoding of the received signal back into binary data. In a 
communications receiver, the sampling point is chosen to be within the centre of the data sym-
bol, thus allowing some protection from distortions on a signal’s rising and falling edges. This 
leads to a lower frequency optimum bandwidth, BW−3dB, which is related to the data rate [6], 
see Eq. (1). This is a mid-way point between (i) a low bandwidth that reduces input noise but 
produces low-pass inter-symbol interference, and (ii) a high bandwidth that captures all of a 
signal without distortion but also captures a large noise bandwidth and unnecessarily increases
design specifications. For a 10 ns (100 Mb/s) data symbol, this would suggest a receiver band-
width of 66.7 MHz. This is significantly below the knee frequency (Eq. (2)) of 250 MHz for a 2 ns 
rise time, TR (10–90%) signal, i.e. 20% of a 10 ns 100 Mb/s data rate symbol.
	
​​BW​ -3dB​ = ​ 
2 ​R​ D​ 
____ 
3  ​	
(1)
	
​​F​ KNEE​ = ​ 0.5 
___ 
​T​ R​ ​	
(2)
1.2.2. The bit error rate
The bit error rate (BER) is defined as the number of single-bit errors within a continuous bit 
stream [1, 2, 6]. Data links at 100 Mb/s to 10 Gb/s may utilize error correction and are thus 
specified with ‘native’, no-FEC, error rates at 1 × 10−9, i.e. a single bit error within a transmis-
sion of one billion bits. For links with slower data rates or where the application incurs signifi-
cant channel distortions (such as VLC), the use of FEC may be a requirement. For these cases, 
the designer aims for the best native BER performance but as this cannot be guaranteed due 
to unknown factors impinging on the communications channel, a worst case maximum BER 
is chosen. For many FEC algorithms there is a limit as to effective recovery, at an approximate 
BER level of 1 × 10−3. The BER is both a specification of the link and a measurable performance 
parameter. As an example, a BER of 1 × 10−6 to 1 × 10−9 may be specified as part of a protocol 
standard, but a measured value of 1 × 10−6 at a particular incident optical power may also 
become improved at a higher optical power.
There are two critical issues for the BER, (i) signal noise and (ii) inter-symbol interference. 
Assuming the use of non-return-to-zero (NRZ) on-off-key (OOK) modulation, the error rate 
is related to the probabilities that the noise of a ‘one’ or ‘zero’ cross a threshold, Nth. As both 
zeros and one are subject to noise, both have amplitude distributions about their means, (N0 
and N1), these will have standard deviations of σ0 and σ1 respectively. The threshold and bit 
error rate can be approximated, for Gaussian noise profiles by Eqs. (3) and (4).
	
​​N​ th​ = ​ 
​σ​ 0​ ​N​ 1​ + ​σ​ 1​ ​N​ 0​ 
_________ 
​σ​ 0​ ​σ​ 1​ 
​	
(3)
	
​BER = ​ 1 
__ 
2 ​ erfc​(​ 
​N​ 1​ - ​N​ th​ 
______ 
​σ​ 1​ ​√ 
__
 
2 ​  ​)​	
(4)
Optical Communication Technology
144

Inter-symbol interference (ISI) is the bleed-through of symbols directly before and after, inter-
fering with the reception of a bit. If we view the system as a low-pass filter of bandwidth, 
BW−3dB, rectangular pulses become smeared in time with exponential rise and fall times [1]. 
As the signal is the supposition of multiple transitions the amplitude at the sampling point 
becomes corrupted by these tails. If the bandwidth decreases, these tails become longer in 
comparison to a bit period. Ideally, all ISI should have settled prior to sampling, however ISI 
acts to decrease the region within a symbol where robust sampling can occur.
1.2.3. Receiver sensitivity
For communications link budgets, it is useful to establish the receiver sensitivity [1]. This is 
defined as the incident optical power necessary for a receiver to reach the specified BER at the 
specified data rate, and is measured in dBm [1]. To ensure communication through a variety of 
signal attenuation factors, a high receiver sensitivity is required. We would therefore choose a 
receiver with a sensitivity of −20 dBm (0.01 mW) above a receiver with −5 dBm (0.32 mW). This 
would be particularly true if we knew the optical power was likely to be low at 0.05 mW due 
to perhaps low transmitter power and optical filtering. The sensitivity is dependent not only 
on the physical optical sensitivity, but also the received signal as a proportion of the receiver 
noise and inter-symbol interference. Thus, for a high-sensitivity receiver, (i) optical efficiency 
and electrical gain need to be high, while (ii) noise, inter-symbol interference and sampling 
phase-noise need to be low [1, 6].
1.2.4. The quantum limit
The receiver sensitivity can easily be reformulated in terms of the number of photons required 
per bit [1]. As this can be generalized to a theoretical receiver, we come across the theoreti-
cal ideal known as the quantum limit, QL. An ideal receiver would have zero noise (zero 
bits given by zero photon arrivals) and would receive single-photons with 100% efficiency. 
As photon arrivals follow Poisson statistics, the QL can be given by Eq. (5), where TB is the 
symbol duration and γ(TB) denotes the average number of photons received per symbol. 
For a BER of 1 × 10−9, approximately 20 photons are needed per symbol, which at 100 Mb/s  
(TB = 10 ns), is 2 × 109 photons per second. For 650 nm (red) light this is 0.611 nW (−62.14 dBm).
	
​​BER​ QL​ = ​ 1 
__ 
2 ​ ​e​ -γ​(​T​ B​)​​	
(5)
1.2.5. Energy per bit and power consumption
While the power dissipation of a receiver is a product of the supply voltage and receiver cur-
rent, receivers with different data rates are often compared using the energy per bit, measured 
in Joules per bit (J/b) [1, 6]. As data rates are stretching beyond Gb/s, the energy per bit and 
therefore the total energy usage become significant issues [5]. Amplification and equalization 
circuitry often incur large energy costs; hence effort is being concentrated on efficient implemen-
tation. While reduced voltage supplies for integrated circuits (ICs) helps reduce power consump-
tion, analogue design becomes more complex. Coupled with the bulkiness of robust analogue 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
145

­circuitry in advanced CMOS nodes (<45 nm), there is a trend towards denser digital circuitry in 
place of analogue where this is achievable, (i.e. trends of delay-locked loops (DLLs) replacing 
phase-locked loops (PLLs)). A significant open question is how to achieve high receiver sensitiv-
ity while obtaining a low energy per received bit? As transmitter efficiency and overall power/bit 
should also be included in the transmission energy budget of data, it is in our interest to reduce 
the power required of the most inefficient sub-system, along with improving its efficiency.
1.2.6. Integration and silicon area usage
The degree of receiver circuit integration, directly impacts system level costs and performance. 
Older receivers required separate ICs for the basic receiver tasks discussed in Section 1.1, 
however increased integration allows higher bandwidths, lower power dissipation and sig-
nificantly reduced system level design times [7]. As an example, integrating a CDR circuit 
with the receiver removes high-bandwidth, accurate traces from a printed circuit board (PCB). 
It also reduces the power that must be dissipated by the input and output pads of multiple 
ICs, and drastically improves jitter [1]. Likewise, by integrating a photodiode in the same sub-
strate as a CMOS receiver, the capacitance and inductance of bond pads and wires between 
an external photodiode and IC can be removed and thus achieving higher bandwidth. As 
multi-channel and multi-port ICs become more prevalent, some circuit blocks can be shared, 
thereby increasing area and energy efficiency. While requiring increased configurability, and 
difficulty in testing and verification, there is significant drive towards reduction in the number 
of input/output (I/O) pads within a system, hence integration of sub-systems onto a single IC.
1.3. Target application: visible-light communications
Visible light communication is a free-space method emerging as an alternative to local wireless 
systems [3, 4, 8, 9]. It is intended for data rates between 100 Mb/s and 1 Gb/s and has recently 
been ratified by the institute of electrical and electronic engineers (IEEE) (IEEE P802.15.7) [10]. 
A significant thrust is the dual use of energy-efficient light emitting diode (LED) technologies 
for illumination and communications [3, 10] (Figure 1). The advantages of VLC are principally 
Figure 1. Visible optical communications and room lighting using red, green and blue modulated, LEDs. The wide 
divergence angle, presents an issue as the received optical power is low.
Optical Communication Technology
146

that the visible band is: (i) of wide bandwidth, (ii) is un-licensed and (iii) immune to electromag-
netic interference from existing wireless technologies [1, 2, 6]. The primary target for end-users 
are mobile devices such as smart-phones and laptops where VLC can be used to supplement 
wireless systems for high bandwidth applications [3, 4] such as real-time, high-quality media 
streaming [5]. It is projected that as (i) the frequency allocation tables become increasingly dense 
and (ii) transmitters and receivers become increasingly difficult to produce at the high GHz 
radio levels, that some form of optical link—above the THz gap—will be required [3].
Despite advances in VLC, the application has a number of inherent issues that require appli-
cation specific receiver designs. Firstly, the divergence angle of LEDs—particularly when 
wide-area lighting is needed—produces a large, diffuse illuminated area [3, 4]. When using a 
receiver IC of limited size, as per mobile systems, the receiver will capture a small proportion 
of the total transmitted optical power. Secondly, as optical sources are modulated at speeds 
close to their native bandwidth, both the average optical power and the modulation extinction 
ratio (the difference between high and low amplitudes) become smaller. Finally, in order to 
utilize the wide optical bandwidth, some form of optical filter is needed to perform wave-
length multiplexing, i.e. multiple data channels on different colours. This has two implica-
tions, firstly that for ideally white illumination (wide-band), the receiver will receive a signal 
strength which is a narrow-band subset of wavelengths. A three-wavelength system (e.g. red, 
green, and blue, RGB), will naturally imply optical powers approximately one third of the 
total optical power. The second implication is that the filter itself will reduce optical power as 
they are neither perfect within their pass-band (signal attenuation) and have finite stop-band 
rejection (inter-colour interference and therefore finite separation). The effect of these issues, 
is that optical power incident on a receiver will be attenuated, while still being modulated at 
high data rates and with the user expecting both low error rates and low power consumption.
1.4. Research aims: extreme receiver sensitivity
We can consider VLC, as involving an inherent communications link budget issue, i.e. mul-
tiple attenuation factors necessitate reciprocal receiver gains. Further, the future requirements 
for low energy-per-bit communications would suggest an overall reduction in the link bud-
get. The difficulty in such a scenario is twofold:
•	 First, the gain required in the communication budget may be extreme, especially if Gb/s 
links are required with multiple wavelength multiplexed channels, wide-area coverage 
and compact optically simple receivers.
•	 Second, as optical powers decrease and electrical gains increase, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 
becomes a significant hurdle for robust detection. Johnson noise may limit analogue gain, es-
pecially if cooling is unachievable. Photon shot-noise may also become significant, without the 
possibility of using increased optical power at the transmitter (room lighting limited).
The work within this chapter therefore focuses on receiver designs with extreme sensitivity and 
high bandwidths to overcome the inherent attenuation factors of VLC, see [11, 12] and refer-
ences therein. The overall method of using the avalanche multiplication of photo-generated 
carriers may use extra electrical power at the receiver—principally through increased biasing 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
147

voltages. But, as this removes the need for analogue amplification circuitry, represents a more 
economical use of both electrical power and silicon area.
2. High-sensitivity optical to electric conversion
When electromagnetic radiation is incident upon a material, there are three processes that can 
lead to photon interaction, and thus the detection of that photon [13]. These are the (i) photo-
electric effect [14], (ii) Compton scattering and (iii) pair production. Taking the high-energy 
processes first, we can begin to discount processes in order to arrive at the process whereby 
optical, and in particular visible, sensors operate.
•	 In Compton scattering, the incident photon is scattered by an atomic electron. It imparts 
some energy to the electron, meaning that the photon energy is reduced, and thus the 
wavelength becomes longer. Compton scattering therefore does not destroy the photon. 
As noted in [13], this effect is small for energies “below tens of KeV”, i.e. 1 KeV is 1.24 nm 
and 10 KeV is 0.124 nm, and therefore can be discounted from visible applications within 
the band 400–700 nm.
•	 In pair-production, the photon energy is high enough to result in the production of an 
electron-positron pair, i.e. the electron’s anti-matter counterpart. The photon energy must 
therefore be higher than Ep = 2mec2, where me is the rest-mass of an electron. As this is 1.02 
MeV, i.e. 0.0012 nm, this process occurs only for X-ray and Gamma-ray interactions, and 
thus can be discounted from any visible light application [13, 14].
Elimination therefore leaves the photoelectric effect—which is subdivided (within textbooks, 
patents, company websites, whitepapers and journals) into the external and internal photoelec-
tric effects. It is therefore the only physical process suitable for optical to electrical conversion 
within visible applications [13, 14].
2.1. The photoelectric effect: converting light
In both photoelectric processes, a photon is absorbed by an atom, thus destroying the photon. 
If the photon energy is sufficient to overcome the work function of the material, a bound-free 
transition takes place whereby an electron is promoted from an outer electron orbital and is 
ejected from the surface [13, 15]. Remaining energy is accounted for by the kinetic energy of 
the electron as a free particle [15]. This is the external photoelectric effect as photo-electrons 
physically leave the material. The photon energy is given by Eq. (6), where h is the Plank con-
stant, c is the speed of light, λ is the wavelength and ν is the optical frequency.
	
​​E​ P​ = ​ hc 
__ 
λ ​ = hυ​	
(6)
In contrast, for semiconductors with band-gap, EG, between the valance, EV, (i.e. outer-orbital 
bound electrons) and conduction electrons, EC, (i.e. delocalized cloud of electrons) [16], a pho-
ton of energy greater than the band-gap (EP > EG) promotes an electron from the valence to 
the conduction band. As the absence of an electron in a valence state is described as a hole, 
Optical Communication Technology
148

the internal photoelectric effect produces an electron-hole pair [16]. This is a bound-bound or 
intrinsic transition [14, 15]. The electron is still ejected from the atom; however, not from the 
surface. If two electrodes are placed on the material with a slight potential gradient, or if that 
potential exists due to a p-n doped junction, the electron-hole pair are separated and drift due 
to their relative charges. With many photo-generated carriers within the material due to many 
incident photons, the bulk conductivity of the material increases [16], allowing a photocurrent 
to flow through an external circuit. Photons of high energy are highly likely to cause band to 
band transitions, however as the wavelength increases towards a photon energy close to the 
band-gap, the likelihood of transition decreases, given by the absorption coefficient, α. This 
leads to a long-wavelength cut off, λC, given by Eq. (7). For silicon, this is 1.1 μm, where the 
absorption coefficient is 1 × 101 cm−1, whereas at 400 nm it is 1 × 105 cm−1.
	
​​λ​ C​ = ​ 1.24 
____ 
​E​ G​ ​	
(7)
The internal photo-electric effect is therefore the mechanism whereby semi-conductor mate-
rials can be utilized for the detection of light. As materials have various band-gap energies, 
different materials can be used to detect optical energy with different wavelengths [16]. 
Typically, less than one electron-hole pair is produced per absorbed photon, fundamentally 
limiting the internal quantum efficiency and the spectral responsivity measured in Amperes 
per Watt (A/W). The optically-induced current, IP, flowing through a photodiode is given by 
Eq. (8) [16], assuming a detector thickness much larger than the light penetration depth, (1/α). 
q is the electronic charge, POPT, is the incident optical power, μn is the electron mobility. η is the 
quantum efficiency, ε is the electric field within the photoconductor, L is the distance between 
the contacts, and τ is the carrier lifetime.
	
​​I​ P​ = q​(η ​ 
​P​ OPT​ 
____ 
hv ​)​(​ 
​μ​ n​ τε 
____ 
L  ​)​	
(8)
Within CMOS technologies, photodiodes are fabricated using p- and n- type dopants to form 
a p-n junction [14, 16]. As the average depth of absorption changes with photon wavelength, 
the depth of the junction is chosen, if possible, to maximize the received photocurrent. The 
width of the p-n junction is also critical in this; however, it also has implications for photodi-
ode bandwidth. The response speed is restricted by three phenomena. Firstly, the capacitance 
of the p-n junction (dictated by the junction width). Secondly, the time delay of carriers gener-
ated outside of the junction, diffusing into the junction. And thirdly, the drift or transit time, 
tr, of the carriers within the junction [1, 6, 16]. The transit time is given by Eq. (9), where L can 
be replaced by the junction width, W, as the electrode contacts are often fabricated on the top 
and bottom of the junction within planar technologies.
	
​​t​ r​ = ​  L 
___ 
​μ​ n​ ε ​	
(9)
Eqs. (8) and (9) indicate both limits and opportunities with respect to receiver design. If the 
junction width or photoconductor length are reduced, the response speed increases, although
this becomes limited if a thin junction width leads to a high capacitance and therefore a slow 
photodiode resistance/capacitance (RC) time constant. Reducing the width also reduces the 
photocurrent, requiring a high receiver gain to compensate. If the electric field is increased, 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
149

both the photocurrent and diode bandwidth increase. It is here we encounter the fundamental 
limit and trade-off within high-speed, high-sensitivity receiver design. That transit time, and 
therefore bandwidth behaves in a reciprocal manner to photocurrent magnitude. As the elec-
tric field looks to be beneficial, this is a clue to guide research in the field.
2.2. The Avalanche gain mechanism: photo-carrier multiplication
A central challenge within receiver design is how to obtain the required amplification [16], or 
sensitivity. This must be done without undue use of (i) amplifier circuits (thus silicon area and 
power usage) or (ii) wide and therefore slow p-n junctions [1, 6]. Avalanche multiplication 
used in avalanche photodiodes (APDs), has been previously investigated for communications 
[1, 16–19]. This moves amplification into the diode providing initial gain without circuitry, 
and by increasing ε, allows both a larger photocurrent and shorter transit time.
The multiplication process uses an increased reverse bias voltage, VR [16], creating an energy 
difference of q(Vbi + VR), where Vbi is the built-in potential between the p-side and n-side regions. 
The resultant increase in electric field, ε, accelerates a free carrier, labelled 1 in Figure 2, to 
a kinetic energy, EK, sufficient to overcome the ionisation energy, EG, of the ­material [16] 
(Eq. (10)). Upon a collision between a photo-carrier and the crystal lattice, the accelerated 
carrier ionises another carrier. An electron-hole pair, labelled 2 and 2′, is generated with those 
carriers then accelerated by the electric field, causing further ionisation [16, 17, 20]. This con-
tinues exponentially, creating an avalanche of carriers within the depletion region.
	
​​E​ K​ = ​(1.5)​ ​E​ G​	
(10)
Figure 2. Band diagram showing reverse bias avalanche multiplication. When the electric field is elevated above the 
ionisation energy level, an accelerated carrier imparts a significant kinetic energy to a bound electron upon collision with 
the lattice. Adapted from Ref. [16], pp. 79 and 97.
Optical Communication Technology
150

APDs are biased such that multiplication achieves a constant generation rate, and thus constant 
gain [21] but not run-away avalanche leading to junction breakdown ([22] and references therein). 
The diode produces a current dependant on the incident photon flux with the gain and depletion 
region width being dependant on the bias [16, 21]. Some structures can be biased further into 
reverse bias, giving larger gains and greater sensitivities. In exceptional cases, run-away multipli-
cation is used for specialised diodes called single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) [20, 22–25].
The use of avalanche gain, can be advantageous for sensitivity, as a gain of M = 10–1000, can be 
accomplished within the diode without the need of analogue amplification [1, 6]. Avalanche 
gain, is thus useful, however it comes with some disadvantages. Firstly, the higher bias voltage 
must be generated, necessitating additional power supply circuits or on-chip charge pumps. 
Secondly, multiplication is inherently random leading to increased noise. Finally, there is a 
gain-bandwidth trade off formed by the persistence of the avalanche process, whereby if the 
optical power decreases quickly, the avalanche caused by the previous high-optical power 
state takes some time to subside. To progress sensitivity and speed, through use of avalanche 
multiplication, circuits mitigating some of the above disadvantages are needed. For example, 
could we switch to smaller, lower power digital circuits and utilize very high multiplication 
factors by reducing the impact of multiplication noise?
2.3. Single-photon avalanche diodes: history and operation:
The Geiger region lies at the extreme end of the reverse photodiode range, beyond the linear 
avalanche gain region but prior to breakdown of a guard ring surrounding it ([11, 16, 21, 23, 
25], and references therein). Initial research into avalanche behaviour, centered on microplas-
mas [21, 25]. These are small breakdown regions, corresponding to silicon defects [21, 25]. The 
historical study of microplasmas, resulted in artificial microplasmas [25] with guard rings to 
force a known breakdown region. These artificial structures later became known as Geiger-
mode avalanche photodiodes (GM-APDs) or single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) [11, 
23]. As they allow the avalanche mechanism to run-away, breaking down the p-n junction, 
their gain factors can be greater than 1 × 106, i.e. a single-photon, yielding a single electron-
hole pair is able to produce a sizable avalanche photocurrent.
The Geiger region provides long periods of quiescent operation at a voltage of VOP = VBD + 
VEX, where VEX is the excess bias applied above the breakdown voltage, VBD [20–23]. Upon 
the arrival of a photon, the device transitions from the quiescent point (Figure 3), to the I-V 
curve, with the avalanche quickly building up (10–100 ps). The current flows through any 
external series resistances, causing a significant voltage drop, designed to be of magnitude 
VEX over that resistance. This reduction in voltage, (i) is sensed, indicating a single-photon 
event and (ii) reduces the voltage across the SPAD p-n junction [22, 23]. The reduced voltage, 
decreases the kinetic energy of carriers and halts the avalanche, a process known as quench-
ing. The lower current flow allows the SPAD to recharge to VBD + VEX. There are two prin-
cipal operating modes, passive quenching with passive reset (PQPR) and active quenching 
with active reset (AQAR) [23]. The passive circuit uses a large ~100 kΩ resistance (typically 
implemented using transistors), RQ, and optionally a smaller 50 Ω sense resistor. The circuit 
recharges with a time constant given by RQCSPAD, where CSPAD is formed by (i) the p-n junction 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
151

capacitance, and any parasitic capacitances on the diode (Figure 4). In the active case, the 
change in voltage triggers a quenching transistor which pulls VEX to zero. After a short delay 
a separate low on-resistance transistor resets the device to VEX.
In Figure 4, both positive-going and negative-going PQPR SPAD circuits are shown, along 
with the parasitic anode to substrate (CAS) and cathode to substrate (CCS) capacitances. The 
transistor gate voltage, DTctrl, can control the on-resistance, allowing adaptation of the SPAD 
dead-time, Td. The n-type metal-oxide-semiconductor (NMOS) transistor circuit is preferable 
Figure 4. Two PQPR circuit topologies. Left: positive-going circuit with an NMOS quenching transistor and a small 
anode parasitic capacitance on the diode moving node. Right: negative-going circuit with a PMOS transistor, but with a 
larger cathode to substrate parasitic capacitance.
Figure 3. Top: the bias regions and I-V curve of a SPAD, showing the avalanche, quench and reset cycle. Bottom: the 
voltage-time pulses for both passive and active quenching circuits. Notice the steep, well defined edges of the AQAR 
pulse shape. The dead-time Td is shown for both.
Optical Communication Technology
152

as (i) CAS is typically smaller than CCS and (ii) NMOS transistors can be integrated within a 
SPAD array without the deep N-well required for p-type metal-oxide-semiconductor (PMOS) 
devices.
It is with circuits such as this, that high-sensitivity receivers can be realized [11, 12]. One 
circuit approach would be to combine avalanche gain exceeding that used in APDs, with 
topologies known to give high sensitivity. The SPAD circuit can be used to replace the contin-
uous-time photodiode, trans-impedance amplifier (TIA) and feedback network, Rf, circuitry 
(Figure 5, left). A small digital inverter, necessary to prevent loading on the SPAD, replaces 
any post-amplification, while the resulting full logic swing can be used with a digital counter 
(Figure 5, right). This discrete time “direct-to-digital” approach allows all gain to be imple-
mented within the diode, removing complex analogue circuitry, and drastically reducing area 
requirements. Electrical power is expended within the SPAD due to a total voltage of VOP, 
and the avalanche current flow per detection, however analogue amplifier circuits typically 
require continuous bias currents for each amplification stage branch [1, 6].
2.4. Single-photon avalanche diodes: key performance parameters
Before discussing SPADs within optical receivers, there are several key performance param-
eters that must be discussed. As the field is still under active investigation, there are as yet no 
definitive methods to bring low-level parameters up to the communications level, particularly 
the bit error rate (BER). This contrasts with mature photodiode receivers where the receiver 
BER can be derived [1, 2, 6]. Taking the properties of a single SPAD first, we encounter non-
ideal behaviour away from true single-photon counting [23]. For receivers, the concept of the 
receiver power penalty within the link budget [6], can be used to estimate the effects, to first 
order, of various offsets and non-idealities. The power penalty, expressed in decibels (dB), 
models the adjustment in optical power required to compensate for an effect.
1. SPADs produce avalanche events despite the absence of light, this is the so-called dark count 
rate (DCR), measured in counts per second (cps) or Hertz (Hz) [20, 21, 23, 24]. This is related 
to (i) thermal generation of carriers, and (ii) tunnelling of carriers predominantly due to traps 
within the band structure. The DCR has steadily improved through (i) academic investigation 
of guard ring structures such as retrograde guard rings [26], (ii) modelling and understand-
ing of the transient behaviour of the junction itself [27] and (iii) CMOS process cleanliness,
and can now be as low as 1 Hz [27]. A per-SPAD rate such as this is now effectively ideal in 
Figure 5. Left: a continuous-time conventional photodiode receiver, and right: a discrete-time replacement with single-photon  
sensitivity, where the SPAD and inverter allows optical to electrical conversion into a voltage (i.e. trans-impedance) with 
full logic swing magnitudes.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
153

comparison to high (>100 Mb/s) data-rate communications. The DCR limits the optical photon 
flux at which reliable single-photon detection can be achieved. Therefore, the incident optical 
power would need to be increased by a power penalty, PPDCR. This is given by Eq. (11), where 
DCRPC is the DCR per channel per symbol period as a proportion of the required number of 
photons per symbol, similar to the voltage threshold offset power penalty ([1], p. 71). As the 
DCR and symbol period decrease, this penalty becomes negligible. For a DCRPC of 10% of the 
required photons (~20), the PPDCR is 0.79 dB.
	
​​PP​ DCR​ = 10 ​log​ 10​(1 + ​ 
2 ​DCR​ PC​ 
_______ 
100  ​)​	
(11)
2. A SPAD—like a photodiode or avalanche diode—does not detect light with 100% effi-
ciency. The photon detection efficiency (PDE), typically some 20–40%, is linked to three 
processes, (i) the internal quantum efficiency [16], (ii) the wavelength specific absorption 
depth and the width and depth of the p-n junction, and (iii) the avalanche turn-on probabil-
ity [20, 23, 25]. This latter factor is a product of the kinetic energy achievable before a car-
rier recombines, and is thus dependent on the electric field. In combination with the DCR, 
this limits the lower optical power that can be reliably detected. A power penalty, PPPDE, to 
account for the finite detection efficiency can be calculated using Eq. (12). For a SPAD with 
20% PDE, this is 7 dB.
	
​​PP​ PDE​ = −10 ​log​ 10​(​ PDE 
____ 
100 ​)​	
(12)
The PDE has increased through commercial R&D into SPAD-dedicated micro-lenses. However, 
it has proved difficult to improve the internal quantum efficiency as increased electric fields 
correspondingly increase the DCR, while wider depletion regions require modifications to 
dopants that may not be an option for a multi-customer CMOS foundry. Correspondingly, 
the drive for high-PDE has led to the optimisation of the layer stack above the silicon surface, 
including reduced metallisation, thinner nitride layers and anti-reflection coatings, or the use 
of back-side illuminated structures. The combination of these design options has promoted 
foundries such as ST Microelectronics and TowerJazz to develop dedicated optical CMOS 
processes for SPAD implementation.
3. The dead time, Td, is a discharge and recharge period, during which the bias falls below 
the normal VEX + VBD [20, 21, 23]. No photon arrivals can be detected, although for PQPR as 
the voltage exponentially recharges there is an increasing probability of an avalanche event, 
and thus the dead time can be extended, an effect called paralysis [28, 29]. A short dead time 
is advantageous as it maximizes the detections per second, CMAX (Eq. (13)). Unfortunately, 
an arbitrarily short dead-time, cannot be achieved as second order effects become more pro-
nounced [23]. The dead time has been reduced within the literature, principally through the 
use of AQAR, and the use of smaller diodes. For AQAR, the maximum count rate and the 
dead time required for a target minimum number of photons per second, NPHOTONS, for a num-
ber of SPADs, NSPADS and target number of channels, NCHANS, are given by Eqs. (13) and (14) 
respectively. For passive quenching, both equations are multiplied by 1/e [28, 29].
Optical Communication Technology
154

	
​​C​ MAX​ = ​ 
​N​ SPADs​ 
_______ 
​N​ CHANs​ ​T​ d​ ​	
(13)
	
​​T​ d​ = ​ 
​N​ SPADs​ 
______________ 
 
​N​ CHANs​⌊​N​ PHOTONs​⌋​ ​	
(14)
4. Without a long dead-time, there is a small but finite probability of a secondary avalanche, 
denoted as an after-pulse, ap [20, 23]. This is related to the release of a charge carrier from a 
trap within the device. The number of trapped carriers is dependent on the charge flow dur-
ing an avalanche, hence reducing SPAD capacitance is beneficial [22, 24]. The number of traps 
is a function of process cleanliness and device structure, while the trap lifetime, and hence the 
approximate required dead-time is a function of temperature. A minority-carrier effect, may 
limit the lower-bound of the dead-time with respect to after-pulsing, and hence fundamen-
tally limits reductions in dead-times [22].
5. The Poisson distribution of photon arrivals is complemented by a similar timing variation 
in photon detection [20, 26]. This event timing jitter is a product of two contributions. Firstly, 
the statistics of avalanche build up [30], lateral spreading of the avalanche throughout the 
junction volume and the carrier transit time [31]. Secondly a lengthy, but low-probability jit-
ter tail is caused by carriers deeper within the substrate diffusing towards the p-n junction. 
The use of silicon-on-insulator (SOI) CMOS processes may offer some mitigation, however a 
significant trend for jitter reduction has been SPADs of small diameter and the tailoring of the 
SPAD doping.
Arrays of SPADs in CMOS planar processes also have a number of non-ideal behaviours and 
limitations. As the SPAD dead-time or IC application may necessitate the use of multiple 
diodes, array level limitations have a large impact on final receiver performance [11].
6. The fill factor (FF) is the ratio of the optically receptive area to the total device area and 
is a key parameter in obtaining the goal of a high sensitivity receiver. For a square array 
of circular SPADs, the fill factor (FFSQ) is given by Eq. (15). Where AACT is the total optically 
active area, AARR is the total square array area and NSPAD is the number of SPADs within the 
array. DR is the radius of the per-SPAD active area, DG is the guard ring width, and DS is the 
guard-ring to guard-ring separation. The fill factor significantly alters the receiver sensitivity 
as photons incident on inactive regions are not counted but non-the-less are included in link 
budgets. This leads to a fill-factor power penalty, PPFF, given by Eq. (16) [11]. The fill factor is 
often limited by the diode geometries available for a given noise or capacitance specification
[24], the complexity integrated onto the receiver and the CMOS process design rules [22, 24].
	
​​FF​ SQ​ = ​ 
​A​ ACT​ 
____ 
​A​ ARR​ ​ = ​ 
π ​D​ R​ 
2 ​ ​N​ SPAD​ 
 
__________________________ 
 
 
​[2 ​D​ R​ ​√ 
______ 
​N​ SPAD​ ​ + ​(2 ​D​ G​ + ​D​ S​)​(​√ 
______ 
​N​ SPAD​ ​ − 1)​]​ 
2​
 ​	
(15)
	
​​PP​ FF​ = −10 ​log​ 10​(​ FF 
___ 
100 ​)​	
(16)
Prior to 2010, the fill-factor was often limited to 1–2% [11]. This necessitates a factor of 50–100 
increase in optical power (PPFF = 17 dB), to return the detected photons per data symbol to the 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
155

ideal (FF = 100%) theoretical value. Despite restrictions [24], the fill factor has been increasing 
through a number of techniques. N-well sharing, out-of-array electronics, reduced quenching 
circuit areas, NMOS-only logic, increased diode radii with retained low-noise, use of clus-
tered mini arrays, non-circular geometries and micro-lenses, have all lead to fill factors reach-
ing recent maximums of 67% [32] and 70% [33]. With a fill factor such as 70%, the optical 
power would need to be increased by a factor of 1.43 (PPFF = 1.55 dB). To date, the fill-factor 
has been a particular focus of both academic and commercial R&D with several companies 
becoming heavily invested.
7. Detector cross talk, which is often at the 1–2% level in SPAD arrays using out of array cir-
cuitry, is induced by secondary photons in the substrate [34]. These are produced through 
radiative recombination during an avalanche. In-array circuitry has also been recognised as 
a contributor [22]. Therefore, while area within the array should be used to maximise the 
functionality to area cost ratio, high-speed circuitry, clock buffers and digital supplies should 
be placed outside the active areas. Cross talk can be reduced with increased SPAD spacing; 
however, this negatively impacts the fill factor.
8. As with all sensors, the temporal response departs from the ideal as characterized by the 
step and impulse response [11]. Upon the reception of a “zero” to “one” bit-level transition (a 
positive step assuming OOK), the ideal would be for the received transient to be limited by 
the channel. The step response however may cause a finite rise time and ripple that must settle
before the output can be sampled. Likewise, upon the reception of a “zero” after a “one”, the 
impulse response limits the speed at which the receiver settles to the new level. Upon either 
transition, the system must wait before sampling, and thus the symbol rate is fundamentally 
limited (discussed further later).
3. Circuit approaches and topologies
To date there are three distinct circuit topologies used within SPAD-based receiver designs. 
Two of the topologies use the innate full-logic-swing of the SPAD to produce an all-digital 
approach with either a sampled integrating or continuous time output. The third topology 
again aims for a continuous time output, but does so using the SPAD to switch current steer-
ing circuits. Each topology has advantages and disadvantages; however, the largest impactor 
is the level of integration within a CMOS technology as a function of the receiver functions 
discussed in Section 1.1. Along with these topologies, pure analogue, parallel connections 
have been formed into so called multi-pixel photon counters (MPPCs), these differ from 
SPAD arrays as the diode is not used to create a full logic level voltage. A positive feasibility 
study of MPPC use for communications can be found in [35].
3.1. Digital count summation: digital synchronous discrete time
One of the first all-digital multi-SPAD arrays custom designed for optical communications 
[12], aimed to replicate a synchronous integration mode-receiver [1]. A receiver of this type 
is presented in Section 3.2 as an example SPAD-based receiver. Integration prior to signal 
Optical Communication Technology
156

sampling allows: (i) the output signal amplitude to be increased, i.e. allowing a doubled inte-
gration time, will approximately double the output amplitude, and (ii) noise which has a 
period shorter than the integration window is reduced. As SPADs produce a discrete time 
pulse, integrating signals is equivalent to pulse counting [11].
The topology is shown in Figure 6A, where the pulses from a SPAD are counted digitally 
using a ripple or synchronous counter. An integration window (Figure 6B) shorter than the 
symbol period can be used (i) to allow rejection of photon counts caused by the rise and fall 
periods of the input, (ii) to reject DCR events outside of the window, and (iii) to stop, sample 
and reset the digital counter. The addition of multiple high-speed synchronous data streams 
from multiple ‘pixels’, (formed from a SPAD and a counter), can be performed easily and 
with low latency. A multi-diode approach therefore allows multiple detection events during 
periods equivalent to the SPAD dead-time. A SPAD array output, in the form of a wide bit-
depth synchronous digital stream can then either be (a) output to allow array diagnostics and 
signalling formats such as pulse amplitude modulation (M-PAM) or (b) thresholded on-chip 
allowing recovery of single-bit serial data streams. As the readout clock can be adjusted in 
phase relative to the transmitter clock, the position of the integration window can be chosen 
to minimize the BER, and its width can be optimized to maximize received signal amplitude.
3.2. XOR-tree summation: digital asynchronous discrete time
To decrease the required logic, negated AND and negated OR (NAND/NOR) trees were 
investigated for combining multiple SPADs in small, higher fill factor mini- silicon photo-
multipliers (SiPMs) ([11] and references therein). However, to operate at high counting rates, 
the SPAD pulse (10–30 ns) must be reduced to <1 ns using per-SPAD pulse shortening. This 
is still smaller than per-SPAD digital counters, however it prompted the investigation of 
exclusive-OR (XOR) trees for mass digital pulse summation of larger SPAD arrays [36, 37] 
(Figure 7A). The XOR truth table lends itself readily to a summation task as sequential lead-
ing edges of SPAD pulses (without pulse shortening), simply toggle the output (Figure 7B). 
The limitation of this is the rate at which the final XOR within a tree can toggle its output.
As XOR gate standard cells occupy a smaller area than the digital logic required per SPAD in 
both digital summation and pulse-shortened NAND/NOR summation, the fill factor of the cir-
cuit can be increased significantly, in the case of [36], a fill factor of 43% was achieved. Indeed, 
such a receiver has demonstrated 4-PAM VLC, with highly discernible Poisson-limited levels,
Figure 6. (A) The circuit topology with a binary counter per SPAD with synchronous binary addition of multiple SPAD 
counts within a defined integration window. (B) Timing diagram showing an input optical symbol, with an integration 
period blanking off the low-high and high-low transitions.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
157

albeit with a low data rate [38]. As noted by the authors, this topology can be combined with 
(a) the digital summation approach, (b) on-chip modulation decoding logic, (c) signal process-
ing logic, and (d) the adaption of the XOR tree and number of SPADs per channel. This would 
allow receiver optimization for power usage and optical sensitivity [38].
3.3. Current steering summation: analogue continuous time
In Figure 8, the current summation topology is shown [39], this uses the SPAD to switch 
currents onto output nodes shared by multiple SPADs, IQ− and IQ+. When the SPAD tog-
gles, the current path changes due to the opening or closing of transistors MS1 and MS2. 
Transistor MCS could be implemented outside of the array, and transistors MS1 and MS2 can 
be far smaller than large digital circuits such as synchronous carry look-ahead counters. The 
authors therefore hoped for a high fill factor, however the use of PMOS devices limited fill 
factor through the SPAD N-well spacing rules. A fill factor of 3% was achieved however this 
was not optimized. A deeper issue is that the topology includes an inherent signal attenua-
tion, whereby a full-logic swing on the SPAD (VEX = 1.6 V) and inverters results in a maximum 
per-SPAD steered current of 100 uA. With a value of 300 Ω for RO+ and RO− this yields 30 mV 
per SPAD. Larger trans-impedance values could be used (e.g. 1 kΩ, yielding 0.1 V per SPAD),  
however trans-impedance bandwidth decreases as this resistance increases, i.e. BW−3dB 
= (2πROCD)−1 [1]. It seems a shame to insert (i) a signal attenuation, and (ii) the transform 
{SPAD avalanche current to SPAD voltage to readout current to readout voltage}, into the 
topology to read out the SPAD array and communication signals.
While summation using Kirchhoff’s current law for many SPADs is more efficient in terms 
of area and power than a multi-bit digital summation tree, and thus a lower energy per bit, 
Figure 8. A current summation topology where a SPAD steers current through transistors MS1 or MS2. Multiple outputs 
can be added using Kirchhoff’s current law on nodes IQ− and IQ+. Off-chip trans-impedance resistances RO− and RO+ 
are used to convert the current to a continuous-time voltage.
Figure 7. (A) The XOR summation of pulses, without pulse shortening, of four SPADs. The toggling of the output is a 
form of pulse density modulation; however, a binary counter can be used for pulse integration during a symbol. (B) 
Timing diagram of the XOR circuit for events on SPADs 1 and 2.
Optical Communication Technology
158

this readout structure introduces noise through transistor mismatch and the Johnson noise 
of the trans-impedance resistances. As this noise acts upon the voltage levels of “zeros” and 
“ones” at the analogue LMH7220 comparator, the steered current per SPAD, and thus the 
per-SPAD voltage has a fundamental limit, especially if the receiver is intended for M-PAM 
modulation schemes. This is an additive readout noise in combination with both Poisson 
photon arrival and noise induced by dead-time, DCR and after-pulsing effects. Further, to 
compare the energy per bit and the receiver area, modelling would need to include the power 
dissipated and area of (i) both RO resistors, (ii) the comparator, (iii) the field programable 
gate array (FPGA) serial-deserial (SERDES) input pads and (iv) the latching flip-flop. This 
would be the case as this yields the same synchronous full-logic level digital bit as the previ-
ous topologies, albeit single- rather than multi-bit. While the output is asynchronous with 
samples taken when the data eye is maximally open, with no blanking periods SPADs break-
down due to photons within the transitions of the optical source, thus preventing them from 
contributing once the optical signal has reached its correct level. This would be critical for 
reducing the standard deviations, σ1, σ2 and σ3, upon M-PAM levels with means N1, N2 and 
N3. Modulated OOK data streams have been received with this topology with 125 Mb/s at a 
BER of 1 × 10−3.5 achievable with a dead time of 8.8 ns and before decision feedback equaliza-
tion [39, 40]. We must note however, that to be fair all receivers should be compared without 
equalisation, although equalisation represents a logical subsequent signal processing step for 
low BER communications.
3.4. An exemplar receiver IC
To demonstrate the concepts and to investigate issues inherent in the design of such receivers, 
the digital summation topology has been investigated using a 32 × 32 array of 8 μm SPADs in 
130 nm imaging CMOS (Figure 9) [11, 12]. This does use a hybrid approach with NAND/NOR 
signal addition prior to the main digital parallel summation tree, but does so mildly using 
‘super-Pixels’ formed from four SPADs (Figure 10).
The design, discussed in detail within [11, 12], operates as an integration-mode receiver, with 
two blanking periods of 500 ps at the start and end of a symbol. These screen out SPAD events 
during the transitions of an optical source, and thus decreasing the variability of counts within 
an integration period. The digital summation tree allows clocking at 100 MHz, culminating 
in either a single channel 14-bit output or a 9-bit 16 channel output operating at 25 MHz per 
channel. As the receiver was intended as a test-harness for various concepts, the array treated 
the fill-factor and PDE as fixed offsets that could be improved in subsequent generations. 
Rather than designing to maximize known performance metrics, the array was designed to 
test transient issues along with unknown factors important for both communications and 
high-sensitivity, high sample-rate metrology.
By passing full logic swing synchronous parallel data, rather than (a) fast toggling pulse den-
sity modulated data, (b) asynchronous ripple-counter data or (c) currents requiring a trans-
impedance, the receiver requires no circuitry prior to its test data being captured by an FPGA 
FIFO, or being thresholded. The receiver, summarized in Table 1 (see [11] for results/model-
ling), represents a test harness with dedicated modes for array characterization.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
159

Figure 10. Block diagram of the architecture for 16 SPADs, showing per-SPAD active and passive quenching, dead time 
control via the analogue voltage DTCTRL, and pulse shortening. A binary counter (6 bit) is used per group of four
SPADs and NAND/NOR signal addition is used.
Figure 9. Micrograph of the 1024 SPAD digital summation integration-mode receiver with the SPAD inset. This has a fill 
factor of 2.4%, and implements up to 16 ‘Data Channels’ each of 64 SPADs.
Optical Communication Technology
160

4. Results
This section will present experimental results from the example digital summation inte-
gration-mode receiver. The sensitivity curve or photon transfer curve will be shown and a 
model for this will be presented. The step response will also be shown as it makes a direct 
Parameter
Value
Units
Notes
CMOS process
130 nm Imaging
—
90 nm metallization
Peak PDE
20
%
VEX = 1.2 V at 450 nm
SPAD VBD
−13.05
V
—
Dead Time
5–250
ns
Active or passive
Pulse shortening
500
ps
For NAND/NOR Sum
SPAD VEX
1.35
V
Typically, 1.25 V
Fill factor
2.42
%
Exc. I/O Pads
# SPADs
1024
—
Circular
SPAD diameter
8
μm
Active area
Quenching
AQAR or PQPR
—
Adjustable
Digital VDD
1.2 and 3.3
V
Core/IO
Pixel counter bits
6
Bit
Per 4 SPADs
Output width
14 or 9
Bit
Single- or Multi-Channel
# Channels
1 or 16
—
Configurable
Die size
2.4 × 2.1
mm
~5 mm2
Clock frequency
108
100
MHz
Pad-Limited (Max)
(Typical)
Median DCR
2.5
kHz
16°C, VEX = 1.35
Max count rate
65
Gphoton/s
~10 ns Dead time
After-pulsing
0.9
%
1 μs window
Energy per bit
370
pJ/Hz
Estimated
Sensitivity estimate
−31.7
dBm
100 Mb/s BER = 1 × 10−9 
100% extinction ratio
Sensitivity estimate calibrated
−28.5
dBm
Inc. LED extinction ratio 
reduction
Table 1. Performance details for the 32 × 32 digital summation integration-mode receiver.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
161

impact on communications performance. This will also be modelled illuminating the choices 
a designer has with respect to the SPAD dead-time, number of SPADs, digital-counter read-
out rate and maximum modulated input power. Finally, experimental communications 
results will be shown, demonstrating both feasibility and several issues we have discussed.
4.1. Photon transfer curve and optical sensitivity
In Figure 11, the photon transfer curve (PTC) is shown. This plots the detected photon events per 
second against the input optical power. The Na modes describe a time multiplexing approach, 
which while beneficial for the temporal response, will not be discussed here (see [11]). The Na = 
4 mode is of interest as it turns on all SPADs within the summation. At the centre of the curve, 
the receiver has a linear response, however it saturates at both the low and high levels due to the
combined DCR and the active or passive quenching maximum count rate, CMAX, respectively. 
Passive quenching shows both the presence of the 1/e factor in its maximum counting rate, and 
the issue of paralysis whereby the count rate starts to decrease at high optical powers. For com-
munications, the receiver must operate within the linear region, as nonlinearities act to modify 
the extinction ratio of the detected signal, and thus negatively impacts the BER.
For design of SPAD-based receivers, active quenching appears to be advantageous, however 
as it requires extra circuitry per-SPAD, the choice of active or passive quenching must be 
taken in view of top level communications performance metrics. By reducing the dead-time, 
a higher count rate is achievable, while an increased number of SPADs has the same effect but 
comes with increased total DCR. It is advantageous to reduce the DCR through both innova-
tion and by turning high-DCR SPADs off (as shown on Figure 11) as this extends the lower 
optical power limit and pushes the receiver closer to being quantum limited.
Figure 11. The photon transfer curve of photon counts per second against optical input power. The curve is linear within 
the centre; however, saturation occurs due to the combined DCR of all SPADs within the summation and the active or 
passive quenching maximum count rate, CMAX.
Optical Communication Technology
162

The dynamic range can be calculated as: (i) the ratio of maximum (i.e. CMAX) to minimum (i.e.  
​​∑​(DCR)​ observable signals ​(approx. 80 dB in Figure)​, or ​(ii)​ the ratio of the maxi-
mum to the noise of the dark count floor rather than its absolute value, i . e.​​ ​​√ 
________ 
∑ ​(DCR)​ ​ (approx. 
149 dB). If we accept that between two modulated amplitude levels, a suitable gap must be left in 
order to achieve the required BER, the size of the linear region gives an estimate as to the theoreti-
cal number of M-PAM levels that could be implemented. With the required offsets, due to the 
finite fill factor and photon detection efficiency known through measurement of the PTC, other 
power penalties can be assessed and ranked as a guide to future design.
4.1.1. A competitive count model of SPAD avalanche initiations
The PTC can be modelled using competitive interaction, matching the measured experimen-
tal data (Figure 12). The arrival of a photon, (assuming AQAR), predicates loss of a photon, 
dark count or after-pulse if one occurs during the dead time. This creates competition at high 
count rates, in which (i) photons prevent dark counts or after-pulses, (ii) dark counts prevent 
photon counts or after-pulses, and (iii) after-pulses prevent photon counts or dark counts.
A simple model, describing the number of output counts as a function of input photons is 
given in Eq. (17). Where FF is the fill factor, DCR is the dark count rate, ΔT represents the time 
that counts are collected and P(ap) is the after-pulsing probability. PDE(λ) is the photon detec-
tion efficiency at a particular wavelength and ψ(λ) is the number of photons, of wavelength λ, 
incident per second. This does not account for the dead-time, although it could be combined 
with hybrid paralysable models of dead-time limited counting [28, 29]. This would modify 
the output counts, Ncounts, but would not include the concept of competition due to events 
other than photon arrivals. The model assumes that photons, dark counts and after-pulses 
can be separated, which while achievable with careful experimentation, cannot be performed 
during normal operation. The question therefore arises of what is the DCR level when the 
receiver is being illuminated, knowing that some DCR events will not be detected as the 
SPAD has already broken down? As noted within [23], a photon arrival and an after-pulse, or 
a dark count and an after-pulse are not statistically independent.
	
​​N​ counts​ = ​[1 + P​(ap)​]​(PDE​(λ)​ψ​(λ)​FF + DCR)​ ∆ T​	
(17)
As high counting rates prevent the separability, independence and static contribution assump-
tions being used, the concept of an enable time, Tenb, as a proportion of ΔT, can be introduced, i.e.
an avalanche induced dead time will remove a period, Td, from ΔT. The time in which a SPAD is in 
its receptive state, is then given by Eq. (18), and is the first step towards a count competitive model. 
The values ψact and DCRact are the actual numbers of photon and dark detections, however these 
are intermediate output values in Eq. (18) as they must be corrected for count competition [11].
	
​​T​ enb​ = ΔT −​[​(1 + P​(ap)​)​(​ψ​ act​ + ​DCR​ act​)​(​T​ d​)​]​	
(18)
A regression can be made backwards to the input values for photons, ψ0, dark counts, DCR0, 
and after-pulses, AP0, that can be calculated from the incident optical power, fill factor or 
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
163

carrier generation rate etc. The final counts Ncounts, including competitive interaction and the 
finite dead time, is then given by Eq. (19).
​​N​ counts​ = ​(​ 
ΔT 
 
____________________ 
 
1 + ​(1 + P​(ap)​)​(​ψ​ 0​ + ​DCR​ 0​)​(​T​ d​)​ ​)​(​ψ​ 0​ + ​DCR​ 0​)​ + ​(​ 
ΔT 
 
____________________ 
 
1 + ​(1 + P​(ap)​)​(​ψ​ 0​ + ​DCR​ 0​)​(​T​ d​)​ ​)​ 
2
​(​ψ​ 0​ + ​DCR​ 0​)​P​(ap)​	 ​(19)
In Figure 12, this model shows a low overall residual error, while incorporating the saturation 
at the level of CMAX. The deviation from experimental values in the region of 1 × 10−8 W/cm2 is 
due to small inconsistencies in the measurement approach as the optical power approached
the limits of the optical power meter. The power of the model however, is that the instan-
taneous DCR or after-pulsing counts can be estimated given count competition rather than 
assuming their calculated, or stand-alone measurement values. For example, DCR0 may be 
measured at a mean of 100 cps, however through the introduction of some photon detections 
and the corresponding loss in Tenb, the actual detected dark count rate, DCRact may instead be 
90 cps, i.e. 10 thermal generation events were ignored as they happen to coincide with SPAD 
dead-times caused by photon events. The value of DCRact is therefore plotted showing that 
as a SPAD approaches count saturation, the number of detected dark events falls. This effect 
must therefore be included in any assessment of count noise at a particular optical power, as 
would be needed for the BER of OOK or M-PAM of finite extinction ratio.
4.2. Step and impulse response
The step and impulse responses play a key role in the effectiveness of communication. In 
[11, 12], the OOK communications experiments are severely impacted by both (i) a step 
Figure 12. Count competitive and simple addition models for the photon transfer curve. The fitting parameters are: λ = 
450 nm, PDE = 23%, FF = 2.4%, P(ap) = 1%, Td = 16 ns, DCR = array average DCR. Two linear fits are included to both the 
central region of the experimental PTC and the constant noise floor. The competition implies a reduced DCR as the PTC 
saturates, this is also included.
Optical Communication Technology
164

response initial peak, ripple and lower than expected settled count rate and (ii) an impulse 
response slow decay. Both act to close the data eye, thereby increasing the BER. For the 
step response, the inter-symbol interference effect is directly linked to the dead-time of 
SPADs as a function of the array read-out-rate, and has also been observed experimentally 
in [39, 40].
Figure 13 shows a large change in the peak and ripple as the input power increases [11]. For 
the 5 μW step, the peak is 29% above the steady state. This will force a separate peak in histo-
grams of the data amplitude levels depending on the data sequence. The following data point 
shows a value 10% below the steady state, indicating that a received ‘one’ at this point would 
have an artificially lowered amplitude. In comparison, lower optical powers such as the 0.5 
μW step, give peaks only 10% above the steady state, followed by a minimal trough. When 
combined with the observation that the lower light level responses have a steady state closer 
to the initial, (and correct incident), number of photons, there will be a corresponding reduc-
tion in the splitting of the N1 data distribution and an improved BER (explored further in [11]). 
As the steady state is below the initial number of counts, the relative decrease in steady state 
as optical power increases acts to decrease the received extinction ratio of the modulated OOK 
or M-PAM signal, thereby increasing errors.
4.2.1. A detector pooling model of SPAD array step response:
The SPAD-array step response can be modelled allowing optimisation of future designs. 
Initially, the receiver has a full complement of SPADs (e.g. Narray = 1024). At some subse-
quent time, a number of diodes have broken down, giving a number at the output. These 
have been removed from the pool, and hence the effective total efficiency of the array, 
(i.e. the PDE and array fill-factor for an array of Narray SPADs), ηdet, for subsequent photon 
arrivals reduces as there is a new number of available SPADs, Navail. The removal of SPADs 
from the pool, and the reduction in detection probability, leads to decreased output counts 
Figure 13. Normalised average step response over a sweep of optical power. The peak and ripple in the number of 
counts per 10 ns bin, is highlighted in the inset zoom (50 ns) after the start of the laser step.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
165

despite continuous input levels. Sometime later, the SPADs that were removed will be 
recharged back into the available pool, bringing the effective detection efficiency back 
towards unity.
Eq. (20) is an initial recursive discrete time model for the number of SPADs available at a time 
step, n, where Cin(n) is the expected number of input counts (photons, dark counts and after-
pulses). The model makes several assumptions, however fitting to experimental results shows 
that: (i) the assumptions hold for the 32 × 32 digital summation integration mode receiver and 
(ii) these can be tackled in subsequent revisions of the model. The model assumes that the 
SPADs break down at the start of a discrete time step, and that the array readout frequency 
giving rise to these discrete time steps is initially equal to the SPAD dead time. This latter 
assumption is expanded within the modelling below to include dead times integer multiples 
of the readout period, i.e. 2n, 3n etc. It should be noted that the quantity, PDE0FF0Cin(n) mod-
els the number of SPAD detections received by the SPAD array within the discrete period and 
thus can be combined with the count competitive model (Eq. (19)).
	
​​N​ avail​(n)​ = ​N​ avail​(n − 1)​ - ​ 
​PDE​ 0​ ​FF​ 0​ ​N​ avail​(n − 1)​ ​C​ in​(n − 1)​ 
 
 
____________________ 
 
​N​ array​ 
​ + ​ 
​PDE​ 0​ ​FF​ 0​ ​N​ avail​(n − 2)​ ​C​ in​(n − 2)​ 
 
 
____________________ 
 
​N​ array​ 
​	
(20)
The steady state and the reduction of the extinction ratio due to this effect, can be estimated 
by Eq. (21), (the ‘alpha model’), or a simple model (Eq. (22)) using the initial input counts (see 
[11]). The ‘alpha model’ uses the long-term average input counts, 〈Cin〉, expected for a light 
level, i.e. Ncounts from Eq. (19), along with a fitting factor, α, which has been found through 
minimisation of the residual to be 0.725 i.e. approximately ​​1​/​​ ​√ _
 
2 ​​.
	
​​C​ out​(n)​ = ​〈​C​ in​〉​[1 − ​ 
​〈​C​ in​〉​ 
_____ 
​N​ array​ ​(1 + α ​ 
​〈​C​ in​〉​ 
_____ 
​N​ array​ ​)​]​	
(21)
	
​​C​ out​(n)​ = ​〈​C​ in​〉​[1 − ​ 
​〈​C​ in​〉​ 
_____ 
​N​ array​ ​]​	
(22)
The discrete time model (Eq. (20)) is (i) uncalibrated, (ii) departs from noisy experimental 
results and (iii) is not yet combined with the steady state model of Eq. (21). Despite this it can 
be used as an indication as to future modelling and device requirements. The critical point of 
both time and steady state models is that they allow preliminary investigation into the split-
ting of the OOK N1 distribution that is seen clearly in experimental communication results 
(next section). In Figure 14, an array of 1024 SPADs receives a step change in optical power. 
The input is fixed at an example 100 photons per symbol as ultimately the BER must remain 
static (Eq. (5)) [1, 6]. With the dead time fixed at 10 ns, the discrete time ‘readout’ period is 
changed as a proxy for different data rates. As the data symbol or ‘readout’ period becomes 
shorter than the dead time, there is a severe increase in the ripple, the number of symbols 
prior to SPADs recharging into the detector pool and a decrease in the steady state. While 
readout periods of 20 ns for the 10 ns dead time produce minimal decreases in the effective 
detection efficiency and step-response ripple, we must remember that there may be a limit to 
how short the dead time can be. As designs push the data rate in the first instance, a dead-time 
equal to the readout or symbol period is preferable.
Optical Communication Technology
166

In Figure 15, a readout period of 1 ns is chosen to highlight observations within the model. 
The step is held at 100 photons per symbol and the dead time is again set to 10 ns, however 
here the size of the array is changed from 2048 to 256 SPADs. It is possible to decrease the 
severity of the step response by increasing the number of diodes. However, clearly it is the 
ratio of the expected counts per symbol to the pool size that is critical. Reduce the number 
of diodes too much and the step response ripple becomes the limiting factor for both com-
munications (BER) and optical metrology (for 100 photons per sample, the steady state of 
the 256 SPAD array is approx. 20 counts per sample). For completeness, the model, (once 
calibrated), can be used to estimate the number of diodes necessary, at a specified dead time 
(10 ns) and symbol period (1 ns), for a step response ripple and steady state that is within 
the Poisson noise of the expected input count level. For 100 counts per symbol, the standard 
deviation, (​​√ 
____ 
100 ​ = 10), leads to ~9750 SPADs required for a steady state of 90.
These parameter sweeps, although chosen to visually highlight SPAD array issues, point to 
three heuristic design rules:
•	 First, that the dead-time should be equal to the data rate, (10 ns for 100 Mb/s etc.),
•	 Second, that the number of SPADs should be high in comparison to the expected photon 
counts per data symbol, and
•	 Third, if Td is limited, the number of diodes can be increased to reduce the detrimental ef-
fects on the step response if we wish to operate at a data rate higher than 1/Td.
Figure 14. Modelled (uncalibrated) step response with an input step of 100 photons per symbol, a pool of 1024 SPADs 
and a SPAD dead time of 10 ns. The discrete time step or array readout speed is swept as a proxy for data rates between 
50 Mb/s and 1 Gb/s.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
167

Of course, these rules are a product of only the step response model. Increasing the number of 
diodes within the array may have a detrimental effect on the array fill factor. Hence research 
must concentrate on models that once combined, can be used for overall receiver optimisation 
with respect to communication level metrics (sensitivity, BER, data rate, etc.).
4.3. Communication results and feasibility
Early communications results have been achieved using the 32 × 32 SPAD-based integrating 
receiver, demonstrating that such receivers are feasible. Figure 16 shows the eye diagram of a 
50 Mb/s on-off key non-return-to-zero data stream. The transmitter in this case is a Gallium-
Nitride 34 μm diameter 450 nm micro-LED, with a bandwidth of 220 MHz. The data eye is 
open at this optical power (20 μW/cm2) and data rate, however several issues become apparent.
•	 ­	Firstly, upon a ‘zero’ to ‘one’ transition, there is a large peak 75–100 counts higher than the 
main N1 level (approx. 250). This can be directly attributed to the step response discussed 
above, and can be seen clearly near sample 110 in the time traces of Figure 17. Indeed, it 
leads to a split N1 distribution, with the severity of the splitting of the ideally two distribu-
tions (N0 and N1) being evident in the count histogram.
•	 ­	Secondly, the impulse response, (measured in [11]), creates a slow ‘one’ to ‘zero’ transition. 
This is clearly visible near time sample 90 (Figure 17). For some high frequency transitions, 
the impulse response prevents the transmitted ‘zero’ from obtaining the low count average 
Figure 15. Modelled (uncalibrated) step response with an input step of 100 photons per symbol, a SPAD dead time of 10 
ns and an array readout period of 1 ns (for illustration purposes). The number of SPADs in the pool is swept highlighting 
that if a dead time equal to the symbol period is not possible, the number of SPADs must be large in comparison to the 
expected photon arrivals per symbol.
Optical Communication Technology
168

(approx. 45) as the impulse response is still decaying when the next ‘one’ bit is transmitted 
(see near sample 150). This therefore leads to the splitting of the N0 distribution.
While excellent agreement is shown between the transmitted and received pseudo ran-
dom bit streams (Figure 17), the closure of the eye can be attributed to (a) the steady state 
of the step response, (b) the bleeding of previous ‘one’ bits into subsequent ‘zero’ bits 
due to the impulse response, and (c) the finite extinction ratio of the micro-LED transmit-
ter. The 32 × 32 SPAD receiver, as a testing harness, has provided crucial details for the 
future development of SPAD-based receivers in that clearly, the transient response which 
Figure 16. A measured eye diagram for 50 Mb/s OOK-NRZ data. The dead time was approx. 13.5 ns.
Figure  17. The transmitted OOK NRZ data stream, a time trace of the SPAD-receiver output and the histogram of 
received amplitudes. A sampling threshold at 150 counts shows separability of the N0 and N1 distributions, however the 
impulse and step responses have acted to split the distributions and close the data eye. With a reduced impulse and step 
response, the transmitter should render Poisson-limited distributions near 50 and 350 counts.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
169

was only evident once empirically measured, must be addressed for low bit error rate 
communications.
5. Conclusions
SPAD-based optical receivers increase the prospective methodologies for applications requir-
ing extremely high optical sensitivity. This chapter has covered the specifics of both optical 
detection using the internal photoelectric effect, and how avalanche multiplication can be 
extended to run-away avalanche producing full logic-level voltage pulses with single-photon  
sensitivity. The application, visible light communications, highlights that such receivers require 
further study before all noise sources and all circuit topologies are understood fully with 
respect to the higher-level communication performance metrics.
Three SPAD receiver topologies were introduced, the digital summation, the XOR summation 
and a current-summation. The performance metrics of both (i) optical communications (data rate, 
bit error rate, energy per bit etc.) and (ii) single SPAD and SPAD array circuits (fill factor, PDE, 
DCR), were also discussed. At present, there is little receiver theory to link low-level SPAD metrics 
with higher-level performance, although some work as already been done. For example, both 
the SPAD array fill factor and photon detection efficiency are known to directly impact optical 
sensitivity, and appropriate modelling has been developed. The receiver BER has also been inves-
tigated with respect to the SPAD dead time and the output photon-countingstatistics of a digital 
summation SPAD-receiver. To date however, there is little to link the SPAD after-pulsing prob-
ability with the BER, although one would assume its inherent delay would act as a form of ISI.
One requirement for future research and commercialization, would be the use of applica-
tion specific design methodologies fully linked to higher level communications performance. 
How should the designer balance the SPAD fill factor and dead-time for example, when 
attempting to optimize a receiver for a required data rate and sensitivity? At present, too few 
high to low performance relations exist to allow such an interplay to be optimized. Likewise, 
if the application speed requires the dead-time to be traded off with after-pulsing, the effect 
that after-pulsing has needs to be quantified to allow comparison with dead-time ISI effects.
Overall, SPAD-based receivers are an active field of research, aiming to provide optimized 
designs with both extreme sensitivity and high-speed. Data-rates and energy per bit will 
likely remain modest and far removed the highest speed links of today. However, such receiv-
ers may offer options in (i) room-lighting VLC applications, supplementing existing Wi-Fi 
for download intensive tasks such as high-quality, real-time video streaming, and (ii) niche 
applications where optical attenuation is significant enough to warrant increased receiver 
gain and a higher energy per bit.
6. Student exercise questions
1.	 Calculate the quantum limit number of photons required per symbol, assuming an ideal, 
noiseless receiver, at a data rate of 50 Mb/s, a BER of 1 × 10−6, and a wavelength of 600 nm.
Optical Communication Technology
170

2.	 Calculate the minimum number of SPADs within a receiver array, for the conditions in 
question #1, if all SPADs have a dead time of 10 ns.
3.	 If the SPADs are circular, and laid out in a square array, calculate the approximate array 
fill factor (10 μm SPAD diameter), assuming (i) no CMOS circuitry is incorporated within 
the array and (ii) that Ds and Dg are 2 μm and 5 μm respectively.
Author details
Edward M.D. Fisher
Address all correspondence to: e.fisher@ed.ac.uk
Institute of Digital Communications (IDCOM), The School of Engineering, The University of 
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
References
[1]	 Razavi B. Design of Integrated Circuits for Optical Communications. 1st ed. McGraw-
Hill, New York, USA; 2003.
[2]	 Binh LN. Digital Optical Communications. 1st ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA; 
2008.
[3]	 Hanzo L, Haas H, Imre S, O’Brien D, Rupp M, Gyongyosi Y. Wireless myths, realities, 
and futures: From 3G/4G to optical and quantum wireless. Proceedings of the IEEE. 
2012;100:1853-1888 (Special Centennial Issue)
[4]	 Elgala H, Mesleh R, Haas H. Indoor broadcasting via white LEDs and OFDM. IEEE 
Transactions on Consumer Electronics. 2009;55(3):1127-1134.
[5]	 Cisco Systems Inc. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast 
Update, 2016-2021 White Paper [Internet]. 09/02/17 [Updated: 09/02/17]. Available from: 
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-
index-vni/mobile-white-paper-c11-520862.pdf [Accessed: 24/02/17]
[6]	 Sackinger E. Broadband Circuits for Optical Fiber Communication. Wiley, New Jersey, 
USA; 2005.
[7]	 Carusone A, Yasotharan H, Kao T. Progress and trends in multi-Gbps optical receiv-
ers with CMOS integrated photodetectors. In: Custom Integrated Circuits Conference 
(CICC); IEEE, San Jose California, USA; 2010:1-8.
[8]	 Zeng L, O’Brien D, Minh H, Faulkner G, Lee K, Jung D, Oh Y, Won ET. High data rate 
multiple input multiple output (MIMO) optical wireless communications using white 
LED lighting. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. 2009;27(9):1654-1662.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
171

[9]	 O’Brien D, Le Minh H, Zeng L, Faulkner G, Lee K, Jung D, Oh Y, Won ET. Indoor visible 
light communications: challenges and prospects: free-space laser communications VIII. 
Proceedings of the SPIE. 2008;7091:709106-709109.
[10]	 IEEE Computer Society—WG802.15—Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) 
Working Group. P802.15.7 —IEEE Approved Draft Standard for Short Range Wireless 
Optical Communication Using Visible Light [Internet]. April 2011 [Updated: Rev. 
P802.15.7]. Available from: https://standards.ieee.org/develop/project/802.15.7.html
[11]	 Fisher E. A parallel, reconfigurable single-photon avalanche diode array for optical 
communications [Thesis]. The School of Engineering, The University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK; 2015.
[12]	 Fisher E, Underwood I, Henderson R. A reconfigurable single-photon-counting integrating 
receiver for optical communications. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits. 2013;48(7): 
1638-1650.
[13]	 Henley E, Garcia A. Sub-Atomic Physics. 3rd ed. World Scientific, Toh Tuck Link, 
Singapore; 2007.
[14]	 Durini D, editor. High Performance Silicon Imaging: Fundamentals and Applications 
of CMOS and CCD Sensors. 1st ed. Elsevier Ltd, Woodhead Publishing (for Elsevier), 
Cambridge, UK; 2014.
[15]	 Roychoudhuri C, Kracklauer AF, Creath K, editors. The Nature of Light: What is a 
Photon?. 1st ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA; July 2008. 452 p.
[16]	 Sze SM. Semiconductor Devices: Physics and Technology. 2nd ed. Wiley and Sons, New 
Jersey, USA; 2001.
[17]	 Campbell J. Recent advances in telecommunications avalanche photodiodes. Journal of 
Lightwave Technology. 2007;25(1):109-121.
[18]	 Yang B, Schaub J, Csutak S, Campbell J. 10 Gbps all silicon APD optical receiver. Lasers 
and Electro-Optics Society. The 15th Annual Meeting of the IEEE. 2002;2:681-682.
[19]	 Takahashi S, Tajima A, Tomita A. High-efficiency single photon detector combined with 
an ultra-small APD module and a self-training discriminator for high-speed quantum 
cryptosystems. In: Proc. 13th Micro-Optics Conference, Japan. 2007
[20]	 Ghioni M, Gulinatti A, Rech I, Zappa F, Cova S. Progress in silicon single-photon avalanche 
diodes. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics. 2007;13(2):852-862.
[21]	 Haitz RH. Mechanisms contributing to the noise pulse rate of avalanche diodes. Journal 
of Applied Physics. 1965;36(10):3123-3131.
[22]	 Webster E. Single-photon avalanche diode theory, simulation, and high performance 
CMOS integration [Thesis]. The School of Engineering: University of Edinburgh; 2013.
[23]	 Cova S, Ghioni M, Lacaita A, Samori C, Zappa F. Avalanche photodiodes and quenching 
circuits for single-photon detection. Applied Optics. 1996;35(12):1956-1976.
Optical Communication Technology
172

[24]	 Richardson J, Webster E, Grant L, Henderson R. Scaleable single-photon avalanche diode 
structures in nanometer CMOS technology. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices. 
2011;58(7):2028 -2035.
[25]	 Goetzberger A, McDonald B, Haitz R, Scarlett RM. Avalanche effects in silicon p-n junc-
tions. II. Structurally perfect junctions. Journal of Applied Physics. 1963;34(6):1591-1600.
[26]	 Richardson J, Grant L, Henderson R. Low dark count single-photon avalanche diode 
structure compatible with standard nanometer scale CMOS technology. IEEE Photonics 
Technology Letters. 2009;21(14):1020 -1022.
[27]	 Webster E, Richardson J, Grant L, Henderson R. Single-photon avalanche diodes in 90 
nm CMOS imaging technology with sub-1 Hz median dark count rate. Proceedings of 
the International Image Sensor Workshop. 2011:262-265.
[28]	 Lee S, Gardner R. A new G-M counter dead time model. Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 
2000;53(4-5):731-737.
[29]	 Neri L, Tudisco S, Musumeci F, Scordino A, Fallica G, Mazzillo M, Zimbone M. Note: 
dead time causes and correction method for single photon avalanche diode devices. 
Review of Scientific Instruments. 2010;81(8): 086102-1 to 086102-3
[30]	 Blazej J, Prochazka I. Avalanche photodiode output pulse rise-time study. In: SPIE 7355, 
Photon Counting Applications, Quantum Optics, and Quantum Information Transfer 
and Processing II; May; SPIE Headquarters: Bellingham, Washington, USA; 2009. pp. 
73550M-11.
[31]	 Spinelli A, Lacaita A. Physics and numerical simulation of single-photon avalanche 
diodes. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices. 1997;44(11):1931-1943.
[32]	 Vilella E, Alonso O, Montiel A, Vila A, Dieguez A. A low-noise time-gated single-photon 
detector in a HV-CMOS technology for triggered imaging. Sensors and Actuators A: 
Physical. 2013;201(1):342-351.
[33]	 C. Niclass, M. Soga, H. Matsubara and S. Kato, “A 100m-range 10-frame/s 340×96-
pixel time-of-flight depth sensor in 0.18μm CMOS,” 2011 Proceedings of the ESSCIRC 
(ESSCIRC), Helsinki, 2011, pp. 107-110. doi: 10.1109/ESSCIRC.2011.6044926
[34]	 Rech I, Ingargiola A, Spinelli R, Labanca I, Marangoni S, Ghioni M, Cova S. Optical cross-
talk in single photon avalanche diode arrays: a new complete model. Optics Express. 
2008;16(12):8381-8394.
[35]	 Zhang G, Yu C, Zhu C, Liu L. Feasibility study of multi-pixel photon counter serving as 
the detector in digital optical communications. Elsevier Optik. 2013;124(22):5781-5786. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijleo.2013.04.060
[36]	 Dutton N, Gnecchi S, Parmesan L, Holmes A, Rae B, Grant L, Henderson R. A Time-
correlated single-photon-counting sensor with 14GS/s histogramming time-to-digital 
converter. In: Technical Digest International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC); 22 
Feb; San Francisco. All IEEE references share the same IEEE headquarters location of: 
New York, USA; 2015. pp. 1-3.
Single-Photon Avalanche Diodes in CMOS Technologies for Optical Communications
http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.68935
173

[37]	 Gnecchi S, Dutton N, Parmesan L, Rae B, Pellegrini S, McLeod S, Grant L, Henderson 
R. Digital silicon photomultipliers with OR/XOR pulse combining techniques. IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices. 2016;63(3):1105-1110.
[38]	 Almer O, Dutton N, Abbas T, Gnecchi S, Henderson R. 4-PAM visible light communi-
cations with a XOR-tree digital silicon photomultiplier. In: Summer Topicals Meeting 
Series (SUM); 13 July; IEEE; 2015. pp. 41-42.
[39]	 Chitnis D, Collins S. A SPAD-based photon detecting system for optical communica-
tions. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 2014;32(10):2028-2034.
[40]	 Chitnis D, Zhang L, Chun H, Rajbhandari S, Faulkner G, O'Brien D, Collins S. A 200Mb/s 
VLC demonstration with a SPAD based receiver. In: Summer Topicals Meeting Series
(SUM), 2015; July; All IEEE Publisher Locations are New York, USA; 2015. p. 226-227.
Optical Communication Technology
174

