www.allitebooks.com

Oracle CRM On Demand 
Administration Essentials
A one-stop implementation reference guide to Oracle 
CRM On Demand, the  world's best-selling brand of 
CRM technology
Padmanabha Rao
Venkatesan Sundaram
P U B L I S H I N G
professional expertise distilled
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Oracle CRM On Demand Administration Essentials
Copyright © 2012 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the authors, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: December 2012
Production Reference: 1121212
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84968-500-9
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Neha Rajappan (neha.rajappan1@gmail.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Authors
Padmanabha Rao
Venkatesan Sundaram
Reviewers
Hendrick Edwin
Tuhina Goel
Kelly Schultz
William Yu
Acquisition Editor
Rukshana Khambatta
Lead Technical Editor
Kedar Bhat
Technical Editors
Vrinda Amberkar
Dominic Pereira
Copy Editor
Alida Paiva
Project Coordinator
Leena Purkait
Proofreader
Aaron Nash
Indexer
Rekha Nair
Graphics
Aditi Gajjar
Production Coordinator 
Arvindkumar Gupta
Cover Work
Arvindkumar Gupta
www.allitebooks.com

About the Authors
Kadirenahalli Venkata Padmanabha Rao has been in the industry for  
14 years. He started with India's National Resource Data Management System 
project in 1998, working on a decision support system for the Zilla Panchayat of the 
Raichur district in the state of Karnataka. He was a research assistant for the World 
Bank's Environmental Management Capacity Building project in India. Paddy was 
an educator and an information technologist in the non-proit sector before joining 
CRMIT in 2007. In CRMIT, he brings his familiarity with research, development 
policy, and education to the technology table.
He is a graduate of the National Institute of Technology at Hamirpur and lays 
equal store by atoms and bits with his training in engineering and economics. His 
academic interests include massive multiplayer mobile games and transportation 
problems. He is excited by the possibilities today to deliver a mind blowing 
experience on a large scale to customers.
This book was developed over an unfairly long period and  
across three time zones. It is bound to have some noise despite  
our—the authors—efforts to remove them all. We welcome  
your feedback, bouquets, and brickbats. You can write to us  
at crmondemandbook@gmail.com.
I would like to thank my customers for the opportunities to build 
and learn. We thank Oracle Corporation, whose excellent products 
prompted this book. Our publishers at Packt were friends on this 
journey and we are grateful for their generosity. Our reviewers came 
with humor and passion for their work, and we are thankful for their 
contributions. I would like to thank my co-author, Venky, for being 
the patience extraordinaire with my pace on this book. My schools 
and family provide the foundation upon which rests my work.
www.allitebooks.com

Venkatesan Sundaram is a co-founder of CRMIT and is positioned as the Senior 
Director of Project Delivery/Consulting.
Before CRMIT, he had worked in various consulting positions for Baan Info Systems, 
BroadVision, and Cognizant Technology Solutions.
He specializes in implementation of CRM solutions across multiple verticals 
and also architected many e-commerce solutions. One of the implementations 
(www.irctc.co.in) is the fastest-growing e-commerce site in India and the irst 
mobile commerce application. At the time of its delivery, the project won PC 
Quest's "Maximum Social Impact for Indian people in 2004" and the "Best IT 
Implementation in India for 2005" awards.
He holds a Post Graduation degree in Software Enterprise Management from 
the Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, Bachelor's degree in Electrical 
Engineering, is certiied in Production and Inventory Management (CPIM) by 
the American Production and Inventory Control Society, and is a certiied Project 
Management Professional (PMP) by the Project Management Institute (PMI).
I would like to thank MD and CEO of CRMIT, Mr. Vinod Reddy, 
co-workers Naga Chokkanathan, Tuhina Goel, and many of my 
colleagues in CRMIT, who contributed knowingly or unknowingly 
to the valuable contents in this book.
The reviewers provided valuable guidance and corrections and any 
errors still remaining are entirely mine. Finally, the team at Packt 
constantly nagged and cajoled to keep some sort of schedule, and 
without them this book would still be on the drawing board.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Hendrick Edwin currently holds the position of Senior Consultant CRM at 
Capgemini in The Netherlands. In his current position, he focuses on designing  
and delivering package-based Oracle and Salesforce CRM applications that have 
clear business beneits.
He has ample experience with Oracle products such as Oracle's Siebel, Oracle BI,  
and Oracle CRM On Demand. Among his areas of expertise are Enterprise Marketing 
and Business Intelligence. Recently, he was responsible for implementing CRM 
applications in an international setting. At the moment, he plays a leading role in 
developing the Oracle Fusion CRM capabilities at Capgemini.
He holds a BSc in Marketing and a MSc in Business Administration from Rotterdam 
School of Management, Erasmus University.
Tuhina Goel is a CRM consultant with more than 5 years of business consulting 
experience in enterprise as well as the cloud version of Oracle CRM. She is currently 
working with Amadeus Software Labs, India. Having worked with clients in diverse 
industries such as manufacturing, retail, banking, airline, and healthcare, she has 
developed a deep insight into the CRM domain. She is a person who takes on 
creative challenges and has a profound attention to detail. A self-confessed traveler 
and cook, she loves to explore new places and try out new recipes in her free time. 
Currently, she lives in Bangalore and can be contacted at her LinkedIn page.
www.allitebooks.com

Kelly Schultz is a geek against her will. She was coerced into a career in IT when 
she volunteered to liaise on some "little" marketing projects. After 12 years, having 
sampled all facets of the software development lifecycle as a PM and Business 
Analyst (including working for Oracle Consulting), she's still saying working with 
CRMOD is the best gig she ever had!
William Yu is an experienced SaaS CRM solution consultant. He is a solution 
consultant for Oracle's next generation CRM platform—Fusion CRM and Oracle 
Social Relationship Management offerings.
In the past, he has worked as a CRM sales consultant for a vendor, as a lead 
consultant for an implementation partner, and as a CRM go-to person for an 
enterprise client. This gives him a complete view of a CRM project/solution.  
He sold, designed, and implemented some of the most successful Oracle CRM  
On Demand projects in Victoria, Australia. He knows the CRMOD design, 
coniguration, reporting, integration, and scripting inside out.
His experience was also adopted and published in the book Oracle CRM On Demand 
Deployment Guide.
I'd like to thank my wife, Ying Yan who supported me during the 
reviewing of this book as she takes good care of my two kids, Ella 
and Emily.
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com
Support iles, eBooks, discount offers and more
You might want to visit www.PacktPub.com for support iles and downloads related to  
your book. 
Did you know that Packt offers eBook versions of every book published, with PDF and ePub 
iles available? You can upgrade to the eBook version at www.PacktPub.com and as a print 
book customer, you are entitled to a discount on the eBook copy. Get in touch with us at 
service@packtpub.com for more details.
At www.PacktPub.com, you can also read a collection of free technical articles, sign up for a 
range of free newsletters and receive exclusive discounts and offers on Packt books and eBooks.
http://PacktLib.PacktPub.com
Do you need instant solutions to your IT questions? PacktLib is Packt's online digital book 
library. Here, you can access, read and search across Packt's entire library of books.
Why Subscribe?
• 
Fully searchable across every book published by Packt
• 
Copy and paste, print and bookmark content
• 
On demand and accessible via web browser
Free Access for Packt account holders
If you have an account with Packt at www.PacktPub.com, you can use this to access 
PacktLib today and view nine entirely free books. Simply use your login credentials for 
immediate access.
Instant Updates on New Packt Books
Get notiied! Find out when new books are published by following @PacktEnterprise on 
Twitter, or the Packt Enterprise Facebook page.
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Overview of CRM On Demand 
7
What is CRMOD? 
8
The CRMOD service 
9
Service infrastructure 
10
The software 
12
CRMOD administration 
13
CRMOD out of the box 
13
Custom administration 
14
Summary 
16
Chapter 2: Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box 
17
Step 1 – Knowing the prebuilt marketing, sales,  
and service organizations 
19
CRM data 
19
Function – Marketing 
19
Function – Sales 
21
Function – Service 
24
CRM staff 
26
Step 2 – Setting your company proile 
29
The Company Administration data 
30
The Company Proile 
30
Company SignIn and Password Control 
40
Activating languages 
41
IP Address Restrictions 
41
The Sign In Audit and Audit Trail sections 
42
Currency deinition 
43
Creating the login IDs for users 
44
Creating the product catalog 
47
Enabling sales forecasts 
48
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Step 3 – Pass the word around 
50
Creating company-wide alerts and messaging 
50
Issuing the user IDs 
51
Ongoing support to users 
52
Summary 
52
Chapter 3: CRM On Demand Customization 
53
The application architecture 
54
Customizability 
55
The data model 
56
Data management 
57
The process model 
57
Object model 
58
Business rules 
64
Security model 
65
The interface model 
67
Online interface 
68
Web services interface 
68
Special interfaces 
68
Summary 
69
Chapter 4: Application Customization 
71
Data model-level customization 
72
Adding, modifying, and deleting ields 
73
Cascading ields 
78
Layout management 
80
Page layout 
80
Dynamic layouts 
86
Search layouts 
87
Homepage and Action Bar layout 
90
List management 
91
Miscellaneous application customization 
92
Summary 
93
Chapter 5: User Access Controls 
95
The user ID 
96
Manager hierarchy 
99
User group 
99
The accesses to data 
100
Team access 
102
Book access 
103

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
The user role 
105
Role name 
107
Accesses to objects (record types) 
107
The owner access proile and the default access proile 
108
Accesses to objects' Homepages or tabs 
108
The Homepage layouts 
109
The Search page layouts 
109
The Detail page layouts 
110
The default sales process for opportunity records 
110
The Lead Conversion layout 
111
The Action Bar layout 
111
The default Theme for UI 
111
Privileges 
112
Accesses to customize the UI 
112
Accesses to data channels 
112
Accesses to user channels 
113
Summary 
114
Chapter 6: Business Process Automation and Management 
115
Worklow coniguration 
116
Hold on! 
116
About worklows 
117
Adding and modifying the worklows 
117
Record types 
120
Trigger events 
121
Worklow rule condition 
122
Actions 
125
Ordering of actions 
125
Assign a Book 
125
Create Integration Event 
126
Create Task  
127
Send Email 
128
Update Field After Wait 
130
Update Values 
131
Wait 
131
Actions available by events 
133
Ordering the worklows 
133
Deleting worklows 
136
Active and inactive worklows 
136
Worklow Monitor 
137
Pending Instances 
138

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Error Instances 
138
Deleting instances from the Worklow Monitor 
138
Assignment rules 
139
About Assignment rules 
139
Hold on! 
139
Applicable objects 
140
Deining a rule group 
140
Lead Conversion Administration 
144
Hold on! 
144
Converting a lead 
144
Lead Conversion Mapping 
144
Hold on! 
144
Mapping ields for converting leads 
145
Creating a lead conversion layout 
147
Sales methodology 
149
Sales process 
149
Sales stage 
150
Setting up a sales stage 
151
Mandatory ields 
152
Process coach 
154
Automated tasks 
155
Useful resources 
156
Sales category 
157
Setting up a sales stage category 
158
Administering forecasts 
158
What type: Determining the types of forecasts 
159
How to choose the right type of forecasting methodology 
159
When: Determining the forecast duration 
159
For whom: Designating forecasting roles 
160
How often: Frequency of forecasting 
160
Setting up Forecast Deinition 
161
Updating and maintaining forecasts 
162
Summary 
163
Chapter 7: Content Management 
165
Content 
166
The product catalog 
168
Product category 
169
Product 
170
Assessment scripts 
171
Reports/analytics folders 
173
Attachment iles 
174
Summary 
175

Table of Contents
[ v ]
Chapter 8: Web Services Integration 
177
CRM On Demand integration abilities 
178
Transferring data between systems 
180
Surfacing data from other systems 
181
Coniguring Web links and custom applets 
182
Coniguring a Web link 
182
Coniguring a web applet 
184
Coniguring integration events 
186
Enabling CRM On Demand web services 
189
Listing the available CRM On Demand web services 
192
Managing sessions in CRM On Demand web services 
195
CRMOD web service best practices 
196
CRMOD web service allotment and limiters 
199
Monitoring web service allotment usage 
199
Administrating service allotment 
200
Setting alerts for service allotments 
200
Service Allotment Usage History 
201
Monitoring ile and record utilization 
202
Web Services Utilization 
203
Summary 
204
Chapter 9: Reports and Analytics 
205
The Answers On Demand service 
205
Prebuilt reports 
206
Interactivity 
208
Prebuilt dashboards 
209
Writing a report 
210
Report Folders 
211
Manage Analyses 
211
Open Existing Analyses 
212
Subject Areas 
213
Building the report 
216
Deine Criteria 
217
Create Layout 
221
Deine Prompts 
222
Summary 
223
Chapter 10: Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and  
Integration Tools 
225
Accessing CRM On Demand data and integration tools 
226
Importing your contacts 
226
Step 1 – choosing your data ile 
227
Step 2 – ile validation 
228
Step 3 – mapping your ields 
229

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Oracle Ofline On Demand 
230
Downloading data into Ofline On Demand 
232
Adding/updating data in Ofline CRM On Demand 
233
Uploading Ofline On Demand data to CRM On Demand 
234
Oracle PIM Sync On Demand 
234
Oracle Outlook E-mail Integration On Demand 
237
Oracle data loader 
239
Oracle Migration Tool On Demand 
240
CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales 
241
Accessing CRMOD content outside the application using  
On Demand Widgets 
242
Summary 
245
Chapter 11: Help, Support Ecosystem,  
and Features in New Releases 
247
Training and Support 
247
Help—CRM On Demand usage manual 
249
Support portal 
251
Before creating the service request 
252
Creating a service request 
253
Support forums 
255
Release notes 
256
Product enhancements 
257
Release upgrade activities 
257
New features in recent releases of CRM On Demand 
258
Summary 
261
Chapter 12: Oracle Partner Offerings 
263
Oracle's partner ecosystem 
263
Oracle CRM On Demand implementation partners 
264
Oracle CRM On Demand extensions 
267
How to make a purchase decision for a CRM On Demand extension 
268
Is the product certiied? 
268
Can I try it? 
270
What level of support is available? 
270
What about new feature requirements? 
271
Is the source code available? 
272
Is the solution built using an open or proprietary technology? 
272
Most popular extensions 
272
E-mail channel for CRM 
272
Telephone channel for CRM 
273

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Mobile CRM 
274
Quote and order management 
274
Self-service portal 
275
Social collaboration tools 
275
Summary 
276
Index 
277


Preface
Is this book going to make you an expert with Oracle CRM On Demand? We think 
it can and we hope it does. How long can I expect to be the expert? Theoretically 
that would be till the cash cows come home but let's get real—you stop being one 
when you begin to think you are one. We debated long and hard whether this book 
should be the last word on Oracle CRM On Demand or a irst word on Oracle Fusion 
CRM, the other product that is doing the rounds these days. Fusion is tall and sits 
on the shoulders of giants, one of them being CRM On Demand. Eventually, Fusion 
will consume these giants, but you will have gotten the lay of the land working with 
CRM On Demand. It is high time we got started.
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Overview of CRM On Demand, states the scope of this book and that of  
the Oracle CRM On Demand product. Starting with a brief history of the product,  
it explains the designed values of the system. The chapter is intended to leave you 
with a clear understanding of the technology and its objectives, which should help 
you assess its value to your organization.
Chapter 2, Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box, is a description of how to go from 
purchasing the product licenses to creating login IDs for the users to generating 
analytics, all possibly within the course of a few days of a week. This chapter aims to 
explain the rich design and technology of Oracle CRM On Demand that is available 
out of the box. It critiques the need to customize the product. This chapter describes 
the administrator steps to implement the product in your organization without the 
assistance of technical specialists.
Chapter 3, CRM On Demand Customization, explains the extensive customizability of 
the product and the contexts in which to exploit them. Over time you will need to 
customize the product to meet your business requirements. This chapter covers the 
essentials for the administration of the product over the long term.

Preface
[ 2 ]
Chapter 4, Application Customization, describes the customization of the user interface 
(or screens as some might call them). The user interface is built from the ground 
up using a deinition of business objects; objects are built from a deinition of ields 
and rules, and deined by relationships to other objects. You will need to have read 
Chapter 3, CRM On Demand Customization, to gain from this chapter.
Chapter 5, User Access Controls, explains the product features available to build a 
system that relects the real organization of people in your business. The product can 
be customized to provide for the most complex of organization charts. This chapter 
is essential to the administration of CRM On Demand in your evolving organization. 
You will need to have read the previous two chapters to appreciate this chapter better.
Chapter 6, Business Process Automation and Management, explains the construction 
of automatic validations and processes in your CRM On Demand. Worklows, 
assignment rules, conversion processes, and sales processes might need to be 
customized for your organization and this chapter explains their administration.  
The previous three chapters provide the context for the information in this chapter.
Chapter 7, Content Management, deines content and describes its administration. Content 
is corporate knowledge, and the system cannot afford to have outdated content.
Chapter 8, Web Services Integration, reviews the web services in CRM On Demand, 
with examples of requirements and solutions. Information systems are typically 
integrated to provide a consistent view of data and information across the length and 
breadth of the enterprise. Integration involves writing programs to transport data 
and contexts between systems. This chapter introduces the reader to the open world 
of web services and their use in CRM On Demand. A comprehensive description of 
web services and the art of writing programs would require a book in its own right.
Chapter 9, Reports and Analytics, is an introduction to the Answers On Demand 
product that comes integrated with CRM On Demand. While the preceding chapters 
help with customizing the system to generate better data, this chapter proceeds with 
the task of building the custom reports/analyses of all varieties (which are usually 
the originators of the customization in the irst place). Answers On Demand is an 
extensive tool in the hands of users and administrators. A comprehensive lesson 
about it would occupy a book in itself. We recommend the books published by Oracle 
Press to get started on exploiting this powerful product that comes embedded with 
CRM On Demand.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 10, Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools, describes the 
product tools for data that is outside the online CRM On Demand system. Such 
data includes external data iles and ofline systems. This chapter describes the 
product tools that are available for importing data (transactional data and system 
data), synchronization with personal information management systems, and plugin 
software such as widgets and ofline CRMOD.
Chapter 11, Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases, informs you about 
the learning support provided by Oracle On Demand Customer Care, including 
the comprehensive My Oracle Support (MOS) portal. The current version of 
CRMOD is release 21 and the product management maintains a brisk pace of 
releases. It is imperative to be up-to-date with the latest release notes to be able to 
exploit the many enhancements to the product that come online in a release. This 
chapter includes a brief description of the enhancements in the last two releases. 
The enhancements are related to the core product function and as such the 
preceding chapters in this book are key to deriving value from the enhancements 
in each release.
Chapter 12, Oracle Partner Offerings, lists the custom products that are endorsed by 
Oracle for integration with CRM On Demand. These products use web services 
and provide surround functionalities. Oracle Partners are independent companies 
accredited by the Oracle product management. Partner offerings are reliable and 
high performance software, whose architecture and delivery is aligned with that of 
the core product.
What you need for this book
Information and technology are equally essential to business today, and they are 
increasingly becoming synonymous with each other; however, approaching IT 
as a single word would stop you getting the most out of this book. A passion for 
information and/or a passion for technology, at the altar of business, would help 
you digest this book rapidly.
Second, you will need to have access to Oracle CRM On Demand, the product that 
lives on the Internet. Oracle offers a 30-day trial license with administrative privileges, 
at no charge. CRM On Demand administration is largely driven by the users, who we 
hope are among the readers of this book. In having access to Oracle CRM On Demand, 
you are suficiently equipped to understand its administration well enough, aided by 
this book, to raise service requests to your system's administrator.
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
[ 4 ]
For now, this book is composed entirely in English. With due apologies to the  
scores of users and administrators of CRM On Demand, who enjoy one or more of 
the 16 non-English versions of this product, you will need conversational English to 
engage with this book.
Who this book is for
This book will be useful to an architect, a product manager, a business analyst, an 
interface developer, and the professional administrator, who is working with or 
expects to be working with Oracle CRM On Demand. A long-time administrator of 
CRMOD whose technological socialization is largely with Oracle CRMOD customer 
care may ind this book—written by independent analysts—a good read. The initial 
chapters of this book would be useful for project sponsors to get to know the product 
and its relevance. We do not think that this book will be of value to anyone who has 
been a full-time administrator of CRMOD continuously for the last ive years or more.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Conirm 
that you want to delete the worklow by clicking on Ok in the Conirm dialog box".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us 
to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the color images of this 
book
We also provide you a PDF ile that has color images of the screenshots/diagrams 
used in this book. The color images will help you better understand the changes in 
the output. You can download this ile from http://www.packtpub.com/sites/
default/files/downloads/5009_images.pdf.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or 
the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can 
save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions of this 
book. If you ind any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.packtpub.
com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata submission form link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.

Preface
[ 6 ]
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected  
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Overview of CRM  
On Demand
If you think https://sso.crmondemand.com/router/logon.jsp is a practical and 
elegant URL, then we couldn't agree more. Oracle CRM On Demand (CRMOD) is 
designed better than any other service in its class. Effective change-management in 
the marketing, sales, or service practices of your enterprise cannot be accomplished 
with CRMOD alone. However, the state-of-the-art, on-demand software to support 
effective customer relationship management practices in an enterprise is best 
deined by CRMOD. This chapter is an introduction to the (software as a) service, 
contract, and party known as CRMOD. It gives an overview of CRMOD and of its 
administration. Legions of users and entire companies still refer to it as SOD, short 
for Siebel On Demand and have login passwords as "ilovesod". A rose is a rose by 
any other name!
By the end of this chapter, we will have understood the composition of:
• 
The CRMOD service—its history, technical, and commercial design
• 
The task of CRMOD administration

Overview of CRM On Demand
[ 8 ]
What is CRMOD?
It pays to know the history of CRMOD when learning its present and predicting  
its future.
The history of Siebel Systems Inc. as the provider of world-class software for 
customer relationship management in enterprises is well known and we shall not 
go into its rich history here. We will only recall that Siebel was synonymous with 
CRM systems in the 1990s. In 2003, Siebel Systems Inc. went live with Siebel On 
Demand (SOD), hosting at IBM's data centre in Texas, USA. The upshot of SOD 
was that it was "software as a service" (SaaS) and its delivery was helped by an 
amalgamation of Upshot and Siebel Enterprise. There were no global SaaSes at 
the time, for on-premise hardware and software could not be replaced as far as 
security, availability, and performance were concerned. Siebel OD was hosted on 
Windows, Siebel Enterprise 7.5 with DB2 and ran on Microsoft Internet Explorer, 
offering a subset of functionality of the on-premise version, that is, Siebel CRM 
Enterprise. It focused on rapid deployment for a reasonably homogenized 
marketing and sales department and after-sales service department. The user's 
interface to SOD was better than that offered by other websites, web portals, and 
web applications on the Internet at the time.
The year 2006 saw the acquisition of Siebel Systems by Oracle Corporation, renaming 
the service as Oracle CRM On Demand, and migration of the hosting to Oracle's 
data centre in Austin, Texas. A product versioning scheme conveyed the long term 
commitment for maintaining the CRMOD service. Just as with Siebel On Demand 
Release 13, you would continue to have no choice to stay on an outdated version; 
newer versions would be either bug ixes or new functionality, "free" of cost, so dare 
we ask why you would not want to be on the latest version? Oracle CRMOD has 
had regular enhancements to the application including releases of editions that are 
speciic to some industries such as life sciences, automotives, inancial services, and 
high-technology. A high quality, on-demand service is sustainable at a large scale so 
it goes without saying that Oracle CRMOD aimed to increase its clientele by orders 
of magnitude.

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
In 2012, it is now CRMOD release 21, which is available from data centers located 
in Australia, Ireland, and the USA. This release contains about 40 deined business 
objects, a robust analytic system including prebuilt analyses, usage analytics, a 
bulk data loader, a coniguration migration tool, administration APIs, external ile 
hosting, several prebuilt integrations with other Oracle enterprise products, and the 
option to host CRMOD on-premise in your data centre. It is delivered from Oracle 
Enterprise Linux and Siebel Enterprise 7.8 with Oracle 11g. This release runs on 
Microsoft IE, Mozilla Firefox, Apple Safari, and on the Apple iPad. Adjunct to this 
are the Desktop CRM and the Mobile CRM products that can be administered as 
your main form of CRMOD. The Oracle data centre provides you with three systems 
for every subscription: the production and the stage environments, and a customer 
test environment on request.
The CRMOD service
You do not implement CRMOD so much as release CRMOD to a suspecting workforce.
CRMOD is a web application, that is, you talk with it on HTTPS and in XML; your 
communications can be from web browsers such as Internet Explorer, Firefox, or 
Safari, or a web server such as Apache or IIS.
The commercial and technical currency of CRMOD is the user licenses, that is, you 
need to buy as many licenses as the number of users (both human and machines). 
The number of data records that you can store is a multiple of your user licenses, 
and the rate of use of the application resources (such as analytics queries and web 
service calls) is a multiple of your user licenses. The limits on the rate of the use of 
the application resources were introduced in release 19 and the limits are currently  
at a level high enough to meet the demands of a "normal outlier" as well.
CRMOD is built on a model of a customer relationship management software.  
It is not a mere database or just a collection of forms for data entries. It is a  
why-what-where-when-how-to structure for the application and performance  
of customer-centric data and information. Employees, customers, products, prices, 
and processes are some of the standard elements of its structure.

Overview of CRM On Demand
[ 10 ]
Service infrastructure
The hardware and software system that hosts the CRMOD application is called a pod. 
When you subscribe to CRMOD you can opt, at different prices, to be a single tenant 
or one of the many tenants of the host. The multi-tenant subscription is suitable if you 
are a small to medium-sized organization with fewer than 1000 users and/or 500,000 
"accounts". A single tenant subscription should be your selection if you are a medium 
to large organization with a user base exceeding 1000 and/or 1 million "accounts". You 
can also opt to provision the pod in your private data center; this is the @Customer 
deployment of CRMOD. The comparative economics of hosting CRMOD@Oracle and 
hosting CRMOD@Customer varies depending on the number of users, growth, and 
regulatory costs. In the case of CRMOD@Customer, Oracle Corporation gives you the 
list of hardware and middleware to buy and provision in your data centre, and installs 
the CRMOD application on it. @Customer, Oracle maintains the application regularly 
on slightly negotiated schedules albeit as any other pod @Oracle.
The multi-tenant pod is one where multiple instances of a CRMOD application 
operate on the same physical infrastructure, for the many tenant companies. All 
companies' data is present in the same database; however, a company has no access 
to the data of another company. Every customer instance would have its own copy 
of the customer-speciic application's coniguration details such as its own ields, 
layouts, roles, reports, and so on.
In the single tenant pod, every company has a dedicated physical infrastructure 
providing better performance and independence from the luctuating utilization of 
server resources of other companies as may happen in a multi-tenant pod.
The @Customer deployment is usually bought by companies that have legal 
restrictions on the storage of data in the countries where the Oracle data centers 
are located (USA, Ireland, and Australia) or in external locations. Examples of such 
companies are banks and government agencies.
In addition to the production instance of CRMOD, every company has a staging of 
CRMOD. About 3 months after you have purchased your licenses, the stage would 
have the copy of your production instance—the data as well as the application's 
coniguration. The stage is refreshed periodically (quarterly as per current schedule) 
with a copy of the production instance.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
The stage is oficially meant for use by Oracle, to troubleshoot your production 
issues and test the patch releases before applying them to production. Technically, 
you are free to use the stage for your development activities as well, subject to some 
conditions; these are as follows:
• 
The availability of the stage is not assured on any given day or time. The 
stage may go ofline for maintenance activity at any time without prior 
notice. The duration of downtime is not assured either. In the long history of 
CRMOD, the stages have rarely gone ofline for more than once a month or 
for longer than 12 hours.
• 
The stage gets refreshed with a copy of the production on schedule. In this 
process you may lose any data between your stage and production as of 
the date of snapshot plus any difference between the date of snapshot and 
date of actual refresh. Typically there is a difference of a week between the 
snapshot and the actual refresh.
• 
You will need to identify and manage the risks of your production data 
residing on the stage. Access to the stage should be treated with the same 
amount of care that you would bring to the accesses to your production. 
It is your responsibility to ensure that your development team and the 
production data's copy on stage has appropriate access controls according  
to your company's requirements.
The advantage of using the staging environment is that you can rely on getting a full 
copy of your production system every quarter, at no manual cost.
The stage may not prove to be the complete environment for your development 
and testing activity. In such an eventuality, you can take recourse to the CTE, the 
Customer Test Environment. The CTE is a production quality environment and is 
designed for more reliability than the stage. You are not allowed to put large loads 
of data on the CTE. The CTE gets only the application updates and is not refreshed 
by Oracle with the copy of your production instance. The stage and the CTE are 
designed to complement each other as part of your agile CRM technology's release 
plan. The coniguration migration tool combined with the schedules of the CTE and 
the stage can be used very effectively for your Production enhancement plans.
What is the name of your pod? In the CRMOD URL https://secure-
ausomxPOD.crmondemand.com, the letters in place of "POD" carry the 
three-letter name of the given pod. Your production pod, stage pod, and 
the CTE pod each have different names. Every pod in the CRMOD world, 
whether @Oracle or @Customer, is given a unique name.

Overview of CRM On Demand
[ 12 ]
The software
CRMOD out of the box has built-in sales, service, and marketing processes modeled 
after industry-leading best practices. A process consists of a set of activities in a 
sequence to achieve a speciic objective. For example, a marketing process might 
have the following steps:
1. Segmenting your customers as campaign recipients.
2. Setting up a campaign.
3. Executing the campaign.
4. Collecting the response from the recipients.
5. Generating the leads from the campaign response.
6. Qualifying the leads.
7. Identifying opportunities.
8. Reporting and analyzing the effectiveness of the campaign.
To perform each of the steps in a process, CRMOD offers the following features:
• 
A prebuilt data model with relevant ields
• 
Facilities to associate related information to support the process
• 
Embedded business rules
• 
Embedded data visibility and access controls
• 
A comprehensive set of 50 prebuilt reports and analytics
• 
A collection of dashboards
All these features make a compelling case to go live out of the box.
Reports can be generated in real time, meaning that the information can be queried 
and presented from CRM transactional tables, or the reports can be historical  
(a day older) where data would be queried from de-normalized, high performance 
analytical tables. CRMOD maintains the transactional tables and the analytical cubes 
in a single database in the pod. Obviously, it is wiser to use analytic reports to ensure 
better reporting performances as well as to avoid load on the transactional database, 
thus slowing down your online CRM applications. Reports can be simple, presenting 
the data in a table format or can be interactive with ilters, charts, pivots, tickers, 
facilities to drill-down, and scripted actions.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
Industry editions
Customer management is a horizontal function, that is, it is existent in every enterprise. 
However, the practice of that management in, say, an insurance business, is distinct 
compared to that in an automotive business or in a pharmaceutical business. CRMOD 
provides industry editions of the software to support the industry-speciic needs.
For retailing businesses, there is the partner relationship management module 
to facilitate partner management activities, such as partner recruitment, partner 
training, marketing development funds, fund requests, ROI tracking of marketing 
programs, and deal-management features to effectively leverage your partners. 
The wealth management edition deines a host of objects to support household 
relationships and inancial accounts management. The insurance edition deines all 
the objects through the life cycle of a policy sale and service. The life sciences edition 
offers objects and reporting to manage samples, call planning, call tracking, and 
education events. The automotive edition has the objects, worklow, and reports for 
dealer management through post-sales vehicle revenue tracking.
The S.M.A.R.Test way to maximize returns and reduce your costs of deploying 
CRMOD is to merge Oracle's research with the industry's best practices and  
release it without customizing the software.
CRMOD administration
The CRMOD administrator is the business analyst and the information  
technologist, combined.
As an administrator you should avoid reinventing the wheels of your CRMOD 
as much as possible. So let us take a very quick look at the default deinitions and 
processes in CRMOD that come right out of the box.
CRMOD out of the box
Contact, campaign, lead, opportunity, account, service request, and activity 
management are the standard functions that are available out of the box.
The lead management process comes up with a set of screens to create a lead, capture 
activities that are speciic to the lead, run qualiication scripts to qualify the lead, 
reject and archive the lead, convert the qualiied lead to an opportunity, associate  
the opportunity to an new/existing contact, and associate the opportunity to a  
new/existing account.
www.allitebooks.com

Overview of CRM On Demand
[ 14 ]
The account management process provides a facility to create/edit your accounts' 
key information, associate the accounts to the contacts, opportunities, leads, 
activities, service requests, assets, and so on to build a comprehensive view of the 
account, deine an account team with differential access rights to the account data, 
and establish a hierarchy of accounts if need be.
The contact management process provides a facility to record key information of 
your B2C customers or your B2B contacts, and associate the contacts to accounts, 
opportunities, leads, activities, service requests, and a contact team.
An opportunity is when you have a product/revenue identiied and a date by 
when you expect to have a win/lose decision on it. The opportunity management 
process in CRMOD has a sales process that deines six stages, product revenue ields 
for recurring, and one-time sales and forecasting. Combined with the opportunity 
assignment manager, the opportunity assessment scripts, and the prebuilt lists and 
analytics on the opportunity home page, the default opportunity module is powerful.
The service request management process captures the product and a standard set 
of service deinition ields to help route the requests to the relevant staff. Combined 
with the assignment manager, the service request call scripts, the solution object, 
and the prebuilt lists and analytics on the service request's home page, the default 
service request module can be released as a self-suficient application for your 
service department.
In Chapter 2, Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box, we will walk through the details of 
going live out of the box.
Releasing CRMOD out of the box makes for a stable growth and medium-to-high 
share of the adopter market. The next step in the business of change is making a 
"star" and eventually a "cash cow" out of it. This typically requires generating large 
scale demand and/or high value niches, and of course expanding your production  
to meet that demand. This customization activity usually involves coniguration 
of the various features of the CRMOD and/or writing integration software for 
increased automation.
Custom administration
CRMOD has a full-ledged administration module that you can use to customize the 
object, accesses, and process deinitions to suit the trademark marketing, sales, and 
service practices of your company.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
The ields in the prebuilt data model can be customized. You can add new ields of 
many datatypes, namely ShortText, LongText, Numeric, Integer, Picklist, Date, 
DateTime, MultiSelectPicklist, Currency, and Weblink. A LongText datatype 
can hold 255 English characters, a Numeric ield stores decimals, and Weblink is 
a hyperlink with intelligence. The MultiSelectPicklist datatype is a powerful 
construct and especially so when you ind it neatly available in the report palette; 
to ind an equally powerful use for it in the business process is the hallmark, we 
believe, of an administrator with a sound mind. Do note that once created a ield 
cannot be destroyed. You can mask it by using the invisible character (Alt + 255)  
but you cannot delete it.
You can rename the custom objects to hold your company-speciic information. For 
example, to capture the hobby details of your customers, you simply rename one 
of the custom objects as "hobby" and associate the "hobby" object to the standard 
contact object to capture one or more hobbies of the contact, and run worklows, 
processes, and reports upon that.
You can modify the page layouts to have the ields of your choice. The layouts can 
be associated to a speciic role such that a sales manager may be able to see the gross 
proit information in an opportunity but a service oficer may not be able to see if he 
views the opportunity details.
Tools such as the assignment manager, the assessment scripts, and the worklows are 
some of the other key facilities that are meant to be customized by nature.
You can opt to create new user roles or modify the prebuilt ones if you are certain 
you will not need the prebuilt deinitions in the future.
CRMOD is built for practices in marketing, sales, and service in all their varied 
forms, and that means that across companies that use CRMOD, one would ind  
it deployed for intermediate processes such as originations, approval worklows, 
self-service portals, presentation layer for a host of backend systems, product design 
portals, market research service, and so on. Many of these deployments, which we 
have been lucky to observe, advise, or deliver, are carefree exploitations of the rich 
feature set of CRMOD, namely its functional object model, simple user interface, web 
services, and analytics.
To customize CRMOD is to know it inside out. To that end, all the chapters after the 
next chapter will walk you through the particulars of customizing your CRMOD to 
suit your business process.

Overview of CRM On Demand
[ 16 ]
Summary
The CRMOD service is a fairly complex one wherein value is realized in the 
collaboration between Oracle and you. In this chapter, we looked at the deliveries 
by Oracle when you buy CRMOD, and the concomitant responsibilities on your 
part to exploit them for your business. We understood the design and objectives 
of the CRMOD application that should help compose the job description for the 
CRMOD administrator. We had an overview of the standard capabilities of the 
software that are available out of the box as well as the capabilities that can be 
customized. In the subsequent chapters we will look at the particulars of the 
CRMOD application in detail.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live  
Out of the Box
In the previous chapter, we had an overview of the CRM On Demand product as 
an information system for customer relationship management. In this chapter, our 
focus is to explore more on how, with minimum customization, we can put the CRM 
On Demand system into production to save a lot of time and effort. Customizations 
incur new costs (of development, training, maintenance, and change management) 
and are typically sponsored to support the company's unique capabilities in both 
people and processes—capabilities that sustain its differentiation from competitors 
in the market. When the company is beginning or transitioning an information 
system for its CRM, it gets enormous value in simply adopting the information 
system that is already available in the CRM On Demand product, built on industry 
standard business process models of CRM. To go live out of the box, that is, without 
any customization, is effective for new companies and new organizations. When 
an enterprise has established its place in the market with custom-tailored CRM 
processes that may not map exactly to industry standards but at the same time work 
well for them as an organization, a customized CRM On Demand should be the 
order of the day.
Standard enterprise technology management, such as listing the business drivers, 
deining the business objectives, mapping the business processes, capturing master 
data, identifying the transactional data to be captured, and the overarching change 
management towards user adoption of the new system, is independent of whether 
you go live with a customized CRM On Demand or go live straight out of the box. 
Therefore, neither this chapter nor the book delves into the project management 
activity of the implementation.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 18 ]
The objective of this chapter is to provide you with the complete list of activities 
to be performed to go live with CRM On Demand without any customization of 
the product. For example, assume your company is a global logistics business with 
sales, marketing, and support teams operating in many countries, bought as many 
CRM On Demand user licenses as there are staff in the sales, marketing, and service 
teams, and intends to standardize its customer relationship management system 
across the board. The company management has opted to go live with CRM On 
Demand without any customization. With an additional user license for you to 
administer the new system, you have the responsibility of deploying the system 
to the users. Here, we will explore in detail the activities that a CRM On Demand 
administrator would perform to deploy CRM On Demand out of the box to the 
intended users across the countries.
We have grouped the activities in three steps. The steps are sequential and each  
step represents a reliable status of the deployment of the system. These steps are  
as follows:
1. The irst step is to familiarize with the prebuilt content in the CRM On 
Demand for the marketing, sales, and service organizations.
2. The second step is setting your company-level parameters, which includes 
creating the login IDs, territories, and company content, such as the products 
catalog and the sales forecast reports.
3. The third and last step is issuing the login IDs to the users and sustaining 
their adoption of the new system.
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to do the following:
• 
Understand the business functionalities of the Vanilla CRM On  
Demand application
• 
Establish the primary settings in the CRM On Demand application to 
implement it in your company
• 
Create login IDs for the users of the application in your company.
The preceding information and skills will help you deploy CRM On Demand out of 
the box in a structured way.

Chapter 2
[ 19 ]
Step 1 – Knowing the prebuilt marketing, 
sales, and service organizations
The CRM On Demand product comes prebuilt with a template to meet the common 
CRM needs of most organizations. Understanding that template in detail will enable 
you to map it to your company's CRM organization. Thus, as the CRM On Demand 
administrator, your business analytical skill and documentation of the mapping of 
the prebuilt organization to the real organization are key to a proitable adoption of 
the new information system.
As we saw in the previous chapter, there is more than one edition of the standard 
CRM On Demand. Apart from the generic edition, there are distinct editions for the 
different industries of inancial services, life sciences, insurance, wealth management, 
and automotive, each of which has additional prebuilt content that is speciic to the 
CRM organization practices in its industry. The industry-speciic content, however, 
requires customization of the system before they can be deployed, and as such we 
will elaborate it in the next chapter.
A CRM system is essentially data (its generation and maintenance) and the usage 
of that data (by the staff that use the data to generate new values). In the following 
section, we will discuss in detail the preconigured data structures that are available 
in CRM On Demand, steps involved in coniguring the company level information to 
suit your organization needs, setting up the users in the system,  
and going live with the newly implemented CRM application.
CRM data
For the marketing suborganization, the data includes campaign, recipient, and lead. 
For the sales suborganization, the data are account, asset, contact, opportunity, 
sales process, revenue, and sales forecasts, and the service suborganization data are 
service requests and solutions. One could argue that the asset is a data of the service 
organization and the standard CRM model therefore deines asset as a common 
object. Activity is a data generated by all organizations.
The following section is the translation of the organization and its data in terms of 
the information system elements, namely function and business objects. It gives the 
deinitions of these objects and their features in CRM On Demand.
Function – Marketing
The various marketing functions will be explored in the upcoming sections.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 20 ]
Campaign
The campaign module helps to create, update, and track campaigns. A campaign 
is a mechanism via which you convey a marketing message to your existing 
and potential customers. Typically, campaigns deliver a promotional offer or 
informational content on your organization's new products or services via different 
channels of communication, to cross-sell or upsell to you current customers or to 
acquire new customers. The goal is to generate additional interest in the company's 
products and services.
When you use campaigns, it enables you to do the following tasks:
• 
Store all campaign-related information, such as budgeted costs compared 
with actual costs, targeted leads, and marketing material (for example, 
brochures and artwork) in one place
• 
Share the campaign details to your sales and marketing team
• 
Analyze the campaign results in terms of generated leads, contacts, accounts, 
and opportunities
• 
Build reports and dashboards to analyze the return on investment of your 
campaign activities in real time
• 
Perform a trend analysis between the past and current campaigns
• 
Import leads and link them to an existing campaign
The list of preconigured ields in the campaign object can be found in the CRM On 
Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?CampaignEditHelp.html.
Recipient
Recipients are the ones who receive the campaign information and store them as 
contacts in your CRM On Demand system. A recipient receives your marketing 
communications and you hope to receive his/her response. The same contact can  
be a recipient of one or more campaigns.

Chapter 2
[ 21 ]
Lead
A lead is any addressable person who is in a potentially opportunistic position with 
a prospective or existing customer (account or contact) of yours, and with whom 
you can interact to develop an opportunity for the prospective/existing customer. 
The sales process might originate with lead generation. Leads move progressively 
through qualiication to conversion. You can convert leads to contacts, accounts, deal 
registrations, and opportunities. After a lead has been converted to an opportunity, 
it enters the sales process. Certain ields in opportunity obtain their values from the 
lead record. These values are based on mapping the leads that have been converted 
during the sales process. The list of preconigured ields in the lead object can be 
found in the CRM On Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?LeadEditHelp.html.
Function – Sales
The various sales functions will be explored in the upcoming sections.
Account
Use the Account Edit page to create, update, and track accounts. Accounts are 
generally organizations that you do business with, but you can also track partners, 
competitors, afiliates, and so on as accounts.
If account records are central to how your company manages its business, as is the 
case in many companies, enter as much information about accounts as you can. 
Some of that information, such as the Region or the Industry ield, can be used in 
reports as a way to categorize information. Similarly, if you link a record, such as 
an opportunity, to an account record with the Region or Industry ield illed in, 
those opportunities can be grouped by the region. A list of preconigured ields 
in the account object can be found in the CRM On Demand help text reference at 
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.
htm?AccountEditHelp.html.
The Account Name and Location ields help us to uniquely identify an account 
record in the system, meaning there can't be two accounts in the system with the 
same Account Name and Location ields.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 22 ]
Contact
Use the Contact Edit page to create, update, and track contacts. Contacts are 
individuals that your company currently conducts business with or expects to 
conduct business with in the future. These individuals can be employees of other 
companies, independent consultants, vendors, or personal acquaintances. A contact 
is generally associated with an account, and often, an account record includes 
links to information about several different contacts at that company. A list of 
preconigured ields in the contact object can be found in the CRM On Demand 
help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/
index.htm?toc.htm?ContactEditHelp.html.
Opportunities
Use the Opportunity Edit page to create, update, and track opportunities. 
Opportunities are potential sales deals that, at some point, might be included in 
revenue forecasting.
You can create an opportunity by converting a qualiied lead to an opportunity,  
or you can create a new opportunity from an existing account or contact.
Opportunity records help you to manage your sales pipeline as you work to close 
deals. All of your opportunity information is visible in one place and is linked to the 
related lead, contact, and account information. This information gives a complete 
picture of your opportunity and your customer.
To ensure that an opportunity record captures all the selling activity, the changes to 
the records can be tracked through an audit trail.
A list of preconigured ields in the opportunity object can be found in the CRM On 
Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?OpptyEditHelp.html.
Sales process
The sales organization has time-bound goals. In the normal course of business, 
its pipeline of opportunities faces market competition and a variety of risks at the 
customers' end. The sales process is the discipline by which the sales organization 
generates reliable forecasts of revenues.
The sales process is the standardized worklow of selling. It has stages deined by 
the actions taken by the sales person and reactions received from the customer. 
The inal stage of a sales process is either the Closed/Won or the Closed/Lost 
stage. Intermediate stages leading to the inal stage are described, sequenced, and 
quantiied in terms of the probability of reaching from that stage to that of the 
Closed/Won stage.

Chapter 2
[ 23 ]
Thus, an opportunity at the sales stage X that puts a probability of 60 percent implies 
the opportunity with that customer having a 60 percent probability of reaching 
Closed/Won by the expected closing date for the given revenue.
Different sales processes may be deined for different types of opportunities. 
Multiple sales processes can be normalized using sales categories, to enable 
forecasting at a global level.
An opportunity can be associated with only a single sales process.
Revenues
You can link products or services (drawn from your product catalog) to 
opportunities in order to do the following tasks:
• 
Track which products belong to the opportunity
• 
Calculate revenue-based opportunity on product revenue
• 
Base your company's forecasts on product revenue or product quantities
If the product represents recurring revenue, you can input the Frequency and # of 
Periods information.
For usability, you can link a product to an opportunity when you create the 
opportunity in an unbroken sequential step, or alternatively at a later time.
To calculate the opportunity revenue based on the linked product revenue,  
follows these steps:
1. On the Opportunity Detail page, click the Update Opportunity Totals 
button available in the Opportunity Product Revenue section. This totals 
the product revenue for each linked product and displays it in the Revenue 
and Expected Revenue ields for the opportunity. The calculation behind 
this functionality differs depending on whether the Product Probability 
Averaging Enabled option is enabled on the company proile.
2. The company forecasting method determines which ields you must select 
when linking products to your opportunities.
3. If your company forecasts the revenue, based on opportunities, rather than 
products, do not select the Forecast checkbox on the Opportunity Product 
Revenue record.
4. If your company forecasts revenue based on product revenue, and you want 
to include this product revenue record as part of your forecasted revenue 
totals, or your forecasted quantities, or both, select the Forecast checkbox.
www.allitebooks.com

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 24 ]
5. Make sure that the date in the Start/Close Date ield falls within the forecast 
period, and that the record is owned by a forecast participant.
6. If a product is not sold, you can update the associated Start/Close Date and 
clear the Forecast checkbox on the Product Revenue page for that product 
to prevent the revenue for the product from being added to your company's 
forecasts. Alternatively, if one of the several products linked to the 
opportunity is on hold, you can remove the product from the opportunity, 
and create another opportunity for that product to prevent its revenue from 
being included in the forecast.
A list of preconigured ields in the opportunity revenue line object can be found 
in the CRM On Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?opptyproducthelp.html.
Assets
When you want to track a product that you have sold to a customer or company,  
link the product record to the account as an asset.
If you enter the Notify Date ield's value on the asset record, a task is created when 
you save this asset record. The task appears as Asset Name requires follow-up 
on My Homepage, Account Homepage, and Calendar. A list of preconigured 
ields in the asset object can be found in the CRM On Demand help text reference 
at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.
htm?acctassethelp.html.
Sales forecasts
Use the Forecast page to review, adjust, and submit forecasts. A forecast is a saved 
snapshot of expected revenues over time. CRM On Demand calculates forecasts for 
each quarter and breaks down that information by iscal month.
Forecasts in CRM On Demand automate a process that is often manual and 
sometimes inaccurate. Forecasts help companies to develop sales strategies. They 
also help companies to identify future business needs by giving managers accurate 
and up-to-date information about expected sales and quarterly progress toward sales 
targets. Individual sales representatives do not have to compile statistics. Instead, 
they decide when to include a record in their forecasts. The remainder of the process 
is automatic.
Function – Service
The various service functions will be explored in the upcoming sections.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
Service requests
Use the Service Request Edit page to record, track, and address customer requests 
for information or assistance. A service request holds all the relevant and detailed 
information about a particular service activity. You can also use the service request to 
capture additional information, such as solutions or activities required to resolve the 
service request. Service representatives can access all the relevant information about 
service requests in one location. To ensure that a service request record captures all 
the service activity, the changes to records can be tracked through an audit trail. A 
list of preconigured ields in the service request object can be found in the CRM On 
Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?SerReqEditHelp.html.
Solutions
Use the Solution Edit page to create, update, and track solutions. Solutions contain 
information about how to resolve a customer query. By maintaining a knowledge 
base of solutions, your service representatives have access to a centralized knowledge 
base to help them resolve customer problems. In addition, the knowledge base 
expands as users interact with customers and create new solutions.
CRM On Demand tracks the usage of solutions and enables users to rate solutions. 
This information helps organizations to improve the solutions that they provide 
to customers and to identify problems in products or services. Frequently-used 
solutions give indicators to the organization on areas where product quality or 
supporting documents have to be improved. Poor solution ratings might indicate the 
need to improve solutions. A list of preconigured ields in the solution object can be 
found in the CRM On Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?SolutionEditHelp.html.
Activity
Use the Calendar page to review, create, and update your activities.
An activity consists of tasks that you need to accomplish before a certain date and 
appointments that you want to schedule for a speciic time. Tasks and appointments 
can be meetings, calls, demonstrations, or events. The difference between tasks 
and appointments is that tasks appear in a task list and have a due date and status, 
whereas appointments are scheduled on your calendar with a speciic date and time.
Activities can be associated to most of the standard and custom objects in the CRM 
On Demand application. A list of preconigured ields can be found in the CRM On 
Demand help text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?AppointEditHelp.html.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 26 ]
CRM staff
A user of your company's CRM On Demand gets access to the CRM data based on 
the accesses assigned to his user ID. Every user ID is associated to a user role, which 
deines all the access rights. A user ID can be associated to only one user role. There 
is no limit on the number of user roles that you can deine on the system. The user 
role access levels are broadly captured in the following two types:
• 
Feature access: Features (more commonly known as privileges) refer to the 
type of managerial/administrative worklows and actions that a user can 
perform in the CRM system. These actions include accessing all the data in 
the analytics tables, accessing prebuilt dashboards, accessing prebuilt reports, 
creating personal reports, creating custom reports, publishing list templates, 
creating campaigns, leads qualiication and conversion, publishing solutions, 
sharing calendar with others, recovering deleted data, creating the assignment 
rules for automatic assignment of records, accessing CRM On Demand 
ofline version, integrating the CRM On Demand with their e-mail client and 
PIM, exporting their data, importing personal data, and personalizing their 
homepages and detail pages.
• 
Record access: These are the permissions to create/read-all/edit/delete the 
records in the system, and in reference to the user's ownership or absence of 
ownership on the record. For example, can the user create campaign records, 
can the user read all the leads available in the system, can the user delete his 
activity records, and so on.
The following table describes the prebuilt user roles. You will need to map this to the 
staff roles in your company's CRM organization:
User role
Privileges
Record access
Executive
Has access to all the features, 
other than administration 
and customization features
Has access and Read all records 
privilege to the most common horizontal 
record types such as accounts, contacts, 
activities, assets, campaigns, leads, 
opportunities, service requests, and 
solutions and sales forecasts. They can 
create records of these record types 
except solutions.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
User role
Privileges
Record access
Advanced 
User
Has access to create custom 
reports, create assignment 
rules, publish lists templates, 
and leads evaluation 
(qualification, archiving, 
rejection, and conversion). 
Has access to all "non-admin" 
features, such as Access All 
Data in Analytics.
Has access and can create a privilege 
for the most common horizontal record 
types, such as accounts, contacts, 
activities, assets, campaigns, leads, 
opportunities, service requests, 
solutions, and sales forecasts. But 
advanced users can only read her/his 
own records.
Sales and 
Marketing 
Manager
Has access to sales and 
marketing related privileges 
such as create assignment 
rules, publish lists templates, 
and so on.
Has access to the most common 
horizontal type of records and can read 
all the records in the system. The sales 
and marketing manager has no access to 
generate sales forecasts (this means that 
the manager cannot force an automatic 
submit of the sales forecasts of his sales 
representative but has to wait for the 
sales representative to submit their 
forecasts).
Field Sales 
Rep
Has access to leads 
evaluation (qualification, 
archiving, rejection, and 
conversion).
Has access to the most common 
horizontal types of records and can read 
only those records owned by him.
Inside Sales 
Rep
Has access to leads 
qualification and archiving.
Has access to the most common 
horizontal types of records and reads all 
the records in the system.
Regional 
Manager
Has access to leads 
evaluation, Campaigns 
management and to create 
assignment rules.
Has access to the most common 
horizontal types of records and can read 
only those records owned by him.
Service 
Manager
Has access to publish 
Solutions, publish lists 
templates and recover 
deleted data.
Has access to the most common 
horizontal types of records (except 
Sales Forecasts) and can read only those 
records owned by him. The Service 
Manager can however read all the 
Accounts and Contacts records in the 
system.
Service Rep
-
Has access to the most common 
horizontal types of records and can read 
only those records owned by himself 
/ herself. The service representative 
can however read all the accounts and 
contacts records in the system.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 28 ]
User role
Privileges
Record access
Administrator
Has access to all features in 
the system, and the access to 
modify the accesses of other 
user roles.
Has access to create/read/delete all 
types of records.
The previous table lists the permissions of each prebuilt role to access a record type, to 
create a record of a speciic record type, and whether the user has access to view all the 
records created in the system. The permissions on each record (read-only/edit/delete) 
are deined by the Owner Access Proile and the Default Access Proile settings for 
each role as shown in the next screenshot; these proiles are explained as follows:
• 
Owner Access Proile: Deines permission on a record when the user is the 
direct owner and/or a derived owner through the manager hierarchy
• 
Default Access Proile: Deines the permission on a record to a user who is 
not directly or indirectly the owner of that record but is visible to the user 
because the Can Read All Records option is selected for the relevant record 
type in the record-type access settings on the user's role

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
To understand the details of the access proiles of a particular user role you will need 
to know two things. First, that the name of the access proile follows the convention 
[user role name] Default Access Proile and [user role name] Owner Access Proile. 
Secondly, the path to the access proiles, which is Admin | User Management and 
Access Controls | Access Proiles. A screenshot of Access Proile is shown as follows:
This completes the irst step. If you are a novice to the CRM On Demand service, we 
hope the preceding pages have given you the conidence and the "view" for step 2.
Step 2 – Setting your company proile
The second step of deploying out of the box involves giving the system the details 
about your company. The activities that comprise this step are as follows:
1. The Company Administration data.
2. Creating the login IDs for users.
3. Creating the product catalog.
4. Enabling the sales forecasts.
Each of these activities are explored in detail in the following sections.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 30 ]
The Company Administration data
The Company Administration page is the place where you deine the company 
proile and some other global settings. The following screenshot details some of the 
important parameters that can be deined as part of the company administration. 
You can access this section by going to Admin | Company Administration:
The Company Proile
The Company Proile page carries the key parameters. The screenshot is as follows:
Under Company Key Information, ensure that you set the CRM On Demand 
administrator user as Primary Contact along with his phone number. Don't make the 
mistake of setting the CEO of the company as Primary Contact. If you do so, Oracle 
support may end up calling your CEO on any support-related matters.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
Under Company Settings, most of the default options such as Language,  
Currency, and Time Zone are set by Oracle, based on the inputs provided by you 
at the time of taking the trial run and/or the purchase order. As these are long-term 
and fairly static settings, you will need to select them thoughtfully at the start. You 
can change these settings with a service request to customer support. As a global 
company with staff distributed across various time zones, you would do well to 
set up the parameters in a manner that would be applicable for most of the users of 
the system at the company level. Note that CRM On Demand is designed for global 
deployments and therefore, these company-level defaults can be overridden at the 
user level using user-level settings.
The In-Line Edit, Message Centre, and Heads-Up Display options are meant to 
enhance user productivity when using the system.
In-Line Edit provides a facility to edit the details of the record in the list view or a 
detailed view without going to the edit mode. In-Line Edit reduces the amount of 
data sent from the client browser to the CRM On Demand server. In the following 
screenshot, the Location ield under Company Proile can be edited without getting 
into the edit mode by clicking the Edit button:
Similarly in the list view too, In-Line Edit facilitates a quick edit of the listed records 
without getting to the detailed record page.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 32 ]
Message Center is a mini collaboration tool available to the users to share general 
information with other users of the system-speciic or record-speciic information. As 
you can see in the following screenshot, on clicking the notes icon on the right-hand 
corner of the Opportunity Detail page, the notes pop-up appears displaying the notes 
written by users on this opportunity record. If you opt to subscribe for the notes, 
any message posted by any user of the system on this opportunity record will be 
displayed in the Message Centre section in the left-hand side navigation bar, giving 
an easy access to view all the messages posted by the users.
Heads-up Display provides quick links to go to a speciic related information section 
of a record without scrolling the browser. On clicking the Contacts link, as shown 
in the following screenshot, the user is directly taken to the account's Contacts list 
applet that appears at the bottom of the Account Detail page. Clicking on the Top 
link will take you to the Opportunity Detail section.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
The Record Preview mode opens the preview window when a user points to a 
hyperlink or clicks the preview icon depending on the settings selected (click on the 
preview icon on the link). For example, if an opportunity is associated to an account, 
the account name is displayed as a hyperlink to navigate easily to the related Account 
Detail page. Enabling preview would help you to view the details of the account 
from the Opportunity Detail page without navigating to the Account Detail page. As 
shown in the following screenshot, on clicking the preview icon in the Opportunity 
Detail page, the details of Account Action Rentals are displayed in an overlay pop up:
Global Search Method provides a facility to specify the search option you would 
like to enable in the system. If you choose the Targeted Search option, the system 
provides a facility to search by one or more of the conigured ields in the object to 
search the records stored in the object. As you can see in the following screenshot,  
I have set the Targeted Search option at the company level and as a result, on the 
left-hand side navigation search applet, I have a facility to search Contacts in the 
system by Last Name, First Name, and Email. If you key in more than one ield, 
it performs an AND search. If you like to search by a different set of ields, you can 
either use the Advanced search facility or customize the Search panel for all users.
www.allitebooks.com

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 34 ]
On the other hand if you have selected Keyword Search, the search applet in the  
left-hand side navigation appears as shown in the following screenshot, providing 
you with a single blank ield where you can key in any text to do a wildcard search 
against a set of preconigured ields. Unlike Targeted Search, here, the system uses 
the OR condition if there are more than one preconigured ield.
In the previous screenshot, when you key in armexplc as an input to the search ield, 
it gets you all contacts with the e-mail domain ending with armexplc-od.com. The 
prebuilt Search panel has the relevant set of ields for each object. A complete list of 
the preconigured keyword search ields, sorted by objects, is available in the online 
help ile of CRM On Demand at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?defaultsearchfieldshelp.html. The Keyword 
Search option can hinder the performance of the system as it runs on all the objects 
during every search.
Fiscal Year Start Date, Fiscal Year Start Month, and Calendar Type can vary by 
country or industry and can be changed on request to customer care.
Enabling Product Probability Averaging would compute the opportunity 
probability as a weighted average probability of opportunity revenues. In the 
following example, on clicking Opportunity Totals button, the probability at the 
opportunity level is calculated as (60% * 1000 + 40% * 2000) / (1000 + 2000) = 46.67%:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
Enabling Opportunity Revenue Split would provide an option to split the 
revenue of opportunity between more than one team member working in the same 
opportunity. In the screenshot, 20 percent of revenue is accounted to Jiten and the 
remaining 80 percent to Donna. The split gets relected in the sales forecast and in 
reports that are used to measure the sales team member performance:
The ield Record Type Auditable Fields sets the cap on maximum number of ields 
that can be audited across objects of different types. When a ield is audited, for 
every change to the ield value an audit log is created capturing the information 
changed. As you can see in the following screenshot, changes to the opportunity 
ields such as Probability and Revenue are tracked for reference in the Audit Trail 
applet in the Opportunity Detail page:

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 36 ]
The Audit Expiry (Days) ield speciies the age in days by which the audit records 
are purged. The value can be between 1 and 90 days. A value of 0 indicates the 
records are never purged and a 0 value can only be set by the Oracle customer care.
Themes provide a facility to customize the look and feel of CRM On Demand as 
per your corporate standards or your branding needs. You can choose one of the 
predeined themes available or you can create a custom theme. Custom themes can 
be deined under the Admin | Application Customization | Themes section. You 
should have the privilege Manage Themes set in your roles privilege to access the 
Themes section and create your own themes or to modify the existing ones. The 
following screenshot shows one of the available themes (Technology) under the 
Themes section. You can either modify it or you can copy the existing theme and 
customize the same. It is best to copy and modify an existing theme rather than 
changing the existing ones.

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
The Company Data Visibility Settings provides an option to turn on/off some of 
the security-related features of the data. Chapter 7, Content Management, discusses 
in detail the various mechanisms to secure the application data. These settings are 
shown in the following screenshot:
The Manager Visibility Enabled checkbox turns on/off the mechanism by which the 
reporting manager can view records of users who report to him.
Enable Parent Team Inheritance provides a way to automatically default the 
account team members as members of opportunity and contact teams, thereby 
providing an easy way for account team members to access opportunities and 
contacts related to the account.
Default group Assignment provides a facility for a group of users to have shared 
ownership of accounts, contacts, households, opportunities, and portfolio records 
created by any of the group members.
Enable Books enables the business feature book whereby a set of records associated 
to a given book can be accessed by a group of users associated to that book.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 38 ]
Display Book Selector enables a mechanism to ilter the records by books applicable 
to the users.
The Integration Settings section is a place where you can turn on/off some of the 
web service integration features. We will discuss this in detail in Chapter 8, Web 
Services Integration.
The Desktop Integration Settings section provides facilities to customize some of 
the desktop productivity tools provided by CRM On Demand, such as Personal 
Information Manager (PIM) sync, ofline tools, and Outlook e-mail integration 
plugin. We will cover this in more detail in Chapter 9, Data and Integration Tools.
Many of the ields under Company Security Settings are related to Single sign-on 
(SSO). Single sign-on is a mechanism by which the users of an organization can 
use a common username and password to access any of the company's application 
including CRM On Demand. For example, if there is an intranet portal for the 
company and the company authenticates the users by their intranet portal user 
ID and password, then after getting authenticated by the intranet portal, from the 
intranet portal page, users can seamlessly log in to CRM On Demand or any other 
internal application without logging in again.
Company Idle Time Out speciies the timeout value for an On Demand session  
in minutes. You can also request customer care to set the timeout value for an  
On Demand session. It can be set to a maximum of 60 minutes and a minimum  
of 10 minutes.
Authentication Type can be either by the CRM On Demand username and password 
combination or by Single sign-on or by both, depending on your company's policy 
settings. If you haven't enabled SSO, it is set as User ID/PWD.
If you wish to replace the standard CRM On Demand login page with a custom 
login page branded as per your corporate standards, you can specify the URL of the 
custom page in Sign In Page for Userid/PwdAuthentications; thus, after session 
timeout On Demand automatically takes the user to the custom page for relogin 
rather than the standard On Demand login page. Typically, this page is hosted by 
customers in their web server. The Userid and Pwd options are the same as the On 
Demand username and password.
SignIn Page for SSO Authentications is exactly similar to Sign In Page for  
Userid/Pwd Authentications, but applicable only when you enable Single sign-on 
where you use a common company's username and password to log into any of your 
corporate applications.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
ITS URL for SSO Authentications is an intermediate page that transfers the  
user to the CRM On Demand's home page from the company's intranet portal, 
passing the authenticated token from the company's SSO server. After verifying the 
authentication token, On Demand logs the user automatically to CRM On Demand.
The IP Address Restrictions Enabled checkbox provides a facility to restrict access 
to CRM On Demand from a set of deined IPs. It restricts the user from logging in 
from anywhere in the world, but provides a security feature to limit the access, for 
example, strictly from the company's internal network.
The Inline Attachment Open Enabled checkbox provides a facility to open 
attachments inline in the On Demand window.
The Cross-Site Request Forgery Protections Enabled checkbox restricts external 
pages to directly make an HTTP post on a CRM On Demand page. If you enable this 
checkbox, the system forces the external pages to include a security token that can be 
authenticated by CRM On Demand before executing the action.
The Enable IFRAME Embedding checkbox provides an option to embed CRM On 
Demand in an iframe tag in an external application whereby on clicking on any 
of the internal links in CRM On Demand, the page opens within the embedded 
iframe. This provides a mechanism to embed CRM On Demand as a portlet in your 
corporate intranet.
The Analytics Visibility Settings section is related to reporting and analytics. 
We would cover the details in Chapter 10, Introduction to Reports. At a higher level, 
settings such as Reporting Subject Areas, Historical Subject Areas, and Role-Based 
Can Read All Records provide you with a facility to restrict the data displayed to 
users via reports.
The Additional Information section, which is located below the Analytics Visibility 
Settings section provides information on the number of active users, inactive users, 
and the total number of licenses purchased by your company. The number of active 
users can be at the most equal to the number of licenses.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 40 ]
Company SignIn and Password Control
The company's SignIn and Password Policies section is a place where you can 
deine the Sign In Policy Information settings, standards you would like to impose 
on passwords set by users, authentication information to reset the password, and 
turn-on/off facilities that allow the user to change the login user ID and e-mail. The 
following screenshot shows this section with all its settings:
As most of the parameters are self-explanatory, let me explain only the tricky ones 
here. When you activate a user in CRM On Demand, the user receives two e-mails 
sent to his conigured e-mail ID. One contains a temporary password generated by 
the system and the other contains a temporary link where a user can go and reset 
the temporary password by authenticating himself with the temporary password 
he received. The Number of Days Temporary Sign In Is Valid ield is used to 
invalidate the temporary URL beyond certain days for security reasons. If you 
activate hundreds of users together and some of them are out of ofice and unable 
to reset the temporary password within the validity period, he may not be able to 
reset the temporary password when he is back in ofice. You may have to reset the 
password again to reissue a new temporary password and a temporary URL to 
facilitate his access to CRM On Demand.

Chapter 2
[ 41 ]
The Password Change Limit Window and Maximum Number of Password Changes 
ields specify the maximum number of times you can change the password in a given 
period. If you set Maximum Number of Password Changes as 3 and Password 
Change Limit Window as 1 day, you cannot change the password more than three 
times in a day.
It is optional to provide lexibility for the end users to change their user ID and 
e-mail. Typically, companies set the user ID and e-mail ID as the company's desktop 
sign-in ID and e-mail address without a facility for users to modify the same for 
simplicity and consistency purposes.
Activating languages
CRM on Demand is available in many languages. All default text ields supplied 
with the product, such as short text ields and picklist values, along with online 
help and tutorials, are shown in the available languages depending on the language 
settings in the user proile.
However, when you customize ields or picklist values, you must manually enter 
the equivalents in other languages if you want those to appear in their translated 
versions. Otherwise, they appear in the original language in blue text with brackets 
around them, regardless of the language you selected. Initially, the only active 
language is the one that was selected as the company's default language when your 
company signed up for Oracle CRM on Demand. To make the language choices 
available to your users, you must activate them in this section.
IP Address Restrictions
If you have checked the IP Address Restrictions Enabled checkbox at the company 
proile level with the help of customer support, then here you can specify the list of 
IPs from where access to CRM On Demand is allowed. For example, if you would 
like to restrict the access to CRM On Demand only from your ofice network, you can 
conigure the Internet gateway's IP address over here to avoid access to the system 
from anywhere outside your ofice. Ensure you add the right IP address so that the 
administrator can still access the application. Otherwise, customer support has to 
grant access again.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 42 ]
The Sign In Audit and Audit Trail sections
This section provides a facility for the administrator to monitor the sign-in status and 
operations performed by the users of the system. The Sign In Audit section is shown 
in the following screenshot:
The different types of operations can be Interactive or Web Services, and the 
Operation tab's values can be Reset Password, Forget Password, Answer Security 
Questions, Change SSO Identiier, Change to User ID, Change to Email Address, 
Set Password, Initial Password, PIM Sync, Ofline, and so on. The Audit Trail 
section is shown in the following screenshot:
Fiscal calendar deinitions are generated by the system on the basis of the Fiscal 
Calendar Type, Fiscal Year Start Month, and the Fiscal Year Start Date ields set in 
the company proile. If it is set as Calendar Quarters, each of the four quarters will 
have three months with the irst month of the irst quarter as the starting date as per 
your Fiscal Year Start Month and Fiscal Year Start Date settings. If you have opted 
for week-based quarters such as 4-4-5 or 5-4-4, each quarter will have 13 weeks 
with either the irst or the last month alone having 5 weeks. The iscal deinitions in 
the company proile can only be modiied by raising a support request to customer 
care. Typically, business plans, reports, forecasts, and so on are created on the 
basis of the iscal period rather than by calendar quarters or months, so setting this 
in accordance with your business needs is important. The Fiscal Calendar Detail 
section is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 2
[ 43 ]
Currency deinition
This is the place to activate all the currencies that are applicable to the company. 
Only on activating the currencies, will users be able to select the currency in deining, 
for example, the currency of the opportunity revenue.
The Exchange Rate Edit page is the place where you deine exchange rates between 
a country's currency and your company's Default Currency deined in the Company 
Proile settings. For example, as shown in the next screenshot, if you set up the 
currency rates between USD and EUR and between USD and AUD, then CRM 
On Demand calculates the conversion between EUR and AUD by irst converting 
EUR to USD and then from USD to AUD. You can specify the Exchange Date 
setting along with the Exchange Rate setting. You can click the Exchange History 
link to look into all the past exchange rates set in the system. The system picks up 
the appropriate exchange rate depending on the data of transaction for forecasting 
rollup. In case of opportunity, the opportunity revenue date is used to pickup the 
closest possible exchange rate available in the system. For example, if exchange rates 
are entered for only 05-15-2011 and 08-15-2011, then for forecasting rollup, the 
system follows this logic:
• 
For transactions prior to 05-15-2011, the 05-15-2011 rate is used
• 
For transactions between 05-15-2011 and 08-14-2011, the 05-15-2011  
rate is used
• 
For transactions on or after 08-15-2011, the 08-15-2011 rate is used
www.allitebooks.com

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 44 ]
In the case of reports, a single exchange rate for the month is picked up and for 
all the transactions that fall under the same month, that exchange rate is used for 
conversion to a single currency. For example, if exchange rates are deined for  
05-10-2011, 05-20-2011 and 08-14-2011, then:
• 
The May 2011 rate will be the value set for 05-20-2011 (the latest rate set  
for May)
• 
The August 2011 rate will be the value set for 08/14/2011 (the only rate set 
for August)
• 
April 2011 and prior months will be assigned the rate for May 10, 2011  
(there are 2 dates for the month of May)
• 
June 2011 and July 2011 will be assigned the August 2004 rate  
(closest future month)
• 
September 2011 and future months will be assigned the August 2011 rate  
(no future month, so irst previous month is used)
Creating the login IDs for users
Users can be set up in the system by creating users one by one by using either of the 
following ways:
• 
Use the New User action under Administration | User Management and 
Access Control | User Management
• 
Use the Quick Add action under User Management or by importing users 
from a CSV ile using the Import Assistant tool

Chapter 2
[ 45 ]
As can you see in the following screenshot, when you use the Quick Add feature, 
the system prompts you only for the key-speciic information that are required for 
setting up users, such as Last Name, First Name, User ID, Email, and Role.
User ID is the sign-in ID that the user uses to log in to the system. The full sign-in ID 
to log in to CRM On Demand is preixed with the company identiier deined under 
the Company Administration section. If your company identiier is ABC and user ID 
is XYZ, the sign-in ID of the user would be ABC/XYZ.
The Active status determines whether the user can access the system or not. The 
number of active users at any point of time is limited by the number of licenses 
purchased by your company. Users once created in the system cannot be deleted; 
they can only be set as Inactive. If you intend to activate the user as soon as you 
create the user in the system, set the Status value as Active and check the Email 
Password checkbox. On saving the user status, the system automatically sends the 
sign-in information to the user by an e-mail, in two parts; one contains a temporary 
URL and the other contains a temporary password and details of the user's sign-in 
ID. A user has to click on the temporary URL, reset the temporary password with 
his own password, and can then start using CRM On Demand. If you don't intend 
to activate the user on creation, you can uncheck Email Password and later send the 
sign-in information using the Reset Password link in the User Detail page. Some 
of the other important ields required while deining a user are explained in the 
following table:
User property
Description
Reports To
The manager for the user. The definition of the manager 
of the user is required if you intend to use the Manager 
Visibility feature. Unless this reporting hierarchy 
is set up properly, managers may not have access to 
records created by their subordinates, they can't see the 
subordinates' records in reports and cannot review and 
approve the forecast submitted by the subordinates. 
Currently, CRM On Demand doesn't support reporting 
to more than one manager.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 46 ]
User property
Description
Reporting Subject Areas and 
Historical Subject Areas
These settings determine the data visibility for the 
users in reports developed from real-time subject areas 
and historical subject areas. The possible values are as 
follows:
• Manager Visibility: Allows the user to see the 
data that is owned by the user and the data owned 
by the user's subordinates.
• Team Visibility: Allows the user to see the data 
that is owned by the user and the data shared with 
the user through teams.
• Full Visibility: Allows the user to see the data 
that is owned by and shared with the user 
and data owned by and shared with the user's 
subordinates. The Full Visibility option is not 
available for real-time or reporting subject areas, 
meaning the user can't see together the records 
owned by subordinates as well as teams where he 
is part of it.
Role-Based Can Read All 
Records
If this flag is selected and if while defining the user's 
role, he/she has been assigned permission to read all 
the records, then the user would be able to access all the 
records in the Reports section too. Typically, this feature 
is used for administrators and managers.
External Unique ID
This is the unique ID of the user in the external system. If 
you have an organization-wide HRMS system, then this 
field would be the same as the identifier of the user in 
the external system. It helps to map the users of CRM On 
Demand with the external system users.
Integration ID
This can be considered as an equivalent of the Row 
ID field in CRM On Demand in an external system 
to uniquely identify the user in the other system for 
integration purposes.
External Identifier for Single 
Sign On
This is the sign-in ID for the user if the Single Sign-On 
option is checked under the Company Administration 
section. The value of this field is used by CRM On 
Demand to map the Single sign-on user ID to an On 
Demand user ID.
Authentication Type, Records 
Preview Mode, Head-Up 
Display, Theme Name, 
Language, Local Currency, 
and Time Zone
They are similar to the ones defined in the Company 
Administration section and defaulted automatically. You 
can override them at the user level if you wish to.

Chapter 2
[ 47 ]
User property
Description
Never Call, Never Email, and 
Never Mail
These are the fields used by CRM On Demand marketing 
to avoid calling, e-mailing, and mailing users of the 
system.
Always Send Critical Updates
If this checkbox is selected, the user receives e-mails 
containing important information from Oracle CRM On 
Demand, such as product updates, service updates, and 
so on of CRM On Demand and the related products.
After you have created the login IDs and set them to Active status, you would proceed 
to set up the product catalog. Although the product catalog is normally assumed to 
be available as a standardized list, the reality in many companies (be they large or 
small enterprises) is that the lists tend to be standardized by multiple departments 
and teams. The sales and service teams may have slightly different deinitions of the 
product category, which is not a problem in itself as long as they remained in their 
silos. However, CRM On Demand requires a single product catalog of the company. 
The set of login IDs that you have created will be handy in getting a quick consensus 
on the product catalog, right from your chief executive oficer through the service and 
sales representatives.
Creating the product catalog
There are merely four things you need to know about the product catalog:
• 
First, you may not need the product catalog facility if your company 
sells custom services. The catalog is typically relevant for discrete goods 
businesses, or standardized service offerings.
• 
Second, product names have to be unique.
• 
Third, a product record cannot be deleted after it has once been created.
• 
Fourth, the path to the product catalog, which is Admin | Content 
Management | Products.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 48 ]
The product category records and product records can both be imported using the 
Import UI Assistant tool. We can edit the product name of an existing record but 
we should avoid that at all costs. The CRM On Demand product catalog is designed 
for a fair bit of product management practice. The Orderable ield when unchecked, 
removes the product from the active catalog. We should use this feature to manage 
requirements to change the names of an existing product or to delete products from 
the catalog, and to schedule the release of new products to the sales force as well. The 
Type and the Status ields are useful too. Categories make a catalog and therefore 
we should prefer a generous use of the product category over creating a simple, long 
list of all the products. CRM On Demand updates all the analytics tables to relect 
the latest catalog. So, product category names can be edited anytime, and product 
records can be edited to move them to a different category. Editing the product name 
however would lead to bad reports as the revenue or asset data do not get refreshed 
in the analytics tables.
Enabling sales forecasts
There are three things that you need to know about sales forecasts:
• 
First, the forecast engine has to be activated the irst time, and updated every 
time there is any change in the forecast participants. Both the actions are 
simply called Update.
• 
Second, a forecast participant is any user who can submit his forecasts to the 
forecast computer. This translates to every user whose user role gives him 
the access to create a Forecast type of record.
• 
Third, changes in the forecast participants could be that of new (forecast 
creator) users being added to the system and existing (forecast creator) users 
leaving the system.
The path to update the forecast engine is Admin | Data Rules and Assignment | 
Forecast Deinition | Update.
On clicking the Update button, you will see the deinition settings displayed in three 
parts. Let us walk through these parts.
The next screen shot is of the irst part. Opportunity Revenue Forecast refers to 
forecasting from the revenue ield on the opportunity record. Opportunity Product 
Forecast refers to forecasting from the revenue ield on the product revenue records 
under the opportunity. You can select both if your organization requires them, but in 
most cases there is usually an organization standard of what to use for the forecast. 
You can check the appropriate tick boxes as required in your sales organization, and 
then click on the Next button.

Chapter 2
[ 49 ]
The second step of Forecast Deinition is Forecast Frequency. This contains the 
preset frequency of the forecasting for one quarter and takes the submitted sales 
forecasts of the irst day of every month. Keeping this frequency setting as it is,  
you can click on the Next button to get to the inal step.
The previous screenshot is of the inal step. Here, you need to deine/add the 
forecast participants. The column labeled Forecast Roles should contain all the user 
roles that have users who are forecast creators. The Field Sales Rep, Inside Sales 
Rep, Executive, Advanced User, and the Regional Manager user roles have access to 
create forecasts and can engage in sales work that will produce forecasts. Therefore, 
assuming all of these user roles are assigned among your login IDs, you would use 
the chevron buttons to move the user roles from the column labeled Company Roles 
to the column labeled Forecast Roles. The Sales & Marketing Manager role does not 
have access to create forecasts so there is no point in adding this user role to the list 
of participants. The Sales & Marketing Manager role has access to read all forecasts 
and will view them at the Forecast tab when the forecasts have been generated on 
the irst day of the month.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 50 ]
There are two other optional settings in this part of the deinition. These are related 
to a customization of the organizational structure. We will revisit them later in  
this book.
You would thus complete the Update task by clicking on the Finish button.
This completes the second step of the deployment. It is a milestone that usually leads 
to a round of internal testing and inal checks before the big bang of Step 3. A simple 
and clean approach to sanity testing is to have one of the advanced users on board. 
You could issue his login ID to him and then round-robin the user roles on his login 
ID. Needless to say, the administrator's login ID should never be switched to another 
user role, as that is a one-way ticket out of the system.
Step 3 – Pass the word around
Now that you have readied the system, the next step is to have the users login to the 
system and thereafter support their adoption and the use of this new system. The list 
of activities in this step are as follows:
• 
Creating company-wide alerts and messaging on CRM On Demand
• 
Issuing the user IDs
• 
Provide ongoing support to users on CRM On Demand
Creating company-wide alerts and messaging
You would likely prepare for the launch of the new system by e-mail and have 
departmental meetings announcing the new system and its launch process. These 
communications do help in preparing users to transition to the new system. Meanwhile, 
you could consider ways to welcome the users from within the new system when they 
log in for the irst time, and through the initial few weeks after the launch.
The Company Alerts facility and the Message Centre section can be put to good use 
at this task.

Chapter 2
[ 51 ]
You can broadcast alerts to all users of your company, and the alerts will appear on 
the main Homepage when the user logs into CRM On Demand. You would want 
to create welcome messages, support information alerts, and any other collateral 
suitable to your audience. An alert message can have attachment iles and URLs. 
Perhaps an audio-video presentation of the new system and a "how-to" could be 
hosted on an internal HTTP server and the URL posted as part of the welcome 
message. The use of the alert facility is limited only by your imagination. The path to 
the alert administration is Admin | Company Administration | Company Alerts.
The Message Centre section at the upper-left corner of the CRM On Demand page 
can be used to engage with the users of your new system, at a personal level. If you 
are going live with a small number of users, you could actually consider leaving 
a personal message to each of the users. The Message Centre section's placement 
and its animations do invite attention, and certainly of the irst-time users. To leave 
a message to a user, search for the user record using the search panel. A wildcard 
search would output all the user records. Hovering the mouse on the Last Name 
ield invokes the Message Centre icon, clicking on which, would allow you to send a 
message to that speciic user. The message would be available in the user's Message 
Centre when he logs in.
Issuing the user IDs
It is a rare administrator who recognizes that the end users could hardly care 
about the permanent URL of the new system or about the small lifespan of the 
temporary password, and yet these are fairly common problems—of users looking 
helpless on the second day because they either forgot to bookmark it on the 
irst day or simply did not bother to note the easy URL of the CRM On Demand 
(https://sso.crmondemand.com/router/logon.jsp), of users logging in for 
the irst time two weeks after you reset their passwords, and of course by then 
the temporary password has expired. It is the administrator's problem if a user is 
unable to log in to the system. A launch failure is never a good thing so we accept 
that it pays to take precautionary steps at the user level.
CRM On Demand issues the temporary URL and temporary password almost 
instantaneously, and it helps to trigger those password resets on launch day to 
exactly those users who can reliably be expected to login within the next couple of 
days. It would help you more to send a personal e-mail to all those users, stating the 
permanent URL of the application and their login ID format.

Steps 1-2-3: Go Live Out of the Box
[ 52 ]
Related to user friendliness is the CRM On Demand Help window that can popup 
when the user logs in. The technical page doesn't add any value to the end users 
and therefore you should consider disabling it in the user record at the time you are 
resetting the password. The Show Welcome Page on Sign In ield, if set to N will 
not display the CRM On Demand welcome page to your users when they login.
Ongoing support to users
Having gone live out of the box, it will not be long before users begin to raise 
requests and alarms about and around the CRM On Demand. As the data 
accumulates in your system and reports take a while longer to generate, users and 
you would likely see the need for a service request management system. To eat your 
own dog food is the hallmark of the professional, and to that end, we recommend 
that you use the service request functionality available in the system for you to 
receive and process service requests of your customers.
In the next chapter, we focus on the art of customizing the CRM On Demand 
application to meet our business needs.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the default sales, marketing, and service functions 
that come embedded as part of an out of the box CRM On Demand instance, went 
through some of the key objects that are available in the system to capture the CRM 
data, learned about turning on/off company-wide features, setting up users in the 
system, utilizing some of the predeined user roles available, and a list of activities 
to be performed to activate the users and go live with an out of the box CRM On 
Demand system. In the subsequent chapters, we will discuss in detail customizing 
the CRM On Demand system to meet any of your organization-speciic needs if the 
standard out of the box features we learned in this chapter are not good enough to 
meet your requirements.

CRM On Demand 
Customization
After your business has conceptualized a customer relationship as a proitable object 
of management, it expects the Customer Relationship Management system, that is, 
the CRM application software, to be it for the business. The reason you have bought 
CRM On Demand instead of building a CRM application in-house is because, as we 
learned in the preceding chapter, the out of the box CRM On Demand application 
delivers the software and functionalities that will meet the needs of your CRM 
organization. The CRM On Demand application is built to a world-class industry 
reference model of customer relationship management practice, and therefore, going 
live out of the box is quite common among its buyers as it meets most, if not all, of the 
business requirements for the introductory stage. In such a case, one will of course 
need to follow through on the newly introduced system to it it with the custom nuts 
and bolts required by the business. In some cases the business may require that the 
new CRM application be introduced with all the custom nuts and bolts in place before 
deploying it to the users. This exercise of coniguring the out of the box application 
(either after the introduction or as part of the introduction itself) and/or writing new 
external software that integrates with the application is called customization. CRM 
On Demand is designed to be extensively customized to the speciic needs of your 
CRM organization. CRM On Demand is unlike its peers in the industry in terms 
of both the features it delivers out of the box and the easy facilities it provides for 
modifying the application. As such, the terms coniguration and customization are 
fairly synonymous when you are implementing CRM On Demand.
www.allitebooks.com

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 54 ]
The objective of this chapter is to introduce the customizability available in the CRM 
On Demand application. To eficiently and effectively customize any given thing, 
one needs to know the art, design, and technology, in other words, the architecture 
of that thing. You are already aware of the architecture of your business and now 
you need to understand the architecture of the CRM On Demand application to 
be able to integrate it neatly to the requirements of your business. This process of 
integrating the two systems—that of the business system with its line and staff 
of "CRM" thinkers and doers with that of the electronic system, that is, the CRM 
application capable of high velocity collection, storage, processing, and publication 
of "CRM" data to and from both individual business people and other electronic 
software systems—usually involves customizing the business as well to adopt some 
of the CRM practices implicit in the CRM On Demand application.
It is the role of a good analyst to understand the business process as it stands 
today—and at the same time also retain the concept of lexibility—to determine 
a cost/beneit of which business processes can be adjusted to accommodate the 
application's best practices sans customization, as well as to determine which parts 
of the application speciically must change to meet the business need. Documented 
business processes are the foundation of good CRM project management. A 
description of the process of such an integration system is out of the scope of this 
book, but it sufices to note here that the overarching decision of the enterprise 
to buy the CRM On Demand application "off-the-shelf" instead of building an 
application in-house should guide every question you ask and every decision  
you make on the customization of the CRM On Demand application.
By the end of this chapter, you will know the following:
• 
The architecture of the CRM On Demand application
• 
The customizable components of the CRM On Demand application
The application architecture
CRM On Demand is an application software, used to consume and produce  
CRM-related data, by business users who are operating by processes that are  
deined by the enterprise. The following diagram is a representation of the logic  
of the CRM On Demand application. In this diagram, Data refers to the data model. 
Business Processes refers to the process model including the business objects, the 
user organization (of responsibilities and authorities), business rules, and worklow 
integrations with other systems. User refers to the interface model in the application, 
including the online and web services available to the user of the application.

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
If you are familiar with the Siebel Enterprise application software and its construction, 
the terminologies used in this chapter about the CRM On Demand application are 
not meant to be read in relation to those of the Siebel Enterprise application. The 
CRM On Demand application is a deployment of the Siebel Enterprise application 
with signiicant simpliications and enhancements of functionalities of the Siebel 
Enterprise application, to deliver it as SaaS. Speciically, the separations between the 
data, business, and UI layers that are visible and accessible in the Siebel Enterprise 
application are invisible in the CRM On Demand application. As such, the data layer 
that is distinct from the business layer is not a practical concept for administration of 
CRM On Demand.
Customizability
The three parts: namely the data model, business model, and the interface model that 
make the software are separable and are individual parts of the software. This means 
that, technically, each of them can be subject to customization.
The application software is a single piece of the CRM On Demand service; the 
hardware on which the software runs is the other piece. The hardware and the 
software together provide the quality of service, that is, the application's performance, 
reliability, and scalability. The CRM On Demand service does not have an automated 
hardware provisioning and therefore each of the three parts of the software has 
speciic limits to its customization. In the following sections, we will look at the 
customization limits of the three parts of the CRM On Demand software.

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 56 ]
The data model
The data model of CRM On Demand is not available for customization. However, it 
helps to understand the data management tools available to the administrator. The 
relevant sections in the Admin Homepage page of the application, are depicted in 
the following screenshot:
CRM On Demand deines the following two types of data:
• 
Transactional data
• 
Files
Files are stored in a separate ile system. Files are represented as attachments in CRM 
On Demand.
The database, data tables, columns, and rows that constitute the physical and 
logical storage and management of transactional data is out of the scope of the CRM 
On Demand application customization. Service allotments deine the amount of 
transactional records storage that is available to your organization.
Except executable iles, a ile can have any type of extension. A single ile cannot 
exceed 20 MB in size. Service allotments deine the amount of ile storage available 
to your organization. A central Attachments Management console is provided in the 
Content Management section of the administration page, to enable the administrator 
to manage the consumption of ile storage space.

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
Data management
A record that is deleted by a user is marked for actual purging from the database 30 
days from the date of deletion. The Deleted Items list has prebuilt display columns 
and these cannot be customized. The schedule of purging cannot be customized. The 
records in the Deleted Items column can be recovered. The ability to recover deleted 
items is a customizable feature.
The application provides prebuilt tools for the batch export, import, and deletion of 
data. The tools cannot be customized. The tools provide industry-standard facilities 
and options for the task of batch exports, imports, and deletions.
The process model
The process model comprises the object model, business rules, and the security 
model. The vast bulk of the process model is available for customization.
The following screenshot highlights the sections in the Admin Homepage page that 
are related to the process model of the application:

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 58 ]
Object model
The business objects and their inter-relationships constitute the object model. The 
object is also known as a record type. An object is one of two types; namely, the 
standard object and the custom object. While the standard objects are predeined, 
the custom objects, as their name implies, get their deinitions when you customize 
them. The names and display icons of all the objects can be customized, in all the 
activated languages.
An object comprises the main/parent object and its relationship with other/child 
objects. It would be useful to think of the business object as a collection of business 
components, with a main component, and its relationships with the other/child 
components. For example, the account object is a collection of the account component; 
it has an M:M relationship with the contact component, a 1:M relationship with the 
service request component, an M:M cardinality with the CustomObject1 component, 
a 1:M cardinality with the activity component, and so on. Similarly, the service 
request object is a collection of the service request component and its relations are  
1:M activity, 1:1 product, M:M CustomObject1, 1:1 account, 1:1 contact, and so on.
A business component is manifest by its ields. A component comprises key ields, 
other input ields, record auditing ields, and audit ields.
The standard objects include lead, activity, campaign, account, contact, opportunity, 
service request, business plan, objective, price list, insurance policy, insured party, 
inancial account, opportunity competitor, contact role, contact interests, service 
request team, vehicle, dealer, product samples, medical event, among many others 
totaling about 50 objects covering the various industries. The modeling of the 
standard objects cannot be customized.
The custom objects are devoid of any functional deinition and you give them 
business names and deinitions when you have conigured them as part of your 
application. The custom objects are available in speciied quantities depending on 
the type of CRM On Demand service that you buy; a single-tenant pod of CRM 
On Demand can be set to provide any required number of custom objects, while 
a multi-tenant pod provides up to 30 custom objects. The custom objects have 
two subtypes among them. The ones numbered 1 to 3 are prebuilt with an M:M 
cardinality with all the standard objects and themselves, and a 1:M cardinality  
with the custom objects numbered 4 and above. The custom objects numbered 4  
and above are prebuilt with a 1:M cardinality with all the standard objects and 
custom objects in the application.

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
In other words, the custom objects numbering from 1 to 3, have prebuilt intermediate 
tables, while the later custom objects are simpler in builds and are expected to be 
used as intermediate tables themselves if you need to construct an M:M cardinal 
relationship with custom objects. By the same token, for reports/analytics, the 
custom objects numbering from 1 to 3 have many prebuilt subject areas while the 
later custom objects have a single, comprehensive subject area that brings all the 
objects together. Understanding the business processes and business object needs 
before starting your project can ensure that the right processes, which require an 
M:M cardinality, are assigned to the right custom objects.
A business object is manifest by the Record Detail page, Record Edit page, Targeted 
Search page, and the home page; these pages are customizable.
A Record Detail page consists of the main/parent component record page, 
followed by sections of related information. Except the key ields, all the  
other input ields on the record page can be set to be a Required ield and/or 
 a Read-Only ield on that page.
The parent component record page form is a layout of two columns and six  
sections in which the ields are positioned. The form layout of 2 X 6 cannot be 
customized. Unused sections do not display on the screen. Each of the six sections 
can be customized to have section headings in every active language. Every object 
is prebuilt with one ield that can be inputted with 16,350 characters; the placement 
of this ield is customizable in the custom objects and is not customizable in the 
standard objects where its default position is at the bottom of the parent record page. 
A sample Customer Details page is shown in the following screenshot:

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 60 ]
Related information refers to views of records of the associated components and 
views of external/unlinked data (that is, web applets). The records are displayed 
in a list view. The list view displays ive records on a random sort, and a link to 
view the full list. The list view cannot be customized; however, the list columns can 
be customized to a maximum of 9 columns. The vertical sequence of the related 
information sections can be customized on every Record Detail page. There is no 
standard facility to customize the pool of related information; such a customization 
calls for the use of web applets, which can programmatically fetch the data from the 
various sources and provide the custom views.
In release 20, the related information sections can be opted to be 
displayed in a Tab view. The Tab view displays all the sections as 
tabs, in a line horizontally. The Tab view reduces the length of the 
Record Detail page and reduces the data that needs to be fetched 
when the Record Detail page is loaded. One downside of the Tab 
view is that as the number of sections exceed the horizontal space 
available, they automatically collapse into a drop-down icon at the 
right-hand side. See the last chapter in this book for details of the 
release 20 of CRM On Demand.
In general, related information refers to all those associated records that are  
non-mandatory to the business processing of the parent record. While components 
that have a 1:M and M:M relationship would have a section of their own as part of 
the related information, the components that have a 1:1 cardinality with the parent 
component can be either placed as a related information section or included in the 
parent record page. The placement of a 1:1 associated component in the Record 
Detail page would be dependent on the business rules and the security model 
that you plan to implement in your process model. To elaborate, if the associated 
1:1 component is a mandatory record without which the parent record is deemed 
incomplete for business processing, the placement on the parent record page is 
necessary to enforce the rule of creating or supplying that associated record before 
creating the parent record. On the other hand, placing it as related information and 
manual veriication by dedicated user/roles (as part of the security model) would 
well meet the requirements with its different eficiency.
Fields
A ield has a unique name in each language, a data type, a default value  
(either pre-default or post-default), a validation rule, a validation error message,  
and web service integration tags. An object is provided with relevant predeined 
ields and a limited quantum of custom ields, including a ixed quantity of ields 
that are indexed.
The set of ields for indexing cannot be customized.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Every object has its key ields, that is, user keys, which may be a single ield or a set of 
ields. The key ields are the deining ields of that object; the values of the key ields 
in a record provide a unique identity to that record. Duplicate records are identiied 
at the time of input based on the values in the key ields. The de-duplication feature is 
available in the standard objects of account, opportunity, lead, and service request. The 
de-duplication feature cannot be customized to apply to the other objects. The ields 
that are deined as the key ields for the object cannot be swapped with another ield.
The tabulation of the business objects and their key ields is given in the following 
table. This table does not list all the objects available in the CRM On Demand 
application. To illustrate, Opportunity Name and its Account Name constitute the 
key ields of an opportunity. The key ields of all objects are predeined and cannot 
be customized.
Another easy way to know the key ields of an object is to 
launch the Data Import wizard. The key ields will be listed 
on top of the irst wizard page!
The record auditing ields are a ixed set of ields that audit the user manipulation 
of the record. Examples of such ields are CreatedBy, ModifiedTimestamp, and 
CreatedByEmailAddress. These ields are updated by system worklows and can 
be displayed on the record page. The calculation logic of the record auditing ields 
cannot be customized.
The quantity of custom ields available is not the same across all objects. The 
tabulation of the quantity of custom ields by data type available in each object 
is given in the second table. Name and Integration Tag of a custom ield can be 
changed any number of times; however, the data type of a ield cannot changed  
after it is created.
Auditing ields of an object refer to the set of key ields and/or other input ields 
that you want audited. Every object can have a maximum of 35 ields marked for 
auditing. You can select, that is, customize, the set of ields for auditing. The columns 
of the Audit Trail section cannot be customized.

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 62 ]
External objects
The business processes of your CRM may require the users to access external 
systems from within the CRM On Demand application window. The access may be 
mediated by security features such as Single sign-on (SSO) and common identities 
stored across the two separated systems. The CRM On Demand integration point for 
such customization is the Custom Web Tabs and Global Web Applets links. The set 
of user object ields available for URLs and/or HTML in the Custom Web Tabs and 
the Global Web Applets links cannot be customized.
The following table lists the business objects and their corresponding key ields:
Name of the business object
Key fields
Account
Account Name and Location
Contact
First Name, Last Name, and Email
Product Category
Category Name
Product
Product Name
Opportunity
Opportunity Name and Account
Opportunity contact role
Opportunity Name and Contact Full Name
Opportunity product revenue, asset
Product
Campaign
Source Code
Campaign recipient
Campaign, Contact, and Source Code
Lead
First Name, Last Name, Company, and Email
Service request
SR Number
Solution
Title
Task, appointment, and note
Subject
CustomObjects 01 and higher
Name
Partner
Partner Name and Location
Price list
Price List Name
Business plan
Plan Name

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
The following table lists the quantity of custom ields available, by business object:
Record type/
Business object
Check 
Box
Currency
Date
Date/
Time
Integer
Multi-
select 
Picklist 
Number
Percent
Phone
Picklist
Text
(Long) 
Text
(Short) 
Web
Link
Account
35
80
25
25
35
10
33
30
10
100
30
45
100
Contact, 
opportunity
35
25
25
25
35
10
33
30
10
100
30
70
100
Lead, activity
35
25
25
25
35
10
33
30
10
100
30
45
100
Campaign, 
MedEd, solution, 
household, funds, 
portfolio, fund 
request, MDF 
request, SP request
35
25
25
25
35
0
33
30
10
100
30
45
100
Vehicle
70
50
60
50
70
0
33
30
10
100
30
45
100
Service request
35
25
25
25
35
10
68
60
30
200
60
105
100
Customobject 1-3
35
25
35
25
35
10
35
30
20
100
30
60
100
Dealer
70
105
60
50
70
0
35
30
20
100
30
60
100
Product 
35
25
25
25
35
0
35
30
20
100
30
60
100
Asset, revenue
35
25
25
25
35
0
68
60
30
200
60
105
100
User
35
25
35
25
35
0
35
30
20
100
30
60
100
Customobjects 4 
and higher
35
25
25
35
35
0
35
30
20
100
30
90
100
Industry-specific 
record types other 
than those listed in 
this table
35
25
25
35
35
0
35
30
20
100
30
90
100

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 64 ]
Business rules
Business rules refer to the policies and worklows to govern the user's production of 
business data. Examples of validations are: a lead must have a physical address, the 
opportunity owner's location must be less than 200 miles from the customer's address, 
the user cannot create a task record with a past due date, a contact must have either 
the date of birth or a valid phone number, the area and cause of a service request must 
not be changed after the service request is closed, Company Name must be minimally 
four characters long, and so on. Validations on ields, which have typed inputs, listing 
of values of a ield, default values for ields, cross-ields validations for record-level 
integrity, insistence of the state model of the record (that is, particular paths of the 
status) are ield-related rules that are meant to have custom content.
Worklow actions, be they instantaneous or time-based, are rules-based facilities 
that are meant to be deployed for your custom processes. Worklow actions include 
updating ield values, e-mail notiications, tasks scheduling, assignment of records to 
speciic users, and integration of the data with external systems.
The integration of the objects of the CRM On Demand application with the  
external objects/pages that are accessed via the Custom Web Tabs link can be  
tightly customized using the web link ields and web applets in the objects.
The list of values of the status ields of the activity and service request objects cannot be 
customized. The state model of the lead qualiication cannot be customized. For sales 
processes, the inal two stages of Closed/Won and Closed/Lost cannot be changed.
The hierarchy of territories, the hierarchy of the books of business, the opportunity 
product catalog, the assessment scripts for leads, opportunities, contact and service 
requests, the lead conversion rules, opportunity forecast rules, and the opportunity 
sales processes are the content that are meant to be customized to your organization. 
However, none of these rule engines can be customized.
Assignment rules for automated routing of the opportunity, lead, service request, 
and account records to speciic users, teams, and territories are examples of 
customizable content for the worklows. However, the Assignment Manager tool 
itself cannot be customized; for example, Assignment Manager stops evaluating 
rules once a match is found and you cannot customize this process.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
When you do want multiple rules to be evaluated before an 
assignment is made, you would use the worklows, with their 
sequences and ordered actions. In release 20, you can set a worklow 
to stop all subsequent worklows, and this at a simple level is nearly 
the same as how the Assignment Manager tool operates. For other 
details on release 20, see the Chapter 11, Help, Support Ecosystem, and 
Features in New Releases, in this book.
Security model
The security model refers to the accesses to the object, data, and application features, 
in what is called the user role, that is assigned to every user of the CRM On Demand 
application. User roles can be created and deinitions of the prebuilt user roles can  
be customized.
Apart from the mandatory user role, a user can be given accesses through four  
other ways: namely, the manager hierarchy, the team, groups, and the books of 
business. The deinition of each of these four access controls are predeined and 
cannot be customized.
Delegated user is another access control that is available in CRM 
On Demand. A user can delegate his/her access proiles to other 
users. The access to create data cannot be delegated.
The manager hierarchy refers to the linear organizational chart of the users, which 
is represented in the Reports-To ield of the user's object. A user cannot report to 
more than one manager, and a manager cannot report to a subordinate (that is, 
circular hierarchies are not permitted). The manager hierarchy is organization-wide 
and therefore the access applies over all the data in the system, independent of the 
business objects.
A team is deined at each object and is therefore a record-level access control. Teams 
created by users for a particular record apply to that particular record. The access to 
create and modify the teams is customizable. Team members may have differential 
accesses to the particular record, in terms of reading/editing/deleting that record 
as well as on the team itself. The team accesses are available for all the objects in the 
CRM On Demand application.

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 66 ]
A group is a simpler construct of the team, which applies across all the standard 
business objects. A group access is limited to the records that are owned by any one 
member of the group. It provides a common-owner access to the particular record to 
all the group members.
Groups were an early implementation of predetermined teams. 
By assigning an account or contact or opportunity to a group, the 
members of the group become automatically assigned to the team. 
Groups have generally been replaced by books of business and are 
not recommended for continued use as an access-control mechanism. 
Groups do offer an advantage in sharing calendars; however, groups 
allow you to provide several users with access to each other's calendar.
The books of business is a combination of a security object and a business object. 
A hierarchy of books can be set up, and a book can have only one parent book. A 
book has data and users of that book. The users can access that data with speciic 
rights. The cardinality of the book and the user is M:M and that of the book to data is 
M:M. A book need not contain data in it and can instead be an organizing folder or 
a general record for any other purpose; a book that is tagged to contain data cannot 
later be reverted.
A book hierarchy has its cost and beneit. A hierarchy is easy for 
access and worklow maintenance but it takes longer for the system 
to go through the hierarchy when searching for a record. At the 
user proile, a book can be set as default for searching, for each 
record type and/or for the entire system, and these facilities should 
be exploited if you are designing complex book structures.
The books administration section appears on the Admin Homepage page as Book 
Management. The following screenshot shows the administrative work in this 
section, including creating a book, its sub-books, and associating users for a book:

Chapter 3
[ 67 ]
The interface model
The CRM On Demand application has multiple interfaces for the users. Every  
one of these interfaces is predeined and cannot be customized. The interfaces  
are as follows:
• 
The entire application, online via Internet Browsers IE7 and higher, Firefox 3 
and higher, and Safari 5x on iOS
• 
The transactional data and application data, via web services using HTTPS 
SOAP XML

CRM On Demand Customization
[ 68 ]
Online interface
The browser-based interface for the online application contains four elements in the 
window; namely the global header, the action bar, the tables (tabs), and the global 
footer. The content of each of the four elements can be customized for every user 
role. Thereafter, every individual user can customize/personalize the action bar and 
the tables, provided the user's role has access to personalization. The four elements 
in themselves cannot be customized.
Web services interface
The web services interface provides Web Services Description Language (WSDL) 
iles and schema iles by a business object. The WSDLs are available in two notations: 
namely WS 1.0 and WS 2.0, which differ in the kind of data operations they support. 
The WSDLs are available in two representations for each of the business object ields: 
namely the custom tags WSDL and the generic tags WSDL. The schema iles are 
available in the WS 1.0 notation.
The CRM On Demand application WSDLs cannot be customized.
The access to the WSDL iles is an independent, role-level privilege, that is, a user 
who has access to web services does not automatically get access to the WSDLs.
Special interfaces
The CRM On Demand application provides additional, speciic interfaces that utilize 
the published web services and other non-published web services that are accessible 
to Oracle Corporation alone. Such interfaces include the following:
• 
The core CRM model application, ofline, in an MS Excel-based utility, using 
web services for synchronization
• 
The core CRM model application, online, on designated Mobile  
device platforms
• 
The core CRM model application, online, as widgets
• 
The core CRM model application, integrated synchronization with MS 
Outlook, and Lotus Notes (personal information manager)

Chapter 3
[ 69 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned the scope of customization that is available across 
the CRM On Demand application. We began with the application architecture to 
understand the structures in the application. The CRM On Demand application has 
three parts, that is, the data model, the process model, and the interface model. We 
then proceeded to understand the scope of customization available in each of the 
three individual parts.
Understanding the scope of customization is essential to eficient customization of 
the application to it it to your business requirements.
In the subsequent chapters we will learn the details of the customizable elements, 
including how to customize them.


Application Customization
As you saw in the previous chapter, the CRM On Demand application logic consists 
of data, business process, and user layers. The spotlight of this chapter is to detail 
out the level of customization possible at the data and user interface layer of CRM 
On Demand. The chapter focuses on customizations at the business process and user 
layer. By the end of this chapter, you will know the following:
• 
The level of customization possible at the data and user interface layers
• 
Steps to perform customization
• 
Best practices associated with it
For better clarity, this chapter is divided into three major sections, which are 
explained as follows:
• 
Addressing customizations at data model level: Here, we talk about 
customizing the CRM On Demand data model
• 
Layout-level customization: Here, we discuss surfacing the changes to the 
underlying data model to the end users
• 
Other assorted customizations: Here, the focus is on customizing any other 
conigurable user interface section in CRM On Demand

Application Customization
[ 72 ]
Data model-level customization
We have seen in the earlier chapters that CRM On Demand provides, by default, a 
range of objects such as accounts, contacts, leads, and so on to store and retrieve your 
vital CRM data. Though these objects look independent, your CRM database is not 
complete without them being related to each other. For example, information about 
the companies that your organization deals with can be stored in the account object 
and the contacts in these companies can be stored in the contact object. Though these 
accounts and contacts, as standalone, are valuable sources of information in your 
CRM database, typically, your needs doesn't stop here. You might be interested to 
know the list of contacts with whom you deal with in each of the companies. This 
apparently requires a third object "account-contact" to capture the relationship 
between accounts and contacts. The third object "account-contact" can be a simple 
one, which just stores the accounts and contacts to establish the relationship or it 
can enrich it with additional information at the relationship level such as the role 
a particular contact plays in relation to an account. The same contact can play the 
role of decision-maker for a company but an inluencer for another company which 
makes the relationship between accounts and contacts as M to M.
As a company administrator, you should be able to access the entity-relationship 
diagram of the CRM On Demand application from support.oracle.com. In the 
support portal under the Knowledge section, search for CRM On Demand:  
Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD) for CRM On Demand Industry Editions  
to get access to it.
It is an important point to note that you don't have lexibility to customize the  
default relationship between the CRM On Demand objects but you do have 
lexibility to add ields to some of the relationship objects such as the one that  
relates accounts and contacts.
In addition to this, CRM On Demand also provides you a set of custom objects (1 to 
15) to capture some of your business entities that are not available out of the box. For 
example, a standard CRM On Demand object model doesn't have a standard object 
called orders but you can rename one of the available custom objects to orders and 
use it to store order information in CRM On Demand.

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
The custom objects numbered 1 to 3 are prebuilt with an M:M cardinality with all 
the standard objects. They have an M:M cardinality among themselves, and 1:M 
cardinality with the custom objects numbered 4 and above. Similarly, the custom 
objects numbered 4 and above have 1:M cardinality with all the objects including 
among themselves. It is important that you understand the difference in the 
relationship between custom objects "1 to 3" and "4 and above".
You can smartly use the custom objects to alter the relationship between any two 
standard objects or between a standard object and a custom object or between two 
custom objects. For example, the standard data model deines the relationship 
between contact and service requests as one-to-many, which is the most common 
scenario where you have multiple service requests coming from a single contact. But 
let us say your business situation demands a many-to-many relationship as you may 
like to associate the same service request from many of your contacts possibly due 
to the reason that all of them have similar issue on your products/services. Though 
the prebuilt On Demand data model doesn't provide the lexibility to handle this, 
you can introduce a custom object (4 and above) as an intermediate object between 
account and service requests there by altering the relationship between service 
requests and contacts as M:M from 1:M.
Adding, modifying, and deleting ields
As you saw in the earlier chapters, standard On Demand objects come with a wide 
set of standard ields that are ready to use. In addition to these, there are precreated 
custom ields that can be used for any of your customization needs. Though the 
custom ields are precreated at the On Demand database level, you have to explicitly 
add the ield to make it available for your customization needs.
Deleting the ield (standard as well as custom) is not possible in CRM On Demand, 
so think twice before adding a new custom ield to avoid cluttering your system  
with too many unused custom ields. Field names are sorted by alphabetical order  
in the administrative screens of CRM On Demand, so if there are unused custom  
(or standard) ields, they can be renamed to a convention (typically preixed with 
ZZ) that pushes the ield to the end of the list and thereby keep your ield list concise. 
Fields can be "recycled"; but as in any DB model, be wary of historical data residing 
in ields planned for re-use. Renamed standard ields may show in default reports.

Application Customization
[ 74 ]
To add a ield, say Region, to a standard account object, go to to Admin | 
Application Customization | Account | Account Field Setup and click on the New 
action. This opens the screen that is shown in the following screenshot to capture the 
properties of the ield to be created. Note that before you start creating new ields, 
you should check whether the ields are available in the list of preconigured CRM 
On Demand ields. Start creating new ields only if you don't ind them. Also, if the 
ield is going to be used heavily in lists, search, or in real-time reporting, ensure you 
use an indexed ield for optimal system performance. Indexed custom ields are 
preconigured and available in the system with preix "indexed". As the number of 
indexed ields is limited, use them judiciously.
The Display Name textbox of the ield obviously takes the value Region. The 
checkbox Mark for Translation assists you to overwrite the Display Name value as 
well as ield validation error messages in other languages if you intend to conigure 
the system in multiple languages.
If you like to make the ield as mandatory in the CRM On Demand data entry form, 
mark it as Required. Note that designating a ield as mandatory here makes the 
ield mandatory in all the standard/custom layouts that you create. If you want to 
selectively make it mandatory only for a designated layout of one or more roles, 
don't make it mandatory here but make it mandatory in the appropriate layout.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
If the ield is only for displaying information and assuming there is a way to 
determine the region on the basis of the selected account's country using ield 
default, you can set it as Read-Only.
By selecting Copy Enabled, we determine whether the ield value has to be copied 
when we perform a record-copy action at record level.
As you learned in the previous chapter, On Demand provides a wide variety of ield 
types such as, Checkbox, Currency, Long Text, Short Text, and so on; and depending 
on your needs, you can chose the right one. Once a ield type is selected, it cannot be 
modiied later. In our example of adding a custom ield named Region, the obvious 
choices are Short Text, Long Text, or Picklist. Selection between Short Text and Long 
Text is determined by your ield length requirements, whereas choice of Picklist is 
determined by whether the ield has the predetermined, limited set of values or not.
The Default Value textbox helps to default the ield value with a default region. For 
example, let us assume that predominantly your customers are from America, you 
can then default region to America. If you select Post Default, America is defaulted 
after you hit the Save button in the account data entry form, whereas if you haven't 
checked it, it is prepopulated and surfaced in the new account data entry form. The 
user always has an option to overwrite. Irrespective of whether you have selected 
Post Default or not, if the user overwrites the information by keying in a value for 
the ield in the form, the keyed-in value takes precedence over the default value that 
you set at the coniguration level. 
Field Validation helps to build some validations on the ield. Assuming you decided 
to keep the ield as Short Text instead of Picklist so that the user can key in any value, 
but at the same time you want to enforce that the user uses only capital letters, you 
can include a validation rule similar to the following:
(FindOneOf ([<Region>], "qwertyuiopasdfghjklzxcvbnm") = 0)

Application Customization
[ 76 ]
The Field Validation lookup window provides a clever editor to write your ield 
validation rules. This window is shown in the following screenshot:
The steps to write the ield validation rules are as follows:
1. Select the findNoneOf()function from the functions drop-down menu.
2. Select the Region ield from the Account Fields drop-down menu.
3. Expand the validation as provided in the code snippet.
4. Check whether the syntax is valid using the Check Syntax action.
5. If you need any additional help on syntax or some sample expressions for 
reference, click the Syntax Guide and Sample Expressions links.
As you have observed in the previous validation syntax, if the validation expression 
evaluates to true, that is, if there are no lower-case letters found in the ield, the 
system doesn't throw an error; but on the contrary, if the validation expression 
evaluates to false, the system throws an error to the end user.
These steps complete the process of writing the ield validation rules for any of the 
custom or standard ields. Writing advanced/complex ield validation in CRM On 
Demand is a knack by itself and it can only be built with practice and experience 
over a period of time.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
If the ield is of type Picklist, save the ield, go back to the page that list all the ields, 
and click the Edit Picklist link to add the new Picklist values. The pop-up window 
that appears on clicking the Edit Picklist link is shown in the following screenshot:
You can add new ields, order the sequence in which the ields in the drop-down 
should be listed, and mark the Picklist values for translation to overwrite the Picklist 
values for different languages. Although you cannot delete an existing Picklist value 
such as an existing ield, you can disable them and suppress the disabled ield using 
the Hide Disabled action.
The easiest way to manage translations is to use the Rename Fields action in the 
Account Fields page, where in a single window you can provide the translated 
label values for all the ields depending on the language that you have selected 
at the top. You still have to get to the Edit Picklist window to provide translated 
values for validation error messages and Picklist values; this is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Application Customization
[ 78 ]
Similar to the way you manage ields of account object, you can manage the ields 
speciic to the relationship between two objects such as account and contact, account 
and account, account and team by going to Admin | Application Customization 
| Account (Object) | Field Management. Note that there are inconsistencies in the 
system in terms of the lexibilities to add custom ields in the relationship object. For 
example, you can add custom ields in Account Contact and Account Relationship 
whereas it doesn't provide an option to add a custom ield in Account Team ield 
setup. You can observe these inconsistencies across the objects. As an administrator, 
you have to be familiar with these limitations. Also, note that the custom ields that 
are added to the relationship objects doesn't appear in CRM On Demand reporting/
analytics. Don't be surprised if it is made available in your current version of CRM 
On Demand as Oracle is making consistent progress in removing these limitations 
in every new release. If you are stuck with this limitation, you can consider building 
a custom relationship between these standard objects using one of the available 
custom objects.
Cascading ields
Cascading Picklists provide you with a facility to limit the related Picklist values on 
the basis of the selected parent Picklist value. For example, assume that depending on 
Account Industry, you want to limit the value of Account Priority, then you can deine 
a cascading Picklist deinition to enforce the same. The steps to implement cascading 
Picklist constraints are shown in the following screenshot and they can be accessed 
from Admin | Application Customization | Account | Cascading Picklist:

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
In Step 1, select Parent Picklist as Account Industry and Related Picklist as 
Priority. In Step 2, deine the constraints. The constraints here are basically to set 
the applicable values for Priority depending on the selected industry. As you can 
see in the following screenshot, for the Aerospace & Defence Industry, we have 
constrained the applicable priorities as Low and Medium. You can do the same for 
each of the industry Picklist values in the same screen; these settings are shown in 
the following screenshot:
The last step is a conirmation page which lists the details of constraints that you 
have selected for your review and on hitting the Finish button, the deinitions are 
saved in the system and the constraints are enforced to users in account's data entry 
forms; the inal step is shown in the following screenshot:

Application Customization
[ 80 ]
Note that for Related Picklist Values, you cannot have two Parent Picklist Values. 
Similar to the cascading Picklist deinition for main objects, you can establish similar 
constraints between Picklists at related objects such as Account Relationship. Note 
that this cascading Picklist feature is not available for all related objects. For example, 
for account object, it is only available for Account Relationship. You are limited by 
what is exposed by CRM On Demand at this stage.
Layout management
Under layout management, we would cover customization of different types of 
layouts such as page layouts, search layouts, homepage layouts, lists layouts,  
and so on.
The standard CRM On Demand application comes with a set of layouts for each of 
the objects. You can create custom layouts by copying the available standard layout. 
Typically, additional layouts would be created for the following reasons:
• 
To expose your custom ields that is not present in standard layout.
• 
To create role-speciic layouts. For example, the layout that you would like 
to present for a sales representative could be different from the layout for a 
sales manager. Sales manager may have visibility to additional ields, such 
as account level revenue igures, may have privileges to modify the account 
status ield, and so on; whereas a sales representative should not be seeing 
the account level revenue information nor should they be able to modify the 
account status.
Page layout
Page layout determines the ields exposed in the New/Edit screen in standard/
related/custom objects in CRM On Demand. As we discussed in the previous chapter, 
you have to be aware of the fact that page layouts are two-column layouts with a 
maximum six sections. You don't have the lexibility to add more columns or more 
sections but you can place your ields in the desired sections in the layout. Page layouts 
can be static or dynamic. Dynamic layouts are explained in detail in the next section.
Under Admin | Application Customization | Account (Object) | Page Layout 
Management, you can create/modify/delete the page layouts for the selected main 
object or any of the related information objects. The steps involved in creating/
modifying the page layout for the main object are explored in the following sections.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
In Step 1, give a brief name and a detailed description for the page layout. 
Description is used to capture the necessity of creating a custom layout instead of 
re-using the standard layouts or any of the already existing layouts. If you create 
layouts for different roles, then the recommended best practice is to preix the layout 
name with the role name for easy manageability in the future; Page Layout Wizard is 
shown in the following screenshot:
In Step 2, determine whether you would like to make any of the ields in the object 
Required or Read-Only at the layout level. If the ields are made as Required or 
Read-Only at the ield deinition stage, you cannot modify those properties here.  
So unless you like to make the ields Required or Read-Only across all layouts, 
don't set these constraints at the object ield while deining; Step 2 is shown in the 
following screenshot:

Application Customization
[ 82 ]
In Step 3, move the available ields to any of the available sections in the two-column  
layout. Note that you cannot increase or decrease the number of columns in the 
layout or use a custom style for page layouts. The mandatory ields deined in  
Step 2 or in the Object ield deinition have to be added to one of the page layout 
sections. If not, then the system throws an error when you try to save the layout 
deinition. Note that the Description ield available in most of the objects to capture 
large text inputs from the user always appears at the bottom of the screen layout 
and its location is ixed. You don't have an option to customize it. Step 3 is shown  
in the following screenshot:
In Step 4, determine the list of related information sections that you like to  
display under the main object. All applicable and related objects are listed on the 
left-hand side and it is predetermined by the entity-relationship diagram that we 
had discussed in the beginning of the chapter. If you move them to the Available 
Information section, the section would be available for the user and users interested 
in the related information can add it to their screen using the Edit Layout button 
available in the record Detail page. If you move them to the Displayed Information 
section, the information is displayed by default to the users in the record Detail page 
and users can hide it using the Edit Layout button available in the record Detail 
page. Step 4 is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
As you see in the following screenshot, the Account Detail section is the layout for 
the main object and the Contacts section is the layout for the related information 
section. When you drill down to one of the selected contacts, you would then be 
taken to the Contact Detail page where contact would be the main object and related 
accounts would be presented as child objects.

Application Customization
[ 84 ]
In Step 5, you can select the Related Information Layout option applicable for each 
of the selected Related Information Section names. This is to customize the ields 
that are listed in the related information section. The related information layout can 
be a standard one or any of the customized layouts that you have created. Step 5 is 
shown in the following screenshot:
To create a customized related information layout, go to Admin | Application 
Customization | Account | Page Layout Management; you can ind the list of 
related information sections available for customization under the Account Related 
Information Layout link. The next screenshot shows this link for an Account object. 
Note that not all the ields deined in the main object are available for display here. 
For example, under the Contacts section of the account object, you may not ind all 
the contact ields available for display. Also, note that the number of ields that can be 
displayed in Related Information Section is limited to 9. Unlike the ive-step process 
used to deine the page layouts for the main object, deining the Related Information 
Layout page is a simple, two-step process where in Step 1, you provide a name for 
the customized layout and in Step 2, you select a list of relationship-speciic ields that 
you would like to display under Related Information Section.

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
If the data displayed in Related Information Section stores any relation-speciic 
information, you can deine a detailed page layout for the same by going to Admin 
| Application Customization | Account | Page Layout Management. As you can 
see in the following screenshot, on clicking the Edit link, the application opens the 
related information page details, whereas if you click on the Last Name link, you 
would then be taken to Contact Detail page:

Application Customization
[ 86 ]
We will discuss a special type of applet called web applets in Chapter 8, Web Services 
Integration. Note that until you link these layouts to a use role, the user will not be 
able to see these layouts. The steps involved in linking the layout to the user role will 
be discussed extensively in Chapter 5, Business Process Management.
Dynamic layouts
Dynamic layouts are a special type of layout that change the layout of the screen on 
the ly depending on the selected Picklist value by the user. For example, the kind of 
information that you capture for a service request of a speciic type of product, say 
credit cards, could be different from say mortgage. Presenting all the ields of a credit 
card and mortgage in the same form would make it cumbersome for the end users to 
ill in the relevant ields depending on the product selected.
Dynamic layouts addresses this problem by providing a facility to dynamically 
change the layouts depending on the value of the driving Picklist ield the user 
selects. The driving Picklist values are predetermined by CRM On Demand for every 
object and cannot be changed. You can create dynamic layouts by going to Admin | 
Application Customization | Account | Dynamic Layout Management. Creating 
dynamic layout is a two-step process where in Step 1, you assign a name for the 
dynamic layout and in Step 2, you select the applicable page layout for each of the 
driving Picklist values. These steps are shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
The predeined driving Picklists for the standard objects, industry-speciic 
objects, and custom objects are available in the CRM On Demand help-text 
reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/
dynamicpagelayoutshelp.html.
Note that the combination of dynamic layouts along with the role-based layouts is 
very powerful and is useful to meet many of your data visibility needs. There is a 
wide spectrum of options available to you, such as the following:
• 
A single standard layout for all users
• 
Different layouts for people falling under different roles
• 
Different layouts for different type of records classiied by the Record  
Type ield
• 
Different layouts for every combination of role and records classiied by the 
Record Type ield
Depending on your needs, you should be able to choose the right option for  
your deployment.
Search layouts
The information stored in CRM On Demand should be easily accessible to the end 
users for their day-to-day needs. You can locate records in the CRM database by 
using the Search option in the left-hand side, navigation bar. Also, we can locate 
records by using the Advanced option that is available in the Search section, by 
creating predeined lists, or by using the lookup icon when you intend to search  
and associate records with other records.
The Search ield layout management provides the facility to customize these 
aspects. The Search layout for every object can be conigured by going to Admin | 
Application Customization | Account | Account Search Layout.

Application Customization
[ 88 ]
It is a three-step process, where you deine the name and description of the  
Search layout in Step 1, and the list of ields by which you would like to search  
in the left-hand side navigation bar on the click of the Search lookup window  
in Step 2. These steps are shown in the following screenshot:
In Step 3, you can deine the list of ields that you would like displayed when search 
results are presented to the users. Note that in Lookup Window, the maximum 
number of ields that can be displayed is restricted nine and in the Search Results 
page, in addition to those nine ields, you can add 11 more ields limiting the total 
number of ields to 20.

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
As you can see in the previous screenshot, in a standard Search Results page, the 
ields that you selected in the search layout, such as Account Name, Location, 
Priority, Account Sub Type, Industry, and Owner are displayed. But in the account 
lookup window, the standard ields Account Name, Location, and Main Phone 
# are displayed even though we have selected the same set of ields for Lookup 
Window and Search Results Fields. The difference is due to the fact that you have 
checked the Conigure Lookup window with default ields checkbox. If you do not 
check this checkbox, the ields that are conigured in the standard Search Results 
page would be displayed in the lookup window too.
Note that for optimal performance, use indexed ields when deining your targeted 
search ields. Indexed ields are displayed in green text. Indexed ields that are also 
case insensitive are displayed in blue text. It is important to use indexed ields for 
ields that are expected to be queried often. In implementations where the number of 
records runs in the thousands, you may end up with performance issues if you use 
default text ields for Search instead of indexed ields.

Application Customization
[ 90 ]
Homepage and Action Bar layout
When you click any of the object's tabs that is displayed in CRM On Demand, you will 
be taken to the homepage of the object. Similar to the Record Detail page layout, the 
homepage layout is again a two-column layout and the applets that you can surface 
in these columns are limited by a set of applets provided by CRM On Demand. The 
set of applets can vary depending on the object. Creation of a custom homepage is 
fairly straightforward; here, you would arrange the list of applets in either of the two 
columns available. These steps are shown in the following screenshot:
All Sections contains the list of all the available applets provisioned by CRM 
On Demand along with any other custom applet that you have created. We will 
discuss extensively about custom applets in Chapter 8, Web Services Integration. 
When you move these applets to Available Sections, these applets would be made 
available for the user and they can surface the desired applets by arranging them 
in their homepage using the Edit Layout button, provided the user has Personalize 
Homepages privilege to modify the homepage layouts in their role deinition. In 
line with the previous customization settings, you can ind Account Homepage 
displayed accordingly. Homepage layouts can be customized by going to Admin | 
Application Customization | Account | Homepage Layout Management. Account 
Homepage is displayed in the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
Similar to object homepage layout customization, the homepage that is displayed 
when logging into CRM On Demand under the Home tab can also be customized 
by going to Admin | Application Customization | Application Setup | My 
Homepage Layout. The steps involved in displaying it are exactly same as the object 
layout customization.
The list of applets displayed in the left-hand side navigation bar can also be 
customized by going to Application Customization | Action Bar Layout. The 
standard applets that you can pick and chose to display in the left-hand side 
navigation bar are limited to the predeined set of applets provisioned by CRM On 
Demand but you create custom applets wherever there is a need.
List management
Lists provide a simple way for the users to get a set of frequently accessed records 
on the basis of a predeined query criteria. You can create a list by clicking on New 
under the Object Home Page | <Object> List applet. The list that you create as an 
administrator can be made available for all users, for users belonging to a speciic 
role, or only to yourself.
Under Admin | Application Customization | Account | List Access & Order, you 
can customize the availability of these lists in the List applet displayed in the object 
homepage. The list management is role-speciic, where on selection of the role, all 
lists that are created for this role are listed under the All Lists section. You can make 
the desired lists available for the role. When you move them to the Show in Short 
List section, these lists would be available in the List applet in the object homepage.

Application Customization
[ 92 ]
As you see in the following example, all the available lists excluding one are made 
available to this role and a small subset is made available under Show in Short List, 
which is displayed under the homepage applet. You can access the rest of the deined 
lists using the Manage Lists link:
Miscellaneous application customization
There are a few other miscellaneous customizations that you can perform by  
going to Admin | Application Customization. The object names can be changed 
under Admin | Application Customization | Application Setup | Customize 
Record Types.
As you can see in the following screenshot, apart from specifying the Singular, 
Plural, and Short names (used in the tabs), you can also chose a custom icon for each 
of the objects. A list of the available icons are displayed on clicking magnifying glass:
Similarly, translated values for the object can be provided by selecting the 
appropriate language in the translation drop-down box.

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
CRM On Demand provides a facility to audit changes in the ield value of the 
records. You can customize the ields that you like to audit by going to Admin | 
Application Customization | Account | Field Audit Setup. Auditing is available 
only for certain record types. For some of the record types, by default, the system 
turns on auditing and for others you may have to explicitly turn on auditing. 
Maximum number of ields that can be audited is limited to 35, but you can 
request customer care to add more ields but note that it dampens the application 
performance. A list of objects and ields audited by default for each of the objects is 
available in the CRM On Demand help-text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/customizingaudittrailhelp.html.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned the scope of application customization that is available 
across the CRM On Demand application. We began with the object-relationship 
customization, followed by customization of various types of layouts such as page 
layouts, search layouts, homepage layouts, and also touched upon how to customize 
miscellaneous user interfaces.
Understanding the scope of customization is essential to effectively customize the 
application and meet your business needs. We haven't touched some of the elements 
of application customization such as web applets, homepage custom reports, as it is 
more apt to go over them in the relevant chapters that follow.


User Access Controls
An organization is essentially a structure of people, each of whom has designated 
responsibilities and the requisite authority to maintain those responsibilities. The 
CRM organization in your business includes the swathe of people from the chief 
executive to the billing executive, with service technicians, marketing directors, 
sales managers, campaign executives, call centre agents, salespersons, external 
consultants, and many other line and staff people in between, each of whom 
expects to have access to the CRM information system in order to perform their 
work. The CRM organization might include people such as system auditors, 
report writers, and trainers. Automated integration between the CRM system and 
other information systems (be that such systems are internal to your business or 
external publicly available services) would introduce machines as users of the CRM 
system. The objective of this chapter is to learn to customize the CRM On Demand 
application to it the structure of your CRM organization. The collection of users is 
the CRM organization entity, a.k.a. organizational chart. Among other things you 
would want to differentiate between what the various staff do and functions they 
need to perform, and therefore what their role is in the organization, what the staff 
need to see (or not see) and therefore their access to view the data within the CRM 
system. In Chapter 3, CRM On Demand Customization, we looked at the concept of 
CRM staff. This chapter will go into detail about how to build the system for the 
staff in terms of their business functions, data visibilities, and access rights.
The users of the system may include machines as well as humans. Some organizational 
charts may admit to having no machines in their CRM business process, stipulating 
that every conduct of the process be the responsibility and authority of a speciic 
human. With the advent of industry and business-speciic mark-up languages, and 
increased computing power leading to better quality of data, a host of web services 
and computing capabilities allow for reliable machines in the business processing. 
Some organizations may thus deine a great number of machines in the CRM processes 
in conjunction with humans. The deinition therefore is of user identities (user ID), and 
the CRM system/organization is simply the collection of user IDs.

User Access Controls
[ 96 ]
In a large organization where a particular job may be divided among multiple user 
IDs for reasons of eficiency and scale, we see the need for a common Job Title to 
identify the different user IDs with the same quantum and quality of work. When 
the work is organized at a larger scale, the Job Titles and other demarcations such as 
Divisions and Regions of the many user IDs would coalesce into business user roles. 
For example, the CRM organization of a large multinational company may deine 
a business role of the Regional Field Salesperson, which is applied commonly to its 
300 salespersons that are each assigned separate regions of their own and who are 
ield based (in contrast to being based at a telecom centre). In this case, the 300 user 
IDs would all have the same business user role, however their individual access to 
the data in the system would be mediated by other controls that represent the region, 
the ield type, and the sales work. The controls become extensive if the regions 
overlap or if the ield type responsibility overlaps with that of the telesales type of 
responsibility, or if the selling work overlaps with other responsibilities, and so on.
In this chapter we will learn about the following:
• 
The deinition of the user ID
• 
The accesses to data for a user ID
• 
The deinition of the user role
By the end of this chapter you will be able to deine and build user IDs, user 
roles, groups, books of business, and access proiles to operate on individual or 
hierarchies of books of business, teams, and user IDs.
The user ID
In an ideal case the CRM organization is composed of user IDs each with a unique 
non-overlapping set of business responsibilities and authorities. At the other 
extreme of the organizational ideal is the communal one where all users have access 
to all data, with no distinct responsibilities and authorities amongst them. These 
two theoretical extremities illustrate the concept of the user ID. A user ID is either 
an owner or a non-owner of data. The non-owner is labeled as "default user" or 
"unrelated user". Thus a user ID has either owner access or the default access to any 
given data. A user ID does not have both owner access and default access to any 
given data. Where the user ID is the owner of the data, the owner access is applied, 
and where the user ID is not the owner of the data the default access is applied. The 
owner access and default access being two separate deinitions for a user ID, it is 
conceivable to have the same access for both ownership and non-ownership, or for 
the owner access to be "less" than the default access. The user ID merely establishes 
the ownership on the data, while the access establishes what operations can be done 
in either case (of ownership and non-ownership).

Chapter 5
[ 97 ]
A user ID is sustainable in the system only if it has its owner/default access 
deinitions for the entire data set in the system. The collection of owner access 
deinitions across all the objects is called an owner access proile. The collection  
of default access deinitions across all the objects is called a default access proile.
In the CRM On Demand object model, the Service Request 
does not mandate an owner. However, you can customize 
to make ownership mandatory for SR records.
The Access Proile Management section of the User Management and Access 
Controls section of the Administration page is shown in the following screenshot:
An example access proile creation, through the Access Proile Wizard, is shown in 
the following series of screenshots.
The Access Proile Wizard provides two main steps. Step 1 sets the basic properties 
of the access proile in terms of its name, whether the proile is to be active/available 
or disabled, whether it is to be available in the lists of access proiles for team access 
and for book access (see the Team access and Book access sections for more details).

User Access Controls
[ 98 ]
Step 2 of the Access Proile Wizard lists all the objects available in your CRM On 
Demand application:
For each of the objects in step 2, you would also set the access levels for their  
child/related objects. Clicking on the Related Information link in each line item,  
will show you the page that lists the child objects for that parent object. Here you  
can set the accesses for the child objects.
This is a critical piece that should be systematically documented in 
the design. Among the coniguration templates that are available 
in the CRMOD Support portal, the template for the User Access 
Controls is comprehensive. It has the work sheets to capture all the 
details of an access proile.
The following screenshot shows the Related Information section for the Account 
parent object:

Chapter 5
[ 99 ]
Manager hierarchy
A hierarchy of user IDs is a common form of organization. If you have enabled the 
manager hierarchy in your company proile then the manager access will apply to the 
data accesses of every user ID in your organization. The manager access operates on 
the basis of the Reports-To ield in the proiles of all the user IDs of the organization. 
The manager access operates independently of whether a given manager user ID is 
active or inactive in the system. A manager gets access to all the data that is accessible 
to his/her subordinates. The manager's owner access proile will apply on all data that 
becomes accessible to the manager by virtue of the hierarchy.
A manager user has the facility to ilter the data by individual 
subordinate, in the targeted search, advanced search, and lists.
User group
A group of some user IDs sharing all their data may be found in some small 
organizations. If you have enabled the group assignment in your company proile 
then the group access will apply to the data accesses of the user IDs that are included 
in the user groups. A user ID can be a member of only one user group. There can be 
any number of user groups in the organization.
All member user IDs of a user group gain owner access to the records that are owned 
by any one of the member user ID. Each member user ID of a user group exercises 
their personal default access proile over the records that are not owned by the user 
group (not owned by any of the member's user IDs).
The group assignment access operates prospectively. When a user ID gets added  
to a user group the user ID does not gain owner access to the group's prior records 
but only gains owner access to the records that are produced from the time of joining 
the group.

User Access Controls
[ 100 ]
The accesses to data
A user ID has the following accesses to any given record:
• 
Create/add association to another record
• 
Read/view/inherit primary
• 
Edit (or update)
• 
Delete/remove association with another record
• 
Add/remove association to other user IDs (team)
• 
Add/remove association to other data access controllers (books of business)
The create access is notionally part of the owner access as the user ID that creates 
a record becomes its irst owner. For business and commerce, authoring new data 
(record) automatically implies additional responsibility and downstream authority for 
the owner, for a duration that is determined by the lifespan of that record. Therefore 
it is common to rationalize the authority to create such primary data as accounts, 
partners, plans and the like, in order to ensure a high quality of "master" data.
An organization may need to restrict reading access to data to the owner of that 
data, and/or leave the decision on publication of that data in the hands of the owner 
of that data. The trivial case is of the user ID having access to read all the records. 
Some organizations might restrict reading access to speciic ields of the record. Such 
restrictions are normally designed over speciic types of data and to speciic types 
of staff. Such normalization of data accesses and users leads to the concept of user 
roles. In CRM On Demand, while the read access for any given record is captured 
in the owner and default access proile deinitions, the extent of reading access, that 
is whether the user can read all the records and/or whether all the ields of a record 
(also known as visibility) are captured in the user role deinition.
The View/Inherit Primary accesses are deined for the records that are related/
child to the reference parent record. Both "View" and "Inherit Primary" imply that 
on the record Detail page where the related/child records are listed, the user ID 
will have edit and/or read-only and/or delete access to those child records based 
on the access given for that particular object in its parent-level deinition. For 
example, for the Opportunity records that are child/related to an account record, 
a "View/Inherit Primary" access to Opportunity child records under the account 
access deinition implies that the user ID will be able to edit and/or read-only 
and/or delete those child Opportunity records based on the setting at the parent 
Opportunity Access deinition.

Chapter 5
[ 101 ]
View and Inherit Primary
The View and Inherit Primary accesses are different when the user 
role does not have access to read all the records of the object. Inherit 
Primary provides access to merely owned/related user records, in 
the form of child lists, if the user role does not have access to read all 
the records of the object, whereas the view provides access to all the 
records, in the form of child lists, even if the user role does not have 
access to Read All the records of the object. The view here is that the 
user ID can get a "glimpse", a view of the child records. However, a 
detailed reading of those child records would be available only if the 
user ID is an owner/related user of that child record. Thus the View is 
a lenient version of the Inherit Primary.
An authority to create data need not necessarily imply an authority to edit the data 
after it has been created. Some organizations may ind it feasible to separate the 
authorities to create and to edit data, some others may need to restrict edit rights to 
the parent record while not restricting it to the related/child records, and some may 
need to restrict edit rights to the related/child record while allowing only reading 
of the parent records. These constitute the access proile deinitions. Organizational 
needs such as to restrict editing to certain ields of a record while allowing reading 
of the rest of the ields, different sets of ields to be available for editing for 
different types of users and the like, lead to the composition of the user role, and 
appropriately in CRM On Demand these latter accesses are captured in the user role 
deinitions while the record-level accesses are captured in the access proiles.
Data once created is not merely the property of its owner/related users but also the 
property of the legal organizational entity. It is normal therefore that the access to 
delete single records or relationships between the parent and associated child records 
is restricted to speciic types of users (be they owner/related or unrelated), leading to 
the concept of the user role. Further, the authority to delete records may be organized 
in terms of whether it will be available at the level of individual records and/or for 
bulk operations as well. Expectedly, the authority to delete is captured in the access 
proile while the privilege of bulk deletion is maintained in the user role deinition.

User Access Controls
[ 102 ]
The access proiles deinition captures the "when and what access" while the 
"where, which, and how access" is captured in the user role deinition. A user ID is 
meaningless if it is lacking in either its set of owner and default access proiles or its 
user role deinition. The organizational and business considerations that we have 
discussed above are underlined in the design of the CRM On Demand's User Access 
Management administration section. The relationship between access proiles and the 
user role is provided for by including the access proiles as one of the components of 
the user role deinition, and keeping the user role as the lone access-related mandatory 
association for a user ID. The other mandatory ields of the user ID, namely the irst 
name, last name, work phone, e-mail address, and the login ID serve for the unique 
identiication of humans/machines that are members of the organization.
Team access
By adding or removing other user IDs to the record, the current owner of a record 
can potentially share and/or relinquish its ownership of that record with another 
user ID. Two or more user IDs that are associated to a record constitute the team for 
that record.
The team is a separate object and therefore super to the related record. The team 
could also be super to the user ID that has owner access on that record. Therefore 
the addition of another user ID to a record, that is, creating a team, requires deining 
the data accesses for the incoming user ID over that record and all its related/child 
records as well. This leads to deinitions of the team access proile. The team access 
proile of a user ID deines the data accesses for that user ID on that speciic record.
The user ID, the individual member of the organization, brings to the organizational 
table platform capabilities, or skills, to be exploited by and in the organization. Some 
examples of skills are contract writing, trading, product designing, administering, 
selling, buying, legal counseling, managing, researching, mass communication 
or marketing, and servicing. An eficient organization captures the skills in the 
user role deinition, allowing for the user ID to play various operational roles on 
different teams. This is the concept of a team role. Thus, a user ID who is skilled at 
"selling" might play the role of a consultant in one team, the main seller in another 
team, a partner seller in yet another, an observer in another, and any other form of 
collaboration that is feasible in the organization.
Thus in the presence of a team the access control necessarily moves away from being 
based on individual user IDs to more normalized structures such as user roles and 
team roles.

Chapter 5
[ 103 ]
The team access operates over the record in entirety. A corollary of deining teams in 
the organization is that you should not need to control a user ID's access at the level of 
the ields of a record, based on that user ID's team role. Any such organization would 
require increasingly complicated deinitions of the user role and team role matrix, 
making the matrix eventually unsustainable. While user ID based accesses at the ield 
level can still be applied in the presence of teams it becomes practically limited when 
the size of the organization is 5 or more, as the access validations become too complex 
to maintain reliably. The CRM On Demand application maintains a restriction on the 
length of validations precisely to prevent such constructions.
An organization is a discipline of competent, self-aware parallel-computing user 
IDs, an automaton as it were; therefore any organization that requires intensive 
computation and control of accesses at every operation by a user ID would 
ordinarily not have teams within it. The team is a super entity that subordinates 
the user ID in relation to the given record. The team is a record level access control 
and therefore requires eschewing large scale requirements of team role speciic ield 
level access controls in the organization. In most, if not all, cases if you ind yourself 
trying to draw complex matrices of user roles and team roles to meet the business 
requirements, it is safe to assume that either the requirements have not been reined 
or the organization does not presently need a Customer Relationship Management 
system to operate its business.
Book access
The book of business (or book) is a tag that can be associated to a user ID and to  
a record. A user ID and a record become related by virtue of having the same 
tag. Thus books can bring a group of user IDs and a group of data together, by 
associating those given user IDs and those given data to the same tag, the book. 
The books provide a matrix on the physical organization. It provides for user IDs 
to participate, and be available across the entire business organization, overcoming 
divisional and departmental silos of data. The same book can be associated to 
different types of records, such as an account, opportunity, and service request.
The book is a type of record, and can be created by user IDs. Similar to other records, 
the access to books is deined in the access proiles and the user role.
By adding or removing books to the record the current owner of a record can 
potentially share and/or relinquish its ownership of that record with a group of 
user IDs each of whom may have differential accesses on the record. By adding new 
books to the system, a user ID can potentially share and/or gain ownership over 
records that get associated to those books.

User Access Controls
[ 104 ]
The book is a separate object and therefore super to both the records in it and the 
user IDs in it. The book could also be super to user IDs that have owner accesses on 
the records in that book. The book is also super to the records in it, in that a book 
cannot be deleted until all the records are removed from it. Therefore the addition of 
a book to a user ID i.e. creating a book user, requires deining the data accesses for 
the incoming user ID over all the records that might ever get associated to that book. 
This leads to deinitions of book access proile. The book access proile of a user ID 
deines the data accesses for that user ID on all the records in that book.
In comparing the book to the team, we can summarize as follows. A team associates 
multiple user IDs to a single record. A book associates multiple user IDs to multiple 
records. The team constitution is controlled by the irst owner of the speciic record. 
The book constitution is controlled by the management access that user IDs have to 
books plus the distributed usage of the book.
An eficient organization might capture the skills of its user IDs at a very high level 
in the form of user roles, and allow for the user ID to play various operational roles at 
different "spaces" and "times" in the organization through association with relevant 
books. This is the concept of a book role. Thus, a user ID who is competent about 
"Nordic culture" might play the role of a consultant in the Nordic Opportunities 
Book, Nordic Service Requests Book, Nordic Accounts Book or simply in the Nordic 
Book of the organization, and any other kinds of isolation that are feasible in the 
organization. As another example, if you are a Health Insurance business in the USA 
the governmental mandate on restricted data access would require you to create 
books to isolate user IDs who have not signed the HIPAA agreements from those who 
have signed them, to ensure your business is compliant with the HIPAA regulations.
Thus in the presence of a book the access control necessarily moves away from being 
based on individual user IDs to more normalized structures such as user roles and 
book roles.
The book access operates over the entire record and all the records in it. A corollary 
of deining books in the organization is that you should not need to control a user 
ID's access at the level of the ields of a record, or over speciic records in the book, 
based on that user ID's book role. Any such organization would require increasingly 
complicated deinitions of the user role and book role matrix, making the matrix 
eventually unsustainable. While user ID based accesses at the ield level can still be 
applied in the presence of books it becomes practically limited when the size of the 
organization is 5 or more, as the access validations become too complex to maintain 
reliably. The CRM On Demand application maintains a restriction on the length of 
validations precisely to prevent such constructions.

Chapter 5
[ 105 ]
An ideal organization is a discipline of competent self-aware parallel-computing user 
IDs. An organization that requires intensive computation and control of accesses 
at every operation by a user ID would ordinarily not have books within it. The 
book is a super entity that subordinates simultaneously both the individual user ID 
and individual record in relation to other records and user IDs in it. The book is a 
data access controller by itself. It requires the organization to eschew requirements 
of book role based ield level access controls and/or book role based record level 
access controls. In most, if not all, cases if you ind yourself trying to draw complex 
matrices of user roles and book roles to meet the business requirements, you should 
look to reine the requirements. 
Books are an ideal, lexible mechanism for additional data visibility 
settings. A record can be added to a book manually or automated by 
worklows. A large number of books usually entail a large number 
of worklows to be added. When there are too many worklows and 
especially with frequent maintenance a web services program may be 
more eficient at the job of moving records amongst the books.
The user role
As you have probably realized by now, the variety of data and accesses, when 
operative in any organization made of more than 5-10 users, leads you to rationalize 
the data accesses in terms of business user roles. You begin to move away from the 
following equation:
user ID = user role
Instead you compose it as the following:
user role = {user IDs}
Or perhaps the following:
user ID = f (user Role)
It is important to bear in mind though that at its simplest the user role is the data 
access deinitions for the user ID. In the CRM On Demand application all the 
transactions on the system are mediated by the user ID and the number of access 
deinitions that are packed together in creating a user role deinition is tagged to the 
user ID; it is not that the user ID is tagged to the user role deinition. This is manifest 
in that the user role ield is a mandatory ield when you create a user ID.

User Access Controls
[ 106 ]
The items in the user role deinition are as follows. They are listed here in a particular 
order for conceptual clarity:
• 
Role name
• 
The accesses to objects (record types)
• 
The owner access proile and default access proile
• 
The accesses to objects' Homepages (tabs)
• 
The Homepage layouts for the accessible objects
• 
The Search page layouts for the accessible objects
• 
The Detail page layouts for the accessible objects
• 
The default sales process for opportunities
• 
The Lead Conversion page layout
• 
The Action Bar page layout
• 
The default Theme for the UI
• 
The accesses to customize the UI
• 
The accesses to data channels
• 
The accesses to user channels
In the Administration page of CRM On Demand, the role deinition is done with 
the Role Management Wizard, which provides eight steps for completing the role 
deinition, as shown in the following screenshot. The sequencing and organization 
of these eight steps are meant to help you rapidly set up a user role; hence it has the 
label "wizard".

Chapter 5
[ 107 ]
The Role Management Wizard is a conigurator and therefore it begins at the Data 
layer followed by the Business layer and inally the UI layer. The wizard builds the 
internal code in real time as you progress from start to inish. Therefore, it expects 
information from the ground upwards. For instance, the user role will require a 
Search layout for leads (step 6) only if that role has access to the Lead record type 
(step 2). In contrast to the conigurator as a system builder you would, of course, 
follow the top-down approach, starting with building the Homepage layouts, 
Search layouts, and Detail page layouts. The user role deinition would logically be 
your inal task in building the system, where you bring together the built custom 
layouts to combine with the relevant set of system privileges and the foundational 
data accesses.
In the conceptual descriptions of the following 14 items we give the mapping to the 
speciic step in the eight-step wizard.
Role name
The role name (and its translations in the selected languages) is the irst and mandatory 
value for the user role deinition. The role name can be 50 alphanumeric characters in 
length, in each of the selected languages. This appears in step 1 of the wizard.
The Action Bar layout, Lead Conversion layout, and the default 
sales process are multiobject and multisystems constructions. If 
your customization of CRMOD involves those multiple elements it 
is essential that they have been analyzed and designed as necessary 
for each user role, which is why they appear in step 1 of the Role 
Management Wizard.
Accesses to objects (record types)
This appears in step 2 of the Role Management Wizard. The access to each of the 
objects (objects that are enabled in your CRM On Demand application) is deined  
in three inter-independent controls, with Boolean values (yes or no). The three 
controls are as follows:
• 
Can (this role) access (this object)?
• 
Can (this role) create (new records of this object)?
• 
Can (this role) read all (the records of this object present in the system)?

User Access Controls
[ 108 ]
The "can access" control determines the application of the other two controls. If the 
"can access" is set to "no", its values of "can create" and "can read all" are immaterial 
and irrelevant. When "can access" is "yes" and "can read all" is "no", the visibility of 
the records will be entirely controlled by the owner access proile, including the child 
records accesses therein. See the tip on "View and Inherit Primary" in the The accesses 
to data section earlier in this chapter.
The owner access proile and the default 
access proile
As described earlier in this chapter, you would have previously created the access 
proiles, and in the step 3 of the Role Management Wizard, you have associated the 
relevant owner access proile and the default access proile.
Accesses to objects' Homepages or tabs
Accesses to objects' Homepages is step 5 of the wizard. Every main object in the 
CRM On Demand object model has for the UI a tab (short for "table") for the visual 
representation of the object. The tab contains the space to display a Homepage of the 
object. A tab has a name and a pictorial icon to represent it. You can customize the 
name, and its translations in all the selected languages. You can change the pictorial 
icon to any one of the 50 icons that are available in the icon collection. The tab is 
also the space to display the Detail page of a record of that object, however it is not 
necessary for the object tab to be present on the UI to display the object record.
For the given user role you would select the tabs and their horizontal ordering based 
on the UI that suits the requirements of the user role. This is known as the Tab layout 
for that user role. It is worth noting that the tab is derived from the record type access; 
if the role is not given access to a record type, the tab related to that record type would 
not manifest on the UI even if you select it for the Tab layout. The Homepage layout 
that is assigned to the record type in step 8 of the wizard displays on the tab of that 
record type. That is, when a tab is absent from the Tab layout the object Homepage 
layout becomes unavailable to the user ID. A tab cannot exist without a Homepage 
layout and therefore CRMOD defaults to the seed Homepage layout of the record type. 
See the next section for descriptions of the Homepage layouts. 
The CRM On Demand application automatically adjusts the number of tabs on the 
screen based on the user's display device. The wider the screen, the more all the 
assigned tabs are displayed horizontally, and where the screen is not as wide the tabs 
that are down the line are automatically put into the drop-down menu that appears 
after the last tab.

Chapter 5
[ 109 ]
Custom Web Tabs are tabs that you create, to operate any interactive content be it a 
CRM On Demand page or an external page. We will study the utility of Custom Web 
Tabs later in Chapter 8, Web Services Integration.
The Homepage layouts
The Homepage layouts for each of the tabs are created priorly. The Homepage of 
an object can have lists and applets. Applets are used to operate interactive content 
from within the CRM On Demand application or external systems.
In step 8 of the wizard we tag the Homepage layouts created for each tab that will be 
displayed for the user role. Assigning a Homepage layout to an unselected tab does 
not have any impact as the tab access in step 5 is the container, and in its absence 
the Homepage has no container in which it is to be displayed. A user role can be 
assigned only one Homepage layout for an object/tab, and an object/tab can support 
any number of Homepage layouts each of which are destined for assignment to 
different user roles. In a small- to medium-size organization it would be effective 
to design a global Homepage layout that contains all the various lists and applets, 
and can train users to customize their Homepage layout. We learnt about building 
custom Homepage layouts in Chapter 4, Application Customization.
The Search page layouts
The Search page layouts for each of the accessible objects are created priorly. The 
Search page layouts for objects is relevant where the default search method of 
the company is the targeted search. If you select the keyword search as the search 
method for your company, the Search page layouts are irrelevant and have no 
impact. The Search page layout has the search input ields and the search output 
ields. In addition, it deines the output ields separately for searching from the panel 
on the Action Bar and for searching via the lookup on a record.
In step 7 of the wizard, we tag the Search page layouts created for each object that is 
accessible to the user role. Assigning a Search page layout to an inaccessible object 
does not have any impact as the object access in step 2 determines whether the object 
page constructors are enabled for the user ID. A user role can be assigned only one 
Search page layout for an object, and an object can support any number of Search 
page layouts, each of which are destined for assignment to different user roles. It is 
usually effective to design common Search page layouts for all or sets of user roles, 
utilizing ields optimized for fast search and output, and subsequently train users to 
run custom searches using the Advanced Search feature on a needs basis.

User Access Controls
[ 110 ]
The Detail page layouts
The Detail page layouts for each of the accessible objects, for the user role, are created 
previously. The Detail page layout has the parent record ields and the related 
information applets sequenced below the parent record. The Detail page layout also 
sets each ield as editable, mandatory, or read-only (for that layout). The Detail page 
layout can be static or dynamic for the user role.
In step 6 of the wizard we tag the Detail page layouts created for each object that is 
accessible to the user role. Assigning a Detail page layout to an inaccessible object 
does not have any impact as the object access in step 2 determines whether the object 
page constructors are enabled for the user ID. A user role can be assigned only 
one Detail page layout (whether static or dynamic) for an object, and an object can 
support any number of Detail page layouts (both static and dynamic), each of which 
is destined for assignment to a different user role. We learnt about building custom 
Detail page layouts in Chapter 4, Application Customization.
The default sales process for opportunity records
This appears in step 1 of the Role Management Wizard. Sales processes are created 
previously. Chapter 6, Business Process Automation and Management, provides the 
details on setting up custom sales processes. If your company has deined multiple 
sales processes (with or without normalized categorization of sales stages) there are 
various ways in which your company may have designed to employ those processes.
One approach would be to associate every process to every opportunity type that 
is handled by the organization. A second approach would be to associate processes 
to user roles, without regard to the opportunity types. A third approach would be 
a mix of the two approaches but where some opportunity types are left free of a 
process. In the latter case, the default sales process of the user role would become 
available on such undeined opportunity types as there may be. The default sales 
process is also used by the Revenue Forecast engine for such unlinked opportunity 
types, where the user role is a forecast participant.
As a sales process can deine mandatory ields by sales stages for the Opportunity 
page, it is important to synchronize the Opportunity Detail page layouts assigned 
to the user role with the default sales process of that user role (if the default sales 
process is actually of relevance in your organization). Any gaps in the process 
validations and layout would cause errors during run time, preventing the user from 
editing/saving those opportunity records.
Assigning a default sales process to a user role which has no access to the 
opportunity object is still relevant, if the user role is a participant in the  
Revenue Forecast and submits forecasts.

Chapter 5
[ 111 ]
The Lead Conversion layout
This appears in step 1 of the Role Management Wizard. Lead Conversion layouts are 
created previously. Chapter 6, Business Process Automation and Management, provides 
the details on setting up custom Lead Conversion layouts. Your company may have 
deined multiple Lead Conversion layouts to be used across various user roles.
As a Lead Conversion process deines ield mapping across objects and involves 
creation of new records of multiple objects, it is important to synchronize the Lead 
Conversion layout that is assigned to the user role with the object accesses and access 
proiles assigned to that user role. Any gaps between the conversion process and 
object access proiles would cause errors during run time, preventing the user from 
completing the conversion.
Assigning a Lead Conversion layout to a user role which has no access to any of 
the related objects and/or to the Lead Qualiication/Conversion process, does not 
impact the system.
The Action Bar layout
The Action Bar is available as a standard page for all users of the CRM On Demand 
application. The custom Action Bar layouts for user roles are created priorly before 
they can be assigned to user roles. Chapter 4, Application Customization, provides 
the details on setting up custom Action Bar layouts. The custom Action Bar layout 
can have the full or subset of the pre-built applets of CRM On Demand in addition 
to custom global applets that operate interactive content from within the CRM On 
Demand application or external systems.
In step 1 of the wizard we tag the custom Action Bar layout created for the user role. 
A user role can be assigned only one Action Bar layout, and the CRM On Demand 
application can support any number of Action Bar layouts. In a small- to medium-
size organization it would be effective to design a common custom Action Bar layout 
containing all the various custom applets and train users to customize their Action 
Bar layout to surface the applets that are relevant to their needs.
The default Theme for UI
Custom Themes are created previously. Themes can contain corporate imagery, 
branding, and links to hosted corporate content. From the collection of Themes 
available in the system, in step 1 of the wizard we can tag the default Theme for the 
user role. The default Theme is relevant if the user role will have no access to select 
their choice of Theme or does not select their choice of Theme. A user can assign their 
choice of Theme via the My Proile page in the My Setup administration section. The 
Theme has to be an editable ield on the User Owner page layout for the user to be 
able to edit and select their choice of Theme.

User Access Controls
[ 112 ]
Privileges
In step 4 of the deinition you would assign privileges at the system level. The 
privileges can be categorized as those relating to personalization of the UI and  
those relating to accesses.
Accesses to customize the UI
The UI consists of the Action Bar layout, the Homepage layout, the Detail page 
layout and the Tab layout. The user's personal password is part of the user's 
personalization with the CRM On Demand application. Step 4 of the wizard lists 
all the privileges that can be enabled for the user role. These are Boolean settings; 
checking the checkbox activates the line item. The privileges pertaining to the My 
Setup category deine whether the user role can customize the layouts and reset their 
personal password.
Accesses to data channels
The data channels in CRM On Demand consist of the online UI channel, the data 
management channel of data exports and imports, the Integration channels of online 
Web Services and Widgets/Web applets, and the desktop/mobile channels of PIM 
Sync, Outlook/Notes e-mail integration, and the ofline application.
The access controls that we have discussed in this chapter are relevant to the main 
channel of the online UI. The other data channels provide their speciic prebuilt 
accesses to data and which cannot be customized by the CRM On Demand 
administrator. In step 4 of the wizard, which lists all the privileges that can be 
enabled to the user role, these specialized channels can be enabled to the user role as 
necessary. We will briely discuss the characteristics of each of these specialized data 
channels. The common characteristic of these alternative channels of access is that 
they are useful when one needs to extract the CRM data to an external system be it a 
networked server or the local desktop.
The channel of data exports and imports provides unrestricted access to export all 
the ields of a record and/or import data to any ields of a record, without being 
subject to the visibility restrictions of the online UI.
The channel of online web services is a programmatic interface to query all ields 
of a record and insert into any ield of a record however it is subject to the record 
type  accesses that are deined for that user role (in step 2 of the wizard). The 
programmatic interface allows high velocities of data operations compared to the 
online UI channel.

Chapter 5
[ 113 ]
The channel of online Widgets/Web applets provides a programmable interface to 
transmit all ields of a record to external systems, and/or receive data from external 
systems, after the user has logged into the online UI channel.
The desktop/mobile channels refer to supplementary applications that integrate 
with surrounding applications, such as the e-mail clients and desktop processors. 
In these integrations, the data is downloaded, stored, and maintained in the local 
clients. The data is synchronized on demand, based on the synchronization rules 
set by the user in their local application. The data access is subject to the visibilities 
and controls that are set for the online UI channel of the user role; however, custom 
ields, validations, and custom Page layouts are not supported.
Accesses to user channels
The user channels in CRM On Demand refer to channels by which data and/or 
accesses of one user can be channeled to another user. Calendar sharing and user 
delegation are the two user channels available in CRM On Demand for normal 
business users. User channels are initiated and controlled by the 'giver' at all times. 
The channels have prebuilt and ixed deinitions which cannot be customized by the 
CRM On Demand Administrator.
In step 4 of the wizard, the Calendar Sharing and User Delegation privileges can 
be enabled to the user role as necessary. Enabling the Calendar Sharing privilege 
merely allows the user to share their calendar with others if they personally choose 
to. Calendar includes only the appointment records and those which are not marked 
"private". Enabling the User Delegation privilege allows the user to delegate access 
to their secured data to any number of other users. The delegates receive the same 
access to the data that is available to the user who is delegating to them, that is the 
delegator's owner and default access proiles apply. Delegation applies to all the data 
of the delegator and limited delegation cannot be made. However, the create accesses 
of the delegator are not conveyed to the delegates.
The other user channel is that of the Administrator. The CRM On Demand 
application Administrator is the primary user who channels accesses to all the  
other users of the system. In step 4 of the wizard, a host of privileges pertaining 
to the administration of the application are maintained for the user role. All the 
privileges are enabled by default to the prebuilt user role of "administrator" and 
newer deinitions are enabled to the Administrator by the On Demand Customer 
Care service. Any of these privileges, in their logical combinations, can be enabled 
for other technical or business users as necessary.

User Access Controls
[ 114 ]
Summary
In this chapter we learnt to customize the CRM On Demand application to the 
business organization of users. We learnt how to conceptualize the organization 
and the central idea of the user ID. We learnt the types of accesses on data that are 
available in the application. We learnt the various mechanisms available to control 
the data accesses to user IDs, and thus map the real organization of people to the 
user IDs in the CRM On Demand application. A keen understanding of the user 
management and access controls facilities in the CRM On Demand application goes  
a long way in the successful implementation and adoption of the information system, 
meeting the business objectives.

Business Process Automation 
and Management
Customer relationship management (CRM) is a combination of people, processes, 
and technology that seeks to understand a company's customers. In this chapter, we 
are going to focus on the "process" part of CRM.
On a day-to-day basis, any company runs on business processes. Just about 
everything that goes on—from general business operations, sales, customer services, 
to industry-speciic activities—has well-deined processes. Thus, to improve the 
eficiency of any company, it is vital to identify, optimize, and automate the business 
processes to reduce the manual effort as well as operational inconsistencies. This is 
where the concept of business process management comes into the picture.
Business Process Management (BPM) in CRM's perspective means identifying, 
optimizing, and automating those processes which increase customer satisfaction. 
This helps to cut down the lead time involved in many of the customer-centric 
business processes from weeks to a few hours.
Consider a typical scenario where an existing bank customer calls up a bank and 
wants to inquire about the rate of a home loan. The bank should ideally have a set of 
business rules which can be applied to customer details such as salary, bank balance, 
occupation, and credit record for quoting the rate. The business process should 
be optimized and automated in such a way that the system retrieves these details 
automatically based on the customer ID/phone number and applies the applicable 
business rules, coming up with the quote straight away, without a customer 
representative carrying out these processes manually and holding the customer on 
the call. Automating such day-to-day business processes can attribute towards better 
personnel and organizational productivity, quick and improved decision making, 
and enhances operational excellence. Business process management can therefore 
prove to be a strong reason that businesses run smoothly.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 116 ]
In CRMOD, our allies for BPM are worklows and assignment rules. We will see in 
this chapter how they help us in aligning the operational procedures and practices 
of a company as per the business needs. The worklows and assignment rules help 
to automate process steps that are done manually, perform business rules validation 
to improve the quality of data keyed in the CRM system, and facilitate automatic 
assignment of records to cut down the processing lead time and so on.
Worklow coniguration
Worklow coniguration in CRMOD is used to automate business processes to 
increase eficiency and adherence to business policies. Simple examples of what  
can be achieved through worklows are:
• 
Sending e-mails
• 
Creating follow-up tasks
• 
Updating customer data in CRM On Demand
• 
Assigning a record to a book
• 
Creating integration events
• 
Deleting data from CRM On Demand
• 
Creating a wait action on a worklow to delay the execution of other 
(following) actions
Hold on!
Before you actually log in to the CRMOD application and start coniguring 
the worklows, don't forget to complete the prerequisite steps for successfully 
structuring your worklows; these are as follows:
1. Ensure you have the Manage Data Rules - Manage Worklow Rules 
privilege assigned to your role.
2. Check the Enable Worklow option in the Company Proile page.
3. Work with business stakeholders to identify worklow and  
assignment requirements.

Chapter 6
[ 117 ]
4. Follow best practices while creating new worklows or updating the existing 
ones in CRMOD. The most methodical way is to document worklow rules, 
corresponding actions, as well as the expected outcome before coniguring 
them in the CRMOD application. Follow a relevant naming convention to 
name each worklow created in the system; for example, adding a preix to 
each name can describe the job function or even geographic assignments. 
This will help you to group worklows visually on the screen and accelerate 
the process of troubleshooting for consultants.
5. A thorough test strategy with realistic sample data is required to test the 
conigured worklows after the build. It's a must to have all test scenarios as 
well as reverse scenarios documented.
6. Worklows are not available by default when CRM On Demand is 
provisioned for you. You have to contact the customer care to enable the 
feature. When customer care sets up the worklow rule functionality, the 
Worklow Coniguration link is visible in the Business Process Management 
section of Admin Homepage.
About worklows
After completing the ground work as mentioned in the previous section, you are 
well equipped to create worklows in the CRMOD application.
A worklow is made up of three components. These three components deine 
and drive the functionality of any worklow. The components which comprise a 
worklow are listed as follows:
• 
Rule: The rule deines the conditions to be met to execute an action
• 
Trigger: The trigger deines the speciic event that must occur for the 
worklow to get executed
• 
Action: The actions are the actual activities that a worklow performs.
Adding and modifying the worklows
The user of the application must have the necessary privileges to be able to create 
and manage worklows. Once the desired privileges are acquired, the user can 
attempt at coniguring worklows in CRMOD.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 118 ]
To begin, go to Admin | Business Process Management, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
Click on the Worklow Coniguration link to start coniguring worklows. On clicking 
the link, you will be redirected to a page where the already conigured worklows are 
listed. On this page, an option is provided to the user to create/modify a worklow. 
Follow these simple steps to create a new worklow:
1. Click on the New button on the title bar to create a new worklow rule;  
this button is shown in the next screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 119 ]
2. When the New button is clicked, a new page opens up where you are 
required to specify details related to the worklow such as Worklow Name, 
Record Type, Trigger Event, Rule Condition, and the Active status, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
After a workflow rule is created and saved, Record Type or 
Trigger Event on the rule cannot be changed. However, the 
workflow condition and order can be updated.
3. To create a new worklow rule by copying an existing one, click Copy on the 
worklow rule that you want to copy; refer to the following screenshot:
When you create a new worklow rule by copying an existing one, the values of 
Record Type and Trigger Event are retained from the original worklow rule and 
rest of the features are available for making any changes.
We will cover each aspect of these components used for creating a worklow in detail 
as we move ahead in this chapter.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 120 ]
Record types
While creating a worklow rule, almost all record types are available to choose from. 
Industry-speciic record types are available only when an industry-speciic edition is  
in use.
Mostly, a worklow rule is related only to a single record type. This implies that 
when a worklow rule condition is applied and assessed on the selected record type, 
the actions are also performed on the same record type.
An exception to this statement comes into the picture when Trigger Event is set as 
After association with parent or After dissociation from parent.
A classic example for this scenario is a contact record being associated with an 
account record. So, if the business need is to trigger a worklow whenever there is an 
association formed between a contact and an account, there will be more than one 
record type available in the worklow structure.
In this case, we set Record Type as Contact, Parent Record Type as Account, and 
Trigger Event as After association with parent.
In this case, both Parent Record Type and Child Record Type can be speciied.
Refer to the following screenshot to visualize this scenario:
Once a worklow rule is saved, Record Type on the worklow rule 
cannot be changed at all. Hence, think twice before making a choice and 
saving a new worklow rule to avoid cluttering the system with unused 
worklows. However, there is always an option to delete the worklow.

Chapter 6
[ 121 ]
Trigger events
As the name suggests, trigger events are events that trigger the execution of the 
worklow. So depending on your business need, select the right trigger event. The 
way you choose the trigger events can make or break your business logic by either 
automating a manual process at the right instance or by creating havoc by setting 
off at a wrong instance. Based on the trigger event, the worklow rule conditions are 
evaluated (or if there are no conditions deined on the rule) and appropriate actions 
are taken if the condition is met.
Various available trigger events are as follows:
• 
When new record saved
• 
When modiied record saved
• 
Before modiied record saved
• 
When record is deleted
• 
After association from parent
• 
After dissociation from parent
• 
When record is restored
Note the difference between the When modiied record saved and Before modiied 
record saved events.
The When modiied record saved event is the trigger event which triggers when 
an existing record is modiied and thereafter saved by clicking on the Save button. 
Some of the actions that it can trigger are sending an e-mail, creating a task, 
assignment to a book, creating an integration event, and updating ield values. The 
Before modiied record saved event is the trigger event which triggers when an 
existing record is attempted to be modiied and before it can be saved. So if you 
require a validation to be applicable on a particular ield, this trigger event comes in 
handy, not allowing the user to save the modiied record till the deined conditions 
are met. The only available action that can be invoked as a result of this trigger event 
is the Update Field action.
To sum it up, any of the following can trigger a worklow rule:
• 
Creating, updating, or deleting a record
• 
Associating or dissociating a record with/from another record
Once a worklow rule is saved, the trigger event on the worklow cannot 
be changed at all. Hence make a careful selection so that you don't end 
up cluttering the system with unused and redundant worklows.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 122 ]
Refer to the following screenshot, which shows the available trigger events:
Worklow rule condition
A worklow condition deines a criterion which should be met for an action to 
take place. It is evaluated whenever a trigger event sets off. It is optional to have a 
worklow condition deined on a worklow rule. A rule with no condition indicates 
that the rule should be executed on all records of the designated type when the 
triggering event occurs.
To deine a rule condition, click on the fx icon in the Worklow Rule Condition 
section of the page, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 123 ]
On clicking the fx button, an Expression Builder window opens up. Expression 
Builder is a tool for deining and implementing business rules using expressions 
(operators, functions, ields, and literals that can be evaluated by CRMOD); this  
tool is shown in the following screenshot:
A worklow rule condition can comprise 1024 characters at 
the most.
The Expression Builder tool is a clever and intuitive editor which helps us in 
building basic and advanced criteria/validations, which form a worklow condition. 
This condition is evaluated by the worklow engine to take the desired actions.
Let us try working with an example to further illustrate various components of a 
worklow. Consider a business scenario where it is required to intimate the sales 
representative's manager whenever a new opportunity is created by him. Let us 
break down the given requirement into various components of a worklow,  
as follows:
• 
Record Type: Opportunity
• 
Trigger Event: When new record saved
• 
Worklow Rule Condition: None (in this case, action will be performed 
every time the worklow is triggered)
• 
Action: Send e-mail to manager

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 124 ]
Let us now go a step ahead and add a rule condition so that the action is performed 
only when the rule condition is met. The business scenario is now modiied to 
sending an e-mail to the sales representative's manager when a new opportunity 
record is created and the opportunity reaches the Closed/Won sales stage.
So the applicable Worklow Rule Condition will be something similar to  
the following:
PRE('<SalesStage>') <> [<SalesStage>] AND FieldValue('<SalesStage>') = 
"Closed/Won"
The PRE function in Expression Builder returns the previous value of the speciied 
ield. The irst part of this expression basically ensures that the worklow actions are 
executed only when the Sales Stage ield is modiied and the second part ensures 
that worklow actions are executed only when the sales stage is Closed/Won. This 
expression is shown in the following screenshot:
The steps to write this Worklow Rule Condition are presented in the following steps:
1. Select the PRE and FieldValue functions from the Functions drop-down menu.
2. Select the Sales Stage ield.
3. Expand the validation as provided in the code snippet.

Chapter 6
[ 125 ]
4. Check whether the syntax is valid using the Check Syntax button.
5. If you need any additional help on syntax or some sample expressions for 
reference, click on the Syntax Guide and the Sample Expressions links.
These steps complete the process of building a rule condition for any worklow. 
Writing advanced/complex rule conditions in CRM On Demand is a knack by itself 
and they can only be built with practice and experience over a period of time.
Actions
Actions determine the actual course of activities that will take place when a rule 
condition is met. A worklow without an action is just like a restaurant without a 
chef, where a framework is available but there is no one to drive it.
There can be multiple actions created for each worklow rule. However,  
the number of actions for each worklow rule is limited to a maximum of 25.  
An attempt to create more than 25 actions for a worklow rule will trigger an  
error message from the application.
Ordering of actions
When there are multiple actions deined for a worklow rule, a sequential order 
is followed to perform the deined actions starting from the action numbered 1. 
Subsequent actions are performed after completion of the previous action. Click on 
the Edit Order button to order the actions.
The Active checkbox should always be checked in order to activate an action, or 
else it will not trigger at all! On the other hand, you can opt to uncheck the Active 
checkbox if you don't want a particular action to take place.
Various available actions will be explored in the upcoming sections.
Assign a Book
This action automatically assigns a record to a speciic book/books if the worklow 
rule conditions are satisied. For example, add a new UK-based user to the respective 
book based on his country/location. This, as discussed in the previous chapters, is to 
control the visibility of data across the application.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 126 ]
Refer to the following screenshot to visualize how this action can be conigured:
Provide a name for the action, select the book using the book lookup window,  
and specify the Assignment Option and Apply To options. Many Assignment 
Option values are available to choose from depending on the business needs. Refer 
the CRM On Demand help section at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/
books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?assigningrecordstobookshelp.html for 
more details.
When removing or replacing books, the Apply To option determines the records 
to which the speciied assignment option will apply. Manual Associations affects 
records that are manually associated with books while Automatic Associations 
affects records that are automatically associated to books; both handle all records 
that are either manually or automatically assigned.
Create Integration Event
This action triggers the creation of integration events and adds it to the predeined 
integration queues. Integration events are covered in detail in Chapter 8, Web 
Services Integration. For now, a brief introduction to what basically an integration 
event means is provided so that the usage of this particular trigger event can be 
understood and appreciated.
Integration event enables triggering of external processes when speciic changes such 
as creating, updating, deleting, associating, and dissociating of records occur in CRM 
On Demand. The external processes can access the detail of the events in CRM On 
Demand through one or more integration event queues.

Chapter 6
[ 127 ]
For example, let's consider a scenario where an external application has to be notiied 
when the status of a service request in CRM On Demand is modiied. You can create 
a worklow that executes when the above condition is met by adding an integration 
event to the integration event queue for the external program to read and perform 
required actions. Speciic ields of the service request that are to be tracked can be 
deined as part of the coniguration. The following screenshot helps to visualize how 
an integration event is conigured:
Provide an appropriate name for the worklow action and select the integration 
queues to which the integration event will be written to. Once this action is created, 
you can use the conigure option to specify the ields to be included/tracked in the 
integration event queue.
Create Task 
This action creates a task if the worklow rule conditions are satisied, for example,  
a follow-up task for a service representative.
Refer to the following screenshot to have a quick glance at the Create Task action:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 128 ]
Provide an appropriate name for the worklow action along with other details such 
as Owner (who will own the task record), Due Date (the date at which the tasks fall 
due), Priority (priority of the task), Status (the default status with which the task 
has to be created), Subject (the subject line of the task), Private (turn on the private 
lag if you intend to restrict the visibility of the task to only the task owner), Task 
Currency, and Description of the task. A new task will be created in the system 
based on the values provided in the action. Refer to the CRM On Demand help-text 
reference at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.
htm?toc.htm?wftaskhelp.html to understand the meaning and acceptable values 
for each ield required for creating a task action successfully.
Send Email
This action sends an e-mail if the worklow's conditions are satisied. The action will 
come in handy in the case of the example quoted earlier in the chapter, where an 
e-mail is required to be sent to the sales representative's manager when a particular 
rule condition is met.
Refer to the following screenshot to have a quick glance at the Send Email action:

Chapter 6
[ 129 ]
Provide a relevant name for the action. The From ield contains the e-mail address of 
the sender of the e-mail, (for example, the e-mail address of the sales representative). 
There are various options to choose from; these are as follows:
• 
Default Email Address: support@crmondemand.com is the default e-mail 
address selected
• 
Current User: E-mail address of the signed-in user who triggers the 
worklow is selected
• 
Speciic Email Address: Manually key-in the e-mail address or deine the 
e-mail address using the Expression Builder tool (fx)
The To ield contains the e-mail address of the recipients (for example, manager's 
e-mail address). The various options available are as follows:
• 
Speciic User: Click the lookup icon to select the user
• 
Relative User on Record: Select the recipient from the list
• 
Speciic Email Address: Specify the addresses manually or deine the e-mail 
address using the Expression Builder tool (fx)
Multiple e-mail addresses are supported and accepted in the To ield. To enter multiple 
addresses, a semicolon (;) is used as a delimiter to separate each e-mail address.
The Subject ield contains the subject line for the e-mail. The available options  
are as follows:
• 
Enter free text in the subject line. For example, Opportunity is in the  
Closed/Won stage!
• 
Embed functions and ield names in the text: Expression Builder 
can be used to embed a function or ieldname. For example, A new 
%%%[<AccountType>]%%% account has been created.
Enter text in the Message Body textbox for the e-mail as follows:
• 
Enter free text in the message body. For example, Hello Mr. John Doe.
• 
Embed functions and ield names in the text. For example:
Hello Mr %%%[<ContactLastName>]%%%
The Message Body ield can contain a maximum of 2000 characters, including the 
percent signs before and after the expressions.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 130 ]
Update Field After Wait
This action is used to update a ield on the record type that has triggered the worklow 
rule. There must be at least one active wait action that precedes the Update Field After 
Wait action on the worklow rule. This action is performed only when the deined wait 
period is over. CRMOD does not allow you to activate an Update Field After Wait  
action unless the action is preceded by an active wait action. The key is Active.  
So make sure that you check Active after you have created your wait condition.
You can create more than one Update Field After Wait action on a worklow rule, 
provided that at least one active wait action precedes the irst Update Field After 
Wait action on the rule. Note that time to wait can be 0 seconds, so that the wait 
isn't really a wait at all, so be assured that this action will not slow down your 
business process.
Refer to the following screenshot to have a quick glance at the Update Field After 
Wait action details:

Chapter 6
[ 131 ]
Also refer to the CRM On Demand help-text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?wfupdatehelp.html for 
additional details on applicable values for each of the above ields.
To illustrate the Update Field After Wait action, I would like to cite a classic example 
where the action comes in handy. Consider a new service request created in the 
system to register a complaint/issue by a customer. If the newly created service 
request (SR) is not assigned to any agent within a speciied time (for example, within 
1 hour), it should then be automatically assigned to the agent-supervisor, who in 
turn can manually reassign the SR to any available agent.
Now try implementing the requirement by using the action in question by setting the 
following values:
• 
Record Type: Service Request
• 
Trigger Event: When new record saved
• 
Worklow Rule Condition: Set Owner to Null (SR is not assigned to  
any agent)
• 
Wait Action: 1 hour
• 
Update Field After Wait: Update the OWNER ield by assigning the SR to 
the supervisor
Update Values
This action is used to update a ield value on a record when the worklow rule 
conditions are satisied. The ield value is updated when a record is changed.
Wait
This action delays the execution of subsequent actions on a worklow rule until the 
deined period is over.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 132 ]
Refer to the following screenshot to have a quick glance at the details of the  
Wait action:
Provide an appropriate name to the action. Reevaluate Rule Condition After Wait 
is used to ensure that the trigger rules are executed again after the wait period to 
ensure the business rules are satisied even after the wait period to execute the 
actions. To enable this feature, a checkbox needs to be checked while coniguring 
a Wait action in CRMOD. This would reevaluate the rule condition again after the 
waiting period ends.
To understand this concept better, let us extend the example cited in the previous 
section where an unassigned SR is automatically assigned to a supervisor when the 
waiting period ends.

Chapter 6
[ 133 ]
In the previous example Trigger Event is set to New SR created and the rule 
condition is Owner is null. If the Reevaluate Rule Condition After Wait checkbox 
is checked, then every time the waiting period ends (1 hour in our case), the rule 
condition deined on the worklow will be reevaluated. So after 3 hours, it will 
reevaluate the rule before assigning the SR to the supervisor as it is highly probable 
that in last the 3 hours, an agent would have got assigned to the SR.
Specify the duration of the wait in the Wait Duration section. There are multiple 
options available for doing so. Refer to the CRM On Demand help-text reference to 
explore the various options for deining a wait period at
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.
htm?wfupdatehelp.html.
Actions available by events
The trigger event on the worklow rule determines what type of actions can be 
created on the rule. So the available set of actions that can be created for a particular 
worklow rule is a subset of the entire set of actions we looked at in the previous 
section, depending on the trigger event you choose for the worklow.
The action that is available for all events is Send Email. The restrictions on available 
actions by each of the trigger events is understandable as there is no meaning in 
expecting an action on Assign a Book for the Before record is deleted trigger, since 
record itself is deleted in the system. For a complete list of applicable actions for a 
given event, refer to the CRMOD help-text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/workflowruleshelp.html.
Ordering the worklows
Ordering a worklow means assigning it an order number when there are multiple 
worklows conigured for the same event. On creation of a new worklow, the next 
unused order number is automatically assigned to it. The ordering of the worklow 
rules is based on record type and trigger events. This means that for a combination 
of the same record type and trigger event the order numbers must be unique for 
each worklow. This ensures that the worklows are executed in the right sequence, 
triggering the right actions when multiple worklow conditions are met.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 134 ]
It is quite possible that a worklow rule is judiciously created on a correct record type 
with an appropriate trigger event to accomplish a set of activities (actions) but when 
the right time comes, it does not do what it is supposed to do. This is a very common 
scenario that you will face when working with worklows. So instead of breaking 
your head over the worklow design and condition/action-expressions, you now 
know what needs to be checked irst—the order of the worklow!
Let us consider a very simple example to illustrate the concept of ordering  
the worklows.
The objective of this example is that when a new account of type Retailer is created, 
an e-mail is sent to the manager and when a new account of type Competitor is 
created, the record is added to the Competitor book.
For this, we set the Record Type to Account and Trigger Event to When New 
Record Saved.
In this case, both the objectives are mutually exclusive in nature. Two different 
worklow rules are required to achieve the desired task. A different order number 
will be assigned to each worklow rule so that both can be invoked whenever a new 
account record is created and based on the type of account, desired actions are taken.
The lipside to this scenario is the invoking of a worklow rule which is dependent 
on successful task completion by a preceding worklow on the same record type and 
trigger event. In this case, it becomes critical to correctly order the worklows or else 
the dependent worklow will not be invoked at all.
For example, based on the type of SR created in the system, update the e-mail 
address ield and send an e-mail notiication to the supplied email address.
If the service request type is set to Complaint, then set Update Email Address to 
complaints@abc.com. If the service request type is set to Enquiry, then set Update 
Email Address to enquiries@abc.com.
In both cases, e-mail notiication can be sent after the e-mail address ield is correctly 
populated with the e-mail address. So the worklow for updating the e-mail address 
ield based on the service request type should always precede the worklow used for 
sending out the e-mail as the e-mail address value will be picked up from the record 
on the basis of what was set by the preceding worklow action.
If the worklows are incorrectly sequenced then the worklow might not trigger  
at all.

Chapter 6
[ 135 ]
Let us consider a scenario where a new worklow rule is created with Record 
Type as Account and Trigger Event as When record is deleted and there are two 
worklow rules with the same record type and trigger event combination existing in 
the system. In such a case, the new worklow rule will be assigned an order number 
of 3. You can change the order number anytime to reprioritize the worklows.
Refer to the following screenshot to see how the Edit Order button works:
Select the worklow that you want to reorder by clicking on Worklow Name, listed 
in Worklow Rules List.
On the Worklow Rule Detail page, click Edit Order. In the Edit Worklow Order 
page, click the arrows to change the order of the rule. Click Save to save your 
changes. All these are shown in the following screenshot:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 136 ]
Deleting worklows
In today's fast-paced world, every business process evolves with time. If your 
business processes undergoes changes, it is highly probable that some of the  
existing worklows will become obsolete.
To address the same, there is a provision provided in CRMOD to completely delete 
the existing worklows and create new ones.
When you delete a worklow, all actions associated with the worklow are also 
deleted. Also, the order numbers on the remaining worklows for the relevant record 
type are automatically updated as necessary to ensure that there is no gap in the 
sequence of the numbers.
Refer to the following screenshot to have a quick glance at using the Delete button to 
delete a worklow:
Select the worklow that you want to delete from the list by clicking the Worklow 
Name link. In the record-level menu for the worklow, select Delete. Conirm that 
you want to delete the worklow by clicking on Ok in the Conirm dialog box. 
One can also delete a worklow directly from the worklow list on the worklow 
homepage without navigating to the record level details.
Active and inactive worklows
As discussed earlier in the chapter, the Active checkbox on the worklow must be 
checked to keep it in active state. Only if the checkbox is checked, will the worklow 
be invoked and related actions triggered.
If you want to temporarily make a worklow dormant, it is required to uncheck 
the Active checkbox. This would lead to deactivating the worklow till the time the 
checkbox is checked again. When a worklow is inactivated, any associated action 
on the worklow will not be triggered. This feature comes in handy when you 
don't want to perform any of the worklows to be executed when you load data 
into the system.

Chapter 6
[ 137 ]
If you deactivate a worklow rule while an instance of a Wait action 
on the rule is in the pending state, then when the waiting period ends 
on the instance of the action, none of the remaining actions on the 
worklow rule are performed, and none of the subsequent worklow 
rules in the sequence of rules for the record type are triggered.
You can inactivate a worklow rule by unchecking the Active checkbox, either on the 
Worklow Rules List page or on the Worklow Rule Detail page, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
Worklow Monitor
Worklow Monitor, as the name suggests, is a tool for monitoring and managing 
instances of waiting worklows and reviewing worklow error messages.
In layman's terms, it will help you to take your worklow out of Limbo!
You can use Worklow Monitor to view instances of the worklow's wait actions 
that are in a pending state and instances of worklow actions that terminated 
unexpectedly on or after a wait action ended. The Worklow Monitor page shows 
two lists:
• 
A list of pending instances
• 
A list of error instances
This tool is shown in the following screenshot:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 138 ]
Pending Instances
The Pending Instances section, shown in the previous screenshot, contains the list of 
all worklow instances that are pending in the Wait mode. For example, you would 
have conigured a worklow which is supposed to trigger an e-mail notiication if 
new service requests remain unassigned without an owner for 48 hours. Now for 
every service request created without an owner, a worklow instance would be 
created and available in the Pending Instances section. These worklow instances 
would be moved out of this section after a waiting time of 48 hours. This section 
helps you to drill down on the pending instance, view the action details, and delete 
it if required. On deletion, any conigured worklow action—for example, Send 
Email—will not be executed. This comes in handy to handle some ad hoc cases 
where you are sure that there is no use in further execution of the worklow instance.
Error Instances
The Error Instances section will help you to look into failed instances of worklow 
on or after any Wait action. If there are worklows which don't have any wait action 
but end up in an error, they don't appear in this section. They are generally shown 
as an onscreen error to the end user if the worklow is triggered on user actions 
such as create, update, or delete record, or in the log iles if it is trigged due to data 
import processes. 
A worklow can fail due to multiple reasons. For example, in the scenario that we 
discussed in the Pending Instances section where an e-mail notiication has to be 
sent in 48 hours if a service request is unassigned to an owner, a worklow instance 
would have failed after Wait; maybe because the service request itself is deleted in 
the system or it could be a case where the worklow rules are not robust enough to 
handle all possible record ield values, leading to errors in executing the worklow 
condition. If it is the latter case, then having a close monitoring of the Error Instances 
section will help you out to identify and ix these errors in worklow coniguration, 
as they may not be noticed or reported by end users.
Deleting instances from the Worklow Monitor
Worklow instances can be deleted one at a time or a can be deleted as a batch of 
iltered list of worklow instances. The Batch Delete option is not available for error 
instances and generally these error instances are maintained in CRM On Demand for 
3 months before the system automatically purges it.

Chapter 6
[ 139 ]
Assignment rules
If a question were to be asked, "What is the primary purpose of your business", 
the most likely response would be "to create a customer". Thus, customer service 
is one of the greatest keys to your business success. It can literally make or break 
you. The reason is evident as your entire business, marketing, sales, and proits 
depend on your customers. As discussed earlier in the chapter, automating critical 
business processes and reducing the turn-around time for customer service plays 
an important role for any business. Till now, we got a chance to learn the concept of 
worklows and how vital it can prove to be in automating business processes within 
the CRM On Demand application. Assignment rules are one of the pillars of CRM 
On Demand. In this section, we will concentrate on learning and creating assignment 
rules to streamline and automate assignment processes in CRM On Demand.
About Assignment rules
Assignment rules are used to automatically assign records to the right people in the 
organization. Automatic assignment of records increases productivity and ensures 
that records are routed to the right people as soon as they are created/modiied in the 
system. It also facilitates large volumes of records to be imported and automatically 
assigned, eliminating the need for manual assignment or bulk assignment.
Hold on!
Before you begin, ensure that the Data Rules and Assignment privilege is assigned to 
your role. Assignment rules can be complex, so it is always a good idea to document 
the business assignment rules. This is used for designing as well as for training the 
user community where the records are being assigned. Documenting assignment 
rules provides a framework and a reference point to understand how the workload is 
routed and managed on the basis of skill-set, product expertise, or demography. Some 
common scenarios are as follows:
• 
Sales leads are assigned to the regional sales manager based on  
the demography
• 
Newly created service request is assigned to the technical service manager 
based on the skill-set

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 140 ]
Applicable objects
Assignment rules facilitate in the automatic assignment of leads, opportunities,  
service requests, and accounts to appropriate individuals, teams, and territories.  
This assignment is done based on the rules which can be set up in the CRMOD 
application. Note that the Reassign Owner checkbox should be checked wherever 
required (lead, opportunity, service request, or account) to trigger the assignment rule.
Deining a rule group
Rule groups are made up of rules, which, in turn, are made up of criteria.
A rule group is a set of rules that deines all the possible scenarios that should be 
considered when routing records to people. Multiple assignment rule groups can be 
created in the system; however, there can be only one active rule group at a time for 
a record type.
It is a good practice to mark unused rule groups as inactive 
rather than deleting them as they can be used as a reference 
in future.
The following section details the steps involved in deining a rule group:
1. To create a rule group, navigate to Admin |Business Process Management 
| Date Rules & Assignment.
2. In the Assignment Rules section, click the link for the appropriate record 
type. A list of all of the rule groups that have been deined for your company 
till now appears.
3. Click on the New Rule Group button to create a new rule group, as shown in 
the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 141 ]
4. On the New or the Edit page, ill in the ields as mentioned in the  
following table:
Field
Description
Rule Group Name
Name of the rule group.
Active Rule Group
By default, only one rule group can be inactive. If 
you make one of the rule groups active, the other 
rule groups become inactive.
Unassigned Owner
A user in CRM On Demand to whom the records 
are assigned, if the system is not able to assign the 
record successfully to anyone.
Return E-mail
For lead and service request assignments, the 
system has a feature to send an e-mail notification to 
the owner on assignment of the record. The e-mail 
address specified here would appear in the From 
e-mail address of those e-mails.
Unassigned Account Territory
Similar to Unassigned Owner, but here it provides 
the facility to specify the territory to assign your 
records if the system is not able to find a matching 
territory with your defined rules.
Unassigned Opportunity Territory
Similar to Unassigned Account Territory, but 
applicable only for assignment of opportunity 
records.
A rule deines the criteria used to assign ownership of a record to the appropriate 
person. While deining a rule, it is important to bear in mind the order, that is, a 
correct order number should be assigned to every rule because if a record does not 
match the irst rule, the next rule in the group is considered until a match is found. 
Conversely, if a rule is met, subsequent rules are ignored.
The following section details the steps involved in deining a rule:
1. To create a rule, navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Date 
Rules & Assignment.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 142 ]
2. On the Rules title bar under the Rule Group Detail page, click New, which 
is highlighted in the following screenshot:
3. On the New or the Edit page, ill in the ields as mentioned in the  
following table:
Field
Description
Rule Name
Name of the rule.
Order
The sequence in which the rules have to be executed. The moment 
one of the rules in the rule group is successful the system doesn't 
execute subsequent rules.
Assign To Owner
The user to whom the record will be assigned if the rule criteria  
are met.
Assign To 
Territory
The territory to which the record will be assigned if the rule criteria 
are met.
Include Related 
Contacts
This field is applicable for account rules. Provides an option to assign 
the related contacts of the account to the same user if the rule criteria 
are met.
Include Team 
Assignment
This field is applicable for account and opportunity rules. Provides an 
option to include team members if the rule criteria is met.
The rule criteria is the information that is actually evaluated and used for assigning 
records. A rule criterion has the following three components:
• 
Field: The record ield that will be evaluated
• 
Condition: How the value of the ield is evaluated
• 
Value(s): The text or number in the ield against which a match is evaluated
For example, Field can be set as Region, Condition can be set as Contains all values, 
and Value(s) as West.

Chapter 6
[ 143 ]
The following section details the steps involved in deining a rule criteria:
1. To create a rule criteria, navigate to Admin | Business Process Management 
| Date Rules & Assignment.
2. On the Rule Criteria title bar under the Rule Detail page, click New, as 
shown in the following screenshot:
3. On the New or Edit page, ill in the ields as mentioned in the  
following table:
Field
Description
Example
Field
The field to be evaluated.
Region
Condition
The condition that has to be used to compare the field value 
against one of the possible values defined in the rule. Note 
that the operations such as Contains all values, Contains 
exact field value, and Contains none of the values are not 
applicable for date fields. Similarly Greater than or equal to, 
Less than or equal to are applicable only for number fields; 
and the Between operator only for date fields.
Contains all 
values
Value(s)
If you have multiple values, then separate each value by a 
comma. If you have a comma in the value text, enclose the 
same using quotation mark and if you are using the Between 
operator use comma as a separator to specify the minimum 
and maximum field value.
West
Note that if there are multiple criteria deined under the 
same rule, the system applies an And condition and the 
rule succeeds only if all the criteria are met.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 144 ]
Lead Conversion Administration
Leads are generated from trade shows, mailing campaigns, and other such marketing 
events. When such a lead matures, it qualiies to be converted into an account, contact, 
or an opportunity. This would typically trigger when a salesperson thinks that the 
lead has been well qualiied and that there is a real opportunity, following the contact 
he had with the prospect. CRMOD application facilitates this conversion process.
Hold on!
Before you can utilize the Lead Conversion utility of the CRMOD application, make 
sure you have the required access and privileges assigned to your role. A role must 
have the following settings:
• 
The CRM Marketing: Convert Leads privilege
• 
Appropriate access-level settings for record types that allow you to convert leads
Converting a lead
When users convert a lead, they can do one of the following:
• 
Create a new account, contact, or an opportunity, which is linked 
automatically to the lead record.
• 
Link the lead record to existing account and contact records. Users select the 
records that they want to link to the lead while converting the lead.
Lead Conversion Mapping
Lead Conversion Mapping facilitates ield mapping, after a lead is converted,  
for accounts, contacts, or opportunities. When users convert leads to an account, 
contact, or an opportunity, some values are carried over to the new/existing records 
by default. However, you can extend the amount of information that is carried over 
by mapping additional ields, including custom ields.
Do not map Web link ields for lead conversion. The contents of 
Web link ields cannot be carried over to the new records when a 
lead is converted.
Hold on!
Ensure that your role includes the Data Rules and Assignment privilege to perform 
a lead conversion mapping.

Chapter 6
[ 145 ]
Mapping ields for converting leads
To map additional ields when converting a lead, follow these steps:
1. Navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Data Rules & 
Assignment | Lead Conversion Administration | Lead Conversion 
Mapping; this is shown in the following screenshot:
2. On the Lead Conversion Mapping page, select the ields that you want  
to map.
3. Use the Default button in the title bar, to revert back to default settings.  
Refer to the following screenshot to visualize Lead Conversion Mapping:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 146 ]
So let us now see how values in the mapped ields are carried over; they are 
explained as follows:
• 
On conversion of a lead, when users create a new account, contact, 
opportunity, or deal registration records, the values from the mapped ields 
on the lead record are carried over to the speciied ields in the new record. 
According to the previous screenshot, when a Lead record is converted to a 
Contact record and an Account record, the value of the Address 1 ield at the 
Lead record will be populated in the Contact Address 1 ield of the Contact 
record and Billing Address 1 ield in the Account record.
• 
On conversion of a lead, when users link the lead record to an existing 
account, contact, opportunity, or deal registration records that they select 
when converting the lead, the ields in the existing records that already have 
values remain unchanged. Fields that are empty are updated with the value 
from the mapped lead ield.
Lead Conversion Layout
Depending on the business model deined for an organization, a sales representative 
should be able to convert a nurtured lead into an account, contact, or an opportunity. 
However, if the business model demands, there should be an option to restrict the 
sales representative to convert a lead to accounts, contacts, and opportunity and just 
do a partial or customized conversion.
To address this need, the concept of lead conversion layout comes into the picture. 
This utility is used to deine customized lead conversion layouts, which specify what 
options are available to users when they convert leads. Once the layouts are deined, 
they are assigned to user roles as per the business requirements.
Refer to the CRM On Demand help-text reference at http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/ldconvlayouts.html to explore the list of 
conigurable options available in the Lead Conversion Layout page.
The Deal Registration options are applicable only if your company is set up to use 
the Oracle CRMOD Partner Relationship Management Edition.

Chapter 6
[ 147 ]
Depending on the options that you make available for a record type, the corresponding 
sections on the Convert Lead page are affected, explained as follows:
• 
If you do not make any of the options available for a record type, the Convert 
Lead page does not include a section for that record type.
• 
If you make only the Do Not Convert to Account option available for the 
Account record type, the Accounts page does not appear on the page.
• 
If you make only the Do Not Convert to Opportunity option available for 
the Opportunity record type, the Opportunity section does not appear on 
the page.
• 
If you make only the Do Not Create Deal Registration option available 
for the Deal Registration record type, the Deal Registration section does 
not appear on the page (this is applicable only in Oracle CRMOD Partner 
Relationship Management Edition).
Creating a lead conversion layout
To create a lead conversion layout, follow these steps:
1. Navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Data Rules & 
Assignment | Lead Conversion Administration | Lead Conversion Layout; 
this is shown in the following screenshot:
2. In the Lead Conversion Layout page, click New Layout.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 148 ]
3. In Step 1, enter the name for the layout. Enter a description for the layout 
(optional). If you want this layout to be the default for all users, select  
the Default Lead Conversion Layout checkbox, as shown in the  
following screenshot:
By default, the standard Lead Conversion Layout 
provided in Oracle CRM On Demand acts as the default 
lead conversion layout for the company unless another 
layout is marked as the default.
4. In Step 2, highlight the record type for which you want to select the actions 
(Account, Contact, or Opportunity) in the Lead Conversion Record Types 
section, and then use the arrows to transfer the actions you want to display 
on the page from the Lead Conversion Available Actions section to the Lead 
Conversion Selected Actions section. Repeat this step for each of the record 
types; this step is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 149 ]
5. In Step 3, review your selections, and if necessary, return to Step 2.  
Select actions to change your selections. This step is shown in the  
following screenshot:
By customizing speciic lead conversion layouts on the basis of record types and 
selecting corresponding actions, we can empower and control the user roles to 
convert leads differently in different scenarios.
Sales methodology
A very interesting saying in the world of sales goes like this: "sales process is to 
religion as sales methodology is to prayer". Sales methodology is the approach that 
you use within your sales process in much the same way that prayer is the approach 
you take within your religion.
An effective sales methodology is one that a sales organization has thought out 
clearly and provides it to its sales force. A consistent sales methodology helps you to 
enforce consistency within the sales force and track your progress against important 
milestones in your company's sales cycle. In this section of the chapter, we are 
going to learn about CRM On Demand's default sales methodology and the ways to 
conigure and customize it according to the speciic needs of the sales environment.
Sales process
In simple words, a sales process is a methodology adopted by any sales organization 
for selling its products or services. In CRMOD, a sales process is a collection of sales 
stages which provides meaningful visibility into the sales pipeline.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 150 ]
An organization may have one or more sales processes depending on the process 
they adopt towards selling different kinds of products and services. For example, 
Oracle as an organization may sell both products and services. The sales process to 
be adopted in terms of various sales stages for the product's line of business could 
be different from the services line of business and that is where coniguration of 
multiple sales processes helps.
You can associate the sales process to the opportunity type or user's role; so 
depending on the opportunity type or role of the user creating the opportunity,  
the appropriate sales process is defaulted by the system automatically.
Sales stage
A sales stage is a step in a sales process towards reaching the inal state of winning 
or losing the opportunity. Typically, the sales stages progress sequentially, though 
always not necessarily. The CRM On Demand system provides the facility to 
specify the sequence for each of the sales stages, an opportunity winning probability 
percentage for every sales stage, and set of activities that you can automatically 
create for users to perform when the opportunity reaches a given sales stage.
In addition to that, you can also deine the mandatory ields in each of the sales stages 
as well as the steps to be performed by the sales user for each of the sales stages, along 
with any supporting documentation that he can refer to using the sales coach feature. 
The details of the coniguration steps involved in it are detailed in the subsequent 
sections. Refer to the following diagram for a detailed analysis of the sales cycle:
Opportunities enter the sales funnel when they are created individually or converted 
from a lead.

Chapter 6
[ 151 ]
Setting up a sales stage
To set up the sales stages, follow these steps:
1. Navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Data Rules & 
Assignment | Sales Methodology | Sales Processes.
2. Select Sales Process Name by clicking on the link in the Sales Process  
List page.
3. In the Sales Stage title bar, click New to create a new sales stage, or select 
Edit in the record-level menu of the sales stage that you want to edit.
4. On the Edit page, complete the required information. Sales Stage Name  
and Order are mandatory ields and cannot be left blank while setting up  
a sales stage.
The different types of ield are explained in the following table:
Field
Description
Sales Stage
The sales stage name; a mandatory field.
Default 
Probability
The probability of winning the opportunity at this sales stage. A 
number from 0 to 100. The default sales stage Own has a probability 
of 100 and Lost has a probability of 0. The probability percentage 
specified here is defaulted when the opportunity moves to the sales 
stage. This percentage can be overwritten by the user.
Order
The order of the sales stage in the sales process. Set it properly so that 
it appears in the same order in the Sales Stage drop-down menu in 
Opportunity.
Description
Comments.
Mark for 
Translation
This is an optional field that you may have to select if you intend to 
translate the name of the sales stage in multiple languages. It gives a 
visual cue to remind you that you have to set the translated value of the 
sales stage for each of the languages that you intend to configure in the 
system.
Stage Category
A category under which the sales stage falls. A list of available 
predefined categories would be displayed here.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 152 ]
All these ields are shown in the following screenshot:
Once a sales stage is created, the following customizations can be deined for a  
sales stage:
• 
Mandatory ields
• 
Process coach
• 
Automated tasks
• 
Useful resources
We will cover each of these bullet points in detail to develop a better understanding.
Mandatory ields
Additional mandatory ields can be deined that are speciic to a sales stage. Note 
that Closed/Lost and Closed/Won are system-mandatory sales stages and hence 
cannot be deleted or renamed from the sales process.
To add additional mandatory ields, follow these steps:
1. Scroll down to the speciic sales stage by clicking on the Sales Stage link.
2. Click on the New button in the Additional Required Fields title bar.
3. Select the ield from the list.
4. Enter the default value. It is advisable to review the onscreen tips while 
making a selection.

Chapter 6
[ 153 ]
5. Save the record. Refer to the following screenshot to better understand  
these steps:
6. For example, If Sales Stage is Initiation, Priority ield on the Opportunity 
record should become mandatory and the default value should be set to 
High, as shown in the following screenshot:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 154 ]
Process coach
The sales process coach acts as a guide for sales representatives, guiding them through 
each stage in the sales process. Using the process coach can help a sales team in 
ensuring that every sales stage is completed without missing necessary information.
To set up the coaching feature for a sales stage, follow these steps:
1. Scroll down to the speciic sales stage by clicking on the Sales Stage link.
2. Click on the New button in the title bar of the Process Coach Steps page.
3. In the Edit page, enter Order number to control the sequence in which this 
information should appear. Provide a relevant Step Name.
4. Save the record, as shown in the following screenshot:
The Process Coach for Sales Stage page opens up when an employee clicks on the 
Coach button for an opportunity record. This provides a screenshot of the milestones 
and activities which should be addressed or completed while in this particular stage.
Refer to the following screenshot to visualize this concept:

Chapter 6
[ 155 ]
Automated tasks
Automated tasks can be used to automatically create certain tasks that are speciic 
to a sales stage. These tasks will be created when an opportunity is in a speciic sales 
stage and will appear in the employee's task list for following up. This acts as a to-do 
list for the employee. Sales representatives have visibility of these tasks for each sales 
stage. Follow these steps to create a task when an employee updates a sales stage:
1. Scroll down to the speciic sales stage by clicking on the Sales Stage link.
2. Click New in the title bar.
3. On the Automated Tasks Edit page, enter the required information, which 
will serve as a template for the task. The task created is available on the 
Opportunity Detail page as well as in the relevant activity lists.
Provide a number in the Due Date field to indicate when the task is 
due since the time it was created. For example, set Task Created Date 
as January 6, 2012 and Due Date as 7. Thus, the task will appear in 
the employee's task list as due on January 13, 2012.
4. For Owner, the following behavior applies:
 °
The task is created for every user having the role you select
 °
If no user fulfills the account team role, then the task is assigned to 
the opportunity owner
5. Save the record. Refer to the following screenshot:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 156 ]
Useful resources
Useful resources are the additional information that can be used by a sales 
representative when dealing with an opportunity, in particular a sales stage.  
Useful resources will equip the sales representative well enough to handle the 
opportunity in a more complete and controlled way.
Various documents, templates, and other relevant information can serve as useful 
resources. This information is made available in the form of attachments and URLs.
The Attachment Edit section is shown in the following screenshot:
The attachments or URL linked to this sales stage can appear in the Process Coach 
for Sales Stage page from the opportunity record page for the employee to refer to, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 6
[ 157 ]
Sales category
As we have discussed earlier in this chapter, multiple sales processes, based on 
various factors, can co-exist in the CRM On Demand application. In turn each 
sales process can comprise of multiple sales stages. There can be a business need 
to consolidate the sales data across the sales stages belonging to different sales 
processes, for analysis and forecasting. Sales category is deined to achieve the same. 
Sales stage categories can be deined as stage 1, 2, or 3. Sales categories can be linked 
to speciic sales stages across sales processes. Information related to different sales 
processes can be consolidated based on the sales categories for an accurate view 
of sales pipelines across different opportunities and roles. The next diagram gives 
an example of leveraging the CRM On Demand reports facility to build a pipeline 
analysis report on opportunities under various sales stages. As you can see, the 
Revenue and Expected Revenue (revenue multiplied by probability) columns are 
grouped by various opportunity sales stages deined in the system.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 158 ]
Setting up a sales stage category
Sales categories can be set up by following these steps:
1. Navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Data Rules & 
Assignment | Sales Methodology | Sales Categories.
2. Click New for creating a new sales stage category or select Edit from the 
record-level menu for the sales stage category that you want to edit.
3. On the subsequent page, ill in the required information; this is explained in 
the following table:
Field
Description
Stage Category
Sales category name.
Order
The sequence of sales category. This sequence would be used when 
ordering sales categories in CRM On Demand reports.
Mark for 
Translation
It is an optional field that you may have to select if you intend to 
translate the name of the sales category in multiple languages. It 
gives a visual cue to remind you that you have to set the translated 
value of the sales stage for each of the languages that you intend to 
configure in the system.
Refer to the following screenshot; it shows the Edit Sales Stage Category section:
Administering forecasts
Forecasting is a self-assessment tool for any company. You need to keep checking 
the health of your business periodically by generating forecast reports and graphs to 
analyze the pulse of your business. It will lead to differentiating in just surviving and 
being highly successful in business as the entire organization planning and readiness 
depends on your forecast. It is a vital cornerstone of a company's budget. The future 
direction of the company may rest on the accuracy of your sales forecasting.

Chapter 6
[ 159 ]
Setting up and administering forecasts effectively provides critical metrics for 
determining any company's sales effectiveness. In the CRMOD application,  
forecasts provide revenue-related information in the form of snapshots.  
Forecasts can be archived, which can serve as a reference in future.
CRM On Demand administrators can deine when, how often, for whom, and  
what types of forecasts are generated. We will answer each of these questions  
in the upcoming sections.
When a forecast is generated, CRMOD sends an alert to the participating employees to 
review the forecast. The alert is posted on My Homepage of the employee for 2 days 
(this period can be extended by updating the Expiration Date ield for that alert).
What type: Determining the types of forecasts
Forecasts can be based on any of the following:
• 
Opportunity revenue: Generates forecasts on the basis of the  
opportunity revenue
• 
Account revenue and contact revenue: Generates forecasts on the basis of 
revenue in revenue lines created under an account or a contact
How to choose the right type of forecasting 
methodology
If your company needs to forecast opportunity revenue, regardless of how  
much revenue is generated from individual products, then choose opportunity 
revenue forecasting.
On the other hand, if your company needs to forecast one-time or recurring product 
revenue for individual products or services, then choose product revenue forecasting.
You can use account or contact revenue if most of your business comes from existing 
accounts or contacts on a periodic basis in some form of repeat/replenishment orders.
When: Determining the forecast duration
Forecasts can display revenue projections for up to four quarters. By default, only 
the current quarter is included in the forecast. There is a provision to change the 
duration setting if you want multiple quarters to be included as part of the forecast. 
The current quarter is always included in addition to any future quarters in the 
forecast. So if three quarters are selected as the forecast duration, it will include the 
current quarter and the next two quarters.

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 160 ]
For whom: Designating forecasting roles
You can select the roles that you want to include as part of a forecast deinition.  
All users assigned to the selected role automatically become the forecast participants. 
Every forecast participant—who has a valid role deined in the user proile, is an 
active user, and also has a valid reporting hierarchy—is deined. Entire forecasts can 
fail if any of the forecast participants is not set up accurately.
The success and failure scenarios for forecast roll-up are presented in the following 
diagram. The irst shows a success scenario where the forecast of individuals are 
rolled up to one person at the top of the hierarchy. The second is a failure scenario  
as there are two different branches rolling up to different persons playing the role  
of an executive.
In case of a failed forecast due to an improper reporting structure among 
the participants, an e-mail notiication is sent to the primary contact 
(deined in the company proile) from customer support. The forecast is 
automatically generated when the reporting structure is amended.
How often: Frequency of forecasting
Forecasts can be generated on a weekly or monthly cycle. If you choose a weekly 
forecast schedule, you will be asked to specify the day of the week you want the 
forecast to be generated. If you choose a monthly forecast cycle, you will be asked to 
specify the day of the month. The frequency depends on your business need to do 
comparative analysis in the future of how the forecast evolved over a period of time 
for a given forecast period. Many organizations penalize sales teams for inaccurate 
forecasts either way (the actual value is either above or below the forecast).

Chapter 6
[ 161 ]
Setting up Forecast Deinition
A wizard will guide you through the steps of setting up your forecast. Follow these 
steps to set up the forecast deinition:
1. Navigate to Admin | Business Process Management | Data Rules and 
Assignment | Forecast Administration | Forecast Deinition.
2. Click Update.
3. In Step 1, check the checkbox corresponding to the forecast type that you 
want to generate, as shown in the following screenshot:
4. In Step 2:
 °
In the Forecast Duration field, select the forecast duration
The duration of each quarter is determined by the 
fiscal calendar settings for your company.
 °
The Create Forecast Snapshot Each field specifies how frequently the 
forecast snapshot is to be created
 °
The Forecast Snapshot Day field, specifies the exact day of the 
month/week on which the forecast snapshot is to be created; these 
fields are shown in the following screenshot:

Business Process Automation and Management
[ 162 ]
5. In Step 3:
 °
Add the user roles for those users who are to participate in the 
forecast to the Forecasting Roles area.
 °
There is an option for allowing forecasting for inactive users. Check 
the Allow Forecasts for Inactive Users checkbox. Forecasts for 
inactive users would be useful in case you haven't reassigned the 
opportunities of the users to other active users in the system.
 °
Check the Auto-submit forecasts for team upon manager  
submit checkbox for allowing the manager to automatically  
submit forecasts for their reports. All these options are shown  
in the following screenshot:
6. Click on the Finish button.
Updating and maintaining forecasts
An organization may require you to update its forecast deinition to change the 
forecast frequency, or to add or remove roles, and so on. In addition, when certain 
changes are made to the user records, or if your iscal calendar is modiied, you must 
update the forecast deinition so that it incorporates the changes.
To update a forecast with different settings, the administrator needs to click Update 
and go through the three steps of the Forecast Deinition wizard. The option to 
update any forecast is available on the Forecast Deinition page. The good thing is 
that after the forecast deinition is updated, a summary of the update and a list of the 
updated participants are displayed on the forecast deinition page.

Chapter 6
[ 163 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned the importance of business process management and 
the key aspects of coniguring BPM in the CRM On Demand application. We irst 
deined the two most important ways of automating business processes in CRM On 
Demand using the Worklow Coniguration and Data & Assignment pages. Then 
we covered each concept in detail with relevant business scenarios and examples. We 
also introduced the default sales methodology of CRM On Demand and the extent 
to which it can be customized by deining multiple sales processes, sales stages, and 
sales stage categories. In the last section of the chapter, we introduced forecasting, 
which is an important module as it facilitates measuring your sales performance and 
effectiveness. If leveraged eficiently, forecasting can really help in analyzing and 
projecting the sales of an organization.


Content Management
An organization is essentially an operation of knowledge, information, and data by 
the staff. When isolated data is organized we have information and when isolated 
information is organized we have knowledge. The goal of every business is, of course, 
to constantly accumulate or add to its knowledge in order to remain an effective 
organization; when the knowledge is represented or captured in a form that can be 
shared with and used by all the staff it helps increase the eficiency of the organization. 
Published or announced knowledge is content. The CRM organization will need to 
generate and manage its content regularly to be effective and eficient in its work.
A list of new customers in the past 15 days, a list of new customers in the past 15 
days who were signed on Wednesdays or Thursdays, a Catalog of products that 
were offered for sale by the organization ive years ago, a Catalog of products 
that are offered for sale by the organization for the next six months, and the list of 
standardized product names used by the organization, are all examples of content 
that can increase the effectiveness and eficiency of the CRM organization.
In this chapter we will learn about:
• 
Four types of content that can be managed in CRMOD
• 
The management of the four contents
By the end of this chapter you will be able to manage the Product Catalog and 
assessment scripts, manage access to reports and analytics folders, and manage the 
stock of attachment iles in your CRMOD.

Content Management
[ 166 ]
Content
There are four types of content that can be generated and managed in CRMOD:
• 
Product Catalog
• 
Assessment Scripts
• 
Reports/Analytics Folders
• 
Attachment Files
In the CRMOD Administration page, the Content Management section appears as 
shown in the following screenshot:
An effective CRM organization maintains a single catalog of the products produced 
by the business. Regardless of whether the business produces intangible services 
or tangible goods, salespersons and service persons can be more effective in the 
customer relationship management if there is a single catalog of products with  
which to communicate within and outside the organization. The product catalog  
is the content that needs to be centrally administered and maintained.
Evaluating leads, contacts, opportunities, and accounts through their life cycles is the 
normal worklow of sales and marketing organizations. Similarly, gathering service 
feedback from customers is a worklow of service organizations. The questions that 
constitute the evaluation scripts, and the feedback scripts, represent the business' 
knowledge about its mission and objectives. The assessment script is the content  
that needs to be centrally administered and maintained to be accessible to all users  
of the system.

Chapter 7
[ 167 ]
Reports and analytics are usually written to provide answers to speciic  
business-related questions. The business questions usually have different depths 
in terms of both quantity of data and the quality of answer expected, depending 
on the business role of the person asking that business question. An effective CRM 
organization ensures that each staff member has access to the maximum quality and 
quantity of information that relates to their speciic role. Information overloads are 
as debilitating as information under supply. Separately, providing complete access to 
all of the business data to all the staff is an expensive process. For these purposes it is 
common to create a "folder" to contain reports that are relevant to speciic roles, and 
restrict the access of users to these folders, thus ensuring all users have access to their 
most relevant information. Managing such report folders or content is necessarily a 
central function.
Attachment iles or URLs are related information to data records in the CRM system. 
Users, based on their access proiles, gather and/or generate attachment iles 
("attachments" or "iles") as part of the lead, opportunity, contact, account, and other 
records. Administrators may have attachment iles as part of the broadcast alerts. 
Attachment iles are typically used to store content that is otherwise not represented 
in the structured data records of the system. The stock of attachment iles in your 
CRM system will need to be managed periodically for reasons of access control, 
relevance of the content, and consumption of network and storage resources. Access 
to the content within the attachment iles is out of the scope of the CRM On Demand 
access controllers. So, for example, your organization may design to gather the 
attachment iles from CRM On Demand and store them in a secured access-controlled 
server externally (which is provided with a seamless integration to CRM On Demand) 
or have a central user to manually apply password controls on attachment iles, and 
so on. Content within some iles may become outdated over time and therefore need 
removed from the system. Attachment iles consume scarce network and storage 
resources, and therefore require centralized monitoring and management.
The administrative privileges related to content management should normally be the 
preserve of the main administrator user role and rarely activated to other user roles, 
for the changes in this part of the system are immediate and far reaching.

Content Management
[ 168 ]
The product catalog
Every business has a set of products (goods and/or service) that provide it the reason 
to exist. No organization can exist that cannot articulate its productive potential. The 
product catalog is the list of products that are offered for sales and/or service by 
your business. The product catalog is the master/reference list that a salesperson or 
a service person would look up when transacting on opportunities, service requests, 
and other custom processes in your CRM organization (that are implemented in the 
CRM On Demand application) that relates to the products/goods that are offered by 
your organization to the world at large.
The product catalog at its simplest is a list of the names of the products. At the  
other extreme, it is a catalog that organizes the products by a commercial taxonomy, 
and carries comprehensive details for each of the products, including their physical, 
commercial, and business parameters. Some examples of such parameters are  
as follows:
• 
The current status of the product (alpha, beta release, production,  
and limited edition)
• 
Date of commercial release
• 
Date of production ending
• 
Legal terms in sale and service
• 
Minimum quantity of purchase
• 
Maximum quantity of purchase
• 
Place of manufacture
• 
Product code
• 
Shipping terms
• 
Type of pricing
• 
Minimum retail price
• 
The price lists for the product
• 
The relation to other products
A product usually has as many prices as the markets in which it is offered. While 
digitization of products and globalization of economies tend to reduce the number of 
markets to 1, in practice, the market is a negotiation between your business and the 
rest of the world economy.

Chapter 7
[ 169 ]
Product category
An effective catalog normally organizes/groups the products into product 
categories. The categories may be organized in a hierarchy to better represent the 
lineage, classiication, and other generalities of the actual products. An eficient 
product catalog posits the actual goods/services that are dealt by the business as 
products, and captures other abstraction surrounding those actual products as 
categories and/or commercial details of the products. In other words it requires 
the length and breadth of the CRM organization to agree on a common language to 
deine/list the product names, the product categories, and the product attributes. 
Where this exercise is usually simple for a business that manufactures and sells, say, 
a single size, material and color of umbrellas, the real-world business of our times 
gives a lot of thought to deining its business, products, categories, and competitors, 
when designing its product catalog. In CRM On Demand, you would irst create 
the records for each product category that have been deined for the catalog. If you 
have a hierarchy of categories, you would create the parent category irst and follow 
it down to the child category. A record of a product category has a category name, 
its parent category (if applicable), and a description of the category, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Content Management
[ 170 ]
Product
A product once created cannot be deleted. You can remove/withdraw a product 
but never really delete it once it has been sold! This is true for the market and the 
same applies to the product record in CRM On Demand too. You remove a product 
from the market by not taking orders for it, and in CRMOD that is represented by 
the Orderable ield on the product record. A product record that is not marked as 
Orderable (checkbox ield = "Y") does not appear in the Product lookup ield on 
the Revenue and other custom pages. It is not a good practice in the real market 
and correspondingly in CRMOD as well, to rename a product that has already been 
marketed. If you do need to rename, in CRMOD you should plan to update all 
the transactional records that are associated with the product record that has been 
renamed; not doing so would lead to incorrect forecasts, reports, and analytics.
A product can have a parent product and thus a hierarchy can be organized for the 
set of products. Normally you would need a hierarchy of products when you are 
selling/servicing components or parts as individual products in themselves.
A product catalog is the collection of product records. Before you can create records 
for each of your products you will need to know the attributes or characteristics 
or typology or ields to deine, capture, and describe the products. The product 
management department of your business would usually have the list of attributes 
or ields that catalog all the products in your business. If the product cataloging 
attributes that are available in CRMOD out of the box do not sufice for your 
business, you can conigure the additional cataloging attributes for the product 
record in the Product Application Customization section. The product is like any 
other object in CRMOD and the standard facility of object customization is available 
for it. The following screenshot shows the product object customization facility. Note 
the useful facilities such as Cascading Picklists, List Access & Order, and Search 
Layout Management that are available on the product object.

Chapter 7
[ 171 ]
After you have inalized your product record page, including any custom ields 
and their layout, you would proceed to create the records for each of the products. 
You should note that a product name has to be unique and the Orderable checkbox 
is essential in populating the product catalog. The following screenshot shows a 
sample product record from a catalog:
The product records can be imported in batch using the standard data import  
UI assistant.
Assessment scripts
You can conigure assessment scripts for Leads, Opportunities, Contacts, and Service 
Requests. These objects are related in the CRM business process, and therefore the 
assessment ilters are usually deined/captured so to resonate across the objects. 
CRMOD has a ixed set of four ields for assessment ilters that are connected across 
the Lead, Contact, Opportunity, and Service Request objects. An assessment script 
however is speciic to each object. You can have any number of assessment scripts for 
an object, however you will need to distinguish among the many scripts by applying 
mutually exclusive ilters on them. Or, you may design a single script for an object 
that can be applied to all types of records of that object.

Content Management
[ 172 ]
An assessment script has a unique name, its status as active or inactive, the ilters 
to which it applies, the nature of questions (radio buttons, checkboxes, picklists), its 
decision tree, and inally the set of questions with their weights and sequence in the 
script. The following screenshot shows a sample assessment script:
Assessments can be run on the same record, such as a Lead or Opportunity, multiple 
times. Different assessment scripts may be run on the same record multiple times, 
as long as the record meets the assessment ilters of each assessment script. Every 
assessment, say of a Lead record, is stored separately and associated as a child record 
to the assessed Lead record. If you design multiple assessment scripts and if the 
various assessment records map their responses and/or inal scores to the same ields 
on the assessed record, then subsequent assessments on that same Lead record would 
keep overwriting the previous values on those common ields on the Lead record.
The four assessment ilter ields are the essence of the assessment scripting in CRMOD. 
You should not use those ields as any other prebuilt picklist ields in the object but 
plan and design to employ them for picklists relevant for assessment scripts regardless 
of whether you will implement assessments in your business process.
Assessments are available in the reports/analytics tables of CRMOD.

Chapter 7
[ 173 ]
Reports/analytics folders
We saw in an earlier chapter that one of the privileges settings in the user role is that 
of whether that role has access to all the data in the analytics tables, independent 
of its speciic accesses to the transactional tables. Reports and analytics are usually 
abstracts, summaries, dissections and scenarios, over the raw transactional data. 
From a functional perspective, in some organizations users and/or roles may have 
the training to build their own reports over the entire dataset of the company, some 
organizations may restrict reporting and analytics to their transactional data alone, 
and some others may deine, pre-build, and provide a ixed collection of reports 
and analytics into a folder for each role. From a technical perspective reports and 
analytics, when they process large datasets and/or are utilized at high frequencies by 
many users, can consume signiicant computing resources, in which case governance 
of them becomes imperative. The Answers On Demand is where users build and 
access reports/analytics in CRMOD. Answers provides the facility to organize 
the content by folders. A hierarchy of folders can be maintained. In CRMOD, the 
administrator can govern access to the built reports and analytics, by associating the 
folders to user roles. Access to a parent folder implies automatic access to the content 
of all the sub-folders. A user role can be associated to multiple peer folders.
The Administrator role has access to all folders by default. Any role that is created by 
copying the Administrator role deinition too begets this inherent property.
Do not copy the prebuilt Administrator role to create a new user role.
The following screenshot shows a sample listing of folders and user roles having 
access to them:

Content Management
[ 174 ]
When you reorganize the folders, including creating new folders and renaming 
existing folders, you should revisit the folder accesses in order to refresh the access 
control. You do not need to refresh the access control when you add or remove 
content from the folders.
Attachment iles
Attachment iles can be associated by users to most objects in CRMOD. Attachment 
iles represent unstructured data in the system. Such data may pose signiicant 
challenges to the business. Unstructured data can leak data outside the structured 
security controls. Files can consume scarce storage resources, if left unchecked and 
without a maintenance process.
For these requirements the administrator of CRMOD has a facility to view all the 
attachment iles that are stored in the system in a single place, to study, monitor, 
manage, and maintain the iles easily.
The list provides all the meta details of the attachment iles loaded by users, 
including the ile name, ile extension, ile size, the user name who uploaded the 
ile, and the object to which the ile is associated. The administrator can download 
individual iles directly from the console. Separately, one can export the list of 
attachment iles for ofline analysis and decisions including purging, archiving, 
and replacements. Attachment iles can be batch downloaded via the standard data 
export facility of CRMOD. Attachment iles that are deleted can be restored similar 
to the restore facility available for transactional records.
Attachment iles can be batch uploaded, as a ile or URL, using the Web Services.  
See the chapter on Web Services Integrations for more information.
Attachment iles cannot be associated to the Custom Objects 4 and above.
The following screenshot shows a view of the Manage Attachments section:

Chapter 7
[ 175 ]
Summary
In this chapter we learnt that content comprises corporate knowledge items such as 
the product cataloguing attributes and the list of products, predeined reports and 
analytics, scripts to assess/evaluate CRM business data, and documents or iles that 
users generate and associate to CRM business data. Maintaining the content is one 
of the main tasks of the administrator of the CRM system and this chapter explained 
the basics of the maintenance process in CRMOD.


Web Services Integration
Web services are all about standards-based integration between applications over 
the Web. The advantage of web service-based integrations over other means lies in 
the fact that web services allow you to integrate external systems without worrying 
about the technology/internal intricacies of other systems with which you integrate.
Web services are built on a core set of technologies, such as Extensible Mark-up 
Language (XML), Web Services Description Language (WSDL), and Simple Object 
Access Protocol (SOAP). The primary scope of this chapter is limited to discussion 
of web services in the context of CRM On Demand, where we try to understand 
the integration capabilities of CRM On Demand that can help you to implement 
different types of integration between CRM On Demand and external systems 
followed by details on how to get started with CRM On Demand web services, list 
of services available, session management in CRM On Demand web services, design 
best practices in implementing web service-based applications, understanding web 
service limiters, and ways and means to monitor/handle web service limiters.
This book is not meant to go into the programmatic aspects of developing a  
web service program; for that you should refer to the reference material  
available on the Web.

Web Services Integration
[ 178 ]
CRM On Demand integration abilities
Information that CRM system requires might be scattered across multiple internal 
systems in any organization. Document management could be handled through the 
Microsoft SharePoint portal, order management-related tasks in your ERP system, 
employee-related information in your PeopleSoft application, customer inancials in 
your FlexCube banking system, and so on. Bringing in this distributed information 
from across multiple silos into CRM—thus facilitating coherent search, access, 
replication, transformation, and analysis over a uniied view of information assets 
to meet business needs—is a challenging task in implementing any CRM system. 
What kind of integration solution you need to adopt depends on your detailed 
integration requirements. To be able to select the right approach towards integrating 
these systems, arriving at the right answers for the following questions with your 
business/technology stakeholders is a good starting point:
• 
What is the business value expected from integrating these systems?
• 
To realize the business value and come up with a suitable approach, 
determine following points to arrive at the detailed integration use-case:
 °
Understand the information that resides in the other system(s)
 °
Understand the need for one way or bi-directional integration
 °
Evaluate whether a batch integration would suffice or does it require 
a real time integration
 °
Document out the role-based process workflow of users using the 
integrated applications
 °
Capture the data structure and design elements of web-based 
frontend forms
 °
Detail out the type of authentication and data security needs required 
by different roles for the integrated systems.
• 
Similarly, on the technology front, identify and document the following 
technical details:
 °
Finalize the application development technology such as Java, .NET, 
and so on depending on your development team's skill sets.
 °
Identify the right application server to deploy the solution. It could 
be an open source application server such as Tomcat or any of the 
paid application servers such as WebLogic, WebSphere, and so on 
available in the market.

Chapter 8
[ 179 ]
 °
Choose between the hub-and-spoke integration model and the  
point-to-point integration model depending on the complexity and 
number of systems integrated. Point-to-point will suffice if it is just 
between two systems and the integration use case is pretty simple. 
The hub-and-spoke model is preferred if the integration use case is 
complex and we are looking at integrating multiple systems.
 °
Identify the frequency of data exchange between the systems.
 °
Estimate the volume of data exchange that can happen between the 
two applications to design the application for better performance  
and scalability.
 °
Evaluate the need for any special performance or error handling 
considerations such as minimal throughput transactions per second, 
special error logging format, e-mail notifications, re-run on failure 
scenarios, and so on.
If you have all the preceding information, then, as a next step, the following decision 
chart would come in handy to inalize the integration approach:
As you can see in the preceding diagram, there are two broad approaches possible. 
One is to do a replication of data from one system to another system to meet the 
integration needs and the other option is to surface the data of one system to another 
system without duplicating the data.

Web Services Integration
[ 180 ]
Transferring data between systems
This approach is the hardest between the two available options where required data 
entries are replicated in both the systems in real-time or batch mode. One of the most 
common reasons for the customer to opt for this approach is to run reports/analytics 
in CRM On Demand using data streams that come from multiple systems. This can 
be facilitated in CRM On Demand in the following two ways:
• 
Data transfer at real-time: When data has to be pulled in real-time from 
one system to another system during user interaction, this approach can 
be adopted; for example, for not only surfacing the account balance from 
inancial information system to a call center agent in CRM On Demand but 
also persisting the latest retrieved account balance in CRM On Demand. 
The only disadvantage with this approach is that it can be time-consuming 
to retrieve the information in real-time and this can take a toll on the 
performance. This could be an ideal approach if the response time for 
retrieval of the projected load can be guaranteed by the target application 
with which you integrate. This can be achieved by using the following:
 °
Web applet: Retrieve data corresponding to a record (for example, 
the latest account balance of all financial accounts of a customer 
from a core banking system), persist the data in CRM On Demand at 
runtime, and at the same time surface the data to the end user as a 
web applet in the Customer Detail page. Refer to the Configuring Web 
links and custom applets section for configuring a web applet in CRM 
On Demand.
 °
Web link: It's similar to web applets, but the only difference is that it 
has to be executed by the end user by clicking the Web link whenever 
he needs the external system information. This is the preferred 
approach from a performance standpoint as it avoids putting 
unnecessary load on the other system. Refer to the Configuring Web 
links and custom applets section for configuring a Web link in CRM  
On Demand.
Both Web links and web applets can also be leveraged to send 
data to external systems from CRM On Demand on loading or 
clicking the web applet or the Web link.

Chapter 8
[ 181 ]
• 
Batch: This is suited for ofline information exchange, where information in 
the systems is synced up on a periodic manner. Though the primary mode 
of integrating with CRM On Demand is through web services or the Bulk 
Loader utility, the way you integrate with other systems may be through 
different means such as web services, APIs, ile-based exchange, and so 
on, depending on the capabilities of the other system. This can work in 
combination with real-time integration, where at the end of the day, a batch 
program can run and update the latest balance of inancial accounts—from 
banking systems—for accounts where the balance is more than a day old. For 
batch-based integration, you can use either of the following approaches:
 °
Integration events (for data to flow out of On Demand): Refer to the 
Configuring integration events section for more details. This approach 
is adopted if every change in the CRM On Demand system data has 
to be applied on the other system and applying periodic net change is 
not good enough. For example, assume that every time the status of 
the service request is changed to Re-Open, you perform some actions 
in the backend systems. When the number of times you perform Re-
Open and the sequence of change in the status flow matters, using 
integration events is the suitable approach.
 °
Querying records based on certain criteria: This approach is adopted 
when the requirement is to apply a net change (you aren't bothered 
about the number of times the status is changed and the sequence 
in which the status changes happen) in the other system. The set 
of incrementally changed data can be identified either through the 
timestamp fields (modified timestamp fields are available in every 
object in CRM On Demand) or using special fields that can serve as 
flags to identify the net changes to be applied on the other system.
Surfacing data from other systems
This approach comes in handy when your requirement is limited to the  
lookup/reference of data in one system by users of the other system, such  
as lookup of order status in ERP in CRM for the sales manager to respond to  
the status of their recent orders. This can be facilitated in CRM On Demand in  
the following two ways:
• 
Web applet: Retrieve data corresponding to a record (for example, orders 
that are created due to a successfully Closed/Won opportunity) as part of a 
web applet by calling the other system in real-time and surfacing the web 
applet without really persisting the data in CRM On Demand. Refer to the 
Coniguring Web links and custom applets section for coniguring a web applet 
in CRM On Demand.

Web Services Integration
[ 182 ]
• 
Web link: It's similar to web applets, but the only difference is that it has to 
be executed by the end users by clicking the Web link whenever he needs the 
external system information. This is a preferred approach from performance 
stand point as it avoids putting unnecessary load on other system. Refer to 
the Coniguring Web links and custom applets section for coniguring a web 
applet in CRM On Demand.
Coniguring Web links and custom applets
In the following sections we will discuss in detail the steps involved in coniguring 
a Web link and web applet—the two available options to surface data from external 
system in CRM On Demand.
Coniguring a Web link
Adding Web link custom ields to CRM On Demand provides many new integration 
opportunities. A Web link is a custom ield in CRM On Demand that can be placed 
in the CRM On Demand forms to surface relevant data either from an external 
application or from other CRM On Demand pages.
A good example of surfacing data from an external application is passing the 
account's address data to Google Maps for surfacing the account's address in a map. 
An example of surfacing data from another CRM On Demand page could be of 
surfacing a CRM On Demand report to present a list of open service requests for the 
account in the Account section.
The following screenshot presents the key parameters to be conigured for a Web 
link. You can access this page by going to Admin | Application Customization | 
Record Type Setup | Field Management System | Create Web Link Field:

Chapter 8
[ 183 ]
The key parameters to be conigured are described as follows:
• 
The Web Link Target parameter controls how you expect the system to 
surface the external data when you click the Web link. You have an option 
either to surface the external page in the current window or in a new CRM 
On Demand custom web tab or in a new browser window.
• 
The Display Options parameter helps you to select whether you want to 
make this link available in the Detail page, the Edit page, or both. Note that 
in the Edit page, if you change the address and click the link to Google Maps, 
it would still take you to the old address.

Web Services Integration
[ 184 ]
• 
The Active Link Condition parameter helps to deine a condition under 
which the link should be active. In the example, where we discussed Google 
Maps, you can make the link inactive, if account doesn't have any address 
information, by specifying a condition that account address ields are not 
empty. Similarly, Display Link Condition is a condition where only if it is 
set to TRUE, the link will be displayed in the page.
• 
The Url ield is where you specify the external URL or link to another CRM 
On Demand page. In our example, this points to the external URL maps.
google.com and the account's address ields Address1, Address2, Address3, 
City, and Country are passed as parameters for Google Maps to display the 
corresponding map. You can pick and choose the desired ields for the URL 
query parameter from the Account Fields drop-down menu or from the User 
ields drop-down menu depending on what parameters you have to pass to 
the external system.
Coniguring a web applet
Custom web applets allow you to embed external web content at multiple places in 
CRM On Demand.
In the CRMOD application, the user can embed web content within the  
following pages:
• 
A record type's Detail page (navigate to it by going to Admin | Application 
Customization | Record Type | Record Type Web Applet; set Location as 
Detail Page)
• 
A record type's Homepage (navigate to it by going to Admin | Application 
Customization | Record Type | Record Type Web Applet; set Location  
as Homepage)
• 
My Homepage (navigate to it by going to Admin | Application 
Customization | Global Web Applet; set Location as Homepage)
• 
Action Bar (navigate to it by going to Admin | Application Customization 
| Global Web Applet; set Location as Action Bar)

Chapter 8
[ 185 ]
The web applet properties that you would end up coniguring are shown in the 
following screenshot; only the Location ield differs, depending on where you  
embed the applet:
Different types of web contents can be surfaced in the web applets and these are 
listed as follows.
• 
Feed: Used to embed RSS feeds. For example, you might want to embed a 
news feed on My Homepage, Suppose you want the user's Twitter feed to be 
displayed in the web applet; you can conigure the URL as http://twitter.
com/statuses/user_timeline.rss?id=%%%stTwitter_ID%%%&count=10, 
where stTwitter_ID is a custom ield in the User Proile page that captures 
the Twitter ID of the logged-in user.
• 
HTML: Used to embed HTML code. For example, embed web widgets from 
an external source such as Google Maps. For more information on how to use 
the HTML option, you can refer to http://maps.google.com/help/maps/
getmaps/plot-one.html.
• 
URL: Used to embed the content available at the speciied URL in an applet 
within CRMOD. The URL referred to here is the standard web URL and 
could point to your order management system to display the list of orders 
associated with the account that the user is viewing in the system.

Web Services Integration
[ 186 ]
As we had discussed in the previous section, you can pick and choose the desired 
ields for the URL query parameter from the Account Fields drop-down menu or 
from the User ields drop-down menu, depending on what parameters you have to 
pass to the external system. The Always Run ield would instruct the application 
whether to run the code always in an applet or only when the user clicks the option 
to execute it. This comes in handy when you need to minimize the load that you put 
on the external system.
Coniguring integration events
Integration events enable triggering of external processes when speciic changes such 
as creating, updating, deleting, associating, and dissociating of records occur in CRM 
On Demand. The external processes can access the detail of the events in CRM On 
Demand through one or more integration event queues. For example, let's consider a 
scenario where an external application has to be notiied when the status of a service 
request in CRM On Demand is modiied. You can create a worklow— which executes 
when this condition is met—where it adds an integration event to the integration 
event queue for the external program to read and perform required actions using the 
integration event-related web service operations. You can also specify ields of the 
service request that are to be tracked as part of the integration event coniguration, 
which helps you to read the modiied values of the ields without performing an 
additional web service query.
You have to raise a service request to customer care to enable an integration event. 
Once enabled, navigate to Admin | Data Management Tools | Integration Event 
Administration | Integration Event Queue Management to conigure it. Note that 
on an event, CRM On Demand cannot directly call an external web service, a JSP 
page, or an ASP page to pass the event details; you need a batch program to read 
the integration events stored in CRM On Demand integration event queue. The 
Integration Event Administration section is shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 187 ]
You can conigure multiple queues here depending on your requirements. A queue 
may be used to track the changes in opportunities to integrate with your planning 
system and another may be used to track the change in the service requests status 
to an external engine that performs calculation adhering to service level agreement 
(SLA). The properties that need be conigured while creating an integration event 
queue are presented in the following screenshot:

Web Services Integration
[ 188 ]
By default, you would have a queue by the name of Default Queue conigured in 
the system; you can also conigure any custom-named queue. The key parameters to 
conigure the integration queues are documented at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/books/OnDemOLH/index.htm?toc.htm?createintegrationqueues.
html. When you conigure worklows of integration events, you specify the queue 
name to which these integration events are sent. The name that you conigure here is 
the name that you will choose while coniguring worklows. As part of the worklow 
deinition, you create a worklow by selecting the appropriate object, event, and 
condition under which the worklow should be triggered (for example, every time an 
account status is changed in the CRM On Demand system), followed by coniguring 
an integration event queue where you direct the events to a named integration event 
queue. You can also conigure the list of ield changes in the account object that you 
like to capture as part of the event message.
You would consume these messages by invoking the integration event web services 
in your integration programs. The details of the service APIs available are presented 
in the following section. The steps involved in creating a worklow to capture the 
events in an integration event queue are as follows:
1. Create a worklow using the Worklow Rule New section, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 189 ]
2. Conigure an action of the integration event type using the section shown in 
the following screenshot:
3. Conigure the action you deined in the previous step to capture the 
following ield changes:
Enabling CRM On Demand web services
To execute any of the identiied integration strategies to meet your integration 
needs, you need web services in CRM On Demand to create, read, update, or delete 
information in CRM On Demand. When a new instance of CRM On Demand is 
provisioned, by default web services integration is made available for users playing 
the role of the administrator in CRM On Demand. To check whether your role has 
the necessary permission to work with CRM On Demand web services, select your 
role from Admin | User Management and Access Control | Role Management 
| Edit your role| Go to the Step 4 | Privileges to see whether the following two 
privileges are enabled:

Web Services Integration
[ 190 ]
The Enable Web Services Access privilege provides you with the permission to 
perform web service functions in CRM On Demand, whereas Manage Access to 
Web Services provides your role lexibility to assign the Enable Web Services 
Access privilege to other roles conigured in the system.
For the developers in your organization one of the key iles that they would require 
to perform web service integration in any technology of their choice (Java, .Net, 
and so on) is the Web Services Deinition Language (WSDL) ile. The WSDL ile 
contains all the required information, such as the endpoint URL to be accessed to 
perform a web service operation, the input and output message structure, and the 
list of operations exposed, for a developer to programmatically execute web service 
calls. The WSDL ile can be downloaded by your developers from the Admin | 
Web Services Administration section by selecting the suitable object and hitting the 
Download Custom WSDL or the Download Generic WSDL button, as shown in the 
following screenshot:
As you can see in the previous screenshot, there are two versions of services 
available—Web Services v1.0 and Web Services v2.0. The former service is still 
available for clients who have compatibility issues; that is, developers who have 
developed web service-based integrations before Release 16 of CRM On Demand. In 
other words, you can say Web Services v2.0 is a superset of Web Services v1.0; and 
a company planning to build new web service-based integrations should use Web 
Services v2.0 instead of the former service.

Chapter 8
[ 191 ]
In addition to these two versions, you can also ind Service APIs and 
Administrative Services in the Select Service drop-down menu. Service APIs 
typically contains functions to perform user administration, as well as to query 
system and usage information.
Administrative Services contains functions to read the CRM On Demand metadata 
(coniguration information) in XML format. The downloaded metadata can be used 
to programmatically update the coniguration in new instances of CRM On Demand. 
This is very useful if you perform migration from one instance of CRM On Demand 
to other instances, such as from staging to production.
You would use the Download Custom WSDL button if you have customized the 
integration tags (ield identiiers) for custom ields that you have created in the 
system as per your company standards, and you can use the Download Generic 
WSDL button if you haven't done any such changes and left the integration tag 
values to the default values set by CRM On Demand.
Integration tags are nothing but a unique identiier for a web service program to 
identify an object or a ield in the CRM On Demand system. Unlike the Display 
Names ield used while coniguring the system, integration tags don't contain any 
special characters, blank spaces, and so on to adhere to the web service standards. 
Note that you don't have an option to change the integration tags for a standard, out 
of box ields provided by CRM On Demand.
Similarly, the Download Custom Schema and the Download Generic Schema 
options provide you with a facility to download the data structure of the object you 
have selected. Schema iles are required if you use the integration event service in 
CRM On Demand, where via worklows any ield changes to an object in CRM On 
Demand during various events such as creation, updation, and so on are captured in 
an integration event queue, which can be polled by your web service program using 
an integration event service for further processing.
A developer who has the knowledge of building applications using web 
services exposed by an external system would be able to understand how to 
programmatically call in the object-wise operations exposed by CRM On Demand.

Web Services Integration
[ 192 ]
Listing the available CRM On Demand 
web services
A list of the core services exposed via web services on any object in CRM On 
Demand is listed in the following table. Note that these are object-speciic web 
service functions. For a complete list of objects supporting these queries go to the 
Admin | Web Service Administration section to review the same. With every new 
release of CRM On Demand, more and more objects are exposed via web services.
Method
Comments
Delete
On basis of the unique record identifier, this operation deletes the record 
in the CRM On Demand database.
Execute
This can be used to perform multiple operations (update, insert, and 
delete operations) on multiple records using a single web service query. 
Note that, though, you can perform different operations in a single query, 
the records should only be of the same object type.
Insert
This operation can be used to create a new record in CRM On Demand.
QueryPage
This operation can be used to fetch a list of records that meets the given 
query criteria.
Update
Updates an existing record in CRM On Demand on basis of the unique 
record identifier.
In addition to the broader understanding of the previously-mentioned key services 
exposed for every object, it is important to understand the usage of the following 
arguments that are sent as part of the many previous web service calls:
Argument
Comments
Echo
The Echo argument is applicable for web service functions such 
as Insert, Update, and Delete where it controls whether the 
web service calls should trigger integration event workflows 
configured in CRM On Demand or not. The default value is On, 
where it triggers integration event workflows; and if set as Off it 
doesn't trigger.
This is basically used to avoid any recursive queuing in integration 
event queues where you have a need to differentiate between the 
update action performed by end users using web interface and 
programmatic updates.

Chapter 8
[ 193 ]
Argument
Comments
ViewMode
The ViewMode argument determines the data visibility. The list of 
possible values for ViewMode is listed as follows:
• Manager: Provides access to records owned by the current 
user or his subordinates or records where he is part of the 
record team.
• EmployeeManager: This is the same as Manager, but 
provides access only to records where the user is part of the 
record. A team is not considered.
• Sales Rep: Provides access to records where the user is 
part of the record team.
• Personal: Provides access to only records that are owned 
by the user.
• Organization: Provides access to all the records that the 
user has access to in the organization he belongs to.
• Broadest: Provides access to all the records that the user 
has access to. This is the default access.
• AllBooks: Similar to Broadest, but speciically meant 
for objects that have the books feature enabled, where by 
default it provides access to all books that the user has 
access to.
• Context: Provides access to only records that fall under 
the user default book. For access to a specific book, you 
have to use the BookId and BookName arguments.
LOVLanguageMode
Controls whether processing for picklist values is done with 
language independent codes (LIC) or language dependent codes 
(LDC). 
Apart from the object-speciic core services, CRM On Demand also exposes more 
services under Service APIs and Administrative Services. The Service APIs option 
typically contains functions to perform user administration as well as to query 
system and usage information. Administrative Services contains functions to read 
the CRM On Demand metadata (coniguration information) in the XML format. A 
list of Service APIs is listed in the following table:
Method
Web service
Comments
DeletedItemQueryPage
Deleted Item
Gets information about deleted 
items. The items deleted could be 
either through standard web UI 
or via web services.

Web Services Integration
[ 194 ]
Method
Web service
Comments
DeleteEvents
Integration Event
Deletes events from an integration 
event queue. This facilitates 
deletion of events that are already 
processed by the integration 
program.
GetEvents
Integration Event
Gets events from an integration 
event queue. This provides an 
option to read events from the 
integration event queues.
GetMapping
Mapping Service
Gets a list of the display names of 
fields for a particular record type. 
This maps the display names with 
integration tags hence it provide 
a programmatic facility to fetch 
integration tags.
GetPicklistValues
Picklist
Gets lists of picklist values for a 
given picklist.
GetServerTime
Time
Gets the On Demand server time.
LoginHistoryQueryPage
Login History
Gets information about user login
history.
MergeRecords
Merge
Merges records. Provide a facility 
to merge duplicate records, if any.
MetadataChangeSummary 
QueryPage
Metadata Change
Summary
Gets a summary of changes to 
metadata.
SalesProcessQueryPage
Sales Process
Gets the sales process 
information.
SetPasswordAPI
Password
Sets the passwords of users who 
use the application.
SetSessionTimeZone
Time
Sets the time zone for a session.
UpdatePicklist
Picklist
Updates picklist values.
UpdateCascadingPicklists
Picklist
Updates cascading picklist values.
UserUsageQueryPage
User Usage
Gets information about web
services utilization.

Chapter 8
[ 195 ]
Administrative Services contain functions to read the CRM On Demand metadata 
(coniguration information) in the XML format. This option provides a programmatic 
facility to read, update, create, and delete the coniguration information in CRM On 
Demand. The list of coniguration metadata that can be read, updated, created, and 
deleted is limited to Access Proile, Action Bar Layout, Cascading Picklist, Custom 
Record Type, Custom Web Link, Custom Web Tab, Field Management, Homepage 
Layout, Page Layout Field, Page Layout Related Information, Picklist, and Role 
Management. With every new release, CRM On Demand exposes more and more 
metadata via web services.
For additional details on web services, refer to the CRM On Demand web 
services guide available at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E27437_01/books/
OnDemWebSvcs.pdf.
Managing sessions in CRM On Demand 
web services
Establishing a valid session with CRM On Demand is a prerequisite to perform 
any of the web service functions listed in the previous section. A valid web service 
session helps On Demand to identify the user who is performing the web service 
action, thereby limiting the actions he can perform as well as the dataset he has 
access to. Sessions can be stateful or stateless. In case of stateful sessions, a valid 
session is obtained by performing a login query and the returned session ID is used 
for making subsequent web service queries, thereby establishing session continuity 
across all web service operations performed using the same session. In the case of 
stateless sessions, with every request, username and password tokens are passed, 
hence the requests are treated as discrete requests (stateless). In the case of stateless 
web service requests, CRM On Demand takes care of re-using the sessions in the 
server-side if a new request comes again from the same user.

Web Services Integration
[ 196 ]
Prior to CRM On Demand R16, stateless web services were not available. Only 
stateful web services were available and it was the developer's responsibility to 
ensure that the sessions were optimally utilized using a client-side session pooling 
mechanism to ensure that you don't exceed the number of limited sessions set 
forth by CRM On Demand. From R16, with stateless web service sessions in place, 
a stateless web service is considered the best practice to integrate with CRM On 
Demand. By default, the stateless web service is turned on for a new client getting 
a CRM On Demand instance. For clients using CRM On Demand prior to R16 
and having now migrated to the latest version of CRM On Demand, stateless web 
service can be turned on by customer care by unchecking the Web Services R16 
Compatibility Mode setting in the Company Proile page in Oracle CRM On 
Demand, as shown in the following screenshot:
CRMOD web service best practices
Some of the best practices in implementing CRM On Demand web service-based 
applications are listed in the following section. Ensure your development team takes 
care of adhering to these listed best practices.
It is recommended that you use batch operations to perform Insert, Delete, 
Update, or InsertOrUpdate operations as it optimizes the performance by reducing 
the number of web service requests. Typically, batch operations are used for data 
sync operations and a single batch has a limit of 20 top-level records per request. 
Note that even if a single record in a batch causes an error, the entire batch is not 
processed; that is, a batch of 20 account updates where one record contains an error 
will result in failure in the update of all 20 records.

Chapter 8
[ 197 ]
Prior to R16, when stateless web service sessions were not in place, care had to be 
taken in managing the session use at the client-side by application developers. From 
R16 onwards, the recommendation is to use stateless web service as it takes the pain 
out from developers in managing the sessions. Hence, our recommendation is to 
convert your existing stateful applications to stateless at the earliest. But, if for any 
reason your applications were developed prior to R16 and are still using stateful web 
service sessions, ensure that the following best practices are adhered to:
• 
Always close sessions immediately after the web service operation if you are 
not going to re-use the web service session before the session timeout interval 
of 10 minutes. This would be a common scenario when you create stateful 
sessions that are speciic to the logged-in user (using SSO token), where the 
user accesses via the web applets or web links, web service-based applications 
very sparingly (few times in a day) for his day-to-day operations.
• 
On the other hand, keep the sessions open and re-use them when the 
application process is likely to be used multiple times by the same user 
within the timeout period of 10 minutes. This is the recommended approach 
for all batch operations where multiple web service requests are executed in 
short time intervals, as well as when using real-time web service applications 
that the user accesses repeatedly, such as in a call center environment where 
the agent accesses the custom web service application for every call that 
comes in.
• 
When you are using a stateless web service, there is no need to create any 
sessions. You can pass the SSO token or user ID and password for every 
web service query and CRM On Demand uses a server side session pool 
mechanism to manage these web service requests.
• 
If you are using stateful sessions, then session pooling is an additional  
option that you can use to increase the performance of your application.  
In session pooling, you create a pool of sessions using a common Admin 
login with a hardcoded user ID and password stored at the application 
server and re-use the sessions for any web service requests coming from any 
end user accessing the web service applications. This is an option provided 
the end user data visibility doesn't matter, such as setting the status of all 
the activities of associated service requests as Closed when the user clicks a 
custom Web link to set the status of the service request as Closed.
Note that you set the client timeout for any web service call to 
10 minutes, to ensure that the client doesn't time out when the 
query is being processed by CRM On Demand.

Web Services Integration
[ 198 ]
If you are making complex web service queries containing ilter criteria at the parent 
as well as the child record level (joins), the application performance might be poor. If 
you are facing this issue, then either go for multiple simple queries, or a combination 
of web service queries and soft iltering to improve performance. The right approach 
depends on the context of the usage, so there is a no single rule governing all cases.
Error handling and logging is key when developing a client application. Ideally, 
error handling/logging should provide the following information:
• 
SOAP requests/responses should be logged in debug mode to work  
with Oracle support to resolve any web service-related issue. Sometimes,  
just by looking at the actual SOAP request, we can identify the solution to  
a problem.
• 
Endpoints (server name, protocol) should not be hardcoded. Ensure they are 
kept in a conigurable manner outside application code, making life easier in 
porting the application from one instance to another instance (for example, 
from CTE to production).
• 
Identify entry and exit of calls to On Demand web services to isolate CRM 
On Demand versus your application performance issues.
• 
A batch error could result from data errors or non-data errors such as 
network outage, session expiry, and so on. If an error is not data-speciic, it is 
advisable to relogin and retry the web service call. If an error is data-related, 
one approach could be to split the batch into smaller chunks in a recursive 
manner so that records that don't have any data errors are processed without 
any issues.
• 
Ensure the way you designed your application takes care of several limiters 
that CRM On Demand has put in place to protect the system from various 
forms of denial-of-service attacks and incorrect usage. The delimiters are 
the limit on the number of sessions, request rate, request size limit, session 
timeouts, maximum records returned, and maximum objects in a web 
services request. We will discuss more about the applicable limiters in 
subsequent sections.
• 
CRM On Demand might not be available sometimes for scheduled 
maintenance and upgrades. The application should be able to deduct and 
handle these cases appropriately.

Chapter 8
[ 199 ]
CRMOD web service allotment and 
limiters
On the basis of an exhaustive study conducted by CRM On Demand, Oracle has 
correlated some of the common performance issues faced by their clients with 
speciic usage patterns. As CRM On Demand is widely sold to its customers in  
multi-tenant mode, a wrong usage of the system's resources by one of the tenants  
in a POD can create issues to other tenants connected to the same POD. To avoid  
this issue, CRM On Demand has enforced several limiters in the system, thereby 
reaping the following beneits:
• 
More predictable and consistent performance
• 
Reduced service requests and escalations at all levels of the business 
including sales, support, operations, engineering, and project management
• 
Clear service deinitions and policies facilitating appropriate  
customer planning
• 
Enhanced SaaS hosting operations capacity planning
• 
Operational transparency, wherein customers have a more complete and 
holistic view of their implementation to drive user adoption initiatives
These limiters are set by Oracle under the three broad categories of storage 
allotments, web service allotments, SQL limits and peak hours for SQL timeout 
limits. These limiters change from time to time and also depend on the type of CRM 
On Demand instance such as single-tenant, multi-tenant, and so on. To know the 
applicable allotment values to your instance, raise a support request to Oracle.
Monitoring web service allotment usage
The subsequent sections detail the various options available in CRM On Demand to 
perform service allotment administration, setting alerts on hitting service allotments, 
and a list of sections available to monitor the service allotment usage effectively.

Web Services Integration
[ 200 ]
Administrating service allotment
There is a page in the CRMOD application to view and monitor the service 
allotments for your company. This section is used to view your current and historical 
usage of CRM On Demand services as well as to enable proactive alerts when you 
exceed the threshold values. To view service allotments, current and remaining 
usage, and conigure alerts, navigate to Admin | Company Administration | 
Service Allotment Administration. This page is shown in the following screenshot:
In the Service Allotment List page, you can view the following data for each service 
allotment of your company:
• 
The Allotment Name detail.
• 
The Allotment Type detail.
• 
The Allotment Units detail.
• 
The value set for the allotment by customer care.
• 
The amount of the allotment currently used.
• 
The amount of the allotment remaining.
• 
Whether an alert is enabled for the allotment. If the current usage exceeds the 
threshold value, an e-mail alert is sent to the deined recipients.
• 
The user who last modiied the allotment data.
Setting alerts for service allotments
Scroll down on a service allotment to conigure an alert. The threshold value should 
be speciied for the system to send proactive alerts to the conigured recipients when 
the service utilization exceeds the thresholds.
If alerts are enabled for a service allotment, the following defaults apply:
• 
Alert Recipients: The e-mail address of the primary contact for the company
• 
Alert Threshold: 70 percent of the allotment value

Chapter 8
[ 201 ]
To set an alert for a service allotment, follow these steps:
1. In the upper-right corner of any page, click on the Admin global link.
2. In the Company Administration section, click on the Company 
Administration link.
3. In the Service Allotment Administration section, click the Service 
Allotment Administration link.
4. In the Service Allotment List page, click Edit.
5. In the Service Allotment List page's Edit section, complete the  
following ields:
 °
Alert Recipient: Enter the e-mail addresses of the users who will 
receive a warning e-mail
 °
Alert Threshold: Enter the percentage of the allotment value at 
which the alert e-mail will be sent
 °
Alert Enabled: Select this checkbox to enable the sending of  
alert e-mails
Refer to the following screenshot, which captures all these details:
Service Allotment Usage History
From the Allotment Usage List page, you can review all the historical usage data 
about the allotments for your company.
Navigate to Admin | Company Administration | Service Allotment Usage History.

Web Services Integration
[ 202 ]
By default, the allotment details are listed in the following columns:
• 
Date
• 
Period
• 
Allotment Type
• 
Service Allotment
• 
Allotment Units
• 
Allotment Used
• 
Created Date
Refer to the following screenshot, where all these column names are shown:
You can view allotment usages for Daily, Weekly, or Monthly periods, although this 
view varies with the allotment type.
Monitoring ile and record utilization
As you can see in the following screenshot, the ile utilization details can be viewed 
from Admin | Company Administration | Service Allotment Administration | 
File Utilization. It provides object-wise information on the number of iles that are in 
the system, space occupied by the iles, and the date at which the snapshot is taken.
By default, the current usage is displayed, but you can always view the historical 
usage using the All File Usage list from the File Utilization List drop-down menu, 
as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 203 ]
Similar to File Utilization List, Record Utilization List gives you information on 
the number of records by each record type in CRM On Demand database. This 
can be accessed from Admin | Company Administration | Service Allotment 
Administration | Record Utilization. By default, the Current Record Usage list 
is displayed and you can always view historical usage by selecting the All Record 
Usage list from the Record Utilization List drop-down menu; the Record Utilization 
List section is shown in the following screenshot:
Web Services Utilization
The Web Services Utilization section, available at Admin | Company 
Administration | Service Allotment Administration | Web Services Utilization, 
provides all the required information to monitor the usage of web services. The 
information available in this section is detailed in the following table:
Field
Description
End Time
The end time for the web service operation. It would be useful to 
compare this against your client-side logs to see whether there 
is any network latency that is creating a delay in the web service 
operation.
Entry Type
The application values are Login, Logout, and Dispatch. 
Dispatch is the common value for all calls other than Login and 
Logout.
Input Message Size 
(Bytes)
Size of the web service payload.
Operation
The web service operation performed.
# of Operations
Number of operations.
Output Message Size 
(Bytes)
Size of the web service output XML.

Web Services Integration
[ 204 ]
Field
Description
Session Id
The unique session ID for the web service request. Note that this 
doesn't match with the actual web service session that you get 
access to programmatically. This makes it difficult to debug any 
application performance issue.
Start Time
The starting time of the operation.
User Alias
The user who has executed the web service request.
Web Service Client 
Name
The web service client name. Comes in handy to differentiate 
between web service operations performed by multiple web 
service applications.
Web Service Name
The name of the web service.
Web Service Space
The namespace of the web service.
Summary
Thus, in this chapter, we learned about the integration capabilities of CRM 
On Demand that can help you to implement different types of integration 
between CRM On Demand and external systems followed by details on how 
to get started with CRM On Demand web services, a list of services available, 
session management in CRM On Demand web services, design best practices in 
implementing web service-based applications, understanding web service limiters, 
and ways and means to monitor/handle the web service limiters. In the subsequent 
chapters, we will discuss some of the prebuilt integration solutions available from 
Oracle and Oracle partners in the CRM On Demand space. Additional information 
about CRM On Demand web services, sample codes, and utilities can be found at 
the Training & Support link in your CRM On Demand instance under the Web 
Services Library section.

Reports and Analytics
The guru of the practice of business management, the late Peter Frederick Drucker, 
described business as asking the question of and knowing the answer to "Who is my 
customer?" The purpose of the transactional records that reside in your CRM system 
is to help improve your understanding of your individual customer, prospects, and 
the market. We record to research. The Answers On Demand service is a prebuilt 
and inseparable service of CRMOD. It is designed to deliver answers to the business 
questions of your users.
In this chapter, we will learn about:
• 
The Answers On Demand service
• 
Writing your own analytics and reports
By the end of this chapter, you will know about the service in CRMOD for reports 
and analytics, and the basics of writing reports and analytics.
The Answers On Demand service
A machine intending to eficiently answer business questions has to design for three 
things: namely, access to all the data generated by the business, the kind and form of 
business questions that might normally be asked, and most importantly, an interface 
for the user to ask the question and get the answer. A general modeling of such a 
machine is shown in the following diagram:

Reports and Analytics
[ 206 ]
Each of the layers are technically-separated servers working in a hierarchy, as shown 
in the diagram.
The data layer, for Answers On Demand, is a set of all the ields of all the objects 
that are deployed in your CRMOD. The business layer is a collection or subset of 
objects that are thought of as functionally related and/or relevant for reporting 
and analytics. An example of a collection that is not normally functional or related 
is the opportunity and service requests data. Needless to say, it is possible for a 
business to actually relate an opportunity to a service request. The business layer 
is the functional and creative component that is deined by the data model and the 
universe of business questions in the given enterprise. The presentation layer refers 
to the representation and/or delivery of the information by the machine to the user.
Traditionally, the word "reports" refers to information that is presented in a ixed 
format to the user. The term "analytics" refers to information that is presented 
interactively to the user. Dashboards present a collection of reports and/or analytics, 
including analytical features over the collection. In this chapter and in CRMOD as well, 
for simplicity purposes, the term "reports" is used to imply both reports and analytics.
In CRMOD, working with reports and dashboards is possible by accessing the 
Reports tab and the Dashboard tab, as shown in the following screenshot:
Prebuilt reports
Oracle CRM On Demand is the only service in the industry that delivers a set 
of comprehensive reports, analytics, and dashboards out of the box. If you have 
adopted the model of CRMOD for your business processes, you will have all the 
normal reports and analytics that you might require, available right away from the 
second day of your inputting data to the CRM system. The analytical server runs 
the Extraction-Transformation-Loading (ETL) batch jobs on your CRMOD instance 
every night (in your local time zone), and therefore the analytics running on the 
historical subject areas will be available on the second day as soon as the irst bit of 
transactional data is inputted to the system. It is as simple and powerful as that, and 
therefore you need to take the time to study these fabulous set of prebuilt reports, 
analytics, and dashboards that are present.

Chapter 9
[ 207 ]
The following is a screenshot of the entire prebuilt collection for a visual reference. 
Each report is accompanied with a brief description to help understand what the 
report displays. As you can see, the reports are organized based on the standard 
model of CRM processes: namely, marketing, sales, and service processes. 
Additionally, there are reports for you to track the usage of the CRM system.  
These reports are organized under the Usage Tracking section.
Usage Tracking displays data about users; hence, access to these reports should be 
part of the general data access policies in your CRM organization. In CRMOD, access 
to the Usage Tracking section is therefore set out as a privilege while deining the 
user's role, separate from the general access to the other reports and data.

Reports and Analytics
[ 208 ]
Interactivity
Reports answer speciic questions about the business. A simple listing of data, or 
a "data dump" does not make a report. An intelligent report anticipates the form 
of questions that might be raised in a business, and offers interactivity to the user 
to pose the questions and get the answers. The collection of prebuilt reports in 
CRMOD ranges from simple lists to highly interactive reports that will meet most 
of the reporting needs of your users. These prebuilt reports are relevant if you are 
using the standard CRMOD out of the box. The next screenshot is of an interactive 
report, which shows the history of the opportunity pipeline along with a view from 
the various levels of the organizational hierarchy. A user can select the range of the 
opportunity closed date and the manager level of that data as the ilters for the data, 
and then select what he wants to see in that data against a timeline, for example, a 
simple count of the opportunities, or a sophisticated metric of the average days spent 
in each sales stage.
A detailed description of the individual reports in the collection of prebuilt reports 
is out of the scope of this book. We encourage you to get to know these reports 
individually by using them. There is no better way to learn about them than by 
actually working with them. You need to ensure that there is suficient data in the 
system that will populate the reports.

Chapter 9
[ 209 ]
The prebuilt reports are delivered by a closed folder in the Answers On Demand 
service of your CRMOD; this means you cannot customize the reports. You can 
copy them, modify them, and save them as your custom reports, but you cannot 
change the content, listing, and organization of the collection of prebuilt reports 
that appear in the Reports tab. The entire collection of prebuilt reports is in a single 
folder and you can provide access to this folder to individual users by allocating a 
speciic privilege to them. Note that the reports folder access that we learned about 
previously does not apply to the prebuilt folder.
Prebuilt dashboards
We learned the deinition of a dashboard at the beginning of this chapter. The 
CRMOD is the only service in the industry that offers dashboards out of the box. 
Similar to prebuilt reports, dashboards too are comprehensive and are based on the 
standard CRM model. The following is a screenshot of the Dashboard main page:

Reports and Analytics
[ 210 ]
The user selects a dashboard and clicks on the Show button to view the dashboard. 
Similar to prebuilt reports, the best way to get to know about the prebuilt 
dashboards is to click on each of them. The prebuilt dashboards cannot be modiied. 
You can build new, custom dashboards, all of which would appear in the same 
Select Dashboard drop-down menu, with a clear separation between the prebuilt 
dashboards and the custom dashboards. This separation could get a bit dificult 
for user adoption, as every user will see the entire drop-down menu, and therefore 
highly-customized dashboards that are speciic to a user role would need some user 
training along with using proper naming conventions.
The Select Dashboard drop-down menu items can be hidden using 
JavaScript; however, note that, as with any use of JavaScript, the 
maintenance cost also increases gradually. Hiding a dashboard is 
generally not a normal requirement, so you should review any such 
requirement thoroughly to check if the fundamental requirement is 
merely for data access or for viewing a mere dashboard.
Writing a report
When you customize CRMOD at the business or data layers to any extent—small 
or big—you will have concomitant requirements for reports that you would not 
ind in the collection of the prebuilt reports. We will briely look at the elements of 
writing a report. A detailed study of the Answers On Demand service that comes out 
of the box with CRMOD is out of the scope of this book. The CRMOD Answers is a 
complete reporting system. There are some very good reference books on the market 
that are focused on the art of getting custom reports from CRMOD Answers.
There are only three steps to write a custom report, which are as follows:
1. Create a folder for the custom report. A folder can hold as many custom 
reports as you want it to hold. A folder is part of a folder tree; you can build 
a tree of any length and depth you want.
2. Select the appropriate primary Subject Area option for the report.
3. Build the report.
We will look at each of these steps extensively in the remaining sections of this chapter.

Chapter 9
[ 211 ]
For those who write custom reports, the door to use the Answers On Demand service 
is the Design Analyses link found in the irst section of the Reports tab. There is 
absolutely nowhere else to go when writing custom reports; we agree this can be 
quite a disconcerting idea when you consider that this software is otherwise rife with 
a web of links all over the system. Please click this low-proile, high-value hyperlink 
now if you have not already done so.
Report Folders
The Design Analyses page can be viewed as containing two facilities when read 
from the top of the page.
The top half of the page is the semantic repository—the business layer of the 
analytics system, or the "categories" of business questions that your CRM 
organization might pose. This is the section where you create new analyses.
The bottom half of the page is the presentation repository—the presentation layer 
of the analytics system, or the catalog of reports. Here, you would edit the existing 
reports and reorganize/organize them with report folders. Expectedly, therefore, 
you will ind two facilities in the catalog: namely a facility to edit/modify the 
existing reports and a facility to manage the reports folders. You can see these  
two sections labeled as Open Existing Analyses and Manage Analyses.
Manage Analyses
The next screenshot is of the Manage Analyses section that appears after you have 
clicked on the Manage Analyses button in the Design Analyses page.
You can create, rename, copy/move, and delete folders and subfolders. You have to 
scroll down on a folder to navigate to its subfolder structure.

Reports and Analytics
[ 212 ]
You will want to adopt a reasonable convention for naming the report and the report 
folders. It is recommended that you deeply nest the report folders. The Description 
ield for the reports should be used promptly as it will be useful when the number of 
users increases.
When you have renamed or moved an existing folder that contains 
reports, which in turn contain links to other Narrative reports 
(narrative reports will be explained later in the chapter), then 
remember to update those links manually with the revised URL.
Open Existing Analyses
The next screenshot is of the Open Existing Analyses pop-up window that appears 
after you have clicked on the Open Existing Analyses button in the Design 
Analyses page.
In the pop-up window, you will ind the entire tree of all the prebuilt and custom 
folders; you can then navigate to the report that you want to modify. You have to 
click on a folder to display its subfolder's structure. When you click on a speciic 
report, CRMOD Answers will display that report in the design palette. You can then 
proceed to edit that report as required and inish the edit by clicking on the Finish 
button provided in the design palette.

Chapter 9
[ 213 ]
Subject Areas
Having created the folders for the new custom report, let us proceed and create our 
report. The irst step in creating a report is to understand the concept of a subject 
area. The subject area refers to a collection of data tables that are conceptually related 
to each other. An example of two data tables that are, traditionally, not related 
conceptually in CRM practices (yet) are the opportunity and service request data 
tables. Subject areas organize the data for reporting, in ways that follow the business' 
processing of those data. For example, you would ind a subject area that brings 
together the data tables of contacts, service requests, activities, and accounts.
The second step to create a report is to understand that analyses are usually  
of two types. Analyses may draw on real-time data, giving answers to real-time 
questions; these normally go by the name of Reporting. Analyses may also draw  
on historical data, giving answers to historical questions; these normally go by the 
name of Analytics.

Reports and Analytics
[ 214 ]
A business system would normally be designed to separate its reporting and 
analytics facilities for at least two reasons. The demand for these two services is not 
the same intra-day, intra-week, intra-month, intra-quarter, intra-year, intra-decade, 
or intra-century. To supply these two services signiicantly, different technical 
resources are required. CRMOD follows the industry practice and therefore you 
would ind that in the Create New Analysis section, there are two subsections: 
namely Analytics on the left-hand side and Reporting on the right-hand side, each 
of which lists the subject areas that are available out of the box. Subject areas are 
business constructs and CRMOD does not provide facilities to customize the subject 
areas or create new subject areas.
When creating a report, it pays to think thrice before 
you click.
The following is a screenshot of the subject areas in CRMOD Answers. When you 
click on any subject area, you have begun creating an analysis:

Chapter 9
[ 215 ]
The content of a subject area is a data table. You should check every subject area that 
is available in Answers by clicking on it, and study its contents to learn the collection. 
When you click on a subject area, Answers displays the report design page. The 
design page has two parts to it: namely, the left-hand side that displays the subject 
area's contents and the right-hand side that displays the canvas and palette to build 
the report. In the next section, we will learn the main elements of building a report. 
The following is a screenshot of the contents of sample subject areas:

Reports and Analytics
[ 216 ]
Building the report
In CRMOD Answers, a report is a deinition, or a command, to the system.  
The report deines or commands which columns to gather from the database,  
what ilters to apply for the data from those columns, and how to present the  
iltered data to the user.
When you build a report, you are building the deinition or command.  
CRMOD Answers lays out an intuitive design page for you; this is displayed  
in the following screenshot:

Chapter 9
[ 217 ]
There are four actions or steps to build an Answer:
1. Deine Criteria (deine the columns and ilters).
2. Create Layout (deine the presentation of the data).
3. Deine Prompts (optional) (deine the presentation of the data).
4. Review.
Deine Criteria
You can deine columns for the Answer by clicking on the column from the subject 
area on the left-hand side of the design page. The columns will align themselves 
from left to right in the sequence in which you click the column. You can realign the 
columns by using the drag-and-drop method (use your mouse). There is no limit 
to the number of columns that you can put in the deinition. The more columns, 
obviously, the longer it will take the system to build the report when the user clicks 
to generate the report.
When you wish to generate a transactional report, put the RowId 
column of your primary table as the irst column. When a user clicks on 
the report to generate the report, Answers begins gathering the data in 
the sequence of the columns, and therefore having the indexed RowId 
column helps in reducing the time taken to gather the data. The RowId 
column can be hidden from presentation, if you need. Adding the 
RowId column is not advisable in all cases. When a report is pivoted on 
a list of values or metrics, adding the RowId column should be avoided.

Reports and Analytics
[ 218 ]
Every column that you add gets displayed in the Columns section with two pieces 
of information. The irst information is in the blue-colored bar (Activity), and it 
states the name of data table where the column exists. The second is the grey-colored 
box, which contains six pieces of information in all. The irst of the six pieces of 
information is the column name. In the following screenshot, we can see that the  
data table is named Activity, commonly, for all the three columns with column 
names Activity ID, Activity Type, and Priority: 
After the column name, there are ive more pieces of information (or properties) 
in the grey-colored box, and these are large information sets in themselves and 
therefore are represented by ive small square buttons with icons on them.
The button that is on the right-hand side of the column name is used to sort the order 
of the data in that column. The downward-facing arrow indicates a descending sort, 
and the upward-facing arrow indicates an ascending sort. When both the arrows are 
visible in the screenshot, it implies that the data is unsorted. This button is a toggle 
button, so repeated clicking of the button will cycle through the descending and 
ascending indicators.

Chapter 9
[ 219 ]
The four buttons below the column name, from left to right, are used to: 
• 
Format data and columns
• 
Transform, perform calculations, and work with other formulas on each row 
of that column
• 
Filter the data of that column
• 
To remove a column
When you click on the button that is used to format the columns (the button 
immediately below the data table name), you will see the Column Properties  
pop-up window as shown in the following screenshot; this window comprises  
the Style, Column Format, Data Format, and Conditional Format tabs:

Reports and Analytics
[ 220 ]
When you click the Filter button, you will see the Create/Edit Filter pop-up window 
as shown in the following screenshot. On clicking the Formula button, you will see 
the Edit Column Formula pop-up window, which is also shown in the following 
screenshot. CRMOD Answers provides a comprehensive collection of functions to 
meet the most complex of transformation and computation requirements:
To add a column ilter without displaying the column itself, 
press the Ctrl key and click the column. This brings up the 
Create/Edit Filter box directly.

Chapter 9
[ 221 ]
Create Layout
Clicking on the Step 2: Create Layout button on the top of the design page will 
display the layout section. A layout holds many views of the data.
CRMOD Answers provides a collection of views to the users from which they can 
select for the presentation of the data. The set of views that are available is prebuilt 
and you cannot add views to the set. The set of available views are Title, Table, 
Chart, Pivot Table, Column Selector, Gauge, Funnel Chart, Ticker, Static Text, 
Active Filters, Legend, Selector, No Results, and Narrative.
By default, an Answer normally has at least two views, the irst view being the 
Title view, usually at the top of the layout; followed by the actual data displayed in 
the selected view. An Answer layout may have zero views; for example, when an 
Answer is speciically designed to be used as a ilter within other Answers.
The following screenshot shows two sample views (Title and Table) added to the 
layout. If you want a different view, then choose from the Add View menu in the 
tab. You can choose to delete the original Table view or the Title view; you can also 
edit the existing views from this tab.

Reports and Analytics
[ 222 ]
Deine Prompts
The third step in building a report is an optional step and its use depends on the 
report. When your requirement is to present a further interactive iltering feature 
to the user, you would deine those as Prompts in this step. These prompts appear 
as ilters to be selected/deined by the user, after the user clicks on the report to 
generate the report. The following screenshot shows the Prompt Properties section 
that can be used to deine the prompt properties deined by you at the time of 
building the report:

Chapter 9
[ 223 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned about the Answers On Demand service that is integrated 
in CRMOD. We learned the deinitions and the uses of the Report, Analytics, and 
Dashboard options. We also learned about the features of Answers On Demand, 
including its set of prebuilt reports, dashboards, and the facility to write custom 
reports. We learned the basics of writing custom reports including the concepts of 
subject areas and report folders. In the next chapter, we will look at the support 
services available for CRMOD.


Leveraging CRM On Demand 
Data and Integration Tools
To make sound business decisions, an organization must establish a solid data 
foundation. This foundation must combine both current and historical data values from 
multiple disparate operational systems in order to identify trends and predict future 
outcomes. Data integration involves combining data residing in different sources and 
providing users with a uniied view of these data. When using an enterprise packaged 
solution such as CRM, data integration becomes a key to deliver complete, accurate, 
and consistent information in a timely manner. CRM On Demand facilitates data 
integration and migration with the help of out-of-the-box import/export functionality, 
data loader, coniguration migration tools, and web services. 
In this chapter we will discuss the data loader and coniguration migration tool, 
which are helpful for CRM On Demand administrators.
In addition to the above facilities available for Administrators, CRM On Demand also 
provides a simple utility for the end users to import their contacts from excel/CSV 
iles. Similarly for the end users to work effectively and stay ahead of the competition 
in today's demanding business environment, they require a lexible and convenient 
solution that delivers essential information regardless of where they are working. To 
address this need CRM On Demand offers the following suite of tools:
• 
Ofline Client
• 
Personal Information Manager (PIM) Sync for outlook integration
• 
Mobile CRM
• 
Widgets to embed CRM On Demand data in external portals
This chapter also discusses these great utilities, which a CRM On Demand 
administrator should be aware of as they are of interest to end users.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 226 ]
Accessing CRM On Demand data and 
integration tools
The data and integration tools available in CRM On Demand can be accessed 
from the My Setup link that is seen at the top-left corner after logging in to CRM 
On Demand. The section has two links. One is Data and Integration Tools where 
most of the tools that we talked about in the introduction section are available and 
the other link Embed CRM On Demand Content contains sections that facilitate 
embedding CRM On Demand lists, reports, message center, and so on, in an external 
application such as Google or in your corporate intranet website:
Importing your contacts
The import assistant helps you to add or update existing contacts in CRM On 
Demand. Depending on your role, the number of contacts you can import can vary. 
End users can import up to 2000 contacts at a time from a comma-separated value 
(.csv) ile and administrators can import up to 30,000 contact records at one time, 
with a maximum ile size of 20 MB.
To access the import utility, navigate to My Setup | Personal Homepage | Data & 
Integration Tools | Personal Import and Export Tools | Import Your Contacts:
Performing the task of importing contacts is a three-step approach. The details on 
each of the steps involved is presented in the following sections.

Chapter 10
[ 227 ]
Step 1 – choosing your data ile
In this step, apart from selecting the data ile that you are going to import, you also 
select some of the key parameters of the import process. The parameters involved are 
detailed below.
Select the ield that identiies the record in your ile uniquely in the CRM On 
Demand system. This could be an "External Unique ID" of an external system from 
where you are importing the contacts or the "On Demand Row ID", which is the 
unique identiier for records in CRM On Demand (typically used when you want to 
update the already existing records in the system), or CRM On Demand predeined 
ields which are irst name, last name, e-mail ID, and work phone number.
Next you should let the system know what it should do if there are records already 
present in the system that match with the records in your import ile. The options 
that you have are either to create additional records even if the duplicates exist or 
not to import the duplicate records or to overwrite the duplicate records with the 
information that is available in the import ile.
You also let the system know what to do if the record identiied by the unique 
identiier doesn't exist in the system. You could either create the new record or  
not create the new record.
Specify what to do if the associated information is not present in the system. In the 
case of contacts, let us say the associated account of the contact is not present in the 
system, you have an option either to create a new account or not to create a new 
account. As far as contact import is concerned you have an option only to associate 
the account as part import process.
The rest of the parameters are related to letting the system know the date/format  
of date ields that you are importing, ile encoding type, the ield de-limiter  
(CSV or semi colon), and the level of error logging to be performed.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 228 ]
The last parameter is to select the ile that you would like to import.
Step 2 – ile validation
On moving to step 2, the system will validate the ile that you are trying to import 
and provide warning/error messages if any. If there are any errors in the ile that 
you have uploaded, you may not be able to proceed further unless you upload the 
ile, ixing all the speciied errors. In addition to the above, in this step you will 
specify the data mapping ile that has to be used to map the columns in your import 
ile against the Contact ields in CRM On Demand. If you don't have one, you can 
skip this step as in the following step the system provides an option to perform the 
mapping. At the completion of the import process, the system generates a mapping 
ile. The generated mapping ile will be available in CRM On Demand under data 
import logs for your future use.

Chapter 10
[ 229 ]
Step 3 – mapping your ields
In step 3 the system will automatically pick up the ields in the irst row in your import 
ile and provide you a facility to map against the contact ields. It is important that you 
map all the mandatory ields as otherwise your import process will not work.
Once you are done with the above, the system validates the mapping to ensure all 
necessary ields are deined in the data ile, and mapped to the contacts ields in 
CRM On Demand. In the next step it provides an indicative time that the system 
will take to perform the import process as well as the link from where you can 
monitor the import queue. On clicking on the import queue, you will be taken to 
the following page where a status "Completed" means that your import process 
is executed. You can drill down the import request to download the error log ile, 
mapping ile, and data ile you have imported. If there are any errors in your import, 
you can ix the errors and start re-importing it again following the same steps. The 
error log ile generated by CRM On Demand is pretty straightforward with reasons 
for failure in importing the data in record-wise format. This provides an easy option 
to ix these errors and re-import the data again. The imported contacts can be viewed 
under the Contacts tab in CRM On Demand:

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 230 ]
Oracle Ofline On Demand
Oracle Ofline On Demand is an Excel-based utility that allows you to view, add, 
modify, and delete your CRM On Demand data locally in your laptop/desktop 
without Internet connectivity. Whenever you have access to the Internet you can 
upload the modiied information to CRM On Demand to make it available for 
online access to all users of CRM On Demand. It is an Excel-based utility that runs 
on Windows XP or Windows 7 and supports only Microsoft Excel 2003, 2007, or 
2010. Installing the ofline On Demand is pretty simple as it is essentially an Excel 
ile that is available for download at My Setup | Data & Integration Tools | 
Oracle Ofline On Demand.

Chapter 10
[ 231 ]
If you open the downloaded Ofline On Demand, by default stored under  
c:\Siebel\Offline On Demand, the homepage looks like the one in the following 
screenshot. You may get a security warning from Excel saying "Some active content 
has been disabled". If you get one, click on the Options button next to it and select 
the Enable this content option to ensure the solution works properly in your system.
The homepage provides you a whole lot of detailed information on how to 
download the data in your Ofline On Demand, how to add new records, update 
existing records, upload the updated information, tips to search records in the 
system, and resolving conlicts, if any, on uploading the information back to 
CRM On Demand when you have access to Internet connectivity. Do review this 
information carefully before you start using the application. The subsequent steps 
would detail some of the key steps such as downloading data, modifying/creating 
new data and uploading the modiied information back to CRM On Demand.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 232 ]
Downloading data into Ofline On Demand
On click the Download button in the Excel, the Excel prompts you to sign in with 
your CRM On Demand user ID and password to access On Demand and download 
the accounts, contacts, opportunities, tasks, and appointments information. The 
ilters for download are either by Account, Contact, or Opportunities. Depending 
on the selection of Primary record type, all applicable lists for your login under 
Accounts/Contacts/Opportunities would be displayed. On selecting one of 
the lists, the system downloads all related information for the selected object. 
For example, if you have selected Contacts (as the primary record type) and All 
Contacts, the system downloads all contacts you have access to in the system, 
associated opportunities, and accounts. Depending on your selection under the 
Additional Information section, it would download the applicable appointments 
and tasks information too.
The volume of data that you can import is restricted at a 
maximum of 250 accounts or 750 contacts/opportunities records. 
The download may take some time to complete depending on the 
total volume of records imported.

Chapter 10
[ 233 ]
Adding/updating data in Ofline CRM On 
Demand
Once the download process is complete, the Excel sheet looks almost like your 
Online CRM On Demand with required tabs to view, update, and create your 
accounts, contacts, opportunities, tasks, and opportunities data. Please note that 
Ofline On Demand is restricted to ofline access of contacts, opportunities, tasks,  
and opportunities data only and doesn't support any custom objects or other 
standards objects conigured in the system. The following screenshot presents how 
the ofline On Demand looks after successful download of records in your Excel:
Excel provides you a facility to search any of these downloaded records using the 
Search option in the left navigation bar, create new records, or use the Edit link before 
each of the records to edit and update the information. Note that unless you perform 
the Upload action, the information will not be available in CRM On Demand for 
access by others. The layouts of the view/edit page would relect the coniguration 
setup in CRM On Demand at the time of download. The system would also perform 
the basic validations that you have deined at the ield level in CRM On Demand.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 234 ]
Uploading Ofline On Demand data to CRM On 
Demand
You can upload the modiied information in your local system by clicking the 
Upload button. On successful upload, the system pops up a message, as shown  
in the following screenshot:
The system tells you that your information is uploaded successfully and further 
changes to the data that was downloaded in the past are not possible. If you intend to 
perform more changes, you have to select the yes option to download the up-to-date 
information in CRM On Demand. If you don't intend to do any further modiications 
in the Ofline On Demand, you can select No but make a note that you cannot edit or 
add new records in the system unless you refresh Excel with fresh data from CRM On 
Demand. You can always download it using the standard Download button too.
Oracle PIM Sync On Demand
PIM stands for Personal Information Manager and Oracle PIM Sync On Demand 
facilitates synchronizing your appointments, contacts, and tasks in CRM On Demand 
with the ones that you have stored in your e-mail client. It supports Microsoft Outlook 
2003/2007/2010, Palm OS 4.1.2/4.4.4, and Lotus Notes 7.0.4/8.0.2/8.5/8.5.1/8.5.2. 
PIM sync can be downloaded from My Setup | Data and Integration Tools | Oracle 
PIM Sync On Demand section. On installing and running the PIM sync, it prompts 
you to enter your CRM On Demand username and password and displays options to 
perform the application setup:

Chapter 10
[ 235 ]
The application setup basically provides you information on what objects you like to 
sync up, such as Contacts, Appointments, and Tasks:

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 236 ]
For each of the objects you can select the Setup Wizard to perform further 
coniguration. The key coniguration steps are basically to let the system know 
whether you like to perform a one-way sync from CRM On Demand or bi-directional 
sync between CRM On Demand, your e-mail client followed by the frequency at 
which the sync has to be performed:
You can either opt for a manual sync or automatic sync at periodic intervals by 
selecting the appropriate options. Note that this can be different for each of the 
objects such as contacts, tasks, or appointments.

Chapter 10
[ 237 ]
On successful completion of the previous step, the application is all set to 
synchronize the data in between your email client and CRM On Demand. The 
advanced setup in the irst screen provides you an option to specify Internet 
connectivity options if your organization requires proxy setup to connect to CRM On 
Demand. Make a note that PIM sync was recently discontinued by Oracle. Though 
the product is available for download and use, if you encounter any issues, Oracle 
support would not be able to help you:
Oracle Outlook E-mail Integration On 
Demand
Oracle outlook Email Integration On Demand provides you a facility to upload the 
emails in your Outlook to completed activities in CRM On Demand. The completed 
activity can be associated to the relevant Account, Contact, Lead, Opportunity, or 
Service Request records in Oracle CRM On Demand. Note that this tool is available 
only for Outlook versions 2003, 2007, and 2010 and supports only Windows XP or 
Windows 7. The tool can be downloaded from My Setup | Data and Integration 
Tools | Oracle Outlook Email Integration On Demand.
The installation of Oracle OEI On Demand adds the Add to CRM On Demand 
button to your Microsoft Outlook toolbar:

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 238 ]
To start using Oracle OEI On Demand, select any of the e-mails in your Outlook and 
Click on the Add to CRM On Demand button in Microsoft Outlook. On the Sign-in 
page, enter your Oracle CRM On Demand login and password. A task completion 
form, as shown in the following screenshot, should appear:

Chapter 10
[ 239 ]
In the task you can search and select the relevant contacts, accounts, opportunities, 
leads, and service requests that you want to associate to your selected e-mail. If you 
don't ind them you can right-click on the e-mail addresses that are displayed to 
create new contacts/leads in CRM On Demand. Though by default the status of the 
activity is set as Completed you always have an option to change the type, status, 
and priority at the bottom of the task window. You also have an option to create a 
follow-up task or appointment if required, to facilitate any post-follow up action 
on sending/receipt of an e-mail. When you are composing a new e-mail, the same 
action can be invoked using the Send and Add to CRM On Demand button that 
appears in the new e-mail composer screen:
Thus the Outlook Email Integration plug-in provides a nice facility to tag all  
relevant information in the form of e-mail, with associated records in CRM On 
Demand, without a need to perform them manually by logging into CRM On 
Demand saving your users precious time.
Oracle data loader
Oracle data loader is a command-line utility that helps you to create/update records 
in CRM On Demand. The command-line utility can be scheduled to run periodically, 
thereby information lowing from an external system on a periodic basic can be 
uploaded to CRM On Demand automatically without any manual intervention. Data 
loader performs better than the import assistant and is suitable for high volume data 
upload to CRM On Demand. The tool is essentially a collection of Java programs and 
can be downloaded from Admin | Import and Export Tools | Oracle Data Loader 
On Demand. Detailed explanation of the usage of the tool can be found at Oracle 
CRM On Demand Documentation Library available at http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/E27437_01/homepage.htm.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 240 ]
Oracle Migration Tool On Demand
As discussed in earlier chapters, Oracle provides multiple CRM On Demand 
environments for the beneit of the customer and application administration  
team—CTE, Staging, and Production. Each of these environments is meant to be used 
during the entire lifecycle management of a project. For example, the development 
team might choose the staging environment as a test-bed for building a complex 
integration and set of conigurations in preparation for a roll-out. The same set of 
changes has to be replicated in the production environment after being tested for the 
end user to use. To optimize this exercise, Oracle provides the Migration Tool utility. 
The Oracle Migration Tool On Demand client is a command-line based utility, which 
eliminates having to manually reproduce customized coniguration data from one 
Oracle CRM On Demand environment to another, for example, from a customer test 
environment to a production environment. The Oracle Migration Tool On Demand 
client allows you to extract and import speciic coniguration data to your computer 
interactively, or in batch mode.
The list of coniguration items that can be exported from one instance of CRM On 
Demand to another instance continuously evolves from one version of CRM On 
Demand to the next and as of Release 19 most of the coniguration items identiied 
below can be migrated automatically, saving considerable manual effort:
• 
Home page layouts, Page layout and Action bar layout, Related  
information layout
• 
Picklists and Cascading Picklists
• 
Custom applets, web tabs, and web links
• 
Custom record types, Field management deinitions
• 
Access Proile and Role management
• 
Sales management template, and worklow rules and actions
The tool can be downloaded from Admin | Data Management Tool | Import and 
Export Tools | Oracle Migration Tool On Demand. The user of the tool requires the 
following privileges to execute the tool:
• 
The Data Management: Import privilege and Data Management:  
Export privilege are needed to download the Oracle Migration Tool On 
Demand client
• 
Enable the Web services access privilege to run the Oracle Migration Tool On 
Demand client

Chapter 10
[ 241 ]
Detailed explanation on the usage of the tool can be found at the Oracle CRM 
On Demand Documentation Library available at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/homepage.htm.
CRM On Demand Connected Mobile 
Sales
Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales helps you to access Oracle CRM 
On Demand on your mobile device, keeping you connected to your data. Oracle 
CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales can help you to customize the mobile 
application without having to write any code, leverage existing Oracle CRM On 
Demand customizations. The steps involved in provisioning Oracle mobile sales 
assistance are as follows:
• 
Administration privileges in Oracle CRM On Demand to enable Oracle CRM 
On Demand Connected Mobile Sales.
• 
Valid subscription for Oracle Mobile Sales Data Access. This requirement 
enables Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales to exchange data 
with Oracle CRM On Demand.
• 
Coniguration of speciic privileges in Oracle CRM On Demand.
• 
Using Application Composer to make available record types and ields to 
users of Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales.
• 
Installation of Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales on  
mobile devices.
Detailed explanation of each of the above steps can be found at the Oracle CRM 
On Demand Documentation Library available at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/
E27437_01/homepage.htm.
Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales runs on Apple iOS and 
BlackBerry devices. For the speciic list of supported devices, see the Oracle CRM 
On Demand System Requirements web page at http://www.oracle.com/us/
products/applications/crmondemand/system-requirements/index.html and 
scroll down to the heading for Oracle CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales 
System Requirements.

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 242 ]
Accessing CRMOD content outside the 
application using On Demand Widgets
The focus of this chapter has been on accessibility of information, anywhere and 
anytime. Logical extension to this is to make the CRM data available outside the 
CRMOD application. For example, Accounts or Contacts can be included within 
other web portal applications such as iGoogle or MyYahoo to incorporate content or 
RSS feeds. On Demand Widgets provide this lexibility to embed CRMOD's content 
outside the application.
Oracle CRM On Demand provides you with HTML code that you can use to embed 
a number of On Demand widgets in desktop applications that support Web widgets. 
You can also embed Web widgets in portals, or in any standalone Web page. A Web 
widget is a portable piece of third-party code that can be embedded in HTML. If 
your company administrator has made this feature available to you, HTML code that 
you can use to embed On Demand widgets in other applications is provided on the 
Embed CRM On Demand Content page in Oracle CRM On Demand:
When you successfully embed this HTML code in your application, an Oracle CRM 
On Demand Sign-in window appears. Then, you can enter your sign-in details to 
access your Oracle CRM On Demand Favorite Lists, Message Center, and so on. 
You can open Oracle CRM On Demand in a new browser window by clicking on 
Open Application.
The list of widgets available in CRM On Demand are listed as follows:
• 
Favorite Lists Widget: This On Demand widget displays your favorite  
Oracle CRM On Demand lists; for example, All Opportunities, My Accounts, 
and so on.
• 
Message Center Widget: This On Demand widget allows you to access 
messages received in Oracle CRM On Demand without requiring you to irst 
sign in to Oracle CRM On Demand.

Chapter 10
[ 243 ]
• 
Reports Widget: This On Demand widget displays reports created in Oracle 
CRM On Demand.
• 
Simple List Widget: This On Demand widget displays a one-column list 
of shortcuts to Oracle CRM On Demand records. For more information on 
embedding the Simple List Widget, see Embedding a Simple List Widget.
The different types of widgets that are available in CRM On Demand are accessible 
on the following screen:
For widgets and Message Center, the HTML code required to surface the CRM On 
Demand content in an external web application can be copied directly from My 
Setup | Embed CRM On Demand Content | Favorite List Widget (HTML) or 
Message Center Widget (HTML). The code for favorite lists looks like the following:
<iframe src="https://secure-ausomxdsa.crmondemand.com:443/OnDemand/
user/WidgetFavLists?lpr=1&title=FAV_LISTS" style="border:0px;pa
dding:3px;margin:0px;overflow:hidden;width:350px;height:220px;" 
frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

Leveraging CRM On Demand Data and Integration Tools
[ 244 ]
To embed reports or dashboards, irst specify the path of the report under the Path 
section. The report path can be obtained from Reports | Design Analysis | Open 
Analysis where when you select a speciic report, the path of the report would be 
shown under the Item ield, as shown in the following screenshot:
Copy and paste the path shown under Item to the Path under the report widget 
section, and click on the Show New HTML button to generate the new HTML that 
can be embedded in an external web application. In the case of Simple List Widget, 
on selection of the appropriate list, the HTML code changes automatically and can 
be embedded in an external web application. Thus CRM On Demand provides easy 
ways of surfacing your CRM On Demand in external web applications.

Chapter 10
[ 245 ]
Summary
In this chapter we learnt the scope of integrating and migrating data which resides  
in the CRMOD application with other applications by using various utilities provided 
by Oracle. These include the in-built Import-Export utility, Oracle Ofline On Demand, 
PIM Sync utility, Oracle Outlook Email Integration On Demand utility, Oracle Data 
Loader On Demand, Migration Tool, CRM On Demand Connected Mobile Sales Utility 
and On Demand Widgets. In the next chapter we will discuss the Help & Support 
Ecosystem component of CRM On Demand.


Help, Support Ecosystem, 
and Features in  
New Releases
When you are working with Oracle CRM On Demand, there are many ways in 
which you can get help. This chapter addresses some of the most popular channels 
and how they can be utilized to get support when you need it the most.
When you log in to Oracle CRM On Demand, the top-right corner shows many menu 
items. Two of them are of interest to us in the context of help and support:
• 
Training and Support
• 
Help
Towards the end of this chapter we will also discuss some of the new features of 
recent CRM On Demand product releases and relevant knowledge base materials 
available over the Web to explore them in detail.
Training and Support
This is primarily the self support area for CRM On Demand users, Training and 
Support Centre. This opens in a separate popup, so that you can continue working 
in your CRM system, while keeping this as a handy reference tool.

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 248 ]
The homepage of your Training and Support Centre shows various options, such as 
the following:
• 
Application Alerts: This shows the status of various CRM On  
Demand components (Service Availability, Web Services, Analytics, 
Assignment Manager, Email Marketing, and so on) from your staging  
or production servers
• 
My Oracle Support: This is an area for you to log service requests and track 
them to completion (more on this later)
• 
Best Practices, Expert Solutions, Articles, and Communities
• 
FAQs and Support Policies
• 
Access to CRM On Demand Documentation in full: You may view the 
documents or download them as PDF, for ofline access and reference
• 
Links to download CRM On Demand add-on applications, and useful 
templates and tools
• 
News & Events, Release Info, Access to CRM On Demand web services 
documentation
• 
Feedback/contact Oracle

Chapter 11
[ 249 ]
All articles you read in this area are constantly updated. This means that even 
if a CRM On Demand release changes, you are just a click away from the latest 
documentation. It may be very convenient to download a local copy of the entire 
documentation, but do remember that this is a SaaS solution, and hence, online 
help is the inal source of truth.
For those who want to enjoy the best of both worlds, Oracle releases PDF versions of 
its online documentation very frequently. Visit this area to view and download them 
after every major release.
If you ind a document useful, or feel it is not helping you much, use the Rate This 
Article option provided on every page to give your feedback to the support team. 
You can also hit the Share Feedback link to write to Oracle directly.
Help—CRM On Demand usage manual
This link provides the complete help manual for CRM On Demand users. As earlier, 
you may browse through the topics online, or download an ofline PDF version.
CRM On Demand online help is split into convenient chapters such as Getting 
Started, Calendar and Activities, Sales, Marketing, and so on. Once you click a chapter, 
you can browse through the subtopics and articles:

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 250 ]
All the help articles are presented with detailed explanations, screenshots, and links 
to related articles. You may print an article or jump to a PDF version at any time.
In addition to browsing chapters, subtopics, and articles, you can even read this help 
documentation as a book. The previous and next buttons on top of each page will 
help you navigate between pages.
Another useful option is the Index tab. This gives an exhaustive list of all topics in 
this help manual, similar to a book's Table Of Contents page.
Let us say you wanted to read about a particular point, but it seems to be missing 
in the chapters, subtopics, and articles. You couldn't even ind it in the Index page. 
What do you do?
The best option is to search for it. CRM On Demand help provides a very robust 
and powerful search engine where you can type one or more keywords and get only 
those articles related to them. This is probably the most widely used feature in the 
"Help" area, and is shown as follows:

Chapter 11
[ 251 ]
Support portal
CRM On Demand help manuals and documentation are useful to a large extent. 
However, when you are facing a serious issue, or want to achieve something new 
that the system doesn't seem to support, it is advisable that you log a service request 
with Oracle.
For this, you need to access the Oracle support portal irst and become a member. 
Registration is free and takes just a few clicks.
Typically, you will be accessing the support portal via http://support.oracle.
com. If you want to conirm, just hit the Training and Support link in your CRM On 
Demand window and then click on the Submit a Service Request link.
Now, you will be accessing a home page called My Oracle Support. This provides 
you various options such as user registration, login, training videos, FAQs, and so 
on. You can even choose the language in which you want to receive support.
The irst time you this page, you need to register yourself as an Oracle support user. 
This involves illing a form and conirming your e-mail ID. Within a few minutes, 
you are ready to go.

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 252 ]
After your registration is conirmed, click on the Sign In… button, which will ask 
you for your username and password. Enter these details and access the homepage 
of your support portal.
This page displays all your Service Requests as a snapshot. You can click on the 
Create SR button to log a service request, or search and browse through the 
knowledgebase, patches and updates information, and so on.
For almost all users, Create SR button is disabled when they access the support  
portal irst time. This means they can't log a service request about the problem  
they are facing.
To enable this button, you need to ask your CRM On Demand administrator irst. 
They have to link your Oracle support portal ID with your company CRM On 
Demand instance. Once this is done, you can start logging in service requests.
Before creating the service request
Search the knowledgebase fully, before creating a service request. Someone  
else might have faced this problem already and Oracle would have written  
a knowledgebase article that can solve your issue immediately. Do thorough  
research and conirm that your issue is unique and needs a new service request.
Even after you click on the Create SR button, Oracle still gives 
you a list of knowledgebase articles that are written for the 
problem area you have chosen. You can read them before 
inally creating the Service Request.

Chapter 11
[ 253 ]
In order for Oracle support to go in and have a look at the problem you are 
experiencing, the support team will need to get into your system irst. Instead of 
sharing your username and password with Oracle support, you can provide access 
to the support personnel to log in and troubleshoot using your login by turning on 
Sign-In Access, available at My Setup | Personal Proile | Sign In Access. The 
start and end date for sign-in access can be set in accordance with the needs of the 
service personnel. Post the end date of sign-in access, so support personnel cannot 
impersonate you.
Creating a service request
When you are creating service requests, there are a number of details you need to 
take care of:
• 
Provide a crisp summary and description about the problem you are facing. 
Don't leave any room for miscommunication and explain the context in the 
clearest possible way.
• 
Be sure to mention the object's name where the issue is occurring (sometimes 
it may have been renamed), what the exact ield names are in the system 
(not the ield name that you know internally), and include the exact layout 
or worklow's name, if there is something occurring with the layout or 
worklow. This may sound very obvious to you, but remember that someone 
who does not know your system intimately is going to enter your application 
now, and they need to ind their way around using your description. Make it 
as exact as possible.
• 
Choose the right product, version, and problem type. Don't choose some 
default values or skip these ields. This ensures that your service request will 
be assigned to the correct skilled support engineer.
• 
If your issue covers multiple areas, it is advisable to expedite your issues 
to create separate service requests for each area. For example, one for 
administration and one for reporting. In this case, the reporting issue 
will go to a reporting expert and the administration issue will go to an 
administration expert. If you choose not to do this initially, you will most 
likely ind Oracle support asking you to do so, and thus the longer it will 
take for your issue to hit the corresponding experts' queues.
• 
Provide a brief description of the test scenarios you have already carried out 
and the results you are seeing. If you have some error codes to report, specify 
them here. If you have any additional iles (screenshots, XML iles, log iles, 
and so on), attach them.

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 254 ]
• 
If you have set up delegated admin (recommended), include a note that you 
have done so, mentioning until what date and which login the delegated 
admin access is set to.
• 
Choose the right severity; on a scale of 1 to 4, how severe is your problem? 
This helps Oracle to prioritize their tasks and provide optimal support.
• 
On the last page of the Create SR wizard, make sure your e-mail address and 
phone number are correct. The support engineer working on your issue may 
want to speak to you to understand the issue better, and in that case, a wrong 
phone number will delay the possible resolution.
• 
If you are logging the request on behalf of someone else, check whose phone 
number/e-mail is mentioned in the service request. Make sure this is the best 
person who can talk to the support team and resolve the issue at the earliest.
Once your service request is created, you will be given a unique Service Request 
Number. This has to be used in all your future communication with Oracle.
For example, you may use this number to search for the current status of your  
service request in the support portal. If you are calling an Oracle call center 
(telephone support), they will ask for this number before providing any further help.
You can ind Oracle's telephone support numbers in your Training and Support area, 
under the Contact Us link. For most countries, toll free numbers are provided so that 
you don't have to pay anything for the phone call. If your country is missing from this 
list, use a nearby country's phone number, or support portal.
Once a service request is created, how long will Oracle take to resolve it?
This purely depends on the issue. However, there are certain benchmarks you  
can assume:
• 
By default, your CRM On Demand sales agreement with Oracle has a  
Service Level Agreement (SLA), which clearly mentions the expected 
response times.
• 
You can sign up for additional support too, from Oracle.
• 
Also, there are additional disaster recovery services available. Refer to the 
CRM On Demand website for the latest pricing information for these services.
There are certain things Oracle Support won't do. For example, they won't act as 
consultants. If what you are asking to do is a typical admin task or report that is a 
skill and can be obtained through Oracle training or engaging a consultant, Oracle 
support will direct you down that route. They may assist you as a one-off case, but 
ultimately you will need to have skilled resources in house for these activities.

Chapter 11
[ 255 ]
Oracle support analyzes all the issues, errors, complexities, and testing bugs before 
they are forwarded to product engineering. After this you will be informed about the 
solution decision, and by when (which patch/release) you can expect it.
Support forums
Oracle CRM On Demand has a huge community of end users, business analysts, 
conigurators, developers, integration experts, and more. In addition, there are Oracle 
engineering, sales team members who have a lot of experience in building/selling 
CRM On Demand. These people will have seen virtually every possible business 
case and technical issue, and will have practical tips, tricks, and best practices. This is 
another rich support channel that you can tap into.
To access the CRM On Demand forums, you need to click on the Community link in 
your support portal. This opens in a separate window and provides options such as 
Communities/Groups, News/Announcements, and Discussions & Documents.
Once you are in the community portal, you can start searching for discussions of 
interest to you, follow them, post responses, create new discussion threads, and more.
As you start using these forums actively, you can start contributing by providing 
tips and tricks to other users. Every time you help your community users, you gain 
points. These can be accumulated and you can become a CRM Guru!
In addition to this, the community portal also allows you to write/upload reference 
documents for other users. This is similar to help manuals, the product documentation 
we referred to earlier, except that they are contributed by the community.
To summarize, the community portal is a social channel for getting CRM On 
Demand support. When you build a good network, this may be the fastest way to 
learn and get help.

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 256 ]
Release notes
Oracle CRM On Demand constantly evolves by ixing bugs, issues, and adding 
enhancements. As a customer, you can get to know about all these by referring to the 
latest release notes.
You can access the release notes information from the Training and Support menu 
item. In the new popup that opens, click on the Release Info tab and it will display 
the latest version of release notes, system requirements, and other resources.
In the same page, you can also view the older release notes, and read up on what has 
changed in this release.

Chapter 11
[ 257 ]
Product enhancements
In addition to service requests, you can also log enhancement requests on Oracle 
CRM On Demand. The procedure is the same as for a service request, but you should 
select the type as Product Enhancement.
When an enhancement request is logged, Oracle will assign it a unique ID and 
keep it in the pipeline. When more and more customers are asking for the same 
enhancement, product management picks those features for the next release.
If you want to know what features will be present in the next CRM On Demand 
Release, you need to follow Oracle's Release Pipeline/Roadmap document, which is 
released annually. You can also request this via a service request.
Release upgrade activities
When Oracle makes a new release of CRM On Demand, there is a certain process 
every customer-side administrator should perform. This is to ensure that the new 
version is fully tested before being exposed to their end users.
Normally, Oracle informs all the customers about a new release, via their notiication 
e-mail. However, there is no assurance that those alert mails are going to the right 
person in your organization.
This happens because, during the sales process, Oracle reps set the notiication 
information with whatever data they have at that time. Most likely, this will be the 
e-mail ID of the project sponsor in charge of buying the application.
This means, every time there is a new CRM On Demand Release, this (non technical) 
person gets the e-mail and ignores it because they don't understand the possible 
impact. On the lip side, the administrator who is actually implementing or 
maintaining it will never get a mail, and this can cause serious trouble.
To avoid such issues, make sure you are on the Release notiication list. This can be 
done through the following steps:
• 
My Setup | Personal Proile | Personal Information | My Proile | 
Personal Detail | Edit
• 
Check the Contact Preferences checkbox
• 
Make sure Always Send Critical Alerts is selected
• 
Save the preferences

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 258 ]
This ensures you will get an e-mail for every new release. Once you see the e-mail, 
you need to follow a three-step process:
1. Oracle plans for the new release, sends the notiication to the administrator(s) 
of your CRM On Demand instance about when the release can be expected, 
in which instance(s) it will be enabled, and what changes (if any) need to be 
taken by you to adopt to the new version.
2. Migrate the staging environment, doing an end-to-end testing of all CRM On 
Demand pages, including integrations and making modiications,  
if necessary.
3. Migrate the production environment.
While testing the new release, if you face any issues, you will need to follow the 
same standard support portal service request process. Oracle will provide solutions 
to take care of these upgradation problems.
Your issues may not be addressed immediately, especially if you are in a 
multitenant CRM On Demand environment. Oracle will deinitely solve 
all the generic product issues that every customer is facing, but if you 
are facing an issue related to your customization or integration, then 
that will be given a lower priority. Until it is resolved, you may have to 
look for workarounds, so that your production users are not affected.
New features in recent releases of CRM 
On Demand
Throughout this book we have focused on the core sales, marketing, and service 
features of CRM On Demand that are very crucial for a successful CRM On Demand 
deployment. Saying that, we also understand the importance of you being aware of 
some of the cool features that are introduced in new releases of CRM On Demand.
We started writing this book when CRM On Demand release 18 was on the market 
and today the latest version that is provisioned for new customers is release 21, and 
existing customers are migrating in an incremental manner to release 21.

Chapter 11
[ 259 ]
On average Oracle makes one release every six months and add-on innovation packs 
(incremental enhancements) every two months. Most of the features of new releases 
of CRM On Demand fall under the following broader sections:
• 
Usability-related enhancements
• 
Improved access to CRM data through a wider variety of channels such as 
tablets, mobiles, desktop applications, and so on
• 
Core functional enhancements
• 
Automation/reports and dashboards-related enhancements
I have summarized some of the notable new features in Release 19, 20, and 21 of CRM 
On Demand in the following section under the previous broader areas and towards the 
end added some references and pointers on the Web for you to explore them in detail.
The usability enhancements made by Oracle in recent releases are noteworthy. A few 
of them that caught my attention are listed as follows:
• 
When you access predeined lists in CRM On Demand, you don't have an 
option to check the total number of records being listed across multiple 
pages. Recently, CRM On Demand provided a cool feature to display the 
number of records retrieved by the list.
• 
You can search in the lookup windows on the basis of the pre-deined lists 
that are conigured, making search and lookup a lot easier.
• 
Similarly, as an administrator you now have an option to display the 
related applets in a list mode or tab mode. If you have many related applets, 
displaying them under the main object in list mode could be a usability as 
well as performance issue. If you set the tab mode, all applets are displayed 
in a set of tabs right below the main object detail page and you can access 
applets of interest when you need to, avoiding scrolling and improving the 
application performance.
• 
A simple enhancement to hide/show the left navigation bar is pretty cool for 
operational users.
• 
On Demand also makes the application compatible with recent releases  
of standard browsers as well as extends support to new browsers such  
as Chrome.
On improved access to CRM data through new channels, Oracle released a new 
product, CRM Desktop, where your CRM On Demand data can be tightly integrated 
with your Outlook client. This makes it a lot easier for end users to synchronize and 
use information that cuts across their outlook and CRM On Demand. It is a great 
productivity enhancement tool for the end users. More features about the tool can be 
found at http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E35875_01/books/OnDemDesktopAdm.pdf.

Help, Support Ecosystem, and Features in New Releases
[ 260 ]
Also the latest support for Safari browsers makes the CRM On Demand application 
iPad compatible, so it is now a convenient alternative to access CRM On Demand  
from iPads.
On functional enhancements, some noteworthy new features are listed as follows:
• 
It is a demand from customers of Oracle to support Opportunity hierarchy 
where business users can split a large opportunity to multiple smaller 
opportunities and link them in a hierarchical manner. This is similar to the 
account hierarchy feature in CRM On Demand. Now with recent releases of 
CRM On Demand, the opportunity hierarchy is supported.
• 
CRM On Demand now extends the availability of assessment features to 
the Activity object and also exposes the assessment scripts via web services 
making it easy to extend/build a custom application using an assessment 
scripts data model.
• 
Address object, which was a pure child object, is now made as a top-level 
object, making "Addresses" stored in the system reusable across the CRM On 
Demand system, avoiding duplication.
• 
Date effectivity in managing a user's access to records via books is a great 
new feature making it easier to manage books if the user switches jobs or 
moves from one department to another.
• 
Many of the relationship objects such as Account-Contact can now be 
customized by adding additional custom ields, facilitating easy capturing of 
more detailed relationship information.
On the automation and worklow side, CRM On Demand continuously facilitates 
lexible automation capabilities in the system by bringing in incremental enhancements 
such as support to more trigger events in worklows, enhanced web service 
capabilities, more cross object worklow validation features, usability enhancements in 
assessments scripts, and so on. Similarly on reports and dashboards, with every new 
releases of CRM On Demand you can ind support for additional objects, new pre-built 
reports and dashboards such as reports to measure user adoption rate, and so on.

Chapter 11
[ 261 ]
As it may not be possible to really list and detail every new feature in the recent 
releases of CRM On Demand, I recommend users view these webinars and 
additional reference/pointers listed in the webinars to get more info on new features 
added in Releases 19, 20, and 21 of CRM On Demand:
• 
R19 Features: http://oukc.oracle.com/static09/opn/apps09/
crmondemand/51848/WhatsNewInR19_2/index.html
• 
R20 Features: http://oukc.oracle.com/static12/opn/
events12/99601/021312_99601_TOI_source/index.htm
• 
R21 Features: http://oukc.oracle.com/static12/opn/
events12/103442/102612_103442/index.htm
Summary
In this chapter we learned about various CRM On Demand support channels, how 
to access them, the procedure to register a service request, enhancement requests, 
upgrading your CRM On Demand instance to a newer release, and inally some 
really cool features made available in recent releases of CRM On Demand. Additional 
information about CRM On Demand support/help can be found at Oracle Community 
Forums, Blogs, and the Training and Support link in your CRM On Demand instance.
In the next chapter, we will discuss Oracle's partner offerings and how they can add 
value to your CRM On Demand implementation.


Oracle Partner Offerings
While being a strong, cloud-based application, Oracle CRM On Demand also 
provides a solid platform for extensibility. That is, the available solution can be 
extended to suit any customer needs. We have discussed this in detail, in Chapter 8, 
Web Services Integration.
If you take the analogy of a mobile phone, it acts as a wonderful device to call 
someone and speak to them. At the same time, its beneits become multifold when 
you start installing applications on it. Suddenly, it becomes an e-mail client, an 
e-book reader, even a movie player.
Along the same lines, there are many extensions available for Oracle CRM On 
Demand, which enhance its usability on many levels. This chapter discusses  
Oracle's partner ecosystem and the kinds of applications these partners have  
built for your use.
Oracle's partner ecosystem
Oracle as a corporation works closely with thousands of partners, many of 
them working on the CRM domain. These partners are involved in selling, 
implementing, and building value-added services, products, and applications  
on top of Oracle's offerings.
Partners of Oracle are part of a community called Oracle Partner Network (OPN). 
All its members are split into various categories such as gold, silver, platinum, and 
so on.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 264 ]
In addition, these partners specialize in certain topics. For example, a partner  
may focus only on Oracle CRM On Demand, another partner may focus on  
Oracle database and J2EE, and so on. These specialization statuses are awarded  
to a customer after they go through a stringent process, satisfying various 
requirements such as:
• 
Successful, referenceable product implementations
• 
Certiied consultants in various product areas such as sales, presales, 
support, and implementation
• 
Certiied products (more on this later)
This rigid process ensures that a "Specialized Oracle Partner" is someone who is 
really an expert in the mentioned product. A customer can conidently engage them 
to implement or extend their existing Oracle solution.
Oracle CRM On Demand implementation 
partners
When it comes to implementing a SaaS solution such as Oracle CRM On Demand, 
customers face the following two important questions:
• 
Which solution meets my need very closely? (Or, in this case, whether Oracle 
CRM On Demand its your needs or not.)
• 
How do I implement it as per my requirements?
On both these levels, OPN partners can help you to a large extent, making the best 
use of their Oracle CRM On Demand experience and expertise.
For example, when you are discussing whether Oracle CRM On Demand is the right 
it for your current requirements, most likely a partner will be working with the 
Oracle sales team to provide you a consolidated proposal. This will have mappings 
between your business needs and features of Oracle CRM On Demand, identifying 
gaps, and the solutions to ill them.
Not all the requirements will it with Oracle CRM On Demand fully. They can be 
split into the following ive categories, depending on the action you need to perform 
on them:
• 
No gap: Feature available 100 percent out of the box
• 
Simple gap: Easily conigurable in CRM On Demand
• 
Medium gap: Needs customization

Chapter 12
[ 265 ]
• 
Large gap: May need integration
• 
No it: Oracle CRM On Demand is not designed for this requirement
As your requirements are moved into one of these ive buckets, you can clearly see 
whether Oracle CRM On Demand its your current implementation needs or not. 
This is where a partner's product expertise comes in handy.
While this process is on, the partner may also be arranging for a customized demo 
of the Oracle CRM On Demand system. This will be different from the typical sales 
demos that you have seen earlier, because the partner will conigure the CRM On 
Demand system as per your needs, and try to accommodate as many "no gap", 
"simple gap", and "medium gap" requirements as possible. Sometimes, if time 
permits, they may even build simple integration scenarios to show you what is 
doable for those large gaps.
Once this is completed, the OPN partner will show this customized demo to your 
team, so that you can make a better decision on how well Oracle CRM On Demand 
suits your needs.
This process is used by the partners to demonstrate the power of Oracle CRM On 
Demand, as well as their capability to implement it successfully. Based on this, the 
client can make an informed decision.
Coming to the second question, if a partner was involved during the earlier phase (or 
choosing Oracle CRM On Demand as the product), this decision (how to implement 
Oracle CRM On Demand) becomes quite easy. The client most likely goes with the 
same partner for implementation.
However, this is not an obvious choice. Till this stage, the client would have 
observed only the product (Oracle CRM On Demand) skills of the partner. Now, 
they need to look at the implementation skills. For example:
• 
CRM On Demand implementation process followed by the partner; is it in 
line with the Oracle recommendations?
• 
Their past experiences in this domain/size of an implementation
• 
Team structure, communication protocol, and so on
• 
Customer references
This is just a sample list; each client will have their own detailed process to freeze on 
a partner. Some of them may also decide to implement it on their own.
As you would have observed throughout this book, it is possible to implement 
Oracle CRM On Demand on your own. It provides very good tools to make sure this 
experience is pleasant, reliable, and not developer-dependent.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 266 ]
On the other hand, going with an experienced partner may also help your 
implementation, mainly because they have the product expertise and know  
what it takes to implement it quickly and successfully, following all best  
practices recommended by Oracle, or learned the hard way in one of their  
earlier implementations. This means the overall project implementation time  
will most likely be less than someone on a self-service mode.
To summarize, it is a classic "buy versus build" decision. There are tons of examples 
for Oracle CRM On Demand implementations done in-house, and a higher number 
of customers beneited by engaging an expert partner for this job.
Based on your needs and level of comfort, you can make a call. Oracle also supports 
its clients by recommending best partners in each region, domain, and so on.
In addition, Oracle also has its own team of implementation specialists,  
called Oracle Consulting Services (OCS). OCS has taken the responsibility  
and delivered many Oracle CRM On Demand implementations across the globe. 
Sometimes, OCS may work with another partner for some specialized skills,  
making it a hybrid implementation.
Whoever performs the implementation, it typically takes care of the following tasks, 
depending on the agreement you have with them:
• 
Workshops: Conducting requirement gathering workshops
• 
Document: Business Requirement Document (BRD) sign off
• 
Design: High level and detailed
• 
Conigurations: Objects, reports, worklows, and so on
• 
Integrations (if any)
• 
Testing: Unit testing, system testing, integration testing (as applicable)
• 
Deployment: Staging
• 
User acceptance testing: Training, support, and rework (as applicable)
• 
Deployment: Production
• 
Deployment support
• 
End user trainings: Content creation and delivery
• 
Documentations
• 
Overall project management
• 
Performance tuning services
• 
Change management or user adoption services
• 
Ongoing maintenance

Chapter 12
[ 267 ]
Oracle CRM On Demand extensions
In addition to selling and implementing, a few of the OPN partners specializing in 
Oracle CRM On Demand have built a number of solutions on top of this platform.  
If you have a genuine business requirement, most likely there is already a solution 
available for it.
These solutions are typically called products, extensions, plugins, or applications. 
Irrespective of the name the partner uses, we have to understand that the solution 
exists on top of Oracle CRM On Demand. That is, you have to be an existing Oracle 
CRM On Demand customer to use these applications. They are not standalone 
entities you can buy.
When it comes to pricing, these solutions follow various patterns, as follows:
• 
SaaS: Similar to Oracle CRM On Demand; per user per month fee
• 
One-time fee
• 
Setup fee and SaaS
• 
Based on other metrics (for example, number of e-mails sent via the solution, 
number of quotes submitted, and so on)
Pricing of CRM On Demand extensions, typically depends on the way they are 
deployed. Typically following are the choices:
• 
SaaS: Implemented in the partner environment (it may be single tenant, or 
multi tenant)
• 
SaaS: Public cloud (for example, Amazon Web Services, Google App Engine, 
Oracle Cloud, and so on)
• 
SaaS: Private cloud; implemented in the customer cloud
• 
On premise
• 
Hybrid
Depending on the security requirements for this application, the client opts for one of 
these options and deployment is done. Pricing for the solution is determined based 
on this and various other factors.
In addition to the product cost, there may be a support cost involved. This will 
include answering end user queries and bug ixes. If there are any new feature 
requests, typically they are handled as additional change requests, which may 
involve additional costs.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 268 ]
How to make a purchase decision for a 
CRM On Demand extension
As the Oracle CRM On Demand extensibility platform is open, anybody can start 
building products for it easily. All you need are keen eyes to ind out the gaps in 
features, client expectations, and creativity to visualize your solutions.
In a way this is good, as there are more and more products being released for Oracle 
CRM On Demand every day. That is, you have more options to choose from.
On the other hand, it also brings a high level of uncertainty in the client's mind, how 
to ensure the solution I am choosing is good enough for my requirements? Here are 
some useful tips/questions to ask that will help you during this stage.
Is the product certiied?
Technically speaking, anybody can build and sell products on top of Oracle CRM On 
Demand. Those products may or may not satisfy the business requirements, or worst, 
they may be misusing your data, leading to serious privacy and business issues.
To make sure such issues are avoided and the CRM On Demand products are of 
the quality levels expected by its customers, Oracle has a dedicated program to test 
and certify such third-party products. This is a rigid process to ensure the product 
quality, security, user experience, and more.
This means that if there is a business requirement you have and two products seem 
to complement CRM On Demand by providing this feature you should go for the 
certiied solution. This will most likely be better than the non-certiied solution.
In addition to Oracle certiications, there are a number of other organizations which 
test and certify products on their usability, security, and other aspects. Examples 
include Human Factors International, Verizone Cybertru, and Checkmark. You 
may want to also use this information to decide on which applications are likely to 
perform better than other similar apps.
You can also have a look into the Oracle recommended partners list. These are the 
inner circle partners, whose products are tested and certiied to work with CRM On 
Demand in a seamless and eficient manner.
This is a dynamic list, changing as Oracle adds new partners and products. You can 
access it via My Setup.

Chapter 12
[ 269 ]
Here is an overview of a partners in this list, and the main products they provide:
No.
Partner/Product
Description
1
ActivePrime
A very popular data quality solution. CRM On Demand 
users can check for duplicates and clean information 
either during manual data entry, or in batches, or 
during migration from one server to another. Contains 
sophisticated business rules to decide how to identify 
and clean the data.
2
Antenna
Mobile CRM solution available across many platforms 
and networks. Allows CRM On Demand users to access 
and update their data on the go.
3
BigMachines
Helps in opportunity-to-quote-to-order process for CRM 
On Demand.
4
Cast Iron Systems
Configurable integrations to many industry standard 
SaaS solutions. Can be deployed in a matter of days, 
against the coded integrations which take a few weeks 
at least.
5
Click Tools
Marketing extension to Oracle CRM On Demand. Can be 
used to run campaigns, use calling scripts, build forms, 
run surveys, and so on.
6
EloQua
Multiple business tools for enhancing your Oracle CRM 
On Demand experience. For example, revenue building, 
marketing automation, and prospect profiler.
7
Hoovers
Gets more information and latest updates about your 
accounts and contacts, within CRM On Demand. It also 
provides rich insights to understand the customer and 
close deals faster.
8
InQuira (now part of 
Oracle, called Oracle 
Knowledge)
Intelligent search and knowledge base management 
solution, which can be used by your support staff to get 
more information about the current issue. Can also be 
deployed in the self-service mode.
9
Inside View
Identify and track sales opportunities across various 
channels, including the social media.
10
Experian QAS
Capture or validate accurate contact information in CRM 
On Demand, using a continuously updated knowledge 
base.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 270 ]
Can I try it?
This is an app economy, and companies are quite comfortable with "Freemium" 
models, where customers are provided a free version of the product with some 
limitations, which can later convert to a full version purchase.
For example, let us say you are thinking of going for a mobile CRM solution for your 
Oracle CRM On Demand. In addition to viewing the demo shown by the Oracle 
partner, you can also ask for a limited trial.
The word limited has many meanings here, explained as follows:
• 
Time restriction: For example, 30 days free trial
• 
Feature restriction: For example, only a single object enabled in a free trial
• 
Bandwidth restriction: For example, only 50 records can be used in a free trial
• 
Adware: The product has all the features, but will show nagging 
advertisements every now and then
• 
Base product is free, but the additional options are to be purchased
Our experience is that most of the Oracle CRM On Demand products have some or 
other trial version enabled in them. You can ask for it, and try it for few days before 
making a purchase decision.
What level of support is available?
Most of the innovation in the ield of Oracle CRM On Demand extensions, is 
typically driven by small companies. This means, these products may not be as 
complete as you expect them to be. You need to do a careful analysis before making 
the actual purchase decision.
For example, a product may well cater to your requirements, but its documentation 
may be poor, or support channels ineficient, even non-existent. In such cases,  
it will be a huge issue if you face a problem at a later stage, or need a new  
feature to be developed.
This may sound like a usual risk we need to take with any product. But the fact 
is, you are more likely to hit this issue with SaaS application extensions and it is 
important to play safe.
To give a practical case study, a famous extension to CRM On Demand was using 
certain web services provided by Oracle. Many customers were using it to add more 
value to their sales processes in CRMOD.

Chapter 12
[ 271 ]
When Oracle moved from Release 19 to Release 20, they discontinued one of those 
web services. As a result, the most important part of this extension stopped working.
Fortunately, the partner was well prepared for this scenario and they did a fresh 
development to ill this gap and released a patch immediately. All customers got this 
for free and the issue was sorted out.
Imagine what would have happened if the partner was not active. All the customers 
would've been forced to do fresh development, or go with some other partner to 
ill the gap. This won't be possible if the product documentation is not good, or the 
source code is not made available.
That brings us to the fourth question. We will discuss it a little later, after completing 
other aspects of support.
Oracle CRM On Demand extensions have varying levels of support. Most of them 
would provide web/e-mail support and a few may provide telephone support as 
well. There may be restrictions in terms of how many support tickets, or how many 
hours of support you may receive every month or for every quarter. For example, 
there are 50 hour packages, 100 hour packages, and so on. You may decide which 
package to go for, depending on your usage pattern and the number of users.
In addition to the mode of support and the quantity, it is important that you also 
consider what is covered as part of this support package. Mostly, it will only cover 
user queries and bug ixes. In some cases, it may also include small user interface 
changes such as logo, color, and fonts as well.
What about new feature requirements?
Typically, these are handled as change requests; that is there will be a small 
requirement-gathering session to freeze on the requirements, and a solution design 
prepared, approved by the customer, and then executed as a mini project. This will 
involve additional effort/cost, which may or may not be included in your support 
contract. In such cases, it is important for you to know what billing rate will be used 
for implementing those new requirements in future.
In addition to such paid support, companies also offer some freebies with these 
application purchases. For example, if there is a newer release of Oracle CRM On 
Demand, they will most likely offer a patch to take care of the backend changes. 
Similarly, there may be new features added to the product, which may be given 
away for free. Carefully note these points as well before signing a contract.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 272 ]
Is the source code available?
End User License Agreement (EULA) signed between the Oracle CRM On Demand 
customer, and the company that builds and sells Oracle CRM On Demand extensions 
has various items, one of them being source code access.
Typically, product price only includes the right to use the software. In some cases, 
the client may want to get access to the source code. It may be due to statutory 
requirements, or the company policy, or to make further extensions to the 
available features.
In any case, these two parties may have to sign another agreement between them to 
get access to the source code, along with applicable documentation, training, and so 
on. This agreement will include clauses such as price for the source code, fair usage 
terms, whether the customer can use this source code to build other products, who 
owns the intellectual property rights, and so on.
Is the solution built using an open or 
proprietary technology?
This is a very important aspect when it comes to future customizations. Even if you 
have the full source code, if the technology used to build it is proprietary, it is very 
dificult for the end customer to build further extensions to it.
Hence, it is preferred that companies opt for solutions built using open technologies, 
which would mean you can get talent in the general market who can extend the 
solution using the source code available.
Most popular extensions
There are hundreds of extension solutions available to Oracle CRM On Demand. 
While it is practically impossible to list all of them here, let us cover in brief, the most 
popular solutions that are built, implemented by Oracle partners across the globe, 
and being used heavily by end customers.
E-mail channel for CRM
In addition to CRM, sales, marketing, and support staff heavily use e-mails across 
the globe in almost every industry. They write rich text mails with attachments, 
to interact with prospects, customers, partners, and co-workers to share various 
product and service-related information. Customers also just write an e-mail 
whenever they need a product or a service.

Chapter 12
[ 273 ]
Problem is, these e-mail interactions are missing the CRM system. An account 
record in CRM may remain empty, but hundreds of conversations would have 
happened via e-mail, which is not centralized. Later, if this account is transferred 
to someone else for any reason, the knowledge transfer on what has happened is 
already very dificult.
In addition, when e-mail becomes the de-facto communication channel, it is 
practically impossible to track the SLAs. Hence, all e-mail communications need to 
be centralized in a CRM system.
Some CRMs manage this by providing a button or toolbar in e-mail clients, where 
you can move a mail communication to CRM with a single click. But still, this is 
a manual process and end users need to remember to click this button. They hate 
working in two different systems all the time, and this leads to human errors. To 
summarize, their superiors and others don't get a complete picture.
These issues are better resolved by e-mail channel integrations to Oracle CRM 
On Demand. These software programs listen to a common mail ID, move all the 
communications to a corresponding account, contact, opportunity, service request, 
keep track of SLAs, and so on.
This means your staff need not switch between two systems and can use CRM as 
their only interface. They will use a familiar e-mail-like user interface, while the 
background system will take care of tracking every single communication, without 
any additional clicks/human errors.
Telephone channel for CRM
In addition to e-mails, telephone is another very popular mode of communication for 
CRM users and their end customers. This is especially true in the ield of customer 
support, where call center staff handle tons of service requests, which are to be 
resolved by backend CRM users.
To tackle this problem, there are a number of Oracle CRM On Demand  
extensions that integrate with popular computer telephony systems such as  
Avaya, Cisco, Nortel, Alcatel, Genesys, Trixbox, and so on. To quote just a few 
examples, CRMIT provides a CTI toolkit integrating CRM On Demand with  
Avaya, and AMC Technology provides a built-in solution with Cisco CTI.
Basically, these systems provide an interface where the end user calls are directly 
shown in Oracle CRM On Demand. Even before the call center agent picks the call, 
the corresponding customer details are retrieved from CRM, so that they can be used 
to make the communication effective.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 274 ]
In addition, there are advanced features such as call wrap-up, call transfer, one 
click dialing, and so on, which make the integration between the CRM system and 
voice-based telephony system easy. 
Mobile CRM
This is clearly the era of mobile phones. People interact with smart phones much 
more than any other device. From e-mails to travel bookings, everything is moving 
to mobile phones at a rapid pace.
CRM is no exception. Sales and support staff who are constantly on the move, 
prefer to get details about their leads, opportunities, service requests, and most 
importantly, activities and appointments via their handy phones. They want to 
access this data ofline, request for more information, edit and create records ofline, 
and later synchronize with their centralized system easily.
There are a number of Oracle CRM On Demand mobile solutions on the market, 
including a few from Oracle themselves. Examples include Oracle Mobile Sales 
Assistant, Oracle iSales, and CRMIT's mCRM. These solutions help you access your 
Oracle CRMOD data from mobile devices such as iPhones, iPads, Blackberry phones, 
Android phones, Android tablets, Windows Mobile phones, and more.
Almost all these solutions will provide basic access to CRM data, such as viewing, 
editing, deleting, creating, and so on. A few solutions have gone a level above and 
provide mobile-speciic features such as one-click dialing, text messaging, maps, GPS 
integration, voice recognition, and so on. This helps in improving CRM usability, by 
making it much easier than any other platform.
Quote and order management
Oracle CRM On Demand focuses on the lead-to-order low and takes care of this 
very effectively. Once the opportunity is won, it is transferred to a backend system 
for further processing and fulillment.
In certain customer cases, the opportunity-to-order low is not very straightforward; 
it involves quotes, price negotiations, approvals, and then it gets converted to an 
order. To add more complexity, there is a full-ledged pricing engine/rules to be 
implemented for calculation of the quote price.

Chapter 12
[ 275 ]
There are number of Oracle CRM On Demand extensions such as BigMachines and 
Webcom, which take care of these requirements. They allow creation of quotes from 
opportunities, or as a standalone entity; pricing can be decided based on customer 
type, and then it can be overwritten on the quote level; the generated quotes can 
have tax calculation, shipping cost calculation, and then e-mailed to the client. This 
can start a series of negotiations during which the quote goes through a number of 
versions. Finally, (once approved) it gets converted to an order contract with speciic 
terms and conditions.
Self-service portal
Among all the customer access channels, web self-service is the cheapest. If 
customers can come online, register themselves, search for the information they 
need, register complaints if required, and inally track them, all in a secure web 
portal, that will be a great CRM tool.
Thanks to Oracle CRM On Demand portal extensions by many partners, this is now 
possible. Your end customers, partners, dealers, even employees can interact with 
the CRM data over the web channel. Best part is, you have full control on what 
information they see, and what they don't.
Self-service portals are typically used for knowledge bases, FAQs, dealer network, 
and service request management purposes. They are strongly integrated with the 
company's corporate website and CRM, to bring best results.
Social collaboration tools
CRM is much more fun and easy to use, when it is combined with the power of 
social networks/collaborations. That's how social CRM systems are evolving.
Imagine your CRM system having an embedded social network. You can follow 
other colleagues (even customers, if you combine it with the self-service portal that 
was just discussed), form groups, write public, private messages, share iles, URLs, 
follow CRM records such as opportunities, accounts, and so on, to know what's new. 
You will be sitting in a single CRM feed, responding to stuff, and indirectly you are 
adding more and more information to the underlying CRM to make it very updated.
This may sound like a user adoption tool, but in reality it is a very effective solution 
for improved CRM productivity. With more and more young staff being added to 
the corporate world, such solutions will soon become the norm.

Oracle Partner Offerings
[ 276 ]
There are a number of social collaboration tools available for Oracle CRM On 
Demand, with varying sets of features. But the users who started working on them 
conclude in an unanimous voice, this is the best way to interact with a CRM system.
CRMIT, an Oracle gold partner for CRM, offers most of these solutions as part of  
its CRM++ framework. This is one of the very few platforms providing extensions 
for multiple channels. Some of their popular products include Email Workbench, 
self-service portal, SocialCRM++, and mCRM.
Summary
Thus, in this chapter we learned about the Oracle Partner Network, various kinds of 
services and products that these partners offer, and how best to analyze and make 
a purchase decision on these solutions. In addition, we also discussed the various 
sample extensions that are most popular among CRM On Demand customers. For 
more information on the Oracle Partners who offer such solutions, and the actual 
product information, refer to http://partner.oracle.com/.

Index
A
Access Proile Wizard  97
actions
about  125
book, assigning  125, 126
Create Task  127, 128
email, sending  128, 129
integration event, creating  126, 127
ordering  125
Update Field After Wait  130, 131
values, updating  131
Wait  132
Active Link Condition parameter  184
Add to CRM On Demand button  238
All File Usage list  202
Allotment Usage List page  201
Answers On Demand service
about  205, 206
business layer  206
data layer  206
interactivity  208, 209
prebuilt dashboards  209, 210
prebuilt reports  206, 207
presentation layer  206
applets  109
application architecture  54, 55
Application Customization | Action Bar 
Layout  91
assessment scripts  172
Assignment Manager tool  65
assignment rules
about  139
applicable objects  140
prerequisites  139
rule group, deining  140
attachment iles
about  174
Manage Attachments section  174
B
Batch  181
book access  103
book access proile  104
BPM  115
BRD  266
business layer  206
Business Process Management . See  BPM
Business Requirement Document. See  BRD
C
Cascading Picklists  78
collaboration  102
Company Administration data
about  30
Audit Trail section  42
Company Proile  30-39
company SignIn  40
currency deinition   43
IP Address Restrictions  41
languages, activating  41
password control  40
Sign In Audit section  42
company proile
Company Administration data  30
product catalog, creating  47
sales forecasts, enabling  48, 49
setting up  29
user login IDs, creating  44-47
company-wide alerts
creating  50

[ 278 ]
contact import
about  226
data ile, choosing  227, 228
ield, mapping  229
ile validation  228
import utility, accessing  226
Contacts  22
content
about  165-167
assessment scripts type  171
attachment iles type  174
product catalog type  168
reports/analytics Folders type  173
types  166
Create SR button  252
CRM  53
CRM data
about  19
marketing functions  19
sales functions  21
service functions  24
user role access levels  26-29
CRMOD. See  also CRM On Demand
CRMOD
about  8
history  8
service  9
service infrastructure  10
CRMOD administration
about  13, 14
customizing  14, 15
CRMOD external content
accessing, On Demand Widgets  
used  242-244
CRMOD service
about  9
pod  10
software  12
CRM On Demand
about  113
application architecture  54
data and integration tools, accessing  226
help  247
integration abilities  178
R19 Features  261
R20 Features  261
R21 Features  261
recent release features  258-260
Training and Support Centre  247
URL  51
usage manual  249, 250
web services, enabling  189-191
web services, listing  192
widgets  242
worklow coniguration  116
CRM On Demand Connected Mobile  
Sales  241
CRM On Demand extension
about  267
certiication, testing  268, 269
new feature requirements  271
purchase decision, making  268
solution, building  272
source code availability  272
support level  270
trial  270
CRM On Demand usage manual
about  249
product enhancements  257
release notes  256
release upgrade activities  257
service request, creating  253, 254
service request, pre-creating steps  252, 253
support forums  255
support portal  251, 252
CRM organization  95
CRM system  19
CTE  11
Customer Relationship Management. See  
CRM
Customer Test Environment. See  CTE
customizability
about  55
data model  56
interface model  67
process model  57
customization  53
custom object  58
Custom Web Tabs  109
D
data accesses
about  100

[ 279 ]
book access  103-105
create access  100
team access  102, 103
View/Inherit Primary accesses  100
data and integration tools, CRM On 
Demand
accessing  226
data layer  206
data model
about  56
data management  57
iles  56
transaction data  56
data model-level customization
about  72
ields, adding  73-75
ields, cascading  78-80
ields, deleting  73-75
ields, modifying  73-75
ield validation rules, writing  76, 77
default access proile  97
default search method  109
DeletedItemQueryPage method  193
DeleteEvents method  194
Delete method  192
Design Analyses page  211
Detail page layouts
about  110
Action Bar layout  111
default sales process  110
Lead Conversion layout  111
UI default Theme  111
Display Name textbox  74
Display Options parameter  183
Download Custom WSDL button  191
dynamic layouts  86, 87
E
Echo argument  192
Edit Picklist window  77
End User License Agreement. See  EULA
Error Instances
about  138
Batch Delete option  138
ETL  206
EULA  272
Execute method  192
Expression Builder tool  123
Extensible Mark-up Language. See  XML
extensions
CRM e-mail channel  272
CRM telephone channel  273
Mobile CRM  274
order management  275
self-service portal  275
social collaboration tools  275, 276
Extraction-Transformation-Loading. See  
ETL
F
Field Validation lookup window  76
indNoneOf()function  76
forecast  24
Forecast Deinition wizard  162
forecasting
methodology, selecting  159
forecasts
maintaining  162
updating  162
forecasts administering
about  158
duration, determining  159
frequency  160
roles, designating  160
setting up  159
type, determining  159
forecasts frequency
about  160
setting up  161, 162
Formula button  220
G
GetEvents method  194
GetMapping method  194
GetPicklistValues method  194
GetServerTime method  194
group  66
group assignment  99

[ 280 ]
H
Heads-up Display  32
I
Import UI Assistant tool  48
Insert method  192
integration abilities, CRM On Demand
about  178, 179
data, suring from other system  181, 182
data, transferring  180
data, transferring at real time  180, 181
decision chart  179
integration events, coniguring  186-189
web applet, coniguring  184, 185
web link, coniguring  182, 183
interface model
about  67
online interface  68
special interfaces  68
web services interface  68
isolation  104
ITS URL for SSO Authentications  39
L
language dependent codes. See  LDC
language independent codes. See  LIC
layout management
about  80
action bar layout  90, 91
dynamic layout  86, 87
homepage  90, 91
list, managing  91, 92
page layout  80-86
search layout  87-89
LDC  193
Lead Conversion Administration
about  144
Lead Conversion Mapping  144
lead, converting  144
settings  144
lead conversion layout
about  146, 147
creating  147-149
Lead Conversion Mapping
ields, mapping  145, 146
LIC  193
lists  109
LoginHistoryQueryPage method  194
LOVLanguageMode argument  193
M
Manage Analyses button  211
Manage Lists link  92
manager hierarchy  99
marketing functions, CRM data
campaign  20
lead  21
recipient  20
MergeRecords method  194
Message Centre section
using  50
MetadataChangeSummaryQueryPage 
method  194
Miscellaneous Application  
Customization  92, 93
Mobile CRM  274
My Proile page  111
N
Narrative reports  212
O
object model
about  58, 60
external objects  62, 63
ields  60, 61
OCS  266
On Demand Widgets
used, CRMOD external content  
accessing  242-244
online interface  68
OPN  263
opportunity  14
Oracle
partner ecosystem  263
Oracle Consulting Services. See  OCS
Oracle CRM On Demand
extensions  267
implementation partners  264-266
Oracle data loader  239

[ 281 ]
Oracle Migration Tool On Demand  240
Oracle Ofline On Demand
about  230, 231
data, adding  233
data, downloading  232
data, updating  233
uploading, to CRM on Demand  234
Oracle Partner Network. See  OPN
Oracle PIM Sync On Demand. See  PIM
organization  95
organizational chart  95
Outlook Email Integration On Demand
about  237
using  238, 239
owner access proile  97
P
page layout  80-86
Personal Information Manager. See  PIM
PIM  38, 234-237
pod  10
portlet  39
prebuilt user roles
Administrator  28
Advanced User  27
Executive  26
Field Sales Rep  27
Inside Sales Rep  27
Regional Manager  27
Sales and Marketing Manager  27
Service Manager  27
Service Rep  27
presentation layer  206
privileges
about  112
data channel accesses  112
UI customization accesses  112
user channel accesses  113
process model
about  57
business rules  64
object model  58
security model  65, 66
product catalog
about  168
examples  168
product  170, 171
product category  169
product enhancements  257
Prompt Properties section  222
Q
QueryPage method  192
R
Rate This Article option  249
Record Detail page  59
record type  58
Related Information link  98
release notes  256
report
Answer, building  217
building  216
reports/analytics folders 173, 174
report writing
about  210
columns, deining  217-220
data presentation, deining  221
ilters, deining  217-220
folders  211
Manage Analyses button  211, 212
Open Existing Analyses button  212
prompts, deining  222
subject areas  213, 215
Role Management Wizard  107
RowId column  217
rule
about  141
deining  141
ields  142
rule criteria
components  142
deining  143
ields  143
rule group
about  140
ields  141

[ 282 ]
S
SaaS  267
sales category
about  157
setting up  158
sales functions, CRM data
account  21
assets  24
contact  22
opportunities  22
revenues  23, 24
sales forecasts  24
sales process  22, 24
sales methodology
about  149
process  149, 150
sales category  157
sales stages  151
sales stage, setting up  151, 152
stage  150
SalesProcessQueryPage method  194
sales stage
automated tasks  155
mandatory ields, adding  152, 153
process coach  154
setting up  151, 152
useful resources  156
Sales Stage page  156
Search ield  87
search layouts  87-89
security model  65
self-service portal  275
service functions, CRM data
activity  25
service requests  25
solutions  25
service infrastructure, CRMOD  10, 11
Service Level Agreement. See  SLA
SetPasswordAPI method  194
SetSessionTimeZone method  194
Show New HTML button  244
Siebel On Demand. See  SOD
Simple Object Access Protocol. See  SOAP
Single sign-on (SSO)  62
SLA  254
SOAP  177
social collaboration tools
CRMIT  276
SOD  7
software as a service. See  SaaS
special interfaces  68
standard object  58
Submit a Service Request link  251
support forums  255
support portal  251
T
tab  108
Tab layout  108
targeted search  109
team  65, 102
team access proile  102
Training and Support Centre
homepage, options  248, 249
U
UpdateCascadingPicklists method  194
Update method  192
UpdatePicklist method  194
User Access Management  102
user group  99
user ID
about  96-98
issuing  51
manager hierarchy  99
owner  96
user group  99
user identities. See  user ID
user role
about  105, 107
default access proile  108
deinition items  106
Detail page layouts  110
Homepage layouts  109
objects, accessing  107
objects' homepage, accessing  108
objects'tabs, accessing  108
owner access proile  108
privileges  112
role name  107
Search page layouts  109

[ 283 ]
user role access levels
feature access  26
prebuilt user roles  26
record access  26
user roles  96
UserUsageQueryPage method  194
V
View and Inherit Primary accesses  101
ViewMode argument  193
visibility  100
W
Wait action  137
web contents
Feed  185
HTML  185
URL  185
Web Link Target parameter  183
web service allotment usage
ile usage, monitoring  202
history  201, 202
record usage, monitoring  202
service allotment, administering  200
service allotment alerts, setting  200
Web Services Utilization section  203
web services, CRM On Demand
allotment  199
beneits  199
best practices  196, 198
enabling  189-191
limiters  199
listing  192-195
sessions, managing  195
Web Services Deinition Language. See  
WSDL
Web Services Description Language. See  
WSDL
When modiied record saved event  121
widgets, CRM On Demand
Favorite Lists Widget  242
Message Center Widget  242
Reports Widget  243
Simple List Widget  243
worklow
about  117
active  136, 137
adding  117-119
assignment rules  139
deleting  136
Error Instances  138
event actions  133
inactive  136, 137
modifying  117, 118, 119
ordering  133, 134, 135
Pending Instances  138
record types  120
rule condition  122-124
trigger events  121
Worklow Monitor  137
worklow coniguration
about  116
action component  117
actions  125
prerequisite steps  116, 117
rule component  117
trigger component  117
worklow rule condition
steps  124, 125
WSDL  68, 177, 190
X
XML  177


 
Thank you for buying  
Oracle CRM On Demand  
Administration Essentials
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on speciic technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give 
you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get 
the job done. Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have seen in 
the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving 
you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order to 
continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home to 
books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including (but 
not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles will offer 
information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, developers, 
architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should 
be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like 
to discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning 
editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Oracle Siebel CRM 8 Developer's 
Handbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-186-5             Paperback: 576 pages
A practical guide to coniguring, automating, and 
extending Siebel CRM applications
1. 
Use Siebel Tools to conigure and automate 
Siebel CRM applications
2. 
Understand the Siebel Repository and its object 
types
3. 
Conigure the Siebel CRM user interface – 
applets, views, and screens
4. 
Conigure the Siebel business layer – business 
components and business objects
Oracle JD Edwards  
EnterpriseOne 9.0: Supply  
Chain Management Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-196-4             Paperback: 370 pages
Over 130 simple but incredibly effective recipes 
for coniguring supporting, and enhancing 
EnterpriseOne SCM
1. 
Master all that the EnterpriseOne SCM modules 
have to offer with this book and e-book full of 
step by step instructions
2. 
Go deeper into SCM functionality with special 
orders and approvals
3. 
This recipe-based guide packed with images, 
and concluding with a real-world Supply Chain 
blueprint, helps you fully absorb each step by 
step task
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

Oracle Essbase 11 Development 
Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84968-326-5             Paperback: 400 pages
Over 90 advanced development recipes to build and 
take your Oracle Essbase Applications further
1. 
This book and e-book will provide you with the 
tools needed to successfully build and deploy 
your Essbase application
2. 
Includes the major components that need to 
be considered when designing an Essbase 
application
3. 
This book can be used to build calculations, 
design process automation, add security, 
integrate data, and report off an Essbase cube
Oracle Fusion Middleware 
Patterns
ISBN: 978-1-84719-832-7            Paperback: 224  pages
10 unique architecture patterns enabled by Oracle 
Fusion Middleware
1. 
First-hand technical solutions utilizing the 
complete and integrated Oracle Fusion 
Middleware Suite in hardcopy and ebook 
formats
2. 
From-the-trenches experience of leading IT 
Professionals
3. 
Learn about application integration and how 
to combine the integrated tools of the Oracle 
Fusion Middleware Suite - and do away with 
thousands of lines of code
 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

