www.allitebooks.com

Oracle Siebel CRM 8 
Installation and Management
Install, conigure, and manage a robust Customer 
Relationship Management system using Siebel CRM
Alexander Hansal
N
professional expertise distilled
  BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com

Oracle Siebel CRM 8 Installation and Management
Copyright © 2010 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of 
the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold 
without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, Packt Publishing, 
nor its dealers or distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to 
be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: July 2010
Production Reference: 3260710 
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd. 
32 Lincoln Road 
Olton 
Birmingham, B27 6PA, UK.
ISBN 978-1-849680-56-1
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Tina Negus (tina_manthorpe@sky.com)
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Alexander Hansal
Reviewers
Michael Weigl
Tim Bull
Acquisition Editor
Amey Kanse
Development Editor
Dhwani Devater
Technical Editor
Ajay Shanker
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Editorial Team Leader
Akshara Aware
Project Team Leader
Lata Basantani
Project Coordinator
Leena Purkait
Proofreader
Aaron Nash
Graphics
Geetanjali Sawant
Production Coordinator
Adline Swetha Jesuthas
Cover Work
Adline Swetha Jesuthas
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Alexander Hansal has worked for various companies and governmental 
institutions as IT instructor and consultant. He started as a Siebel CRM instructor for 
Siebel Systems Germany in 2001. After the acquisition of Siebel Systems by Oracle, 
Alexander continues to support European customers as an instructor and consultant 
for Siebel CRM and Oracle Business Intelligence.
Strongly believing in the power of information sharing, Alexander regularly 
discusses Siebel CRM and Oracle BI related topics on his weblog (http://siebel-
essentials.blogspot.com).
I would like to express my gratefulness to the following wonderful 
fellow human beings. Without your contributions this book would 
not have been possible. 
 
Michael Weigl for his review work and for hiring me. 
 
Tim Bull for his invaluable input as native English speaker. 
 
Amey and Leena at Packt Publishing. 
 
All those dedicated people who contribute to the Siebel CRM 
community.
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Michael Weigl holds master's degrees in physics and computer science. After 
having worked as a programmer for several years he has been a technical trainer for 
Digital Equipment, Siebel Systems, and Oracle, teaching programming languages, 
operating systems, network technology, databases, Siebel CRM, and inally Oracle 
BI. This has been interrupted by his participation in various programming projects, 
Siebel implementations, and end-user training opportunities. He is a happy father of 
two adult sons who fortunately have not followed him into the computer industry 
(although they of course love computer games).
Tim Bull has been working with Siebel since joining the company in 1999. Starting 
life as a Siebel Administrator. He has worked as a consultant and is now a Principle 
Instructor for Oracle University developing and delivering technical courses in all 
aspects of Siebel CRM.
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

For Sarah
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface 
1
Chapter 1: Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture 
7
The Siebel web architecture 
8
The Siebel database 
10
The Siebel File System 
11
The Siebel Enterprise Server 
12
The Siebel Gateway Name Server 
13
The Siebel Server 
13
The Application Object Manager (AOM) 
14
Coniguration parameters 
15
Data Manager (DM) 
15
Siebel Repository File (SRF) 
15
Siebel Web Engine (SWE) 
15
Siebel Web Templates (SWT) 
16
The web server 
16
The Siebel Web Server Extension 
17
The browser and the Siebel user interface 
19
Summary 
21
Chapter 2: Planning and Preparing the Installation 
23
Planning the Siebel CRM installation 
24
Sample planning document 
25
More planning information 
26
Understanding hardware and software prerequisites 
26
Sizing the Siebel deployment 
27
Preparing the Siebel database 
28
Creating the service owner account 
30
Creating the Siebel File System root folder 
32
Downloading the Siebel installation archives 
32
Using a download management tool 
34
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ ii ]
Running the Siebel Image Creator 
36
Obtaining the license key 
38
Summary 
39
Chapter 3: Installing Siebel CRM Server Software  
on Microsoft Windows 
41
About the Siebel server installer 
42
Installation using GUI mode 
44
Installation using console mode 
44
Installing the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
46
Installing the Siebel Server 
49
Verifying successful Siebel Server installation 
52
Installing the Siebel Database Server Utilities 
53
About the Sample Database support module 
54
Verifying the successful installation of the Siebel Database Server Utilities 55
Installing support iles for the Siebel EAI Connectors 
56
Installing the Siebel Web Server Extension 
60
Checking the system coniguration with the Siebel Environment 
Veriication Tool (EVT) 
61
Applying patches for Siebel server software 
65
Summary 
65
Chapter 4: Coniguring Siebel Server Software on  
Microsoft Windows 
67
About the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard 
68
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
70
Verifying the successful Siebel Gateway Name Server coniguration 
72
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise 
73
About the Siebel Enterprise name 
76
About additional tasks for coniguring the Enterprise 
77
Verifying the successful Enterprise coniguration 
78
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension logical proile 
79
About SWSE parameters 
81
Verifying the successful SWSE logical proile creation 
82
Installing the Siebel Database schema and seed data 
83
Preparing and executing the grantusr.sql ile 
84
Enter the correct tablespace names 
84
Modify default passwords if needed 
85
Add additional user accounts 
85
Executing the grantusr.sql Script 
87
About the Siebel Upgrade Wizard and the Log Parser 
87
Steps of the Install Siebel Database task 
91
Verifying the successful Siebel database installation 
92

Table of Contents
[ iii ]
Using the Siebel Log Parser 
92
Verifying tables and data 
94
Restarting the Siebel Upgrade Wizard in the case of errors 
94
Coniguring the Siebel Server 
95
Verifying the successful Siebel Server coniguration 
98
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension 
98
Verifying the successful Siebel Enterprise server installation 
101
Starting the Windows services 
101
Logging on as the Siebel Administrator for the irst time 
102
Finalizing the Siebel Server installation 
106
Setting the System Service owner account 
106
Copying the Siebel File System Seed iles 
107
Creating administrative Siebel user accounts 
108
Applying additional license keys 
110
Synchronizing server components 
111
Installing and coniguring Siebel server software in unattended mode 112
Creating an .ini ile for unattended Siebel server installation 
113
Creating a response ile for the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
113
Modifying the .ini ile to launch the coniguration automatically 
114
Executing the installer in unattended mode 
115
Summary 
116
Chapter 5: Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server  
Software on Linux 
117
Installing the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
118
Installing the Siebel Server 
121
Verifying the Siebel Server installation 
122
Installing the Siebel Database Server Utilities 
123
Installing the Siebel Web Server Extension 
124
Using the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard on Linux or UNIX 
126
Preparing to run the Software Coniguration Wizard 
127
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
128
Verifying the Siebel Gateway Name Server Installation on Linux or UNIX 129
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise 
131
Verifying the successful Enterprise coniguration 
134
Verifying the ODBC data source 
134
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension logical proile 
135
Verifying the successful SWSE logical proile creation 
138
Installing the Siebel Database Schema and Seed Data 
138
Preparing the environment for database coniguration 
139
Creating the dbenv.sh script 
139
Modifying the dbenv.sh script 
139

Table of Contents
[ iv ]
Executing the dbenv.sh script 
141
Verifying ODBC settings using odbcsql 
141
Starting the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
141
Starting the Siebel Upgrade Wizard 
144
Verifying the successful Siebel Database installation 
144
Restarting the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
144
Stopping the Gateway Name server 
145
Modifying the siebenv.sh ile 
145
Executing the siebenv.sh ile 
145
Starting and verifying the Gateway Name Server 
145
Coniguring the Siebel Server 
146
Verifying successful Siebel Server Coniguration 
148
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension 
149
Preparing the web server 
149
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension 
150
Verifying the successful SWSE coniguration 
151
Verifying the successful Siebel Enterprise Server installation 
152
Starting the services 
152
Starting the Siebel Gateway Name Server on Linux or UNIX 
152
Starting the Siebel Server 
153
Starting the web server 
153
Logging on as SADMIN for the irst time 
154
Final Steps 
154
Coniguring services for automatic start on Linux 
155
Editing the siebel_server ile 
155
Copying the siebel_server ile to the init.d folder 
156
Setting permissions for the siebel_server ile 
156
Creating a non-root user ile 
156
Creating soft links 
156
Summary 
157
Chapter 6: Installing Siebel Client Software 
159
About the Developer and Mobile Web Client 
159
User groups and Siebel Client Software 
161
Prerequisite software and coniguration settings for  
Siebel Web Clients 
162
About database client software for Developer Web Clients 
162
Installing with administrative user rights 
163
Internet Explorer security settings 
163
Java Runtime Environment (JRE) 
163
Additional software recommendations 
164
Installing the Siebel Developer Web Client 
165
Verifying the Siebel Developer Web Client installation 
168

Table of Contents
[ v ]
About the Siebel Client coniguration ile 
170
About coniguring data sources for the Siebel client 
172
Coniguring the Local data source for the Mobile Web Client 
173
Coniguring the Server data sources for the Siebel Developer  
Web Client 
174
Setting up additional data sources 
175
Creating Siebel application shortcuts 
177
Installing the Siebel sample database 
178
Verifying successful installation of the Siebel Sample Database 
180
Installing Siebel Tools 
182
Verifying successful Siebel Tools installation 
184
Coniguring Siebel Tools for the Siebel Sample Database 
185
Creating shortcuts for Siebel Tools 
185
Applying patches to Siebel client software 
186
Summary 
187
Chapter 7: Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software 
189
Installing and coniguring the Visual Mining NetCharts server 
189
Downloading the Visual Mining NetCharts Server installer 
191
Planning and preparing the NetCharts Server installation 
191
Installing the Visual Mining NetCharts server on Windows 
192
Verifying successful installation of the NetCharts Server 
193
Coniguring connectivity from Siebel CRM to the NetCharts Server 
194
Creating a project folder and ile for Siebel 
194
Setting Siebel Enterprise parameters 
195
Verifying successful setup of Siebel Charts 
196
Installing Oracle BI Publisher 
197
Downloading Oracle BI Publisher Enterprise Server 
199
Prerequisites for Oracle BI Publisher Enterprise Server 
200
Installing Oracle BI Publisher Enterprise Server 
200
Verifying successful installation of BI Publisher 
201
Setting up Siebel CRM for BI Publisher reports 
202
Siebel CRM version differences 
202
Importing Fix Pack SIF iles 
204
Creating a new outbound web service for BI Publisher 10.1.3.4.1 
205
Importing the Siebel inbound web services 
207
Creating XMLP responsibilities 
208
Coniguring the Siebel outbound web service for Siebel 8.2 or higher 
208
Copying Siebel java libraries to the BI Publisher server 
209
Enabling external ile references for BI Publisher 
209
Enabling Siebel Server components 
210
Setting parameters for the XMLP Java subsystem 
212
Setting the BI Publisher Security Model 
213

Table of Contents
[ vi ]
Uploading preconigured reports 
214
Verifying BI Publisher integration for Siebel CRM 
216
Assigning BI Publisher roles to the SiebelCRMReports folder 
218
Copying fonts for BI Publisher reports (optional) 
219
Coniguring the BI Publisher Scheduler (optional) 
219
Summary 
226
Chapter 8 Special Siebel Server Conigurations 
227
Installing and coniguring additional Siebel servers 
227
Planning the installation of additional Siebel Servers 
229
Installing additional Siebel Servers 
229
Verifying the successful Siebel Server installation and coniguration 
230
About coniguring multiple Siebel Servers on the same physical machine 231
Coniguring Siebel load balancing 
232
About Siebel load balancing 
232
Single Siebel Server 
233
Siebel Native Load Balancing 
234
Third-Party Load Balancing 
234
Coniguring the SWSE for Siebel Native Load Balancing 
234
Creating the load balancer coniguration ile 
234
Reconiguring the Siebel Web Server Extension 
235
Validating the eapps.cfg ile 
237
Verifying the successful load balancing coniguration of the SWSE 
238
Installing additional language packs 
239
Downloading Siebel CRM language packs 
240
Adding language packs to existing Siebel installation images 
241
Installing additional language packs for Siebel Enterprise Server software 242
Adding language support for a Siebel Server 
243
Importing language-speciic seed data into the Siebel database 
244
Installing language-speciic seed data 
247
Deactivating non-multilingual List of Values (MLOV) seed data 
248
Importing language-speciic repository metadata 
248
Enabling multilingual List of Values 
251
Installing additional language packs for the Siebel Web Server  
Extension 
254
Verifying the successful language pack installation for  
Siebel server software 
255
Restarting the Siebel Enterprise 
256
Logging on to the new application object manager 
256
Verifying UI translation 
257
Verifying multilingual List of Values 
257
Installing additional language packs for the Siebel Developer  
or Mobile Web Client 
259

Table of Contents
[ vii ]
Verifying the successful language pack installation for the Siebel Developer 
Web Client 
260
About language packs for Siebel Tools 
260
Summary 
260
Chapter 9: Siebel Server Management 
261
Understanding servers, components, and parameters 
262
Servers 
263
Component groups 
263
Component deinitions 
266
Component deinition run modes 
267
Component types 
268
Enterprise parameters 
269
Enterprise proiles 
270
System alerts 
272
Siebel enterprise hierarchy and parameter inheritance 
272
Using server management screens in the Siebel client 
275
Using the Administration - Server Coniguration screen 
276
Backing up the Siebel enterprise coniguration 
276
Restoring the Siebel enterprise coniguration 
277
Enterprise Explorer 
277
Servers view 
282
Job Templates 
284
Using the Administration - Server Management screen 
286
Enterprises view 
286
Servers view 
288
Components view 
288
Tasks view 
289
Sessions view 
289
Jobs view 
290
Using command line tools for Siebel server management 
292
About the srvrmgr command line utility 
293
Listing and reviewing information about the Siebel enterprise 
295
Backing up the enterprise coniguration 
297
Listing and modifying parameters 
297
Creating and modifying component deinitions 
298
Controlling assignment of component groups to Siebel servers 
299
Setting the start up mode of server components 
300
Controlling server components 
301
Running jobs for batch and background components 
302
Using input iles 
302
Summary 
303

Table of Contents
[ viii ]
Chapter 10: User Authentication 
305
User authentication concepts in Siebel CRM 
305
Database authentication 
308
Security adapters are deined as enterprise proiles 
308
Associating a security adapter with a server component 
309
Managing user accounts for database authentication 
310
Directory server authentication 
311
Installing the directory server (optional) 
312
Installing the IBM LDAP Client 
312
Creating user accounts in the directory server 
314
Creating the shared credentials account 
315
Creating the anonymous user accounts 
317
Setting access permissions for LDAP accounts 
319
Verifying the proxy account 
320
Coniguring the LDAP Security Adapter 
321
Coniguring server components 
323
Verifying LDAP authentication 
324
Registering a new user 
324
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server for LDAP  
authentication (optional) 
326
Verifying LDAP authentication for the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
329
Coniguring Siebel clients for LDAP authentication (optional) 
329
Setting the SecThickClientExtAuthent system preference to TRUE 
330
Creating the central authentication coniguration ile 
331
Modifying the client coniguration ile 
332
Verifying directory server authentication for the Siebel client 
332
Web Single-Sign-On 
333
Creating a non-anonymous virtual directory on the web server 
335
Creating or verifying user accounts in the external  
authentication system 
337
Modifying the Siebel Web Server Extension coniguration ile 
337
Modifying the LDAP security adapter 
339
Verifying the Web SSO coniguration 
339
Summary 
341
Chapter 11: User Authorization and Access Control 
343
Understanding Siebel Access Control 
344
Controlling access to Siebel views 
345
The importance of business process analysis 
346
Using responsibilities to control access to views 
347
Creating or modifying responsibilities 
349
Understanding the implications of view access 
350
Controlling view access on local databases 
351
Controlling read-only behaviour of views 
352

Table of Contents
[ ix ]
Controlling the tab layout for screens and views 
353
Controlling access to customer data 
354
Controlling record access for a single user or employee 
355
Controlling record access for multiple employees 
358
Controlling record access for teams based on positions 
360
Controlling record access for different companies based  
on organizations 
362
Controlling access to master data 
364
Personalized access to features and data 
367
Controlling access to applets and views based on personalization 
368
Controlling data display based  
on personalization 
371
Summary 
373
Chapter 12: Managing User Accounts 
375
Understanding divisions and organizations 
375
Setting up divisions 
376
Setting up organizations 
378
Setting up and managing the position hierarchy 
380
Multiple positions for an employee 
382
Setting up user and employee accounts 
382
Creating or verifying user accounts in the authentication system 
384
Summary 
385
Chapter 13: Siebel Remote and the Siebel  
Development Environment 
387
Introduction to Siebel Remote 
388
Differences between developers and end users 
390
Setting up mobile clients 
391
Enabling and coniguring Siebel Remote server components 
392
Creating the database schema iles 
394
Extracting data for local databases 
395
About Siebel Remote system preferences 
396
Running a database extract job for developers 
397
Initializing the local database 
399
Establishing network connectivity for mobile clients 
399
Verifying settings in the client coniguration iles 
400
Additional coniguration ile settings for developers 
401
Logging in to the local database for the irst time 
401
Understanding the Siebel coniguration process 
403
Synchronizing local databases 
405
Manual synchronization 
405

Table of Contents
[ x ]
Siebel TrickleSync 
406
Monitoring and managing Siebel Remote users 
407
Managing the transaction components on the Siebel server 
407
Monitoring mobile client activity 
409
Sending messages to mobile users 
410
Re-extracting local databases 
410
Deactivating mobile user registrations 
411
Summary 
412
Chapter 14: Installing and Coniguring the Siebel  
Management Server Infrastructure 
413
Overview of the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure 
414
Installing and coniguring the Siebel Management Server 
415
Prerequisites for the Siebel Management Server 
415
About the cross-enterprise user account 
416
Adding the Siebel Server bin directory to the PATH environment  
variable 
416
Installing the Siebel Management Server on Microsoft Windows 
417
Verifying the successful installation and coniguration of the Siebel 
Management Server 
420
Installing and coniguring Siebel Management Agents 
422
Verifying the successful installation and coniguration of a Siebel 
Management Agent 
424
Registering Siebel Management Agents 
425
Summary 
427
Chapter 15: Migrating Coniguration Changes between  
Environments 
429
Overview of Siebel Application  
Deployment Manager 
430
Administrative data (Database objects) 
430
Repository objects 
432
Files on Siebel servers and Siebel Web Server Extensions (SWSE) 
432
The Application Deployment Manager Architecture 
433
Setting up Siebel Application Deployment Manager 
435
Enabling the ADM component group 
436
Managing ADM components in source and target enterprises 
436
Coniguring the enterprise proile for ADM 
437
Enabling ADM support for the application object manager 
437
Activating ADM worklow processes 
438
Restarting Siebel Servers 
439
Verifying the adm.cli ile 
439

Table of Contents
[ xi ]
Creating shared directories 
439
Creating the enterprise proile and deployment batch iles 
440
Exporting and Packaging Coniguration Changes 
443
Creating the ADM package 
443
Creating the empty package structure 
443
Exporting administrative data using the Application  
Deployment Manager screen 
445
Exporting administrative data using the ADM Batch Processor  
server component 
447
Exporting repository data using Siebel Tools 
448
Exporting repository object deinitions for Hot-Fixes 
449
Exporting repository object deinitions for mid-level releases 
450
Exporting repository data using the consoleapp utility 
452
Copying iles to the ADM package 
454
About deploying Siebel Repository Files 
455
Sealing the ADM package 
455
Validating the ADM package 
456
Deploying ADM packages 
456
Other migration utilities 
460
Siebel Upgrade Wizard—Migrate Repository 
460
Deploying enterprise coniguration data using the cfgmerge utility 
464
Deploying new component deinitions from source to target enterprises 
465
Using the cfgmerge utility 
465
Summary 
467
Chapter 16: Monitoring Siebel Applications 
469
Server component event logging 
470
Using the Siebel Server Manager command line to set event log levels 
474
Siebel Application Response Measurement (SARM) 
474
Enabling SARM 
476
Enabling SARM for Siebel servers and components 
476
Enabling SARM for other Siebel software units 
478
Managing SARM iles 
480
Using sarmquery to read SARM iles 
481
Specifying the start and end time 
483
Application performance by area and subarea 
484
Time histograms 
487
Identifying slow performing objects 
487
Creating SARM output iles 
488
Automating SARM data retrieval 
489
Siebel Diagnostic Tool 
490
Client-side logging 
494
Enabling client-side logging for the application object manager 
495
Enabling client-side logging on the client machine 
496
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
[ xii ]
Reviewing the client log ile 
496
Siebel Usage Collection 
496
Summary 
499
Appendix A: Sample Planning Document 
501
Database server information 
501
Siebel File System-related information 
502
Web server-related information 
502
Siebel Gateway Name Server installation and coniguration 
503
Siebel Enterprise Server coniguration 
504
Siebel Web Server Extension logical proile coniguration 
504
Siebel Server installation and coniguration 
506
Installing the Siebel database 
507
Siebel Web Server Extension installation and coniguration 
508
Example topology 
508
Appendix B: Uninstalling Siebel CRM Software 
511
Uninstalling Siebel CRM server software on Microsoft Windows 
511
Verifying the Siebel Server uninstaller 
515
Uninstalling Siebel CRM server software on Linux or UNIX 
515
Uninstalling Siebel CRM client software 
516
Appendix C: More Information 
517
Getting trained 
517
Finding information 
518
The Siebel Bookshelf 
518
Oracle Forums 
519
My Oracle Support 
519
The Internet community 
519
Index 
521

Preface
Oracle's Siebel CRM is the market-leading Customer Relationship Management 
software. Unmatched in functionality and scalability, it offers a lot of challenges for 
the system administrator. This book will be your safe vessel while navigating the 
deep waters of installing and managing Siebel CRM.
This book is a complete exercise in installing and managing Oracle's Siebel CRM 8 
for your organization. You will understand the Siebel architecture and install it piece 
by piece. In easy-to-follow chapters, the book guides you through the installation of 
Siebel server, client, and third-party reporting software on Microsoft Windows and 
Linux. We begin with the planning process, cover downloading the software, and 
explain the exact installation and coniguration tasks.
After reading this book, you will feel fully prepared for setting up multiple Siebel 
servers and multi-lingual conigurations. Not only does the book give you step-by-
step instructions, it also fosters your general understanding of the intricate features 
and functionality of Oracle's Siebel CRM. For example, you will understand how data 
security works. In addition, you will learn how to support development environments 
and how to migrate coniguration changes between environments using Application 
Deployment Manager.
Another beneit of this book is that it teaches administrators how to establish system 
monitoring strategies to identify and avoid performance bottlenecks.
This book provides a practical, hands-on experience. Chapter by chapter, a Siebel 
CRM self-study environment is created that can be used to follow the examples 
described in the book and to explore Siebel CRM functionality. The book ensures  
that you understand what you are doing and why you are doing it. It contains clear 
step-by-step instructions, explanatory tables, screenshots, and precise diagrams.

Preface
[ 2 ]
What this book covers
Chapter 1, Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture lays the foundation for a clear 
understanding of the Siebel Web Architecture. You will learn about its building 
blocks and you will be able to describe their functionality and purpose.
Chapter 2, Planning and Preparing the Installation introduces you to the planning and 
preparation process, which ensures that you are able to install and conigure Siebel 
CRM server software lawlessly.
Chapter 3, Installing Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows guides you through 
the process of installing Siebel CRM server software on Microsoft Windows step  
by step.
Chapter 4, Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows shows you how to 
use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to conigure Siebel server software and conduct 
an initial installation of the Siebel server database. The chapter also introduces you to 
veriication and inalization steps.
Chapter 5, Installing and Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Linux teaches you 
to install and conigure Siebel CRM server software successfully on Linux using  
step-by-step instructions.
Chapter 6, Installing Siebel Client Software guides you through the installation 
of the Siebel Mobile or Developer Web Client, the Siebel Sample Database, and  
Siebel Tools. In addition, you will learn how to apply patches to Siebel software.
Chapter 7, Installing Additional Server Software explains how to support end users 
with charting and reporting functionality by installing the Visual Mining NetCharts 
Server and Oracle BI Publisher.
Chapter 8, Special Server Conigurations enables you to install multiple Siebel Servers 
and conigure Siebel Load Balancing. You will also learn how to apply additional 
language packs and support multi-lingual Siebel CRM deployments.
Chapter 9, Server Management provides full insight into the coniguration and 
management of Siebel Enterprises. The chapter introduces the structure of a Siebel 
Enterprise and guides you through typical administrator tasks in the Siebel user 
interface and the Siebel Server Manager command line.
Chapter 10, Authentication makes you an expert in user authentication. Besides 
understanding the mechanism of database authentication, you will learn how to 
conigure LDAP directory authentication and Web Single-Sign-On.

Preface
[ 3 ]
Chapter 11, Authorization and Access Control strengthens your general understanding 
of Siebel CRM functionality by providing deep insight into the concepts of user 
authorization, data access, and personalization.
Chapter 12, Managing User Accounts enables you to set up the organization and 
position hierarchy in Siebel CRM and create user accounts.
Chapter 13, Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment shows how to support 
the development team and how the Siebel Remote module allows you to create local 
databases. In addition, the chapter teaches you how to support mobile users.
Chapter 14, Installing the Siebel Management Server explains how the Siebel 
Management Server and Siebel Management Agents provide the framework for 
Siebel modules such as Application Deployment Manager and Siebel Diagnostic 
Tool. You will learn how to install and conigure the Siebel Management Server 
infrastructure in this chapter.
Chapter 15, Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments guides you through 
the complete process of migrating coniguration changes from development to test 
or production enterprises using Application Deployment Manager and the Siebel 
Upgrade Wizard.
Chapter 16, Monitoring Siebel Applications lets you know how to use the following 
tools to eficiently monitor the performance and usage of Siebel applications: Event 
Logging, SARM, Diagnostic Tool, Client Side Logging, and Usage Collection.
Appendix A, Sample Planning Document supports you with your irst steps and 
contains a complete example planning document.
Appendix B, Uninstalling Siebel Application Software shows you how to uninstall 
Siebel CRM software (if you have to).
Appendix C, More Information gives you information on where to ind more 
information on Oracle Siebel CRM.
What you need for this book
This book is for a technical audience. You will get most out of this book if you have a 
solid information technology (IT) background and familiarity with operating systems 
and relational databases. If you have experience with enterprise-class information 
systems, consider this an additional beneit.
It is strongly recommended to use additional resources on your Siebel learning path. 
The course offerings of Oracle University (http://education.oracle.com) are a 
perfect start.

Preface
[ 4 ]
Who this book is for
The book is written with the role of a system administrator in mind who has to ramp 
up quickly on Siebel CRM, focusing on typical tasks such as installing and managing 
the Siebel CRM infrastructure.
Conventions
In this book, you will ind a number of styles of text that distinguish between 
different kinds of information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an 
explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "We can include other contexts through  
the use of the include directive."
A block of code is set as follows:
create user GUESTCST identified by 8icJIPZH;
grant sse_role to GUESTCST;
alter user GUESTCST default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user GUESTCST temporary tablespace TEMP;
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
list tasks for comp SCC% show CC_ALIAS, TK_DISP_RUNSTATE(10), TK_LABEL
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the 
screen, in menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "Click the 
Manual Start button.".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
 "Follow Me" instructions, which the reader can use to 
complete a demonstration installation of Siebel server 
software appear like this.

Preface
[ 5 ]
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about 
this book—what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for  
us to develop titles that you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, 
and mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send us a 
note in the SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail suggest@
packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing 
or contributing to a book on, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to 
help you to get the most from your purchase.
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes 
do happen. If you ind a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text 
or the code—we would be grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you 
can save other readers from frustration and help us improve subsequent versions 
of this book. If you ind any errata, please report them by visiting http://www.
packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the let us know link, and 
entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are veriied, your submission 
will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any list 
of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be 
viewed by selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. 
At Packt, we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you 
come across any illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please 
provide us with the location address or website name immediately so that we can 
pursue a remedy.

Preface
[ 6 ]
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected 
pirated material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you 
valuable content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with 
any aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.

Introducing the Siebel Web 
Architecture
Installing and managing a complex enterprise application such as Oracle's Siebel 
CRM can be challenging. Whether you consider yourself a seasoned IT professional 
or a beginner: once we add concepts such as load balancing or multiple language 
deployment, it is easy to get lost.
The reason why you are reading this book might have been stated above. In 
this book, we are going to follow a typical Siebel CRM installation procedure. 
Additionally, we will look under the hood and learn how to manage all those 
different pieces of software.
Understanding the building blocks of Oracle's Siebel CRM applications as well as 
knowing how to avoid general pitfalls during installation and system management 
are of course great beneits. We can then execute our Siebel CRM projects more 
quickly and subsequently with less cost and risk.
When you inish this book, you will not only be able to successfully master the 
installation and system management procedures, you will also have the advantage  
of a deep understanding of the intricacies of Siebel CRM.
Instead of starting the setup program in a rush to see what happens, we should 
irst understand what we are going to install. It is therefore strongly recommended 
to follow the course of this book. The topics in this book are arranged so that each 
chapter builds upon the previous one. The following is a list of what we will learn:
• 
Understanding the Siebel web architecture
• 
Planning and preparing a Siebel CRM installation
• 
Installing the Siebel CRM server and client software on different  
operating systems

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 8 ]
• 
Installing ancillary server software
• 
Coniguring load balancing and installing language packs
• 
Managing Siebel Servers
• 
Provisioning external authentication
• 
Understanding and managing data security
• 
Supporting developer teams and mobile users
• 
Deploying coniguration changes
• 
Measuring application performance
This chapter sets the stage with an overview of the Siebel Web Architecture. We 
will describe the building blocks of the latter in order to be able to lay out a concise 
planning document and use a structured approach during the installation and 
coniguration procedures.
The Siebel web architecture
In order to allow thousands of users access to critical enterprise data over the web 
channel, Siebel CRM is based on a typical web architecture. This architecture allows 
for great scalability and platform compatibility and has been under development for 
more than a decade.
In 2001, Siebel released version 7.0 of its CRM suite. This was the irst 
version that was completely web-based. Prior versions (like Siebel 2000) 
were based on the client-server architecture, which was typical for 
enterprise applications in the 90s.
However, Siebel 7.0 was not the irst version that allowed access to data 
and functionality from a web browser. Applications like Siebel eService 
or Siebel eSales were available in earlier versions and the Siebel web 
architecture as we see it today had its origin in these irst customer facing 
web applications.
The Siebel web architecture consists of the following main building blocks:
• 
A relational database to store customer, administrative, and repository data
• 
A shared directory structure to store binary, non-relational information such 
as attachment documents and temporary iles

Chapter 1
[ 9 ]
• 
One or more Siebel Servers, which are grouped together in a Siebel 
Enterprise server
• 
The Siebel Gateway Name Server to manage and store the enterprise 
coniguration
• 
A web server
• 
The Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE), installed on the web server
• 
A web browser to display the graphical user interface
Let us bring these building blocks together in a diagram:
The diagram above depicts the Siebel Web Architecture. In the following section, we 
will discuss each of the major building blocks in detail.
www.allitebooks.com

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 10 ]
The Siebel database
Whenever a salesperson looks up customer information, a call center agent enters a 
new trouble ticket, or a customer drops an item into the shopping cart on the Internet, 
all this information must be stored in a database. Siebel CRM is no exception to that 
rule. Relational database management systems (RDBMS) do a great job in storing any 
type of data and Siebel CRM supports a variety of versions and vendors.
The following table lists database system vendors (in alphabetical order), products, 
and versions supported by Siebel CRM 8.1 (Source: Siebel System Requirements and 
Supported Platforms, Version 8.1).
Vendor
Product
Version
IBM 
DB2 for Windows and 
Unix based OS
9.1 FixPak 4 or above
IBM
DB2 UDB for z/OS
8 or above
Microsoft
SQL Server
2005 SP1 or above
Oracle 
Enterprise Server
10g
Oracle
Enterprise Server
11g
In addition to the above list, Siebel Remote, Siebel Tools, and the Application 
Deployment Manager use an embedded database engine from Sybase (Adaptive 
Server Anywhere). The version currently supported by Siebel CRM 8.1 is 9.0.1. 
Supported software vendors, platforms, and product versions are listed in the 
Siebel System Requirements and Supported Platforms document (SR&SP), which 
is published along with each release of Siebel CRM. SR&SPs can be downloaded 
from Oracle's Technology Network website at http://otn.oracle.com in the 
Documentation section.
What we need to know about the Siebel database is that it is used to store all the 
customer, administrative, and repository data. No business logic, such as constraints, 
primary keys, or foreign key references, is implemented at the database level. So, we 
can imagine the Siebel database simply as a place to store all the relational data we 
need in order to run the system.

Chapter 1
[ 11 ]
The Siebel File System
Not all data needed by end users such as salespersons or call center agents can be 
easily stowed away in a set of tables in a relational database. People often rely on 
graphical information such as charts or images, additional descriptions, documents 
downloaded from the Internet, spreadsheets, and so on to get a more complete view 
of the relational data such as the customer information they see in the Siebel client.
Technically, the Siebel File System is a shared directory with a number of 
subdirectories. Most of these subdirectories are created during the installation 
process but some are added manually when specialized modules such as Siebel 
Search are set up.
Whenever an end user, an external system, or internal processes upload ile-based 
information, the ile is compressed, and stored in the directory tree. We can see a 
typical Siebel File System directory tree in the screenshot below:
For iles that need to be accessed and downloaded by end users or external systems, 
Siebel CRM creates a record in a database table that points to the ile. Because the 
iles are compressed, and stored in a network share that is typically not accessible 
by the average user, the level of information security is very high. Even if we could 
locate a ile stored in the Siebel File System, we would not be able to read the 
information contained in the ile unless we uncompressed it using either the Siebel 
application or command line utilities provided by Oracle.

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 12 ]
The following screenshot illustrates how a document attached to a customer record 
can be located and downloaded from the Siebel Web Client using the Attachments 
view in the Accounts screen.
A PDF ile has been uploaded using the New File button. End users can now access 
the ile by clicking on the hyperlink in the Attachment Name column.
The Siebel Enterprise Server
Even though we can install and manage several Siebel Enterprise Servers in our 
network infrastructure, an Enterprise Server is not a piece of software but merely 
a logical collection of Siebel Servers that access the same Siebel database and ile 
system, and which are managed by a single Siebel Gateway Name Server.

Chapter 1
[ 13 ]
The Siebel Gateway Name Server
A Siebel Enterprise may consist of dozens of Siebel Servers, each running dozens 
of components—programs which implement a speciic functionality. Each of 
these components has different parameter values. In order to easily manage all 
this information across the entire Enterprise, Siebel has developed the Gateway 
Name Server. It is a service or daemon process that stores the entire enterprise 
coniguration in a text ile named siebns.dat, hence the oficial name of the ile is 
"Enterprise Coniguration Store".
In order to understand the role of the Gateway Name Server properly, we can 
examine the following scenario:
A Siebel administrator stops all Siebel services. He then tries to start the Siebel 
Servers without starting the Gateway Name Server. An error message indicates  
that the Siebel Server could not start.
This is because the only piece of information that a Siebel Server has at the moment 
of startup is the hostname of a Gateway Name Server, which it immediately tries to 
contact in order to retrieve more coniguration information.
So, the Gateway Name Server is a critical component of the Siebel Web Architecture 
because it must be present when any Siebel Server starts up or coniguration changes 
have to be applied. However, if the Gateway Name Server fails during normal 
operation, end users and external systems will still be able to access the Siebel 
applications and functionality provided by the Siebel Servers. But, it is of course a 
good idea to monitor the Gateway Name Server and bring it back to life as soon as 
possible if it should fail.
The Siebel Server
Processes that interact with end users, or external systems that access data in the 
Siebel database, or iles in the Siebel File System, are all located on one or more Siebel 
Servers. Each Siebel Server is a member of just one enterprise. In more technical 
terms, a Siebel Server is an application server. An application server is a generic 
container for applications or programs that are made available for access by other 
systems.
Being just that, an application server, the Siebel Server hosts so-called components, 
that implement the various pieces of Siebel functionality such as providing end user 
sessions, uploading iles to the Siebel File System, exchanging data with external 
systems, and so forth.

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 14 ]
For the sake of scalability and preventing single points of failure, installing more 
than one Siebel Server is very common. This allows administrators to assign 
components to explicit servers and avoid poor performance when end users or 
external systems produce heavy load.
The software units on the Siebel Server that are needed to support Siebel  
applications include:
• 
Application Object Manager (AOM)
• 
Coniguration Parameters
• 
Data Manager (DM)
• 
Siebel Repository File (SRF)
• 
Siebel Web Engine (SWE)
• 
Siebel Web Templates (SWT)
The Application Object Manager (AOM)
If we look at the Siebel Web Architecture from an end user's perspective, a 
component must exist on the Siebel Server that handles all requests made by the 
user as he or she clicks in the browser window. Components of this type are called 
Application Object Manager. They are programs that handle all user interactions 
such as authentication, data access, and rendering of the pages passed back to the 
user's browser. In other words, they execute the complete application logic on behalf 
of the end user. If we could place an application object manager under a microscope, 
this is what we would see:
In the following section, we will discuss the software units and iles that are 
constitutional parts of the Siebel application architecture.

Chapter 1
[ 15 ]
Coniguration parameters
It is correct to think of the Application Object Manager as a generic program that 
acts upon a speciic set of parameters for each incarnation. These parameters have 
historically been stored in text iles on the Siebel Server. The iles, with an extension 
of .cfg, are still present in modern Siebel CRM versions but only a tiny fraction of 
the parameters that drive the behavior of the Application Object Manager originate 
there.
The second and more important portion of parameters is stored and managed by  
the Siebel Gateway Name Server and loaded into the Siebel Server's memory when  
it starts up.
Data Manager (DM)
This is the application object manager's access layer against the relational data 
sources. Using speciic dynamic link libraries (dll) on Microsoft Windows or shared 
objects (so) on UNIX-based operating systems, the data manager layer generates 
database vendor-speciic SQL statements.
Siebel Repository File (SRF)
As we can see in the object manager diagram, the application object manager reads 
a ile with a .srf extension. This ile, known as the Siebel Repository File, contains 
a structured representation of the application metadata, which allows the object 
manager to quickly derive vital information such as table and column names, 
business logic, and user interface layout. The Siebel Repository File is consumed 
not only by the application object manager component type but also by other Siebel 
Server components that need access to metadata information.
Siebel Web Engine (SWE)
A request coming in from an end user or an external system is basically a set of 
commands towards the Siebel Web Engine (SWE). The SWE parses the commands 
and calls functions of underlying programs in order to satisfy the request. Other 
modules of the application object manager execute the business logic or access the 
database to retrieve the necessary data. The SWE is also responsible for building the 
result pages, which are then passed back to the browser.

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 16 ]
Siebel Web Templates (SWT)
Many of the layout elements of the Siebel user interface such as lists or forms are 
repetitive in their style (for example a list will always contain a top banner with 
button controls and the columns in the list will always have a header and body text). 
For this reason, the HTML for these elements does not need to be generated on the 
ly. It can rather be stored in text iles that are read by the Siebel Web Engine.
These iles are named Siebel Web Templates and typically have a sufix of .swt. 
If we examine these iles more closely we ind that they contain typical HTML tags 
such as <table> but also tags that are proprietary commands for the Siebel Web 
Engine. These <swe:> tags are replaced with content rendered by the Siebel Web 
Engine at runtime.
The above screenshot shows a Siebel Web Template opened in the Web Template 
Explorer provided by Siebel Tools, the development environment of Siebel CRM.
The web server
As the entire communication with the browser on the end user's computer has to be 
done via http, a web server is a vital part of the Siebel Web Architecture. Siebel CRM 
supports a variety of vendors and products such as Microsoft's Internet Information 
Services, HP Web Server (Apache), or Oracle HTTP Server (Apache).
The web server has to exist but does not need to take heavy load. As we have seen 
above, the Application Object Manager handles all incoming requests. So, the web 
server's only task is to pass requests to the application object manager and pass the 
result back to the end user's browser.

Chapter 1
[ 17 ]
It is exactly at this point where questions should be raised. How can a third-party web 
server communicate with a proprietary application server? (We learned that the Siebel 
Server is not a standard application server.) The solution is just at hand in the form of 
a piece of software that is installed on the web server in order to teach it the internal 
Siebel protocol. This is where the Siebel Web Server Extension enters the stage.
The Siebel Web Server Extension
The Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) enables any supported web server to 
communicate with the object managers on the various Siebel Servers. The SWSE serves 
as a plug-in and enables the web server to forward incoming request URLs from the 
end user's browser to the application object manager session on the Siebel Server.
Among the more interesting capabilities of the SWSE is the authentication of user 
sessions and load balancing. The SWSE reads a coniguration ile named eapps.cfg 
that links each virtual directory on the web server to a process on the Siebel Server. 
This process is implemented as a server component named Siebel Connection Broker.
The following diagram illustrates how the SWSE connects to the appropriate 
Application Object Manager on one of the Siebel Servers on the network: 

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 18 ]
1. The irst part of the URL entered into the browser's address bar points to the 
web server that hosts the Siebel Web Server Extension.
2. The second part of the URL references a virtual directory on the web server. 
The naming convention (as suggested by Oracle but not written in stone)  
is "application_language". So, the above diagram shows an example of  
a connection to the Siebel Call Center application in American English  
(enu = English—United States). Each "application_language" string is stored 
as a section in the eapps.cfg ile read by the Siebel Web Server Extension.
3. In the section in the eapps.cfg ile, the SWSE can read the Siebel Server 
hostname and the port number of the Siebel Connection Broker component.
4. In addition, the SWSE reads the internal name of the Application Object 
Manager instance.
5. The SWSE can now connect to the Siebel Connection Broker component and 
request a session for the Application Object Manager.
6. The Siebel Connection Broker forwards the request to the appropriate 
process on the Siebel Server. 
7. The connection between the SWSE and the Application Object Manager is 
now established.

Chapter 1
[ 19 ]
The browser and the Siebel user interface
We cannot discuss web-based architectures without talking about web browsers. As 
we know, the Siebel Web Engine renders the result pages, which are then passed back 
to the user's browser window. Siebel applications come with a pre-built user interface 
that can be distributed in two modes, namely High-Interactivity (HI) Mode and 
Standard Interactivity (SI) Mode. HI mode provides for very high usability. 
For example, drag and drop operations, scrolling through lists of records, the  
right-click context menu, and the wizard-style Task User Interface are features that 
are only available in the HI mode. The penalty for this high level of user friendliness 
is the limited set of supported browsers. In fact—because HI mode uses Microsoft's 
ActiveX technology—Microsoft Internet Explorer is the only browser that is supported 
for Siebel applications in HI mode. The following screenshot shows the Siebel Sales 
application in High-Interactivity mode running in Microsoft Internet Explorer:
www.allitebooks.com

Introducing the Siebel Web Architecture
[ 20 ]
Other browsers like Firefox or Safari are supported only for Siebel applications in 
SI mode. The following screenshot shows the Siebel Partner Portal application in 
Standard-Interactivity Mode in Mozilla Firefox.
There are even more ways to generate a rich user experience. The Siebel  
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) framework provides pre-built web 
services and capabilities to support any external application, from a simple  
browser to middleware-based UI generators, to access the Siebel data and business 
logic in order to generate their own UI.

Chapter 1
[ 21 ]
A Siebel application can display data from and write data to multiple data 
sources. including non-relational sources.
Siebel CRM has a proprietary protocol named SISNAPI (Siebel Internet 
Session Network Application Programming Interface),  which allows 
processes external to the application object manager to communicate with 
the latter.
Summary
Installing Siebel CRM is a complex endeavour that involves multiple professionals. 
In this chapter, we learned the fundamentals of the Siebel web architecture and how 
this infrastructure provides enterprise class applications to large end user audiences.
In this chapter, we named the building blocks that are needed to run Oracle's Siebel 
CRM applications.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to plan and prepare the installation of the 
Siebel CRM infrastructure.


Planning and Preparing the 
Installation
When tackling the complex task of installing and coniguring Oracle's Siebel CRM, 
we should keep in mind that a well-considered approach and proper documentation 
are key factors for a successful completion.
In this chapter, we will discuss the following steps of the Siebel installation process:
• 
Planning the Siebel CRM Installation
• 
Understanding hardware and software prerequisites
• 
Hardware sizing
• 
Preparing the Siebel database
• 
Preparing the Siebel ile system
• 
Creating service owner accounts
• 
Downloading the Siebel installation archives
• 
Running the Siebel Image Creator
• 
Obtaining the license key

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 24 ]
The overall process of planning and preparation can be described as follows.  
The following lowchart describes the major steps of the process of planning  
and preparing a Siebel CRM installation. In this chapter, we will describe each  
step in detail.
Planning the Siebel CRM installation
Implementing Siebel CRM for thousands of users in corporations that do business 
across the globe is not something a single person would do on a single day. 
Sometimes, hundreds of technicians, IT architects and business analysts are involved 
to fulil the company's requirements. Siebel CRM projects can be costly, lengthy, and 
sometimes risky expeditions into rough terrain.
In a typical Siebel CRM project, people from various companies—integrators and 
IT staff of the customer—work together to install and set up the different Siebel 
environments from irst prototyping areas over the development, test, and training 
environments, to the inal production environment.
Siebel and third-party software for these environments are typically installed on 
multiple server machines and it is not unusual to ind a mix of operating systems.
What is expected from us—being the reliable and trustworthy expert that the 
customer hired to install Siebel CRM on their systems—is a planning document. 
The key to a useful planning document is knowledge about the customer's IT 
infrastructure, as well as the Siebel installation and coniguration processes.
The following is an example of a typical planning document that provides all the 
information that is needed to successfully install the Siebel CRM infrastructure on 
Microsoft Windows machines. The oficial Siebel Installation Guide includes  
a Deployment Planning Worksheet, which can serve as a starting point. In a real  
life project, we can use any spreadsheet application to create and collaborate on  
this information.

Chapter 2
[ 25 ]
You can ind a complete sample planning document in the appendix section of  
this book.
For the sake of example and simplicity, passwords in the sample 
document are written in clear text. In a real life project, we must ensure 
that no sensitive information is included in the document. Rather, we 
can use common encryption tools to secure the information or leave 
references in the planning document to where the information is.
Sample planning document
The following table is a sample planning document for information regarding the 
relational database management system (RDBMS) to host the Siebel database. We 
record information about the RDBMS vendor and version as well as the machine 
hostname and administrative user account. For a typical Siebel CRM installation, we 
also plan the creation of two tablespaces. Details on how to create tablespaces and 
undertake other prerequisite installation steps are described later in this chapter.
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Database Server Vendor
Oracle
Database Server Version
11gR1
DB Server System 
Account/Password
sys/T67PBhtr as SYSDBA
Needed to connect directly 
to the database to run the 
grantusr.sql script.
Database Server hostname
dbsrvr1
DB host admin user
Administrator
DB host admin user 
password
XBXi8F9
See the note on password 
examples.
Database Server port
1521
Database Server SID
ORCL
Siebel DB index tablespace
SIEBELDB_IDX
This tablespace will hold the 
indexes of the Siebel CRM 
schema.
Siebel DB data tablespace
SIEBELDB_DATA
This tablespace will hold the 
data tables of the Siebel CRM 
schema.

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 26 ]
More planning information
Of course, a decent planning document contains more than just a series of tables. 
Sometimes, we might need to bring specialists on board to deine the necessary 
amount of servers, the hardware coniguration, and so forth.
Security-related information such as user accounts, remote access settings, or simply 
the phone numbers of the irewall administrators, can help the project team to inish 
a Siebel CRM infrastructure provisioning on time.
Certainly, the project plan will include a timeline. We will not go into details of 
project management in this book, but we should ensure that our project plan 
provides enough time and money for training—for both technicians and the end  
user community.
Understanding hardware and software 
prerequisites
Many problems in Siebel CRM projects arise from improper planning. As we 
learned, delivering a decent planning document is a key milestone of our Siebel  
CRM implementation project.
The success of the installation process we will start in the next chapter relies on the 
correct installation of third-party software on the correct hardware.
Therefore, it is very important that any person involved in planning and conducting 
a Siebel CRM installation has access to the Siebel System Requirements and 
Supported Platforms document that can be downloaded from the Oracle 
Technology Network website: http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/
E11886_01/srsphomepage.html.
This document is available for each individual Siebel CRM version and outlines  
in detail the minimum hardware requirements and software prerequisites.

Chapter 2
[ 27 ]
For example, if we plan to provide a prototype environment for evaluation and 
testing of Siebel CRM 8.1 and would like to use Microsoft Windows Server 2003 as 
the operating system, we would have to provision hardware and software as follows:
Siebel Component
Minimum Processor 
Requirements
Minimum 
Memory 
Requirements
Siebel Server
2 PIII XEON 500 MHz
1 GB
Siebel Gateway 
Name Server
PIII XEON 500 MHz
256 MB
Web Server
PIII XEON 500 MHz
512 MB
(Source: Siebel System Requirements and Supported Platforms, Version 8.1)
If we were to install these components on a single piece of hardware, we would have 
to provision a 4 CPU unit (2 for the Siebel Server, 1 for the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server, and 1 for the Web Server) with at least 1.7 GB (1 GB plus 256 MB + 512 MB) 
of free memory for the Siebel components, which would be a physical minimum of 2 
GB of memory as the operating system will also be hungry for memory.
Sizing the Siebel deployment
Installing Siebel CRM for personal evaluation or prototyping is one thing, providing 
a stable and high performing enterprise application to hundreds or thousands of end 
users is quite another challenge.
In certain phases of the Siebel CRM implementation project, consultants and IT 
staff will have to deliver a sizing document that provides insight into the expected 
number of end users and their concurrent sessions.
The necessary amount of hardware units and software components is dependent on 
these main factors:
• 
Maximum number of concurrent user sessions
• 
Expected volume of data and indexes
• 
Hardware vendor
• 
Operating system type
• 
Database vendor
• 
Network bandwidth
• 
High-availability and failover requirements

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 28 ]
Each of these has to be considered and evaluated. Customers typically rely on 
the services of experienced staff from either Oracle or consulting corporations to 
accomplish this.
Preparing the Siebel database
At a typical customer site, the IT department will already have multiple relational 
databases in place for their existing enterprise systems. To prepare the installation  
of Siebel CRM, we have to ensure that suficient tablespace is provisioned on  
the RDBMS.
The following is an example for the Oracle database and assumes that the Oracle 
RDBMS has already been installed and a database instance has been created 
following the instructions in the Siebel Installation Guide.
We can use an SQL script similar to the sample code below via the command line 
or any suitable software tool to create two tablespaces, one for the Siebel tables and 
the other for the indexes. This is a recommended practice as the Siebel installation 
wizard will prompt us for the names of two tablespaces.
rem ================================================
rem create initial tablespace for Siebel data tables
rem ================================================
CREATE SMALLFILE TABLESPACE "SIEBELDB_DATA" DATAFILE 'C:\ORACLE\
PRODUCT\10.2.0\ORADATA\ORCL\SIEBELDB_DATA.DBF' SIZE 500M AUTOEXTEND 
ON NEXT 10M MAXSIZE UNLIMITED LOGGING EXTENT MANAGEMENT LOCAL SEGMENT 
SPACE MANAGEMENT AUTO;
rem ============================================
rem create initial tablespace for Siebel indexes
rem ============================================
CREATE SMALLFILE TABLESPACE "SIEBELDB_IDX" DATAFILE 'C:\ORACLE\
PRODUCT\10.2.0\ORADATA\ORCL\SIEBELDB_IDX.DBF' SIZE 500M AUTOEXTEND ON 
NEXT 10M MAXSIZE UNLIMITED LOGGING EXTENT MANAGEMENT LOCAL SEGMENT 
SPACE MANAGEMENT AUTO;
When we run this script, one tablespace named SIEBELDB_DATA and a second 
one named SIEBELDB_IDX with an initial size of 500 MB will be created. Both 
tablespaces will be automatically extended by intervals of 10 MB with no limit.

Chapter 2
[ 29 ]
Other tasks for the process of preparing the Oracle database for an initial Siebel CRM 
installation include:
• 
Setting global parameters for the database
• 
Sizing the redo logs
• 
Creating additional tablespaces
• 
Setting user roles and privileges
We can use the management tools provided by the database vendor to inspect the 
Siebel database and verify the settings. The following screenshot shows information 
about the two tablespaces for the Siebel database in Oracle Enterprise Manager:
www.allitebooks.com

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 30 ]
If you wish to follow along with your own installation of Siebel CRM, you 
can use the Follow Me boxes in the chapters of this book.
As we have discussed the database settings, you can start with installing 
and setting up an Oracle 10g or 11g enterprise database on a machine 
that suits the hardware requirements for a simple test instance. The 
author's recommendation is to use a virtual machine with a fully licensed 
Microsoft Windows Server operating system.
You should run this virtual machine on a physical host machine with 
at least 2 GB (4 GB is better) of physical memory and suficient disk 
space (20 GB of free disk space is a minimum to store the installation, 
database, and Siebel software installation iles). Any modern laptop or 
desktop model should have suficient CPU power to support your irst 
Siebel CRM installation. However, you should take care and invest some 
time to limit the memory footprint of the virtual machine to an absolute 
minimum. You can do so for example by setting unnecessary services to 
manual start.
If you need to download the Oracle database installers, visit otn.
oracle.com and navigate to the download section for the Oracle 
database software. In the OTN License agreement available at http://
www.oracle.com/technology/software/popup-license/
standard-license.html, Oracle grants us a 
"…nonexclusive, nontransferable limited license to use the programs only 
for the purpose of developing, testing, prototyping and demonstrating…"
Follow the instructions in the Oracle documentation to install the Oracle 
database server. You might want to check the sample database option, 
which has the beneit that when the installer inishes, a database instance 
(ORCL) is already present.
Once you have installed and started the Oracle database, you can modify 
and run the scripts explained in this chapter or use your tool of choice to 
create the tablespaces for the Siebel database.
Creating the service owner account
Because the Siebel Gateway Name Server and Siebel Server are implemented as 
services (on Microsoft Windows-based operating systems) or daemon processes (on 
UNIX-based operating systems), the processes must run on behalf of an account with 
certain administrative rights.

Chapter 2
[ 31 ]
On Microsoft Windows-based operating systems, we must ensure that a system 
user account with the following characteristics is provisioned on each machine that 
will host the Siebel services and the Siebel File System before the Siebel installation 
process is started:
• 
The service owner account must either be part of a Windows domain or 
identical local accounts will have to be created locally
• 
Usernames and passwords must not contain any spaces
• 
The password policy must not be set to "User must change password at next 
logon" (uncheck this value) and must be set to "Password never expires" 
(check this value)
• 
The service owner account must be a member of the Administrators group.
• 
The service owner account must have the following user rights assigned in 
the Windows security policies:
 °
Log on as a service
 °
Act as part of the operating system
The following screenshot shows the local security policy setting "Act as part of the 
operating system" for the local user account "SIEBELSVC" on Microsoft Windows:

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 32 ]
Navigate to the user management on your demonstration machine 
and create a local user account with the settings discussed in the 
previous section.
Ensure that you add the user account to the Administrators group.
Then, navigate to the local security policy management in the 
Microsoft Windows Administrative Tools and assign the policies 
mentioned in the previous section to the newly created user account.
Creating the Siebel File System  
root folder
As we have learned in the chapter on the Siebel web architecture, the Siebel File 
System is a set of directories to store non-relational data. Luckily, the generation 
of these directories is managed by the Siebel installers; we only have to provide a 
shared directory.
Using the tools provided by the operating system, we create a directory, share it  
and set user privileges. Granting access only for selected accounts and groups 
ensures that the Siebel File System is secure and only visible to Siebel system  
services and administrators.
On your demonstration machine, create a new directory, share it and 
set the permissions to "Full Control" for the Administrators group and 
the service owner account.
Downloading the Siebel installation  
archives
We have discussed the preliminary steps for the installation of a Siebel CRM 
demonstration system. Now, it is time to download the Siebel installation iles  
from the Oracle E-Delivery website (http://edelivery.oracle.com).
When we irst use Oracle E-Delivery, we must register with our full name, company 
name, E-mail address, and country information. A new registration is processed by 
Oracle in typically a day.

Chapter 2
[ 33 ]
Also, we must ensure that we read and agree to the licensing information. Software 
downloaded from Oracle E-Delivery must either be licensed or is made available for 
a limited 30 day trial period.
Once we have successfully illed in the Export Validation Form, we enter the search 
screen of Oracle E-Delivery. The following screenshot shows the search results for 
the Siebel CRM product pack on the Microsoft Windows (32-bit) platform:
We can also use the License List link in the instructions section to conduct a search 
for the correct product and the associated product pack.
To download the base Siebel CRM software needed for a demonstration system, click 
on the link for Siebel Business Applications (with Translations) Media Pack. There 
are several links for different versions of Siebel.

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 34 ]
Siebel CRM is made available in two lavors. The Siebel Enterprise 
Applications (SEA) is a smaller subset of the Siebel Industry 
Applications (SIA). The Siebel Enterprise Applications are also widely 
known as "horizontal" applications that provide functionality across 
different industries, whereas the Siebel Industry Applications provide 
industry-speciic applications such as Siebel Automotive.
The download link including the acronym SEA takes you to the 
installers for the horizontal Siebel applications.
Oracle has announced it will discontinue the delivery of two separate 
lavors in favor of the Siebel Industry Applications.
When we reach the download page for the selected media pack, we should ensure 
that we download only the bits and pieces that we need. This might prove a little 
dificult for people who have never done this before and the risk of downloading 
unneeded language packs or software and therefore clogging our disk drives is high. 
Oracle provides a Readme ile that lists the contents of each download archive ile.
We can follow this "shopping list" to download what we need for our irst Siebel 
CRM demonstration installation:
• 
All parts of the Siebel Business Applications English language pack
• 
All parts of the Siebel Business Applications Base Applications
• 
All parts of the Siebel Business Applications Siebel Client
• 
All parts of the Siebel Business Applications Siebel Tools
• 
The Siebel Business Applications ImageCreator Files
Using a download management tool
Given the fact that the download iles are huge (from several hundreds of megabytes 
to more than 1.5 gigabytes), the probability of losing our Internet connectivity during 
the download and therefore having to restart the download is relatively high. In 
order to avoid this kind of trouble, we should use a download management tool of 
our choice.
The author (who is not related to the authors of the following software) has  
used the open-source tool named Free Download Manager (FDM) available at 
http://freedownloadmanager.org. An especially nice feature of FDM is its 
ability to read the ile listing of .zip archives and to allow selecting or unselecting 
certain iles within the archive, resulting in a smaller download size. The following 
screenshot shows the ZIP Preview feature of Free Download Manager:

Chapter 2
[ 35 ]
We can see the content of the zip archive for the Siebel Business Applications 8.1.1.0 
Base Applications (Part 1 of 2) with the Visual Mining Netcharts installer unselected.
However, if we are in doubt we should download the entire zip archive and store all 
downloaded archives in a single directory on our hard drive.
Once all zip archives are downloaded, we need to unzip them using our utility of 
choice. Oracle recommends using the unzip utility on UNIX-based operating  
systems and warns of using the built-in unzip feature of Microsoft Windows or  
the commercial WinZip software.
The author has successfully unzipped all downloaded iles with 7zip, an open-source 
utility available at http://www.7-zip.org.
We can simply unzip all downloaded zip archives into a single directory. The 
following screenshot shows the result of unzipping the downloaded zip iles, a set  
of jar archives and the iles for the Siebel Image Creator:

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 36 ]
If you wish to continue following along with the installation of a 
Siebel CRM demonstration system, your task is now to download and 
unzip the Siebel installation archives as described in the above section.
Running the Siebel Image Creator
The Siebel Image Creator is a utility provided for each operating system platform. 
It is responsible for extracting the installation iles from the jar archives and storing 
them in a directory tree—the image—suitable for the installation. Installing Siebel 
CRM directly from the zip or jar archives is impossible.
The Siebel Image Creator can be run in graphical mode (GUI) or in command line 
mode. On operating systems that support graphical user interfaces, we typically 
use GUI mode.
We can start the Siebel Image Creator on Microsoft Windows by double-clicking the 
Windows_ImageCreator.exe ile.
The following table provides step-by-step instructions for how to create a Siebel 
Installation Image using the Siebel Image Creator.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Siebel Image Creator.
Double-click the Windows_
ImageCreator.exe ile.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Display of options.
Choose Create a new image…
Click Next
4
Specify the directory to which the 
installer images should be copied.
Example: C:\Siebel_Install_Image
Click Next
5
Application type selection.
Select Siebel Industry Applications
Click Next
6
Select operating system platform.
Select Windows
Click Next

Chapter 2
[ 37 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Select products.
Select the following:
Siebel Tools
Siebel Web Client
Siebel Sample Database
Siebel Enterprise Server
Siebel Web Server Extension
Click Next
8
Specify languages.
Select ENU – English (American)
Click Next
9
Progress of the ile extraction process is 
displayed.
Wait for completion
10
Success message is displayed.
Click Finish
Now, we can navigate to the directory we speciied in step 4 and verify that the 
Siebel installer iles have been created for the selected products and languages.  
The following screenshot shows the directory tree for a Siebel installation image  
for various products such as Siebel Tools and Siebel Web Client:
If we consider a large project setting then it is deinitely a recommended practice to 
copy the Siebel installation image directory to a network location that is accessible  
by anyone who needs to install Siebel CRM software.

Planning and Preparing the Installation
[ 38 ]
If you have inished downloading and unzipping the Siebel installation 
archives from the Oracle E-Delivery website, you can now follow the 
steps outlined in the above section and create the Siebel installation 
image on your hard drive.
Ensure that you follow the steps in the table above correctly to extract 
the installation images for all Siebel CRM products needed for a 
demonstration environment.
Obtaining the license key
Siebel CRM application functionality is licensed by Oracle on a per-module basis. If 
a customer does not need, for example, the Siebel Marketing functionality, then he 
does not have to pay for it.
The interesting part, however, is that when we install Siebel CRM, we install the 
so-called Siebel Repository, the metadata store holding all pre-built application 
conigurations. This repository is the same for all customers. What customers get 
when they purchase a Siebel CRM license for the modules they have chosen is  
the Siebel license key.
Plainly, the license key is a set of numbers that control the availability of the Siebel 
CRM functionality to the end users. Siebel functionality is accessed by means of 
Siebel Views, which are simply iltered away if the respective license key is not 
present in the Siebel database.
For an initial demonstration installation of Siebel CRM, it is therefore important to 
download the correct license key from the Oracle website. For evaluation purposes, 
we can download a set of license keys that expire after a certain period.
The URL where Oracle makes the license keys for all applications available is 
http://licensecodes.oracle.com.
On that website, we navigate to the Siebel section and locate the link for the all-
inclusive license keys. We ind the correct "lavor" of Siebel CRM and copy all lines  
of the respective license code to our clipboard. It is a good practice to paste the 
license code in a text ile and store it in a safe place.
The license key will be needed during installation of the Siebel database.

Chapter 2
[ 39 ]
You can use the checklist below to verify 
whether you have completed all steps in the 
"Follow Me" boxes.
• 
Provisioned a Microsoft Windows based operating system (including 
Internet Information Services) on appropriate hardware
• 
Installed an Oracle 10g or 11g database server
• 
Created two tablespaces
• 
Created a system owner account with correct privileges
• 
Created and shared a ile system root folder
• 
Downloaded the Siebel installation archives
• 
Created the Siebel installation images
• 
Downloaded and stored the correct Siebel license key
Summary
Creating a planning document is one of the irst tasks for Siebel professionals who 
have to install Siebel CRM. This chapter provided information on how to plan the 
several phases of a Siebel installation using a sample planning document.
In addition, we learned how to execute the prerequisite steps for a Siebel CRM server 
installation on Microsoft Windows. These steps included the creation of tablespaces 
on an Oracle database and managing user accounts and ile shares.
Finally, the chapter covered the steps to download the installation iles, license keys, 
and to create the installation images using the Siebel Image Creator.
In the next chapter, we will get even more practical and learn to install Siebel CRM 
server software on Microsoft Windows.
www.allitebooks.com


Installing Siebel CRM Server 
Software on Microsoft 
Windows
In this chapter, we will discuss the concepts of installing Siebel CRM server software 
on Microsoft Windows-based operating systems in a very practical way. The 
following topics will be discussed:
• 
About the Siebel Server Installer
• 
Installing the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Installing the Siebel Server
• 
Installing the Siebel Database Server Utilities
• 
Installing the Siebel EAI Connector support iles
• 
Installing the Siebel Web Server Extension
• 
Checking the system coniguration with the Environment  
Veriication Tool (EVT)
• 
Applying patches to Siebel Server Software
The overall process low of installing Siebel CRM server software can be  
depicted as follows:

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 42 ]
Each step of this process will be described in this chapter in detail. 
About the Siebel server installer
The Siebel CRM installation images provide a setup executable, which is located 
in the root folder of the respective module we wish to install. When we invoke this 
executable, an installation dialog will guide us through the installation process. 
During this process, the application's binary iles and other iles that provide Siebel 
CRM functionality are extracted from the installation image iles to a directory 
structure on the disk drive.
The setup executables read a text ile named siebel.ini, which contains information 
such as which programs to launch when the ile copy process is complete. In the 
current Siebel CRM releases for example, the siebel.ini iles are preconigured to 
launch the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard immediately after the software  
iles have been extracted.
For the installation of components of the Siebel Enterprise Server on Microsoft 
Windows-based operating systems, we ind the setup.exe ile among others in 
the Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder as shown in the following screenshot:
For operating systems based on UNIX, the structure of the installation image folders 
is similar. However, the setup executable name includes the name of the operating 
system. The following screenshot shows the content of a Siebel installation image 
root folder for installation on Linux. Note the setuplinux executable.

Chapter 3
[ 43 ]
Independent of the operating system, the setup executable supports three modes  
of installation:
• 
Graphical User Interface (GUI) mode
• 
Console mode
• 
Unattended mode
We will discuss the irst two modes in this section. The coniguration steps for 
unattended installation are discussed in the next chapter.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 44 ]
Installation using GUI mode
The graphical user interface mode is the default and most used mode of the Siebel 
setup ile. In Microsoft Windows environments, we can simply double-click the 
setup.exe ile in the Siebel_Enterprise_Server directory and a Java-based 
installation wizard will start up. The following screenshot shows the graphical 
Welcome dialog of the InstallShield Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise Server:
Following the dialogs, the administrator is prompted for several parameter values, 
such as the target directory to copy the application iles to.
Installation using console mode
For certain situations—for example while installing using a remote command shell—
the setup executable supports console mode. In console mode, the information 
display and entry of parameter values is accomplished through the command shell 
of the operating system.
To invoke the setup routine in console mode, we can use the following command 
line syntax (example for Microsoft Windows):
setup.exe -is:javaconsole -console -is:tempdir c:\temp
The –is:javaconsole –console command will invoke the setup.exe program in 
console mode. The –is:tempdir c:\temp command directs the setup.exe program 
to use the c:\temp directory to store temporary iles needed for the execution of 
the wizard. The following screenshot shows the InstallShield Wizard for the  
Siebel Enterprise Server in console mode.

Chapter 3
[ 45 ]
An administrator can still view all the necessary information and will have to enter 
parameter values such as the install directory using the command shell.
Other command line options for the InstallShield setup executables (including the 
Network Image Creator discussed in Chapter 2) are listed in the table below.
Command
Description
-is:javaconsole –console
Launches the InstallShield Wizard in 
console mode.
-is:tempdir <directory>
Provides a directory location to store 
temporary iles.
-is:log <logfile path>
Provides a path to the log ile for the 
installer.
-args RECORD=<path to response 
file>
Runs the installer in record mode. Used 
for preparing unattended installation 
mode. Record mode produces a 
siebel.ini ile.
-args SS_SETUP_INI=<path to  
response file>
Allows running the installer in 
unattended mode. Used to read a 
siebel.ini ile if it is not located in 
the installation image root folder.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 46 ]
The Siebel Enterprise Server installer will be used in the following sections to install 
these building blocks of the Siebel Web Architecture:
• 
Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Siebel Server
• 
Siebel Database Server Utilities
• 
Siebel EAI Connectors
We will now examine the details of each installation procedure.
Installing the Siebel Gateway  
Name Server
A typical Siebel Enterprise Server installation starts with the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server. The reason behind this strategy is that when it comes to the step of coniguring 
the Enterprise and the irst Siebel Server, the Gateway Name Server has to be up  
and running.
It is possible to combine the Siebel Gateway Name Server installation procedure with 
the installation of the Siebel Server, the Siebel Database Server Utilities, and Siebel EAI 
Connectors. This is a typical scenario for a single-machine installation.
However, a more realistic scenario is to install each component of the Siebel Web 
Architecture on separate physical machines. For this reason, the following sections 
discuss the technique of installing the Siebel Enterprise Server components separately.
The installation of the Siebel Enterprise Server components on Microsoft Windows 
begins with double-clicking the setup.exe ile in the Siebel_Enterprise_Server 
folder of the Siebel installation image. The following table describes the steps that the 
InstallShield Wizard guides us through and what entries and actions we have to take 
in order to install the Siebel Gateway Name Server on the machine that we dedicated 
for hosting it in our planning document. We described the planning process in the 
Planning the Siebel CRM installation section in Chapter 2.

Chapter 3
[ 47 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder
2
The Welcome dialog  
is displayed
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which 
the application iles should  
be copied
Example: C:\SIA8.
The directory should already have been 
speciied in the planning document.
A subdirectory for the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server will be created automatically
Click Next.
4
Select products to install
Select the following:
• 
Gateway Name Server
Click Next.
5
Select setup type
Select Custom.
Click Next.
6
Feature selection.
Keep the default selection.
Click Next.
7
Language selection.
Select ENU – English (American).
Click Next.
8
Windows Program Menu 
Folder
Keep the default menu folder name.
Note: The installer will create shortcuts to the 
Software Coniguration Wizard in this folder.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Check the information in the summary dialog.
Click Next.
10
The Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard is launched 
automatically
We will launch the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
later to inish the coniguration of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard and conirm with Yes.
11
The InstallShield wizard 
success dialog is displayed
Click Finish.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 48 ]
We can verify the installation of the Siebel Gateway Name Server by navigating 
to the installer target directory. We can observe that the installer has created 
the following:
• 
A log ile in the target root directory
• 
A directory that hosts the uninstaller program
• 
The directories and iles needed to run the Siebel Gateway Name Server
The screenshot below shows the directories and iles created by the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server installer:
In addition, we can check the Windows start menu for the existence of a program 
folder that should now contain a shortcut labeled Siebel Enterprise Coniguration. 
This shortcut is conigured to launch the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard, 
which we will use later to conigure the Siebel Gateway Name Server and the 
Siebel Enterprise.
The log.txt ile can be helpful in the case that errors occur during the 
installation process.
In this and subsequent "Follow Me" boxes, you are invited to use the 
steps described in the above section to install the Siebel Web Architecture 
on a demonstration machine. Instructions on how to prepare this 
demonstration machine have been given in the previous chapter.
If you wish to follow along with this chapter, complete the following 
steps:
1. Run the setup.exe program and follow the steps described in 
    the above table to install the Siebel Gateway Name Server on your  
    demonstration machine.
2. Follow the veriication steps described in the above section.

Chapter 3
[ 49 ]
Installing the Siebel Server
In the following section, we will discuss the process to install the Siebel Server 
program iles on Microsoft Windows-based operating systems. The following table 
guides us through the dialogs displayed by the InstallShield wizard. We begin by 
invoking the setup executable on the machine that we dedicated to host the Siebel 
Server during the planning process. We described the planning process in  
the Planning the Siebel CRM installation section in Chapter 2.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard
Double-click the setup.exe ile in 
the Siebel_Enterprise_Server 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click Next.
3
Install new components or add 
languages
This dialog is displayed when the 
installer detects any existing Siebel 
Enterprise Server installations.
Keep Install a new instance or add 
new components selected.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied
Example: C:\SIA8.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
Component subdirectory for 
the Siebel Server will be created 
automatically.
Click Next.
5
Select products to install
Select the following:
• 
Siebel Server
Click Next
6
Select setup type
Select Custom.
Click Next.
7
The selectable features for the Siebel 
Server are displayed
These features are explained after this 
table.
Deselect Siebel Management Agent.
Note: We will install the Siebel 
Management Agent separately.
Click Next.
www.allitebooks.com

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 50 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
8
Windows Program Menu Folder
Keep the default menu folder name.
Note: The installer will create 
shortcuts to the Software 
Coniguration Wizard in this folder.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Check the information in the 
summary dialog.
Click Next.
10
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
for the Siebel Server is launched 
automatically
We will launch the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard later to inish 
the coniguration of the Siebel Server.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and conirm 
with Yes.
11
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed
Click Finish.
In step 7 of the table above, the installation wizard for the Siebel Server prompts for 
the following selectable features of the Siebel Server:
• 
Object Manager Component
• 
Handheld Synchronization
• 
Data Quality Connector
• 
Remote Search Support
• 
Java Integrator
• 
PIM Server Integration
• 
Siebel Management Agent
The following screenshot shows the InstallShield wizard dialog, which allows the 
selection or de-selection of these features.

Chapter 3
[ 51 ]
A brief explanation of these features shall be given in the following section. As a 
general rule of thumb, we should keep the default settings when in doubt. This will 
ensure that we can simply activate a feature later in the project. Deselecting a feature 
will require us to run the installer again to make it available.
• 
Object Manager Component: This option enables the installation of the iles 
necessary to operate the Siebel Application Object Manager components on 
the Siebel Server. This feature should always be selected.
• 
Handheld Synchronization: This feature supports data synchronization 
between the Siebel Server and clients installed on handheld PCs. If our 
company does not deploy handheld clients we can deselect this feature.
• 
Data Quality Connector: This feature is needed when your company intends 
to deploy the Siebel Data Quality module, which provides data matching and 
data cleansing capabilities by integrating Siebel CRM with third-party data 
quality software such as Oracle Data Quality, FirstLogic, or Trillium.
• 
Remote Search Support: If we intend to use Siebel Search using a search 
server that is not installed on the machine hosting the Siebel Server, we 
should keep this feature selected.
• 
Java Integrator: Enabling this feature will copy iles needed for integrating 
Siebel applications with Java-based software using the Siebel Java  
Data Bean (JDB).

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 52 ]
• 
PIM Server Integration: The abbreviation PIM translates to Personal 
Information Manager and refers to a program or device that allows storing of 
calendar and contact information. An example for this is Microsoft Outlook. 
The server behind Microsoft Outlook is Microsoft Exchange. Selecting this 
feature will direct the installer to copy the iles needed to enable the server-side 
integration of Siebel CRM with Microsoft Exchange, also known as server-side 
synchronization for Exchange (SSSE). This feature is not selected by default.
• 
Siebel Management Agent: The Siebel Management Agent is a part of 
the Siebel management framework. It enables communication with the 
Siebel Management Server. Proper installation of the Siebel management 
infrastructure is needed if we want to deploy coniguration changes from 
development environments to test or production environments using the 
Application Deployment Manager. Also, the Siebel Diagnostic Tool relies on 
the Siebel management infrastructure. The Siebel Management Agent can be 
installed using a separate installer with the beneit of a separate uninstaller 
being created. For this reason, it is recommended to unselect the feature and 
install the Siebel Management Agent later using its own installer.
Verifying successful Siebel Server installation
In order to verify the successful installation or troubleshoot problems during 
installation of the Siebel Server, we can navigate to the installation root folder. The 
log.txt ile will contain information about the installation process and a siebsrv 
directory should exist containing the folders and iles necessary to operate one or 
more Siebel Servers on this machine.
Also, we can check the Windows start menu for the existence of a program folder 
that should now contain a shortcut labeled Siebel Server Coniguration. This 
shortcut is conigured to launch the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard,  
which we will later use to conigure a Siebel Server.
In order to continue with the installation of the Siebel Web Architecture 
on your demonstration machine, you can now complete the  
following steps:
1. Run the setup.exe program and follow the steps described in 
    the above table to install the Siebel Server software on your  
    demonstration machine.
2. Follow the veriication steps described in the above section.

Chapter 3
[ 53 ]
Installing the Siebel Database  
Server Utilities
Any operation that has to be carried out against the Siebel database is done via the 
Siebel Upgrade Wizard. This utility along with other programs and iles such as 
pre-built SQL scripts are installed using the Siebel Enterprise Server installer option 
Siebel Database Server Utilities.
As the Siebel Upgrade Wizard uses folders and iles situated in the Siebel Server 
installation directory, it is necessary to install the Siebel Database Server Utilities on 
the same machine as the Siebel Server. The Installer shows a warning message when 
we attempt to install the Database Server Utilities into a root directory that does not 
include a Siebel Server installation.
The table below describes the steps that the InstallShield wizard guides us through 
when we install the Siebel Database Server utilities on Microsoft Windows-based 
operating systems.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Install new components or add 
languages.
This dialog is displayed when the 
installer detects any existing Siebel 
Enterprise Server installations.
Keep Install a new instance or add new 
components selected.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: C:\SIA8.
The directory should already have been 
speciied in the planning document.
A subdirectory for the Database Server 
Coniguration Utilities will be created 
automatically.
Click Next.
5
Select products to install.
Select the following:
• 
Database Server Coniguration 
Utilities
Click Next.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 54 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
6
Select setup type.
Select Custom.
Click Next.
7
The selectable features for the Database 
Server Utilities are displayed.
In order to save disk space, we can safely 
deselect the Microsoft SQL Server and 
IBM DB2 options as we are installing on 
an Oracle database.
Note: Keep the Sample Database 
support option selected. This option is 
explained in more detail below this table.
Click Next.
8
Windows Program Menu Folder.
Keep the default menu folder name.
Note: The installer will create shortcuts 
to the Software Coniguration Wizard in 
this folder.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
10
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed.
Click Finish.
About the Sample Database support module
The following screenshot shows the feature options for the Siebel Database 
Coniguration Utilities that we select in step 7 of the above process:

Chapter 3
[ 55 ]
The feature options include:
• 
Sample seed iles (Sample Database support)
• 
Scripts and utilities for Microsoft SQL Server databases
• 
Scripts and utilities for Oracle databases
• 
Scripts and utilities for IBM DB2 databases on Microsoft Windows, Linux, 
and UNIX-based operating systems
• 
Scripts and utilities for IBM DB2 databases on the IBM z/OS  
operating system
If we select the Sample Database support option, we ensure that a directory named 
FILES will be created in the database server utilities installation folder (dbsrvr). 
Despite the name Sample Database support, this option has nothing to do with the 
Siebel Sample Database, which can be installed with the Siebel Mobile Web Client. 
The FILES directory contains iles that support the sample sales literature, images, 
and communication templates for use by administrators and end users of the Siebel 
CRM applications.
We will have to copy these iles to the real Siebel File System to complete the Siebel 
Enterprise Coniguration. This step will be discussed in the next chapter.
Verifying the successful installation of the 
Siebel Database Server Utilities
To verify the successful installation of the Database Server Utilities, we can navigate 
to the target directory and check whether a dbsrvr directory exists. This directory 
should contain subdirectories with executables and SQL scripts for the database 
platforms we have selected during installation.
In addition, the Windows start menu folder should now contain a new shortcut 
labelled Database Server Coniguration.
If you wish to follow along with this chapter and proceed with the 
installation of the Siebel Web Architecture on your demonstration 
machine, you can now complete the following steps:
1. Run the setup.exe program and follow the steps described 
    in the above table to install the Siebel Database Server Utilities on  
    your demonstration machine.
2. Follow the veriication steps described in the above section.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 56 ]
Installing support iles for the Siebel  
EAI Connectors
If our company has decided to use any of the platforms or technologies in the list 
below to integrate with Siebel CRM, we should install the support iles for the 
respective platform using the EAI Connector installation option of the Siebel  
Enterprise Server installer:
• 
Microsoft BizTalk Server
• 
OLE DB
• 
Oracle eBusiness applications 10.7 or 11i
• 
COM Data Control
• 
Java Data Bean
The following screenshot shows the selectable features for the EAI Connector 
installation option of the Siebel Enterprise Server installer:

Chapter 3
[ 57 ]
A brief explanation of this option shall be given in the following sections:
• 
EAI Connector for Microsoft BizTalk Server
According to the Siebel Installation Guide for Microsoft Windows, the EAI 
Connector for Microsoft BizTalk Server is not supported in Siebel CRM 
release 8.1. Oracle will make announcements on its support portal in case 
the support is re-established. (Source: Siebel Installation Guide for Microsoft 
Windows, Version 8.1)
Selecting this feature will result in the creation of a directory that holds iles 
needed to integrate Siebel CRM with Microsoft BizTalk Server, however 
unsupported it might be to use them.
• 
EAI Connector for OLE DB
OLE stands for "Object Linking and Embedding" and is a technology layer 
established by Microsoft to connect applications. The OLE DB standard is  
the object linking and embedding technology used to link applications  
to databases.
In versions up to Siebel 7.8, the Siebel EAI toolkit included an OLE DB 
provider option, which would enable so-called OLE DB consumers such as 
hand-written or standard software to connect to the Siebel business layer 
using the OLE technology stack. Executing the EAI Connector installer with 
this option would place the necessary support iles onto a machine where the 
OLE DB consumer would run.
However, OLE DB has been de-supported by Oracle in Siebel CRM 8.0. So, 
the feature selection is not of any use if we install Siebel CRM 8.0 or above.
• 
EAI Connector for Oracle
When Siebel Systems Inc. was an independent software company, several 
connectors for other standard enterprise applications were part of the  
product portfolio. These connectors were made available for:
 °
Oracle eBusiness applications 10.7 and 11i
 °
SAP R/3
 °
PeopleSoft applications
PeopleSoft and Siebel have been acquired by Oracle in 2004 and 2005 
respectively and Oracle has developed the Application Integration  
Architecture, which provides middleware-based integration for these  
and other standard enterprise applications.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 58 ]
In the (admittedly rare) case of the need to integrate with one of these  
applications in a peer-to-peer manner, then only for Oracle eBusiness Suite 
we would have to run a separate installation process in order to obtain the 
support iles. These iles are basically pre-built scripts to create SQL views  
in the Oracle application's database.
The SAP and PeopleSoft connectors are delivered with the standard  
installation procedure and do not require a separate installer to be run.
• 
EAI Connector for COM Data Control
The Siebel EAI toolkit provides several programmatic options to integrate 
external applications with Siebel CRM using Microsoft's Component Object 
Model (COM). If we would have the requirement to run a program written 
in C++ or .NET on a machine that does not host a Siebel Server installation, 
we would have to run this EAI Connector installer to create the necessary 
support iles. These would be mainly dynamic link library (dll) iles, which 
enable the developer to connect to the Siebel Application Object Manager  
and use the Application Programming Interface (API) provided by Oracle.
If the machine has a Siebel Server installation, then the libraries for COM 
support are already installed and it is therefore not necessary to run the 
installer separately.
• 
EAI Connector for Java Data Bean
In a similar fashion as writing a C++ program to connect to a Siebel 
Application Object Manager from a Microsoft Windows machine, the Siebel 
EAI toolkit provides support for programs written in the Java programming 
language. These programs run on any operating system. If we need to place 
the support iles—in this case mainly Java libraries to support connectivity 
to the Siebel Application Object Manager from Java code—on a machine that 
does not host a Siebel Server, then we would use this EAI Connector installer 
option to do so.
During the Siebel Server installation, we noticed the "Java Integrator" feature 
which, when selected, will direct the Siebel Server installer to create a  
CLASSES subdirectory containing these libraries.
Regarding the information about supported EAI connectivity above, we 
should use the EAI Connector installer whenever we plan to integrate Siebel 
CRM with Oracle eBusiness applications 10.7 or 11i (also known as Oracle 
connector) directly (not via middleware) or need to deploy support iles for 
COM or Java-based connectivity on a machine that does not host a  
Siebel Server.
The following table conveys the steps and necessary input to install the EAI 
Connector support iles:

Chapter 3
[ 59 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard
Double-click the setup.exe ile in 
the Siebel_Enterprise_Server 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click Next.
3
Install new components or add 
languages
This dialog is displayed when the 
installer detects any existing Siebel 
Enterprise Server installations.
Keep Install a new instance or add 
new components selected.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied
Example: C:\SIA8.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
A subdirectory for the EAI Connectors 
will be created automatically.
Click Next.
5
Select products to install
Select the following:
• 
EAI Connector
Click Next.
6
Select setup type
Select Custom.
Click Next.
7
The selectable features for the EAI 
Connector are displayed
As indicated above, select the features 
that suit your needs.
Click Next.
8
Windows Program Menu Folder
Keep the default menu folder name.
Note: The installer for EAI Connectors 
will not create shortcuts in this folder.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
10
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed
Click Finish.
We can verify the successful installation by navigating to the speciied target 
directory and checking whether a new subdirectory named eaiconn has been 
created. The eaiconn directory will contain the support iles for each selected  
feature in a separate folder.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 60 ]
Installing the Siebel Web Server  
Extension
As we learned in the previous chapter, not only is a web server such as Microsoft 
IIS necessary, we must also install the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) on this 
machine. The SWSE serves as a plug-in to the web server and forwards the URL 
requests from clients or external systems to the appropriate processes on the  
Siebel Servers.
The SWSE installer resides in its own installation image and must be run on any 
machine that should later serve as a Siebel web server.
The InstallShield setup executable is located in the Siebel_Web_Server_Extension 
folder of the Siebel installation image. On Microsoft Windows operating systems, we 
can simply double-click the setup.exe ile to invoke the installer.
The table below illustrates the process of installing the Siebel Web Server Extension 
(SWSE) on a Microsoft Windows-based operating system that has the Microsoft 
Internet Information Services (IIS) installed and conigured.
Step
Description
Tasks
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Web_Server_Extension 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied
Example: C:\SIA8\SWEAPP.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
Click Next.
4
Language selection
Select enu – English (American).
Click Next.
5
Windows Program Menu Folder
Keep the default menu folder name.
Note: The installer will create a 
shortcut to the Siebel Software 
Coniguration Wizard in this  
program folder.
Click Next.
6
Summary
Check the information in the  
summary dialog.
Click Next.

Chapter 3
[ 61 ]
Step
Description
Tasks
7
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard for 
the Siebel Web Server Extension is 
launched automatically
We will launch the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard later to inish 
the coniguration of the Siebel Web 
Server Extension.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and conirm 
with Yes.
8
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed
Click Finish.
To verify the successful installation of the Siebel Web Server Extension, we can 
navigate to the installation target directory and check whether folders and iles have 
been created. Most notably, the PUBLIC directory will contain folders that represent 
the installed language packs. The upcoming coniguration steps will place iles in 
each language-speciic folder, which constitute the browser-side look and feel and 
functionality of the Siebel application in the form of style sheets (iles with a .css 
extension), image iles, and both JavaScript (.js) and ActiveX (.cab) components.
Ensure that your demonstration machine hosts a supported version of 
Microsoft's IIS web server and follow the instructions in this section to 
install the Siebel Web Server Extension.
Checking the system coniguration with 
the Siebel Environment Veriication Tool 
(EVT)
Now that copying the iles that will later enable Siebel CRM functionality into the 
respective folders is complete, we are ready to set up and conigure the system 
components that constitute the Siebel web architecture.
It is worthwhile to check our future Siebel server machines for full compatibility  
with the platform requirements as laid out in the document "System Requirements 
and Supported Platforms" for the version of Siebel CRM we are installing.
In order to provide support for this activity, the installer has placed a small utility 
named "Environment Veriication Tool" (EVT) into the installation folders of the  
Siebel server software. EVT consists of a command line utility named evt.exe 
and an accompanying evt.ini ile, which holds the coniguration information for 
the program.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 62 ]
The purpose of EVT is to allow frequent checks of the operating system, its settings, 
and the coniguration of Siebel software and third-party software on the various 
machines that the Siebel infrastructure consists of.
These checks include:
• 
Version and parameterization of the database server and client software
• 
Version and environment settings of the operating system and its  
networking subsystems
• 
Version and coniguration of the web server
• 
Coniguration of the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Coniguration of Siebel Servers and their components
• 
Coniguration of the Siebel Web Server Extension
The evt.ini ile comes preconigured for the most critical checks. It can be modiied 
by an administrator to instruct the evt executable to carry out additional checks.
The Environment Veriication Tool can be run from any point in time once at least 
one component of the Siebel Enterprise Server has been installed. In order to execute 
EVT with the preconigured evt.ini, we navigate to the BIN subdirectory of the 
Siebel software component. In our example, we run the evt.exe from the Siebel 
Server's siebsrvr\BIN directory. We open a Windows command prompt, navigate 
to the BIN folder, and enter evt. The following screenshot shows the result of 
running the evt command on the Windows command line without any 
additional parameters:

Chapter 3
[ 63 ]
The EVT has executed seven checks deined in the evt.ini for Microsoft Windows 
operating systems. Two of these checks have been passed, four have resulted in 
critical failures, and one check has been skipped.
The output on the Windows command line contains information about the critical 
failures as well as the passed checks. EVT also recommends settings to overcome  
the critical failures and warnings.
EVT supports a variety of command line arguments that can be listed by entering 
the following command at the command line:
evt –help
The following table lists the available parameters for EVT and their descriptions:
EVT Parameter
Description
-g
Name of the Gateway Name Server.
-s
Name of the Siebel Server.
-e
Name of the Enterprise Server.
-u
Username used to log into Server Manager.
-p
Password used to log into Server Manager.
-o
Output format.(TEXT(default)|TEXTFILE|HTML|HTMLFILE)
-f
Location of the evt.ini ile.
-q
Query mode. Requires a query string.
-t
Type of server (SWSE|GTWYNS|SIEBSRVR|DBSERVER)
-l
Log ile output directory.
-w
Web server Installation Directory.
-d
Debug mode
One example for a useful command line argument is the following:
evt –o HTMLFILE
The –o HTMLFILE argument directs the evt executable to write the information to an 
HTML ile. The ile is created in the current directory and the ilename is generated 
automatically using a timestamp to ensure uniqueness of the name.

Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 64 ]
The following screenshot shows the html ile opened in a browser. The same 
information as on the command line is conveyed. Color coding, formatting, and the 
ability to automatically generate these iles using scheduling tools provide much 
more lexibility than the command line option.
In conclusion, we should run EVT at least once with the preconigured evt.ini 
before we conigure the Siebel server components. We should correct all errors that 
EVT points out in order to properly prepare the Siebel environment. EVT should 
also be run on a regular basis in order to proactively monitor for changes that might 
affect the performance or even functionality of the Siebel server software.
On your demonstration machine, open a command prompt, navigate 
to the BIN subdirectory of the Siebel Server installation folder, and 
use the EVT as described in this chapter to verify your system is 
ready for operating Siebel CRM applications.

Chapter 3
[ 65 ]
Applying patches for Siebel server  
software
For each major Siebel release such as 8.1.1.0, the base installers are made available 
by Oracle on http://edelivery.oracle.com. When new features or bug ixes are 
rolled out for a major release, registered Oracle customers can download the patches 
or maintenance releases such as 8.1.1.1 or 8.1.1.2 from the Oracle support portal  
"My Oracle Support" (http://support.oracle.com).
Administrators should review the accompanying maintenance release guide 
thoroughly in order to understand the implications of the patch.
Installing a patch is a process similar to that of installing the base applications as 
explained in this chapter in detail. The major difference is that the setup executable 
checks for existing installations and aborts the patch install if there is no appropriate 
base version available on the machine.
All software components of the Siebel infrastructure, including the clients such as 
Siebel Tools, must be on the same patch level. This means that we must plan, test,  
and execute the patch installation professionally.
In order to streamline the patch process, it is highly recommended to run the patch 
installers in unattended mode.
In order to enable speciic features of the patch, it might sometimes be necessary to 
apply so-called repository patches using Siebel Tools. This typically involves the 
development team, testers, and the deployment team and adds to the time necessary 
to complete the patch. The processes to apply repository patches vary and are 
described in the respective maintenance release guide.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the installation of Siebel server software on Microsoft 
Windows-based operating systems. Siebel CRM is rich in features and we also took 
the time to have a closer look at the feature offerings of the installers.
In addition to installing the iles for the Siebel Gateway Name Server, the Siebel 
Server, and the Siebel Web Server Extension, we learned how to use the Environment 
Veriication Tool (EVT) to check the system environment before continuing with the 
software coniguration.
Instructions on downloading and applying patch sets inalized the discussion of 
installing Siebel CRM server software on Microsoft Windows.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the steps necessary to conigure the  
Siebel server software.


Coniguring Siebel Server 
Software on Microsoft 
Windows
In this chapter, we will discuss the details of coniguring Siebel CRM server  
software on Microsoft Windows-based operating systems. The following topics  
will be discussed:
• 
About the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension Logical Proile
• 
Installing the Siebel Database Schema and Seed Data
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Server
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension
• 
Verifying the successful Siebel Enterprise installation
• 
Finalizing a Siebel Enterprise installation
• 
Installing Siebel server software in unattended mode

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 68 ]
The overall process of coniguring Siebel CRM server software can be described 
with the following lowchart diagram. In this chapter, we will discuss each of  
these steps in detail.
About the Siebel Software Coniguration 
Wizard
As we followed the installation process in the previous chapter, we noticed that 
at the end of the installation of the Siebel Gateway Name Server, Siebel Server, or 
the Siebel Web Server Extension, the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard was 
launched automatically.
The purpose of the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard is to provide a safe 
environment with validation of critical coniguration parameter values for 
administrators. It is mainly used during the initial installation process for a Siebel 
CRM server environment. The utility can also be used for modifying or removing 
existing conigurations as well as adding conigurations at a later time.
When the installer invoked the utility automatically at the end of the installation 
process, we cancelled the execution and decided to invoke it later. This enabled us 
to concentrate on the installation of the Siebel Server components and complete the 
system preparation, for example by using EVT.
We can invoke the Software Coniguration Wizard on Microsoft Windows-based 
operating systems by using the shortcuts that the installer has placed in a  
Windows start menu folder. The following screenshot shows the Siebel  
Enterprise Server Coniguration start menu:

Chapter 4
[ 69 ]
The menu contains shortcuts to invoke the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard for 
the Siebel server software components installed on this machine.
If we compare the properties of the start menu shortcuts, we ind a single executable 
named ssincfgw.exe being invoked with different arguments.
For example, the shortcut labelled "Siebel Enterprise Coniguration" contains the 
following command:
C:\SIA82\gtwysrvr\BIN\ssincfgw.exe -args LANG=ENU MODEL_FILE=C:\SIA82\
gtwysrvr\admin\enterprise_console_sia.scm
Clicking this shortcut will launch the executable. The LANG=ENU argument switches 
the user interface language to American English. The MODEL_FILE argument 
provides a path to a text ile that is preconigured by Oracle. This text ile contains 
instructions on what parameters need to be collected and what actions are to be 
carried out by the Software Coniguration Wizard. The term "sia" in the name 
of the model ile refers to Siebel Industry Applications, a set of industry-speciic 
applications that are delivered as a single software package.
The ssincfgw.exe ile is of a similar origin as the InstallShield setup executables 
and because of that it supports graphical user interface (GUI) mode, console mode, 
and unattended mode. Using unattended mode to automate Siebel server software 
coniguration will be discussed later in this chapter.
If the need arises, we can launch the Software Coniguration Wizard in console 
mode by appending the –is:javaconsole –console command to the shortcut. A 
command similar to the following, issued at the Windows command shell, will start 
the Software Coniguration Wizard in console mode:
C:\SIA82\gtwysrvr\BIN\ssincfgw.exe -args LANG=ENU MODEL_FILE=C:\SIA82\
gtwysrvr\admin\enterprise_console_sia.scm –is:javaconsole -console

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 70 ]
The following screenshot shows the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard in  
console mode:
However, the more common scenario is to use the utility in GUI mode and enter the 
parameters from the planning document in the dialogs displayed by the Software 
Coniguration Wizard. Having the planning document that we described in the 
example in Chapter 2 at hand is of paramount importance to successfully completing 
the coniguration of the Siebel Server components.
The Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard works in two phases. In the irst phase, 
parameter values are solicited from the administrator. In the second phase, the utility 
invokes system commands and other utilities such as registering system services in 
Microsoft Windows.
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server
As described in Chapter 3, a Siebel Gateway Name Server must be fully installed, 
conigured, and operational in order to carry out any other task in the process of 
setting up a Siebel Enterprise Server.

Chapter 4
[ 71 ]
After we have successfully installed the Siebel Gateway Name Server software, 
we launch the Software Coniguration Wizard by using the start menu shortcut 
labelled Siebel Enterprise Coniguration. Another option is to continue using the 
Coniguration Wizard when it is automatically launched at installation time.
The following table describes the dialogs that the wizard displays and provides 
details about the parameters that have to be entered from the planning document:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard
Click the Siebel Enterprise 
Coniguration shortcut in the 
Windows start menu that has been 
created by the Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode
Select Conigure Product in Live 
Mode.
Click Next.
3
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration
Click Next.
4
Select tasks for new conigurations
Select Conigure a New Gateway 
Name Server.
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server TCP/IP port
Keep the default (2320).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
6
Service startup mode
Keep the default (automatic service 
start).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
7
Final Tasks
References to Siebel Bookshelf and 
EVT are displayed.
Click Next.
8
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
9
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
10
Execution results are displayed
Click OK.
11
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 72 ]
Verifying the successful Siebel Gateway 
Name Server coniguration
If the wizard indicated successful execution, we should check for the existence 
of a new Windows service labelled Siebel Gateway Name Server. The following 
screenshot shows the property information of the newly created Siebel Gateway 
Name Server service on Microsoft Windows.
Note that the startup type is set to Automatic according to the settings in the 
coniguration wizard.
Apart from a new Windows system service, the coniguration wizard has also 
invoked the creation of iles needed to run the Siebel Gateway Name Server, namely 
the ile siebns.dat, which we can now ind in the ADMIN subdirectory of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server installation folder.
The siebns.dat ile is the location where the Siebel Gateway Name Server stores all 
coniguration information for any component of the Siebel Enterprise. Apart from 
information about itself, the Gateway Name Server has not yet written any other 
information to the ile. In the next section, we will use the coniguration wizard to 
create a new Siebel Enterprise.

Chapter 4
[ 73 ]
In the case of any errors being reported by the coniguration wizard, we should 
review its log ile, which can be found in the LOG subdirectory of the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server installation. After correcting the cause of the error, we should execute 
the coniguration wizard again.
On your demonstration machine, launch the Siebel Software 
Coniguration Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise and follow 
the steps described in the above section to conigure a new 
Siebel Gateway Name Server.
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise
As indicated in the previous section, the Gateway Name Server is now operational. 
We can now create the deinition of a new Siebel Enterprise, which will later contain 
one or more Siebel Servers.
It is technically possible but neither supported nor recommended by 
Oracle to create multiple enterprises in one Siebel Gateway Name 
Server coniguration store.
We can use a utility named nsbrowse.exe (located in the BIN 
subdirectory of the Siebel Gateway Name Server installation folder) 
to open the siebns.dat ile in read-only mode in order to verify or 
troubleshoot settings.
To start the coniguration of the Siebel Enterprise, we launch the Coniguration 
Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise again. We could also have decided to keep the 
wizard open once the Gateway Name Server has been conigured. It is important 
that we execute the wizard on the machine where the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
is running. This is mandatory during an initial installation of a Siebel Enterprise 
because of the fact that the Siebel Gateway Name Server authentication settings  
will be changed during the coniguration process.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 74 ]
The table below conveys the details of the process of coniguring a new  
Siebel Enterprise:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard
Click the Siebel Enterprise 
Coniguration shortcut in the 
Windows start menu that has been 
created by the Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode
Select Conigure Product in Live 
Mode.
Click Next.
3
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration.
Click Next.
4
Select tasks for new conigurations
Select Conigure a New Enterprise in a 
Gateway Name Server
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server Authentication 
User Account Name
These parameters have no effect during 
the irst coniguration. However we set 
the following:
User Account Name: SADMIN
User Account Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
6
Gateway Name Server host name and 
TCP/IP port
Enter the Gateway Name Server host 
name and the TCP/IP port used by the 
service.
Host Name: appsrvrgw1
TCP/IP port: 2320
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
7
Siebel Enterprise Name
Ensure that you review the notes on 
the naming conventions for the name 
of the Siebel Enterprise.
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Description: Siebel Evaluation 
Enterprise.
Click Next.

Chapter 4
[ 75 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
8
Primary Siebel File System
Enter the UNC (Universal Naming 
Convention) path to the shared 
directory dedicated for the Siebel  
File System.
Primary Siebel File System: 
\\ appsrvrfs1\siebile
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
9
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise 
Edition.
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
Table Owner and Oracle SQLNet 
connect string.
Database Table Owner: SIEBEL.
SQLNet Connect String: ORCL.
Note: These values come from the 
planning document. The parameters 
required in this step are speciic to the 
database vendor selected in step 9.
Click Next.
11
Siebel Database User Account Name
This user account and password 
will be provided as an enterprise-
wide default for all Siebel Server 
components that establish connections 
to the Siebel database.
User Account Name: SADMIN.
User Account Password: TJay357D.
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Enterprise Security Authentication 
Proile
Select Database Authentication 
(Default).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document. Details on 
Siebel Security Authentication will be 
discussed in a separate chapter.
Click Next.
13
Security Adapter Name
Keep the default.
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 76 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
14
Propagate Authentication Settings to 
the Gateway Name Server
Keep the default (checked).
Note: As this is the irst time setup of a 
Siebel Enterprise we must ensure that 
we run the wizard on the Gateway 
Name Server machine for this feature 
to work.
Click Next.
15
Additional tasks for coniguring  
the enterprise
As this is the irst time setup of a Siebel 
Enterprise for demonstration purposes, 
we do not select any options. All these 
settings can be done at a later time as 
well.
Keep all checkboxes unselected.
Click Next.
16
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
17
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
18
Execution results are displayed
Click OK.
19
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
About the Siebel Enterprise name
The following naming conventions apply when we select a name for our new 
Siebel Enterprise:
• 
The name must not be longer than 12 characters
• 
Alphanumeric characters and underscores are allowed
• 
No special characters such as hyphens or dashes are allowed
• 
The name should relect the purpose of the Siebel Enterprise (for example 
"SIEBEL_DEV" indicates a development environment)
The irst three conventions are actively validated by the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
and error messages are prompted when the Enterprise name entered violates any  
of the rules.

Chapter 4
[ 77 ]
About additional tasks for coniguring  
the Enterprise
As part of the process of coniguring a Siebel Enterprise, the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard prompts us to select up to three additional coniguration tasks that are 
related to different features of Siebel CRM. These additional tasks are:
• 
Setting up the Enterprise Network Security Encryption Type
• 
Providing Chart Server Settings
• 
Entering parameters that enable Siebel Data Quality Products and Connectors
The screenshot below shows the Siebel Coniguration Wizard prompting for 
selection of additional tasks:
When we select any of these choices, the Siebel Coniguration Wizard displays 
additional dialogs to solicit values for parameters. This is rarely used during an 
initial installation but can be helpful when—at a later stage of the project—one 
of these additional features has to be set up. Even if we could set the respective 
parameters manually, we should use the wizard as it provides input validation and 
creates log iles that allow us to track changes and troubleshoot problems if any arise.
If we choose the Enterprise Network Security Encryption Type option, the next 
dialog allows us to set the SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session Network API) encryption 
type, which controls how network packets exchanged between the Siebel Web Server 
Extension and the Siebel Server processes are encrypted.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 78 ]
When we choose Chart Server Settings, the wizard prompts for the chart server 
hostname and the image format to be used for the rendered charts (GIF, JPG, or 
PNG). The chart server feature relies on the VisualMining NetCharts server, a  
third-party product shipped with the Siebel CRM installation archives. Installation  
of the chart server will be discussed in a separate chapter.
With the third option (Data Quality Products and Connectors) selected, we can tell 
the coniguration wizard whether we want to use Siebel Data Matching (based  
on a third-party product) or not. The wizard will then set the respective  
parameter accordingly.
Verifying the successful Enterprise 
coniguration
Apart from the success message at the end of the coniguration process, we can 
undertake several checks in order to verify the Enterprise coniguration.
First and foremost, the enterprise has been created in the siebns.dat ile. At the 
moment, we can only verify this by comparing the ile size of the siebns.dat ile to 
the size before we started the Enterprise coniguration. Because of the propagation 
of security information, the Gateway Name Server will now authenticate (and audit) 
any connection. We will have to wait with the connection to the Gateway Name 
Server (for example using the nsbrowse utility) until we have fully installed the 
Siebel Database.
The Siebel Enterprise coniguration has also created subfolders in the Siebel File 
System shared folder.
The next check we should do is to navigate to the Microsoft ODBC Data Source 
Administrator and verify whether a new data source has been created. This data 
source will be used for the initial installation of the Siebel database. The Microsoft 
ODBC Data Source Administrator can be found in the Administrative Tools 
folder in the Windows Control Panel.
In order to proceed with the installation and coniguration of the Siebel 
CRM demonstration environment, you will now execute the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and create a new Siebel Enterprise. Use the table 
provided in the above section and your planning document to enter the 
correct parameter values.

Chapter 4
[ 79 ]
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server  
Extension logical proile
The web server with the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) plays a vital role 
in the Siebel web architecture. Because multiple web servers—and therefore 
instances of the SWSE connecting to the same Siebel Enterprise—might exist, the 
basic coniguration information is stored as a logical proile on a network location. 
The logical proile contains information such as the Siebel Enterprise name, port 
numbers, and anonymous user accounts, which will be written into the local 
coniguration iles of the SWSE at a later stage in the Siebel installation process.
In order to create the SWSE logical proile, we employ the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard again and launch the Siebel Enterprise coniguration from the  
Windows start menu.
The following table provides details on the Coniguration Wizard's dialogs. As the 
SWSE coniguration includes very speciic parameters, a brief explanation of  
these settings will be given at the end of this section.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard
Click the Siebel Enterprise Coniguration 
shortcut in the Windows start menu that 
has been created by the Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live Mode.
Click Next.
3
Coniguration Wizard Welcome 
Page
Select Create New Coniguration.
Click Next.
4
Select tasks for new 
conigurations
Select Conigure a New Siebel Web Server 
Extension Logical Proile.
Click Next.
5
Siebel Enterprise Name and 
logical proile storage folder
Note: we can enlarge the dialog window if 
the entry form is not fully visible.
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Note: This value comes from the planning 
document.
SWSE Logical Proile Name: Keep the 
default (a subdirectory of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server's installation folder).
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 80 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
6
Collect application-speciic 
statistics
Keep the default (checked).
Note: This value comes from the  
planning document.
Click Next.
7
Compression Type (for trafic 
between SWSE and Siebel Server)
Keep the default (None).
Note: This value comes from the  
planning document.
Click Next.
8
HTTP 1.1-compliant irewall/
enable compression
Keep the default (Checked).
Click Next.
9
Session timeout values.
Enter 3000 and 9000.
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
HTTP Port Numbers
Keep the default values (80/443)
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
FQDN (Fully qualiied domain 
name)
Keep the default (blank).
Click Next.
12
High Interactivity or employee 
user login name and password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from  
the planning document.
Click Next.
13
Password encryption.
Keep the default (unchecked).
Click Next.
14
Standard Interactivity or contact 
user login name and password.
User Name: GUESTCST
Password: 8icJIPZH
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
15
Siebel Enterprise Security Token
Security Token: TZH65ret (enter twice)
Note: This value comes from the  
planning document.
Click Next.

Chapter 4
[ 81 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
16
Web server statistics page name
Keep the default (_stats.swe)
Click Next.
17
Deploy SSL in the Enterprise
Keep the default (unchecked)
Click Next.
17
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
18
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
19
Execution results are displayed
Click OK.
20
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
About SWSE parameters
The following parameters entered during the SWSE logical proile coniguration 
shall be explained in greater detail below:
• 
Collect application-speciic statistics
The respective parameter in the SWSE coniguration iles (eapps.cfg 
and eapps_sia.cfg) is named AllowStats and if it is set to "TRUE", 
application-speciic statistics (in addition to system-speciic statistics)  
are collected by the SWSE and displayed in the statistic page (_stats.swe 
by default).
• 
Compression type 
The SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session API) protocol allows compression of 
messages exchanged between the SWSE and the processes on the Siebel 
servers. If a smaller network packet size is beneicial (and covers the 
additional processing cost of compression) then the ZLIB compression can  
be enabled.
• 
HTTP 1.1-compliant irewall/enable compression 
If irewall software or hardware secures the Siebel web servers, this 
parameter can be used to enable packet compression. The irewall must  
be compliant with the HTTP 1.1 standard if this parameter is set.
• 
Session timeout values 
If a user session is idle for the speciied time (in seconds), the process thread 
on the Siebel Server will be automatically ended, thus reducing memory 
consumption on the Siebel server.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 82 ]
• 
FQDN (Fully Qualiied Domain Name) 
In order to allow popup blockers to identify the Siebel web server as part 
of a "friendly" domain, the FQDN parameter—when set to the full domain 
name—will direct the SWSE to create URLs for popup windows, including 
the full domain name.
• 
Employee user account
The employee user is an account that has the privileges to connect to the 
so-called employee facing applications, which are typically executed in  
High-Interactivity mode. In order to render the login page, an anonymous 
user account is required.
• 
Contact user account 
The contact user is any account that logs in to the customer facing or partner 
applications that provide access to Siebel CRM data and functionality to 
people outside of the company that owns the Siebel application. Customers 
and partners can typically browse the website anonymously. In this case,  
the contact user account is used for session authentication.
• 
Siebel Enterprise security token 
Several commands can be passed to the Siebel Web Engine via URLs. 
In order to provide a high level of security, these URLs must contain an 
SWEPassword parameter. The value of this parameter must match the 
decrypted value of the EnterpriseSecurityToken parameter in the SWSE's 
coniguration iles. Otherwise, the connection is refused by the Siebel  
Web Engine.
All the passwords that are entered during the coniguration process 
are encrypted before they are written to the coniguration iles. 
This ensures that the security of the Siebel application cannot be 
compromised by accessing the iles.
Verifying the successful SWSE logical  
proile creation
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard uses the values provided by the administrator to 
generate iles in the logical proile storage folder. This folder must be made accessible 
to each machine that hosts a Siebel web server. In order to verify the creation of these 
iles, we can navigate to the proile storage folder speciied in step 5. The following 
screenshot shows the SWSE logical proile directory containing the iles generated by 
the Siebel Coniguration Wizard:

Chapter 4
[ 83 ]
The eapps.cfg (for horizontal applications) and eapps_sia.cfg (for industry-speciic 
applications) iles contain the values entered in the wizard's dialogs.
On your demonstration machine, execute the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard to create the SWSE logical proile. You can use the table in 
this section as a guide.
Installing the Siebel Database schema 
and seed data
If we observe the coniguration process for the Siebel Gateway Name Server and 
the Siebel Enterprise correctly, we ind that the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
authenticates each connection attempt using the account management of the RDBMS 
that hosts the Siebel Database. This is the default setting. Other authentication 
techniques such as LDAP or Microsoft Active Directory are also supported.
The only unauthenticated Gateway Name Server session is the irst connection that 
we used to register a new Enterprise with the Siebel Gateway Name Server. Any 
other connection attempt, such as when we want to register the irst Siebel Server, 
needs to be authenticated.
However, the Siebel Database, which is the default medium for authentication, 
has not yet been conigured. So, the next logical step is to engage the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and install the Siebel Database schema.
The Siebel Database coniguration process differs from the previous processes in the 
sense that we irst have to prepare and run an SQL script (in a ile named grantusr.
sql) against the database and that the coniguration wizard invokes the Siebel 
Upgrade Wizard, which itself invokes other utilities and programs to run speciic 
commands against the database.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 84 ]
So, before we launch the Siebel Coniguration Wizard, we will discuss both the 
grantusr.sql script and the Siebel Upgrade Wizard.
Preparing and executing the grantusr.sql ile
For an initial Siebel CRM installation, it is mandatory to prepare and execute the SQL 
script provided in the grantusr.sql ile. We can ind this ile in the database-speciic 
subdirectory of the Database Server Utilities installation folder. In our example, the ile 
is situated in the ORACLE subdirectory of the dbsrvr folder.
The following amendments need to be made to the ile before executing it against 
the Oracle database:
• 
Enter the correct tablespace names
• 
Modify default passwords if needed
• 
Add additional user accounts
We will discuss these steps in the following sections.
Enter the correct tablespace names
The ile is prepared for use through Oracle SQL*Plus, which means that tablespace 
names are represented by placeholders such as &&siebel_tablespace. SQL*Plus 
will stop at these placeholders and prompt the user to enter the names. In order to 
create a script that is usable with any SQL tool, we will write the tablespace names 
directly to the ile.
We can open the ile in any plain text processor such as Microsoft Notepad and 
replace the text as follows:
1. Replace all the occurrences of &&siebel_tablespace with the name of the 
tablespace for data tables as identiied in the planning document (in our 
example SIEBELDB_DATA).
2. Replace all the occurrences of &&temp_tablespace with TEMP (we use 
the default TEMP tablespace provided during installation of the  
Oracle database).
3. Find the line alter user SIEBEL quota unlimited on SIEBELDB_DATA;. 
Below this line, create a new line (for example by copying and pasting the 
line) and change it to "alter user SIEBEL quota unlimited 
on SIEBELDB_IDX;". This ensures that the user SIEBEL (the table owner) 
will have unlimited quota on the index tablespace.

Chapter 4
[ 85 ]
Modify default passwords if needed
The grantusr.sql ile contains commands to create three user accounts in 
the database:
• 
SIEBEL (table owner)
• 
SADMIN (administrative user)
• 
LDAPUSER (proxy user for LDAP authentication)
All three are created in the Oracle database by commands similar to the following:
create user SIEBEL identified by SIEBEL;
The irst occurrence of SIEBEL will be the user account name whereas the second 
occurrence (after the words identified by) will be the password. If required to, we 
must replace the default passwords—which are the same as the account name—with 
the correct passwords identiied in the planning document.
Add additional user accounts
If we inspect our planning documentation carefully, we will ind that we speciied 
other user accounts besides SIEBEL and SADMIN. Namely, GUESTCST will be used for 
anonymous access to customer and partner-facing applications.
If any additional accounts have to be established before the database installation, it 
might be a good idea to add the respective commands to the grantusr.sql ile.
To accomplish this, we can simply copy and paste the lines that cater for the 
LDAPUSER account and modify the copied lines accordingly to represent the 
creation of the GUESTCST account.
create user GUESTCST identified by 8icJIPZH;
grant sse_role to GUESTCST;
alter user GUESTCST default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user GUESTCST temporary tablespace TEMP;
The code above shows the lines that were added to the grantusr.sql ile in order to 
create the GUESTCST account.
In summary, the grantusr.sql ile now contains commands to direct the Oracle 
database to do the following:
• 
Create the sse_role role for normal accounts and grant the create session 
privilege to it:
create role sse_role;
grant create session to sse_role;

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 86 ]
• 
Create the tblo_role role for the table owner account and grant various 
privileges to it:
create role tblo_role;
grant ALTER SESSION, CREATE CLUSTER, CREATE DATABASE LINK, CREATE 
INDEXTYPE, CREATE OPERATOR, CREATE PROCEDURE, CREATE SEQUENCE, 
CREATE SESSION, CREATE SYNONYM, CREATE TABLE, CREATE TRIGGER, 
CREATE TYPE, CREATE VIEW, CREATE DIMENSION, CREATE MATERIALIZED 
VIEW, QUERY REWRITE, ON COMMIT REFRESH
to tblo_role;
• 
Create the table owner account SIEBEL, associate it to the sse_role and 
tblo_role roles and deine quotas on the tablespaces:
rem Create SIEBEL user
create user SIEBEL identified by dQ7JXufi;
grant tblo_role to SIEBEL;
grant sse_role to SIEBEL;
alter user SIEBEL quota 0 on SYSTEM quota 0 on SYSAUX;
alter user SIEBEL default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user SIEBEL temporary tablespace TEMP;
alter user SIEBEL quota unlimited on SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user SIEBEL quota unlimited on SIEBELDB_IDX;
• 
Create three additional user accounts with the sse_role role assigned:
create user SADMIN identified by TJay357D;
grant sse_role to SADMIN;
alter user SADMIN default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user SADMIN temporary tablespace TEMP;
create user LDAPUSER identified by BFxR87DT;
grant sse_role to LDAPUSER;
alter user LDAPUSER default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user LDAPUSER temporary tablespace TEMP;
create user GUESTCST identified by 8icJIPZH;
grant sse_role to GUESTCST;
alter user GUESTCST default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user GUESTCST temporary tablespace TEMP;

Chapter 4
[ 87 ]
Executing the grantusr.sql Script
After saving the changes we made to the grantusr.sql ile, we can open the SQL 
tool of our choice such as Oracle's SQL*Plus, connect to the Oracle database with 
suficient privileges, and execute the contents of the grantusr.sql ile.
In Oracle's SQL*Plus, we use a command similar to the example below to execute  
the ile's content:
@C:\SIA8\dbsrvr\Oracle\grantusr.sql
The @ sign is used to open and execute the SQL script in the given path. Messages 
such as "user created" and "user altered" indicate successful execution of the script.
About the Siebel Upgrade Wizard and the  
Log Parser
As indicated at the beginning of this section, any critical database-related tasks 
such as creating the initial Siebel CRM tables and indices or importing the initial 
"seed" data are executed by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard. This wizard is a specialized 
software unit that can be invoked from the coniguration wizard or manually from 
the command line.
The utility is mainly used during upgrades from previous versions of Siebel CRM to a 
newer version, such as when upgrading from Siebel CRM 7.7 to 8.1.1. This is a critical 
process and the portions of it that involve modiications to the database schema such 
as creating or altering tables are carried out by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard.
The following are the main actions that the Siebel Upgrade Wizard can execute 
against the Siebel Database:
• 
Initial installation of a new Siebel database (described in this chapter)
• 
Upgrade of an existing Siebel database to a newer version
• 
Apply additive schema changes as part of an upgrade
• 
Import the Siebel Repository metadata from a ile
• 
Export the Siebel Repository metadata to a ile
• 
Migrate the Siebel Repository metadata from one database to another
• 
Run database utilities such as conversion to multi-lingual list of values

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 88 ]
Each of these tasks requires various input parameters such as tablespace names and 
user account names and passwords, which are collected by the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard. Once the wizard has inished collecting parameter values, it will produce a 
ile with an .ucf sufix (upgrade coniguration ile) containing the parameter values.
The coniguration wizard will then launch the Siebel Upgrade Wizard and pass the 
location of the generated .ucf ile. The Siebel Upgrade Wizard will read the ile and 
execute the task.
For each task such as installing or upgrading a Siebel database, Oracle provides 
so-called driver iles that contain the detailed steps to carry out the tasks on a  
speciic database platform.
The upgrade wizard will also read these driver iles and create a "to-do list". It is 
important to understand that the Siebel Upgrade Wizard does not connect directly 
to the Siebel database. To do so and to execute the actions and scripts against the 
RDBMS, the Siebel Upgrade Wizard invokes command line utilities and programs 
shipped with the Siebel installer.
During the processes invoked by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard, the utilities and 
programs direct their log output to iles in a folder speciied at coniguration time. 
These log iles can be big in both amount and size. For this reason, Oracle provides 
a utility called Log Parser, which enables the administrator to monitor a running 
process or document completed (or failed) processes.
The Log Parser, implemented as the command line utility logparse.exe, which is 
located in the Siebel Server's BIN subdirectory, is capable of traversing the log iles 
for a given Siebel Upgrade Wizard process and generating summary iles in plain 
text and formatted HTML. These HTML summaries are useful for documentation 
and troubleshooting and provide hyperlinks to the original log iles.
The following diagram depicts the dependencies between the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard, the Siebel Upgrade Wizard, and the Log Parser:

Chapter 4
[ 89 ]
Now that we know how the Siebel Upgrade Wizard works, we can start the Siebel 
database installation process by launching the Siebel Coniguration Wizard. The 
following table describes each step of the process:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard
Click the Database Server 
Coniguration shortcut in the 
Windows start menu that has been 
created by the Siebel installer.
2
Siebel Server directory
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's 
installation directory.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server Utilities 
directory
Provide the path to the Siebel Database 
Server Utilities installation folder.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise 
Edition.
Click Next.
5
Task selection
Select Install Database.
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 90 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
6
Action selection
Select Install Siebel Database.
Click Next.
7
Conirmation
Select Yes I wish to install a new 
Siebel database.
Click Next.
8
GRANTUSR.SQL
Select GRANTUSR.SQL has been 
run…
Click Next.
9
UNICODE or NON-UNICODE
Select UNICODE.
Click Next.
10
ODBC Data Source Name
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN.
Note: This is the name of the System 
DSN generated during coniguration 
of the Siebel Enterprise.
Click Next.
11
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Siebel Database Table Owner and 
Password
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Password: dQ7JXui 
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
13
Index and Data tablespace names
Index Tablespace Name: SIEBELDB_
IDX
Tablespace Name: SIEBELDB_DATA
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
14
License key entry
Select Yes I would like to enter it now
Click Next.
15
License key entry
Copy and paste the irst line from the 
license key ile you generated during 
the installation preparation process.
16
Oracle parallel indexing
Keep the default ("Does not use…")
Click Next.

Chapter 4
[ 91 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
17
Security group and log output 
directory
Keep the defaults.
Note the log output directory will 
become a subdirectory of the Siebel 
Server's LOG directory.
18
Apply coniguration changes
Select Yes apply coniguration 
changes now.
Click Next.
19
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
20
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
21
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard is 
displayed
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.
22
During the installation process, several 
command windows are opened
Ensure that you do not close or make 
selections in any of the command 
windows.
Wait for the Siebel Upgrade Wizard to 
complete (approximately one hour).
23
The coniguration wizard displays a 
message "Execution successful"
Click OK to conirm successful 
execution of the coniguration wizard.
24
The coniguration wizard jumps to the 
Siebel Server directory selection
Click Cancel in the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard dialog.
25
Conirm exiting the coniguration 
wizard
Click Yes.
26
Siebel Upgrade Wizard displays 
"Complete"
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.
Steps of the Install Siebel Database task
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard executes the following steps when executing the Install 
Siebel Database task against an Oracle database:
• 
Create Siebel tables and indexes
• 
Import seed data
• 
Run several predeined SQL scripts
• 
Create database functions and procedures
• 
Import the Siebel Repository metadata
• 
Insert the license key
• 
Update the history table

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 92 ]
We can verify execution of these steps and explore details such as the SQL code by 
using the Siebel Log Parser.
Verifying the successful Siebel database 
installation
The following checkpoints exist for veriication of a successful Siebel 
database installation:
• 
The HTML summary generated by the Log Parser
• 
Existence of tables and data in the Siebel database
In the following section, we will describe how to use the Siebel Log Parser to monitor 
or document Siebel Upgrade Wizard processes and we will review tables and their 
content to verify the Siebel database installation.
Using the Siebel Log Parser
The Siebel Log Parser is implemented as a command line utility named logparse.
exe. It is situated in the BIN subdirectory of the Siebel Server installation folder.
We can open a Windows command prompt, navigate to the Siebel Server's BIN 
directory, and type logparse to make irst contact with the utility. As some 
required parameters are missing, the utility reports the parameter switches on  
the command line.
/S Siebel Root                    (Required)
/G Language code of log files to be processed (Required)
/R Process Name                   (Required)
/L Log file for this utility      (Default: logparse.log)
/N Number of longest running sqls to show (Default: 10)
/T Threshold time in hh:mm:ss format (Default: 00:10:00)
/E Max number of errors to display in steps summary (Default: 8)
The above listing is generated by the logparse utility when it is called with no input 
parameters. As we can see, the utility requires the path to the Siebel installation root 
directory (/S), the language code of the log iles (/G), and the name of the Siebel 
Upgrade Wizard process (/R). The name of the Siebel Upgrade Wizard process is the 
same as the name of the log output directory entered during the coniguration process.

Chapter 4
[ 93 ]
So, a correct command line for creating a report on the install process would be  
as follows:
logparse /S D:\SIA8 /G ENU /R install
The utility now parses all log iles in the install subdirectory of the Siebel Server's 
log directory and generates a set of HTML iles and a text summary ile. If a default 
browser is speciied on Microsoft Windows, the start page for the HTML summary 
is loaded automatically. The following screenshot shows the start page in Microsoft 
Internet Explorer.
We can click on the Steps/Errors hyperlink to see a detailed list of all executed steps 
and their statuses. If all steps have a status of Complete and the Upgrade Wizard has 
inished successfully, this is an indicator for the successful installation of the  
Siebel database.
The Siebel Log Parser can be used for any process executed by the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard. It is extremely useful to monitor and document complex and lengthy 
procedures such as upgrading a Siebel database to a newer version.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 94 ]
Verifying tables and data
The following SQL query can be helpful in verifying the successful Siebel database 
installation. We can run the select statement using the SIEBEL table owner account.
SQL> select activity_name, tgt_version from s_inst_upg_hist order by 
activity_ts desc;
The select statement retrieves the list of upgrade (or Siebel Upgrade Wizard) 
activities from the S_INST_UPG_HIST table. As this is the last action that is carried 
out by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard, it is a good indicator for success. The ACTIVITY_
NAME column contains the name of the driver ile used to run the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard process.
ACTIVITY_NAME                                      TGT_VERSION
-------------------------------------------------- -----------
master_install.ucf                                 V8.2
The code above shows the contents of the S_INST_UPG_HIST table after the 
successful installation of Siebel 8.2.
Restarting the Siebel Upgrade Wizard in  
the case of errors
There are various sources for errors during the somewhat lengthy process of 
installing a Siebel database. Whenever errors are encountered, the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard will cancel the current task and prompt an error message that has to be 
acknowledged by clicking OK. The Upgrade Wizard window closes upon 
this action.
It is highly recommended to run the Siebel Log Parser in order to gain insight into 
the last successful step and to derive and download the correct log ile that contains  
the error message and details about the situation.
In general, the upgwiz.log ile generated by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard, which 
can be found in the output folder of the log directory, is a good starting point  
for troubleshooting.
The cause for the failure has to be corrected. For example, an error message 
indicating failure because extents are reached in the database should guide us  
to increase the extents or set the autoextend parameter to true for the  
respective tablespace.

Chapter 4
[ 95 ]
Once the corrective action has taken place, we must restart the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard from the command line. We must not run the Coniguration Wizard again,  
as this would overwrite the upgrade coniguration ile.
Instead, we open a command prompt, navigate to the Siebel Server's BIN directory, 
and issue the following command in order to launch the Siebel Upgrade  
Wizard manually.
siebupg /m master_install.ucf
The siebupg executable represents the Siebel Upgrade Wizard. The /m switch points 
to the .ucf file—situated in the current directory—which the executable should 
read. The master_install.ucf ile has been generated by the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard.
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard starts and prompts whether we would like to continue 
an existing upgrade or cancel the operation. We select the option to continue. The 
Siebel Upgrade Wizard will resume from the last step that was not complete.
Use the information in this chapter to run the Siebel Database 
installation on your demonstration machine. Ensure that the installation 
was successful by carrying out the veriication steps outlined above.
Coniguring the Siebel Server
The physical (or virtual) machine where the Siebel Server software is installed can be 
conigured to host one or more Siebel Server instances. For a simple demonstration 
environment, one Siebel Server is suficient.
Again, the Siebel Coniguration Wizard is responsible for prompting the administrator 
for the correct values for the parameters speciic to a Siebel Server. We should 
highlight the fact that we can undertake the coniguration of a Siebel Server only  
when the following activities have been successfully completed:
• 
Installing, coniguring, and starting the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Registering a Siebel Enterprise with the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Database

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 96 ]
The following table outlines the steps of the Siebel Server coniguration process:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Siebel Server Coniguration 
shortcut in the Windows start menu that 
has been created by the Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live Mode.
Click Next.
3
Coniguration Wizard Welcome 
Page
Select Create New Coniguration
Click Next.
4
Database Coniguration Warning
Review the warning that we must have 
an existing Siebel Database.
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server 
Authentication user name and 
password.
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
6
Gateway Name Server hostname 
and port number.
Hostname: appsrvrgw1
Port: 2320
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
7
Siebel Enterprise Name and Siebel 
Server logical name.
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Siebel Server Name: Eval_1
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
8
Siebel Server Description
Description: Siebel Evaluation Server 1
Click Next.
9
Enable Component Groups
Select only CallCenter.
Note: Details on component groups are 
discussed in a later chapter.
Click Next.

Chapter 4
[ 97 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
10
Siebel Connection Broker Port
Keep the default (2321)
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
Remote Synchronization  
Manager Port
Keep the default (40400)
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Additional tasks for coniguring 
the Siebel Server.
Select none.
Click Next.
13
Register external Oracle db ODBC 
driver for the Siebel Connector for 
Oracle Applications.
Uncheck the selection.
Click Next.
14
Clustering coniguration.
Keep the default (Not clustered).
Click Next.
15
Autostart Siebel Server 
 system service.
Uncheck the selection (no automatic 
start).
Click Next.
16
Start the Siebel Server system 
service during coniguration.
Uncheck the selection.
Click Next.
17
Final Tasks
Review the information on EVT.
Click Next.
18
Summary
Verify the selections and values  
you provided.
Click Next.
19
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
20
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
21
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 98 ]
Verifying the successful Siebel Server 
coniguration
In order to verify the success of the Siebel Server Coniguration, we should check 
whether a new Windows service has been generated. We can do so by navigating 
to the Windows Services console and verifying that a new service exists. The name 
of the new service will be "Siebel Server [EnterpriseName_SiebelServerName]", 
where EnterpriseName is a placeholder for the name of the Siebel Enterprise and 
SiebelServerName is the logical server name speciied in step 7 of the coniguration 
process.
On your demonstration machine, use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to 
conigure a new Siebel Server. Use your planning document to enter the 
correct values in the dialogs.
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server  
Extension
During the software installation, we have installed the Siebel Web Server Extension 
(SWSE) on the machine hosting the web server. As with any Siebel server software, 
coniguration steps must be completed.
In a previous section, we discussed the coniguration of the SWSE logical proile, 
which is typically stored on a shared network folder that must be visible to the web 
server machine at coniguration time.
We will now use the SWSE logical proile as part of the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard's process. On the machine hosting the web server and SWSE, we start with 
launching the Windows start menu shortcut for the Siebel Web Server Extension 
coniguration. The following table provides details on the steps of the  
coniguration process:

Chapter 4
[ 99 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Siebel Web Server 
Extension Coniguration shortcut in 
the Windows start menu that has been 
created by the Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live 
Mode.
Click Next.
3
Select coniguration task.
Select Apply an SWSE Logical Proile
Click Next.
4
Select a load balancer.
Select Single Siebel Server
Note: Load balancing will be discussed 
in a later chapter.
Click Next.
5
Siebel Server host name and connection 
broker port.
Host name: appsrvrsieb1
Siebel Connection Broker Port: 2321 
(default)
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
6
SWSE logical proile location.
Browse for or enter a UNC path to 
the directory speciied in step 5 of the 
SWSE logical proile coniguration.
Click Next.
7
Final Tasks
Review the information about EVT.
Click Next.
8
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
9
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
10
A number of command windows are 
opened as the coniguration wizard 
applies the SWSE logical proile.
Wait for all command windows  
to close.
11
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
12
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 100 ]
We notice that during the execution of the SWSE coniguration, a utility named 
metabaseedit.exe is launched several times. This utility is used to generate the 
virtual directories for the Microsoft Internet Information Server (IIS), and associates 
those with the Siebel-speciic ile extensions such as .swe. The following screenshot 
shows the Microsoft Internet Information Services administration console:
The various virtual directories with a sufix of _enu (for American English) have 
been created by the metabaseedit utility. Each virtual directory is mapped to the 
same physical directory PUBLIC/ENU located at the SWSE installation directory.
In order to verify the successful SWSE coniguration, we should navigate to the IIS 
Administration console and check whether a number of virtual directories exist and 
are mapped as described above.
If the virtual directories do not exist, we must review the iles in the SWSE's log 
directory and repeat the SWSE coniguration process after the cause of the problem 
has been removed.

Chapter 4
[ 101 ]
Execute the Siebel Coniguration Wizard on your demonstration 
machine and conigure the Siebel Web Server Extension. Verify that 
virtual directories are created on the web server.
Verifying the successful Siebel  
Enterprise server installation
We can see that installing and coniguring a complete Siebel Enterprise is a complex 
process that involves proper planning and execution of various discrete steps in the 
correct order. We are now ready to verify that we have successfully completed the 
basic installation and coniguration steps. These veriication activities include:
• 
Starting the Windows services
• 
Logging on to the Siebel application as the Siebel Administrator
We will then be able to use the Siebel Web Client to undertake the inishing tasks in 
order to deliver a fully operational Siebel CRM environment.
Starting the Windows services
In order to ensure a fully operational Siebel Server environment, we should ensure 
that the following Windows system services are started in the sequence they  
are listed below:
1. Siebel Gateway Name Server
2. Siebel Server
3. World Wide Web Publishing Service
Note that the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) does not have its own service 
deinition. Whenever we need to restart the SWSE, we have to stop and start the 
according web server (IIS on Microsoft Windows in our example).
Both the Siebel Gateway Name Server and the Siebel Server are implemented as a 
simple executable named siebsvc.exe.
The Siebel Gateway Name Server service calls the siebsvc.exe with parameters that 
"tell" the executable to take over the Gateway Name Server role. The Siebel Gateway 
Name Server service starts up rather quickly and does not consume a huge amount 
of memory.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 102 ]
In case of a Siebel Server, the executable takes the role of a Siebel application server, 
which will establish a connection to its Gateway Name Server in order to read its 
coniguration. Then, it will spawn child processes (one for each server component), 
which will consume both CPU time and memory.
It is always a good idea to monitor the system (using the Windows Task Manager) 
or at least wait for a few minutes to allow a Siebel Server to start. The start time is 
dependent on the amount of enabled components. We will discuss server component 
management in detail in a later chapter.
After starting the Siebel services, it is beneicial to check the log iles for any 
malicious error message that might indicate an incomplete or failed coniguration. 
The log iles for any Siebel software are always situated in the LOG subdirectory of 
the installation folder.
On your demonstration machine, navigate to the Windows Services 
console, stop the three aforementioned services (in reverse order as 
they are listed), and start them in the sequence they are listed. Ensure 
that you scan the Siebel log iles for errors.
Logging on as the Siebel Administrator for 
the irst time
Now it is time to start Microsoft Internet Explorer (we will log on to a Siebel High-
Interactivity application, so this is the only supported browser) and enter  
the following URL:
http://localhost/callcenter_enu
Note that this URL only works on the machine where the web server and SWSE 
are installed. It is a valid scenario for irst tests. If we wish to run our irst test from 
a Windows machine on the network, we will have to replace "localhost" with the 
hostname or IP address of the web server machine.

Chapter 4
[ 103 ]
The browser will be busy for a noticeable time. As this is the irst (or "cold") start 
of a fresh installation, the application object manager has to load the application 
metadata into memory. Also, the iles that have to reside on the web server, such 
as images or stylesheets, are now synchronized from the Siebel Server's WEBMASTER 
subdirectory to the SWSE's PUBLIC directory. This explains the wait time.
Finally, we should see the Siebel login page rendered in the browser, which indicates 
that the Application Object Manager for Siebel Call Center was able to start and 
establish an anonymous session. The following screenshot shows the login page  
for Siebel Call Center loaded in Microsoft Internet Explorer:
Now we enter SADMIN as the user ID and provide the password. We can click the 
arrow icon or press ENTER to continue.
The Siebel Call Center application will now launch. If this is the irst launch of a 
Siebel High-Interactivity application on this machine, we will be prompted to allow 
the execution of the Siebel High-Interactivity Framework. We should check the box 
Always trust content from Oracle USA Inc. and click Yes.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 104 ]
The application continues to launch. One component of the Siebel High-Interactivity 
Framework is the Web Client Health Check. If any of the critical browser settings are 
incompatible with the check rules then a dialog similar to the following screenshot  
is displayed:
The dialog indicates that the Sun Java Runtime (JRE) does not have the recommended 
version of 1.4.2 or higher and that the browser setting Access data sources across 
domains is not set to Enable. We can click Auto Fix to set the parameter (but not 
install a newer JRE). Then, we click the Run button and acknowledge the message 
that indicates that the Siebel applications might not work as expected.
We will cover the client-side settings in detail in Chapter 6. If problems are 
encountered during the irst application startup, it is generally recommended to  
add the web server to the browser's trusted sites list.
Finally, we should see the Siebel application's home page view with a greeting 
message similar to the following screenshot:

Chapter 4
[ 105 ]
We have now completed the basic steps to install a fully operational Siebel Enterprise.
If we receive an error message instead of the Siebel login page, we must check the log 
iles of the Siebel Server and SWSE thoroughly and verify that we have completed all 
installation and coniguration steps correctly.
On your demonstration machine, launch Microsoft Internet Explorer 
and navigate to http://localhost/callcenter_enu in order to 
verify the successful installation of the Siebel Enterprise. Depending 
on your machine and browser settings, you might receive warnings 
and messages. However, you should be able to log in as the Siebel 
Administrator (SADMIN). In the case of errors, you should review 
the log iles and validate the previous steps and processes.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 106 ]
Finalizing the Siebel Server installation
We have successfully logged on to the Siebel Call Center application as the Siebel 
Administrator (SADMIN), which is the only valid user account at the time  
of installation.
To inalize the Siebel Enterprise installation and coniguration, some small but 
important tasks are yet to be completed. These tasks include:
• 
Setting the system service owner account
• 
Copying the Siebel File System seed iles
• 
Creating an administrative Siebel user
• 
Applying additional license keys
• 
Synchronizing Server Components
The process low of inishing the Siebel CRM server software coniguration is  
as follows:
We will discuss these tasks in the following section.
Setting the System Service owner account
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard has created the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
and Siebel Server system services. These services have the Windows Local System 
account assigned. In the process of preparing the system for installation of Siebel 
CRM software, we have created a distinct user account that we now have to assign  
to the Windows service.
In order to do so, we open the Windows Services console and double-click on the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server service to open its properties dialog box. In the Log 
On tab of the properties dialog, we assign the system owner account that we created 
earlier. The following screenshot shows the local siebsvc account being assigned to 
the Siebel Gateway Name Server service. Note that the local domain is addressed 
using a dot.

Chapter 4
[ 107 ]
We repeat this procedure for the Siebel Server service. Assigning separate user 
accounts to the services ensures that we have more control over the user rights 
assignment for the services and the processes they start. For example, the service 
account that we assigned to the Siebel Server must have full access to the  
Siebel File System.
Copying the Siebel File System Seed iles
During the installation of the Siebel Database Server Utilities, we chose the feature 
Sample Database support, which caused the creation of a FILES subdirectory in the 
installation folder of the Siebel Database Server Utilities (dbsrvr).
In order to inalize the Siebel Database installation, we navigate to this directory, select 
all iles that have a .SAF (Siebel Attachment File) or .kb (knowledge base—used for 
the Smart Answer module) sufix, and copy them to the ATT subdirectory of the Siebel 
File System using the copy utility of our choice.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 108 ]
In order to verify the correct placement of the attachment iles, we log on to the 
Siebel Web Client as SADMIN and click the Sitemap (globe) icon to access the 
Sitemap. There we click the Administration - Document link and then click the 
Correspondence Templates link to navigate to the Correspondence Templates 
list view.
In the list of correspondence templates (all imported as seed data during the Siebel 
database installation), we click the hyperlink for the irst template. We should see 
a dialog box allowing us to choose to open or save the document or cancel the 
operation. When we click Open, the document will be downloaded from the 
Siebel File System and opened in the associated application.
We must accept the fact that not all seed documents have an associated seed 
attachment ile, but the procedure described above should work for most of the 
sample correspondence templates and proves that we copied the seed  
attachment iles correctly.
Creating administrative Siebel user accounts
Logging on as the Siebel Administrator (SADMIN) should only be done to verify 
the installation and to undertake special activities as directed by the Oracle 
documentation. General administrative tasks should be carried out using our own 
account, which allows easier tracking and troubleshooting of our activities.
In order to create a new administrative user, we use the Siebel application (where we 
are logged in as SADMIN) and navigate to the Administration - User screen using 
the Sitemap. In the Employees list view, we use the Query functionality to ind the 
employee with a User ID of "SADMIN" and use the Copy Record command 
(Right-click and select Copy Record or press CTRL+B) to copy the SADMIN 
employee record.
In the new record, we modify the First Name, Last Name, and User ID ields to 
relect our own account. The following screenshot shows a new example employee 
account for Alexander Hansal with the User ID AHANSAL created as a copy 
of SADMIN.

Chapter 4
[ 109 ]
Copying the Siebel Administrator employee ensures that we have the same user 
rights assigned and can therefore carry out the same administrative tasks.
Before the new user is able to log on, we must register the user ID and password 
(note that we did not enter a password in the Siebel Client) with the authentication 
system. As we selected the default authentication via the RDBMS account 
management in which the Siebel database is located, we have to create a user  
account in the RDBMS.
We will accomplish this by simply copying the set of commands to create a user 
account from the grantusr.sql ile that we used during the Siebel database 
installation. It is highly recommended to create iles and store them in a central 
location rather than typing the commands directly into the system console.  
Storing the scripts we used to alter the system coniguration allows for easier 
tracking of changes, troubleshooting, and reuse of the scripts in other environments.
The following code can be imagined as part of a .sql input ile used to create the 
AHANSAL user account in an Oracle database.
rem Create user account AHANSAL
create user AHANSAL identified by TZ7yxc99;
grant sse_role to AHANSAL;
alter user AHANSAL default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user AHANSAL temporary tablespace TEMP;
The script creates a user account whose name matches exactly (case is important) the 
user ID of the new Siebel employee. The user will have the password TZ7yxc99 and 
has the role and tablespace assignment of a typical Siebel user.
Note that this method of creating user accounts in the RDBMS is suitable for small 
evaluation or development environments. For production environments with 
thousands of users, companies normally decide to use LDAP or Microsoft Active 
Directory as the authentication system. User accounts typically already exist in those 
directories. Setting up authentication via directory services will be discussed in a 
later chapter.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 110 ]
We can now log off the user SADMIN (by pressing CTRL+SHIFT+X) and log in 
using our new administrative account. We should use that account rather than 
SADMIN from now on.
The Siebel Web Client supports keyboard shortcuts.
As we strive for professional and eficient use of the tools provided, we 
should acquaint ourselves with the most important keyboard shortcuts. 
A list of keyboard shortcuts can be easily found in the Siebel online help, 
which can be opened using CTRL+H. Click the Contents hyperlink and 
then click Getting Started: Using Keyboard Shortcuts.
Applying additional license keys
Even if we are prompted for a license key during the Siebel database installation, a 
typical Siebel CRM license key contains more than a single line of digits. In order 
to provide access to all licensed functionality, the administrator must enter the 
additional license keys.
This can be accomplished using the Siebel Web Client that we used to verify the 
successful installation and to create new administrative users. Another possibility to 
manage license keys exists within the Siebel Tools development environment, which 
we have not yet installed. So, the following section shows how to enter additional 
license keys using the Siebel Web Client.
Using our own administrative account, we log on to the Siebel application and 
navigate to the Administration - Application screen (using the Sitemap) and 
then to the License Keys view.
In the list, we can use the New button to create new records and copy and paste each 
line from our license key ile into the Key Value ield. This is repeated for each line 
in the license key ile. The following screenshot shows the License Key view in the 
Administration - Application screen with additional license key strings entered. 
Note that the license key values in the following screenshot do not represent real 
license keys:

Chapter 4
[ 111 ]
Synchronizing server components
Before the Siebel Server can be used to execute components in batch mode, which 
is also known as "running jobs", the administrator has to synchronize the batch 
component deinitions from the Siebel Gateway Name Server to the Siebel database. 
One reason for this is that dropdown lists are used when deining jobs via the 
graphical user interface (GUI) and these dropdown lists are populated from database 
tables rather than through a (slower) connection to the Gateway Name Server. Server 
administration tasks such as running jobs will be discussed in a later chapter in detail.
In the Siebel Web Client, we synchronize the server components by navigating to the site 
map, the Administration - Server Coniguration screen, and then the Synchronize view. 
In the empty list, click the Synchronize button. The component synchronization takes 
approximately 20 seconds and we can verify successful synchronization by monitoring 
the automatic refresh of the components list. The following screenshot shows the 
Synchronize view after successful synchronization of the server component information 
from the Siebel Gateway Name server to the Siebel database:

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 112 ]
In order to inalize your Siebel demonstration environment, follow the 
directions in this section to:
• 
Set the system service owner account
• 
Copy the Siebel File System seed iles
• 
Create an administrative Siebel user for yourself
• 
Apply additional license keys
• 
Synchronize server components
Installing and coniguring Siebel server 
software in unattended mode
For the rather likely event that we have to repeat a Siebel Enterprise component 
installation and coniguration on other systems, the Siebel installer and the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard support recording our input in response iles, which allows  
us to install and conigure the Siebel server software without any manual  
intervention required.
As the installation and coniguration of Siebel server software are separate processes, 
we have to learn how to:
• 
Create an .ini ile for unattended installation
• 
Create a response ile for unattended coniguration
• 
Modify the .ini ile to launch the coniguration automatically
• 
Execute the installer in unattended mode
Because a Siebel Server is a typical candidate for multiple installations, we use this 
building block of the Siebel web architecture as an example. In the following section, 
we will discuss how to create the iles needed to install and conigure a Siebel Server 
in unattended mode.

Chapter 4
[ 113 ]
Creating an .ini ile for unattended Siebel 
server installation
When we launch the setup executable for any of the Siebel Enterprise Server 
components, it reads a ile named siebel.ini, which is located in the same 
directory as the executable itself. This ile is preconigured by Oracle to support 
manual installation using a graphical user interface (GUI). When we wish to run an 
unattended installation we have to modify the siebel.ini ile. This can be achieved 
either through manual editing of the ile or by executing the Siebel installer in record 
mode. We will now discuss the latter option.
First, we should make a copy of the original siebel.ini ile as a backup.
The next task is to launch the setup executable from the command line similar to  
the following:
setup –args RECORD=D:\ses_install.ini
This will launch the installer in record mode. The wizard will proceed through the 
dialogs as usual. We can perform the steps to install a Siebel server as we did during 
a real installation. Instead of launching the installation at the end of the process, the 
wizard will display a message indicating that the response ile has been generated in 
the location indicated by the RECORD argument.
The response ile is of similar structure as the regular siebel.ini ile but it differs 
from the original ile in the following ways:
• 
All dialog display parameters are set to "no"
• 
The parameter values entered during recording are part of the  
default sections
It is a good practice to store the response iles in a safe location for later use.
Creating a response ile for the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard
In a similar manner as the Siebel installer, the Siebel Coniguration Wizard also 
supports the recording of response iles. We can use the MODE=RECORD argument to 
invoke the coniguration wizard in record mode.
C:\SIA8\siebsrvr\BIN\ssincfgw.exe -args LANG=ENU MODE=RECORD MODEL_
FILE=C:\SIA8\siebsrvr\admin\siebel_server_sia.scm

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 114 ]
The above command will invoke the Siebel Coniguration Wizard for the Siebel 
server in record mode. The wizard will execute as in live mode except that at the end 
of the process it will prompt for a location of the response ile. The response ile is an 
XML ile that contains the values entered in the wizard's dialogs.
Modifying the .ini ile to launch the 
coniguration automatically
The .ini ile that we have generated using the Siebel installer's record mode has to 
be modiied in order to invoke the coniguration wizard automatically when  
the installation is complete.
The coniguration wizard supports an execute mode, during which it reads a response 
ile. In the sense of a real unattended installation, we have to combine the installation 
and coniguration processes in a single invocation. This can be achieved by adding 
information to the installer's .ini ile.
The following example enables automatic coniguration of a Siebel Server on 
Microsoft Windows after installation.
In the .ini ile, locate the [RunAfter.Windows] section and set the value of the 
parameter ConigServer.Windows to yes. The following screenshot shows the 
[RunAfter.Windows] section of the .ini ile after the modiication:
Next, we locate the [ConigServer.Windows] section and make the following 
changes to the Execute and Arg parameters:
Parameter
New Value (Example)
Execute
$(SiebelRoot)\siebsrvr\bin\ssincfgw.exe
Arg
-args MODE=EXECUTE REPEAT=FALSE IN_RESPONSE_FILE=D:\
siebel_server_sia.xml –is:javaconsole -console

Chapter 4
[ 115 ]
The Execute parameter contains the relative path to the Siebel coniguration wizard 
executable (ssincfgw.exe). The Arg parameter contains the commands to execute 
the coniguration wizard in EXECUTE mode with the D:\siebel_server_sia.
xml ile as input. The wizard will run in console mode and will not repeat itself 
(REPEAT=FALSE). The screenshot below shows the [ConigServer.Windows] 
section of the .ini ile after the modiication:
Executing the installer in unattended mode
We are now ready to run the Siebel installer in unattended mode. We must ensure 
that the response iles for both the installer (.ini) and the coniguration wizard 
(.xml) are stored in the correct folders.
We can then launch the installer using the following shell command:
setup -args SS_SETUP_INI=d:\ses_install.ini –is:javaconsole –console
The command invokes the setup executable in console mode and speciies the d:\
ses_install.ini ile as the input ile. Console mode is recommended for unattended 
install because of easier monitoring. The following screenshot shows the command 
shell window that displays the progress of the Siebel Enterprise Server installer  
during an unattended Siebel Server installation.

Coniguring Siebel Server Software on Microsoft Windows
[ 116 ]
Summary
Coniguring Siebel server software correctly is essential for the lawless operation 
of the Siebel CRM infrastructure. In this chapter, we discussed the procedures 
to conigure the Siebel Gateway Name Server, register a Siebel Enterprise, and 
conigure a Siebel Server within the Enterprise.
Additionally, we discussed the coniguration steps for the Siebel Web Server 
Extension followed by a series of checks and inalizing steps such as entering  
license keys and synchronizing server components to ensure the availability of  
all licensed features.
The Siebel installer and coniguration wizards can be launched in unattended mode. 
Preparing and executing an unattended installation of a Siebel Server concluded 
the discussion on coniguring Siebel server software on Microsoft Windows-based 
operating systems.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to install and conigure the building blocks  
of the Siebel server architecture on Linux.

Installing and Coniguring 
Siebel CRM Server Software 
on Linux
In this chapter, we will explain the concepts of installing Siebel CRM server software 
on Linux and other UNIX-based operating systems using a practical approach. The 
following topics will be discussed:
• 
Installing the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Installing the Siebel Server
• 
Installing the Siebel Database Server Utilities
• 
Installing the Siebel Web Server Extension
• 
Using the Siebel Software Coniguration Wizard on Linux or UNIX
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension Logical Proile
• 
Installing the Siebel Database Schema and Seed Data
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Server
• 
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension
• 
Verifying the successful Siebel Enterprise installation
• 
Final steps

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 118 ]
Due to the repetitive nature of Siebel installation procedures across different operating 
systems, this chapter references the previous chapters Installing Siebel CRM Server 
Software on Microsoft Windows and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft 
Windows when applicable. It is therefore recommended to read the aforementioned 
chapters irst, to understand the complete installation and coniguration processes.
This chapter also includes "Follow Me" instructions, which the reader can use to 
complete a demonstration installation of Siebel server software. The "Follow Me" 
instructions assume that a virtual machine with Oracle Enterprise Linux as the 
operating system is available. Also, the installation of Oracle Database 11g R2 and 
Oracle HTTP Server must have been successfully completed on that machine. If 
you wish to install a demonstration environment for self-study purposes while 
you follow this chapter, you can download the software packages from Oracle's 
E-Delivery website at http://edelivery.oracle.com. The oficial documentation 
libraries for Oracle software—which also include the installation guides—can be 
found on the Oracle Technology Network website at http://otn.oracle.com.
Command examples and procedures in this chapter originate from the Siebel 
Installation Guide for UNIX (Version 8.1), which is available as part of the Siebel 
documentation at http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/
SiebInstUNIX/booktitle.html.
Installing the Siebel Gateway  
Name Server
The installation of the Siebel Enterprise Server components on Linux and other 
UNIX-based operating systems begins with executing the setup[OS] executable in  
the Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder of the Siebel installation image, where [OS] 
has to be replaced with a name representing the operating system.
For example, on Linux, the executable is named setuplinux. The following screenshot 
shows the Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder of the Siebel installation image for Linux:

Chapter 5
[ 119 ]
The ile named setuplinux must be executed to run the InstallShield wizard.
Before launching the setup executable, we must ensure that a directory named  
/var/adm/siebel exists. This directory is used to store iles such as vpd.
properties, which control the state of the installation.
It is also recommended to administer all installation steps under the same 
non-root user account.
The following table describes the steps that the InstallShield Wizard executes and 
provides example values for entries an administrator has to make to install the  
Siebel Gateway Name Server on Linux:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Execute the setuplinux ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: /u01/app/siebel/.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
A subdirectory for the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server installation will be created 
automatically.
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 120 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
4
Select products to install.
Select the following:
• 
Gateway Name Server
Click Next.
5
Select setup type.
Select Custom
Click Next.
6
Feature selection.
Keep the default selection.
Click Next.
7
Language selection.
Select ENU – English (American)
Click Next.
8
Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
9
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard is 
launched automatically.
We will launch the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard later to inish the coniguration 
of the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and conirm with 
Yes.
10
The InstallShield wizard success 
dialog is displayed.
Click Finish.
We can verify the installation of the Siebel Gateway Name Server by navigating  
to the installer target directory. We can observe that the installer has created  
the following:
• 
A directory /u01/app/siebel/_uninst, which hosts the 
uninstaller program
• 
The directories and iles needed to conigure and run the Siebel  
Gateway Name Server
If you wish to follow along with this chapter, you can now run the 
installation wizard for the Siebel Gateway Name Server on a machine 
that fulills the prerequisites described at the beginning of this chapter.

Chapter 5
[ 121 ]
Installing the Siebel Server
In the following section, we will discuss the process to install the Siebel Server 
binaries on Linux. The following table entails the steps of the process and the dialogs 
displayed by the InstallShield wizard. We start with invoking the setup executable.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Execute the setuplinux ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Install new components or add 
languages.
This dialog is displayed when the 
installer detects any existing Siebel 
Enterprise Server installations.
Keep Install a new instance or add 
new components selected.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: /u01/app/siebel.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
A subdirectory for the Siebel 
Server installation will be created 
automatically.
Click Next.
5
Select products to install.
Select the following:
• 
Siebel Server
Click Next.
6
Select setup type.
Select Custom.
Click Next.
7
The selectable features for the Siebel 
Server are displayed.
Deselect Siebel Management Agent
Note: It is recommended to install the 
Siebel Management Agent separately.
Click Next.
8
Summary
Check the information in the  
summary dialog.
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 122 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
9
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
for the Siebel Server is launched 
automatically.
We will launch the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard later to inish the 
coniguration of the Siebel Server.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and conirm 
with Yes.
10
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed.
Click Finish.
In step 7 of the table above, the installation wizard for the Siebel Server prompts for 
the following selectable features of the Siebel Server:
• 
Object Manager Components
• 
Handheld Synchronization
• 
Data Quality Connector
• 
Remote Search Support
• 
Java Integrator
• 
Siebel Management Agent
These features are explained in detail in Chapter 3, Installing Siebel CRM Server 
Software on Microsoft Windows.
Verifying the Siebel Server installation
To verify the successful installation of the Siebel Server, we can navigate to the 
installation root folder. A siebsrvr directory should exist that contains the folders and 
iles necessary to conigure and operate one or more Siebel Servers on this machine. 
If the siebsrvr directory is not present or the installation aborts with an error, we 
should check the log ile that can be found in the installation root directory. Before 
repeating the installation process, we should ensure that all previous installations are 
removed—if possible using the uninstaller utility—and that the respective directories 
are deleted.
If you wish to follow along with this chapter, you can now run 
the installation wizard for the Siebel Server on the  
demonstration machine.

Chapter 5
[ 123 ]
Installing the Siebel Database  
Server Utilities
As discussed in Chapter 3, the Siebel Database Server Utilities must be installed on a 
machine that hosts a Siebel Server.
The following table describes the steps that the InstallShield wizard executes when 
we install the Siebel Database Server utilities on Linux:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Execute the setuplinux ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Install new components or add 
languages.
This dialog is displayed when the 
installer detects any existing Siebel 
Enterprise Server installations.
Keep Install a new instance or add 
new components selected.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: /u01/app/siebel.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
 A subdirectory for the Siebel Database 
Server Coniguration Utilities will be 
created automatically.
Click Next.
5
Select products to install.
Select the following:
• 
Database Server 
Coniguration Utilities
Click Next
6
Select setup type.
Select Custom.
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 124 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
The selectable features for the Database 
Server Utilities are displayed.
In order to save disk space, we can 
safely deselect the IBM DB2 options.
Note: Keep the Sample Database 
support option selected to install the 
iles residing in the ile system that go 
along with the Siebel seed data. The 
sample database support feature and 
necessary procedures are described in 
Chapter 3.
Click Next.
8
Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
9
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed.
Click Finish.
Once the wizard inishes copying the iles for the Siebel Database Server utilities, we 
can verify the existence of the dbsrvr directory in the installation root folder. If the 
directory is not present, or the installation procedure has encountered an error, we 
should check the log ile, correct the problem, and remove any existing installations 
before we attempt to repeat the installation.
On your demonstration machine, execute the installation of the 
Siebel Database Server Utilities and verify the procedure.
Installing the Siebel Web Server  
Extension
If we wish to use machines that run on Linux or other UNIX-based operating 
systems as web servers for our Siebel CRM infrastructure, we have to ensure that 
a supported version of the Apache HTTP Server is installed. In order to verify 
the correct HTTP server, we should consult the Siebel System Requirements and 
Supported Platforms document for the selected Siebel CRM version. This document 
is available on the Oracle Technology Network website at http://download.
oracle.com/docs/cd/E11886_01/srsphomepage.html.

Chapter 5
[ 125 ]
To run the web server on Oracle Enterprise Linux for example, we have to download 
and install the Oracle HTTP Server 2.0 as indicated in the oficial documentation.
The InstallShield setup executable for the Siebel Web Server Extension is located  
in the Siebel_Web_Server_Extension folder of the Siebel installation image.
The following table illustrates the process of installing the Siebel Web Server 
Extension (SWSE) on Linux:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Execute the setuplinux ile in the 
Siebel_Web_Server_Extension 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: /u01/app/siebel/sweapp.
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
Click Next.
4
Language selection.
Select enu – English (American)
Click Next.
5
Summary
Check the information in the  
summary dialog.
Click Next.
6
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard for 
the Siebel Web Server Extension is 
launched automatically.
We will launch the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard later to inish 
the coniguration of the Siebel Web 
Server Extension.
Click Cancel to close the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard and conirm 
with Yes.
7
The InstallShield wizard success dialog 
is displayed.
Click Finish.
To verify the successful installation of the Siebel Web Server Extension, we can 
navigate to the installation target directory and check whether folders and  
iles have been created.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 126 ]
Ensure that your demonstration machine hosts a supported web 
server and follow the instructions in this section to install the Siebel 
Web Server Extension.
Using the Siebel Software Coniguration 
Wizard on Linux or UNIX
We can invoke the Software Coniguration Wizard on Linux or UNIX-based 
operating systems from the command shell only. For example, the following 
command will launch the Siebel Enterprise Coniguration wizard in the default  
GUI mode.
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/
admin/enterprise_console_sia.scm
If we do not have a graphical user interface, we can invoke the wizard in  
console mode using the –is:javaconsole -console argument like in the 
following command.
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/
admin/enterprise_console_sia.scm –is:javaconsole –console
The ssincfgw executable is located in the BIN subdirectory of the software installation 
folder (for example in /u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/bin). The –args switch is 
followed by argument names and values.
The LANG argument takes a valid three-letter language code and controls the 
language used for the coniguration wizard's dialogs (ENU for example is for  
English – United States).
The MODE argument takes one of the following values:
• 
LIVE
• 
RECORD
• 
EXECUTE
In LIVE mode, the coniguration wizard will directly execute the necessary 
commands at the end of the coniguration process. In RECORD mode, the wizard 
generates an XML ile containing the parameter values entered during the process. 
The XML ile can later be used to automate the coniguration. This unattended mode 
is invoked by using the EXECUTE value.

Chapter 5
[ 127 ]
The MODEL_FILE parameter must point to a text ile with sufix .scm. These iles reside 
in the admin directories of the software installation folders and are provided by Oracle. 
The .scm iles contain the necessary information to render the coniguration wizards 
dialogs and entry forms.
The following table lists the model iles for each coniguration target:
Coniguration target
Model ile example location
Siebel Gateway Name 
Server
Siebel Enterprise
Siebel Web Server Extension 
Logical Proile
/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/admin/ 
enterprise_console_sia.scm
Note: This is the model ile for Siebel Industry 
Applications (SIA). For horizontal Siebel enterprise 
applications, we use the enterprise_console.scm ile.
Siebel Database
/u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr/admin/dbsrvr.scm
Siebel Server
/u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr/admin/ 
siebel_server_sia.scm or
siebel_server.scm
Siebel Web Server Extension
/u01/app/siebel/sweapp/admin/swse_server_
sia.scm or
swse_server.scm
Preparing to run the Software  
Coniguration Wizard
Before we launch the ssincfgw executable, we must set library paths in order for the 
wizard to execute correctly. The commands to set the paths are provided by Oracle 
in shell scripts such as cfgenv.sh (for Bourne shell).
At the command line, we navigate to the root folder of the software we want to 
conigure (for example /u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr) and execute the shell script.
. ./cfgenv.sh
Note that this is the syntax for Bourne shell. We must ensure that there is a space 
between the dots in order to avoid the script being eventually executed in a  
different shell.
The script sets the following environment variables:
• 
PATH (appends the bin directory of the Siebel software)
• 
LD_LIBRARY_PATH (appends the lib directory of the Siebel software)

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 128 ]
• 
CLASSPATH (set to the setup.jar in the bin directory of the Siebel software)
The following screenshot shows the preconigured cfgenv.sh script, which has to be 
executed before we launch the Siebel Coniguration Wizard:
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway  
Name Server
As we learned in Chapter 3, Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft 
Windows, the Siebel Gateway Name Server must be fully installed, conigured, 
and started before we can continue with the coniguration process.
As we have successfully installed the Siebel Gateway Name Server software, we 
can now conigure the name daemon (which is another way to describe the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server) on Linux.
To start the Siebel Coniguration Wizard, we open a command console, navigate to 
the root directory of the Gateway Name Server (for example /u01/app/siebel/
gtwysrvr) and execute the cfgenv.sh script:
. ./cfgenv.sh
Next, we navigate to the bin directory:
cd bin
Now, we are ready to invoke the coniguration wizard for the Siebel Enterprise with 
the following command:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/
admin/enterprise_console_sia.scm

Chapter 5
[ 129 ]
The following table describes the process steps and dialogs displayed by the  
Siebel Coniguration Wizard:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw 
executable with the input arguments 
described above to start the wizard.
2
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration
Click Next.
3
Select tasks for new conigurations.
Select Conigure a New Gateway 
Name Server.
Click Next.
4
Gateway Name Server TCP/IP port.
Keep the default (2320)
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
5
Final Tasks
References to Siebel Bookshelf and  
EVT are displayed.
Click Next.
6
Summary
Verify the selections and values  
you provided.
Click Next.
7
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
8
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
9
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard
Click Next.
Verifying the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
Installation on Linux or UNIX
In order to verify the successful coniguration of a new Siebel Gateway Name 
Server and its operating state, we navigate to its root folder and execute the  
siebenv.sh script.
. ./siebenv.sh

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 130 ]
The siebenv.sh script sets the environment variables necessary to execute the 
Gateway Name Server control commands. These commands are:
• 
list_ns
• 
start_ns
• 
stop_ns
In the following, we discuss how to use these commands to verify the status of the 
Gateway Name Server.
We can use the list_ns command to verify that a Siebel Gateway Server is installed 
and running. From the Gateway Name Server's installation folder, we enter:
list_ns
The script executes and returns a message, which indicates the start up time and 
process ID of the Siebel Gateway Name Server. If the message indicates that  
the service is not started, we can use the start_ns script to start it. At the 
command line enter:
start_ns
followed by:
list_ns
to verify the successful start.
Another way to verify that the Siebel Gateway Name Server is running is by using 
the ps command. The following command would output all process instances in 
execution by the siebsvc program, which is the executable behind the Siebel  
Gateway Name Server and the Siebel Server:
ps- fea | grep siebsvc
The –fea switch ensures that we see full information for all processes. We use the | 
symbol to direct the output to the "pipe" and the grep command to read only those 
lines from the pipe that contain the string siebsvc.
The previous screenshot shows the result of the ps command. We can verify that the 
siebsvc executable is running and has instantiated the Gateway Name Server  
by verifying the –s switch gtwyns.

Chapter 5
[ 131 ]
If we need to stop the Gateway Name Server, we issue the following command at the 
installation folder:
stop_ns
This command will stop the Siebel Gateway Name Server. However, the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server must be operational before we continue with the installation 
of a Siebel Enterprise.
Apart from creating a new daemon or service, the coniguration wizard has also 
invoked the creation of the siebns.dat ile, which we can now locate in the sys 
subdirectory of the Siebel Gateway Name Server installation folder.
On your demonstration machine, launch the Siebel Software 
Coniguration Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise as described in this section 
and follow the steps to conigure a new Siebel Gateway Name Server.
Coniguring the Siebel Enterprise
The Gateway Name Server is now operational. We can now start to create the 
deinition of a new Siebel Enterprise that will later contain one or more Siebel Servers.
To start the coniguration of the Siebel Enterprise, we launch the Coniguration 
Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise again on the machine hosting the Gateway Name 
Server. We could have also kept the wizard open once the Gateway Name Server  
had been conigured.
If we have not yet done so, we prepare to run the coniguration wizard by executing 
the cfgenv.sh script from the Gateway Name Server's root directory. Then, we 
navigate to the bin directory and invoke the ssincfgw executable:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/
admin/enterprise_console_sia.scm

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 132 ]
The following table conveys the details of the process of coniguring a new 
Siebel Enterprise:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw 
executable with the input arguments 
described above to start the wizard.
2
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration
Click Next.
3
Select tasks for new conigurations.
Select Conigure a New Enterprise in a 
Gateway Name Server
Click Next.
4
Gateway Name Server Authentication 
User Account Name
These parameters have no effect during 
the irst coniguration. However, we 
set the following:
User Account Name: SADMIN
User Account Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server host name and 
TCP/IP port.
Enter the Gateway Name Server host 
name and the TCP/IP port used by the 
service.
Host Name: localhost
TCP/IP port: 2320
Note: These values come from the 
planning document. We can use 
localhost as the hostname because 
the wizard is executed on the same 
machine where the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server is installed.
Click Next.
6
Siebel Enterprise Name
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Description: Siebel Evaluation 
Enterprise
Click Next.

Chapter 5
[ 133 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Primary Siebel File System
Enter the path to the shared directory 
dedicated for the Siebel File System.
Primary Siebel File System: /u01/app/
siebel/fs
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
8
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise 
Edition
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
9
Table Owner and Oracle SQLNet 
connect string.
Database Table Owner: SIEBEL
SQLNet Connect String: orcl
Note: These values come from the 
planning document. The parameters 
required in this step are speciic to the 
database vendor selected in step 8.
Click Next.
10
Siebel Database User Account Name
User Account Name: SADMIN
User Account Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
Enterprise Security Authentication 
Proile
Select Database Authentication 
(Default).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document. Details on 
Siebel Security Authentication will be 
discussed in a separate chapter.
Click Next.
12
Security Adapter Name
Keep the default.
Click Next.
13
Propagate Authentication Settings to 
the Gateway Name Server
Keep the default (checked).
Note: As this is the irst time setup of 
a Siebel Enterprise, we must ensure to 
run the wizard on the Gateway Name 
Server machine for this feature to 
work.
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 134 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
14
Additional tasks for coniguring the 
enterprise.
As this is the irst time setup of a Siebel 
Enterprise for demonstration purposes, 
we do not select any options. All these 
settings can be done at a later time.
Keep all checkboxes unselected.
Click Next.
15
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
16
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
17
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
18
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
Verifying the successful Enterprise 
coniguration
During the coniguration of the Enterprise, the wizard does the following:
• 
Accesses the Siebel Gateway Name Server and register the new Enterprise
• 
Creates a security proile for the Siebel Gateway Name Server using the 
information provided in the dialogs
• 
Creates an ODBC data source
The ODBC data source name is created using the Enterprise's name and a sufix of "_
DSN". In our example, the name of the new ODBC data source is SIEBELEVAL_DSN.
Verifying the ODBC data source
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard for the Siebel Enterprise creates the .odbc.ini ile 
(note the dot at the beginning of the ile name, which makes it a hidden ile), which 
contains the library and driver information for the ODBC driver delivered with the 
Siebel software installer.
We can locate the ile in the sys directory of the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
installation folder. The following screenshot shows the .odbc.ini ile created by 
the Siebel Coniguration Wizard.

Chapter 5
[ 135 ]
The [SIEBELX_DSN] entry deines the ODBC data source for the Siebel enterprise 
named SIEBELX.
You can now execute the Siebel Coniguration Wizard and create 
a new Siebel Enterprise. Use the table provided in this chapter and 
your planning document to enter the correct parameter values.
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server  
Extension logical proile
In order to create the SWSE logical proile, we employ the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard again and start the Siebel Enterprise Coniguration using the  
ssincfgw executable.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 136 ]
If we have not yet done so, we prepare to run the coniguration wizard by executing 
the cfgenv.sh script from the Gateway Name Server's root directory. Then, we 
navigate to the bin directory and invoke the ssincfgw executable:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr/
admin/enterprise_console_sia.scm
The following table provides details on the Coniguration Wizard's dialogs. Please 
refer to the section on the SWSE logical proile coniguration in Chapter 4 for details 
on the parameters.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw 
executable with the input arguments 
described above to start the wizard.
2
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration
Click Next.
3
Select tasks for new conigurations.
Select Conigure a New Siebel Web 
Server Extension Logical Proile
Click Next.
4
Siebel Enterprise Name and logical 
proile storage folder.
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
SWSE Logical Proile Name: Keep the 
default (a subdirectory of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server's installation 
folder) and ensure that the target 
folder exists.
Click Next.
5
Collect application speciic statistics.
Keep the default (checked).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
6
Compression Type (for trafic between 
SWSE and Siebel Server).
Keep the default (None).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
7
HTTP 1.1-compliant irewall/enable 
compression.
Keep the default (Checked).
Click Next.

Chapter 5
[ 137 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
8
Session timeout values.
Enter 3000 and 9000.
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
9
HTTP Port Numbers
Keep the default values (80/443)
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
FQDN (Fully qualiied domain name)
Keep the default (blank).
Click Next.
11
High Interactivity or employee user 
login name and password.
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Password encryption.
Keep the default (unchecked)
Click Next.
13
Standard Interactivity or contact user 
login name and password.
User Name: GUESTCST
Password: 8icJIPZH
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
14
Siebel Enterprise Security Token
Security Token: TZH65ret(enter twice).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
15
Web server statistics page name
Keep the default (_stats.swe).
Click Next.
16
Deploy SSL in the Enterprise.
Keep the default (unchecked).
Click Next.
17
Summary
Verify the selections and values  
you provided.
Click Next.
18
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 138 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
19
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
20
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
Verifying the successful SWSE logical  
proile creation
In order to verify the creation of the SWSE proile iles, we can navigate to the proile 
storage folder speciied in step 4 and verify the existence of several coniguration ile 
templates such as eapps.cfg.
On your demonstration machine, execute the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard to create the SWSE logical proile. You can use the table in 
this section as a guide.
Installing the Siebel Database Schema 
and Seed Data
The Siebel Database, which also serves as the default authentication mechanism, 
has now to be installed. The installation will include the creation of tables and 
indexes as well as the import of seed data, including for example the administrative 
user SADMIN, responsibilities for controlling access to Siebel Views, List of Values  
data for dropdown lists, and the Siebel metadata repository.
The Siebel Database coniguration begins with preparing and running the SQL script 
in the grantusr.sql ile provided by Oracle. The exact steps for preparing and 
executing this ile are described in Chapter 4.
After executing the SQL script in the grantusr.sql ile, we prepare the 
environment, launch the Siebel Coniguration Wizard, and execute the steps  
to install a new Siebel database.
To inalize the database coniguration, we have to execute the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard. The Siebel Upgrade Wizard's purpose and functionality has been  
described in detail in Chapter 4.

Chapter 5
[ 139 ]
Preparing the environment for database 
coniguration
During an initial installation of Siebel CRM server software on Linux or UNIX-based 
operating systems, we must verify that database connectivity can be established via 
ODBC before we are able to continue the installation. This includes the  
following tasks:
• 
Creating the dbenv.sh script
• 
Modifying the dbenv.sh script
• 
Executing the dbenv.sh script
• 
Verifying ODBC settings using odbcsql
Creating the dbenv.sh script
Similar to setting environment variables before launching the Siebel Enterprise 
coniguration, we have to execute a script that prepares the environment for running 
the database coniguration. This script is generated by another script named 
CreateDbSrvrEnvScript. The script is situated in the Siebel Server's directory tree in 
the install_script/install folder. The following command line shows how to 
execute the script:
./CreateDbSrvrEnvScript /u01/app/siebel ENU Oracle
This creates the dbenv.sh script in the /u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr folder with 
American English (ENU) as the language for installing on the Oracle  
database platform.
Modifying the dbenv.sh script
A recommended and often times necessary modiication to the newly created 
dbenv.sh script is to add the full path to the /lib or /lib32 (if applicable) 
directory of the Oracle client or database product installation to the  
LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable.
Using a text editor of our choice, we add code at the end of the dbenv.sh ile that 
sets the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable to be similar to the following:
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}:/u01/app/oracle/product/11.2.0/
db_home1/lib; export LD_LIBRARY_PATH
The path /u01/app/oracle/product/11.2.0/db_home1/lib serves as an example 
for the location of the Oracle lib folder.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 140 ]
Also, we should ensure that the ORACLE_SID environment variable is correctly set 
and exported by adding a line similar to the following to the dbenv.sh ile.
ORACLE_SID=orcl; export ORACLE_SID
This line sets the ORACLE_SID environment variable to a value of orcl, where orcl 
is a valid service name in the TNS entries of the Oracle database or client product.
The following screenshot shows the dbenv.sh script after the modiications 
described in this section:
When you encounter problems with the database connectivity or 
Gateway Name Server authentication, you should always verify the 
settings of LD_LIBRARY_PATH and ORACLE_SID in environment 
scripts such as cfgenv.sh, dbenv.sh, or siebenv.sh.

Chapter 5
[ 141 ]
Executing the dbenv.sh script
We can now navigate to the Siebel Server's installation folder and execute the 
dbenv.sh script as follows:
. ./dbenv.sh
The dbenv.sh script now prepares the necessary environment variables for 
executing the Siebel coniguration wizard.
Verifying ODBC settings using odbcsql
Before we launch the Siebel coniguration wizard, we should test the ODBC settings 
using a command line utility named odbcsql. This command line utility is used by 
the Siebel Upgrade Wizard itself during the database installation and the following 
command can be executed to create a test connection.
Navigate to the Siebel server's bin directory and enter a command similar to 
the following:
odbcsql /s SIEBELEVAL_DSN /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
In this command, the /s switch speciies the name of the ODBC data source that 
must exist in the .odbc.ini ile. The /u and /p switches provide a valid 
database username and password combination.
The output of the utility should indicate that the login to the data source as the  
user SADMIN has been successfully executed. The utility now displays an  
ODBC> prompt.
To exit the utility, enter exit at the prompt.
We must emphasize at this point that the ODBC connection is only used by 
the programs and utilities invoked by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard. To establish 
connections to the database at runtime, the Siebel Application Object Manager 
always uses native database connectivity techniques such as SQL*NET for  
Oracle databases.
Starting the Siebel Coniguration Wizard
We can now navigate to the Siebel server's bin directory and execute the following 
command to invoke the Siebel Coniguration Wizard for the Siebel database 
coniguration process:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr/
admin/dbsrvr.scm

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 142 ]
The coniguration wizard launches and the following table describes each step of  
the process.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw executable 
with the input arguments described above to 
start the wizard.
2
Siebel Server directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's 
installation directory.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server Utilities 
directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Database 
Server Utilities installation folder. 
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise Edition
Click Next.
5
Task selection.
Select Install Database.
Click Next.
6
Action selection.
Select Install Siebel Database.
Click Next.
7
Conirmation
Conirm that you wish to install a new Siebel 
database.
Click Next.
8
GRANTUSR.SQL
Acknowledge that grantusr.sql has been 
run.
Click Next.
9
UNICODE or NON-UNICODE
Select UNICODE.
Click Next.
10
ODBC Data Source Name
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN.
Note: This is the name of the System DSN 
generated during coniguration of the Siebel 
Enterprise.
Click Next.
11
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the planning 
document.
Click Next.

Chapter 5
[ 143 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
12
Siebel Database Table Owner 
and Password.
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Password: dQ7JXui
Note: These values come from the planning 
document.
Click Next.
13
Index and Data tablespace 
names.
Index Tablespace Name: SIEBELDB_IDX
Tablespace Name: SIEBELDB_DATA
Note: These values come from the planning 
document.
Click Next.
14
License key entry.
Select Yes I would like to enter it now.
Click Next.
15
License key entry.
Copy and paste the irst line from the 
license key ile you generated during the 
installation preparation process.
16
Oracle parallel indexing.
Keep the default (Does not use…)
Click Next.
17
Security group and log output 
directory.
Keep the defaults.
Note: The log output directory will become 
a subdirectory of the Siebel Server's LOG 
directory.
Click Next.
18
Command line for Upgrade 
Wizard
Take down a note for the command line to 
invoke the Siebel Upgrade Wizard once the 
coniguration wizard is inished.
Click Next.
19
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
20
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
21
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
22
The Coniguration Wizard 
jumps to the irst dialog.
Click Cancel and Yes to exit the 
coniguration wizard.
After successful completion of the Siebel coniguration wizard, we can verify the 
existence of the upgrade coniguration ile (.ucf) for the install process. The ile can 
be found in the Siebel server's bin directory and is named master_install.ucf.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 144 ]
Starting the Siebel Upgrade Wizard
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard is the specialized software unit that reads the upgrade 
coniguration iles and executes the steps required to complete the process. To install 
the Siebel database, we launch the upgrade wizard using the following command at 
the Siebel server's bin directory:
srvrupgwiz /m master_install.ucf
The /m switch indicates the path to the .ucf ile. The Upgrade Wizard will 
now execute the tasks speciied in the driver iles provided by Oracle using the 
parameter values provided during the coniguration process. The time for the 
installation process is approximately one hour.
Verifying the successful Siebel Database 
installation
We can verify a successful Siebel database installation by using the 
following checkpoints:
• 
The HTML summary generated by the Log Parser
• 
Existence of tables and data in the Siebel database
Both checks are described in detail in Chapter 4.
Restarting the Siebel Gateway Name Server
Before we can continue with the remainder of the Enterprise coniguration steps, we 
must ensure that the Siebel Gateway Name Server is able to authenticate against the 
Siebel database, which now contains the SADMIN user account and administrative 
data for the SADMIN employee.
As indicated above, adding two lines that set the LD_LIBRARY_PATH and 
ORACLE_SID environment variables to scripts such as siebenv.sh is 
recommended to avoid problems with the database connectivity.
The following steps are necessary:
• 
Stopping the Gateway Name Server
• 
Modifying the siebenv.sh ile
• 
Executing the siebenv.sh ile
• 
Start and verifying the Gateway Name Server

Chapter 5
[ 145 ]
Stopping the Gateway Name server
We stop the Gateway Name server—as previously discussed—by navigating to its 
root installation directory and issuing the following command:
stop_ns
The command output indicates that the service is now stopped.
Modifying the siebenv.sh ile
Using a text editor of our choice, we open the siebenv.sh ile situated in the 
Gateway Name Server's installation root folder and add the following lines  
at the end of the ile:
LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}:/u01/app/oracle/product/11.2.0/
db_home1/lib; export LD_LIBRARY_PATH
ORACLE_SID=orcl; export ORACLE_SID
In the above example, the LD_LIBRARY_PATH now contains the path to the Oracle 
database lib folder and ORACLE_SID is explicitly set to orcl.
We can now save and close the ile.
Executing the siebenv.sh ile
In order to set the environment variables for the Siebel Gateway Name Server, we 
execute the siebenv.sh script by entering the following command at the console:
. ./siebenv.sh
The environment variables are now set.
Starting and verifying the Gateway Name Server
Now, we can use the commands we already know to start and verify the state of the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server. At the command prompt we enter:
start_ns
list_ns
The output should indicate that the Siebel Gateway Name Server is now operational.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 146 ]
If, for any reason, the Siebel Gateway Name Server fails to start, we must check 
its log ile to ind the error source. Typical problem areas are the ODBC driver or 
the authentication of the SADMIN user. Some databases such as Oracle 11g treat 
passwords as case sensitive. If the password is entered incorrectly during the 
coniguration of the Siebel Enterprise, we must use the Siebel Coniguration  
Wizard to remove the Siebel Enterprise and then execute it again to register the  
Siebel Enterprise again.
Use the information in this chapter to run the Siebel Database 
installation on your demonstration machine. Ensure that the installation 
was successful by carrying out the veriication steps outlined above.
Coniguring the Siebel Server
We use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to conigure one or more Siebel Servers in 
the new enterprise.
The script to prepare the environment variables for the Siebel server coniguration on 
Linux is cfgenv.sh situated in the Siebel server installation directory. To execute the 
script, we navigate to the Siebel server installation folder and enter:
. ./cfgenv.sh
Then, we can launch the coniguration wizard from the bin directory with a 
command similar to the following:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr/
admin/siebel_server_sia.scm
The following table describes the steps of the Siebel Server coniguration process:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw 
executable with the input arguments 
described above to start the wizard.
2
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Create New Coniguration.
Click Next.
3
Database Coniguration Warning
Review the warning that we must have 
an existing Siebel Database.
Click Next.

Chapter 5
[ 147 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
4
Gateway Name Server Authentication 
user name and password.
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server hostname and 
port number.
Hostname: localhost
Port: 2320
Note: These values come from the 
planning document. We can use 
localhost as the hostname as long 
the Siebel Coniguration Wizard is 
executed on the machine which hosts 
the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
Click Next.
6
Siebel Enterprise Name and Siebel 
Server logical name.
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Siebel Server Name: Linux_1
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
7
Siebel Server Description
Description: Siebel Evaluation 
Server 1
Click Next.
8
Enable Component Groups
Select only CallCenter.
Note: Details on component groups 
are discussed in a later chapter.
Click Next.
9
Siebel Connection Broker Port
Keep the default (2321).
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
Remote Synchronization Manager Port
Keep the default (40400)
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
Additional tasks for coniguring the 
Siebel Server.
Select none.
Click Next.
12
Clustering coniguration.
Keep the default (Not clustered).
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 148 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
13
Final Tasks
Review the information on EVT.
Click Next.
14
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
15
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
16
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
17
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
Verifying successful Siebel Server 
Coniguration
In order to verify that the Siebel Server has been correctly conigured, we can log in 
to the Gateway Name Server using the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command 
line and check that a Siebel Server deinition exists.
In order to do so, we navigate to the bin directory of the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server installation and enter the following at the command prompt:
srvrmgr /g localhost /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
This will log on the user SADMIN to the Gateway Name Server on the local machine 
and open the SIEBELEVAL enterprise.
A successful connection is indicated by the existence of the srvrmgr> prompt. We 
can now enter the following srvrmgr command to list all servers in the enterprise.
list servers show SBLSRVR_NAME(20),HOST_NAME(20)
The list servers command is followed by the show command to specify the 
columns and their display width (in parentheses) in order to provide better 
readability of the output.

Chapter 5
[ 149 ]
The screenshot shows the output of the list servers command. The Siebel server 
with the logical name of Linux_1 is hosted on the ahansaloel machine. Outputs 
similar to this indicate the successful coniguration of a Siebel Server.
On your demonstration machine, use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to 
conigure a new Siebel Server. Use your planning document to enter the 
correct values in the dialogs.
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server  
Extension
On the machine hosting the web server, we execute the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
to create the coniguration iles for the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) and the 
virtual directories that will later be used to access the Siebel applications. Before we 
do so, we have to complete some preparation steps for the HTTP server.
Preparing the web server
Before we start the SWSE coniguration, we must prepare the HTTP server, which on 
Linux or UNIX-based operating systems is either based on the Apache web server or 
the Sun Java System Web Server.
In the following, we outline the preparation steps for the Oracle HTTP Server on 
Oracle Enterprise Linux. In the httpd.conf ile, we make adjustments as follows.
Locate and comment the line AddDefaultCharset ISO-8859-1. This is how the 
line should look after editing:
#AddDefaultCharset ISO-8859-1
Verify the HTTP port number to match the settings in the SWSE coniguration. To  
do so, locate the Listen and ServerName lines with the web server's IP address 
and hostname and change the port number if needed.
The following lines serve as an example:
Listen 192.168.100.100:8081
ServerName siebelweb.us.ourcomp.com:8081
Save the httpd.conf ile and restart the web server.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 150 ]
Coniguring the Siebel Web Server Extension
In order to conigure the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE), we have to prepare 
the environment (as usual) by invoking the cfgenv.sh script from the software's 
installation folder. So, we navigate to the SWSE's installation directory and enter  
the following command:
. ./cfgenv.sh
The script prepares the environment variables needed to execute the coniguration 
wizard. We are now ready to launch the Siebel coniguration wizard using the 
following command from the bin directory of the SWSE installation folder:
ssincfgw -args LANG=ENU MODE=LIVE MODEL_FILE=/u01/app/siebel/sweapp/
admin/swse_server_sia.scm
The following table outlines the coniguration wizard's dialogs and parameters:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Prepare and use the ssincfgw 
executable with the input arguments 
described above to start the wizard.
3
Select coniguration task.
Select Apply an SWSE Logical Proile.
Click Next.
4
Select a load balancer.
Select Single Siebel Server.
Note: Load balancing will be discussed 
in a later chapter.
Click Next.
5
Siebel Server host name and connection 
broker port.
Host name: appsrvrsieb1
Siebel Connection Broker Port: 2321 
(default)
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
6
SWSE logical proile location and web 
server instance location.
Browse for or enter a path to the 
directory speciied during the SWSE 
logical proile coniguration.
Browse for or enter the path to the web 
server root directory.
Click Next.
7
Restart web server.
Choose Yes.
Click Next.

Chapter 5
[ 151 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
8
Final Tasks
Review the information about EVT.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
10
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
11
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
12
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard
Click Next.
Verifying the successful SWSE coniguration
The SWSE coniguration wizard should have successfully modiied the httpd.conf 
ile. We can open the ile and verify the existence of several new alias entries for 
virtual directories similar to the following example:
Alias /callcenter_enu /u01/app/siebel/sweapp/public/enu
This line deines a virtual directory named callcenter_enu, which is mapped to the 
physical public/enu directory of the Siebel Web Server Extension. The following 
screenshot shows a portion of the httpd.conf ile of Oracle HTTP Server after 
the SWSE coniguration:

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 152 ]
We can see the Alias entries for each Siebel application in each supported language 
pointing to the /public folder of the SWSE installation.
Execute the Siebel Coniguration Wizard on your demonstration 
machine and conigure the Siebel Web Server Extension. Verify that 
virtual directories are created on the web server.
Verifying the successful Siebel  
Enterprise Server installation
We are now ready to verify that we have successfully completed the basic 
installation steps. The veriication steps include:
1. Start the services.
2. Log on to the Siebel application as the Siebel Administrator.
We will then be able to use the Siebel Web Client to carry out the inal tasks in order 
to deliver a fully operational Siebel CRM environment.
Starting the services
The following services need to be started in the sequence below:
1. Siebel Gateway Name Server.
2. Siebel Server.
3. Web Server.
The Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) does not have its own service deinition. 
We can reinitialize the SWSE by restarting the web server.
Starting the Siebel Gateway Name Server on 
Linux or UNIX
Before we execute any of the scripts provided by Oracle we must execute the siebenv.
sh script in order to set the appropriate environment variables. To execute 
siebenv.sh, we navigate to the root folder of the server such as the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server's root folder and issue the following command:
. ./siebenv.sh

Chapter 5
[ 153 ]
The command for starting the Siebel Gateway Name Server is implemented as a 
script named start_ns. The script is located in the Gateway Name Server's root 
folder. At the command prompt, we enter the following to start the service:
start_ns
Then, we can use the list_ns command to verify that the Gateway Name Server 
is operational:
list _ns
The output of the list_ns command allows us to verify whether the Gateway 
Name Server is started or not.
To stop the service, we use the stop_ns command.
Starting the Siebel Server
To start the Siebel Server, we navigate to the Siebel server's installation directory 
and execute the following commands:
. ./siebenv.sh
bin/start_server all
The irst line executes the siebenv.sh script in order to set the environment 
variables. The second line uses the start_server command to start all Siebel servers 
conigured on the machine.
We can use the list_server command to monitor the status of the Siebel servers.
The following command will stop all Siebel servers on the machine:
bin/stop_server all
Starting the web server
We should use the following command to start the HTTP server:
startapa
 The stopapa command should be used to stop the web server.
On your demonstration machine, start the Siebel Gateway Name Server, 
the Siebel Server, and the web server. Follow the instructions in the 
chapter to verify the successful start.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 154 ]
Logging on as SADMIN for the irst time
Chapter 4 describes the process of the irst login. As we use the Siebel High 
Interactivity client, which is only supported on Microsoft Internet Explorer, we 
must connect to the Siebel application from a machine with a supported version of 
Microsoft Windows and Internet Explorer. A URL similar to the following will be 
entered into Internet Explorer's address bar:
http://192.168.100.100:8081/callcenter_enu
After a short startup period, the browser should display the login page for Siebel  
Call Center. We can use SADMIN as the username and password as we have 
speciied in the previous tasks.
On a Microsoft Windows machine, launch Microsoft Internet 
Explorer and navigate to the callcenter_enu virtual directory on 
your web server. Depending on your machine and browser settings, 
you might receive warnings and messages. However, you should be 
able to log in as the Siebel Administrator (SADMIN).
Final Steps
To inalize the Siebel Enterprise installation and coniguration on Linux or 
UNIX-based operating systems, the following steps are necessary:
1. Conigure services for automatic start.
2. Copy the Siebel File System seed iles.
3. Create an administrative Siebel user.
4. Apply additional license keys.
5. Synchronize Server Components.
Except for the irst item in the list, the procedures have been described in detail in 
Chapter 4, Installing Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows. As these tasks 
are not related to the operating system, we will only discuss how to conigure the 
Siebel services for automatic start on Linux.

Chapter 5
[ 155 ]
Coniguring services for automatic start  
on Linux
To ensure automatic start up of the Siebel Gateway Name Server or the Siebel Server 
services on Linux or other UNIX-based operating systems, we have to register them 
with the operating system initialization routines.
The following steps are needed on Linux operating systems:
1. Edit the siebel_server ile.
2. Copy the siebel_server ile to the init.d folder.
3. Set permissions for the siebel_server ile.
4. Create a non-root user ile if necessary.
5. Create soft links.
This procedure has to be carried out under the root user account and is explained 
in detail as follows.
Editing the siebel_server ile
The siebel_server ile is located in the bin directory of the Siebel software 
installation folder. For the Siebel Server for example, it is located in /u01/app/
siebel/siebsrvr/bin.
For an automatic start of the Siebel Gateway Name Server, we ensure that the  
SIEBEL_GATEWAY_ROOT variable is correctly set to the root folder of the Gateway 
Name Server installation.
For any Siebel Server residing on the machine, we add the path to the Siebel Server 
installation root folder to the SIEBEL_SERVER_ROOT variable. We can separate 
multiple servers using a blank space.
The following example shows the settings for a Gateway Name Server and one  
Siebel Server:
SIEBEL_GATEWAY_ROOT=”/u01/app/siebel/gtwysrvr”
SIEBEL_SERVER_ROOT="/u01/app/siebel/siebsrvr"
Additional commands such as setting and exporting environment variables like 
ORACLE_SID or ORACLE_HOME to ensure database connectivity may be added to the 
ile as well.

Installing and Coniguring Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux
[ 156 ]
Copying the siebel_server ile to the init.d folder
On Linux operating systems, we have to copy the siebel_server ile to the /etc/
init.d folder.
Setting permissions for the siebel_server ile
We can use the chmod command to change the permissions for the siebel_server 
ile as follows:
chmod 755 /etc/init.d/siebel_server
Creating a non-root user ile
This step is only necessary if the Siebel server software was installed using an 
account other than root. In this case, we create a second ile in the /etc/init.d 
folder named siebel_server_nonroot and add a line similar to the following:
/usr/bin/su – non_root_account_name -c "/etc/init.d/siebel_server $1"
The non_root_account_name string has to be replaced with the name of the user 
account that was used to install the Siebel server software.
Creating soft links
The inal step to setting up an automatic start of the Siebel services on Linux is to 
create two soft links using the ln command. The soft links are either created from 
the siebel_server ile or (if it exists) from the siebel_server_nonroot ile. The 
following example shows the commands for the latter scenario:
ln -s /etc/init.d/siebel_server_nonroot /etc/rc3.d/S72siebel_server
ln -s /etc/init.d/siebel_server_nonroot /etc/rc2.d/K32siebel_server
In order to inalize your Siebel demonstration environment, follow the 
directions in this section and Chapter 4 to:
• 
Conigure the services for automatic start
• 
Copy the Siebel File System seed iles
• 
Create an administrative Siebel user for yourself
• 
Apply additional license keys
• 
Synchronize server components

Chapter 5
[ 157 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to install the Siebel CRM server infrastructure 
components such as the Siebel Gateway Name Server, Siebel Server, and the Siebel 
Web Server Extension on Linux and other UNIX-based operating systems.
The focus of this chapter was also on the differences in the coniguration process 
between Microsoft Windows and Linux or UNIX operating systems.
Important steps include preparing and verifying the environment scripts and  
ODBC connectivity as well as coniguring the services for automatic start.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the installation of Siebel client software such  
as the Siebel Mobile or Developer Web Client, Siebel Tools, and the Siebel  
Sample Database.


Installing Siebel Client 
Software
The majority of business users access Siebel CRM functionality by means of the 
Siebel Web client, which can be considered a "small footprint client" because it  
only relies on iles downloaded automatically by the browser. However, there are 
groups of users who do not have consistent network connectivity, such as travelling 
sales representatives. Developers, administrators, and testing personnel would also 
need a secure environment where they could be sure that their changes do not affect 
other users.
The Siebel client software exists to accommodate these user groups. In this chapter, 
we will learn how to install, conigure, and apply patches to the following  
software products:
• 
Prerequisite Software and Coniguration Settings for Siebel Web Clients
• 
Siebel Developer/Mobile Web Client
• 
Siebel Sample Database
• 
Siebel Tools
About the Developer and Mobile  
Web Client
There is a certain source of misunderstanding with the terms "Developer Web Client" 
and "Mobile Web Client". As this chapter discusses the installation of both varieties 
of the Siebel client software, we try to distinguish them as follows.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 160 ]
Once the Siebel client software is installed, an executable named siebel.exe will be 
present on the machine. This executable reads a text ile with a sufix of .cfg, which 
is known as the client coniguration ile.
The coniguration ile contains data source deinitions that allow the Siebel 
executable to connect to different databases. When the database is present on the 
same machine as the executable and can therefore be accessed without any network 
connectivity, the client is considered a "Mobile Web Client". The mobile mode 
is only supported with Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere databases and is widely 
used to support remote users. The Siebel Remote module provides the necessary 
functionality to create and synchronize thousands of local databases with the 
headquarter server.
When the siebel.exe ile is directed to connect to a relational database over the 
network—which is only supported for administrators or developers—we call it 
"Developer Web Client".
The diagram depicts the difference between the terms "Siebel Mobile Web Client" 
and "Siebel Developer Web Client". A single instance of the Siebel executable can 
connect to various data sources at different times. The type of connectivity (local or 
network) drives the naming convention.

Chapter 6
[ 161 ]
The Developer Web Client is only supported for technical user groups 
such as administrators and developers. In earlier versions of Siebel 
CRM, it was also referred to as "Dedicated Web Client" and many 
developers refer to it as the "fat client". It can be used to connect directly 
to the server database, ile system, and the Gateway Name Server when 
there is no web server or Siebel Server running.
Siebel client software is only supported on Microsoft Windows  
operating systems.
User groups and Siebel Client Software
In a typical Siebel CRM project, different user groups such as ofice-based users, 
mobile users, developers, administrators, and testing personnel must be provided 
with the correct set of Siebel client software to successfully complete their jobs.
The following table can be used to facilitate the installation decisions:
Client Software 
→
Group ↓
Web 
Client 
(browser 
only)
Mobile Web 
Client
Developer 
Web Client
Sample 
Database
Siebel 
Tools
Ofice-based 
User
R
Mobile User
R
R
Developer
R
R
R
R
R
Business 
Analyst
R
R
R
R
Administrator
R
R
R
Testing 
Personnel
R
R
R
From the above table, we can derive the following:
• 
The Siebel Web Client is available to all user groups. This ensures that 
all end users and project team members have access to the Siebel CRM 
applications when they are connected to the corporate network.
• 
The Siebel Mobile Web Client is only distributed to mobile users and 
developers. Details on setting up and administering the Mobile Web  
Client are given later in this and other chapters.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 162 ]
• 
The Siebel Developer Web Client is used by all technical project team 
members such as developers, business analysts, administrators, and testing 
personnel. This ensures that members of these groups can access and test 
Siebel CRM application functionality using a local instance rather than  
the Siebel Server infrastructure.
• 
Installing and using the Siebel Sample Database is highly recommended 
for all people who are involved in the design and development phases  
of a Siebel CRM project, namely developers, business analysts, and  
testing personnel.
• 
Siebel Tools should be provided to all people who need access to the Siebel 
Repository metadata. This includes developers, business analysts, and 
administrators. Business analysts should be given access to Siebel Tools 
because it enables them to explore Siebel standard functionality.
Prerequisite software and coniguration 
settings for Siebel Web Clients
Before we undertake the procedure of installing the Siebel client software on our 
Microsoft Windows workstations or laptops, we should verify that the following 
prerequisites are met:
• 
Database client software is installed (for Developer Web Client only)
• 
The user account for the installation has administrative rights
• 
Browser security settings are correct
• 
The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) is installed
We will discuss the prerequisites in the following subsections.
About database client software for  
Developer Web Clients
When acting as the software engine behind the Developer Web Client, the Siebel 
executable must be able to establish a native connection to the server database. As 
Siebel CRM supports different database vendors such as Oracle, Microsoft, and IBM, 
the respective client software has to be installed and properly conigured on the 
machine where we intend to operate the Developer Web Client.
The Systems Requirements and Supported Platforms document (available on 
http://otn.oracle.com) allows us to identify the correct version for the 
database client software.

Chapter 6
[ 163 ]
To operate a Mobile Web Client, no further installation of a database client is needed. 
The Sybase database engine is delivered as part of the Siebel client installation.
Installing with administrative user rights
The user account that is executing the Siebel client installer must have administrative 
privileges on the Windows machine. The way to set these rights differs depending on 
the technology used for user administration and the version of Microsoft Windows.
Basically, the user account must be a member of the local Administrators group. 
This can be achieved by adding the user to the group in the Microsoft Windows 
Computer Management console or by temporarily granting administrator  
privileges when prompted at the time of installation.
Internet Explorer security settings
Apart from having the appropriate version of Microsoft Internet Explorer available 
on the client machine in order to run the Siebel client in High-Interactivity mode, we 
have to verify the correct browser settings.
Because the Siebel High-Interactivity mode relies on ActiveX technology, we must 
adjust the browser's security settings in a way that allows automatic download, 
installation, and execution of ActiveX controls.
The easiest way to do this is to add the local machine's host name to the list of trusted 
sites. The trusted sites, security level should also be set to Low or Medium-low.
In addition, we should take care that popup windows are allowed for web pages  
that originate on the local machine.
Java Runtime Environment (JRE)
Some functionality of the Siebel Web Client such as the lowchart editor, expression 
designer, or organization chart are implemented as Java applets. In order to execute 
these applets, a local installation of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE) is needed.
If our company does not deploy any of this special functionality, installing the JRE 
becomes optional.
The version of the JRE should be current but at least 1.5.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 164 ]
On your demonstration machine, ensure that the prerequisites 
discussed in this section are met. Adjust settings and download 
and install additional software if necessary.
Additional software recommendations
Depending on how our company has implemented its business processes, several 
other software products might have to be installed on the client machine. For 
example, end users could work with Siebel BI Publisher reports, which can be 
generated in various output formats, such as Adobe's Portable Document Format 
(PDF). In order to view the reports in PDF, a PDF reader such as Adobe Reader must 
be installed.
The following table describes some additional software products that might be 
needed to allow end users to complete their business processes:
Software Vendor and product
Example Scenario
Adobe Reader or other third-party 
PDF viewers
For viewing PDF iles that are either attached to 
Siebel records or generated by BI Publisher.
Microsoft Word or other third-
party ofice applications compatible 
with Word
For working with Word documents generated by 
the Siebel Document Server or attached to  
Siebel records.
Microsoft Excel or other third-party 
spreadsheet tools
For working with data downloaded from Siebel  
list applets.
Microsoft Outlook
To enable client-side integration between Siebel 
CRM and Outlook to synchronize calendar and 
contact data.
Adobe Flash Player (ActiveX)
Needed when Oracle Business Intelligence 
Enterprise Edition (Oracle BI EE) is deployed. The 
default chart format of the integrated chart engine 
in Oracle BI EE is lash (swf).
The above list is not complete. Depending on the business decisions, other software 
installations might become mandatory.

Chapter 6
[ 165 ]
Installing the Siebel Developer  
Web Client
After downloading the installation archives from http://edelivery.oracle.
com and extracting the installation images, we can locate the Oracle Universal 
Installer (oui.exe) in the folder structure. The following screenshot shows the folder 
structure and contents of the install folder of the Siebel_Web_Client installation 
image after extraction:
The process of downloading and extracting Siebel CRM software installation images 
is described in Chapter 2.
While Siebel CRM versions 8.0 and below relied on the InstallShield installation 
wizard, Oracle decided to use its own Oracle Universal Installer for the installation 
of the Siebel Developer or Mobile Web Client and Siebel Tools starting with version 
8.1.1.0. The following screenshot shows the Oracle Universal Installer during the 
installation of the Siebel Developer or Mobile Web Client:

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 166 ]
The step displayed is the check for additional prerequisite software such as Adobe 
Acrobat on the local machine.
The decision to install the Siebel Mobile Web Client or the Siebel Developer Web Client 
is taken during the setup process driven by Oracle Universal Installer. When we select 
"Mobile Web Client", the installer asks for the host name of the Siebel Server where the 
Synchronization Manager component resides. When we select "Developer Web Client", 
additional parameters such as the database vendor and database server connectivity 
information are required. We must emphasize here that even if we intend to use  
both the Siebel Mobile Web Client and the Siebel Developer Web Client on the  
same machine, we only have to run the installer once.
In the following we will describe the installation process for the Siebel Developer 
Web Client 8.1.1.0 and above. We start by double-clicking the oui.exe ile in 
the Siebel_Web_Client/Disk1/install folder that launches the Oracle 
Universal Installer.
The following table provides details about the installer's dialogs and example 
parameters. During the installation, we will select "Developer Web Client" as 
the client type. Later in this chapter, we will learn how to apply the necessary 
coniguration settings to be able to use the client as a Mobile Web Client.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Oracle Universal Installer
Double-click the oui.exe ile in 
the Siebel_Web_Client/Disk1/
install folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click Next.
3
Specify the home directory
Example: C:\Siebel\8.1\Client_1 
(default value).
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
Click Next.
4
Prerequisite checks
The installer performs checks for 
prerequisite checks. Verify that all 
checks are passed successfully.
Click Next.
5
Select Languages
Select English.
Click Next.
6
Welcome to Siebel Business 
Applications Client Setup
Click Next.

Chapter 6
[ 167 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Type of Client
Select Developer Web Client.
Click Next.
8
Siebel Database Server
Select Oracle Database Server.
Click Next.
9
Database Identiication
Database Alias: orcl
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
File System
Directory Path: D:\SIA8\siebile
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
Siebel Remote Server hostname
Siebel Remote Server: osappsebl1
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Enterprise Server Information
Gateway Name Server address: 
osappsebl1.
Enterprise Server: SIEBELEVAL
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
13
Server Request Broker Information
Request Server Name: Eval_1
Note: This is a logical Siebel server 
name, not a host name. This value 
comes from the planning document.
Click Next.
14
Search Server Information
Keep the default values.
Click Next.
15
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Install.
16
The installation progress is displayed

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 168 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
17
Microsoft Internet Explorer is launched
The browser loads the predeploy.htm 
ile in the client's bin directory to load 
the preconigured ActiveX controls.
When the page displays The download 
is complete… we can close the browser 
window.
18
The installation process continues
19
Success Message
Click Exit and Yes to leave the installer.
An important detail of the Siebel Client installer is that it launches the Microsoft 
Internet Explorer browser during the installation process. The browser is directed 
to the predeploy.htm ile in the client's bin directory. The purpose of this ile is to 
download and install the preconigured ActiveX controls. These ActiveX controls are 
necessary to operate the Siebel High-Interactivity client framework.
Administrators can modify the predeploy.htm ile to suit their company's 
requirements. The ile can also be used to prepare end users' workstations or laptops 
for the Siebel Web Client if their user accounts do not have the necessary privileges 
to download and install ActiveX controls. In such scenarios, administrators would 
have to provide a script that runs with administrative privileges to open the ile once 
the Siebel client installation is complete.
Verifying the Siebel Developer Web Client 
installation
In order to verify the successful installation of the Siebel Developer Web Client, we 
can irst navigate to the Windows start menu where we should ind a new menu 
item named Siebel8_home1, which contains the Siebel Web Client 8.x item. We can 
ind the shortcuts to several Siebel applications by navigating to Start | Programs | 
Siebel8_home1 | Siebel Web Client 8.x.
The next veriication step is to launch one of the application shortcuts. For  
example we can click the Siebel Pharma—ENU shortcut. The login dialog  
should be displayed.
We can log in as SADMIN (using the password we provided during the Siebel Server 
installation) to the Server data source. The Connect to dropdown box allows us to 
select from a list of predeined data sources. Note that logging in to the Server  
data source requires a complete installation of the Siebel database as described  
in Chapter 4.

Chapter 6
[ 169 ]
Once we click the OK button, we should be able to observe that after a while the 
browser is launched and the Siebel application is loaded. If any prerequisites such 
as browser security settings are not properly met, messages might pop up indicating 
the necessity to download and install certain ActiveX controls. We should allow 
these interactions and adjust the browser security settings as described above to 
avoid this behaviour in the future.
The following screenshot shows the correctly loaded Siebel Pharma application in 
Microsoft Internet Explorer:
Note that the site icon in the lower right corner of the browser's status bar indicates 
that the local machine is a member of the Trusted sites security zone.
If the veriication fails because of database connection problems—often indicated 
by a Wrong username or password message—we must verify the installation of the 
RDBMS client software and the entries in the Siebel Client coniguration ile (.cfg). 
The next section describes how to access and modify the coniguration ile.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 170 ]
In addition, wrong browser settings can prohibit the successful launch of the Siebel 
application. If this is the case, we must verify the browser settings as described 
earlier in this chapter.
Using the information provided so far in this chapter, install and 
verify the Siebel Developer Web client on your demonstration 
machine. In order to test the Developer Web Client, you will need to 
have a complete Siebel server database installed (as discussed in the 
previous chapters).
About the Siebel Client coniguration ile
When we right-click and select Properties on the Windows start menu shortcuts to 
inspect them more closely, we ind that in each of the shortcuts that launch a Siebel 
application the same executable – siebel.exe – is invoked. The difference between the 
shortcuts lies within the path to the coniguration ile (with a .cfg sufix). The following 
screenshot shows the Properties dialog for the Siebel Pharma – ENU shortcut:

Chapter 6
[ 171 ]
The target of the Siebel Pharma – ENU shortcut is similar to the following:
C:\siebel\8.2\Client_1\BIN\siebel.exe /c C:\Siebel\8.2\Client_1\bin\enu\
epharma.cfg
The /c switch directs the Siebel executable to a text ile named epharma.cfg in the 
language speciic subdirectory (enu for American English) of the bin folder. Each 
Siebel application has its own coniguration ile. For example, to invoke Siebel Sales 
we would need to point to the siebel.cfg ile.
We can open the coniguration iles with any text editor of our choice in order to 
inspect or modify them. Before applying major modiications, it is recommended to 
make a backup copy of the ile. The following screenshot shows the epharma.cfg 
ile opened in Microsoft Notepad:
The irst two parameters in the [Siebel] section—RepositoryFile and 
ApplicationName—point to a repository ile named siebel_sia.srf (which is 
located in the objects folder) and direct the siebel.exe to load the deinition 
of the Siebel Life Sciences application from that ile. The ApplicationTitle and 
ApplicationSplashText parameters deine the text in the browser's title bar and 
the login dialog respectively.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 172 ]
The Siebel client coniguration ile contains dozens of parameters that drive the 
connectivity and behavior of the Siebel application.
Next, we will discuss one of the most important sections of the coniguration ile, 
namely the [DataSources] section.
About coniguring data sources for the  
Siebel client
The typical preconigured coniguration iles for Siebel clients contain four data 
source deinitions, which are listed in the [DataSources] section. The following 
screenshot shows the [DataSources] section of a Siebel client coniguration (cfg) ile:
For each entry in the list, a separate section named after the text to the left of the 
equals sign exists below this section. The text on the right-hand side of the equals 
sign is displayed in the login dialog as values in the Connect to dropdown box. 
The following table describes the default data sources and their purpose:
Data source name
Description
Local
Enables connectivity to a local Sybase database created 
by the Siebel Remote module. When this data source is 
selected, the client is called a "Mobile Web Client".
Sample
Default data source to the preconigured Siebel Sample 
Database (discussed later in this chapter). The sample 
database is a Sybase database as well.
ServerDataSrc
This connection is conigured during the installation 
of the Developer Web Client and allows for connecting 
to the server database deined in the installer dialogs. 
When this data source is selected, the client is called a 
"Developer Web Client".
GatewayDataSrc
Enables the Developer Web Client to connect to the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server to give developers 
and administrators access to the Siebel enterprise 
coniguration and management data. 
Note: this data source entry is hidden from the Connect 
to dropdown box by having the Hidden parameter set 
to True.

Chapter 6
[ 173 ]
Data source name
Description
AnalyticsDataSrc 
(epharma.cfg only)
This data source enables the Siebel executable to 
connect to the presentation layer of the Oracle Business 
Intelligence server, which is part of the Pharma 
Disconnected Analytics architecture and allows end 
users to work with Business Intelligence dashboards in 
ofline mode.
Coniguring the Local data source for the 
Mobile Web Client
In order to enable a fully operational Mobile Web Client, the following parameters in 
the [Local] section must be set correctly:
Parameter
Description
Example Value
DockConnString
Host name of the Siebel server 
that hosts the Synchronization 
Manager component for Siebel 
Remote.
osappsebl1
EnterpriseServer
Name of the Siebel Enterprise that 
the client belongs to.
SIEBELEVAL
RequestServerName
Logical name of a Siebel Server 
that hosts the Siebel Request 
Broker component.
Eval_1
These parameters are usually set during the installation procedure but changes are 
sometimes necessary. The other parameters can usually keep their default values. 
The following screenshot shows the correctly conigured [Local] section of a Siebel 
coniguration ile as an example.
The ConnectString parameter points to a path where the local database will be 
created during initialization of the Siebel Mobile Web client. Creating local  
databases will be discussed in a later chapter.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 174 ]
Coniguring the Server data sources for the 
Siebel Developer Web Client
When the Siebel client is invoked as a Developer Web Client, it is crucial that all 
connectivity endpoints can be reached by the Siebel executable. The following 
parameters must be correctly set in the [ServerDataSrc] section of the Siebel 
coniguration ile to accomplish connectivity to the server database and the  
ile system:
Parameter
Description
Example Value
ConnectString
For Oracle databases, this is the 
service identiier.
ORCL
TableOwner
The table owner in the Siebel server 
database
SIEBEL
DLL
The Siebel CRM version and database 
vendor speciic dll used to connect to 
the RDBMS.
sscdo90.dll
SqlStyle
A database vendor speciic identiier.
OracleCBO
FileSystem
The path to the ATT subdirectory of 
the Siebel File System. The user must 
have read and write permission on the 
network share.
\\seblfs\SIEBFILE\att
The [GatewayDataSrc] section's parameters must be set as follows to ensure 
connectivity to the Siebel Gateway Name Server in order to carry out server 
administration tasks.
Parameter
Description
Example Value
ConnectString
Host name of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server.
osappsebl1
PrimaryEnterprise
The name of the Siebel 
Enterprise.
SIEBELEVAL
When the parameters discussed above are correctly set, we can use the Siebel 
application as a Developer Web Client. This allows us to access data in the Siebel 
server database and the Siebel File System even when the Siebel server infrastructure 
is not available. Furthermore, the Developer Web Client allows us to use the Server 
Coniguration and Server Management screens and administer the Siebel Enterprise. 
Siebel server administration scenarios will be discussed in a later chapter.

Chapter 6
[ 175 ]
The following screenshot shows correctly conigured [ServerDataSrc] and 
[GatewayDataSrc] sections in the Siebel client coniguration ile.
Setting up additional data sources
As a member of a larger Siebel CRM implementation project, we might feel the need 
to connect the Developer Web Client to different server databases, such as those that 
support the development, testing, training, or production enterprises.
This can be accomplished by simply copying the existing [ServerDataSrc] section 
and renaming the new section. The name should relect the purpose, so we could 
think of a new section named [TestDataSrc].
We must also register the new section in the [DataSources] section where we would 
add an entry like the following:
TestDataSrc = Test
The string on the right-hand side of the equals sign will appear in the Connect to 
dropdown box in the login dialog.
In the new data source section, we must adjust the following parameters to point to 
the correct server database. (Source: Oracle Siebel CRM Bookshelf: Integration Platform 
Technologies: Siebel Enterprise Application Integration Guide, Version 8.1)
ConnectString: For Oracle databases, we set this parameter to a valid TNS name 
entry. For Microsoft SQL Server, IBM DB2, and Oracle BI Enterprise Edition 
connectivity we enter the name of an ODBC data source.
TableOwner: This parameter must be set to the name of the table owner user for 
the Siebel database.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 176 ]
DLL and SqlStyle: The following table entails the correct settings for the different 
support database products:
Database Vendor and product
DLL
SqlStyle
IBM DB2
sscddcli.dll
DB2
Microsoft SQL Server
sscdms80.dll
MSSqlServer
Oracle Database
sscdo90.dll
OracleCBO
Oracle BI Server
sscdsacon.dll
Siebel Analytics Server
Note: Siebel Analytics is 
the former product name 
of Oracle BI
Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere
sscdw9.dll
Watcom
The following screenshot shows a new section [TestDataSrc] in a Siebel client 
coniguration ile and the resulting value display (Test) in the Connect to 
dropdown list:
To bypass the login dialog and to launch certain application conigurations faster, we 
can create Windows shortcuts or batch command iles. This will be discussed in the 
following section.

Chapter 6
[ 177 ]
Creating Siebel application shortcuts
The siebel.exe program can take several parameters that are useful to create 
shortcuts in locations such as the Windows start menu, the desktop, or the  
Quick Launch toolbar.
The following table lists the most important parameters and provides examples:
Parameter
Description
Example
/c
The only mandatory parameter 
directs the siebel.exe to the full 
path of a Siebel coniguration (cfg) 
ile.
/c C:\SIA8\Client\BIN\
siebel.cfg
/d
Used to preselect a data source 
from the [DataSources] section in 
the .cfg ile. The value to the left 
of the equals sign must follow the 
parameter.
/d ServerDataSrc
/u
The username.
/u SADMIN
/p
The password (Caution: the 
password will be stored in clear 
text in the shortcut).
/p SADMIN
/b
Followed by a path to a browser 
executable. Useful if Microsoft 
Internet Explorer is not the default 
browser on the machine or to 
test Siebel Standard Interactivity 
applications with browsers other 
than Internet Explorer.
/b "C:\Program Files\
Firefox\firefox.exe"
/l
Used to specify the language 
in which the Siebel application 
should launch. The respective 
language pack must be installed.
/l DEU
/s
Allows spooling the SQL 
statements generated by the Siebel 
executable to a ile.
/s c:\temp\spool.txt
/editseeddata
Overrides the seed data 
protection. Only to be used under 
speciic circumstances.
/editseeddata

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 178 ]
Parameter
Description
Example
/ctsim
Enables the communications 
toolbar (ct) in simulation mode. 
This parameter is obsolete in 
Siebel 8.1.1.
/ctsim
/webservice
Followed by a port number. This 
parameter is supported in Siebel 
8.1.1.2 and above. It allows running 
the siebel.exe program as a listener 
to inbound web service calls.
/webservice 2330
The following is a typical shortcut command string that launches the Siebel Sales 
application and logs the SADMIN user in to the test database. Additionally, the  
SQL statements generated by the application will be written to a text ile in the  
D:\temp folder.
D:\SIA8\CLIENT\BIN\siebel.exe /c D:\SIA8\CLIENT\bin\ENU\siebel.cfg /d 
TestDataSrc /u SADMIN /p SADMIN /s D:\temp\spool.txt
The command line above can be used in a Windows shortcut or a shell script to allow 
fast invocation of the Siebel application.
Use the techniques described in the previous section to 
create useful Windows shortcuts to Siebel applications 
on your desktop.
Installing the Siebel sample database
Oracle provides a sample database that allows us to explore and evaluate Siebel 
application functionality and usage scenarios. This database is delivered as a 
Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere database, which is the same type used for local 
databases for Mobile Web Clients. For the purposes of evaluating the standard Siebel 
application functionality against a set of sample data, it is suficient to install the 
Siebel Mobile or Developer Web Client and the Siebel Sample Database. No other 
software installation such as Siebel Server or database software is necessary.
The Oracle Siebel Business Applications Bookshelf Documentation Library contains the 
Demo Users Reference document, which unveils the various predeined user accounts 
and roles that can be used for evaluation or training purposes. The Demo Users 
Reference document for Siebel 8.1 can be accessed at the following URL: http://
download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/DemoUser/booktitle.html.

Chapter 6
[ 179 ]
The sample database installer is delivered as part of the Siebel installation archives. 
After extraction, we can locate the install.exe program that launches the InstallShield 
installer. As opposed to the Siebel Mobile or Developer Web Client and Siebel Tools, 
the Siebel Sample Database installation is driven by the InstallShield installer and not 
Oracle Universal Installer.
The following table describes the procedure of installing the Siebel Sample Database. 
It is worth mentioning that the sample database can only be installed after a Siebel 
client and the installation folder must be identical to the client's root directory.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard
Double-click the install.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Sample_Database folder.
2
Choose Setup Language
Select the language that will be used for 
the remainder of the installation dialogs.
Example: English
Click OK.
3
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
4
Setup Type
Select Custom.
In the Destination Folder section, click 
Browse and navigate to the Siebel client 
installation directory.
Click Next.
5
Select Components
Keep Sample Files selected.
Unselect Sample Search Index.
Note: The Sample Search Index feature is 
no longer supported in Siebel 8
Click Next.
6
Choose Languages
Select English (American).
Click Next.
7
Select Program Folder
Keep the default.
The installer will create a new Windows 
start menu folder with demo shortcuts.
Click Next.
8
Installation progress is displayed.
Leave the installer window open and wait 
for the process to inish.
9
Event Log
Summary information is displayed.
Click Next.
10
The wizard displays successful 
completion
Click Finish.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 180 ]
Verifying successful installation of the Siebel 
Sample Database
The installation wizard for the Siebel Sample Database creates a Windows start menu 
folder with a collection of demonstration shortcuts. The following screenshot shows 
the Windows start menu generated by the Siebel Sample Database installer (English 
and German language packs were selected).
More shortcuts can be created manually using the technique described in the 
previous section.
The demo shortcut command lines use demo user accounts to provide the launch 
of the application at a single click. For example we can click the Siebel Marketing 
Demo - ENU shortcut.
The Siebel Marketing application should be launched in Microsoft Internet Explorer. 
The demo user Marion May is logged in automatically. The following screenshot 
shows the home page view for Marion May in the Siebel Marketing Demo application.

Chapter 6
[ 181 ]
We can observe that the Siebel Sample database not only allows different user logins 
but also contains a great amount of sample data.
If the installation of the Siebel Sample Database is not successful, we should execute 
the following steps:
1. Uninstall the Siebel Sample Database using the Microsoft Windows  
Add or Remove Programs list (if possible).
2. Delete any remaining sse_samp.dbf ile in the client's SAMPLE/UTF8 
directory.
3. Close all running programs on the machine.
4. Run the installer again and ensure that no other processes are executed  
on the machine until the installation is complete.
On your demonstration machine, install the Siebel Sample Database and 
invoke a sample application.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 182 ]
Installing Siebel Tools
Siebel Tools is a specialized Siebel CRM application that serves as the integrated 
development environment (IDE) for customization of all other Siebel applications. 
Siebel Tools can also be used in conjunction with the Siebel Sample Database for 
evaluation and research purposes. The executable behind Siebel Tools is siebdev.exe, 
which acts in a similar way to the siebel.exe program that supports the Siebel Mobile 
or Developer Web Client. The major architectural difference between Siebel Tools 
and other Siebel clients is that it executes as a Windows application rather than in a 
browser. Similar to the siebel.exe, the siebdev.exe program reads a coniguration ile 
(tools.cfg) and is able to connect to local or network data sources.
Apart from the necessity of having Siebel Tools available on the developer's 
workstation, it is quite common for Siebel Tools to be installed on computers whose 
users are not directly involved in customizing Siebel applications, for example business 
analysts. Also, administrators will ind Siebel Tools useful in order to stay current with 
the development team or adjust object settings themselves.
The Oracle Universal Installer has been used to install Siebel Tools since Siebel CRM 
version 8.1.1.0. Previous versions of Siebel CRM used the InstallShield wizard. The 
following table describes the process of installing and coniguring Siebel Tools:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Oracle Universal Installer
Double-click the oui.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Tools/Disk1/install 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click Next.
3
Select a Product to install
Select Siebel Business Application 
Tools.
Note: The Siebel Business Rules 
Developer has been discontinued by 
Oracle.
Click Next.
4
Specify the home directory
Example: C:\Siebel\8.1\Tools_1 
(default value).
The directory should already have 
been speciied in the planning 
document.
Click Next.

Chapter 6
[ 183 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
5
Prerequisite checks
The installer performs checks for 
prerequisite checks. Verify that all 
checks are passed successfully.
Click Next
6
Select Languages
Select English.
Click Next.
7
Siebel Database Server
Select Oracle Database Server.
Click Next.
8
Database Identiication
Database Alias: orcl
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
9
File System
Directory Path: D:\SIA8\siebile
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
10
Siebel Remote Server hostname
Siebel Remote Server: osappsebl1
Note: This value comes from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
11
Enterprise Server Information
Gateway Name Server address: 
osappsebl1
Enterprise Server: SIEBELEVAL
Note: These values come from the 
planning document.
Click Next.
12
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Install.
13
The installation progress is displayed
14
Success Message
Click Exit and Yes to leave the 
installer.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 184 ]
Verifying successful Siebel Tools installation
To verify the successful installation of Siebel Tools, we navigate to the Windows 
start menu and locate the new program folder. The name of the program folder is for 
example Tools1 8.1.
We start Siebel Tools by clicking the shortcut. At irst launch, the license agreement 
is displayed, which we should agree to. In the login dialog, we enter SADMIN as 
the username, provide the correct password, and select Server in the Connect to 
dropdown box. When the application is completely launched, we should see the 
Object Explorer window to the left. To verify that repository metadata has been 
properly loaded into the Siebel server database, we click the Application object type 
in the Object Explorer window. A list of applications is displayed. The following 
screenshot shows the successfully installed Siebel Tools application with the list of 
application deinitions in the Siebel Repository:
In the unlikely situation that the installation of Siebel Tools has failed, we should 
consult the installer log ile. After correction of the problem, it is recommended to 
uninstall Siebel Tools (if possible) and attempt the installation again.

Chapter 6
[ 185 ]
Coniguring Siebel Tools for the Siebel 
Sample Database
If we wish to use Siebel Tools to connect to the Siebel Sample Database, we have to 
modify the application coniguration ile for Siebel Tools. This ile is named tools.
cfg and resides in the language-speciic subdirectory of the Siebel Tools 
installation's bin folder.
We open the tools.cfg ile with a text editor of our choice and navigate to the 
[Sample] section. The only necessary change is to alter the path to the sse_samp.dbf 
ile in the ConnectString parameter so that it points to the sample database already 
installed in the client directory. It is recommended to copy a working path from one 
of the Siebel client coniguration iles. The following screenshot shows the altered 
ConnectString parameter in the [Sample] section of the tools.cfg ile:
Now, we can start Siebel Tools and log in as the Siebel Administrator (SADMIN) using 
SADMIN as the password and choose Sample in the Connect to dropdown box. The 
Siebel Sample Database contains exactly the same metadata repository that is imported 
during a server database installation. Therefore, it is ideal for research and training 
because any changes made—even erroneous ones—do not affect other users.
On your demonstration machine, install Siebel Tools and conigure 
the tools.cfg ile so you can connect to the Siebel Sample Database.
Creating shortcuts for Siebel Tools
In a similar manner as discussed during the Siebel Developer Web Client installation, 
we can create shortcuts for Siebel Tools.
By opening the properties for an existing default shortcut for Siebel Tools, we  
can observe that the application executable is different from siebel.exe, 
namely siebdev.exe, but takes similar parameters.

Installing Siebel Client Software
[ 186 ]
In addition to the parameters such as /d for the default data source, and /u and /p 
for username and password, siebdev.exe can be run from shortcuts or shell scripts  
with other parameters, which are described in the following table:
Parameter
Description
Example
/bv
Validates the entire repository.
/bv
/batchimport
Used to automate the import of 
repository metadata from .sif iles. The 
example command will launch the batch 
import of all archive iles in the d:\temp 
folder, overwriting conlicting object 
deinitions.
/batchimport 
"Siebel Repository" 
Overwrite d:\temp
/batchexport
Used to automate the export of 
repository metadata to .sif iles. The 
example command will launch the batch 
export for all objects speciied in the 
input.txt ile.
/batchexport 
"Siebel Repository" 
input.txt
/bc
Used for batch compilation of the Siebel 
Repository File (srf). The example 
command will compile a new siebel.
srf ile from all object deinitions in the 
Siebel Repository.
/bc "Siebel 
Repository" siebel.
srf
The following is a typical shortcut to launch Siebel Tools as SADMIN against  
the sample database:
D:\SIA8\TOOLS\BIN\siebdev.exe /c "D:\SIA8\TOOLS\bin\enu\tools.cfg" /d 
sample /u SADMIN /p SADMIN
Applying patches to Siebel client  
software
Oracle makes patch sets for Siebel CRM software available for customers on the My 
Oracle Support website (http://support.oracle.com). The patch sets for Siebel 
CRM contain bug ixes and enhancements.
Siebel patch sets must be applied consistently for all installed software modules, 
ranging from server to client.
After downloading and extracting the patch installers, we can launch the Oracle 
Universal Installer (oui.exe), similar to when installing from scratch. The major 
difference is that we have to select the correct Oracle home location of an existing 
Siebel client installation. The following screenshot shows the Oracle Universal 
Installer dialog for specifying the home details for the patch installation:

Chapter 6
[ 187 ]
We must select the correct home location from the upper Name dropdown box when 
applying a Siebel client patch.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the installation of the Siebel client side software 
products. We learned to distinguish between the Siebel Developer Web Client and 
Siebel Mobile Web Client by the location of the database that the Siebel executable 
connects to.
The chapter discussed the installation of the Siebel Developer Web Client and its 
coniguration as well as the installation and setup of the Siebel Sample Database  
and Siebel Tools.
Additional information about how to create useful application shortcuts for Microsoft 
Windows and how to apply software patches for Siebel CRM clients was also given in 
the chapter.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the installation of ancillary Siebel server  
software to support charts and reports.


Installing Ancillary Siebel 
Server Software
Siebel functionality is often extended through the integration of other Oracle or 
third-party software products. In order to enable the functionality as required by  
the business, administrators have to install and conigure the software. In this 
chapter, we will discuss the installation of two products that support basic data 
visualization and reporting:
• 
Visual Mining NetCharts Server
• 
Oracle BI Publisher
Installing and coniguring the Visual  
Mining NetCharts server
The NetCharts server is a software product of Visual Mining Inc., which allows 
web-based applications such as Siebel CRM to visualize their data in a chart format. 
Even in the days of enterprise-wide business intelligence systems such as Oracle 
Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBI EE), companies either cannot afford 
or do not want to spend money on systems such as OBI EE.
On the other hand, exporting data to spreadsheet applications such as Microsoft 
Excel is a lengthy, unsecure, and error-prone process.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 190 ]
The integration of Siebel CRM with the Visual Mining NetCharts Server ills the 
gap between simple data export and enterprise-scale business intelligence systems. 
Data can stay where it is and the visualization engine is tightly integrated with the 
Siebel CRM application. The following screenshot shows the Revenue by Month by 
Account chart in Siebel Sales:
The above screenshot is an example of how the Visual Mining server is integrated 
into Siebel CRM. End users can ilter the data in the Siebel list applet, choose a 
preconigured chart applet, and set parameters to control the axis labels and  
chart display.
The Siebel chart applets also support drilldown mechanisms and can be dragged 
and dropped into ofice applications such as Microsoft PowerPoint.
Visual Mining's NetChart server has to be installed to support the web-based 
infrastructure of Siebel CRM. The Siebel Mobile Web Client that is installed as 
separate software on the end user's computer includes the NetChart binaries, so  
a client-side installation is not necessary.
The following section describes how to download, install, and set up the Visual 
Mining NetCharts Server for Siebel CRM.

Chapter 7
[ 191 ]
Downloading the Visual Mining NetCharts 
Server installer
The Visual Mining NetCharts Server installer is delivered as part of the Siebel 
CRM base download archives on http://edelivery.oracle.com. The process 
to download the installer archives and generate the Siebel installers using the  
Network Image Creator has been discussed in detail in Chapter 2.
After extracting the installers, we can ind the NetCharts installer (NetChartsSe
rver4.6SiebelEdition.exe) in the Server_Ancillary directory of the Siebel 
installation image folders.
Planning and preparing the NetCharts  
Server installation
It is recommended to install the NetCharts Server on a Siebel Server machine. 
If a different machine is chosen, network connectivity must be veriied between  
the Siebel Server machine and the NetCharts machine.
The NetCharts Server uses a port number (default 8001) to enable communication 
with other systems such as Siebel CRM. We must ensure that this port number is  
free on the machine we dedicate to host the NetCharts server. The following 
screenshot shows the NetCharts Server installer prompting for the port number  
the server will use to listen for requests:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 192 ]
Other port numbers that the NetCharts server uses by default are listed in  
the following table:
Port number
Description
8002
Used for shutdown requests. Default value is listening port + 1.
1099
Java RMI (Remote Method Invocation) port for the NetCharts 
administration console.
In Siebel environments, port number 1099 could already be used by the Siebel 
Management Server. In this case, the RMI port number for the Siebel Management 
Server must be changed before attempting to install the NetCharts server on the 
same machine as the Siebel Management Server. Installation and coniguration  
of the Siebel Management Server is discussed in a later chapter of this book.
Installing the Visual Mining NetCharts server 
on Windows
In order to launch the installer on Microsoft Windows, we simply double-click the 
executable. The installer dialogs and example parameter values are described in  
the following table:
Step
Description
Tasks
1
Installer language
Select English.
Click OK.
2
Introduction
Acknowledge the introductory information.
Click Next.
3
NetCharts License Agreement
Verify the License Agreement and select I 
accept the terms of the License Agreements.
Click Next.
4
Java Advanced Imaging License 
Agreement
Verify the License Agreement and select I 
accept the terms of the License Agreements.
Click Next.
5
Java Runtime Environment 
License Agreement
Verify the License Agreement and select I 
accept the terms of the License Agreements.
Click Next.
6
Port Number
Keep the default (8001).
Click Next.

Chapter 7
[ 193 ]
Step
Description
Tasks
7
Install Location
Example: C:\SIA8\VMNetCharts
Click Next.
8
Summary
Verify the summary information.
Click Next.
9
Installation progress display
Wait for the installer to inish.
10
Install Complete
The installer displays the success message.
Click Done.
Verifying successful installation  
of the NetCharts Server
The following checkpoints exist to verify the successful installation of the Visual 
Mining NetCharts server on Microsoft Windows:
• 
Existence of a Windows service
• 
Connectivity to port 8001
On Microsoft Windows operating systems, we can verify the successful installation 
of the NetCharts server by navigating to the Windows Services console and  
checking for the existence of a service named NetChartsServer4.6SiebelEdition. 
The following screenshot shows the Windows service for the NetCharts server 
generated by the installer:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 194 ]
The start-up type is Automatic and the service has successfully started.
A inal check is to use either telnet or http to connect to port 8001 on the local 
machine. For telnet, we can use a command such as the following:
telnet localhost 8001
This will establish a connection to port 8001 on the local machine. If we receive 
no error message then the connection is established.
In order to verify connectivity using http, we can open a browser window and 
enter the following address:
http://localhost:8001/index.jsp
The response from the NetCharts server is a prompt for the license key. For 
deployments with Siebel CRM, a license key is not needed.
Coniguring connectivity from Siebel CRM  
to the NetCharts Server
Once the NetCharts server is successfully installed and operational, we have to 
carry out the following setup steps:
1. Create a project folder and ile for Siebel.
2. Set Siebel Enterprise parameters for connectivity and image type.
3. Verify the successful setup of Siebel Charts.
These procedures are described in detail in the following sections.
Creating a project folder and ile for Siebel
In the NetCharts installation folder, we navigate to the Server\root\projects 
folder. Next, we create a new subdirectory named Siebel.chart. Using a text 
editor such as Microsoft Notepad, we create a new text ile within the  
Siebel.chart folder and name it Siebel.cdx. In this ile, we type the string 
CDL without adding a line break. The following screenshot shows the new 
Siebel.chart folder and the Siebel.cdx ile:

Chapter 7
[ 195 ]
The Siebel.chart folder will later be used to store temporary chart images and  
HTML iles generated by the NetCharts server.
Setting Siebel Enterprise parameters
The following enterprise level parameters must be set in order to enable the 
Siebel server components to establish the connection to the NetCharts server:
• 
DSChartServer
• 
DSChartImageFormat
The DSChartServer parameter must be set to the hostname and port number that 
the chart server is listening on. The DSChartImageFormat parameter can be set to 
either gif, jpg, or png, and deines the graphics ile type of the chart delivered to  
the Siebel client.
We can use the Siebel Server Manager command line utility to accomplish this. We 
log on to the server manager by navigating to the BIN directory of the Siebel server 
installation folder and entering a command similar to the following:
srvrmgr /g localhost /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
This will establish a connection to the SIEBELEVAL enterprise (/e) on the local 
Gateway Name Server (/g) for the SADMIN user (/u and /p for username and 
password). The Gateway Name Server must be running for successful execution  
of the login.
At the srvrmgr command prompt, we can enter the following commands to 
change the two enterprise parameters described above:
change parameter DSChartServer=hostname:8001 for named subsystem 
ServerDataSrc
change parameter DSChartImageFormat=png for named subsystem ServerDataSrc
The string hostname has to be replaced with the real host name of the machine 
where the NetChart server is installed.
The irst command sets the DSChartServer parameter to the host name and port  
that the NetCharts server is listening on. The second command sets the image  
format to png (public network graphics).
After changing the parameters, we use the exit command to log off from the 
Server Manager command line. Finally, we have to restart the Siebel Server service.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 196 ]
Verifying successful setup of Siebel Charts
Once the Siebel Server has restarted, we can log on to the Siebel Web Client. 
In order to test the chart engine, we should create some test data such as  
Opportunities. To do so, we navigate to the Opportunities screen and then  
to the Opportunity Charts list view.
It is suficient to create a small number (three is suficient) of Opportunity  
records and set the Revenue ield to any reasonable amount.
Now we select the Pipeline Analysis chart from the dropdown list situated  
below the record list. A chart that visualizes the data in the upper list should  
appear correctly. The following screenshot shows the Pipeline Analysis chart  
by Sales Method:
The correct display of a chart in the Siebel Web Client inalizes the installation and 
setup of Siebel Charts.
Depending on the intended usage of the system we should delete the test data.
On your demonstration machine, you can now follow the steps 
described in this section to install the Visual Mining NetCharts server. 
Use the instructions in the section to verify the successful installation.

Chapter 7
[ 197 ]
Installing Oracle BI Publisher
Oracle BI Publisher—formerly known as Oracle XML Publisher—has been 
developed to support reporting in Oracle's eBusiness Applications. When Oracle 
acquired Siebel Systems Inc., the Siebel CRM server infrastructure relied on the 
Actuate Report Server to provide printable reports to end users.
With Siebel CRM version 8.1.1.0, Oracle started shipping the product to new 
customers exclusively with Oracle BI Publisher as the pre-integrated reporting  
tool. Only customers who have been using previous versions of Siebel CRM can 
choose between Actuate or BI Publisher. However, Oracle started phasing out 
Actuate as a reporting engine at the end of 2009.
The core features of Oracle BI Publisher are:
• 
Support for multiple, heterogeneous data sources
• 
Based on pure Java and XML
• 
Support for different template types such as rtf or xsl
• 
Support for multiple output ile types such as pdf, rtf, xls, or ppt
Oracle BI Publisher is available either as a standalone product or as a part of  
Oracle's Business Intelligence Suite Enterprise Edition (OBI EE).  Customers 
who have deployed OBI EE can use the instance of BI Publisher deployed with  
the suite product (if performance considerations allow).
The reporting facility is pre-integrated with Siebel CRM in two ways. The 
Siebel Mobile Web Client—supporting ofline usage of Siebel CRM  
functionality—includes the BI Publisher standalone libraries thus providing 
reporting functionality to disconnected users. To support reporting in the web 
architecture where users connect to the Siebel web server, we have to establish 
connectivity to the BI Publisher Enterprise Server. 

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 198 ]
The following diagram depicts the integration touch points of the Siebel CRM server 
infrastructure with the Oracle BI Publisher Enterprise server:
When an end user requests a report, a Siebel server component named XMLP 
Report Server Component retrieves the necessary data from the Siebel database 
and submits the data in XML format to the BI Publisher server's web service layer. 
The reply from BI Publisher includes the generated report ile, which is stored in 
the Siebel File System and presented to the end user as a download. The following 
screenshot shows the Opportunity Summary report generated by BI Publisher in 
PDF format downloaded to the end user's client:

Chapter 7
[ 199 ]
In the following section, we will discuss the download, installation, and 
coniguration procedures necessary to provide reporting functionality  
to Siebel CRM users.
Downloading Oracle BI Publisher  
Enterprise Server
If our customer either does not possess the Oracle BI Suite Enterprise Edition or 
wishes to deploy BI Publisher separately, we must download the correct version  
of BI Publisher Enterprise before we can begin with the installation.
The following table provides the correct version combinations of Siebel CRM and 
Oracle BI Publisher as well as the appropriate location for the download:
Siebel CRM Version
Oracle BI Publisher 
Version
Download Location
8.1.1.0 and below
10.1.3.4.0
http://edelivery.oracle.com
8.1.1.1 and above
10.1.3.4.1 and above
http://otn.oracle.com
After extraction from the downloaded .zip archive, we ind an installation 
image with several directories—including the documentation library—and  
a setup executable.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 200 ]
Prerequisites for Oracle BI Publisher 
Enterprise Server
As Oracle BI Publisher is based purely on Java, we must ensure that the Java 
Software Development Kit (SDK) 1.5 or higher is installed on the machine that 
will host the BI Publisher Enterprise Server as well as any Siebel Server machine 
hosting the XMLP Report Server component.
If we plan to run BI Publisher as a component of an Oracle Application Server, we 
must ensure that the application server is properly installed and access privileges  
are granted to install and publish the BI Publisher component. The default 
installation of BI Publisher installs the lightweight Oracle Container for Java (OC4J) 
server to support execution of BI Publisher. In the following section, we will use 
OC4J as the application container for BI Publisher.
Installing Oracle BI Publisher  
Enterprise Server
After downloading and extracting the installation image we can invoke the Oracle 
Universal Installer on Microsoft Windows operating systems by double-clicking  
the setup.exe ile.
The following table describes the installation procedure and sample parameters:
Step
Description
Tasks
1
Welcome
The Oracle Universal Installer welcome page is displayed.
Click Next.
2
File Locations
Keep the source ile location settings.
Enter a valid path for the destination ile location.
Click Next.
3
Installation Type
Keep the default (Basic).
Click Next.
4
OC4J Administrator 
Password
Enter a password for the OC4J (Oracle Containers for Java) 
administrator account.
Click Next.
5
Summary
Verify the summary information.
Click Install.

Chapter 7
[ 201 ]
Step
Description
Tasks
6
Installation 
progress display
Wait for the installer to inish.
7
Install Complete
The installer displays the success message.
Click Exit and Yes.
Verifying successful installation  
of BI Publisher
The BI Publisher Server is launched automatically as part of the installation. 
In order to verify whether the server is operational, we can navigate to the  
following URL:
http://bip_host:9704/xmlpserver
In the above example, bip_host has to be replaced with the host name of the  
machine on which BI Publisher Enterprise Server is installed. The port number  
9704 is the default port for the lightweight OC4J application server and could  
differ depending on the type of installation. After a while, we should see a login  
page similar to the following:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 202 ]
We can log on as the Administrator user. The default password for this user is 
Administrator and should be changed sooner rather than later to a secure password.
If we have installed the BI Publisher Enterprise Server using OC4J as the  
application server, we must ensure that OC4J is started automatically when  
the machine boots up.
A command similar to the following starts the OC4J and makes the BI Publisher 
Enterprise Server available:
C:\BIP\oc4j_bi\bin\oc4j.cmd –start
The above command is an example for Microsoft Windows installations, but 
works in a similar way for Linux or UNIX-based operating systems. On Microsoft  
Windows, program menu shortcuts are provided to start and stop the OC4J.
Using the task scheduler of the operating system, we can invoke a small shell 
script with the above command any time the host machine boots up. On Microsoft 
Windows, we can use the Scheduled Tasks feature in the Control Panel to create  
such a task.
Follow the instructions in the previous section to 
download and install the correct version of Oracle BI 
Publisher Enterprise on your demonstration machine.
Setting up Siebel CRM for  
BI Publisher reports
Before end users can use the pre-built BI Publisher reports from their Siebel Web 
client, it is the administrator's duty to complete the setup steps. These steps include 
setting up web service and Java connectivity between Siebel CRM and BI Publisher 
and implementing data security. As these tasks require technical expertise in both 
products, it is recommended that they are carried out by a seasoned professional.
Siebel CRM version differences
Due to the fact that BI Publisher reporting functionality in Siebel CRM 
version 8.1.1.0 is limited (most importantly, parameterization and scheduling of 
reports is not available), it is recommended to use at least patch level 8.1.1.1, which 
includes the missing functionality. Oracle makes patch sets available for licensed 
customers on My Oracle Support (http://support.oracle.com).

Chapter 7
[ 203 ]
Because a patch set does not alter the Siebel Repository or the seed data, some of  
the steps described for version 8.1.1.1 will be different from later major releases of 
Siebel CRM such as 8.2.
The process to enable BI Publisher reports for Siebel CRM depends on the  
Siebel CRM version we are using.
To prepare Siebel CRM version 8.1.1.1 and above (but below 8.2), we have to 
complete the following steps:
1. Import Fix Pack SIF iles and compile the srf ile.
2. Create a new Siebel outbound web service for BI Publisher 10.1.3.4.1.
3. Import the Siebel inbound web services.
4. Create and assign XMLP responsibilities.
For Siebel CRM version 8.2 and above, we can start with this step:
1. Modify the preconigured Siebel outbound web service
For all Siebel versions (including 8.1 and 8.2), the remaining necessary steps are:
1. Copy jar iles.
2. Enable external references for BI Publisher.
3. Enable the Siebel server components.
4. Set the Siebel Java subsystem.
5. Set BI Publisher security.
6. Upload preconigured reports.
7. Verify BI Publisher reports.
8. Assign BI Publisher roles to the SiebelCRMReports folder.
9. Copy fonts to the JRE home (optional).
10. Conigure the BIP Scheduler (optional).
Source: Siebel Reports Guide, Version 8.1 (Oracle Siebel CRM Documentation Library)
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/Reports/ 
booktitle.html
These procedures will be described in detail in the following sections.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 204 ]
Importing Fix Pack SIF iles
This step is only necessary if the Siebel CRM version is a patched version of 8.1 
such as 8.1.1.1. We can skip this step if we are using Siebel CRM 8.2 or above as  
the objects imported during this procedure are already present in the Siebel 
Repository in these versions.
To add the object deinitions that enable the functionality of Siebel Reports for 
version 8.1.1.1 or higher, we have to import them from Siebel Tools archive iles  
that have a sufix of .sif (Siebel Information File). These iles are copied to the 
REPPATCH subdirectory of the Siebel Tools installation folder when the patch set 
for Siebel Tools is applied.
The following steps must be executed to successfully import the new object 
deinitions and compile the Siebel repository ile (.srf):
1. If necessary, stop the Siebel Server service.
2. Log in to Siebel Tools as SADMIN, connecting to the Server data source.
3. In the Object Explorer, select Project.
4. In the Projects list, query for the XMLP Integration project.
5. Right-click the project and select Toggle Allow Object Locking.
6. Check the Locked lag to lock the project.
7. In the Tools menu, select Import from Archive.
8. In the ile selection dialog, navigate to the REPPATCH folder of the Siebel 
Tools installation folder and select the ile named 8111FP_new_feature.sif.
9. Click the Next button and continue until the wizard has completed importing 
the content of the archive ile.
10. In the Tools menu, select Compile Projects.
11. Select the XMLP Integration project.
12. Browse to the Siebel Server's OBJECTS\ENU directory and select the 
siebel_sia.srf ile.
If you are using Siebel Enterprise Applications (SEA) rather than 
Siebel Industry Applications (SIA), select the siebel.srf ile.
13. Click Compile.
14. Keep Siebel Tools open.

Chapter 7
[ 205 ]
Creating a new outbound web service for  
BI Publisher 10.1.3.4.1
This step is only necessary in Siebel CRM version 8.1.1.1 or a higher patch level. It is 
not necessary for version 8.2 and above as the web service deinition is already part 
of the prebuilt seed data and repository for these versions.
First, we have to obtain the web service deinition ile (.wsdl) from the 
BI Publisher Server. The following steps are part of that procedure:
1. Start the BI Publisher server if necessary.
2. Open a browser window and navigate to the web service URL  
http://bip_host.domain:port/xmlpserver/services/
PublicReportService_v11?wsdl
where bip_host.domain:port has to be replaced with the fully 
qualiied host and domain name and the port number where the  
BI Publisher server resides.
3. Using the browser's ile menu, we save the ile as PublicReportService_
v11.wsdl on our disk drive.
The next steps are carried out in Siebel Tools. We use the Siebel Tools WSDL import 
wizard to create a proxy business service and integration object deinitions. In order 
to avoid conlicts, we have to delete the existing object deinitions irst.
The following steps serve as a guide to the process:
1. If necessary, stop the Siebel Server service.
2. If necessary, log in to Siebel Tools as SADMIN, connecting to the  
Server data source.
3. Navigate to the PublicReportService business service and delete it.
4. Navigate to the list of Integration Objects and query for all integration  
objects that have the XMLP Integration project assigned.
5. Delete all Integration Objects in the query result.
6. In the File menu, select New…
7. In the New Objects wizard, select the EAI tab.
8. Double-click the Web Service object. This launches the WSDL Import Wizard.
9. Select the XMLP Integration project
10. Select the PublicReportService_v11.wsdl ile you created earlier

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 206 ]
The following screenshot shows the WDSL Import Wizard in Siebel Tools 
with the settings described in the procedure:
11. Click Next.
12. Check the Deploy Integration Object(s) and Proxy Business  
Service(s) checkbox.
13. Click Finish.
14. In the Tools menu, select Compile Projects.
15. Compile the XMLP Integration project to the Siebel server's .srf ile.
16. Close Siebel Tools.
17. Start the Siebel server service.

Chapter 7
[ 207 ]
Importing the Siebel inbound web services
This task is only necessary if we implement a patched version of Siebel CRM 8.1, 
for example 8.1.1.1. In Siebel 8.2 and above, the web service deinitions needed for  
BI Publisher integration are already imported during installation of the Siebel 
database as part of the Siebel seed data. These web service deinitions implement  
the security and data exchange interface for the integration of Siebel CRM and  
BI Publisher.
The following tasks have to be completed to import the inbound Siebel web  
services in a patched version of Siebel 8.1:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client using an administrative user account.
2. Navigate to the Sitemap and select the Administration - Web 
Services screen.
3. Select the Inbound Web Services view.
4. Click Import and browse to the Siebel Tools installation folder.
5. Open the REPPATCH directory and select the BIPSiebelSecurityWS.xml ile.
6. Click Import.
7. Repeat the steps above to import the BIPDataService.xml ile.
8. In the Inbound Web Services list, query for web services that have names 
starting with BIP.
9. For both web services, modify the address in the Service Ports list to match 
the web server name, username, and password of the Siebel installation.
10. Click Clear Cache in the web services list.
The screenshot below shows the Inbound Web Services list and the two imported 
inbound web services for BI Publisher integration:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 208 ]
Creating XMLP responsibilities
This step is only necessary for deployments of a patched version of Siebel CRM 8.1 
such as 8.1.1.1. As patch sets do not insert seed data into the Siebel database we  
have to create the view and responsibility records manually. This seed data is 
already available when we use Siebel 8.2 or above.
We follow the procedure below to accomplish this task:
1. Log on to the Siebel Web Client using an administrative account.
2. Navigate to the Sitemap.
3. Navigate to the Administration - Application screen, and then the 
Views list.
4. Create a new record in the Views list and set the view name to Report  
Job List View (it is recommendable to copy the view name from Siebel  
Tools to avoid typing errors).
5. Navigate to the Responsibilities view.
6. Create the following responsibilities (CASE is important):
 °
XMLP_ADMIN
 °
XMLP_DEVELOPER
 °
XMLP_SCHEDULER
 °
XMLP_SIEBEL_GUEST
7. Assign the administrative user to each responsibility.
8. Assign the Report Job List View to the XMLP_SCHEDULER responsibility.
We have now inished the necessary tasks to prepare a patched version of Siebel 8.1 
such as 8.1.1.1 for BI Publisher Integration. The next step, Coniguring the Siebel outbound 
web service for Siebel 8.2 or higher, should be skipped if we implemented Siebel 8.1.
Coniguring the Siebel outbound web service for 
Siebel 8.2 or higher
This step is only necessary when we implement Siebel CRM 8.2 or higher. The 
preconigured outbound web service needs to be adjusted to point to the correct  
host name and port number of the BI Publisher server.
We can accomplish this using the following procedure.
First, we have to log on to the Siebel Web Client using an administrative user 
account. We can use the Sitemap to navigate to the Administration - Web Services 
screen and the Outbound Web Services view.

Chapter 7
[ 209 ]
We use the Query functionality to ind the web service with the name 
"PublicReportServiceService". In the Service Ports list we change the address ield 
to relect the correct path to the BI Publisher machine and port number. The inal 
address should be similar to the following example:
http://bip_host:9704/xmlpserver/services/PublicReportService_v11
In the above URL bip_host must be replaced with the host name of the BI Publisher 
server machine.
Copying Siebel java libraries to the  
BI Publisher server
This and the following procedures have to be completed for all Siebel CRM 
versions in order to successfully integrate Siebel CRM with BI Publisher.
In order to enable specialized report functionality, we have to copy Java  
libraries from the Siebel server installation folder to the lib directory of the 
BI Publisher installation.
We navigate to the CLASSES subdirectory of the Siebel Server's installation folder 
and copy the following iles to the oc4j_bi\j2ee\home\applications\
xmlpserver\xmlpserver\WEB-INF\lib folder of the BI Publisher installation:
• 
XSLFunctions.jar
• 
SiebelCustomXMLP.jar
• 
SiebelCustomXMLP_SIA.jar
• 
iSignBmp.jar
• 
InkToolsLib.jar
Making these iles available to the BI Publisher server ensures that specialized 
functions integrated in the preconigured Siebel CRM reports can be  
executed correctly.
Enabling external ile references for BI Publisher
In order to enable the BI Publisher server to execute the custom functions contained 
in the .jar iles we copied in the previous step, we have to set the Disable External 
Reference parameter of the BI Publisher server to False.
In order to do so, we log in to the BI Publisher Enterprise Server as Administrator 
(default password is Administrator) using a URL similar to the following:
http://bip_host:9704/xmlpserver

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 210 ]
After login, we navigate to the Admin tab and click the Properties link in the 
Runtime Coniguration section. It is a good idea to use the browser's text search 
functionality to locate the Disable External Reference parameter. We set the value  
of the parameter to False and then click the Apply button on top of the page.
Enabling Siebel Server components
Using BI Publisher reports requires the availability of two components on at 
least one Siebel server in the enterprise. These components are:
• 
XMLP Report Server
• 
EAI Object Manager
The XMLP Report Server is the sole member of the XMLPReport component 
group and enables communication between the Siebel server and the BI Publisher 
enterprise server.
The Siebel EAI Object Manager is part of the EAI component group and serves as 
the inbound listener for web service calls that are made by the BI Publisher when  
it uses the Siebel security model.
To enable both components on a Siebel server and to ensure that unnecessary  
components of the EAI component group are set to manual start, we create a text  
ile with content similar to the following. Using text iles allows us to repeat the setup 
in different environments with less effort and also helps during troubleshooting.
enable compgrp xmlpreport for server EVAL_AUTO
enable compgrp eai for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp BusIntBatchMgr for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp BusIntMgr for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp CustomAppObjMgr_enu for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp EIM for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp JMSReceiver for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp MqSeriesAMIRcvr for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp MqSeriesSrvRcvr for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp MSMQRcvr for server EVAL_AUTO
manual start comp SMQReceiver for server EVAL_AUTO
sleep 20
We save the ile in a folder that is accessible by the Siebel server, using 
BIPComponents.txt as the name, for example.
The irst two commands enable the XMLPReport and EAI component groups for 
the EVAL_AUTO server.

Chapter 7
[ 211 ]
The manual start command allows us to set the start up type of the components to 
manual, thus providing for faster start up of the Siebel server as a whole. We set  
all components except the EAI Object Manager to manual start because they are  
not necessary for BI Publisher reporting. However, if we need one of the  
components later in the project we can use the auto start command to enable 
automatic start-up again.
Of course, the logical Siebel server name EVAL_AUTO serves as an example and 
must be replaced by an appropriate name.
The sleep 20 command lets the command line stay for 20 seconds so we can 
verify the successful execution.
In order to execute the commands in the ile, we ensure that the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server and Siebel Server services are running. Then, we open a command  
shell and navigate to the Siebel server's bin directory where we enter the following:
srvrmgr /g localhost /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D /i D:\
BIPComponents.txt
In the above command, we invoke the server manager utility connecting to the 
local Gateway Name Server (/g), the SIEBELEVAL enterprise (/e) as SADMIN (/u) 
using TJay357D as password (/p) and execute the BIPComponents.txt ile (/i). 
The following screenshot shows the successful execution of the commands in the 
BIPComponents.txt ile for the server EVAL_AUTO in the Windows command shell:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 212 ]
Setting parameters for the XMLP Java subsystem
In order to enable the outbound communication of Siebel CRM to the Java-based BI 
Publisher, we have to set parameters for a parameter collection that goes by the name 
of XMLPJvMSubsys. These parameter collections are traditionally known as "named 
subsystems" (subsystems of the name daemon—also known as Siebel Gateway 
Name Server). In the Siebel user interface, they are labelled "Enterprise proile".
To accomplish this task, we use the server manager command line tool and an  
input text ile similar to the previous section where we enabled server components.
The text ile's content should be similar to the following (ile paths and server  
names might vary):
change parameter dll=C:\BIP\jdk\jre\bin\client\jvm.dll for named 
subsystem xmlpjvmsubsys
change parameter classpath=C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\SiebelXMLP.
jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\xdoparser.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\
fix6312772.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\xdocore.jar;C:\
SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\xmlparserv2-904.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\
versioninfo.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\share.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\
CLASSES\jewt4.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\jdbc12.jar;C:\SIA82\
siebsrvr\CLASSES\i18nAPI_v3.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\collections.
jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\bipres.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\
bicmn.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\Siebel.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\
CLASSES\XSLFunctions.jar;C:\SIA82\siebsrvr\CLASSES\SiebelCustomXMLP.
jar for named subsystem xmlpjvmsubsys
change parameter vmoptions=-Xusealtsigs for named subsystem 
xmlpjvmsubsys
set server EVAL_AUTO
change parameter jvmsubsys=XMLPJvmSubsys for component 
xmlpreportserver
unset server EVAL_AUTO
sleep 20
We save this text ile in a folder reachable from the Siebel server and name it, for 
example, BIPConfig.txt.
The dll parameter serves to locate the Java virtual machine (jvm) and must point 
to the installation of the Java Developer Kit (JDK) on the Siebel server machine 
(examples are for Microsoft Windows).
The classpath parameter must include the full path to the .jar iles in the Siebel 
server's CLASSES directory. (Note: This string can be copied from the Siebel 
documentation and then modiied to point to the correct folders).

Chapter 7
[ 213 ]
The vmoptions parameter is only necessary on Linux or UNIX-based operating 
systems and should always be set to the values indicated in the example.
The set server command allows us to set the command prompt for a 
speciic server.
The next command in the script assigns the XMLPJavaSubsys named subsystem 
to the XMLP Report Server component.
The unset server command undoes the assignment of the command prompt 
to a speciic server.
The sleep 20 command lets the command line stay for 20 seconds so it is easier 
to check for successful execution before the window closes.
To execute the commands in the text ile, we ensure that the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server and Siebel Server services are running. Then, we open a command shell and 
navigate to the Siebel server's bin directory where we enter the following:
srvrmgr /g localhost /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D /i D:\ 
BIPConfig.txt
 In the above command, we invoke the server manager utility, connect to the local 
Gateway Name Server (/g), the SIEBELEVAL enterprise (/e) as SADMIN (/u) 
using TJay357D as password (/p) and execute the BIPConfig.txt ile (/i).
Setting the BI Publisher Security Model
When end users run BI Publisher reports, we must ensure that only authenticated 
Siebel users are able to do so. To accomplish this security check, the BI Publisher 
server is capable of using Siebel CRM or an LDAP directory that is used by Siebel 
CRM as its authentication authority. In this section, we discuss how to set the  
BI Publisher's security model to use Siebel as the authentication system.
In order to set the BI Publisher security model, we have to complete 
the following tasks:
1. Start the BI Publisher server if necessary.
2. Log in to the BI Publisher server as an administrator.
3. Navigate to the Admin tab.
4. Click Security Coniguration.
5. In the Local Superuser section, check the checkbox labeled 
Enable Local Superuser.
6. Enter a username and password for the local super user.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 214 ]
7. In the Security Model section, select Siebel Security as the security model.
8. In the Siebel Web client, navigate to the Administration - Web Services 
screen, Inbound Web Services view.
9. Query for the inbound web service named BIPSiebelSecurityWS.
10. In the service ports list, verify that the web server address is correct.
11. Copy the address string to the clipboard.
12. Navigate back to the BI Publisher security administration page and paste  
the content of the clipboard to the Siebel Web Service Endpoint ield.
13. Enter a valid Siebel username and password (CASE is important) in the 
Administrator Username and Administrator Password ields.
14. Click the Apply button in the upper portion of the security administration page.
The following screenshot shows the settings for the Siebel Security model in the  
BI Publisher security administration page:
To verify that the BI Publisher security is properly conigured, we have to restart  
the BI Publisher server. Once the BI Publisher server is restarted, we should ensure 
that the Siebel servers are started. Next, we can try to log in to the BI Publisher 
Enterprise server using a Siebel user account that has at least one of the XMLP 
responsibilities assigned (as discussed in a previous step).
If the login is successful, we have correctly conigured BI Publisher security.
Uploading preconigured reports
Siebel Industry Applications are shipped with more than 100 preconigured BI 
Publisher report templates that enable end users to create reports in various output 
formats such as PDF, RTF, or Excel out of the box.
In order to enable the preconigured reports, we have to upload the templates from 
the Siebel server to the BI Publisher repository.

Chapter 7
[ 215 ]
This is accomplished from an administrative view in the Siebel client. Before we 
start, we should verify that both the BI Publisher server and the Siebel server 
infrastructure are up and running. We can then log in to the Siebel Web client using 
an administrative user account. Then, we navigate to the Administration - BIP 
screen and the Report Template Registration view.
In the view, we query and select (multi-select using the CTRL or SHIFT key is 
possible) the reports we wish to enable and click the Upload Files button. Some of 
the preconigured reports visible in the list might not have an associated template 
ile, which results in an error when we try to upload them. In that case, we should 
deselect them and continue to upload only the reports we wish to enable in smaller 
batches. The following screenshot shows the Report Template Registration view 
with the selected report templates:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 216 ]
We can verify the successful upload by logging on to the BI Publisher Enterprise 
server as an administrator. Then, we can navigate to the Shared Folders directory 
and we should ind a SiebelCRMReports folder. This folder is created during the 
irst upload attempt from Siebel CRM. The SiebelCRMReports folder should 
contain the report templates for the reports we uploaded from the Siebel Web  
client. The following screenshot shows the SiebelCRMReports folder in the 
BI Publisher Enterprise administration:
The reports in the folder are available for execution from within the Siebel 
Web client.
Verifying BI Publisher integration for Siebel CRM
Now that we have completed the fundamental setup procedures, we can test the BI 
Publisher reporting functionality by running a test report. Logged in to the Siebel 
Web client as an administrator, we can navigate to the Administration - Application 
screen and the Tables view.
In the Tables list applet, we query for the S_CONTACT table. Enclosing the 
name in double quotes ensures an exact query. Otherwise, the default wildcard 
query would result in too many tables for our irst test.
In the Siebel CRM toolbar, we click the Reports button and select the Tables 
Report. The following screenshot shows the Reports button menu expanded 
and the selection of the Tables Report:

Chapter 7
[ 217 ]
In the pop-up dialog, we select PDF as the report output type and click Submit.
In the File Download dialog box, we can click Open to directly open the report in 
Adobe Reader, which must be installed for this test to work. If Adobe Reader is  
not present, we can choose HTML as the report output format instead.
As a result, the table report for the S_CONTACT table should be displayed.
The following screenshot shows the table report in pdf format for the 
S_CONTACT table:

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 218 ]
Table reports can be used to provide information about the physical Siebel  
data model to non-Siebel users.
Assigning BI Publisher roles to the 
SiebelCRMReports folder
In order to allow users who do not have the XMLP_ADMIN role to view reports, 
we have to assign the SiebelCRMReports folder to other roles such as 
XMLP_SIEBEL_GUEST.
In the Siebel CRM user administration, non-administrative users should have the 
XMLP_SIEBEL_GUEST and XMLP_SCHEDULER responsibility assigned to allow 
them to view and schedule BI Publisher reports.
In the BI Publisher console, we have to navigate to the Admin tab and click the 
Roles and Permissions link. Because the roles are synchronized with the Siebel 
seed responsibilities we ind hundreds of roles.
It is a bit cumbersome to ind the roles starting with XMLP. Once we locate the 
XMLP roles, we click the Add Folders button for the XMLP_SIEBEL_GUEST 
role and assign the SiebelCRMReports folder to the role. We repeat this step 
for the XMLP_SCHEDULER role. The following screenshot shows the  
assignment of the SiebelCRMReports folder to the allowed folders list for 
the XMLP_SIEBEL_GUEST role:

Chapter 7
[ 219 ]
Copying fonts for BI Publisher reports (optional)
To avoid reports being rendered unusable due to missing fonts, we must copy 
the font deinition iles to the home folder of the Java virtual machine used by the 
XMLP Report Server component. The following procedure must be executed on  
all Siebel Server machines that host this component.
In a Microsoft Windows environment, we use a shell command such as copy to 
copy all iles residing in the system fonts folder to the lib\fonts folder of the 
Java Runtime Environment installation. The following is an example command:
copy C:\Windows\Fonts\*.* C:\jre\lib\fonts\*.*
It is noteworthy that we must use a shell command on Microsoft Windows  
machines as the Windows Explorer does not support copy of font deinition iles.
Coniguring the BI Publisher Scheduler (optional)
It is very likely that our company decided to use a patch release of Siebel CRM 8.1 or 
a later version because of the capability to schedule BI Publisher reports and retrieve 
them at a later time.
Setting up BI Publisher for scheduling includes tasks to be carried out on the BI 
Publisher side and procedures to be followed on the Siebel CRM side. In this section, 
we will discuss the complete procedure to set up scheduling for Siebel CRM reports.
The following tasks have to be completed to set up BI Publisher scheduling:
1. Create the BI Publisher scheduler tables.
2a. For patched versions of Siebel CRM 8.1, we must additionally:
i. 
Enter List Of Values data.
ii. Create a symbolic URL deinition for viewing scheduled reports  
in Siebel CRM.
2b. For Siebel CRM version 8.2 and above we must:
i. 
Conigure the BI Publisher host name for viewing scheduled  
reports in Siebel CRM (version 8.2 and above only).
3. For all Siebel CRM versions, these tasks have to be completed to inalize  
the setup:
i.  Create the dataservice.wsdl ile from the Siebel inbound web 
service administration view.
ii.  Verifying BI Publisher scheduling with Siebel CRM.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 220 ]
Creating the BI Publisher scheduler tables
First, we have to enable scheduling for the BI Publisher. In general, this task is 
accomplished by creating the BI Publisher scheduler tables in a relational database.
We log in to the BI Publisher Enterprise server as an administrator. Then we 
select the Admin tab and click the Scheduler Coniguration link in the System 
Maintenance section.
The following settings serve as an example for setting up the BI Publisher  
scheduler tables in an Oracle database.
Parameter
Example value
Database Connection Type
jdbc
Database Type
Oracle 10g
Connection String
jdbc:oracle:thin:@oracle_host:1521:orcl
Username
BIP
Password 
BIP
Database Driver Class
oracle.jdbc.OracleDriver
These example values assume that a BIP user account has been created in an  
Oracle database with the rights to create tables and indices. The connection string  
is populated automatically and only the host name (oracle_host in the example), 
port number (1521) and the service identiier (orcl) have to be entered.
We should click the Test Connection button to verify that our entries are correct. 
To create the BI Publisher scheduler tables, we click the Install Schema button.
We must restart the BI Publisher server to make the changes complete.
Creating List of Values data to support report scheduling
This step is necessary if we deploy a patched version of Siebel 8.1 such as 8.1.1.1 
because of the fact that seed data is not imported when we apply the patch.
In order to support end users in creating scheduled reports, we have to administer 
the missing List of Values (LOV) data to populate the dropdown boxes in the form 
applet used to deine the schedule.

Chapter 7
[ 221 ]
The following task list guides us through the process of creating the necessary  
LOV data:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Data screen, then go to LOV 
Explorer view.
3. Create a new record in the List of Values - Type list with the name 
XMLP_RPT_SCHEDULE_MODE.
4. In the Explorer applet, expand the new type and click the Values folder.
5. In the List of Values list applet, create the following records (we might 
have to use the Columns Displayed command in the applet menu to  
display the Order column):
Display Value
Order
Run Immediately
1
Run Once
2
Run Daily/Weekly
3
6. In the Applet menu, click Clear Cache.
The following screenshot shows the List of Values data entered in Siebel 
CRM 8.1.1.1 to support the BI Publisher scheduling functionality:
Creating a symbolic URL deinition for viewing  
scheduled reports in Siebel CRM
If we decide to use the scheduling feature for Siebel BI Publisher reports, it is 
beneicial to add the symbolic URL deinition in Siebel CRM to support end users  
in the effort of reviewing and downloading their scheduled reports from within  
the Siebel Web client.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 222 ]
The Siebel Portal Framework provides a mechanism named Symbolic URLs in  
order to provide a repository for URL construction. In Siebel CRM 8.1, the seed  
data for symbolic URLs does not include the deinitions necessary for viewing  
the BI Publisher scheduled reports list.
The following procedure must be executed if we wish to support viewing and 
downloading scheduled reports from the Report Job List View in patched  
versions of Siebel 8.1 such as 8.1.1.1:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client using an administrative account.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Integration screen, Host 
Administration view.
3. Create a new record and set the Name ield to the hostname and port 
number of the BI Publisher server such as bip_host:9704.
4. Set the Virtual Name to biphost.
5. Using the dropdown box in the list applet, navigate to the Symbolic URL 
Administration view.
6. Create a new record and set the Name ield to BIPReportJobListPage.
7. Set the URL to http://biphost/xmlpserver/servlet/myhistory.
8. In the Host Name ield, select the hostname and port number of the 
BI Publisher server.
9. Set the Fixup Name ield to Default.
10. Set the SSO Disposition ield to IFrame.
11. In the Symbolic URL arguments list, create the following records:
Name 
Argument Type
Argument Value
PreloadUrl
Command
http://biphost/xmlpserver/
signout.jsp
PreloadUrlPerSession
Command
True
anyname
Command
PostRequest
id
Field
BIPUser
passwd
Field
BIPPassword

Chapter 7
[ 223 ]
We can use the screenshot below to verify our entries:
The screenshot shows the Symbolic URL Administration view with the symbolic 
URL BIPReportJobListPage and its arguments.
Coniguring the BI Publisher host name for viewing 
scheduled reports in Siebel CRM
As Siebel CRM versions 8.2 and above are shipped with a newer set of seed 
data, the Siebel database for these versions already contains the symbolic URL  
deinition for the integration of the BI Publisher scheduled jobs list.
However, we must administer the correct BI Publisher host name in the 
Host Administration list. The following procedure completes this task:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Integration screen, Host 
Administration view.
3. Query for the virtual host named biphost.
4. Set the name ield to the host name and port number of the  
BI Publisher server such as bip_host:9704.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 224 ]
Creating the dataservice.wsdl ile from the Siebel  
inbound web service
When the BI Publisher server executes the scheduled report, it has to connect to 
the Siebel server to obtain the data for the report. The integration mechanism for  
this connection is the Siebel inbound web service named BIPDataService.
The wsdl (web service deinition language) ile for this web service must be  
present on the BI Publisher server. The following procedure guides us through  
the steps to create and store the wsdl ile:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Web Services screen, Inbound 
Web Services view.
3. Query for the inbound web service named BIPDataService.
4. Verify the address in the service ports list. It should point to the  
appropriate Siebel web server and the username and password  
parameters should be correctly set.
5. Click the Generate WSDL button on the Inbound Web Services list applet.
6. Save the ile as dataservice.wsdl to a local directory.
7. Copy the dataservice.wsdl ile to the bin directory of the OC4J 
folder on the BI Publisher server machine (an example path would  
be C:\BIP\oc4j_bi\bin).
8. Restart the BI Publisher server.
Verifying the BI Publisher scheduler functionality
To verify that the scheduling functionality of BI Publisher is properly conigured, 
we can use the Tables Report again. This time, we use the Schedule Report  
command instead of opening the report immediately.

Chapter 7
[ 225 ]
We should follow the procedure below to verify that the BI Publisher  
scheduler works as expected:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web client as an administrative user.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Application screen, Tables view.
3. Query for the "S_CONTACT" table, using double quotes to ensure  
an exact query.
4. Click the Reports button and select Schedule Report.
5. In the Report Name ield, select Tables Report.
6. In the Job Name ield enter Job 1.
7. Keep the default values such as Run Immediately for the Time ield.
8. Click the Schedule button.
9. Close the scheduling dialog box.
10. Click the Reports button and select My BI Publisher Reports.
11. Click the My Jobs link.
12. Verify that a job named Job 1 exists and has a status of Running or Success.
13. If the status is Running, use the Refresh icon to reload the list until the 
status is Success.
14. Click the Download icon in the Document column to view the report.
The following screenshot shows the My Jobs view in the BIP Reports Server screen:
This view uses the Siebel Portal Framework to integrate the BI Publisher web  
page into the Siebel Web client. End users can verify and download scheduled 
reports from the list.

Installing Ancillary Siebel Server Software
[ 226 ]
Depending on the Siebel CRM version you are using, follow the 
necessary steps to conigure and verify the integration points  
between Siebel CRM and Oracle BI Publisher Enterprise server  
on your demonstration machine.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the installation and coniguration of two ancillary 
server software products that enable charting and reporting functionality in  
Siebel CRM.
The Visual Mining NetCharts server is needed to enable the Siebel chart  
applets, which allow end users to visualize the data they currently see in the  
Siebel Web client.
Oracle BI Publisher is the reporting engine that is supported with Siebel 8.1.1 and 
above. In this chapter, we learned how to install the BI Publisher Enterprise server 
and how to conigure both the BI Publisher product and different versions of Siebel 
CRM in order to support real-time and scheduled reports.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to conigure Siebel Load Balancing and  
multi-lingual environments.

Special Siebel Server 
Conigurations
In this chapter, we will discuss additional server coniguration processes that are 
typically executed in Siebel CRM environments. The irst half of the chapter is 
dedicated to load balancing and failover security. For these purposes, administrators 
must know how to install and conigure multiple Siebel servers in an enterprise.
The second half of the chapter discusses the installation and coniguration steps for 
multilingual Siebel CRM environments. In total, we will cover the following topics:
• 
Installing and coniguring additional Siebel servers
• 
Coniguring Siebel Load Balancing
• 
Installing additional language packs
• 
Supporting Multilingual List of Values (MLOV)
Installing and coniguring additional 
Siebel servers
While having only a single Siebel Server is a common scenario for demonstration 
or development environments, there are several good reasons to deploy more Siebel 
Servers in other Siebel environments such as test or production environments.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 228 ]
Among these reasons are the following:
• 
Scalability, load balancing, and performance considerations
• 
Failover security
• 
Deployment of application conigurations with minimal downtime
The following diagram depicts a Siebel Enterprise with two Siebel Servers:
Both servers host the same object manager. Siebel Native Load Balancing 
is enabled, distributing the load evenly between the servers.
When the engineers at Siebel Systems drafted the irst design documents in the  
early 90s, they had large global corporations with thousands of end users in mind. 
This is one of the reasons why the Siebel server infrastructure is so scalable. It is an 
easy computation that the more servers we have, the more end users we can support 
in a timely fashion. However, the load on these servers' CPUs and memory has to be 
evenly distributed.

Chapter 8
[ 229 ]
An additional beneit of distributing Siebel software on more than one hardware 
unit is a higher level of failover security. When one node fails—for example due to 
a malfunctioning power supply—end users might lose their current session but can 
log on to the other nodes and continue to work with minimal loss of productivity.
There are situations such as the deployment of new conigurations where we have 
to shut down and restart servers. If we have more than one server, we can support 
a rolling server restart scenario, which means that only one server is down at a time 
while the other servers are still operational.
Planning the installation of additional  
Siebel Servers
Before we install additional Siebel servers in an existing enterprise, we should 
ensure that the planning documentation is updated accordingly. Each Siebel 
server should have a speciic purpose that translates to the enablement of speciic 
component groups on that server. For example we could plan to install a production 
enterprise with four servers as follows:
Server 
Number
Server Role
Component Groups
1
Object Manager
Call Center
2
Object Manager and Application Deployment
Call Center, ADM
3
Mobile User Synchronization
Siebel Remote
4
Integration
EAI
In order to implement the above plan, we would need to provide four server 
machines and conigure server 1 and 2 for load balancing (as both host the  
same component groups).
In the following section, we will discuss the process of installing and coniguring 
additional Siebel servers in an enterprise as well as the load balancing  
coniguration process.
Installing additional Siebel Servers
If we intend to use more than one Siebel Server, it is recommended to install and 
conigure the additional servers on separate hardware units. Only then will we have 
all the beneits such as hardware failover security. However, it is technically possible 
to conigure multiple Siebel servers on the same hardware unit. This scenario should 
remain reserved only for small demonstration, training, or evaluation environments.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 230 ]
Installation and coniguration of Siebel server software has been discussed in great 
detail in Chapters 3 and 4. There are no major differences when we repeat these 
processes. The following table shall serve as a guide for the process of installing  
and coniguring additional Siebel servers into an existing Siebel enterprise:
Step
Description
Tasks
1
Use the InstallShield wizard to 
install the Siebel Server.
Follow the steps in Chapter 3, section 
Installing the Siebel Server.
2
Ensure that the Siebel Enterprise is 
operational.
Verify that the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server for the Enterprise is started.
3
Ensure validity of parameters.
Verify that the planning documentation 
is up to date and contains the correct 
values for the new Siebel Server.
4
Use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
to conigure the new Siebel Server.
Follow the steps in Chapter 4, section 
Coniguring the Siebel Server.
For installation and coniguration of a new Siebel server on Linux or other  
UNIX-based operating systems, we should follow the instructions in Chapter 5.  
As discussed in the previous chapters, Siebel servers—like all other server  
software in Siebel CRM—could also be installed in unattended mode. The beneit  
of an unattended installation is the avoidance of errors due to the repetitive nature  
of the installation and coniguration of Siebel servers on different machines.
Verifying the successful Siebel Server 
installation and coniguration
Once the new Siebel Server is installed and conigured, we should complete 
the following veriication steps.
On Microsoft Windows, a new service should be visible in the Windows Services 
console. The service should start without errors. On Linux and other UNIX-based 
operating systems, we should also be able to start the service.
If errors occur during the start up of the new Siebel Server service, we should  
consult the server's log directory. It is recommended to use the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard to remove the server and retry the coniguration after the cause of the error  
is eliminated.
Once the service is started, we can log on to the Siebel Server Manager command  
line using a command similar to the following from the BIN subdirectory of 
the Siebel Server or Siebel Gateway Name Server installation folder.

Chapter 8
[ 231 ]
srvrmgr /g appsrvrgw1 /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
In this command, appsrvrgw1 is the host name of the machine where the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server resides. SIEBELEVAL is the name of the enterprise and 
we use SADMIN as the username and TJay357D as the password to log on.
At the command prompt, we enter the following to get a list of servers in 
the enterprise:
list servers
Alternatively, we can shorten the result set by adding the show command  
followed by column names:
list servers show SBLSRVR_NAME, SV_DISP_STATE
As a result, we should see all Siebel Servers in the enterprise and their current  
state of operation. We can now verify that the server we just conigured is 
operational. The screenshot below shows the output of the list servers 
command at the srvrmgr command line prompt:
The Siebel servers Eval_1 and EVAL_AUTO are running while server 
EVAL_AUTO2 is not available because it has not yet been conigured.
About coniguring multiple Siebel Servers  
on the same physical machine
As discussed above, it is technically possible—albeit not recommended for 
environments other than simple demonstration, training, or evaluation  
enterprises—to conigure multiple Siebel servers on the same physical machine.
To accomplish this, we can even skip the installation of the Siebel server software, 
but we must use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to complete the coniguration of 
additional servers.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 232 ]
Special care has to be taken when coniguring the port numbers for the Siebel 
Connection Broker Component. This component is running on every Siebel 
server and occupies a port. The default port number is 2321. So when we install  
a second server on the same physical machine, we must conigure the Connection 
Broker port number to a value other than 2321. Incrementing the number is 
recommendable, so 2322 would be the next port number.
If we have a situation where we intend to use multiple Siebel servers to support 
synchronization of mobile clients' databases, we have to follow the same port 
numbering schema for the Siebel Synchronization Manager port.
All deviations from default port numbers have to be documented diligently  
in order to inform other team members.
If your demonstration machine has enough physical memory to 
support it, you can follow the steps to install and conigure a second 
Siebel server in the enterprise. Alternatively—because it is only a 
demonstration system—you can skip the installation and use the 
Siebel Server coniguration wizard to conigure a second Siebel Server 
from the same installation folder as the irst Siebel server. However, 
you must ensure that the Connection Broker Port for the second server 
is set to a number other than 2321.
In order to support a load balancing demonstration (see next section), 
enable the Call Center component group as you did for the irst server.
Coniguring Siebel load balancing
When two or more Siebel servers host the same component such as the Siebel  
Call Center Object Manager, we have to complete the procedure described in  
this section to allow a round-robin load balancing strategy to be applied when  
user sessions are established.
About Siebel load balancing
Siebel CRM provides three levels of load balancing:
• 
Single Siebel Server
• 
Siebel Native Load Balancing
• 
Third-Party Load Balancing

Chapter 8
[ 233 ]
These options are displayed during the coniguration of the Siebel Web Server 
Extension (SWSE), which has been discussed in Chapter 4. The screenshot below 
shows the SWSE Coniguration Wizard's dialog Select a Load Balancer:
In the following, we will discuss the three options.
Single Siebel Server
When this option is chosen, all entries in the eapps.cfg ile, which resides 
in the SWSE's bin folder, point to the Connection Broker Port on the same 
Siebel Server. Any additional server would have to be entered manually by  
altering the ConnectString parameter.
The following screenshot shows the sections for Siebel Service [/service_enu] and 
Siebel Call Center [/callcenter_enu] in the SWSE coniguration ile (eapps.cfg):
In order to use the second Siebel server on the same machine for the Siebel  
Service application, the administrator has modiied the port number for the  
Siebel Connection Broker port to 2322.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 234 ]
Modifying the eapps.cfg ile directly is error-prone and requires a restart 
of the Siebel Web Server, which leads to system downtime. It is therefore 
recommended to create a backup of the eapps.cfg ile before manipulating it.
Siebel Native Load Balancing
When two or more Siebel servers host the same component and should take 
the load of the user sessions evenly, then we should conigure the SWSE for Siebel 
Native Load Balancing. This process is described in detail later in this section.
Siebel Native Load Balancing is a software-based round robin strategy to evenly 
distribute user sessions across multiple Siebel servers. It relies on a ile named 
lbconfig.txt that contains the information about the physical host names and 
Connection Broker port numbers of all Siebel servers that participate in the load 
balancing strategy.
Third-Party Load Balancing
For large enterprises with user numbers in the tens of thousands, the 
software-based Siebel Native Load Balancing might not be suficient.  
In this case, hardware load balancers can be used to optimize the distribution  
of sessions. The System Requirements and Supported Platforms document lists  
the supported vendors and systems for Third-Party Load Balancing.
Coniguring the SWSE for Siebel Native  
Load Balancing
The process of coniguring the SWSE for Siebel Native Load Balancing consists 
of two main steps:
1. Creating the load balancer coniguration ile.
2. Reconiguring the SWSE.
In the following, we will discuss both steps in detail.
Creating the load balancer coniguration ile
The load balancer coniguration ile (lbconfig.txt) contains the information 
that the SWSE needs to apply the load balancing algorithm to the incoming  
session requests.
The creation of the lbconfig.txt ile is accomplished through a command at 
the Siebel Server Manager command line prompt.

Chapter 8
[ 235 ]
We navigate to the Siebel Server's BIN folder and enter a command similar to the 
following to log on to the Gateway Name Server and open the Server Manager 
command line:
srvrmgr /g appsrvrgw1 /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
In the above example, we connect to the Siebel Gateway Name Server residing  
on the appsrvrgw1 machine and log on as SADMIN to the SIEBELEVAL enterprise.
At the srvrmgr command prompt, we enter the following command to generate  
the load balancer coniguration ile:
generate lbconfig
The command has no output message. To verify the generation of the  
lbconfig.txt ile, we navigate to the Siebel Server's ADMIN subdirectory 
and locate the newly generated ile.
The following screenshot shows a portion of the load balancer coniguration ile 
generated by the generate lbconfig command at the Siebel Server Manager 
command line:
To inalize this step, we must copy the ile to the location of the SWSE logical  
proile, which by default is the ADMIN\Webserver directory of the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server installation folder.
Reconiguring the Siebel Web Server Extension
In order to conigure the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) for Siebel Native 
Load Balancing, we have to remove the existing coniguration and apply the new 
coniguration. For both tasks, we use the Siebel Coniguration Wizard for the SWSE.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 236 ]
The following table describes the process to remove an existing SWSE 
coniguration on Microsoft Windows. The process on Linux or other  
UNIX-based operating systems is similar:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Siebel Web Server Extension 
Coniguration shortcut in the Windows 
start menu that has been created by the 
Siebel installer.
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live Mode.
Click Next.
3
Select coniguration task.
Select Remove the SWSE Coniguration
Click Next.
4
Conirmation
Select Remove Selected Siebel Web 
Server Extension.
Click Next.
5
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
6
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes
7
A large number of command windows 
are opened as the coniguration wizard 
removes the SWSE coniguration and 
deletes existing virtual directories from 
the web server.
Wait for all command windows to close.
8
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
9
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
Once the current coniguration is successfully removed, we can continue by  
applying the new SWSE logical proile.
The following table guides us through the process:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Siebel Web Server Extension 
Coniguration shortcut in the Windows 
start menu that has been created by the 
Siebel installer.

Chapter 8
[ 237 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live Mode.
Click Next.
3
Select coniguration task.
Select Apply an SWSE Logical Proile.
Click Next.
4
Select a load balancer.
Select Siebel Native Load Balancing.
Click Next.
5
SWSE logical proile location.
Browse for or enter a path to the directory 
speciied during the SWSE logical proile 
coniguration.
Click Next.
6
Final Tasks
Review the information about EVT.
Click Next.
7
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
8
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes
9
A number of command windows are 
opened as the coniguration wizard 
applies the SWSE logical proile.
Wait for all command windows to close.
10
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
11
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
The coniguration wizard has now generated new virtual directories and a new set 
of SWSE coniguration iles (eapps.cfg and eapps_sia.cfg).
Validating the eapps.cfg ile
In order to ensure correct operation of Siebel Native Load Balancing, we must 
open the newly generated eapps.cfg ile in the BIN subdirectory of the SWSE's 
installation folder.
In the [ConnMgmt] section, we should check that the EnableVirtualHosts 
parameter is now set to true. The VirtualHostsFile parameter must typically 
be modiied to point to the correct ile (the default path is to a .cfg ile but the 
lbconig ile has a sufix of .txt).

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 238 ]
The screenshot below shows the [ConnMgmt] section of the modiied 
eapps.cfg ile:
The VirtualHostsFile parameter has been changed to point to the lbconfig.txt ile 
in the admin subdirectory of the SWSE installation folder.
To inalize the reconiguration of the SWSE, we must restart the web server service.
Verifying the successful load balancing 
coniguration of the SWSE
In order to verify the successful load balancing coniguration of the SWSE, we 
can open multiple sessions at once and verify their distribution across the servers.
A good practice is to open Microsoft Internet Explorer several times as a separate 
process (avoid using the "New Window" feature). In each browser window, we 
navigate to the URL that directs us to the Siebel Application Object Manager. In  
our example we open the URL for Siebel Call Center in American English.
http://appsrvrweb1/callcenter_enu
When the login page appears, we can log in with any valid user account (SADMIN 
should always work). This process is repeated until we have a number of open sessions 
for the same object manger (Siebel Call Center). These windws must be kept open.
At the Siebel Server Manager command line, we can enter a command similar  
to the following to verify the distribution of sessions across the servers:
list active sessions for comp sccobjmgr_enu show SV_NAME, TK_DISP_
RUNSTATE, OM_LOGIN
In the above example, we only want to see the Siebel Server name, the status  
of the sessions, and the user login name for all active sessions of the Siebel Call 
Center object manager. The following screenshot shows the result for the list 
active sessions command at the srvrmgr command line prompt:

Chapter 8
[ 239 ]
We can observe that three sessions are running. Two sessions are hosted by the 
EVAL_AUTO server and one is hosted by the Eval_1 server.
In the case of errors, we must carefully review all steps and consult the log iles  
of both SWSE and object managers.
On your demonstration machine, follow the steps described in the 
above section to conigure the SWSE for Siebel Native Load Balancing.
Installing additional language packs
To accommodate end users in non-English speaking countries, Oracle provides 
language packs for Siebel CRM software. Siebel 8.1.1 supports 22 languages  
and locale variants as per the following list:
Language
Three letter code
Siebel Description
Arabic
ARA
Arabic (Saudi)
Simpliied Chinese
CHS
Chinese (Simpliied)
Traditional Chinese
CHT
Chinese (Traditional)
Czech
CSY
Czech
Danish
DAN
Danish
Dutch
NLD
Dutch (Standard)
English
ENU
English (American)
Finnish
FIN
Finnish
French
FRA
French (Standard)
German
DEU 
German (Standard)
Hebrew
HEB
Hebrew
Italian
ITA
Italian (Standard)
Japanese
JPN
Japanese
Korean
KOR
Korean
Polish
PLK
Polish
European Portuguese
PTG
Portuguese (Standard)
Brazilian Portuguese
PTB
Portuguese (Brazilian)
Russian
RUS
Russian
Spanish
ESN
Spanish (Modern)
Swedish
SVE
Swedish

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 240 ]
Language
Three letter code
Siebel Description
Thai
THA
Thai
Turkish
TRK
Turkish
In the following section, we will discuss the process of obtaining and installing 
additional language packs.
For several reasons, including the fact that not all system messages 
are translated, we should always install the English language 
pack irst and then add other languages. This ensures that we can 
safely access all functionality even if language dependencies cause 
erroneous behavior on the Siebel application.
Downloading Siebel CRM language packs
If we need to download additional language packs, we do so by navigating to 
the Oracle E-Delivery website at http://edelivery.oracle.com. As discussed 
in Chapter 2, we must use a registered account and then select the Siebel CRM  
software packages for the operating system platform we need. The section that 
contains all the language packs for Siebel CRM 8.1.1.0 is named Siebel Business 
Applications (with Translations) Media Pack 8.1.1.0 Release. For Siebel server software, 
we need to download the respective Language Extension Pack separately. Siebel 
client software packages typically contain all language packs.
Even if we select an operating system type in the E-Delivery search, the language 
extension packs contain the installation archives for all platforms. It is therefore 
beneicial for both download time and disk space to use download management 
software such as Free Download Manager (http://freedownloadmanager.org), 
which allows for selecting just the contents in the download archive that we need, as 
shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 8
[ 241 ]
Adding language packs to existing  
Siebel installation images
Once we have downloaded the language extension packs for Siebel server software, 
we must use an Oracle recommended unzip tool to extract the installation packages 
(.jar iles). We should ensure that the .jar iles are transferred into the folder we 
use to store the base installer archives.
The Siebel Image Creator is used to extract the new content into the existing  
Siebel installation image folders. The following table describes the necessary steps  
to complete this process on Microsoft Windows operating systems:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Siebel Image Creator.
Double-click the Windows_ImageCreator.exe 
ile.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next
3
Display of options.
Choose Add language(s) to an existing image.
Click Next.
4
Specify the directory to which the 
installer images should be copied.
Example: C:\Siebel_Install_Image
Click Next
5
Language selection.
For example, select DEU - German 
(Standard).
Click Next.
6
Progress of the ile extraction 
process is displayed.
Wait for completion.
Note: In case the installer cannot locate the 
.jar ile, a prompt appears to navigate to the 
folder that contains the archive.
7
Success message is displayed.
Click Finish

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 242 ]
We can now verify that the Image Creator has extracted the language-speciic iles 
into new subdirectories of the Siebel installation images. The following screenshot 
shows the Siebel installation image for the Siebel Enterprise Server software 
containing four language speciic subdirectories for German (deu), English (enu), 
Spanish (esn), and Russian (rus), created by the Image Creator:
Use the instructions in the previous section to download 
additional language packs for the Siebel Enterprise Server 
and add them to the existing Siebel installation image.
Installing additional language packs for  
Siebel Enterprise Server software
The following table guides us through the process for Microsoft Windows  
operating systems. Similar steps have to be completed on Linux or other  
UNIX-based operating systems. This process has to be repeated on each  
machine that hosts Siebel Enterprise Server software.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Enterprise_Server folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Setup has detected one or more 
existing versions.
Select an existing instance to add language 
packs to.
Click Next.

Chapter 8
[ 243 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
4
Select Languages
Select one or more languages.
Click Next.
5
The installation progress is 
displayed.
Wait for the installation to inish.
6
The Coniguration Wizard for the 
Siebel Server is invoked by the 
installer.
Click Cancel to close the Coniguration 
Wizard. Using the coniguration wizard to 
add language support for a Siebel server is 
discussed later in this section.
7
The InstallShield wizard success 
dialog is displayed.
Click Finish.
The installer copies the iles necessary for language-speciic functionality into the 
existing installation folders. In addition, iles that contain language-speciic seed  
data and repository metadata are extracted into the Database Server Utilities 
(dbsrvr) directory.
The installation of additional language packs includes procedures to enable the 
language support for a speciic Siebel server as well as the import of the above 
mentioned data iles into the Siebel Database. The language pack installation  
is only complete when we execute these tasks:
• 
Add language support for Siebel servers
• 
Import language-speciic seed data into the Siebel database
• 
Import language-speciic repository metadata into the Siebel database
• 
Updating multilingual List of Values (MLOV) data
In the following section, we will discuss the procedures in detail.
Adding language support for a Siebel Server
If the Siebel server has been installed separately from the other Siebel server software 
products—also known as "stand-alone" installation—we must execute  
the Siebel Coniguration Wizard to add language support to it.
In other words, we use the coniguration wizard to generate additional  
language-speciic component deinitions, such as a Call Center Object Manager  
for German, and associate it to the Siebel Servers on the machine that the wizard  
is executed on.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 244 ]
The following table describes the process to add language support for a Siebel  
Server on Microsoft Windows operating systems. Similar steps must be executed  
on Linux or other UNIX-based operating systems.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Siebel Server Coniguration 
shortcut in the Windows start menu.
2
Select coniguration mode.
Select Conigure Product in Live Mode.
Click Next.
3
Coniguration Wizard Welcome Page
Select Add Language Support for the 
Siebel Server.
Click Next.
4
Gateway Name Server Authentication 
user name and password.
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Click Next.
5
Gateway Name Server hostname and 
port number.
Hostname: appsrvrgw1
Port: 2320
Click Next.
6
Siebel Enterprise Name
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Click Next.
7
Deployed Languages
Select one or more languages to add.
Click Next.
8
Summary
Verify the selections and values you 
provided.
Click Next.
9
Do you want to execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
10
Execution results are displayed.
Click OK.
11
The wizard jumps back to the 
coniguration mode selection page.
Select Exit Coniguration Wizard.
Click Next.
This process must be repeated on all machines that host a Siebel server. We will 
discuss veriication steps later in this section.
Importing language-speciic seed data  
into the Siebel database
The second post-installation step of adding language packs to an existing Siebel server 
installation is to import language-speciic seed data into the Siebel server database.

Chapter 8
[ 245 ]
Like any database-centric activity, this task is executed by the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard, which is invoked by and reads the output of the Siebel Database 
Coniguration Wizard. Details about the Siebel Upgrade Wizard are given  
in Chapter 4.
The following table entails the detailed steps and example entries for importing 
language-speciic seed data using the Siebel coniguration wizard on Microsoft 
Windows-based operating systems. Similar steps will have to be executed on Linux 
or other UNIX-based operating systems. This process must be repeated once for  
each additional language.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Database Server 
Coniguration shortcut in the 
Windows start menu.
2
Siebel Server directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's 
installation directory.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server Utilities 
directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Database 
Server Utilities installation folder. 
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise 
Edition.
Click Next.
5
Task selection.
Select Install Database.
Click Next.
6
Action selection.
Select Add a language to an existing 
Siebel Database
Click Next.
7
GRANTUSR.SQL
Select GRANTUSR.SQL has been 
run…
Click Next.
8
Select Base Language.
Select English (American)
Note: English should always be chosen 
as the base language.
Click Next.
9
Select Language to add.
Select German (Standard)
Click Next.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 246 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
10
ODBC Data Source Name
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN
Note: This is the name of the System 
DSN generated during coniguration  
of the Siebel Enterprise.
Click Next.
11
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Click Next.
12
Siebel Database Table Owner and 
Password
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Password: dQ7JXui
Click Next.
13
Repository Name
Keep the default (Siebel Repository)
Click Next.
14
Oracle parallel indexing
Keep the default (Does not use…)
Click Next.
15
Security group and log output 
directory
Keep the defaults.
Note the log output directory will 
become a subdirectory of the Siebel 
Server's LOG directory.
Click Next.
16
Apply coniguration changes.
Select Yes apply coniguration 
changes now.
Click Next.
17
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
18
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
19
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard is 
displayed.
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.
20
During the installation process, 
several command windows are 
opened.
Ensure that you do not close  
or make selections in any of the 
command windows.
Wait for the Siebel Upgrade Wizard  
to complete.
21
The coniguration wizard displays a 
message "Execution successful".
Click OK to conirm successful 
execution of the coniguration wizard.
22
The coniguration wizard jumps to 
the Siebel Server directory selection.
Click Cancel in the Siebel 
Coniguration Wizard dialog.

Chapter 8
[ 247 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
23
Conirm exiting the coniguration 
wizard.
Click Yes.
24
Siebel Upgrade Wizard displays 
"Complete".
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.
The Siebel Upgrade Wizards executes the following steps during the process:
• 
Install language-speciic seed data
• 
Deactivate non-multilingual List of Values (MLOV) seed data
We will discuss details of these steps next.
Installing language-speciic seed data
Some data used by Siebel applications is localized. The most prominent 
representatives of localized seed data are List of Values (LOV) records that  
contain the values displayed in the static pick lists across the Siebel user interface. 
The following screenshot shows the Account Type ield in the Siebel user interface 
as an example for a static pick list that contains preconigured values in American 
English that the end user can choose from:
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard invokes the necessary utilities to import  
the translated seed data from lat iles into the Siebel database.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 248 ]
Deactivating non-multilingual List of Values  
(MLOV) seed data
Even if translated seed data for static pick lists is imported by the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard, the localized content is in most cases not yet available to the end user 
because additional coniguration steps are required. In order to avoid problems  
with static pick lists such as values for multiple languages appearing in the user 
interface at the same time, the Siebel Upgrade Wizard ensures that the correct 
updates are made to deactivate the List of Values seed data that has not yet been 
conigured for Multilingual List of Values (MLOV). The following screenshot  
shows the List of Values administration view in the Siebel Web client after  
the import of German seed data:
We can observe that the German translations for the Account Type pick list 
are inactive (the Active lag is not set).
Importing language-speciic  
repository metadata
The Siebel metadata repository supports the localization of messages, labels, and 
captions displayed in the Siebel user interface. To enable easier and consistent 
development, the Symbolic String library is the major building block of repository 
localization. The screenshot below shows the Symbolic String object deinition in 
Siebel Tools with German (DEU) and American English (ENU) translations:

Chapter 8
[ 249 ]
Symbolic Strings serve as a common library of reusable, translatable strings that  
are used for labels, captions, and messages across all Siebel applications.
The following table describes the process to import language-speciic repository 
metadata into the Siebel database using the Siebel Coniguration Wizard  
and Siebel Upgrade Wizard:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard.
Click the Database Server Coniguration 
shortcut in the Windows start menu.
2
Siebel Server directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's 
installation directory.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server Utilities 
directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Database 
Server Utilities installation folder. 
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise Edition.
Click Next.
5
Task selection.
Select Import/Export Repository
Click Next.
6
Action selection.
Select Add a language to an existing 
Repository
Click Next.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 250 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Select Language to add.
Select German (Standard)
Click Next.
8
ODBC Data Source Name
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN
Note: This is the name of the System DSN 
generated during coniguration of the 
Siebel Enterprise.
Click Next.
9
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Click Next.
10
Siebel Database Table Owner and 
Password
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Password: dQ7JXui
Click Next.
11
Repository Name and import ile.
Keep the default (Siebel Repository)
Verify the path to the import ile represents 
the language (for example DEU)
Click Next.
12
Oracle parallel indexing
Keep the default (Does not use…).
Click Next.
13
Security group and log output 
directory.
Keep the defaults.
Note the log output directory will become 
a subdirectory of the Siebel Server's LOG 
directory.
Click Next.
14
Apply coniguration changes.
Select Yes apply coniguration changes 
now.
Click Next.
15
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
16
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
17
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard is 
displayed.
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade Wizard 
dialog.
18
During the installation process, 
several command windows are 
opened.
Ensure that you do not close or make 
selections in any of the command 
windows.
Wait for the Siebel Upgrade Wizard  
to complete.

Chapter 8
[ 251 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
19
The coniguration wizard displays 
a message "Execution successful".
Click OK to conirm successful execution 
of the coniguration wizard.
20
The coniguration wizard jumps to 
the Siebel Server directory selection.
Click Cancel in the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard dialog.
21
Conirm exiting the coniguration 
wizard.
Click Yes
22
Siebel Upgrade Wizard displays 
"Complete".
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade Wizard 
dialog.
Enabling multilingual List of Values
Every time we add an additional language pack to the Siebel server 
infrastructure, we must ensure that existing records are correctly updated  
to relect the new localized List of Values data.
Enabling multilingual List of Values requires additional coniguration steps to be 
carried out by developers in Siebel Tools. This coniguration is out of the scope of 
this book but an example shall be given using one of the preconigured multilingual 
List of Value types, namely the BI Publisher Report output type. The following 
screenshot shows the deinition of the OUTPUT_TYPE column in the 
S_XMLP_REP_TMPL table in Siebel Tools.
We can observe that the LOV Type for the column is set to XMLP_RPT_OUTPUT_
TYPE and the LOV Bounded lag is active. In addition, the Translation Table Name 
property is set to S_LST_OF_VAL, which is the name of the table that holds all List 
of Values entries. These settings enable the Siebel application to dynamically look up 
translated values in static pick lists depending on the language of the object manager.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 252 ]
The settings in the above example have been preconigured by Oracle engineering 
and similar settings must be applied to other columns by developers if enabling 
multilingual List of Values for the respective static pick list is a necessary requirement.
The following screenshot shows the List of Values entries for the BI Publisher 
Report output type pick list in the Siebel Web Client:
Both the German and English-American entry are set to active because the process  
of enabling multilingual List of Values has been completed successfully.  
Note: "XMLP" or "XML Publisher" is the old product name for Oracle BI Publisher.
The following table describes the process of using the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
and Siebel Upgrade Wizard to update the Siebel database for multilingual List  
of Values. This process must be repeated for each language pack installation  
and after each MLOV coniguration carried out by developers.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration 
Wizard.
Click the Database Server Coniguration shortcut 
in the Windows start menu.
2
Siebel Server directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's installation 
directory.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server 
Utilities directory.
Provide the path to the Siebel Database Server 
Utilities installation folder. 
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise Edition.
Click Next.
5
Task selection.
Select Run Database Utilities.
Click Next.
6
Action selection.
Select Multilingual List of Value Conversion.
Click Next.

Chapter 8
[ 253 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Action selection.
Select Translate.
Click Next.
8
Select base Language.
Select English (American)
Click Next.
9
ODBC Data Source Name
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN
Note: This is the name of the System DSN generated 
during coniguration of the Siebel Enterprise.
Click Next.
10
Siebel Database User Name 
and Password
User Name: SADMIN
Password: TJay357D
Click Next.
11
Siebel Database Table Owner 
and Password
Table Owner: SIEBEL
Password: dQ7JXui
Click Next.
12
Repository Name
Keep the default (Siebel Repository)
Click Next.
13
Oracle parallel indexing.
Keep the default (Does not use…)
Click Next.
14
Security group and log  
output directory.
Keep the defaults.
Note the log output directory will become a 
subdirectory of the Siebel Server's LOG directory.
Click Next.
15
Apply coniguration changes.
Select Yes apply coniguration changes now.
Click Next.
16
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
17
Do you want to  
execute coniguration?
Click Yes.
18
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard  
is displayed.
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade Wizard dialog.
19
During the installation 
process, several command 
windows are opened.
Ensure that you do not close or make selections in 
any of the command windows.
Wait for the Siebel Upgrade Wizard to complete.
20
The coniguration wizard 
displays a message 
"Execution successful".
Click OK to conirm successful execution of the 
coniguration wizard.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 254 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
21
The coniguration wizard 
jumps to the Siebel Server 
directory selection.
Click Cancel in the Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
dialog.
22
Conirm exiting the 
coniguration wizard.
Click Yes.
23
Siebel Upgrade Wizard 
displays "Complete".
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard executes the following steps during this process:
• 
Validates MLOV inconsistencies
• 
Fixes referential integrity
• 
Updates preconigured MLOV columns to language independent code
• 
Activates List of Values data for non-base languages
In summary, the Upgrade Wizard updates the List of Values records to an active 
state for all columns that are deined for MLOV translation in the Siebel Repository. 
We must remember that the above process has to be repeated if developers modify 
the MLOV coniguration in Siebel Tools.
Installing additional language packs  
for the Siebel Web Server Extension
The following table describes the procedure to install additional language packs 
and create language-speciic virtual web server directories on the web server 
hosting the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE). This process, similar on Microsoft 
Windows and Linux or other UNIX-based operating systems, has to be executed  
on each machine hosting the SWSE.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Web_Server_Extension 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Setup has detected one or more 
existing versions.
Select an existing instance to add language 
packs to.
Click Next.

Chapter 8
[ 255 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
4
Language selection.
Select one or more languages.
Click Next.
5
Installation progress is displayed.
Wait for the installer to continue.
6
The Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard is launched automatically.
Continue with the next steps.
7
Task Selection
Select Add Language Support for the 
SWSE Coniguration.
Click Next.
8
Deployed Languages
Select one or more languages.
Click Next.
9
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
10
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
11
Several command windows  
are opened automatically.
Wait for all command windows to close.
12
Coniguration Wizard displays 
successful execution.
Click OK.
13
The InstallShield wizard success 
dialog is displayed.
Click Finish.
As the wizard modiies the SWSE coniguration, we must restart the web  
server service after the successful execution of the language pack installation.
Verifying the successful language pack 
installation for Siebel server software
In order to verify the successful installation of one or more additional language 
packs for a Siebel enterprise, we should follow the procedure described below:
1. Restart the Siebel Enterprise
2. Log on to the new application object manager
3. Verify UI translation
4. Verify multilingual List of Values
Next, we will discuss each step in detail.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 256 ]
Restarting the Siebel Enterprise
In order to make all changes available to each and every process, it is highly 
recommended to execute a complete restart of the entire Siebel enterprise.  
To accomplish this, we follow this procedure
1. Stop all web servers hosting the SWSE.
2. Stop all Siebel servers.
3. Stop the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
4. Start the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
5. Start all Siebel servers.
6. Start all web servers hosting the SWSE.
Furthermore, we must ensure that the processes have enough time to start up 
properly. We can monitor the CPU usage of the systems and review the log iles  
if we are insecure about the duration and success of the start up procedure.
Logging on to the new application object manager
Once the Siebel enterprise is restarted, we can navigate to a URL that directs us 
to one of the newly conigured object managers. In the below example, we use  
the German object manager:
http://appsrvrweb1/callcenter_deu
Note that we use _deu as a sufix, which is the default language abbreviation 
for German. Once the login page is displayed, we should log in as an  
administrative user and click the Site Map icon in the application toolbar.  
The following screenshot shows a portion of the Site Map of the German version  
of Siebel Call Center:

Chapter 8
[ 257 ]
We can verify that all display values like menu item captions, screen tab labels,  
or site map entries are translated.
The Siebel object manager only supports one language at a 
time—speciied by the Language parameter. The object manager 
will read the Siebel Repository File (SRF) from the subdirectory 
in the OBJECTS folder, which is named after the language code.
Verifying UI translation
In order to verify that all translations are properly loaded, we can press CTRL + H 
to open the Siebel online help page. It should appear in the object manager's 
language as well. The following screenshot  shows a portion of the Siebel online  
help page of the German version of Siebel Call Center:
Verifying multilingual List of Values
Several system-related entities such as Assignment Manager rules, BI Publisher 
report templates, or Server administration are preconigured by Oracle to support 
multilingual List of Values.
It is therefore a good idea to navigate to the BI Publisher Template Registration  
view and verify that the list of values data is translated.
If you have dificulties navigating between Siebel views in a foreign 
language, you can use the technical view name in a URL similar to the 
following to direct the browser to the desired view:
http://appsrvrweb1/callcenter_deu/start.swe?SWECmd=Got
oView&SWEView=Report+Template+Registration+Admin+View
The SWEView parameter takes the technical view name (which you can 
obtain using the "About View" option in the help menu or from Siebel 
Tools) with spaces replaced by plus signs.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 258 ]
Using the Site Map or the technique described in the Did you know? box, we 
navigate to the BI Publisher Report Template Registration view and verify that 
the value for "All" in the output type ield is translated to the selected language. 
The following screenshot shows the German translation of the BI Publisher Report 
Template Registration view:
We can conirm that the value Alle in the output type ield (labeled Ausgabetyp) 
represents the German translation of "All" in the English application. Furthermore, 
we can use this view to verify the correct import of language-speciic seed data by 
reviewing the data in the lower list applet. It correctly contains the report name to 
appear in the Report menu in German and English.
Using the tables in this section as a guide, install one or more 
additional language packs on your demonstration system. Verify 
the installation by following the instructions in the above section.

Chapter 8
[ 259 ]
Installing additional language packs for  
the Siebel Developer or Mobile Web Client
If we wish to provide translated content to the Siebel Developer or Mobile 
Web clients, we have to use the Oracle Universal Installer to apply additional 
language packs.
The table below describes the procedure of adding additional language packs 
to the Siebel Developer or Mobile Web clients:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Oracle Universal 
Installer.
Double-click the oui.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Web_Client/Disk1/install 
folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Specify the home directory.
Select the appropriate Oracle home from the 
Name dropdown list and verify the path.
Note: We must select an existing 
installation.
Click Next.
4
Prerequisite checks.
The installer performs prerequisite  
checks. Verify that all checks are  
passed successfully.
Click Next.
5
Select Languages
For example, select German.
Click Next.
6
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Install.
7
The installation progress is 
displayed.
Wait for the installation to inish.
8
Success Message
Click Exit and Yes to leave the installer.
The installer copies language-speciic iles into the existing Siebel client installation 
folders and creates new Windows start menu shortcuts for the selected languages.

Special Siebel Server Conigurations
[ 260 ]
Verifying the successful language pack 
installation for the Siebel Developer Web Client
In order to verify the successful installation of an additional language pack for the 
Siebel Developer Web Client, we can open the Windows start menu for the Siebel 
Web Client and click one of the newly created shortcuts for the selected language. For 
example we can launch the Siebel Pharma - DEU shortcut if we installed the German 
language pack.
We should be able to log in as SADMIN to the Server data source and verify the 
availability of the application in the installed language.
About language packs for Siebel Tools
Oracle provides language packs for all Siebel applications, including Siebel Tools. 
Following the procedure for Siebel Developer or Mobile Web clients, we could  
also install a translated version of the Siebel Tools development environment. 
However, due to the fact that the user interface of Siebel Tools is then no longer 
consistent with the documentation and online help, this step is rarely considered.
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed two typical tasks in the life of a Siebel CRM 
administrator. In the irst half of the chapter, we learned how to install and  
conigure additional Siebel servers to ensure high availability, performance,  
and failover security.
We also discussed how to enable Siebel Native Load Balancing if the same  
processes are available on multiple Siebel servers.
The second part of the chapter was dedicated to the installation of additional 
language packs to support localized versions of Siebel applications. We learned  
how to install and conigure language packs for Siebel Enterprise server software,  
the Siebel database, the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE), and the Siebel 
Developer or Mobile Web Client.
The chapter also clariied the topic of multilingual List of Values (MLOV) and 
explained the necessary steps to successfully conigure the Siebel application  
to support translated values in static pick lists.
In the next chapter, we will discuss the techniques of Siebel server management.

Siebel Server Management
Once the irst Siebel servers within an enterprise are installed and operational, we 
reach the maintenance phase of a project. Being a Siebel administrator, our task 
list now includes the correct coniguration of server and component parameters as 
well as the ability to identify performance bottlenecks or erroneous situations. This 
chapter introduces Siebel server management skills such as:
• 
Understanding servers, components, and parameters
• 
Using server management screens in the Siebel client
• 
Using command line tools for Siebel server management
Along with explanations of the tools that an administrator can use to manage a Siebel 
enterprise, we will also discover typical server management scenarios such as:
• 
Listing and reviewing information about the Siebel enterprise
• 
Backing up the enterprise coniguration
• 
Listing and modifying parameters
• 
Creating and modifying component deinitions
• 
Synchronizing batch components
• 
Controlling assignment of component groups to Siebel servers
• 
Setting the start up mode of server components
• 
Controlling server components
• 
Creating job templates
• 
Running jobs for batch and background components

Siebel Server Management
[ 262 ]
Understanding servers, components,  
and parameters
As we learned in previous chapters, a Siebel enterprise is a collection of Siebel 
servers that share the following characteristics:
• 
Their conigurations are stored by the same Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
They connect to the same Siebel database and ile system
In order to better understand the relationships between the Siebel Servers in an 
enterprise, their components and parameters, it is best to examine the Enterprise 
Explorer view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen in the Siebel  
Web Client.
We can access that view by logging on to the Siebel Web Client using an 
administrative user account. Then, we navigate to the Site Map, select the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen and click the hyperlink for the 
Enterprise Explorer view. The following screenshot shows the partially expanded 
Siebel Enterprise Explorer tree applet in that view:
We can observe that a Siebel enterprise consists of the following:
• 
Servers
• 
Component groups

Chapter 9
[ 263 ]
• 
Component deinitions
• 
Enterprise parameters
• 
System alerts
• 
Enterprise proiles
Next, we will discuss each of these major building blocks of a Siebel Enterprise  
in more detail.
Servers
As we can conirm by examining the Enterprise Explorer tree, multiple Siebel servers 
can be members of a Siebel Enterprise. Each Siebel server has one or more component 
groups assigned, which results in a list of components that the server hosts.
Furthermore, parameters and event log levels can be set at the server level. In the 
following sections of this chapter, we will discuss the coniguration of Siebel servers 
in greater detail.
Component groups
A component group is—as the name suggests—a collection of components. Grouping 
components allows for better manageability. The preconigured Siebel enterprise 
for Siebel Industry Applications contains more than ifty component groups. The 
following screenshot shows the list of component groups for the selected enterprise:

Siebel Server Management
[ 264 ]
We can click the Component Groups folder in the explorer tree to obtain the list 
as depicted. The components within a component group serve a common purpose, 
such as supporting the deployment of application conigurations (Application 
Deployment Manager group) or assignment of data to users or organization 
(Assignment Manager group).
Component groups are the vehicles that enable Siebel CRM functionality—
implemented as components—on Siebel servers. Later in this chapter, we will  
learn how to assign and enable component groups on Siebel servers.
The following table describes the most important component groups—in 
alphabetical order—available in Siebel CRM version 8:
Name
Alias
Supported Functionality
Application 
Deployment Manager
ADM
Deployment of coniguration changes from 
source to target enterprises.
Assignment 
Management
AsgnMgmt
Automatic assignment of data to employees, 
positions, or organizations.
Auxiliary System 
Management
SystemAux
System Component Group—enabled  
by default.
Communications 
Management
CommMgmt
In- and outbound communication across 
various channels (Email, Fax, Pager).
Data Quality
DataQual
Integration with third-party data cleansing 
and enrichment software.
Enterprise 
Application 
Integration
EAI
Base components for enterprise application 
integration (EAI). Supports queue-based 
transports such as IBM Websphere MQ  
or JMS.
Field Service
FieldSvc
Siebel Field Service application object 
manager and support for automated 
scheduling optimization.
Marketing Object 
Manager
MktgOM
Siebel Marketing application  
object managers.
PIM Server 
Integration 
Management
PIMSI
Integration with Microsoft Exchange Server.
Search Processing
Search
Integration with third-party search engines.
Siebel Call Center
CallCenter
Siebel Call Center application  
object managers.
Siebel CME
Communications
Siebel Communications, Media, and Energy 
application object managers.

Chapter 9
[ 265 ]
Name
Alias
Supported Functionality
Siebel eAutomotive
eAutomotive
Siebel eAutomotive application  
object manager.
Siebel eChannel
eChannel
Siebel Partner Relationship Management 
application object managers.
Siebel eDocuments
eDocuments
Generation of ofice documents such as 
letters, proposals, or agreements.
Siebel Financial 
Services
Fins
Siebel Financial Services application  
object managers.
Siebel ISS
ISS
Siebel Interactive Selling Suite (ISS) object 
managers and components.
Siebel Life Sciences
LifeSciences
Siebel Life Sciences application  
object managers.
Siebel Loyalty
Loyalty
Siebel Loyalty application object managers.
Siebel Public Sector
PublicSector
Siebel Public Sector application object 
managers.
Siebel Remote
Remote
Synchronization with remote clients.
Siebel Sales
Sales
Siebel Sales application object managers.
Siebel Universal 
Customer Master
UCM
Siebel Universal Customer Master 
application object manager and supporting 
components.
Siebel Wireless
Wireless
Siebel Wireless application object managers 
for support of mobile web-enabled devices.
System Management
System
System Component Group—enabled  
by default.
Worklow 
Management
Workflow
Executing Siebel worklows.
XMLP Report
XMLPReport
For generating Oracle BI Publisher reports 
(XMLP or "XML Publisher" is the old 
product name for Oracle BI Publisher).
As we can see from the table above, there are many component groups that mainly 
hold the object manager components for speciic Siebel applications while other 
groups enable cross-application functionality such as integration with external 
systems or reporting.
The two system component groups (System Management and Auxiliary System 
Management) are enabled on each Siebel server by default and should never  
be disabled.

Siebel Server Management
[ 266 ]
Component deinitions
Each component, no matter what speciic functionality it implements, is deined only 
once for the entire enterprise. The result of this is a very high level of reusability. 
Components can run multiple times on any server within the enterprise but they  
all inherit their parameter settings from an enterprise-wide template—the 
component deinition.
In more technical terms, a component is a type of program with a speciic set of 
parameters that can be instantiated on one or more servers in the enterprise.
The core Siebel server technology is implemented in the C++ 
programming language. When the C++ code represented as 
.dll (dynamic link library) iles on Microsoft Windows or .so 
(shared object) iles on Linux and other UNIX-based operating 
systems is executed, a task is instantiated on the Siebel server. 
The task is also visible as an operating system process or thread.
In order to examine the component deinitions for a Siebel enterprise, we can use  
the Component Deinitions view in the Administration - Server Coniguration 
screen of the Siebel Web Client. The out-of-the-box coniguration for a Siebel 
enterprise contains over one hundred component deinitions, most of them 
language-speciic. The following screenshot shows the Component Deinitions 
view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen:
The view displays the list of component deinitions for the current Siebel enterprise 
as well as the parameter deinitions for the selected component deinition.

Chapter 9
[ 267 ]
A component deinition is speciied by the following:
• 
A unique name and alias (short name)
• 
Run mode
• 
Component group membership
• 
Component type
• 
List of parameters that deine the behavior of the component
Next, we will discuss the component deinition run modes and component types.
Component deinition run modes
The run mode of a component deinition drives the general behaviour of the server 
component. There are three run modes:
• 
Background
• 
Batch
• 
Interactive
A background component is deined as a constantly running process which 
performs tasks that require regular attention. Examples of typical Siebel background 
components are the various "EAI Receivers" that enable integration with other 
enterprise applications. We can imagine that if a Siebel application should be able 
to process incoming data at any given point in time, a receiver must be constantly 
listening for data sent by an external system. To avoid the component consuming 
too much CPU time while "waiting", a Sleep Time parameter controls the amount of 
time that the component remains in a "sleeping" state before "waking up" and doing 
the actual work.
Batch components are typically invoked by an administrator, an end-user initiated 
worklow, or by schedule. Each task for these components has a deined start time 
and only consumes CPU and memory of the host machine when it is active. Once the 
task is complete, the operating system process is inished as well. Examples for batch 
components are the Enterprise Integration Manager (EIM), which supports import, 
export, delete, and merge of mass data or the Database Extract component, which is 
used to extract the initial database snapshot for mobile clients.
Application object managers are the dominant example for interactive components. 
Their main purpose is to wait for incoming requests from either the end users or 
external systems and handle the request according to the metadata information in 
the Siebel repository ile (.srf).

Siebel Server Management
[ 268 ]
Component types
The component type property of a component deinition deines both the base 
functionality of the component and the list of parameters for all components of 
that type. When we explore the list of component deinitions for a Siebel enterprise 
we ind. For example, dozens of component deinitions that have a type of 
"Application Object Manager". Closer inspection of the parameters list for each of 
these component deinitions reveals that they have the same parameters albeit with 
slightly different values.
The generic component types used to deine the majority of components in a Siebel 
Enterprise are listed below:
• 
Application Object Manager
• 
Business Service Manager
• 
Enterprise Application Integration Receiver
Application Object Managers, as discussed above, serve as request handlers for end 
users or external systems. The main distinguishing parameters for application object 
managers are Application Name and Language Code.
Components of the Business Service Manager type allow the Siebel server to 
execute code implemented as a so-called business service method as a component. 
The majority of Siebel functionality is implemented as business services. Developers 
can write custom business services to implement additional functionality. The 
Business Service Name and Method parameters distinguish component deinitions 
of this type.
As discussed above, Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) Receivers are 
components that serve as listeners for incoming requests and data from external 
systems. Siebel CRM supports the following protocols for EAI message exchange:
• 
MQ (IBM Websphere Message Queuing)
• 
MSMQ (Microsoft Message Queuing)
• 
JMS (Java Message Service)
• 
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
• 
File
• 
SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol)
Apart from the three component types discussed above, we can ind many others 
that are, most of the time, speciic for one component deinition. These component 
deinitions, such as the Siebel Connection Broker or other system-related 
components, use specialized code to implement their functionality.

Chapter 9
[ 269 ]
Later in this chapter, we will learn how to create additional component deinitions, 
which will deepen our understanding of these major building blocks of Siebel server-
side functionality.
Enterprise parameters
Many parameters have the same value for all component deinitions. Good examples 
for enterprise-wide parameters are Username and Password. They deine the name 
and password of the database account that is used by Siebel processes to connect to 
the Siebel database.
When these parameters are deined on the enterprise level and are not changed at 
a lower level such as the server or component level, the value of each parameter is 
inherited by subordinate members of the hierarchy.
To view the list of parameters for the current enterprise, we can navigate to the 
Parameters view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen in the 
Siebel Web Client. The following screenshot shows the parameter list for the 
SIEBELEVAL enterprise:
The User Name parameter is selected and we can observe by its description that it 
denominates the database username for connections to the Siebel database.

Siebel Server Management
[ 270 ]
Enterprise proiles
Enterprise proiles are reusable collections of parameters. A good example is 
the ServerDataSrc proile which—very much like in a Siebel Developer client's 
coniguration ile—contains the information to allow the object manager to connect 
to the server database.
We can investigate all enterprise proiles for a given Siebel enterprise by navigating 
to the Proile Coniguration view of the Administration - Server Coniguration 
screen in the Siebel Web Client, which is shown in the following screenshot:
The view displays all enterprise proile deinitions for the selected enterprise. The 
Server Datasource proile is currently selected and a part of the list of parameters for 
this proile is visible. We can observe that the DB Connector DLL parameter has a 
value of sscdo90. A similar parameter (DLL) exists in the [ServerDataSrc] section in 
the Siebel Developer Web client's coniguration ile. The following screenshot shows 
the [ServerDataSrc] section of the siebel.cfg ile, which is the coniguration ile 
used for the Siebel Sales application:

Chapter 9
[ 271 ]
We can observe by comparing the values of the DLL parameters that sections in 
client coniguration iles and enterprise proiles serve a similar purpose.
Enterprise proiles are typically referenced by their alias name in server or 
component parameters. For example, the Call Center Object Manager component 
deinition references the ServerDataSrc proile in its data source parameters. The 
following screenshot shows a portion of the Component Deinitions view and the 
OM - Named Data Source name parameter for the Call Center Object Manager 
(ENU) component deinition:
The value of this parameter is a comma-separated list of names of enterprise proiles 
that contain the connectivity information. All other application object manager 
deinitions reference the same enterprise proile to obtain the connection information 
for the server database. Having to set connection parameter for the server database 
only in one place implements a high level of reusability.

Siebel Server Management
[ 272 ]
Enterprise proiles are also known as "named subsystems", which is the 
term used in the Siebel Server Manager command line utility. The word 
"named" is an abbreviation for "name daemon" and refers to the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server service.
System alerts
System alerts are a special type of enterprise proile. Similar to all other enterprise 
proiles, they are reusable collections of parameters. Their speciality lies within the 
purpose of deining a list of e-mail recipients—typically administrators—who need 
to be notiied in case of an error situation on one of the servers.
We can ind a default system alert deinition when we navigate to the System 
Alerts folder in the Enterprise Explorer view of the Administration - Server 
Coniguration screen.
System alerts can be referenced by specifying their name as the value of the 
Notiication Handler parameter of the component deinition. As a result, an e-mail 
will be sent to the recipients deined in the system alert proile when the component's 
tasks exit with an error.
Siebel enterprise hierarchy and  
parameter inheritance
As we have now discussed the major building blocks of a Siebel enterprise, we 
ind that they are arranged in a speciic hierarchy. This hierarchy also deines the 
inheritance of parameter values from higher levels to lower levels. The following 
diagram depicts the information available from the Enterprise Explorer view:

Chapter 9
[ 273 ]
We can summarize our exploration of the Siebel enterprise structure as follows 
(using the numbers in the diagram):
1. A Siebel enterprise contains one or more Siebel servers.
2. More than 50 default component groups are part of a freshly installed  
Siebel enterprise.
3. Each component group contains one or more component deinitions. 
Component deinitions also deine the parameterization of server processes 
at the enterprise level.
4. Each enterprise has a preconigured list of global parameters.
5. Enterprise proiles (including System Alerts) are reusable collections of 
parameters and are typically referenced at lower levels.
6. We can assign multiple component groups to each Siebel server and each 
component group can be assigned to more than one Siebel server.

Siebel Server Management
[ 274 ]
7. As a result of the component group assignment, each Siebel server hosts a 
speciic set of components. Component parameters can be individually set on 
each Siebel server.
8. When a component—representing program code—is executed on a Siebel 
server, a task is instantiated. We can pass speciic parameter values to a task 
before it starts.
When we observe and rearrange the different levels of parameters in the  
above diagram, we ind the following chain of parameter value inheritance in  
a Siebel enterprise:
If a parameter with the same name exists in a lower level and has not been changed 
at that lower level, it inherits its value from the parameter in the upper level. If we 
change a parameter at a lower level, for example at the server component level, this 
is considered a parameter override. In that case, the chain of inheritance is broken 
and the parameter must now be managed on the level that it has been set on.
An administrator must therefore consider any changes to parameters very carefully. 
In general, setting parameter values at higher levels is recommended in order to 
avoid repetitive work at lower levels. If for any reason we wish to reestablish the 
chain of inheritance for a parameter, we must use the Delete Parameter Override 
command from the applet menu. The following screenshot shows the Notiication 
Handler parameter at the server level:

Chapter 9
[ 275 ]
The command Delete Parameter Override—visible in the screenshot in the 
context menu —can be used to delete the overridden value at the current level and 
reestablish inheritance of the parameter value from upper levels.
On your demonstration system use the Administration 
- Server Coniguration screen in the Siebel Web Client 
to verify the indings in the previous section.
Using server management screens  
in the Siebel client
Each standard Siebel application is shipped with two screens that are intended to 
support administrative users in their daily routine of coniguring and managing 
the Siebel enterprise. The beneit of using a graphical user interface lies within the 
similarities to other Siebel screens with regard to querying for data, comparing and 
visualizing data, and so forth. The two screens provided by Oracle are:
• 
Administration - Server Coniguration
• 
Administration - Server Management
Next, we will discuss the most important aspects of these two administrative screens.
Even if the look and feel of the server administration views is similar to 
other Siebel views, the data displayed comes from the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server. This is a nice showcase for the capability of the Siebel 
CRM framework to connect to external systems and provide access to 
their data and functionality via a single user interface.
However, because of the fact that the Siebel Gateway Name Server is not 
a relational database management system, we may encounter dificulties 
when trying to use special query techniques such as wildcards or 
function calls.

Siebel Server Management
[ 276 ]
Using the Administration - Server 
Coniguration screen
In the above sections of this chapter, we have already used some views of the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen to verify the hierarchical relationships 
and properties of a Siebel enterprise's building blocks. We can access the screen 
by logging in to a Siebel application using an administrative user account and 
navigating to the Site Map.
In the following, we will discuss the functionality in the different views of that screen.
Backing up the Siebel enterprise coniguration
Before making major changes to the coniguration of a Siebel enterprise, it is highly 
recommended to back up the existing coniguration. As we learned in previous 
chapters, the entire enterprise coniguration is stored in a text ile named siebns.
dat. The ile is managed by the Siebel Gateway Name Server and must not be 
modiied manually.
To allow easy access to the backup functionality, all enterprise list applets in the 
server coniguration views have a button labelled Backup Enterprise, as shown in 
the following screenshot:
Any time we wish to save the current enterprise coniguration, we simply click the 
button. The browser status bar will display "Backup Enterprise Server is completed 
successfully" once the backup ile is created. We can verify the existence of the 
backup ile in the ADMIN folder (on Microsoft Windows) or the sys folder (on UNIX-
based operating systems) of the Siebel Gateway Name Server's installation directory. 
The ilename will have a sufix containing the timestamp of the ile creation.

Chapter 9
[ 277 ]
Because of the sensitive nature of the siebns.dat ile, the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server automatically backs up the ile frequently. But 
because it keeps only the last ive versions and the backup interval is 
rather short it is very likely that the last "working" version is overwritten.
For this reason, we should always create a manual backup of the 
siebns.dat ile following the procedure described in the above section.
Restoring the Siebel enterprise coniguration
If for any reason we have to restore the enterprise coniguration to an earlier state, 
we have to complete the procedure below:
1. Stop all Siebel servers in the enterprise.
2. Stop the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
3. Rename the existing siebns.dat ile to siebns.dat.notused (or similar).
4. Rename the backup ile to siebns.dat.
5. Start the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
6. Start all Siebel servers.
After the Siebel enterprise is fully started, we should verify that the correct 
coniguration has been loaded by navigating to the Administration - Server 
Coniguration views. We will now discuss these views in detail.
Enterprise Explorer
The Enterprise Explorer view has already been discussed above. Its main purpose 
is to provide insight into the hierarchical structure of the current Siebel enterprise, 
which is facilitated by a tree applet.
Even if the modiication of data such as enabling or disabling component groups or 
setting parameter values is supported, the Enterprise Explorer view is typically used 
in a read-only manner.

Siebel Server Management
[ 278 ]
Enterprises - Component Groups
By navigating to the Enterprises - Component Groups view, we can access the 
following information and functionality:
• 
List of all component groups and their enterprise-wide state (enabled  
or disabled)
• 
List of all components for the selected component group
• 
List of all Siebel servers and the component group assignment and state of 
the selected component group to each server
The following screenshot shows the Enterprises - Component Groups view in the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen:
The key functionality of this view is to assign and enable component groups for 
speciic Siebel servers, thus deining the role of each server and the functionality 
hosted by that server in the enterprise.
A component group must be assigned to a server (the Assigned lag is checked) 
before it can be enabled. When a component group is assigned but not enabled on 
a Siebel server, it is still possible to adjust some settings for components on that 
server. For example, the component start up mode can be set to manual or automatic 
(component start up modes will be discussed later in this chapter). Only when a 
component group is assigned and enabled to a Siebel server, can the components 
within that group execute as tasks on that server.

Chapter 9
[ 279 ]
The following procedure describes the enablement of a component group on a  
Siebel server:
1. In the Component Groups list, query for the desired component group.
2. Ensure that the correct component group is selected.
3. In the Component Group Assignments list in the lower right of the view, 
select the desired server.
4. Click the Enable button in the Component Group Assignments list to enable 
the selected component.
5. Restart the system service for the selected Siebel Server.
If we wish to disable a component group on a Siebel server, we must use the 
Disable button in the Component Group Assignments list. Furthermore, we can use 
the Unassign button to remove the assignment of a component group to a Siebel 
server. When a component group is unassigned, it is also disabled. As a result, the 
functionality provided by the components of that group becomes unavailable on that 
Siebel server when it is restarted.
Restarting Siebel servers after changing component group assignments is necessary 
because of the fact that a Siebel server connects to the Siebel Gateway Name server 
only once during its start up phase to obtain its coniguration.
All component groups are assigned but not enabled by 
default for each Siebel server.
Component groups can also be enabled or disabled on an 
enterprise-wide level. Disabling a component group for the 
entire enterprise would make the respective components 
unavailable on all servers after restarting the services.
Enterprises - Component Deinitions
The next view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen is the Component 
Deinitions view. In this view, we can examine and modify all component deinitions 
and their parameters for the current enterprise.
The following tasks are typically carried out in this view:
• 
Deactivating or activating component deinitions on an enterprise-wide level
• 
Creating new component deinitions
• 
Reconiguring component deinitions
• 
Modifying parameters for component deinitions
• 
Deleting parameter overrides on the component deinition level

Siebel Server Management
[ 280 ]
When modifying parameters in this view, we must consider that—due to the 
inheritance principle—the new parameter value will affect any component instance 
of that component deinition on any Siebel server where it is enabled.
The moment when the parameter change is effective depends on the parameter type. 
We can verify this for each parameter in the form applet in the lower-right corner of 
the view. The following screenshot shows this form applet:
In the above example, the Application Title parameter of an application object 
manager component deinition is shown in the form applet. In the Effective 
section in the right half of the form, we can observe that any change made to the 
parameter will be effective At Next Task, which translates to "when a new session 
is established" for application object managers.
As we can observe on the above screenshot, there are ive levels of effectiveness 
of parameter changes:
• 
Immediately
• 
At Next Task (or session)
• 
At Component Restart
• 
At Server Restart
• 
Requires Reconiguration
While the irst four levels are somewhat self-explanatory, the ifth one ("Requires 
Reconiguration") might need some more insight. We can use the context menu on 
the component deinition list to access the following commands:
• 
Start Reconiguration
• 
Commit Reconiguration
• 
Cancel Reconiguration

Chapter 9
[ 281 ]
The concept of reconiguring component deinitions means that an administrator  
can modify one or more parameters of a component deinition without affecting 
current user sessions. We must follow the procedure below to reconigure a 
component deinition:
1. Select the desired component deinition (typically, an application  
object manager).
2. Right-click the component deinition and select Start Reconiguration.
3. Ensure that the component deinition is selected and has a state  
of "Reconiguring".
4. Modify the parameter values.
5. Right-click the component deinition and select Commit Reconiguration.
6. Ensure that the component deinition state changes to "Active".
7. Allow the server to apply the reconiguration (approx. 1 minute).
8. Test the reconiguration by logging in to the application.
The beneit of using the reconiguration technique is that end users do not have to 
interrupt their sessions. Existing sessions will use the old parameter set while new 
sessions will use the modiied parameter set. We can use this technique for any 
coniguration change that allows the parallel usage of old and new parameter values.
Enterprises - Parameters
The Enterprises - Parameters view allows us to list and modify all parameters for the 
selected Siebel enterprise.
When viewing or searching for parameters, we should consider that there are three 
levels of visibility for parameters and relevant buttons on the parameter lists allow 
us to switch between these levels. The following screenshot shows the Enterprise 
Parameters list applet as an example for all parameter list applets in the Siebel server 
coniguration screen:

Siebel Server Management
[ 282 ]
The following table describes how to use the Reset, Advanced, and Hidden buttons 
to switch between different lists of parameters:
Button
List display
Advanced
Advanced parameters are displayed.
Hidden
Hidden parameters are displayed.
Reset
Normal parameters are displayed (Note: The Reset label is ambiguous, no 
"reset" whatsoever takes place).
Apart from viewing or modifying enterprise parameter values, this view also 
provides the ability to delete parameter overrides at the enterprise level.
Enterprises - Proile Coniguration
The Proile Coniguration view of the Administration - Server Coniguration 
screen allows us to create or modify enterprise proiles. The concept of enterprise 
proiles—being reusable collections of parameters—has already been discussed in 
this chapter.
Enterprises - System Alerts
The System Alerts view allows us to modify or create specialized enterprise proiles 
for Email notiication and has already been discussed above.
Enterprises - Synchronize
As described in Chapter 4 during the discussion of the inal steps to set up a Siebel 
enterprise, the deinitions of batch components have to be synchronized from the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server to tables in the Siebel database.
This task has to be executed at installation time and every time when a deinition of a 
batch component has been created or modiied. The purpose of the batch component 
synchronization is to allow administrators to select these components and their 
parameters from pick lists while creating server jobs.
To synchronize batch components, we must navigate to the Enterprises - Synchronize 
view and click the Synchronize button. We can use the view to verify that the batch 
component deinitions have been successfully synchronized.
Servers view
When we navigate to the Servers view in the Administration - Server Coniguration 
screen, we observe that we can view or modify the following settings for each server 
in the list individually:
• 
Set the component start up mode

Chapter 9
[ 283 ]
• 
View or modify event log levels for servers and individual components
• 
View or modify parameters for servers and individual components
In the following section, we will discuss the irst option in greater detail.
The following screenshot shows the Servers - Components - Events view in the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen:
In this view, we can select a server in the upper list and control the component 
behavior for that server using the startup mode buttons in the Components list  
or by using the sub views for Events (to set log levels) or Parameters for the  
selected component.
When we use the middle tabs for Parameters and Events, we can view or modify  
the parameters and event log levels for the selected server as a whole.
Setting component start up mode
Similar to system services on operating systems, we can conigure a server 
component for automatic or manual start. When the startup mode for a server 
component is set to "Auto Start" (the default value), the component starts up 
immediately when its host server service is started. When a server hosts a great 
number of components, the parallel start up of dozens or even hundreds of processes 
can consume all CPUs and a lot of memory on the machine. This can severely affect 
the server start up time.

Siebel Server Management
[ 284 ]
In order to avoid this, we should consider setting some of the lesser used 
components to manual start up mode. For example, the component group EAI 
contains many "EAI Receivers", which allow integration with queue-based transports 
such as IBM Websphere MQ or JMS. If we enable the EAI component group on a 
server only because we need the EAI Object Manager component, we can safely set 
all other components of that group to manual start. We can accomplish this either in 
the above mentioned view or via commands at the Siebel Server Manager command 
line (discussed in the next section in this chapter).
To set a server component to manual start up mode, we can proceed as follows.
1. Navigate to the Servers view in the Administration - Server  
Coniguration screen.
2. Select the appropriate Siebel server in the upper list.
3. Select the component in the middle list.
4. Click the Manual Start button.
Once manual start is enabled, the Manual Start button becomes inactive and the 
Auto Start button becomes active, allowing us to set the start up mode back to 
automatic if we need to. By observing the inactive buttons, we can also tell in which 
start up mode the component currently is.
Setting components to manual start rather than disabling their component deinition 
keeps the component available on the server. Once the server is started, we can 
use the graphical user interface (GUI) or the command line to manually start the 
components. This will be discussed later in this chapter.
Setting event log levels
In order to assist the administrator with the task of logging component activity or 
troubleshooting erroneous behavior of server processes, the Siebel Server framework 
provides the possibility to set log levels for a great variety of events. Setting event log 
levels is discussed in detail in Chapter 16.
Job Templates
The Job Templates view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen allows 
administrators to deine reusable job deinitions. In the Siebel server framework, a job 
is referred to as a batch component that is scheduled for execution. When creating jobs 
"on the ly" an administrator would typically have to manually override a number of 
parameters. This is a repetitive, time consuming, and error prone activity.

Chapter 9
[ 285 ]
For this reason, the Job Templates view allows us to store the parameter settings for 
a speciic type of job and give it a unique name. The following screenshot shows the 
Job Templates view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen:
A job template deinition is visible. We can observe that several parameters and their 
values are deined in the lower list applet.
An administrator can now select the job's name from the component dropdown list 
in the Jobs view in the Administration - Server Management screen. Creating jobs 
will be discussed in the next section.
Job templates are stored in the Siebel database and are therefore different 
from the other server coniguration data that is managed by the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server. For this reason, we can create job templates only 
from the web client and not via the Siebel Server Manager command line.

Siebel Server Management
[ 286 ]
Using the Administration - Server 
Management screen
While the Administration - Server Coniguration screen allows us to view or modify 
the coniguration of Siebel enterprise members such as Siebel servers or components, 
the Administration - Server Management screen is intended to provide insight into 
the current state of the Siebel enterprise. We will discuss the main views of this 
screen in the following order:
1. Enterprises
2. Servers
3. Components
4. Tasks
5. Sessions
6. Jobs
This order represents the "natural" hierarchy of the building blocks of a  
Siebel enterprise.
Enterprises view
The Enterprises view in the Administration - Server Management screen allows 
administrators to monitor the state of all servers across the enterprise. Furthermore, 
administrators can review and control the state of components for the selected server 
and view a list of tasks for the selected server. The following screenshot shows a 
portion of the Enterprises view:

Chapter 9
[ 287 ]
The Server Eval_1 is in a running state—as indicated by the green trafic light icon 
and the value of Running in the State column. The components list for the selected 
server is also visible. Trafic light icons allow us to quickly verify the state of each 
component on the server.
About component run states
The following table gives an overview of the run states of Siebel server components:
Run State
Trafic Light Icon Color
Description
Running
Green
The component is fully operational and at 
least one task is currently executing.
Online
Green
The component is fully operational but no 
tasks are currently executing.
Paused
Yellow
The component is fully operational. Tasks 
may be currently executing but no new tasks 
will be instantiated while the component is in 
paused state.
Shutting down
Yellow
The component is currently shutting down.
Starting up
Yellow
The component has been started but it is not 
yet fully operational.
Shutdown
Red
The component has been shut down.
Unavailable
Red
The component has experienced an error, 
is currently starting up or has reached the 
maximum number of possible tasks.
Source: Siebel System Monitoring and Diagnostics Guide, Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/SysDiag/ 
booktitle.html
Controlling component run states
Each component list in the Administration - Server Management screen features four 
buttons, which allow administrators to issue commands to control the state of server 
components. The following buttons are available:
• 
Startup
• 
Shutdown
• 
Pause
• 
Resume

Siebel Server Management
[ 288 ]
The following table gives an overview of the functionality of each component  
control button:
Button
Button is enabled when 
component is in state(s)
State(s) of the component after 
command is applied
Startup
Shutdown, Unavailable
Online or Running
Shutdown
Online, Running, Unavailable
Shutdown
Pause
Online, Running
Paused
Resume
Paused
Online or Running
When clicking the respective buttons, we can observe that the component state does 
not immediately change to the inal value. For example, when using the Startup 
button to start up a component from its shutdown state, the component state changes 
to "Unavailable" because it takes a certain amount of time for the process to launch.
Because the Siebel views do not typically refresh automatically, we must manually 
refresh the list by pressing ALT+ENTER. It is generally recommended to refresh the 
views after issuing commands.
Servers view
The Servers view of the Administration - Server Management screen allows 
administrators to monitor and control the following for the selected server:
• 
Siebel server run state
• 
Object manager and system component sessions
• 
Component groups and component states for the selected component group
• 
Tasks
• 
Log entries and statistics
Components view
Sometimes, it is necessary to review and compare component information across 
servers in the enterprise. This is why the Administration - Server Management screen 
contains the Components view.
Featuring the same control buttons as described above, this view displays all 
components across all Siebel servers in the enterprise. For each selected component, 
we can review state values and statistics and monitor and control the state of the 
components' tasks.

Chapter 9
[ 289 ]
Tasks view
Similar to the Components view, the Administration - Server Management screen 
contains a view that allows administrators to monitor and control all tasks across 
all Siebel servers in the enterprise. As discussed earlier in this chapter, a task is an 
instance of a component, present as an operating system process or thread while 
it executes. The screenshot below shows the Tasks - Parameters sub view of the 
Administration - Server Management screen:
The Tasks list applet buttons allow us to control the state of the selected task. It is 
possible to change parameters for the selected tasks but this is limited to parameters 
that have an effective level of Immediately.
Furthermore, the Tasks view's sub views allow us to review log entries, state values, 
and statistics for the selected task.
Sessions view
Sessions are tasks for interactive components, namely application object managers 
and system components such as Server Manager and Server Request Broker. For 
troubleshooting purposes, it might be beneicial to review a lat list of all running, 
completed, or failed object manager sessions for all end users across all Siebel servers.

Siebel Server Management
[ 290 ]
This can be accomplished using the Session view. In this view, we can review and 
monitor all sessions irrespective of their run state. Furthermore, we can list log 
entries, state values, parameters, and statistics for each session.
Jobs view
As we learned above, a job in Siebel terms is a requested or scheduled task for a 
batch component. Jobs can be created manually by administrators or automatically 
by Siebel worklow or other internal services.
The Jobs view of the Administration - Server Management screen—shown in 
the following screenshot—allows us to create, submit, and monitor one-time or 
repeating job requests:
The following table guides us through the process of creating and submitting a job 
under the assumption that we are already logged in to the Siebel Web Client as an 
administrative user:
Step
Description
1
Verify that the component we wish to execute is available on at least one Siebel server. 
If not, we have to enable the respective component group on one of the servers.
2
Navigate to the Administration - Server Management screen, Jobs view.
3
Click New in the Jobs list.

Chapter 9
[ 291 ]
Step
Description
4
Click the select icon in the Component/Job ield to open the component pick list.
5
Select either a component or a component job template from the pick list.
6
Optional: Set the Scheduled Start timestamp to a value other than the default value.
7
Optional: Set the Delete Interval and Delete Units ields (using the form applet in the 
middle of the view) to control the automatic purge of request data from the database 
table.
8
To deine repeating jobs, use the Repeating Info section in the form applet to specify 
the interval of the repetitions.
9
Optional: To specify the behavior in the case of errors, use the ields in the Retry section.
10
Scroll down to the Job Parameters list at the bottom of the view.
11
For each parameter we need to override at the task level, we create a new record in 
the Job Parameters list and provide the parameter name and value.
12
In the upper list applet, click Submit Job.
13
Refresh the list by pressing ALT+ENTER and monitor the job execution status.
14
For repeating jobs, navigate to the Repeating Instances tab to monitor the instances of 
the job.
During its life cycle, a job's status ield can have different values. The following table 
describes each job status:
Job Status
Trafic Light 
Icon Color
Description
Creating
Yellow
The job creation is in progress, changes can be made to ields 
and parameters.
Queued
Yellow
The job request has been submitted but no tasks are 
executing yet.
Active
Green
One-time jobs: A task is currently executing for the 
component deined in the job.
Repeating jobs: Tasks are executed as scheduled.
Success
Green
The task for a one-time job has been successfully completed.
Completed
Green
All tasks for a repeating job have been successfully completed.
Error
Red
An error occurred during task execution.
Hold
Yellow
A repeating job has been put on hold. Tasks will not execute.
Canceled
Yellow
A job that has been queued or on hold has been canceled.
The Siebel server framework ensures that submitted jobs are executed by routing the 
job request to the appropriate server. If for some reason the requested component is 
unavailable, the job remains in queued state until the component becomes available.

Siebel Server Management
[ 292 ]
For an administrator, it is important to understand that a component might become 
available just when a Siebel server is restarted. As there could be a large number of 
queued jobs for that component, the parallel execution of all the requested jobs upon 
server restart could negatively impact the Siebel server performance.
Using the Cancel Job button, we can cancel jobs that are in a queued or hold state. 
If we wish to execute the same job without having to specify all parameters again, 
we must copy an existing job deinition using the Copy Record command—or the 
CTRL+B keyboard shortcut. Restarting a job is not possible.
On your demonstration machine, navigate to the 
Administration - Server Management screen and verify 
the functionality described in this section.
Using command line tools for Siebel 
server management
In the previous section of this chapter, we learned how to use the Siebel Web 
Client's views—the graphical user interface (GUI)—to perform various tasks  
related to coniguring, managing, and monitoring servers and components within  
a Siebel enterprise.
Using the GUI has several beneits, such as the easier lookup and visualization of 
data. However, many administrators prefer to interact with the Siebel servers on a 
command line basis. Using commands at the command line is typically faster than 
using a graphical user interface. Furthermore, commands can be placed in script 
iles, allowing administrators to accomplish complex tasks with a single keystroke.
Next, we will inspect the Siebel Server Manager command line utility and its 
commands. After this section, we will be able to accomplish the same tasks as have 
been described for the graphical user interface via the command line. These tasks are:
• 
Listing and reviewing information about the Siebel enterprise
• 
Backing up the enterprise coniguration
• 
Listing and modifying parameters
• 
Creating and modifying component deinitions
• 
Controlling assignment of component groups to Siebel servers
• 
Setting the start up mode of server components

Chapter 9
[ 293 ]
• 
Controlling server components
• 
Running tasks for batch and background components
Before we begin, we will explore the basic command line utility, namely srvrmgr, 
which we must invoke before we can start issuing commands to the Siebel enterprise.
About the srvrmgr command line utility
The Siebel Server Manager—its oficial name—is a command line utility that can 
be located as an executable ile for Microsoft Windows or UNIX-based operating 
systems. The srvrmgr.exe ile (on Microsoft Windows) can be found in the bin 
directories of the Siebel Gateway Name Server, the Siebel server, or the Siebel 
Developer Web Client installation folders.
We can open a command shell, navigate to the folder containing the srvrmgr 
executable and simply type srvrmgr to obtain a list of required and optional 
input parameters.
If no parameters are speciied, the executable generates a list of parameters.
The following table describes the input parameters for the srvrmgr executable:
Parameter
Description
Required?
/g
Gateway Name Server host name and port number (if 
different from 2320) separated by a colon.
Yes
/e
Enterprise name (Default: siebel).
Yes
/u
Username
Yes
/p
Password
Yes
/s
Logical Siebel server name to connect to.
No
/z
Name of a server group.
No
/l
Language for status messages (Default: ENU).
No
/i
Path to a text ile containing commands.
No
/o
Path to an output ile (used only together with /i).
No
/c
Followed by a single command to execute.
No
/m
Enable compression for message exchange with the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server.
No
/r
Enable encryption for message exchange with the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server.
No
/b
Used with /i to specify batch mode. The utility will exit on 
any error.
No
/h
Display the parameter list.
No

Siebel Server Management
[ 294 ]
A typical command line to connect to a Siebel Gateway Name Server could look like 
the following:
srvrmgr /g appsrvrgw1 /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D
The above command will establish a connection to the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
on the appsrvrgw1 machine, open the coniguration store for the SIEBELEVAL 
enterprise, and authenticate as the user SADMIN using TJay357D as the password.
We can omit the /p parameter and the password to avoid 
exposing the administrator's password on the screen or in text 
iles. The srvrmgr utility will then prompt for the password 
and the keystrokes will not be printed to the screen.
If the information in the command line is correct and the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server is operational, we should see the Server Manager start up information and the 
srvrmgr> prompt.
Once logged in correctly, we can start issuing commands. Besides the information 
in the Oracle documentation (Siebel Bookshelf) we can also use the help command 
to assist us with the irst steps at the srvrmgr> prompt. Typing help at the prompt 
provides a large list of possible commands.
We can use the spool command to write the information of the help command to a 
text ile for better readability. At the srvrmgr> prompt, we enter a command similar 
to the following:
spool c:\srvrmgr_help.txt
help
spool off
The above commands will create a text ile on the local C: drive named srvrmgr_
help.txt. This text ile now contains the output of the help command. The spool 
off command turns the spooling off to avoid other information being written to the 
text ile. The screenshot below shows the beginning of the text ile with the output of 
the help command:

Chapter 9
[ 295 ]
As we can observe, the irst command explained is the list command. It must 
be followed by a keyword such as component groups or an abbreviation such 
as compgrps.
The help command itself can also be followed by the name of a command we wish 
to view details about. The following command for example explains the usage of the 
list session command:
help list session
The following screenshot shows the output of the help list session command at 
the srvrmgr> command prompt:
We can observe that optional keywords such as active or hung can be inserted 
between the list and sessions keywords. In addition, the list session command 
allows the speciication of server, component, or user login names. Optional 
keywords and commands are always put between square brackets in the help text.
Next, we will discuss typical administrative tasks and their srvrmgr command  
line syntax.
If you wish to follow along with the examples, use the help 
command frequently to familiarize yourself with the syntax and 
possibilities of the Siebel Server Manager command line utility.
Listing and reviewing information about the 
Siebel enterprise
We can use the various list commands to review information about the building 
blocks of a Siebel enterprise. Viewing this information on the command line—or 
spooling it to iles—is similar to using the list applets in the server management 
views in the Siebel Web Client.

Siebel Server Management
[ 296 ]
The following table describes the most important list commands that we can issue 
at the srvrmgr> prompt:
Command line
Output
list servers
List of all servers in the enterprise.
list compgrps
List of all component groups and their server assignment across  
the enterprise.
list compgrps for 
server Server1
List of all component groups assigned to server Server1.
list compdefs
List of all component deinitions for the enterprise.
list comps for 
server Server1
List of all component, their startup mode and their current status for 
server Server1.
list params
List of all enterprise parameters and their current values..
list tasks
List of all tasks (running or completed) across all servers in the 
enterprise.
list active tasks
List of all tasks that are currently running across all servers in the 
enterprise.
list sessions
List of all object manager and system component sessions (running  
or completed).
list active sessions
List of all sessions that are currently running.
list named 
subsystems
List all enterprise proiles—called named subsystems at the Siebel 
Server Manager command line—for the enterprise.
Note: Server1 is an example of a logical Siebel server name.
As the output of the list command can be quite wide, it is recommended to adjust 
the settings for the command shell to allow more row width.
The list command can be used in conjunction with the show command to deine the 
columns and their width to use for the output. The following command line serves as 
an example on how to retrieve only three columns of information about tasks.
list tasks for comp SCC% show CC_ALIAS, TK_DISP_RUNSTATE(10), TK_LABEL
We can learn from this example that the show command must be followed by a 
comma-separated list of precisely written column names. Column names can be 
followed by the desired number of characters to display in parentheses.
Furthermore, we can use the percentage sign (%) as a wildcard character to ilter 
the information in the list output as indicated in the above example. The following 
screenshot shows the output of the example command:

Chapter 9
[ 297 ]
Backing up the enterprise coniguration
As discussed in previous sections of this chapter, we should consider creating a 
backup copy of the siebns.dat ile before we undertake major modiications. We 
learned that this can be accomplished by pressing the Backup Enterprise button in 
the graphical user interface (GUI).
At the srvrmgr> prompt, we can use the following command to accomplish the  
same task:
backup namesrvr
The command can be optionally followed by a ile path, which allows us to deine 
the location and name of the backup ile.
Listing and modifying parameters
In the above sections, we already learned about the list params command, which 
allows us to create lists of parameters at various levels such as enterprise, server, 
component deinition, or component.
If we wish to modify parameters, we have to use the change param command 
followed by the parameter's alias name, an equals sign, and the new value for the 
parameter. The following is an example:
change param EnableEAIMemoryMetrics=True for compdef eaiobjmgr_enu
The above command changes the value of the parameter EnableEAIMemoryMetrics 
of the EAI Object Manager component deinition to True. We can obtain the alias 
name of parameters by using the list params command.

Siebel Server Management
[ 298 ]
We can combine multiple parameter-value pairs to a comma-separated list such as in 
the following example:
change param MaxMTServers=2,MaxTasks=100 for comp sccobjmgr_enu server 
Eval_1
Using a command similar to the above, we can change two parameters at once. The 
example shows how to change the values for the MaxMTServers and the MaxTasks 
parameter to 2 and 100 respectively. The change is made for the Call Center Object 
manager component on the Eval_1 server.
The MaxMTServers parameter deines the maximum number of 
multi-threaded operating system processes that can be instantiated 
for the component. The MaxTasks parameter deines the maximum 
number of threads—or tasks—for the component.
Setting these two parameters allows administrators to adjust the CPU 
and memory allocation on the Siebel server machines.
Creating and modifying component deinitions
Even if it is not a daily task, a Siebel server administrator must be able to create 
additional component deinitions and make the respective components available in the 
enterprise.
The following example explains how to use the create compdef command to create 
a new component deinition for a worklow monitor agent.
Worklow monitor agents are background components 
that monitor the Siebel database for certain events and 
execute the actions deined in so-called worklow policies.
create compdef EvalWorkMon for comptype WorkMon compgrp Workflow run mode 
background full name "Evaluation Workflow Monitor Agent" desc "Created 
for testing purposes" with param SleepTime=20,GroupName="Assignment 
Group",DfltTasks=1
When we inspect the example more closely we ind that the new component 
deinition will have an alias name of EvalWorkMon, its component type will be set to 
WorkMon and it will belong to the Workflow component group. The run mode will be 
background. The above example also shows how to set the full name and description 
text for the new component deinition as well as how to provide values for some 
parameters. Setting parameters could also be done in a separate command.

Chapter 9
[ 299 ]
In order to make the new component deinition available, we must activate it using 
the following command:
activate compdef EvalWorkMon
The activate compdef command sets the component deinition's status from 
Creating to Active, thus enabling the instantiation of components. However, the 
new components will not be available on any Siebel server before the server itself  
is restarted.
It is highly recommended to put complex commands like the above example in text 
iles. The reason for this is that the text ile can be saved and reused later to create the 
same component deinition in other environments, which is a very likely scenario.
Furthermore, storing the creation scripts and other frequently used commands in 
text iles allows for easier documentation of changes.
The read command can be used to open a text ile and execute the commands in that 
ile while we have a Siebel Server Manager session window open. The following 
example explains how to use the read command:
read c:\temp\create_custom_compdefs.txt
Entering this line at the svrmgr> prompt will open the ile speciied in the path and 
execute all commands contained in that ile.
Controlling assignment of component groups 
to Siebel servers
The Siebel Server Manager command line also allows administrators to control the 
assignment and enablement of component groups to Siebel servers.
The following table provides examples for assigning, enabling, disabling, and 
removing a component group association for a Siebel server:
Command Example
Description
assign compgrp 
workflow to server 
Eval_1
The command assigns the component group Worklow to 
the server Eval_1.
enable compgrp 
workflow for server 
Eval_1
The command enables the component group Worklow on 
the server Eval_1. Components within this group will be 
available after server restart.
disable compgrp 
workflow for server 
Eval_1
The command disables the component group Worklow on 
the Server Eval_1. Components will no longer be available 
on the server once it is restarted.

Siebel Server Management
[ 300 ]
Command Example
Description
remove compgrp 
workflow from server 
Eval_1
The command removes the assignment of the component 
group Worklow from the server Eval_1.
As we learned in this chapter, component groups are already pre-assigned to all 
Siebel servers but not yet enabled. If our task is to enable a component group on a 
speciic server, the only command needed would be similar to the following:
enable compgrp workflow for server Eval_1
We must restart the Siebel server for the changes to take effect.
Setting the start up mode of  
server components
In order to speed up the start up of a Siebel server, it is beneicial to set certain 
components to manual start up. This will cause the component to be in shutdown 
state when the server is started, thus consuming no CPU or memory.
The Siebel Server Manager command to set components to manual start up mode is 
similar to the following example:
manual start comp sccobjmgr_deu for server Eval_1
The above command sets the start up mode for the German Call Center object 
manager on server Eval_1 to manual.
To set the start up mode to automatic, we can use a command similar to the following:
auto start comp sccobjmgr_deu for server Eval_1
To view the current start up mode for a server's components, we can use a command 
similar to the following:
list comps for server Eval_1 show CC_ALIAS, CP_STARTMODE
To avoid having to specify the Siebel server name with every command, 
we can use the /s lag with the srvrmgr executable followed by the Siebel 
server's logical name. During a srvrmgr session, we can use the set 
server command followed by the logical Siebel server name to focus the 
prompt on that server.

Chapter 9
[ 301 ]
Controlling server components
Similar to using the buttons on the component list applets in the Server management 
screen in the Siebel web client, we can issue commands at the srvrmgr> prompt to 
control the state of server components.
The following table describes the commands to control server components. As 
discussed above, we can use the set server command followed by the logical 
Siebel server name to specify the target server for the commands. The examples in 
the table assume that the server has been set, and use the English Call Center object 
manager as the target component.
Command Example
Command applicable 
when component is 
in state(s)
Final component state(s)
startup comp 
sccobjmgr_enu
Shutdown
Online, Running
shutdown comp 
sccobjmgr_enu
Online, Running, 
Unavailable
Shutdown
shutdown fast comp 
sccobjmgr_enu
Online, Running, 
Unavailable
Shutdown 
Note: The shutdown fast 
command enforces the 
shutdown irrespective of the 
state of tasks for the target 
component.
pause comp sccobjmgr_
enu
Online, Running
Paused
resume comp sccobjmgr_
enu
Paused
Online, Running
kill comp sccobjmgr_
enu
Any state
Shutdown 
Note: the kill comp 
command should only be 
used when the component 
is hung and there is no other 
way to shut it down safely.
To verify the current state of server components, we can use a command similar to 
the following:
list comps for server Eval_1 show CC_NAME, CP_RUN_STATE
The above command will write the component name and the current run state of all 
components hosted by Siebel server Eval_1 to the console.

Siebel Server Management
[ 302 ]
Running jobs for batch and background 
components
While the graphical user interface (GUI) allows administrators to store job templates 
and repeating job deinitions for batch components, the Siebel Server Manager 
command line only provides commands to start tasks—the server manager term 
for jobs—immediately. However, if we wish to invoke a task for a background 
component while the Siebel server is running, the command line is the only location 
to accomplish that.
In the following example, we use the start task command to invoke a task for the 
Generate New Database component.
start task for comp gennewdb with sqlflags=1
The above command invokes a task for the Generate New Database component and 
passes one parameter override to the task.
Using input iles
As indicated in this and previous chapters, it is highly recommended to use input 
iles to store complex command combinations. We can use the /i lag with the 
srvrmgr executable to direct it to read the ile at the path following the lag and 
execute all commands in the ile. The following is an example for a command line 
that invokes the Siebel Server Manager and executes the contents of a text ile:
srvrmgr /g appsrvrgw1 /e SIEBELEVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D /i c:\daily_
batch.txt /o c:\daily_batch_log.txt
When this command is executed in a command shell, the Siebel server manager 
will connect to the Siebel Gateway Name Server on appsrvrgw1 machine, open the 
SIEBELEVAL enterprise coniguration store, and log in as user SADMIN. The executable 
will open the daily_batch.txt ile on the local C: drive, execute all commands in the 
ile and exit on completion. The complete output that would be typically written to the 
command shell will be directed to the daily_batch_log.txt ile on the C: drive.
Commands similar to the above can be placed in script iles, which can subsequently 
be registered in a scheduling facility such as the Microsoft Windows task scheduler 
or cron if we are using Linux or other UNIX-based operating systems.
On your demonstration machine, use the srvrmgr executable 
and experiment with the commands explained in this chapter.

Chapter 9
[ 303 ]
Summary
Administering Siebel enterprises, their servers and components is a complex 
endeavour. Oracle's Siebel CRM provides two built-in tools to assist administrators 
with their daily tasks regarding server monitoring, maintenance, and troubleshooting.
In this chapter, we explored these tools, namely the server management views in 
the Siebel web client, which provide a graphical user interface (GUI) and the Siebel 
Server Manager command line tool srvrmgr.
An introduction to the concepts of the building blocks of a Siebel enterprise was 
given as well.
Using typical server management scenarios like listing server components and 
their current run state or creating job requests, we explored the various ways to 
professionally manage Siebel servers, components and tasks within a Siebel enterprise.
In the next chapter, we will cover the mechanisms of user authentication in  
Siebel CRM.


User Authentication
When we prepare a Siebel environment for productive use, we have to carefully 
select the technology for user authentication. A typical Siebel CRM deployment 
caters for hundreds, if not thousands of end users. Their user accounts, passwords, 
and privileges must be administered in the most professional manner possible. 
Avoiding redundant user accounts across various systems is the most crucial  
aspect of professional user administration. In this chapter, we will explore the 
technical concepts of user authentication in Siebel CRM. The chapter will be 
structured as follows:
• 
User authentication concepts
• 
Database authentication
• 
LDAP server authentication
• 
Web Single-Sign-On (SSO)
User authentication concepts  
in Siebel CRM
We can distinguish three concepts of user authentication in Siebel CRM:
• 
Database authentication (default)
• 
Directory server authentication (LDAP or Microsoft Active Directory)
• 
Web Single-Sign-On (SSO)
While these concepts are supported by built-in functionality, Siebel CRM also 
supports custom authentication solutions by providing a software development  
kit (SDK) to develop a custom security adapter.

User Authentication
[ 306 ]
Before we describe each of the user authentication concepts in greater detail, we 
should explore the general Siebel CRM authentication architecture and its main 
building block, the security adapter. The following diagram represents the Siebel 
CRM authentication architecture and the low of a user authentication request in  
two scenarios:
We can describe these two scenarios as follows:
1.  The end user provides username and password (summarized as user 
credentials) on the web client's login page.
2.  The Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) forwards the login request and  
the user credentials to the application object manager.
3.  Each application object manager is associated with a security adapter,  
which it invokes in order to authenticate the user.

Chapter 10
[ 307 ]
4a.  If the security adapter used by the application object manager is a database 
security adapter, it connects to a relational database management system 
(RDBMS) and veriies the user credentials. The RDBMS can be—and is  
by default—the same that is used to host the Siebel database, but this is  
not mandatory.
4b.  If the security adapter is conigured for the Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP), it connects to a third-party directory server, veriies the 
user credentials, and retrieves the so-called proxy user credentials. Proxy 
user credentials are username and password pairs that are also present as  
an RDBMS account.
5.  If the security adapter reports successful user authentication, the application 
object manager establishes a database connection using either the end user's 
account (scenario 4a) or the proxy user account (scenario 4b).
Independent of the database user account being used for the physical 
database connection, changes to the records in the database are always 
made on the end user's behalf, thus allowing auditing and usage 
tracking on an individual basis. Data visibility is also controlled by the 
end user's account and not the one of the proxy user.
There are several noteworthy details regarding the way Siebel CRM handles 
user authentication:
• 
User accounts (including passwords) are always managed outside of  
Siebel CRM
• 
Each user must be registered as such and associated with a responsibility  
in the Siebel application
• 
The security adapter is a reusable software library that works in conjunction 
with Siebel server components
• 
Application object managers and other Siebel server components can be 
associated with one security adapter at a time
• 
Developers at customer sites can use the SDK provided by Oracle to write 
their own custom security adapter to connect to any authentication system
We will now explore the built-in techniques of Siebel CRM user authentication.

User Authentication
[ 308 ]
Database authentication
Using the account management of a relational database management system 
(RDBMS) for user authentication is the default coniguration of Siebel CRM. For 
example during the installation of the Siebel database—as discussed in previous 
chapters—we must create user accounts in the RDBMS that hosts the Siebel database.
This preconigured behaviour of Siebel CRM is useful during installation and  
for small evaluation, development, or test environments to which only a limited  
number of users have access. Production environments will hardly ever use  
database authentication.
In the following sections, we will explore the preconigured settings that enable  
the default database authentication.
Security adapters are deined as  
enterprise proiles
Each security adapter is implemented as an enterprise proile. As discussed in 
Chapter 9, enterprise proiles are reusable collections of parameters. They are 
referenced by their alias name in parameters of other members of the Siebel 
enterprise such as component deinitions.
The following screenshot shows the three preconigured security adapter deinitions in 
the Proile Coniguration view of the Administration - Server Coniguration screen.

Chapter 10
[ 309 ]
We can observe that the DB Security Adapter is selected and is of type 
InfraSecAdpt_DB, which deines a small list of parameters (three normal and one 
advanced parameter). The DataSourceName parameter of the DB Security Adapter 
proile references the ServerDataSrc proile, which in turn provides the physical 
connectivity information to the Siebel database.
The only advanced parameter in this proile (not visible in the screenshot) is the 
name of the library ile (.dll on Microsoft Windows and .so on UNIX-based 
operating systems) that implements the security adapter's program logic.
Associating a security adapter with  
a server component
Each server component that needs to establish user sessions is associated with 
a security adapter by means of the Security Adapter Name parameter.
The screenshot below shows the component deinition for the Call Center Object 
Manager (ENU) component as the selected record in the Component Deinitions 
view in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen:
We can observe that the Security Adapter Name parameter value is the alias name 
of the DB Security Adapter proile (DBSecAdpt). Furthermore, the Security Adapter 
Mode parameter is set to DB, indicating that user authentication is done via a 
relational database.

User Authentication
[ 310 ]
Both parameters are set on the enterprise level by default. This can be veriied by 
reviewing the Override Level ield in the lower-right form applet of the view. 
The fact that these two parameters are set on the enterprise level—and that their 
values are therefore inherited downward in the enterprise hierarchy—conirms 
that database authentication is the default user authentication behaviour for all 
component deinitions.
Managing user accounts for  
database authentication
If we wish to provide an end user access to the Siebel CRM application by means 
of database authentication, we must ensure that a database account exists for that 
user. In addition, the user must be registered in the Siebel application as a user or 
employee. Registering users or employees in the Siebel application will be discussed 
in Chapter 12.
Depending on the tool set available for the RDBMS we use, we have the choice how 
we manage user accounts. In most projects, the database administrator (DBA) is 
controlling the creation and modiication of user accounts in the RDBMS.
The following script example gives us an idea how a new user account is created in 
an Oracle database. We can use the respective lines in the grantusr.sql ile in the 
ORACLE folder of the Database Server Utilities installation directory as a guideline 
for creating our own scripts:
create user EVALUSER identified by EVALPWD;
grant sse_role to EVALUSER;
alter user EVALUSER default tablespace SIEBELDB_DATA;
alter user EVALUSER temporary tablespace TEMP;
The script creates a new user account with the name of EVALUSER and assigns a 
password (EVALPWD) to it.
The grant command assigns the role sse_role to the user account. This role has 
been created during the initial Siebel database installation process.
The assignment of the default and temporary tablespaces completes the script.  
The SIEBELB_DATA tablespace has been created during the Siebel database 
installation process.
Scripts similar to the example above must be executed against the RDBMS in order to 
create the database account needed to enable database authentication. Alternatively, 
a DBA can of course use graphical user interfaces to create and manage database 
user accounts.

Chapter 10
[ 311 ]
Directory server authentication
For Siebel CRM deployments that support hundreds or thousands of users, it is 
very likely that the administrative overhead of managing user accounts for Siebel 
applications in the RDBMS is too high. Furthermore, it is more reasonable to use 
existing centralized user account management systems, which typically provide a 
higher level of manageability and security than RDBMS account management.
For these reasons, Siebel CRM supports a variety of LDAP (Lightweight Directory 
Access Protocol) based directory servers as well as Microsoft Active Directory. The 
following table lists the directory server vendors (in alphabetical order) and their 
products that are supported with Siebel CRM version 8.1.
Vendor
Product
Supported Protocols
IBM
Tivoli Directory Server
LDAP
Microsoft
Active Directory
LDAP and ADSI
Novell
NDS eDirectory
LDAP
Oracle
Internet Directory
LDAP
Oracle/Sun
Java System Directory Server
LDAP
Source: Siebel Security Guide, Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/Secur/ 
booktitle.html
In the following, we will discuss the setup and coniguration of LDAP-based 
authentication for a Siebel application. The high-level process is as follows:
1. Install the directory server (when needed).
2. Install the IBM LDAP client on Siebel server and client machines.
3. Create user accounts in the directory server.
4. Verify the proxy account.
5. Conigure the LDAP Security Adapter.
6. Conigure server components.
7. Verify LDAP authentication.
8. Conigure the Siebel Gateway Name Server for LDAP  
authentication (optional).
9. Conigure Siebel clients for LDAP authentication (optional).

User Authentication
[ 312 ]
The following diagram depicts the non-optional steps of the process of coniguring 
LDAP authentication:
Installing the directory server (optional)
It is very unlikely that a directory server does not exist in the network infrastructure 
of the company that deploys Siebel CRM or that the existing directory server will not 
be used for Siebel CRM users.
In that case, we must purchase and install one of the supported directory servers 
according to the software vendor's instructions. Installing and coniguring directory 
servers is beyond the scope of this book and therefore not discussed.
Installing the IBM LDAP Client
In order to allow the processes on Siebel servers and clients to connect to the 
directory server, the IBM LDAP Client must be installed on each machine that hosts 
a Siebel application for which we wish to enable LDAP authentication. The IBM 
LDAP client must be installed independent of the directory server vendor.
The IBM LDAP Client is delivered as part of the download archives for Siebel CRM 
on the Oracle E-Delivery website (http://edelivery.oracle.com). If we have 
not already downloaded the IBM LDAP client installer, we must do so now. The 
download archive "Siebel Business Applications Version 8.1.1.0 Base Applications  
for Windows (Part 2 of 2)" typically contains the installer for the IBM LDAP Client.
If we have not already done so, we must also extract the .jar ile from the 
downloaded .zip archive and use the Siebel Network Image Creator to create the 
installation image iles. Downloading Siebel installation archives and using the Siebel 
Network Image Creator has already been discussed in detail in Chapter 2.
The following screenshot shows the installation image for the IBM LDAP Client  
after extraction:

Chapter 10
[ 313 ]
The itds folder (IBM Tivoli Directory Server) contains the installation executables.
The following table describes the process of the IBM LDAP Client installation on 
Microsoft Windows:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
itds folder.
2
Choose a setup language.
Choose English.
Click OK.
3
The welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
4
License Agreement
Select I accept…
Click Next.
5
Installation Directory
Keep the default directory.
Click Next.
6
Feature selection.
Select Client SDK 6.0
Unselect GSKit.
Note: The Global Security Kit (GSKit) 
is only required when client-server 
communication needs to be encrypted 
using SSL.
Click Next.

User Authentication
[ 314 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
8
The installation progress is 
displayed.
Wait for the installation to inish.
9
The InstallShield wizard success 
dialog is displayed.
Click Finish.
The installation process on Linux and other UNIX-based operating systems is 
similar. However, to inalize the installation on these operating systems, we must 
edit the environment preparation scripts (siebenv.sh or siebenv.csh) and add 
the path to the lib directory of the IBM LDAP client to the lines that set the library 
path variables.
The installation procedure must be repeated on each machine that will host a Siebel 
application that uses LDAP authentication. These could be machines that host any  
of the following Siebel software units:
• 
Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Siebel Server
• 
Siebel Developer Web Client
• 
Siebel Tools
If you wish to practice the procedures described in the following 
sections, you should obtain and install both a suitable LDAP 
directory server and the IBM LDAP client as described above.
Creating user accounts in the directory server
For each user that should be able to access the Siebel application, a valid and active 
account must exist in the LDAP directory tree. Typically, as the directory server 
is most likely already in use for other systems than Siebel CRM, these accounts 
probably already exist.
To ensure a minimum amount of administrative overhead, a shared credentials 
account should be added to the LDAP directory tree. This special account will 
carry the information about the so-called proxy database account, a username and 
password combination that the Siebel application will use for each user to physically 
connect to the Siebel database.

Chapter 10
[ 315 ]
In addition, the so called anonymous users as speciied in the Siebel Web Server 
Extension's (SWSE) coniguration ile (eapps.cfg) must be added to the LDAP 
directory tree. The anonymous users are typically created during the initial 
installation phase and allow the application object manager to retrieve, for example, 
the login page template.
Creating the shared credentials account
Depending on the directory server vendor, there might be different approaches to 
log in to the directory server administration console and create directory entries. We 
should follow the vendor's documentation and create a user with attributes similar 
to the following example:
Attribute
Example Value
Description
First Name
Shared
First name of the shared 
credential account.
Last Name
Credentials
Last name of the shared 
credential account.
Common 
Names
Shared Credentials
Common name of the 
shared credential account.
User ID
SCredentials
Maps to the uid attribute 
in LDAP.
Password
T67PBhtr
A secure password 
should be chosen and 
documented.
E-Mail
type=ServerDataSrc 
username=LDAPUSER 
password=BFxR87DT
type=GatewayDataSrc 
username=SADMIN password 
= TJay357D
The mail attribute used 
to store the proxy account 
information by default. 
See below for a detailed 
explanation.
Description
Shared account for Siebel CRM 
LDAP authentication.
Optional.
In the above example, we use the E-Mail ield to store two parameter triplets, which 
deine the data source and the proxy user account name and password to use to 
connect to that data source.
type=ServerDataSrc username=LDAPUSER password=BFxR87DT
type=GatewayDataSrc username=SADMIN password=TJay357D

User Authentication
[ 316 ]
For each data source that is used by the application, we must deine one line similar 
to the above example. ServerDataSrc and GatewayDataSrc are the default data 
sources for a standard Siebel CRM application. Depending on the integration with 
external systems, the development team might provide additional data  
source names.
The type parameter value must be set to the alias name of a valid Siebel enterprise 
proile that deines a data source for the application object manager. The username 
and password parameter values must be set to a valid user account for the respective 
data source. In the above example, LDAPUSER is the account that the application 
object manager will use to connect to the Siebel server database. Therefore, an 
account with the name LDAPUSER must exist in the Siebel server database. 
In addition, LDAPUSER must be registered as a user and associated with an 
appropriate responsibility in the Siebel application.
The following screenshot shows an example shared credentials account deined  
in the administration console for the SUN Java Directory Server:
We are free to use any multi-valued attribute to store the proxy account information. 
However, if we choose a ield different from the mail attribute, we must specify  
that ield later during coniguration of the enterprise proile for the LDAP 
Security Adapter.

Chapter 10
[ 317 ]
Creating the anonymous user accounts
Every Siebel application uses an anonymous user account to create the initial object 
manager session. This session is necessary to provide a user interface to the end user 
where she or he can enter the login credentials or browse anonymously.
The following screenshot shows the homepage for the Siebel eService application:
This view is generated by the eService application object manager using the 
anonymous user account. We can observe that the User Login form in the left  
column of the page allows the user to authenticate by entering a User ID 
and a Password.
Depending on the type of application or the deinition in the Siebel Web Server 
Extension's (SWSE) coniguration ile (eapps.cfg), different anonymous user 
accounts might exist. We must therefore consult either the planning documentation 
or the eapps.cfg ile—located in the BIN directory of the SWSE installation 
folder—to obtain the list of anonymous user accounts to create in the LDAP  
directory tree.

User Authentication
[ 318 ]
The following screenshot shows the section for the eservice_enu virtual directory in 
the SWSE coniguration ile eapps.cfg:
In the example, the eService object manager will use the GUESTCST account as the 
anonymous account, indicated by the AnonUserName parameter's value. We can 
also observe that passwords are stored encrypted in the eapps.cfg ile.
If the parameter AnonUserName is not present in a virtual directory deinition, the 
parameter deinition in the [defaults] section of the eapps.cfg ile applies.
The screenshot below shows the [defaults] section of the SWSE coniguration ile:
We see that SADMIN is used as the anonymous account for each application that has 
no anonymous user deined in the corresponding section in the eapps.cfg ile.
With the information collected about anonymous user accounts, we can use the tools 
provided by the directory server vendor to create corresponding accounts in the 
LDAP directory.
The screenshot above shows the LDAP directory entry for the SADMIN account.

Chapter 10
[ 319 ]
We can observe that the E-Mail ield is blank. As we use the shared credentials 
account to specify the proxy account information, we do not have to repeat this 
information for the other entries in the directory.
Setting access permissions for LDAP accounts
Depending on our company policy or the security settings in the directory server, 
we might have to maintain additional security information in the LDAP directory. 
This information includes allowing users or groups to change, add, or delete 
directory entries.
For example, if we wish to enable user self registration for customer-facing 
applications such as Siebel eService or Siebel eSales, we must allow the  
anonymous user account to create additional accounts in the directory.
We must consult the directory server vendor documentation to understand how  
to apply the access permissions.

User Authentication
[ 320 ]
On your demonstration system, create the necessary 
LDAP directory entries for the shared credentials 
account, the anonymous users, and test users.
Verifying the proxy account
Before we conigure the server components to authenticate users via the directory 
server, we must ensure that the proxy accounts speciied in the shared credentials 
account are valid.
We can accomplish this by logging in to the respective data source using the 
username and password in the proxy account information. For example if we 
speciied LDAPUSER as the username for the Server data source, we should be 
able to log in to the Siebel server database using LDAPUSER as the username.
For an Oracle database, we can use the SQL*Plus command line utility to verify 
the user account. The following screenshot shows the successful login to the Oracle 
SQL*Plus command line tool using the LDAPUSER account:
In addition, we should log in to the Siebel Web Client as an administrative user 
and verify that a corresponding user is registered in either the Users or Employees 
administration views in the Administration - User screen.
If not already done, verify the existence of both 
the database account and the Siebel user or 
employee for the proxy user you have chosen.

Chapter 10
[ 321 ]
Coniguring the LDAP Security Adapter
The LDAP Security Adapter is deined as an enterprise proile. As we learned 
in Chapter 9, we can use either the server management views in the Siebel  
web client or the Siebel Server Manager command line to modify parameters  
of enterprise proiles.
Because of the enterprise-wide implications of switching to directory server 
authentication, it is highly recommended to use the capability of the Siebel Server 
Manager command line to read and execute script iles. The beneits of storing 
commands that manipulate the server coniguration in a script ile are mainly that 
the changes are documented in the ile and the changes can be quickly applied in 
other Siebel environments.
The following script should serve as an example of how to conigure the LDAP 
security adapter:
backup namesrvr
change param ApplicationUser='uid=admin,ou=Administrators,ou=TopologyM
anagement,o=NetscapeRoot',
ApplicationPassword=LdApAdMin,
SharedCredentialsDN='uid=SCredentials,ou=Special 
Users,dc=us,dc=oracle,dc=com',
BaseDn='ou=People,dc=us,dc=oracle,dc=com',
Port=15313,
ServerName=osappeval1,
SharedDBUsername=SADMIN,
SharedDBPassword=TJay357D,
SiebelUsernameAttributeType=uid,
UsernameAttributeType=uid 
for named subsystem LDAPSecAdpt
spool c:\ldap_config_log.txt
list params for named subsystem LDAPSecAdpt
spool off
The above script—stored in a text ile and executed via the Siebel Server Manager 
command line—does the following. Note that line breaks have been added to the 
script to allow better readability.
The backup namesrvr command ensures that the current siebns.dat ile is copied 
to a safe backup ile.

User Authentication
[ 322 ]
The change param command sets several parameters for the LDAPSecAdpt 
named subsystem (recall that named subsystem is the term used by the Siebel Server 
Manager command line for enterprise proiles). The following table describes the 
parameters:
Parameter
Example Value
Description
ApplicationUser
uid=admin,ou=Admin
istrators,ou=Topol
ogyManagement, 
o=NetscapeRoot
A valid distinguished 
name (DN) that 
identiies a directory 
user with suficient 
privileges to look up 
other entries in the 
directory.
ApplicationPassword
LdApAdMin
The password for  
the application user.
SharedCredentialsDN
uid=SCredentials, 
ou=Special Users, 
dc=us,dc=oracle, 
dc=com
The DN of the user 
account that stores 
the proxy account 
information.
BaseDn
ou=People,dc=us,dc
=oracle,dc=com
The DN of a group 
where the user 
accounts are stored.
Port
15313
The port number that 
the LDAP directory 
server is listening on.
ServerName
osappeval1
The host name of 
the machine that the 
LDAP directory server 
is running on.
SharedDBUsername
SADMIN
A valid DB user 
account. Must be a 
registered Siebel user.
SharedDBPassword
TJay357D
The password for 
the shared DB user 
account.
SiebelUsernameAttributeType
uid
The LDAP attribute 
that contains the Siebel 
user's Login Id.
UsernameAttributeType
uid
The LDAP attribute 
used to match with the 
username provided by 
the end user.

Chapter 10
[ 323 ]
The spool and list commands at the end of the script write the new coniguration 
of the LDAP security adapter to a text ile for later retrieval. Spooling information to 
text iles is a common practice in Siebel server management.
Coniguring server components
For each application object manager that we wish to authenticate its user sessions 
via the directory server, we have to specify two parameters. Again, we should do 
this via a reusable script ile in order to document the changes. The script could be 
similar to the following:
set server Eval_1
change param SecAdptMode=LDAP for comp sccobjmgr_enu
change param SecAdptName=LDAPSecAdpt for comp sccobjmgr_enu
The script switches the focus of the srvrmgr> prompt to the server Eval_1. It 
then modiies the English Call Center object manager instance on that server by 
changing the value of the parameter SecAdptMode to LDAP and the SecAdptName 
parameter value to the alias name of the LDAP Security Adapter enterprise proile, 
namely LDAPSecAdpt.
After such changes, the component must be restarted using commands similar  
to the following:
shutdown fast comp sccobjmgr_enu
startup comp sccobjmgr_enu
Before restarting application object managers, it is highly recommended—at least on 
production systems—to verify that no sessions are currently running. Alternatively, 
end users should be notiied before the component is shut down. A command similar 
to the following can be used at the srvrmgr> prompt to list active sessions for an 
application object manager:
list active sessions for comp sccobjmgr_enu
We can notify end users about the imminent shut down, for example by using the 
Message Broadcast feature of Siebel CRM.
On your demonstration machine, use the commands described 
in the above sections to modify the LDAP security adapter 
enterprise proile and a selected application object manager.

User Authentication
[ 324 ]
Verifying LDAP authentication
In order to verify that the object manager successfully authenticates both anonymous 
and registered user logins, we must establish a session by navigating to the 
application URL in a browser window.
In addition, we can temporarily increase the event log level for the security adapter 
related events by using a srvrmgr command similar to the following:
change evtloglvl SecAdptLog=5,SecMgrLog=5 for comp sccobjmgr_enu
This command sets the event log level for the Security Adapter Log and Security 
Manager Log events to a value of 5 for the English Call Center object manager, thus 
increasing the amount of information in the object manager's log ile.
As usual, we should remember to set the log level back to 0 or 1 once the testing 
phase is complete.
If we receive an error when trying to access the Siebel application URL, we must 
check the log ile for messages indicating the source of the failure. If we see the login 
page for the application in the browser window, we should be able to log in using 
any user account that is currently present in the LDAP directory and registered  
as a Siebel user.
After ensuring that all necessary services are restarted, navigate to the 
application URL on your demonstration machine and verify that you 
can log in using your test LDAP account (for example SADMIN).
Registering a new user
To verify that the security settings in the LDAP directory allow the registration of 
new users, we should log in to the Siebel application using an administrative user 
account such as SADMIN.
We then navigate to the Site Map, select the Administration - User screen and click 
the hyperlink for the Employees view. In that view we can use the Copy Record 
command (CTRL+B is the keyboard shortcut) and create a copy of the employee 
record for SADMIN. In the new record, we specify the ields described in the 
following table:

Chapter 10
[ 325 ]
Field
Example Value
Description
First Name
LDAP
Choose a value that 
indicates a test purpose.
Last Name
Test
Choose a value that 
indicates a test purpose.
User ID
TLDAP
Must be unique.
Password
TLDAP
The password ield 
should be writeable 
when LDAP 
authentication is 
properly set up.
Conirm Password
TLDAP
The password 
conirmation ield should 
be writeable as well.
After setting the ield values, we click the Save command in the applet menu (or 
press CTRL+S on the keyboard) to save the record.
Now, we open the administration tool for the LDAP directory and query for the test 
account using any of the ield values that we speciied before. We should be able to 
verify that a new directory entry has been automatically generated upon saving the 
employee record in the Siebel web client.
The following screenshot shows the newly created directory entry for the test 
employee account in the directory server administration console:

User Authentication
[ 326 ]
The PropagateChange parameter in the LDAP Security Adapter 
enterprise proile controls whether changes to the directory entries can be 
made from the Siebel application or not. When the parameter value is set 
to TRUE, then the behavior is as described above. If the value is FALSE, 
then no changes can be made from within the Siebel application.
Finally, we should log in to the Siebel application using the new account to verify 
the successful coniguration for directory server based user authentication for the 
application object manager.
After successful login, we should see the homepage salutation for the new user.  
The following screenshot shows the salutation text for the LDAP Test user on the 
Siebel application home page view:
After successful testing, we should consider deleting the test user account in both the 
Siebel employee administration view as well as the LDAP directory.
Follow the procedure described above to create 
a new user from within the Siebel web client.
Coniguring the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
for LDAP authentication (optional)
Similar to the components on the Siebel server, the Siebel Gateway Name Server 
can be conigured to authenticate user sessions via an external directory server. 
However, this is an optional task and it is very likely that our company decides to 
keep database authentication as the mechanism for authenticating administrative 
logins to the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
The main vehicle to provide the authentication information is via the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server's coniguration ile. The ile is named gateway.cfg and can be located 
in the BIN directory of the Siebel Gateway Name Server's installation folder.

Chapter 10
[ 327 ]
It is recommended to create a backup copy of the gateway.cfg ile and then set the 
parameters in the original ile according to the examples provided in the following 
table. Basically, we are setting the same parameters as during coniguring Siebel 
server components, only in a text ile.
Section
Parameter
Example Value
[InfraSecMgr]
SecAdptName
LDAPSecAdpt
SecAdptMode
LDAP
[LDAPSecAdpt]
ServerName
osappeval1
Port
15313
BaseDN
ou=People,dc=us,dc=oracle,
dc=com
SharedCredentialsDN
uid=SCredentials, 
ou=Special Users, 
dc=us,dc=oracle, 
dc=com
UsernameAttributeType
uid
PasswordAttributeType
userPassword
CredentialsAttributeType
mail
RolesAttributeType
cn
ApplicationUser
uid=admin, 
ou=Administrators, 
ou=TopologyManagement 
,o=NetscapeRoot
ApplicationPassword
LdApAdMin
PropagateChange
FALSE
SiebelUsernameAttributeType
uid
All other parameters in the [LDAPSecAdpt] section may have empty values.

User Authentication
[ 328 ]
The following screenshot shows a sample gateway.cfg ile with the necessary 
parameter settings to support LDAP authentication for the Siebel Gateway  
Name Server:
We can encrypt the value of the ApplicationPassword parameter 
in order to avoid security issues. To accomplish this, we must use the 
encryptstring command line utility, which can be located in the Siebel 
Web Server Extension's (SWSE) bin directory. For example, to encrypt the 
string LdApAdMin we would type the following at the command line:
 encryptstring LdApAdMin
The output of the utility is the encrypted string, which can then be copied 
and pasted to the gateway.cfg ile.
Since we speciied the RolesAttributeType parameter with a value of cn 
(referencing the Common Name(s) LDAP attribute), we must add "Siebel 
Administrator" as a new line entry of the Common Names attribute in order to  
allow administrators to log in to the Siebel Gateway Name Server. The 
administrative and sensitive nature of the Siebel Server Manager functionality 
requires that administrators are assigned the Siebel Administrator role via 
responsibility administration (for database authentication) or an attribute in the 
directory entry as described.

Chapter 10
[ 329 ]
The Common Name(s) attribute must contain the full name of the user as well 
as "Siebel Administrator" in separate lines. Siebel Administrator is the privilege 
or responsibility that a user must have in order to use the Siebel Server Manager 
command line.
Of course, we can create or use any other multi-valued LDAP attribute than 
Common Name(s)—or cn—to store the user role for Siebel Gateway Name  
Server authentication.
Verifying LDAP authentication for the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server
In order to verify the successful coniguration of the Siebel Gateway Name Server, 
we must restart the entire Siebel enterprise, which includes the following steps:
• 
Stop all Siebel Servers
• 
Stop the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Start the Siebel Gateway Name Server
• 
Start all Siebel Servers
After restarting the enterprise, we can use the srvrmgr command line utility and try 
to log on using one of the user accounts that have the "Siebel Administrator" role 
assigned in the LDAP directory.
If the login is successful and we can retrieve information from the command line  
(for example using the list servers command), then we have properly conigured 
the Siebel Gateway Name Server to authenticate user sessions via an external 
directory server.
In the case of errors, we must consult the Siebel Gateway Name Server's log iles 
and verify all coniguration steps.
Coniguring Siebel clients for LDAP 
authentication (optional)
If our company's security requirements include directory server-based user 
authentication for Siebel clients such as the Siebel Developer Web Client or 
Siebel Tools, we can switch from the default database authentication to LDAP 
authentication in a similar manner as we discussed for the Siebel Gateway  
Name Server.

User Authentication
[ 330 ]
We could simply edit the client's coniguration ile (.cfg) similarly to the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server's coniguration ile. But let us consider the administrative 
overhead that would arise when we had to make changes to dozens of coniguration 
iles on different workstations. To avoid this time-consuming and error-prone 
process, Siebel CRM clients have the capability to read the authentication 
information from a centrally stored ile, which we can for example place in a  
shared network folder.
The following process must be completed to enable directory server-based user 
authentication for the Siebel Developer Web Client or Siebel Tools:
1. Set the SecThickClientExtAuthent system preference to TRUE
2. Create the central authentication coniguration ile
3. Modify the client coniguration ile
4. Verify directory server authentication for the Siebel client.
In the following section, we will discuss each step of this process in detail.
Setting the SecThickClientExtAuthent  
system preference to TRUE
System preferences are enterprise-wide parameters that are stored in the Siebel 
database. We can view, create, and modify system preferences using either the  
Siebel Web client or Siebel Tools.
The SecThickClientExtAuthent system preference must be set to TRUE in order to 
allow "thick clients"—a term used to describe the Siebel Developer Web Client or 
Siebel Tools, as they both must be installed locally, hence they are "thick"—to use 
external authentication mechanisms.
In the Siebel Web client, we navigate to the Administration - Application screen and 
click the hyperlink for the System Preferences view.
In the list, we query for the SecThickClientExtAuthent system preference and set 
the value to TRUE. We then step off the record or save the record using CTRL+S on 
the keyboard. The following screenshot shows the System Preferences view in the 
Administration - Application screen:

Chapter 10
[ 331 ]
The SecThickClientExtAuthent system preference value is set to TRUE to support 
external authentication for the Siebel Developer Web Client or Siebel Tools.
Creating the central authentication  
coniguration ile
To avoid repetitive work when changes are made to the directory server 
infrastructure, we create a new text ile and ensure that it can be accessed for  
reading from all machines that host Siebel clients.
The content of the ile is only the [LDAPSecAdpt] section, which usually resides in 
the local client coniguration iles. The following table describes the parameters in  
the [LDAPSecAdpt] section and gives examples:
Parameter
Example Value
ServerName
osappeval1
Port
15313
BaseDN
ou=People,dc=us,dc=oracle,dc=com
SharedCredentialsDN
uid=CCredentials,ou=Special 
Users,dc=us,dc=oracle,dc=com
UsernameAttributeType
uid
PasswordAttributeType
userPassword
CredentialsAttributeType
mail
ApplicationUser
uid=admin,ou=Administrators,ou=Top
ologyManagement 
,o=NetscapeRoot
ApplicationPassword
LdApAdMin
PropagateChange
TRUE
SiebelUsernameAttributeType
uid

User Authentication
[ 332 ]
We must save the ile with no other content but the [LDAPSecAdpt] section in a 
shared folder. An example ile path could be \\workserver\share1\
siebel_ldap.cfg.
The shared credentials user account in the directory server should not deine proxy 
data sources when used with Siebel clients. We can create an additional shared 
credentials account and deine the following value in the attribute used to carry the 
proxy connection information:
username=SADMIN password=TJay357D
The user for the proxy connection must be a registered Siebel user. If security 
concerns arise because we use SADMIN as the proxy, any other registered user  
can be used as a proxy user.
Modifying the client coniguration ile
We must now direct the Siebel client executable to the central LDAP coniguration 
ile we just created. This can be accomplished by setting the following parameters in 
the [InfraSecMgr] section in the client's coniguration ile (.cfg).
Parameter
Example Value
SecAdptName
LDAPSecAdpt
SecAdptMode
LDAP
UseRemoteConfig
\\workserver\share1\siebel_ldap.cfg
If the UseRemoteConig parameter is present, the client executable will ignore the 
[LDAPSecAdpt] section in the local coniguration ile and try to read the information 
from the ile deined in the parameter value.
The above applies to Siebel Developer Web Client coniguration iles and the Siebel 
Tools coniguration ile (tools.cfg). If the [InfraSecMgr] section is not present, we 
must create it in the ile.
Verifying directory server authentication for  
the Siebel client
We should now be able to start the Siebel Developer Web Client or Siebel Tools and 
log in using any user account that is present in the LDAP directory tree.
In the case of errors, we must consult the Siebel client's log ile and verify the 
coniguration steps.

Chapter 10
[ 333 ]
If we have to troubleshoot the local client software we can set 
the SIEBEL_LOG_EVENTS environment variable to a value of 4 
or 5 to increase the amount of information in the client's log ile.
However, we must ensure that the environment variable is 
deleted or set to a value of 0 for normal operation. Higher log 
levels always affect performance negatively.
Web Single-Sign-On
Web Single-Sign-On allows companies to deploy web-based portal pages from 
which users can launch other web applications such as Siebel CRM. The typical 
scenario is that the end user community does not wish to provide login credentials 
for each web application repetitively. To accommodate this requirement, Siebel  
CRM supports web Single-Sign-On (SSO).
Web SSO is based on user authentication at the web server level. The web server 
takes care of authenticating the user. On Microsoft Windows platforms, this is 
typically achieved with Microsoft Internet Information Services (IIS) and Microsoft 
Active Directory (AD).

User Authentication
[ 334 ]
The following diagram depicts the Siebel Web SSO architecture and its 
authentication low:
We can describe the authentication low for Web SSO as follows:
1.  The end user accesses the Siebel Web client URL.
2.  The web server authenticates the user and passes the username to  
the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE).
3.  The SWSE retrieves the trust token from its coniguration ile and passes 
it to the application object manager. The trust token is an encrypted string 
which—when accompanying a user session request—identiies the user as 
authenticated, or "trusted".
4.  The application object manager uses the security adapter to verify  
the trust token.
5.  When the trust token from the SWSE matches the trust token stored in the 
security adapter enterprise proile, the application object manager establishes 
a session for the user without prompting for a username and password.

Chapter 10
[ 335 ]
Web SSO is only supported in conjunction with an LDAP or ADSI 
security adapter. This is because only the enterprise proiles for LDAP 
or ADSI security adapters can store the trust token as a parameter.
In summary, the end user experience is such that she or he just has to provide 
the login ID and password only once, typically when logging on to the Microsoft 
Windows workstation.
Next, we will describe a simple test scenario that implements Web SSO using 
Microsoft's Internet Information Services (IIS) as the web server and Windows local 
user management as the external authentication system. In order to set up Web SSO, 
the following steps must be executed at least:
1. Create a non-anonymous virtual directory on the web server
2. Create or verify user accounts in the external authentication system
3. Modify the SWSE coniguration ile
4. Modify the security adapter
5. Verify the Web SSO coniguration
Creating a non-anonymous virtual directory 
on the web server
In our example Web SSO coniguration, we will use the web server's built-in 
authentication capabilities. In order to enforce username and password retrieval 
when a directory is accessed, we must modify the directory security settings to 
disallow anonymous access. In the example below we modify the security settings 
for the virtual directory of the German Siebel Call Center application.

User Authentication
[ 336 ]
The following screenshot shows the Directory Security settings for the 
callcenter_DEU virtual directory in Microsoft IIS:
Anonymous access has been disabled. Integrated Windows authentication is 
enabled. When these settings are applied, only users that are authenticated by 
Windows (when logging in at the workstation) are eligible to access the virtual 
directory's content.

Chapter 10
[ 337 ]
Creating or verifying user accounts in  
the external authentication system
As we are exploring a Microsoft Windows scenario, we must ensure that a 
Windows account exists for each Siebel user we wish to use as test accounts. In 
real life production systems, these would typically be created or already present in 
Microsoft Active Directory. In our simple example, we create a local test user account 
on the Windows machine using the Local Users and Groups section in the Windows 
Computer Management console.
The test account must also be a registered user in the Siebel application. If the user 
is not already registered, we must create a test employee with the same user ID as 
used for the Windows user account in the Employee administration view in the 
Administration - User screen in the Siebel Web client.
Modifying the Siebel Web Server Extension 
coniguration ile
In order to enable Web SSO for the German Siebel Call Center application, we must 
edit the Siebel Web Server Extension's (SWSE) coniguration ile (eapps.cfg). We 
can locate the eapps.cfg ile in the BIN directory of the SWSE installation folder.
Before we start adding parameters to the section, we must create an encrypted 
representation of the trust token. As explained above, the trust token is a string that 
is passed from the SWSE to the application object manager to identify the user as 
already authenticated. For security reasons, the trust token should not be entered in 
the eapps.cfg ile in clear text.
To encrypt the trust token string, we have to use the encryptstring utility, which 
resides in the SWSE's bin directory. In order to encrypt the string HELLO—an 
example string that we choose as the trust token—we open a command shell, 
navigate to the SWSE's bin directory and enter the following command:
encryptstring HELLO
The output of the encryptstring utility is the encrypted representation of the string 
HELLO. The following screenshot shows the usage of the encryptstring utility and 
its output:

User Authentication
[ 338 ]
We should copy the output string to the clipboard to have it ready for inserting into 
the eapps.cfg ile. We open the ile with a text editor of our choice and look up the 
[/callcenter_deu] section that deines the parameters for the German Siebel Call 
Center application.
We append the following parameters to the section:
Parameter
Example Value
Description
SingleSignOn
TRUE
Enables SSO for the application.
TrustToken
svHnyKBl11UBmVNIBw==
The encrypted representation of the 
trust token string.
UserSpec
REMOTE_USER
The default variable used by the 
web server to pass the username.
UserSpecSource
Server
Deines the web server as the source 
of the UserSpec parameter value.
In addition, we must add or edit the following parameter in the [swe] section of the 
eapps.cfg ile:
Parameter
Example Value
Description
IntegratedDomainAuth
TRUE
Must be set to TRUE 
to support Windows 
Integrated Authentication.
Source: Siebel Security Guide, Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/Secur/ 
booktitle.html
The following screenshot shows a portion of the modiied eapps.cfg ile:

Chapter 10
[ 339 ]
The parameters have been added as described above to support Web SSO for the 
German Siebel Call Center application.
After modifying the ile, we save it and restart the web server service to reinitialize 
the Siebel Web Server Extension.
Modifying the LDAP security adapter
To inalize the server-side settings to support Web SSO, we must set two parameters 
of the LDAP security adapter enterprise proile. As usual, we should create a script 
ile and use the Siebel Server Manager command line utility to apply the changes. 
The command in the ile is as follows:
change param SingleSignOn=TRUE,TrustToken=HELLO for named subsystem 
ldapsecadpt
This command sets the SingleSignOn parameter value to TRUE, thereby enabling 
Web SSO functionality for the security adapter. The TrustToken parameter value 
is set to HELLO, which is the unencrypted trust token string.
After applying the changes, we must restart the Siebel server(s), which host the 
application object manager for which we wish to enable Web SSO.
Verifying the Web SSO coniguration
To verify the successful Web SSO coniguration, we log on to the Windows machine 
using the new test account. Once the user is logged on, we open an Internet Explorer 
window and navigate to a URL similar to the following for the German Siebel Call 
Center application:
http://osappeval1/callcenter_deu
If Web SSO is properly conigured, the Siebel application should launch and navigate 
directly to the application homepage view where we can use the salutation text to 
verify that the user has been authenticated without the need to provide a username 
and password in the Siebel login page.

User Authentication
[ 340 ]
The following screenshot shows the Siebel Call Center homepage with the salutation 
text for Alexander Hansal:
The user has been authenticated by Web SSO. We should consider deleting the test 
account after successful veriication if security regulations apply.
If you wish to practice setting up Web SSO for a Siebel application, you 
can do so by following the steps in the above example. You should bear in 
mind that this is only an example for demonstration purposes and a real 
life implementation of Web SSO would involve more steps.

Chapter 10
[ 341 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to switch from the default user authentication 
mechanism, namely database authentication, to external directory server-
based authentication. After exploring the functionality of the security adapter 
infrastructure, an example coniguration for LDAP authentication was discussed.
LDAP authentication is supported for Siebel server software such as application 
object managers or the Siebel Gateway Name Server. The chapter introduced us to 
the complete procedure of setting up LDAP authentication for a Siebel application. 
To support centralized user management for user communities that use  
"thick clients" such as Developer Web Client or Siebel Tools, we described the 
procedures to enable LDAP authentication for Siebel clients as well.
To accommodate the requirement to only log in once to the workstation and then 
access all web applications without having to log in again, we learned how to set up 
a Siebel application for Web Single-Sign-On.
In the next chapter, we will explore the principles of Siebel user authorization  
and access control.


User Authorization and 
Access Control
Given the fact that the founders of Siebel Systems Inc. started designing Siebel CRM 
in the early nineties, and that several hundreds of engineers have been continuously 
extending the functionality of Siebel CRM, we ind today the result of thousands of 
person-years of innovation. This vast array of functionality for use across various 
industries will never be made accessible to a single user in its entirety for the simple 
reason of the confusion and frustration arising from the abundance of information.
The other reason for limiting access to application features and data for end users is 
data security. This is a major aspect of every software implementation project.
In this chapter, we will explore the mechanisms of user authorization—how we 
can manage the access to Siebel CRM functionality for large user groups—and the 
concepts behind data access control. The chapter will be structured as follows:
• 
Understanding Siebel Access Control
• 
Controlling access to Siebel views
• 
Controlling access to customer data
• 
Controlling access to master data
• 
Personalized access to features and data

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 344 ]
Understanding Siebel Access Control
Siebel Access Control is the inal security layer that an end user has to pass in order 
to get access to Siebel CRM functionality and data. The following diagram depicts 
the security layers that a user typically has to cross to access application functionality 
and data:
Network security is typically represented by the requirement to log in with a valid 
username and password to the corporate network using either the workstation 
logon provided by the operating system or a secure connection via the Internet, for 
example by means of VPN (Virtual Private Network) protocols.
To access the various applications that a company deploys to its staff, the end user 
either has to provide security credentials such as a username and password or she or 
he is authenticated by an integrated mechanism such as Web Single-Sign-On (SSO). 
Application security for Siebel CRM has been discussed in the previous chapter.
Once the user is logged on to the Siebel CRM application, she or he must have access 
to a set of screens and views, depending on which business processes are part of her 
or his work assignment. Feature access, or in other terms the authorization to use the 
Siebel views, which a user needs to carry out the assigned business processes, is a vital 
part of Siebel CRM user authorization and will be discussed in detail in this chapter.

Chapter 11
[ 345 ]
Finally, depending on the position or job entitlement of the end user, data access 
control mechanisms must be in place to ensure that the end user has exactly deined 
access to the data she or he needs to execute the business processes or is allowed to 
see. In this chapter, we will also discuss the mechanisms to control access to data in 
Siebel CRM.
As a Siebel administrator, it's important to understand the mechanisms that deine 
an end user's access to Siebel views and the data therein in order to be able to 
manage and troubleshoot data security in Siebel CRM.
Controlling access to Siebel views
When we look at a Siebel view from a high level, it has the characteristics of a web 
page that provides access to data stored in the Siebel database or external systems 
and the functionality to work with that data. The functionality can range from simple 
queries in the data set to complex automated steps. Creating a new quote for a 
customer from the Account List View is an example of the latter.
The screenshot below shows the Account List View in the Siebel Web client:

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 346 ]
We can observe that the end user has access to account records and that for each 
record a set of commands is available in the context menu. The New Quote 
command visible in the context menu is an example of functionality beyond 
simple record querying and manipulation.
The importance of business process analysis
From a business process perspective, a user who is in charge of looking up or 
creating a customer account and then creating a new quote for the customer needs 
access to the above described Siebel view. Next, we will learn how business analysts 
gather this kind of information.
During the early phases of Siebel CRM projects, business analysts conduct 
workshops with end users to determine the exact deinitions of the company's 
business processes. They then map each step in a business process that should be 
executed in Siebel CRM to a Siebel view.
The following diagram depicts the relationships between the business process, its 
steps, and the detailed instructions for each step as well as the mapping of each 
business process step to a Siebel view:
Detailed instructions can relate to applets in the view such as "Click the Query 
button in the form applet".
When a business analyst performs the business process analysis thoroughly—
including the mapping of business process steps to Siebel views—she or he bridges 
the gap between business and technical perspective, thus providing the foundation 
for a process-driven CRM project. Process-driven projects are considered more 
successful and faster than technology-driven projects where user communities are 
presented with a new application without prior business process analysis.

Chapter 11
[ 347 ]
When the business analysis is completed, we also should ind information on which 
persons in the Siebel CRM user community should execute which business process. 
The business analysis team can achieve this by adding information about user 
groups and users to the business process documentation. The following diagram 
shows how user and group information is related to each business process:
Each business process can be among the daily tasks of many groups, which in turn 
have one or more users.
When the business process documentation includes the information about the users 
and groups entitled to a business process, we can easily derive a list of Siebel views 
that a single user needs to execute her or his daily tasks in Siebel CRM.
The business analysis team can now continue to relate business information  
to technical information by mapping users and groups to Siebel entities. The 
following diagram introduces the concept of Responsibility:
Responsibility is a Siebel entity that represents the main mechanism of controlling 
access to views for groups of users who share the same business processes.
Using responsibilities to control access  
to views
As we have learned from the above diagram, a responsibility is a list of users 
and a list of views at the same time. Each user can be associated with one or  
more responsibilities. A view can be listed in many responsibilities.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 348 ]
Responsibilities are administered in a set of specialized views in the Siebel Web 
client. Administrators can use these views to modify or create responsibilities and 
associate them with users and views.
We can access the responsibility administration views by logging in to a 
Siebel application using an administrative user account, navigating to the 
Administration - Application screen in the site map, and clicking the hyperlink for 
the Responsibilities view. The following screenshot shows the Responsibilities 
administration view:
Using this view, administrators can create and modify responsibilities (upper list 
applet) and associate them with views (lower-left list applet) and users (lower-right 
list applet).
Working with responsibilities includes various tasks, which can be listed as follows:
• 
Creating or modifying responsibilities
• 
Understanding the implications of view access
• 
Controlling view access on local databases

Chapter 11
[ 349 ]
• 
Controlling read only behavior of views
• 
Controlling the tab layout for screens and views
Next we will discuss each task in detail. Example scenarios will be given in each 
section as well.
Creating or modifying responsibilities
In order to understand how to create or modify responsibilities and how these 
settings affect the end user experience, we will explore an example scenario. We  
can use any of the so-called seed responsibilities that are loaded into the Siebel 
database during the installation process for research purposes.
The following task list guides us through the process of associating a user with  
a responsibility:
1. Log in to the Siebel application as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Application screen, 
Responsibilities view.
3. Query for the seed responsibility named "Universal Agent".
4. Use the CTRL+B keyboard shortcut to copy the Universal 
Agent responsibility.
5. Enter a meaningful name for the new responsibility.
6. Navigate to the Administration - User screen, Employees view.
7. Locate or create a test employee account (not SADMIN). If you create a  
new employee, you must also ensure that a user account for that employee 
exists in the authentication system.
8. In the responsibilities list for the test employee, ensure that only the new test 
responsibility is selected.
9. Open a new browser window and navigate to the Siebel Call Center URL.
10. Log on using the test employee account.
11. Navigate to the site map and compare it to the site map you see in the irst 
session (of the administrative user).
12. Verify that the site map in the test user's session provides a smaller set of 
screens and views.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 350 ]
The following screenshot shows the site map resulting from the assignment of a copy 
of the Universal Agent responsibility to a user of Siebel Call Center:
The site map shows fewer screens than the Siebel Administrator has access to.
Understanding the implications of view access
Only views listed in the user's responsibilities can be accessed by the user. This 
means that the following elements of the user interface are only present (or active) 
when the user has the target view listed in one of his or her responsibilities:
• 
Tabs and Links
• 
Hyperlinks in the site map
• 
Drill down hyperlinks
• 
Links from screens and application home pages
• 
View links in iHelp items
In addition, the user will receive an error message if she or he tries to access the 
view by using a bookmark or direct entry in the browser address bar. Similar error 
situations can occur when a Siebel worklow or a script tries to access the view on  
the user's behalf.
As an example, we can verify the site map management by removing the views  
that belong to the Administration - Training screen from the test responsibility. 
The following task list guides us through the process:

Chapter 11
[ 351 ]
1. If necessary, log in to the Siebel application as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Application screen, Responsibilities view.
3. Locate the test responsibility created earlier.
4. In the Views list, delete the following views:
 °
Training Test Run List View
 °
Training Test Run Detail View
5. Click the Clear Cache button in the Responsibilities list.
6. Log in to Siebel Call Center using the test employee account.
7. Verify that the Administration - Training screen is no longer present in the 
site map.
When conducting the business process analysis for a Siebel CRM project, it is highly 
beneicial to collect information about the necessary views early in the project. 
Adhering to high standards of project management ensures that critical information 
such as which user group has access to which set of views is available when needed.
Controlling view access on local databases
In order to avoid slow performance and network congestion during synchronization 
of local databases with Siebel Remote, we can control the availability of views in 
local databases. Typically, views that allow the end user to access large data sets 
should be made unavailable when the user is working ofline. Examples for these 
views are the "All Accounts" or "All Accounts across Organization views", as well as 
most administrative views.
The Local Access lag in the view list controls the availability of a view in a Siebel 
Mobile Web Client. The screenshot below shows the Views list applet in the 
Responsibilities view in the Application - Administration screen with the Local 
Access column.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 352 ]
Some views in the above screenshot have the Local Access lag unchecked. Mobile 
users will therefore be unable to access these views. In addition, data that would be 
visible in these views will not be synchronized to the local database, thus increasing 
the speed of the overall synchronization process.
Controlling read-only behaviour of views
Under some circumstances, companies want to provide read-only access to data to one 
group of users while others should still be able to create, update, or delete data. Siebel 
CRM supports this behaviour by providing a Read Only View lag. When this lag 
is set for a view, all users who have the responsibility containing that view can only 
access the data in the view in read-only mode. They will not be able to insert, update, 
or delete records in the view. The screenshot shows the All Account List View with 
the Read Only View lag set in the responsibility administration view.
This lag can be set for each view-responsibility association. The setting is only 
effective when a view is set to read only in all responsibilities that the user is 
assigned to.
The screenshot below shows the form applet in the All Account List View for a user 
who has the Read Only View lag checked in all responsibilities that contain this view:
The effect of the setting is that all data ields are greyed out and the New and Delete 
buttons are inactive. As a result, the user can not insert, update, or delete records in 
that view.

Chapter 11
[ 353 ]
Controlling the tab layout for screens and views
In addition to allowing administrators to control the access to views and their 
behaviour, responsibilities also allow for deining a default tab layout. In Siebel  
terms, tabs are clickable items in the UI that allow a user to select either a  
screen—navigating to the default view for the screen—or a detail view.
We refer to the tab layout as the order of appearance in the screen bar and view bar of 
the Siebel user interface. The tab layout is controlled by a total of three mechanisms:
• 
Metadata in the Siebel repository ile
• 
The tab layout for the responsibility
• 
The individual tab layout for each user
Next we will explore how to modify the tab layout for a responsibility. This task  
list explains the procedure to change the appearance of screen and view tabs for  
the Siebel Call Center application:
1. Log in to the Siebel application as an administrator.
2. Navigate to the Application - Administration screen, Tab Layout view.
3. In the Responsibilities list, query for the responsibility you wish to modify.
4. In the Application list, query for Siebel Universal Agent (this is the technical 
application name for Siebel Call Center).
5. In the Screen Tab Layout list, set the order number for the Service screen to 3.
6. Check the Hide lag for the Administration - Product screen.
7. Select the Accounts screen.
8. In the View Tab Layout list, check the Default View lag for the My  
Accounts view.
9. Click the Clear Cache button on the top list applet.
10. Log on to a second session for Siebel Call Center as a test employee who  
has the modiied responsibility as the primary responsibility.
11 Verify the following:
 °
The Service screen tab is the third tab from the left
 °
The Administration - Product screen tab is not visible
 °
Clicking the Accounts screen navigates to the My  
Accounts view
The above procedure serves as an example to demonstrate how the tab layout 
settings affect the end user experience.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 354 ]
Use your Siebel demonstration installation 
to experiment with responsibilities using the 
information above as guidance.
Controlling access to customer data
When we think about the fact that the Siebel database stores data that is being 
viewed and modiied by hundreds or thousands of employees of a company, 
potentially thousands of customers and even external companies, we ind that 
eficient iltering of data is a mandatory requirement.
Customer data records such as accounts, service requests, orders, and agreements must 
be "tagged" with which user group or users can access them. In Siebel CRM, almost 
every entity can be associated with the following data to enable precise data security:
• 
One or many users or employees
• 
One or many positions
• 
One or many organizations
The following diagram helps us understand the relations between these entities:

Chapter 11
[ 355 ]
A user is a person who can use login credentials (a unique login name and a 
password) to log in to a Siebel application. A user must be associated with at least one 
responsibility. Customers who are given access to Siebel data by means of customer 
facing applications such as Siebel eSales or eService are an example of registered users. 
A Siebel employee is deined as a user who is lagged as an internal employee and is 
therefore associated with at least one position. A position can also be described as a job 
role in a company and is always part of an organization. Organization is a term used 
in Siebel to describe a part of a company structure, such as an internal department, or 
an external organization, such as a partner company whose employees are granted 
access to Siebel applications such as the Siebel Partner Portal.
Each customer data record can be associated with one or more employees or users by 
storing a reference to the employee or user as a foreign key. The ield which allows us 
to view or modify this relationship in the user interface is typically labelled "Owner".
When we associate a record with one or more positions, this is called a "Team" in 
Siebel terms. This is because a position can be a group of employees who have the 
same job within an organizational unit. For example "Call Center Agent" can be a 
position held by hundreds of employees.
By associating a record to one or more organizations, we can provide a iltering 
mechanism that allows us to hide information from other companies or departments. 
This is also called multi-tenancy.
Managing users, employees, positions, and organizations is discussed in greater 
detail in the next chapter.
In the following, we will describe some scenarios to strengthen our understanding 
of Siebel access control. All examples can be reproduced using the Siebel Sample 
Database and the Siebel Mobile Web Client. Chapter 6 of this book discussed how to 
install the Siebel clients and the sample database.
Controlling record access for a single user  
or employee
To discover how Siebel customer data records can be eficiently retrieved and iltered 
for individual users or employees, we can use the Siebel Service functionality. A 
service request describes a customer inquiry or problem and must be resolved by a 
single person in the company.
By using a command line (or Windows shortcut) similar to the following, we can 
launch the Siebel eService application and connect to the Siebel Sample Database using 
the demo user account of Dana Smith (DSMITH). For convenience, it is recommended 
to create Windows shortcuts in order to launch the test applications more easily:

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 356 ]
D:\SIA81\CLIENT\BIN\siebel.exe /c D:\SIA81\CLIENT\bin\ENU\eservice.cfg /d 
sample /u DSMITH /p DSMITH
The Demo Users Reference document in the Siebel bookshelf lists 
all demo user accounts that are provided in the Siebel Sample 
Database for various Siebel applications. Using demo user 
accounts for evaluation and research purposes is more beneicial 
than using the SADMIN account because the demo users and 
employees are associated with more meaningful responsibilities. 
This allows us to create test scenarios and evaluate them from the 
perspective of different application users.
The following screenshot shows the homepage of Siebel eService for Dana Smith, 
which is displayed when we launch the application as described above:

Chapter 11
[ 357 ]
We can now verify that Dana Smith has used Siebel eService before to create service 
requests. By clicking the Check status of a service request link in the My Company 
section of the homepage, we navigate to the list of service requests created by Dana 
Smith. No other eService user will ever be able to see those service requests because 
the application logic matches the creator ield value of each service request with the 
ID of the current user to ilter the data.
The following screenshot shows the My Service Request list for Dana Smith in 
Siebel eService:
It is a good idea to note (or copy to the clipboard) the service request number (in the 
column labeled SR #) of the irst service request.
We can now use the Siebel Public Sector application to explore the role of the demo 
user Ashley Cohen (ACOHEN). Siebel Public Sector is just one of many applications 
that could be used to explore Siebel access control from the perspective of an 
employee. By using a command line or Windows shortcut similar to the following, 
we can launch the application and connect to the Siebel Sample Database using 
ACOHEN as the username and password.
D:\SIA81\CLIENT\BIN\siebel.exe /c D:\SIA81\CLIENT\bin\enu\publicsector.
cfg /d sample /u ACOHEN /p ACOHEN
Once the application is launched, we navigate to the Service screen and click the 
hyperlink for the My Service Requests list view. In the list, we use the SR # column 
to query for the service request created by Dana Smith. We can paste the service 
request number from the clipboard.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 358 ]
The following screenshot shows the detail form applet in the My Service Request list 
view displaying the service request created by Dana Smith:
The reason why Ashley Cohen is able to see this service request in the My Service 
Requests list view is that her employee record is associated with the service request 
record by means of the Owner ield (fourth ield from above in the Status and 
Ownership section) thus indicating that Ashley Cohen is responsible for resolving 
the service request.
To retrieve all service requests that a user is assigned to, the Siebel application 
matches the current user's ID with the ID stored in the Owner ield.
This concludes our example for controlling record access for single users or employees.
Controlling record access for  
multiple employees
In the following section we will examine a scenario for a record that must be visible 
to multiple employees. An easy to follow example is in the form of Siebel activities, 
which are also displayed in the calendar views. We will create a new activity for a 
meeting and assign a colleague to it. Again, we will use the Siebel Sample Database. 
We can follow the following task list to accomplish this:

Chapter 11
[ 359 ]
1. Log in to the Siebel Call Center application as the Siebel Administrator 
(SADMIN) and connect to the Sample database.
2. Navigate to the Activities screen - Activities List.
3. Create a new activity record.
4. Enter a description, for example Test access control.
5. Enter a value in the Duration ield, for example 60 (minutes).
6. Click the select icon in the Employees ield and add Casey Cheng (CCHENG) 
to the list of selected employees.
7. Step off the record or press CTRL+S to save the activity.
8. In the File Menu, click Connect. The Connect command allows us to log in 
to the application with a different user account without having to log off 
completely.
9. In the Login dialog, enter CCHENG as the username and password.
10. Once the session for Casey Cheng is established, verify that the activity is 
visible in both the My Activities list and the Calendar on the homepage view.
The following screenshot shows the Siebel Call Center homepage view for the demo 
user Casey Cheng:
The activity created by the Siebel Administrator user is visible in Casey's activity list 
and calendar.
Activities are examples for records that can be associated with one or more employees. 
The Siebel application displays all activities that a user is assigned to because it 
matches the user's ID with the IDs that are associated with the activity records.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 360 ]
Controlling record access for teams based  
on positions
Entities such as service requests or activities have a relatively short life cycle. This 
means that the persons associated with the data will likely work with the record 
from its creation to completion of the task.
This is different for records such as accounts or contacts that have a much longer 
lifespan. The people responsible for an account might very well change over the years.
In order to avoid the administrative overhead that would arise from associating 
individuals with long lived records, Siebel CRM supports the concept of positions. 
A position is an individual job description in an organization. Each employee 
must be associated with at least one position that in turn must be associated with 
an organization. By reading this information, the Siebel application can determine 
which organization the employee belongs to.
The following example uses the Siebel Sample Database to demonstrate how 
positions can be used to create sales teams for opportunities and how the association 
of positions to records inluences the visibility of these records.
We can follow the task list below to verify the behaviour of Siebel access control:
1. Log in to Siebel Sales as Terry Smythe (TSMYTHE) connecting to  
the Sample database.
2. Navigate to the Opportunities screen, My Opportunities list view.
3. Create a new opportunity record.
4. Enter a meaningful name, for example "Test Opportunity".
5. Enter a Revenue amount of 100,000 USD.
6. Step off the record or press CTRL+S to save it.
7. Click the select icon in the Sales Team ield and verify that Terry Smythe's 
current position (HT 20 21 Sales Representative) has been automatically 
added to the team.
8. Add the position HT 20 10 Sales Vice President to the team by using the 
functionality of the shuttle applet. Note that this position is held by Nat 
Sachs (NSACHS).
9. Use the File menu's Connect command to connect to the Siebel Sales 
application as Nat Sachs by using NSACHS as the username and password.
10 Navigate to the My Opportunities list view and verify that the record created 
by Terry Smythe is visible for Nat Sachs.

Chapter 11
[ 361 ]
11. Use the File menu's Connect command to connect to the Siebel Sales 
application as Madison Stern by using MSTERN as the username  
and password.
12. Navigate to the My Opportunities list view and verify that the record created 
by Terry Smythe is not visible for Madison Stern. This is because Madison 
Stern's position is not on the Sales Team.
13. Navigate to the My Team's Opportunities list (by using the dropdown in  
the title bar of the list) and verify that the record created by Terry Smythe  
is visible for Madison Stern.
The My Team's Opportunities view directs the Siebel application to consider the 
position hierarchy. Because Madison Stern's current position is registered as a parent 
position to Terry Smythe's position, Madison can see the opportunity in the My 
Team's view without the need to explicitly add her position to the Sales Team.
To review the position hierarchy, we use the File menu's Connect command to 
connect to the Siebel Sales application as the Siebel Administrator by using SADMIN 
as the username and password. We can follow this task list to verify the reporting 
relationship between Madison Stern and Terry Smythe:
1. Log on to the Siebel application as SADMIN.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Group screen, Positions view.
3. In the form applet, click the Query button.
4. Enter "Stern" in the Last Name ield and click Go. This retrieves the position 
that Madison Stern is associated with (HT 20 20 Sales Manager).
5. Copy the position name into the clipboard.
6. Run a new query and paste the position name into the Position ield.  
Click Go.
7. Expand the explorer tree on the left side of the view to verify that Terry 
Smythe's position is a child position of Madison Stern's position, indicating 
that Madison is Terry's manager.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 362 ]
The following screenshot shows the Positions view in the Administration - Group 
screen:
The explorer tree is expanded and displays the reporting relationship between the 
manager and the sales representatives.
The "My Team's" views allow managers to view all records that are associated to 
their subordinates.
Controlling record access for different 
companies based on organizations
Organizations are used in Siebel CRM to represent separate business units that can 
be associated with records to allow eficient and secure iltering of data. Siebel CRM 
supports multiple separate hierarchies of organizations. This allows us to deine 
multi-tenant compatible applications.
The following example uses the Siebel Sample Database and demonstrates how  
two different companies can share information about sales opportunities using  
the Siebel Partner Portal, a standard interactivity application which runs in a  
variety of browsers.
We can follow the task list below to discover access control based on organizations:
1. Log on as Siebel Administrator to the Siebel Sample Database using the 
Siebel Sales application.
2. Navigate to the Opportunities screen, My Opportunities view.
3. Create a new test opportunity and enter a meaningful name.
4. Drill down on the opportunity name.
5. Click the More Info tab in the middle of the view.

Chapter 11
[ 363 ]
6. Click the select icon in the Organization ield.
7. Add the HT 51 Active Systems - HQ organization to the list of 
selected organizations.
8. Step off the record or press CTRL+S to save the opportunity.
9. Use a command line or Windows shortcut similar to the following to log 
in to the Siebel Partner Portal application as Robin Marlow, a manager at 
Active Systems, an external organization registered in the Siebel database as 
a partner company.
 
D:\SIA81\CLIENT\BIN\siebel.exe /c D:\SIA81\CLIENT\bin\ENU\scw.cfg  
 
/d sample /u RMARLOW /p RMARLOW
10. Click the Check Opportunities for the Company hyperlink in the My Links 
applet in the middle of the Partner Portal home page.
11. Verify that the opportunity created before is visible to Robin Marlow.
The following screenshot shows the All Opportunities list in the Siebel Partner 
Portal application:
The opportunity displayed can be accessed by the external employee Robin Marlow 
because his company is registered as an organization in Siebel CRM and that 
organization has been associated with the opportunity record.
Follow the scenarios for access control for customer 
data described in the above section on your 
demonstration machine.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 364 ]
Controlling access to master data
We have learned above that access to data in Siebel CRM can be controlled for 
each record individually. On the one hand, this is necessary and required but  
on the other hand, there is a high level of effort required to manage data visibility on 
a record-by-record basis.
For this reason, Siebel CRM provides the ability to create catalogs that are divided 
into categories and grant access on the catalogue or category level. The ability to 
create catalogs is limited to the so-called Siebel master data entities.
Siebel master data can be described as relatively static, authored data such as products 
or documents. Such records will only be created and modiied by a small group of 
administrators but referenced very often by the business users. Product records are 
typically grouped to sales catalogs to provide easier presentation and browsing of 
product data in online portals. Instead of associating each product with a user or group 
directly, access control takes place at the category or catalog level. The following table 
describes major Siebel master data entities that we can create catalogs of:
Siebel Entity
Typical Usage
Description
Product
Online Selling
Products can be presented in hierarchical 
categories. Templates can be used to deine the 
look and feel of the data display.
Literature
Knowledge 
Libraries
Documents can be uploaded into Siebel. Large 
amounts of information can be presented in a 
structured manner.
Solution, 
Resolution Item
Knowledge 
Base
Solutions and associated resolution items can be 
used to store information about how to resolve 
issues. Typically used in service scenarios.
Training Course, 
Curriculum
Training 
Library
End users can use the training catalog to ind and 
register for training classes.
SmartScript
Self Service 
Wizards
SmartScripts can be designed to guide employees 
through internal processes.
Competitor, 
Decision Issues
Sales Library
Competitor information and sales decision issues 
can be easier located in catalog format.
Event
Event Catalog
Events can be presented in a catalog for easier 
lookup and registration.
The mechanism to control access to catalogs and categories is an access group. An 
access group is a collection of other groups of people such as user lists, companies, 
households, or internal divisions. The beneit of access groups is that data visibility 
is granted independent of the relationship of the members of the group. This is the 
main difference to classic access control, which is based on the hierarchical nature of 
organizations or positions.

Chapter 11
[ 365 ]
The following screenshot shows the Access Groups view in the Administration - 
Groups screen:
In this view, administrators can create access groups by associating user lists, 
accounts, internal divisions, positions, and organizations or households without 
being limited by organizational boundaries.
In the following scenario, we explore how access groups can be used to control access 
to catalogs and categories in Siebel CRM. The example uses the Siebel sample database. 
We can follow the following task list to discover access control for master data:
1. Log in to Siebel Call Center as the Siebel Administrator (SADMIN), 
connecting to the sample database.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Catalog screen, Catalog  
Administration view.
3. Query for the Corporate and Business Units catalog.
4. Verify that the catalog type is set to InfoCenter. This makes the catalog 
available for use in the Info Center screen to provide information for internal 
employees and partners.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 366 ]
5. Drill down on the catalog name to see the categories for this catalog.
6. Create a new category named Test. Note that the category has the Private 
lag checked by default. Keep the private lag checked.
7. Click the Literature link.
8. Click the Add button in the Literature list and add a selection of PDF 
documents to the Test category (use the File Type column to query for pdf  
as the ile type).
9. Navigate to the site map and select the Info Center screen.
10. In the Info Center screen, verify that the Corporate and Business Units 
catalog is visible.
11. Verify that the Test category is visible.
12. Click on the Test category.
13. Verify that a list of documents is displayed.
14. Use the browser's back button to return to the administration view for the 
Test category.
15. Select the Test category and click the Access Group link (not the tab).
16. Click the irst access group in the list and verify that the Siebel Administrator 
position is a member of the group. Note that you are currently logged in as 
the Siebel Administrator.
17. Click the browser's back button to return to the catalog administration view.
18. Delete both access groups from the Test category.
19. Navigate to the Info Center screen and verify that you can no longer access 
the Test category. This is because no access group that you are a member of  
is associated with the private category.
The above scenario demonstrates that when a catalog or a category within a catalog 
is declared as private, an end user must be a member of at least one of the access 
groups associated with that catalog or category in order to access the data. Users can 
not be associated directly to access groups. We can group individual users into user 
lists, which then can be associated to an access group.

Chapter 11
[ 367 ]
The following screenshot shows the Info Center screen in the Siebel Web Client:
The Info Center is a mechanism to provide structured information to internal 
employees or partner employees whilst maintaining a high level of data security by 
means of access groups.
Personalized access to features and data
The access control features discussed so far can be considered standard methods to 
provide usable sets of views and data to end users. However, implementation teams 
are often confronted with the requirement to ilter data based on criteria other than 
the user's current position. For example, there might be the need to display data of 
celebrities only to selected employees.
Another requirement could be that experienced users should be able to use a large 
and complex form applet for data entry whereas new hires should start with a 
simpler version of the applet.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 368 ]
To support these requirements, Siebel CRM includes the personalization engine, 
which acts as an additional ilter layer on views, applets, and records to provide 
a personalized user experience. The following diagram depicts the various ilter 
mechanisms that limit the user's access to data, views, and applets:
As we can see from the diagram, the Siebel Personalization layer allows us to declare 
which data sets, views or individual applets inside a view can be accessed by a user 
or employee.
Next we will explore how access to applets and views or data iltering can be 
controlled using the Siebel Personalization engine.
Controlling access to applets and views 
based on personalization
We can use the Siebel Sample database to explore examples of how access to 
individual applets or views is controlled by Siebel personalization. We can follow  
the task list below to achieve this:
1. Log in to Siebel Call Center as SADMIN, connecting to the Siebel  
Sample database.
2. On the homepage view, click the Help menu and select About View.
3. In the About View dialog, verify that the calendar applet is named  
eCalendar Daily Applet Home Page.
4. Navigate to the Administration - Personalization screen, Applets view.
5. Query for the eCalendar Daily Applet Home Page applet.
6. Verify that a conditional expression (GetProileAttr('Is Anonymous') 
 = 'FALSE') is deined for the applet.

Chapter 11
[ 369 ]
Conditional expressions are deined in the Siebel Query Language. We can click the 
select icon in the conditional expression ield to open the Siebel Expression Designer, 
which is shown in the following screenshot:
Administrators can use the expression designer to quickly create Siebel Query 
Language expressions, which the application interprets at runtime to determine 
whether a condition is satisied or not.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 370 ]
The personalization engine can use built-in functions of the Siebel Query Language 
such as GetProfileAttr() to read the value of proile attributes—a Siebel term that 
can be translated as session variables. The "Me Proile" is the proile of the currently 
logged in user. Under some circumstances, for example during a phone call with 
a customer, the application can load the "You Proile", which is the set of proile 
attributes for a secondary user.
Other built-in functions and operators can be selected in the upper text areas of the 
expression designer. In addition, the conditional expressions can reference ields of 
the current record to evaluate data-speciic criteria.
To continue with our example, the expression GetProfileAttr('Is Anonymous') 
= 'FALSE' compares the value of the current user's "Is Anonymous" proile 
attribute with the string 'FALSE'. That means, if the value of "Is Anonymous" is 
'TRUE'—indicating that the user has not yet been authenticated—the left and right 
side of the expression will not match and therefore the condition is not met. If a 
condition is not met, the respective applet will not be displayed.
The fact that we see the Calendar applet in the homepage indicates that we are 
not an anonymous user. We can test the personalization engine by modifying the 
expression to GetProfileAttr('Is Anonymous') = 'TRUE' and investigating 
what happens to the homepage view, as shown in the following steps:.
1. Modify the conditional expression for the calendar applet to 
GetProfileAttr('Is Anonymous') = 'TRUE' and save the record.
2. Right-click the list applet and select Reload Personalization Rules from 
the menu. This refreshes the cache of the personalization engine.
3. Navigate to the Home screen and verify that the calendar applet is no 
longer visible.
4. Click the Edit Layout button and verify that the applet is not just hidden  
but really unavailable to the user.
5. Use the browser's back button to navigate back to the personalization  
settings for the calendar applet and set the conditional expression back to  
the original state.
6. Save the record and use the context menu to reload the personalization cache.

Chapter 11
[ 371 ]
A similar mechanism applies when we wish to use the Siebel personalization engine 
to conditionally remove entire views from the user's current set. For example the 
Upgrade Kit Application View—a view that allows a mobile user to verify the 
availability of upgrade kits, which can be synchronized via Siebel Anywhere—can 
only be used in the Siebel Mobile Web Client. Therefore, a conditional expression is 
deined for that view in the Administration - Personalization screen to check the 
value of a user proile attribute that indicates whether the current client is a mobile 
web client (standalone) or a web client.
The following screenshot shows the personalization settings for the Upgrade Kit 
Application View:
The condition deined by the expression GetProfileAttr('IsStandaloneWebClie
nt') = "TRUE" is only met when the user is logged in to the Siebel Mobile Web Client.
Controlling data display based  
on personalization
The personalization engine's capabilities include the deinition of data ilter rules and 
associating them with applets. These rules deine the data that the applet displays. We 
can imagine that—in database terms—the personalization rules add an additional set 
of WHERE clauses to the SELECT statement generated by the Siebel application.
The following example uses the Siebel Sample Database and the Siebel Automotive 
vertical application. We will explore how the list of vehicles in the Siebel Dealer 
portal can be iltered by the car make that the employee is responsible for.
To explore this behaviour, we can follow the instructions below:
1. Log in to Siebel Call Center as SADMIN, connecting to the sample database.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Personalization screen, Applets view.
3. Query for the Auto Vehicle List Applet.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 372 ]
4. Verify that the applet is associated with a rule set (check the list applet at  
the bottom of the view). This rule set (Make Visibility Rule Set (Employee 
Login)) is applied when the conditional expression that accompanies it 
evaluates to "True".
5. Drill down on the rule set.
6. Select the "Ford" rule in the rules list in the middle of the view.
7. Inspect the Conditional Expression ield (visible in the form at the bottom of 
the view) for the Ford rule. The Ford rule is only applied when the Job Title 
of the current user starts with the word "Ford".
8. Inspect the Include Expression ield for the Ford rule. This is the ilter deined 
by the rule. Only records where the value of the Make ield starts with "Ford" 
are displayed when this rule is applied.
9. Use a command line or Windows shortcut similar to the following to log in to 
the Siebel Dealer Portal application as Gus Morris (GMORRIS):
 
D:\SIA81\CLIENT\BIN\siebel.exe /c D:\SIA81\CLIENT\bin\enu\  
 
edealerscw.cfg /d sample /u GMORRIS /p GMORRIS
10. In the Siebel Dealer Portal, navigate to the site map, select the Vehicles 
screen and click the hyperlink for the Auto Vehicles List view.
11. Observe that Gus Morris can currently see cars of all makes.
12. Click the Log In/Out link on the top right of the application to log off and 
close the Siebel Dealer application.
13. In the Siebel Call Center application, navigate to the Administration - User 
screen, Employees view.
14. Query for the employee record with GMORRIS as the User ID.
15. Set the Job Title ield of Gus Morris to "Ford Dealer".
16. Save the record by pressing CTRL+S.
17. Log in to the Siebel Dealer Portal as Gus Morris again.
18. In the Siebel Dealer Portal, navigate to the site map, select the Vehicles 
screen, and click the hyperlink for the Auto Vehicles List view.
19. Verify that now only Ford cars are visible to Gus Morris.

Chapter 11
[ 373 ]
The following screenshot shows the vehicle list for Gus Morris in the Siebel Dealer 
Portal application:
Because Gus' job title starts with "Ford", a rule in the personalization rule set 
associated with the list applet applies that prevents Gus from seeing vehicles  
other than Ford.
Use the Siebel Sample database on your demonstration machine 
to repeat the scenarios explained in the above section.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how Siebel access control and Siebel personalization 
allow administrators to deine precise access to application features and data.
We introduced the concept of responsibilities, which allows deining groups of users 
or employees that have access to the same set of views in order to fulil their daily 
tasks as deined by the business processes of their company.

User Authorization and Access Control
[ 374 ]
The built-in access control mechanism for data is based on personal ownership or an 
employee's position within an organization. Specialized views such as the "My" or 
"All" views exist to invoke the respective iltering instructions.
The Siebel Personalization engine is a powerful iltering layer that allows 
administrators to deine complex expressions, which drive the availability of  
applets, views, and records.
By using the Siebel Sample Database and various applications such as the Siebel 
Partner Portal or Siebel Dealer, this chapter also deepened our understanding of 
Siebel standard functionality.
In the next chapter, we will discuss Siebel user account management.

Managing User Accounts
As we have learned in the previous chapter, any person—be it an internal employee, 
a partner employee, or a customer—who wants to use a Siebel CRM application, must 
be registered as a user or employee and be associated with at least one responsibility. 
Data visibility in Siebel CRM is controlled by the access control layer, which takes 
personal data ownership or the user's current position within an organization into 
account in order to provide secure access to customer data.
It is therefore mandatory for an administrator to understand how to correctly set up 
and maintain the organizational information to provide end users with the Siebel 
application features and data they need to do their daily jobs.
In this chapter, we will discuss how to:
• 
Understand divisions and organizations
• 
Set up and manage the position hierarchy
• 
Set up user and employee accounts
Understanding divisions and  
organizations
Mapping real world entities to technical concepts is one of the key factors for 
successful software products. It is therefore quite interesting to see how the Siebel 
design team faced the challenge of bringing the complex hierarchical relationships  
of large corporations into the Siebel data model.

Managing User Accounts
[ 376 ]
Early in the analysis phase of a Siebel CRM implementation project, the divisional 
or departmental hierarchy of the customer is analyzed and documented. The typical 
diagram type to document the divisions of a company is an organization chart. The 
following is the organization chart for an example company:
The Sales, Service, and Marketing divisions are subordinate to the Headquarter 
division. The Sales department has subdivisions, which deine the territories  
(North and South) that the sales force operates in.
Setting up divisions
Once the divisional hierarchy of a company is documented, it must be translated 
to Siebel administrative data. An administrator uses the Administration - Group 
screen, Internal Divisions view—shown in the following screenshot—to enter 
and manage the division information:

Chapter 12
[ 377 ]
This view allows administrators to enter and maintain information about a company's 
divisions. The example company visible in the screenshot (Vision Corporation) is part 
of the Siebel sample database and has four subordinate divisions.
In order to create a new divisional hierarchy, we can follow the steps in the  
task list below:
1. Log in to the Siebel application using an administrative user account.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Group screen, Internal Divisions view.
3. Create a new record for the top-level division irst.
4. Enter address and other information if required.
5. Save the division record.
6. Create a new division for each subordinate division and use the Parent 
Division ield to select the appropriate parent division.
7. Use the explorer applet to verify that the divisional hierarchy represents  
the organization chart.
The following screenshot shows the explorer applet in the Internal Divisions view 
after the entry of the data from the example organization chart:
In order to distinguish the example company from other divisions in the database, 
the acronym "AHA" was used.
From an administrative perspective, we must be aware of the fact that organizational 
changes might occur frequently. These changes can include one department 
becoming subordinate of another, or other departments being detached from the 
hierarchy in order to become separate companies. Siebel administrators must be 
informed of these changes in order to be able to adjust the division data in a  
timely manner.

Managing User Accounts
[ 378 ]
In your demonstration environment, use the instructions in the above 
section to create a division hierarchy. You might want to use the 
example or create your own divisions.
Setting up organizations
When a division or an entire partner company wants to use the Siebel CRM 
infrastructure, this is typically accompanied by the requirement to associate data 
with the division or partner company in order to provide data security.
As we discussed in the previous chapter, records in the Siebel database can be 
associated with one or more organizations to ilter these records for users of the 
respective organizations.
Siebel administrators can declare a division as an organization. This is done by 
simply checking the Organization Flag of a division. However, this change cannot 
be undone. Once the division is lagged as an organization and the record is saved, 
the lag becomes read only, as shown in the following screenshot:
We can decide which divisions within the organization chart should be lagged as 
organizations depending on the data security requirements deined by the project 
team. The result is typically a second hierarchy of organizations within the division 
hierarchy. Once an organization is created, Siebel data such as customer accounts, 
service requests, and so on can be associated with the organization. The following 
diagram shows how the divisions named Headquarter and Sales have been lagged 
as organizations. They are now part of the organization hierarchy.

Chapter 12
[ 379 ]
By default, each new organization becomes subordinate to the 
"Default Organization", which the position of the Siebel  
Administrator (SADMIN) is assigned to. If data security policies 
mandate, we must set the Parent Organization ield to an empty value 
in the Organizations view of the Administration - Group screen.
Even if a division cannot be associated to Siebel data, employees who have a position 
within that division are automatically associated with the nearest organization that 
can be located upwards in the division hierarchy.
In the above example, an employee who has a position in the AHA Sales North 
division will be associated with the Sales organization. The following screenshot 
shows the AHA Sales North division (note that the Organization Flag is unchecked) 
in the Internal Divisions view:

Managing User Accounts
[ 380 ]
The Organization Name ield displays the name of the nearest organization (AHA 
Sales) above the AHA Sales North division. Employees who are associated with a 
position in the AHA Sales North division will automatically be associated with the 
AHA Sales organization. They will therefore be able to see data associated with the 
AHA Sales organization and each record they create will be automatically 
associated with the AHA Sales organization.
Similar to divisions, organizations cannot be deleted. When organizational changes 
require it, a Siebel administrator must detach the non-existing organization or 
division from all parent records by emptying the parent division ield and change the 
name to indicate the state of the organization or division. For example, the name can 
be preixed with "NOT USED" to indicate that the division or organization no longer 
exists. Furthermore, records that are associated with an organization that no longer 
exists must be re-assigned to other organizations. This is typically achieved by  
using the Siebel Assignment Manager.
Mark at least one of the sample divisions you created earlier 
as an organization by setting the Organization Flag and 
saving the record.
Setting up and managing the position  
hierarchy
Employees are not associated directly with organizations. Siebel CRM uses a 
mechanism named positions to deine both the association of an employee to an 
organization as well as the reporting relationship or hierarchy of the positions.
Positions represent a job entitlement for which people are recruited and 
subsequently paid. Employees can hold more than one position, for example to  
take over a colleague's job during vacation or sickness. Positions can also be held  
by multiple employees, which is unlikely for a CEO position but maybe more likely 
for sales representative or call center agent positions.
Each position can be assigned as a parent position to multiple child positions, thus 
enabling the administrator to create the so-called reporting hierarchy, which deines 
both the career level and the data access rights of an employee who is assigned to the 
position. The following diagram depicts a typical position hierarchy and indicates 
that each position must be assigned to exactly one division or organization:

Chapter 12
[ 381 ]
Positions within a single hierarchy can be associated with divisions or organizations 
that might be unrelated to each other. This provides a high level of lexibility, which 
allows administrators to implement almost every organizational setup.
Administrators enter the position hierarchy with guidance from the documents 
delivered by the business analyst team in the Administration - Group screen's 
Positions view, which is shown in the following screenshot:
In the above example, the administrator has inished entering the positions depicted in 
the above diagram. The explorer applet allows administrators to verify the reporting 
hierarchy deined by the parent position ield. The Division ield is a mandatory ield. 
It allows an administrator to select any division (marked as organization or not) and 
associate it with the position.
Use the example position hierarchy described 
above to implement sample positions in your 
demonstration environment.

Managing User Accounts
[ 382 ]
Multiple positions for an employee
As indicated above, an employee can be associated with more than one position to 
allow, for example, the implementation of vacation replacement. When an employee 
holds more than one position, the Siebel application always uses the employee's 
primary position to determine the organization she or he belongs to during login.
In the User Preferences screen, the employee can use the Change Position view 
to switch from one position to another. However, in a single session, the employee  
can only hold one position at a time. The screenshot below shows the Change 
Position view:
The employee who is currently logged in holds two positions, one of which is 
marked as the active position. By selecting another position and clicking the Change 
Position button, the employee can switch to the other position, which might result in 
an association to a different organization.
Once the employee has switched to another position, she or he can use the same views 
as before but the data displayed will most likely differ because of the Siebel access 
control layer iltering the data for the employee's current position and organization.
Setting up user and employee accounts
As discussed above, each person who wants to use a Siebel CRM application 
must be registered as either a user or employee. The difference between user 
and employee is that employees are associated with at least one position.
User records are typically created for customers who register themselves in customer 
facing web applications such as Siebel eService or Siebel eSales. The worklows 
invoked during the user registration process ensure that user records are created  
and associated with the necessary responsibilities automatically.
In the following, we focus on managing employee accounts. The following task 
list guides an administrator through the procedure of setting up a new  
employee manually:
1. Log in to the Siebel application using an administrative user account.
2. Navigate to the Administration - User screen, Employees view.

Chapter 12
[ 383 ]
3. Create a new record and ill in the following ields (at least):
 °
First Name
 °
Last Name
 °
User ID (a unique user identiier for the employee)
 °
Responsibility (assign at least one responsibility to 
the employee)
 °
Position (assign at least one position to the employee)
 °
Time Zone (if the company deploys Siebel CRM across 
multiple time zones, associate the correct time zone with  
the employee)
 °
New Responsibility (empty this ield if the employee is not 
responsible to create new users or employees).
 °
Password and Conirm Password (these ields are only 
writeable if directory server authentication is implemented)
4. Save the record.
The following screenshot shows the form applet in the Employees view of the 
Administration - User screen:
A new employee record for Alexander Hansal has been created by the administrator.

Managing User Accounts
[ 384 ]
The New Responsibility ield deines the initial primary responsibility 
of any new user or employee that is created by the user or employee it 
is deined for. This is necessary for automated user registration where 
self-registering customers inherit the responsibility deined in the 
anonymous user account's New Responsibility ield.
The GUESTCST user for example, is used as the anonymous user for 
customer facing applications and has a "new responsibility" of "Web 
Registered User", which allows a customer who has registered her or 
himself to access more views than in anonymous mode.
Creating or verifying user accounts in the 
authentication system
As discussed in Chapter 10, each employee or user must be authenticated by an 
external system that is either a relational database management system (RDBMS)  
or a directory server (LDAP or Microsoft Active Directory).
For Siebel CRM implementations that use database authentication, a user account 
with the same username as deined in the User ID ield must be created in the 
account management of the RDBMS as discussed in Chapter 10.
If directory server authentication is implemented, the information entered in the 
Employees view of the Administration - Group screen is propagated to the directory 
server and a new directory server account will be created automatically for the 
employee or user.
It is among the Siebel administrator's duties to create or verify the respective 
accounts in the authentication system.
On your demonstration system, create a new employee account and 
ensure that the authentication system is updated accordingly. Test 
the new account by logging in to the Siebel application using the new 
employee's credentials.

Chapter 12
[ 385 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the necessary steps to create the administrative data 
that allows people to log on to Siebel CRM applications as users or employees.
In Siebel terms, a user is a person who has a responsibility and who can log in to a 
Siebel application. An employee is a user who has a position within an organization. 
To enable fully functional data security, administrators must create organizations 
and positions before they can start creating employee accounts.
The chapter provided insight into the administrative views and the typical 
administrative tasks to manage divisions, organizations, positions, employees,  
and users.
In the next chapter, we will learn how administrators can use Siebel Remote to 
support developers and mobile users.


Siebel Remote and the Siebel 
Development Environment
When Siebel CRM was designed in the mid-nineties, the initial idea was to create a 
sales force automation (SFA) system that allowed traveling sales representatives to 
capture customer data on site and synchronize with the company server later in  
the day.
This is how Siebel Remote, the module supporting synchronization of mobile client 
data with the server database, came into existence. Even in a time of ubiquitous 
Internet access, applications that allow for working with the data ofline are still 
widely adopted. The simple reason behind this fact is that full time wireless access to 
the company network is still either too costly or impossible to achieve.
Siebel Remote is a module that is used in each and every Siebel CRM project around 
the world, even if the company never deploys mobile clients. This is because Siebel 
developers rely on the mechanisms to create and synchronize local databases in 
order to obtain a secure workspace for application coniguration.
In this chapter, we will learn how to support developers and remote users alike with 
the features of the Siebel Remote module. The chapter is structured as follows:
• 
Introduction to Siebel Remote
• 
Setting up mobile clients
• 
Enabling and conigure Siebel Remote server components
• 
Creating the database schema iles
• 
Extracting data for local databases
• 
Initializing the local database
• 
Understanding the Siebel coniguration process
• 
Synchronizing the local database
• 
Monitoring and managing Siebel Remote users

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 388 ]
Introduction to Siebel Remote
As indicated above, Siebel Remote is the result of many years of design and 
development. In the following, we will explore the fundamental concepts of  
Siebel Remote.
The following diagram deines the major building blocks of the Siebel  
Remote architecture:
We observe that from a high-level perspective, the architecture consists of Siebel 
server components, iles generated and read by those components, and the Mobile 
Web Client.

Chapter 13
[ 389 ]
The following table describes the building blocks numbered in the above diagram. 
Each of the components will be explained in more detail later in the chapter:
Number
Component
Description
1
Generate New 
Database
A server component that is responsible for 
reading the current schema of the server 
database and generate a database template on 
the Siebel server.
2
Database Extract
This server component extracts the data 
snapshot for each registered mobile client and 
stores it as a set of iles on the Siebel server.
3
Transaction Processor
A background component that reads a central 
transaction log table (S_DOCK_TXN_LOG) in 
the server database and writes the transactions 
to iles on the Siebel server's ile system.
4
Transaction Router
This background component continuously 
reads the transactions extracted by the 
Transaction Processor and creates individual 
transaction iles for each mobile client 
depending on visibility and other rules. As a 
result, each client will only receive a subset of 
the server data.
5
Local Database 
Initialization
When a mobile user logs in to the local 
database for the irst time, a network 
connection is established to fetch the template 
generated by the Generate New Database 
component and the data iles generated by 
the Database Extract component. These iles 
are then used by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard 
on the local machine to instantiate the local 
database.
6
Local Database 
Synchronization
When a mobile user synchronizes, a session 
on the Synchronization Manager component 
is established via the network. The network 
connection is then used to transport the 
server-side transaction iles to the mobile 
client and transport the local transaction iles 
to the server. On the mobile client, the local 
database is then updated with the server-side 
transactions.
7
Transaction Merger
This background component continuously 
reads the transaction iles synchronized from 
the mobile clients and applies the transactions 
within these iles to the server database.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 390 ]
As indicated above, the data synchronization is implemented by the means of 
exchanging transaction iles between the systems rather than establishing direct 
database connections. The transaction iles have a sufix of .dx and are incrementally 
numbered. Their content is only readable by the Siebel components and consists of 
individual transactions such as inserting, updating, or deleting a record.
Differences between developers and end users
It is important to understand that both Siebel client types—the Siebel Mobile Web 
Client and Siebel Tools—can be used in remote mode. The clients differ as much as 
their users and the way they work with the clients.
Next, we will explore the differences between the way a Siebel developer uses Siebel 
clients and a local database and the way a typical end user such as a travelling sales 
representative uses the Siebel Remote infrastructure.
Task
Developer
End User
Initialize the local 
database.
Can use Siebel Tools or 
the Mobile Web Client to 
initialize the local database.
Can only use the Mobile Web 
Client to initialize the local 
database.
Load repository 
data into the local 
database.
It is mandatory for 
the developer to load 
repository data into the 
local database.
End users do not have a local 
copy of repository data.
Work with data.
Uses Siebel Tools to modify 
or create repository data. 
Uses the Mobile Web 
Client to create test data 
and modify or create 
administrative data such as 
Responsibilities for testing 
reasons.
Inserts, updates, and deletes 
customer data using the 
Mobile Web Client.
Synchronize the local 
database.
Developers typically do 
not synchronize the local 
database with the server. 
The major reason is to 
avoid inconsistent test 
data to be inserted into the 
server database.
End users must synchronize 
on a regular basis to ensure 
that the changes they made 
locally are made accessible 
to other users on the server 
database.
We can observe that developers need a local database to provide a safe environment to 
apply and test changes they make to the repository metadata. However, developers do 
not typically use the synchronization features of the Mobile Web Client.

Chapter 13
[ 391 ]
In the following, we will explore the tasks that a Siebel administrator has to 
undertake to support developers. Many of the tasks also apply to the deployment  
of local databases for the remote end user community.
Setting up mobile clients
Registering an employee as a mobile client is the irst task in the process of 
supporting users who need a local database. This procedure is necessary for 
developers and end users alike.
Administrators register employees as mobile clients in the Administration - Siebel 
Remote screen, Mobile Clients view, which is shown in the following screenshot:
The following steps describe the process of registering a new mobile client:
1. Navigate to the Administration - Siebel Remote screen, Mobile
 Clients view.
2. In the Mobile Clients list, click New.
3. Enter a name for the mobile client. This is typically the same as the user's 
login name but can be different from it.
4. Select an employee or enter a user login identiier in the User ID ield.
5. Select the MOBILE CLIENT - STANDARD routing model (See the 
information box below for details on routing models).
6. Save the record.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 392 ]
Routing models in Siebel Remote deine what data is synchronized to 
the mobile client. For developers who never or rarely synchronize, the 
standard routing models are suficient. Specialized routing models exist 
for scenarios that require smaller amounts of data to be synchronized. For 
example, the Selective Retrieval routing model only synchronizes records 
that have been lagged for remote use.
Enabling and coniguring Siebel Remote 
server components
The Siebel Remote component group contains all necessary components to support 
mobile clients. Administrators must enable this component group on one server  
in the Siebel enterprise. The Siebel Remote component group consists of the 
following components:
• 
Transaction Processor
• 
Transaction Router
• 
Transaction Merger
• 
Synchronization Manager
• 
Generate New Database
• 
Database Extract
• 
Parallel Database Extract
• 
Replication Agent
The following table describes these components and provides information about 
the need to enable these components for a Siebel development environment or for 
mobile end users:
Component
Description
Enable for 
developers
Enable for mobile 
users
Transaction 
Processor
Extracts all record 
transactions from the server 
database (table S_DOCK_
TXN_LOG) to iles in the 
txnproc directory on the 
Siebel Server.
No
Yes

Chapter 13
[ 393 ]
Component
Description
Enable for 
developers
Enable for mobile 
users
Transaction 
Router
Reads the iles generated by 
the Transaction Processor 
and generates user-speciic 
transaction iles in the 
outbox directory of the 
user's docking folder on the 
Siebel server.
No
Yes
Transaction 
Merger
Applies transactions in iles 
in the inbox directory of the 
user's docking folder on the 
Siebel server to the server 
database.
No
Yes
Synchronization 
Manager
Authenticates mobile 
clients and synchronizes 
transaction by transporting 
iles from the user's outbox 
folder on the server to the 
local inbox and from the 
local outbox folder to the 
inbox directory on the 
server.
Only 
during local 
database 
initialization
Yes
Generate New 
Database
Reads the schema of the 
server database and creates 
a database template in the 
dbtempl folder on the 
Siebel server.
Only when 
the server 
database 
schema has 
changed.
Only when the server 
database schema has 
changed.
Database Extract
Creates a snapshot of the 
current data set visible 
to the user in the outbox 
directory of the user's 
docking folder.
Yes
Yes
Parallel Database 
Extract
This component supports 
multiple threads to speed 
up the database extract 
process for multiple users 
at once.
Typically not 
used
Can be used to 
improve performance 
of the database extract 
process.
Replication 
Agent
Synchronizes a replication 
server database with the 
headquarter database.
No
Typically not used.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 394 ]
In order to enable the Siebel Remote component group on a Siebel server, we can 
use the srvrmgr command line utility. A command similar to the following enables 
the group on a Siebel server:
enable compgrp remote for server Eval_1
The server name Eval_1 is an example in the above command line.
We must restart the Siebel server once a component group has been enabled. In  
order to minimize the load on the server's CPU and memory, it is recommendable  
to use commands similar to the following to set unneeded components to manual 
start up mode:
manual start comp PDbXtract for server Eval_1
The above command sets the Parallel Database Extract component to manual start.
Siebel Remote supports the concept of replication servers. These servers 
synchronize against a headquarter server and can have their own 
group of mobile clients. Given today's ubiquity of high-speed wide area 
networks, Siebel replication servers are rarely implemented.
Creating the database schema iles
After a new installation of a Siebel enterprise and after each change to the schema 
through developer activity or an upgrade to a newer Siebel version, administrators 
must run a job for the Generate New Database component.
The component is named Generate New Database because it creates a new empty 
Sybase Adaptive Server Anywhere database in the DBTEMPL folder of the Siebel 
server's installation directory. This empty database contains the same tables and 
indexes as those that existed in the server database at the point in time when the 
component was invoked.
We can use either the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line utility to start 
a task for the GenNewDb (its alias name) component or use the Jobs view in the 
Administration - Server Management screen in the Siebel Web Client.
The following procedure describes how to run a job for the Generate New Database 
component using the Jobs view:
1. Navigate to the Administration - Server Management screen, Jobs view.
2. Click New to create a new job request.

Chapter 13
[ 395 ]
3. Select Generate New Database from the Component/Job pick list.
4. Click the Submit Job button.
5. Monitor the Job using ALT+ENTER to refresh the Jobs view frequently 
until the job's status changes to Success.
6. Open the Siebel Server's installation folder and navigate to the  
DBTEMPL folder.
7. Verify that a new subdirectory has been created and that a ile  
sse_utf8.dbz exists among other iles. This ile is a compressed, empty 
Sybase database with the same tables and indexes as the server database.
The following screenshot shows the Jobs view in the Administration - Server 
Management screen:
A job request for the Generate New Database component is visible in the list.
Sybase databases have a super user account named DBA. The password 
for this account is generated by using the irst eight characters of the 
name of the Siebel enterprise. If the enterprise name is shorter than eight 
characters, the missing characters are replaced by numbers starting at 1.
For example, if the enterprise name is Siebel, the DBA account's password 
will be Siebel12. Administrators can choose a different password by 
setting the DbaPwd parameter value before submitting the job request.
Extracting data for local databases
The next step is to extract a data snapshot for one or more mobile users using the 
Database Extract server component. Before we submit a job request for the Database 
Extract component, we must verify that the Siebel Remote system preferences are  
set correctly.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 396 ]
About Siebel Remote system preferences
We can inspect the system preferences for Siebel Remote by navigating to the 
Remote System Preferences view in the Administration - Siebel Remote screen. 
The form applet in this view is shown in the following screenshot:
In the following table, we describe the most important system preferences for 
Siebel Remote and their impact on the mobile client. In addition we describe the 
recommended settings for developers and mobile users.
System 
Preference
Description
Value for developers
Value for mobile 
users
Enable Mobile 
Password 
Expiration
When set to true, 
the mobile client's 
password will expire 
after the amount of 
days speciied in the 
Expiration Period 
ield. A warning 
will be displayed 
as speciied in the 
Warning Period ield.
Unchecked.  
(Local databases for 
developers do not 
contain sensitive 
data.)
Checked.  
Values for expiration 
set according to 
corporate security 
policies.

Chapter 13
[ 397 ]
System 
Preference
Description
Value for developers
Value for mobile 
users
Enable Mobile 
Password 
Syntax Check
When set to true, the 
password chosen by 
the mobile user will 
be checked against the 
rules in the three ields 
below this lag.
Unchecked. 
(Developers should 
be able to choose a 
password freely.)
Checked. 
Syntax rules set 
according to 
corporate security 
policies.
Enable Mobile 
Web Client 
Lockout
When set to true, the 
mobile client account 
will be locked after the 
speciied number of 
failed login attempts 
for the speciied 
number of days.
Unchecked. 
(Due to the possible 
loss of productivity 
when a developer is 
locked out)
Checked. 
In consideration of 
corporate security 
policies.
Enable 
Transaction 
Logging
Enables the logging of 
database transactions 
to the S_DOCK_TXN_
LOG table.
Checked.  
for database extract. 
Uncheck once 
local databases are 
initialized.
Always checked. 
Except before major 
data imports or 
updates which 
mandate a new 
database extract.
Running a database extract job for developers
Because we consider a development environment scenario in this chapter, the 
following procedure includes instructions to set the security control ields in the 
Remote System Preferences view to false—as recommended above. The procedure 
describes how to execute a job for the Database Extract component for a single user 
or groups of users.
1. Navigate to the Administration - Siebel Remote screen, Remote System 
Preferences view.
2. Uncheck the Enable Mobile Password Expiration lag.
3. Uncheck the Enable Mobile Password Syntax Check lag.
4. Uncheck the Enable Mobile Web Client Lockout lag.
5. Check the Enable Transaction Logging lag.
6. Click Save.
7. Navigate to the Administration - Server Management screen, Jobs view.
8. Click New to create a new job request.
9. Select Database Extract from the Component/Job pick list.
10. Scroll down to the Parameters list.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 398 ]
11. Create a new parameter record, select Client Database encryption method 
and enter a value of None.
12. Create another parameter record, select Client Name and enter either an 
exact mobile client name, a comma-separated list of mobile client names,  
or use the asterisk (*) wildcard character. For example, specify all mobile 
clients that start with A by entering A* as the value for the parameter.
13. Create another parameter record, select Encrypt client Db password and 
set the value to False.
14. If we wish to extract repository data so that developers do not have to copy  
it in Siebel Tools, we can set the Extract all Repository Tables parameter 
to True.
15. In the upper list applet, click Submit Job.
16. Monitor the job using ALT+ENTER until the job's status changes to Success.
To verify the successful execution of the Database Extract job, we can navigate to 
the docking folder in the Siebel Server's installation directory. For each mobile client 
speciied in the Client Name parameter, we should now ind a subdirectory with the 
client's name. This directory has an inbox and an outbox subdirectory.
The outbox subdirectory should contain a set of iles, which represent the data 
that was present in the server database when the job was executed. The following 
screenshot shows the outbox folder for the mobile client AHANSAL and its content 
generated by the Database Extract component:
The iles in the outbox directory contain the data that will be used to initialize the 
local database.

Chapter 13
[ 399 ]
On your demonstration machine, use the information in the 
above sections to register an existing employee as a mobile client, 
enable the Siebel Remote component group, and execute jobs for 
the Generate New Database and Database Extract components.
Initializing the local database
The initialization of the local database is a task that is typically carried out by 
the mobile users or developers themselves. However, it is important for a Siebel 
administrator to understand the procedure to be able to assist in case of errors.
Prerequisites for a successful initialization of the local database include:
• 
Establishing network connectivity
• 
Verifying settings in the client coniguration iles
Next, we will discuss these prerequisites.
Establishing network connectivity  
for mobile clients
For the initial download of the iles that are needed to initialize the local database 
and before any attempt to synchronize, the computer that hosts the Siebel Mobile 
Web Client or Siebel Tools must be able to establish a TCP/IP connection to the 
Siebel Server machine that hosts the Synchronization Manager component.
Developer workstations are typically stationary and connected to an ofice network. 
Laptops are typically used by remote workers. It does not matter which technology 
(Wireless LAN, VPN or other) is used to establish network connectivity. The only 
thing that matters is that the computer can connect to the Siebel Server via TCP/IP.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 400 ]
Verifying settings in the client  
coniguration iles
Depending on the client used to initialize the local database, settings in one or more 
client coniguration iles (.cfg) must be veriied. The following parameters in the 
[Local] section of the .cfg iles must be set as described in the table below in order 
to successfully initialize and synchronize the local database:
Parameter
Description
Example Value
ConnectString
Deines the absolute 
path to the local Sybase 
database and includes 
parameters that are 
passed to the Sybase 
database engine.
D:\SIA81\CLIENT\local\
sse_data.dbf  -q -m -x 
NONE -gp 4096 -c15p 
-ch25p
Note: The switches control 
the behavior of the Sybase 
database engine such as memory 
allocation.
DockConnString
Deines the hostname 
and port number where 
the Synchronization 
Manager server 
component is listening. 
If no port number is 
speciied, the default 
port number of 40400 is 
used for the connection.
opsapps4
The following screenshot shows a typical client coniguration ile with the 
parameters in the [Local] section correctly set:

Chapter 13
[ 401 ]
The dbf ile speciied in the ConnectString parameter does not yet exist. 
It will be created by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard in the initialization step.
Additional coniguration ile settings  
for developers
Developers typically use both the Siebel Mobile Web Client and Siebel Tools against 
the same database. Therefore, the above settings must be applied to the Siebel Tools 
coniguration ile (tools.cfg) and all client coniguration iles that are used by the 
developer for implementation and local testing purposes.
The ConnectString parameter must point to the same folder across all iles. 
This means that the folder path in the Siebel Tools coniguration ile must be 
changed to point to the client installation folder or vice versa In addition, the 
LocalDbODBCDataSource parameter in the [Siebel] section of all coniguration 
iles used by the developer must point to the name of the same ODBC data source 
used to access the local database.
Logging in to the local database for  
the irst time
When a mobile user logs in to the local database for the irst time, she or he receives a 
message that indicates that the local database has not been found. This is an expected 
situation and the user has to acknowledge the message by clicking the Yes button in 
order to connect to the synchronization manager on the Siebel server to download 
and initialize the local database. The following screenshot shows the  
notiication message:

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 402 ]
After clicking the Yes button, a dialog box is displayed, prompting for the mobile 
client name, the username and the future password for the local database. The 
following screenshot shows the Siebel Remote Parameters dialog box:
The Client Name parameter value must match the name of a registered mobile user. 
The User Name and Password parameters specify the login credentials that the 
mobile user will have to use to log in to the local database after it has been created.
After clicking the Continue button, the Siebel Remote software connects to the 
remote server and downloads the compressed schema and data iles over the 
network to the local computer.
Once the iles are downloaded and extracted, the Siebel Upgrade Wizard is invoked. 
The wizard runs automatically and uses the downloaded iles to create and populate 
the new local Sybase database in the location speciied in the ConnectString 
parameter of the client coniguration ile. The following screenshot shows the Siebel 
Upgrade Wizard displaying its progress during the local database initialization:

Chapter 13
[ 403 ]
Once the Siebel Upgrade Wizard has completed all steps, the application is launched 
and the user is logged in. Developers who used Siebel Tools for the local database 
initialization will be logged on to Siebel Tools. Mobile users will see the Siebel 
application's homepage view.
If the database extract job was run using the Extract all Repository Tables parameter 
set to True, developers can start working immediately because the repository tables 
are already populated. If not, the developer will have to complete the process of 
local database initialization by using the "Get All Projects" functionality provided by 
Siebel Tools to copy repository data to the local database.
Follow the instructions in the section above to prepare the client 
coniguration iles for your installation of Siebel Tools and the Siebel 
Developer Web Client. Then, use the client of your choice to log in with 
the mobile user account you created earlier to the local data source. 
Complete the process of initializing a local database by following the 
instructions in the section above.
Understanding the Siebel  
coniguration process
Administrators must be aware of the Siebel coniguration process in order to be able 
to assist developers when problems arise. The following example scenario shall  
serve to help in understanding the way developers use Siebel Tools to apply 
coniguration changes:
Task
Description
Network 
Connection 
Required?
Check Out
When developers need to acquire write access to object 
deinitions in the Siebel repository, they must "check out" 
the object or the project that contains the object.
During the check out process, all selected object deinitions 
are copied from the server database and overwritten in the 
local database.
A lag is set in both databases to indicate the lock and 
ownership of the developer, thus avoiding that other 
developers work on the same object at the same time.
Yes

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 404 ]
Task
Description
Network 
Connection 
Required?
Conigure
Developers modify or create object deinitions in their local 
database in order to implement functionality required by 
the business.
No
Compile
Using the Siebel Tools compile functionality, developers 
create a new version of the Siebel repository ile (.srf) ile 
for their Developer Web Client.
No
Unit Test
Developers use their local instance of the Siebel Developer 
Web Client against the same local database they use with 
Siebel Tools. By abiding to this principle, they can test 
modiications without affecting other developers.
No
Check In
Once the developer has tested the modiications, the object 
deinitions are copied to the server database and the lock 
lags are unset. Now, all other developers can access the 
new or modiied objects.
Yes
The typical architecture of a Siebel development environment can be described 
schematically by the following diagram:

Chapter 13
[ 405 ]
From the diagram, we can conirm that Siebel developers can work on their 
workstation independent of other developers. As we can observe, Siebel Tools 
establishes connections to both the local and the server database during the check 
out and check in processes. It is important to mention that the check out and check in 
processes never require Siebel Remote server components to be online or running.
Synchronizing local databases
In Siebel CRM projects that support remote end users, administrators must be  
aware of the synchronization process. After all, there are hundreds or even 
thousands of local databases that have to be synchronized with the server  
database on a regular basis.
Siebel CRM offers two approaches to achieve regular synchronization:
• 
Manual synchronization
• 
Siebel TrickleSync
Next, we will discuss both approaches and clarify the administrative steps.
Manual synchronization
In order to trigger the synchronization process, a mobile end user must establish 
connectivity to the corporate network and then select the Synchronize Database 
option from the application's File menu.
The user is then authenticated by the Synchronization Manager component on the 
remote Siebel server and the Siebel Remote dialog box is displayed, as shown in the 
following screenshot:

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 406 ]
This dialog box allows the remote user to select what actions should be executed 
during the synchronization session. In the above example, all actions are selected, 
including sending, receiving, and applying all changes to the local database and  
ile system.
End users can now click the Synchronize button to start the synchronization 
session. A "two arrows" icon in the Windows system tray indicates a running 
synchronization session. When end users press the Shift key while clicking the 
Synchronize button, the Siebel Remote window will stay open and display the 
progress of the synchronization.
Once the synchronization is complete, mobile users can navigate to the User 
Preferences screen, Remote Status view in order to see details about their recent 
synchronization sessions.
End users should be encouraged to synchronize at least twice a day—in the morning 
before they start working and in the evening when they inish working. This ensures 
that nightly batch jobs on the server environment can process all data sent in from 
the mobile work force and that the mobile users receive all changes made by the 
nightly batch jobs before they start working.
Siebel TrickleSync
In order to ease the burden of manual synchronization, Siebel Remote includes 
TrickleSync. This feature allows administrators and end users (if their responsibility 
includes the view to make the changes) to control the automatic synchronization of 
local databases. Synchronization can occur even when the end user is not using the 
Siebel Mobile Web Client.
An administrator can control the TrickleSync settings for each mobile client in the 
Administration - Siebel Remote screen, Trickle Sync view. The following screenshot 
shows the TrickleSync settings for a mobile client:

Chapter 13
[ 407 ]
TrickleSync is enabled in the example and the frequency is set to 10 minutes without 
user conirmation.
TrickleSync is implemented as a separate executable on the mobile client machine 
named autosync.exe. This executable is started automatically with the Siebel 
Mobile Web Client when TrickleSync is enabled. If administrators wish to 
synchronize the local Siebel database when the Siebel Mobile Web Client is not open, 
they must cater for automatic start of the autosync.exe program such as placing a 
shortcut to it in the Windows Startup menu folder.
With Siebel TrickleSync, a high synchronization frequency and therefore high 
reliability and security of data entered by remote users can be easily achieved.
Monitoring and managing Siebel  
Remote users
When a company decides to deploy Mobile Web Clients to their remote workforce, 
administrator positions must be staffed in order to provide smooth operation of all 
processes related to synchronizing data between the central server database and 
hundreds or thousands of local databases.
In the following, we will give a brief overview of the most important tasks that a 
Siebel Remote administrator will have to accomplish:
• 
Managing the transaction components on the Siebel server
• 
Monitoring mobile client activity
• 
Sending messages to mobile users
• 
Re-extracting local databases
• 
Deactivating mobile user registrations
Managing the transaction components  
on the Siebel server
The following server components are critical for lawless processing 
of data synchronization:
• 
Transaction Processor
• 
Transaction Router
• 
Transaction Merger

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 408 ]
• 
Synchronization Manager
Administrators must ensure that these components are well monitored and that 
notiication mechanisms such as Siebel alert proiles are in place to inform the 
administrative staff when problems occur.
Apart from the Synchronization Manager, for which full operability is given when  
its status is either online or running, the other server components in the above list 
must have a status of running. Otherwise, there is a high risk of backlogged or even 
lost transactions.
Both the graphical user interface and the Siebel Server Manager command line can be 
used to monitor and manage the aforementioned server components. The following 
screenshot shows the Servers view in the Administration - Server Management 
screen in the Siebel Web Client:
In this view, administrators can verify and change the status of all components 
enabled on the selected server including the components of the Siebel Remote 
component group. In the above screenshot, the Transaction Processor and 
Transaction Router components are running while the Transaction Merger 
component is not operational.

Chapter 13
[ 409 ]
Monitoring mobile client activity
The Administration - Siebel Remote screen provides various views that an 
administrator can use to verify and monitor the status and activities of mobile 
clients. A good example is the Client Status view, which provides information about 
the database extract, initialization, and current status for each selected mobile client. 
The following screenshot shows the Siebel Remote Client Status form applet in the 
Client Status view:
Other views in the Administration - Siebel Remote screen that are useful for 
administrators are listed in the following table:
View
Description
Download Statistics
Displays information about data downloaded 
to the selected mobile client during the last 
synchronization session.
Upload Statistics
Displays information about data uploaded to 
the headquarter server from the selected mobile 
client during the last synchronization session.
Synchronization Sessions
Lists all synchronization sessions and their 
timings for the selected mobile client.
Client Diagnostics
Detailed listing of all operations that occurred 
during all synchronization sessions.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 410 ]
Sending messages to mobile users
In case administrators need to communicate with mobile users on synchronization-
related matters, they can create a ile named motd.txt (message of the day) in the 
Siebel server's ADMIN directory.
When mobile users synchronize, they will receive the message in the motd.txt ile. 
An example is shown in the following screenshot:
Source: Siebel Remote and Replication Manager Administration Guide, Version 8.1
Re-extracting local databases
There are several scenarios that require the repeated extraction of local database 
snapshots. These scenarios include:
• 
Database schema changes
• 
Import or modiication of large amounts of data on the server database
In such scenarios, it is faster and more reliable to extract new databases for the 
mobile user community rather than to synchronize huge amounts of transactions. 
In the case of mass data changes on the server database such as importing large 
amounts of records using Enterprise Integration Manager (EIM), it is even 
recommended to disable transaction logging completely by unchecking the 
Enable Transaction Logging lag in the Remote System Preferences view in the 
Administration - Siebel Remote screen.

Chapter 13
[ 411 ]
This will speed up the import process as a whole because transaction records will not 
be written to the S_DOCK_TXN_LOG table. On the other side, mobile users will not 
receive the new or updated records, so the local databases have to be extracted again.
Administrators can simply repeat the Database Extract component job in order to 
extract new databases. The default value of "True" for the Save client transactions 
parameter ensures that no data is lost when the mobile client synchronizes.
The synchronization mechanism detects the new database and prompts the user to 
download it. After downloading the iles, the Siebel Upgrade Wizard is invoked as 
usual to create the new local database.
Deactivating mobile user registrations
In case we need to disable a mobile user's account we must ensure that transactions 
are no longer synchronized to the mobile client. We can accomplish the deactivation 
of a mobile client by setting the End Date ield in the Mobile Clients view in the 
Administration - Siebel Remote screen as shown in the screenshot below:
The End Date value for the mobile client indicates that no transactions will be 
synchronized to the mobile client after the 5th of February 2010, 5:00 PM.
In addition to setting the end date, we must stop and start the Transaction  
Router and Transaction Processor server components in order to refresh their  
cached information.
To ensure that the mobile client can no longer establish a synchronization session,  
we must also delete the user's docking directory from the Siebel server.

Siebel Remote and the Siebel Development Environment
[ 412 ]
Summary
The Siebel Remote module enables both the synchronization of hundreds or 
thousands of mobile clients with a central server database and the creation of local 
databases for developers.
In this chapter, we have explored the Siebel Remote architecture and described 
processes for both types of users. We learned how to enable Siebel Remote and 
extract local database templates and data on the Siebel Server.
To deepen our understanding of the coniguration process, we explained the 
architecture and processes of the Siebel development environment.
Finally, this chapter introduced important procedures related to monitoring  
and managing remote users.
In the next chapter, we will learn how to install the Siebel Management  
Server infrastructure.

Installing and Coniguring the 
Siebel Management Server 
Infrastructure
In an ongoing effort to provide a stable and extensible platform for cross-enterprise 
administration tasks, engineers at Siebel Systems created the Siebel Management 
Server and Management Agent infrastructure.
At the time of writing this book, two Siebel modules use the Siebel Management 
Server infrastructure. These features are Application Deployment Manager (ADM) 
and the Siebel Diagnostic Tool.
Installing and coniguring the Siebel Management Server infrastructure is a 
prerequisite to using ADM to migrate coniguration changes between Siebel CRM 
environments. If our company has licensed the Siebel Diagnostic Tool, we have  
to install and conigure the infrastructure as well.
This chapter introduces the Siebel Management Server infrastructure and focuses  
on the installation and coniguration tasks for the Siebel Management Server and  
the Siebel Management Agents. The chapter is structured as follows:
• 
Overview of the Siebel Management Server infrastructure
• 
Installation and coniguration of the Siebel Management Server
• 
Installation and coniguration of the Siebel Management Agents
• 
Register Management Agents

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 414 ]
Overview of the Siebel Management 
Server Infrastructure
The Siebel Management Server infrastructure, consisting mainly of a single Siebel 
Management Server and one Siebel Management Agent per Siebel Server, is an open 
Java-based framework to accomplish administrative tasks that span across all Siebel 
enterprises. Two features of Siebel CRM currently use this infrastructure:
• 
Application Deployment Manager
• 
Siebel Diagnostic Tool
In this chapter, we focus on the installation and coniguration of the Siebel 
Management Server infrastructure. Application Deployment Manager and the  
Siebel Diagnostic Tool will be discussed in upcoming chapters. It is very important  
to understand that the Siebel Management Server infrastructure is a generic 
framework that has been chosen by Siebel engineering to support the two 
aforementioned features.
The following diagram helps us understand the architecture of the Siebel 
Management framework:

Chapter 14
[ 415 ]
The diagram depicts the building blocks of the Siebel Management Server 
infrastructure and their relationships to other members of the Siebel Web Architecture.
The Siebel Management Server can be described as a single orchestration service 
that uses the Siebel Management Agents to access information on the various Siebel 
servers across all enterprises. One Management Agent is required to be installed for 
each Siebel Server.
Both the Siebel Management Server and the Agents are written in Java and are 
implemented as system services. There is no limit in the number of enterprises or 
Siebel servers per enterprise that can be monitored by a single Management Server.
The Siebel Management Server itself can be accessed by command line tools in order 
to execute the programs residing on the server and collect their output. Each module 
that uses the Siebel Management Server—namely Application Deployment Manager 
and the Siebel Diagnostic Tool—is implemented as a set of iles (coniguration iles, 
executables, and so on), which reside on the management server machine.
Installing and coniguring the Siebel 
Management Server
The Siebel Management Server installers are available from http://edelivery.
oracle.com. The process of downloading and extracting the installation images 
has been described in detail in Chapter 2.
The Siebel Management Server is only supported on Microsoft Windows operating 
systems. The major reason for this limitation is that it comes preconigured for the 
ADM functionality, which includes a small Sybase database for holding ADM-related 
information. Siebel CRM supports Sybase databases only on Windows platforms.
Prerequisites for the Siebel  
Management Server
The following prerequisites must be met before we begin with the installation and 
coniguration of the Siebel Management Server:
• 
Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.5 or higher is installed
• 
Java Runtime Environment (JRE) 1.5 or higher is installed
• 
A recent framework (version 5.8 or higher) for the Perl programming 
language is installed (Perl scripts are used to generate coniguration iles)

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 416 ]
• 
There is no drive mapped using the letter Z: (to avoid error messages 
during coniguration)
• 
A Siebel user account is created in all Siebel enterprises with the same 
username and password (cross-enterprise user account)
• 
A local service owner account has been created during the Siebel  
Server installation
• 
The Siebel Server's bin directory is added to the PATH environment variable
About the cross-enterprise user account
The Siebel Management Server uses the same mechanisms of user authentication 
as all other Siebel CRM software. In other terms, users who want to log in to  
the Siebel Management Server must be registered as a Siebel user with the  
following responsibilities:
• 
MgmtSrvr-Admin (general administrative privileges)
• 
MgmtSrvr-Deploy&Execute (for ADM deployment)
• 
MgmtSrvr-Monitor (for Siebel Diagnostic Tool)
• 
Siebel Administrator
The user must have an account in each authentication system used. If more than 
one authentication system is used for the different Siebel enterprises, then the user 
account must have the same password in all authentication systems.
The user account must also be granted the privileges to log on to the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server. If the Siebel Gateway Name Server or the Siebel Server 
Manager use database authentication, then the user must be associated with the 
Siebel Administrator responsibility. If directory server authentication is used,  
"Siebel Administrator" must be in the list of the account's common name ield in  
the directory.
Adding the Siebel Server bin directory to  
the PATH environment variable
We must add the path to the Siebel Server's bin directory to the Windows system 
environment variable named Path because of the fact that the Perl scripts, used to 
register Siebel Management Agents, call the srvrmgr executable.

Chapter 14
[ 417 ]
We can use the Properties window for the My Computer icon and navigate to the list 
of system environment variables. Select the Path system variable and click Edit. Then 
copy and paste the exact path to the Siebel Server's bin directory at the beginning of 
the variable value text and add a semicolon after the pasted text.
If you wish to follow along with this chapter and install and conigure 
the Siebel Management Server infrastructure on your demonstration 
machine, ensure that the prerequisites described above are met.
Installing the Siebel Management Server  
on Microsoft Windows
Because the coniguration steps require access to executables such as srvrmgr in 
the Siebel Server's bin directory, it is generally recommended to install the Siebel 
Management Server on a machine that hosts a Siebel Server installation. As indicated 
before, the machine must run under a Microsoft Windows operating system.
We start the installation of the Siebel Management Server by double-clicking 
the setup.exe program in the Siebel_Management_Server folder of the Siebel 
installation image. The following table describes the steps and dialogs of the 
InstallShield wizard and the Siebel Coniguration wizard:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Management_Server folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: C:\SIA81\mgmtsrvr.
The directory should already have been 
speciied in the planning document.
Click Next.
4
Installation Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
5
The installation progress is 
displayed.
Wait for the installation to inish.
6
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard is 
launched automatically.
Continue with the coniguration of the 
Siebel Management Server.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 418 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
7
Siebel Enterprise Name
Example: SIEBELEVAL
Click Next.
8
Siebel Gateway Name Server
Enter the hostname of the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server.
Note: Choose the machine that hosts the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server for your irst 
target enterprise.
Click Next.
9
Siebel User Account
Enter the username and password for the 
cross-enterprise account created earlier.
Click Next.
10
Diagnostic Tool User Account
Enter the username and password for the 
cross-enterprise account created earlier.
Click Next.
11
RC2 Password Encryption
Select the checkbox.
Click Next.
12
RC2 Key File and Port Number
Keep the defaults.
Click Next.
13
Diagnostic Tool HTTP Port
If the default port is already used, change 
the port number and document it clearly.
If not, keep the default (8080).
Click Next.
14
JRE Home Location
Provide a valid path to the Java Runtime 
Engine installation.
Click Next.
15
Authentication Type
Select Database.
Click Next.
16
Security Adapter Coniguration File
Copy the ile path and use a text editor to 
open the ile.
Change the value of the 
DSConnectString parameter to the name 
of the ODBC data source for the Siebel 
enterprise. (Hint: Use the Microsoft ODBC 
Data Source Administrator utility to obtain 
the correct ODBC data source name.)
Save and close the coniguration ile.
Click Next.

Chapter 14
[ 419 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
17
Secure Sockets Layer
Select NoSSL.
Click Next.
18
Windows User Account
Enter the fully qualiied name (hostname\
account) of a local Windows user account. 
This should be the Siebel Service Owner 
Account.
Hint: use the hostname command in a 
Windows command shell to obtain the 
correct host name (case sensitive).
Click Next.
19
ADM Default Package Directory
Navigate to the \adm\packages folder 
of the Management Server installation 
directory.
Example: C:\SIA81\mgmtsrvr\adm\
packages.
Click Next.
20
Management Agent Host Name 
and Port
The coniguration wizard allows to 
conigure up to two connections to 
management agents. Even if we create 
new coniguration iles later, we must 
provide valid values to proceed with the 
coniguration.
Enter the host name of a Siebel Server 
you wish to use as a target for ADM 
deployment.
Keep the default port (1199).
Click Next.
21
Server Name
Enter the logical name of a Siebel Server 
that resides on the host you speciied in the 
previous step.
Click Next.
22
Server Type
Select Siebel Server.
Click Next.
23
Conigure Second Management 
Agent
Uncheck the lag.
Click Next.
24
Start Management Server
Uncheck the lag.
Click Next.
25
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 420 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
26
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
27
Success
The wizard displays successful 
coniguration.
Click OK.
28
Exit the Coniguration Wizard
Click Finish to close the coniguration 
wizard.
Verifying the successful installation and 
coniguration of the Siebel Management Server
In order to verify the successful installation and coniguration of the Siebel 
Management Server, we should open the Windows Services console and look for a 
new system service named Siebel Management Server (port 1099). The port number 
may vary depending on the values we provided during the coniguration process. 
The following screenshot shows the properties dialog for the Siebel Management 
Server system service created by the Siebel Coniguration Wizard:

Chapter 14
[ 421 ]
To further verify the installation and coniguration, we should start the Management 
Server service. Even if no Management Agent is installed at this moment, we should 
be able to log on to the Diagnostic Tool using the cross-enterprise user account we 
created earlier.
After starting the Management Server service, we open a browser window and 
navigate to a URL similar to the following:
http://hostname:8080/DiagTool
In the above example, hostname should be replaced with the name of the machine 
where the Siebel Management Server is installed. If we used a port number other 
than 8080, it should be changed as well. The browser should display the login dialog 
for the Siebel Diagnostic Tool, as shown in the following screenshot:
We should be able to log in with the cross-enterprise user account we created earlier.
After login, we receive an error message "Unable to load enterprise / server 
information…", which is an expected behavior since the coniguration of the 
Diagnostic Tool has not yet been completed.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 422 ]
The presence and successful start of a Windows system service and the ability to log 
on to the Diagnostic Tool completes the veriication steps for the Siebel Management 
Server installation and coniguration.
If the veriication steps are not successful, it is recommended to inspect the log iles. 
Before attempting a new installation of the Siebel Management Server, we must 
remove the system service with the Microsoft Windows sc command.
On your demonstration machine, install and conigure 
the Siebel Management Server according to the 
instructions above.
Installing and coniguring Siebel  
Management Agents
As indicated above, the Siebel Management Agent software must be installed on 
each machine that hosts a Siebel Server. The process of downloading and extracting 
the installation images for the Siebel Management Agent is similar to that for every 
other piece of Siebel software.
The Siebel Management Agent installers are available for every operating system 
platform on which Siebel Servers are supported. Installing the Siebel Management 
Agent is also an option during the installation of a Siebel Server. In Chapter 3, we 
discussed that it is beneicial not to select this option during Siebel Server installation 
because a separately installed Management Agent can also be uninstalled separately.
The following table guides us through the process of installing and coniguring a 
Siebel Management Agent:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the InstallShield Wizard.
Double-click the setup.exe ile in the 
Siebel_Management_Agent folder.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed.
Click Next.
3
Specify the directory to which the 
application iles should be copied.
Example: C:\SIA81\mgmtagent.
The directory should already have been 
speciied in the planning document.
Click Next.

Chapter 14
[ 423 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
4
Installation Summary
Check the information in the summary 
dialog.
Click Next.
5
The installation progress is 
displayed
Wait for the installation to inish.
6
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
is launched automatically.
Continue with the coniguration of the Siebel 
Management Agent.
7
Siebel Server Installation 
Directory.
Provide a valid path to the Siebel Server 
installation directory.
Example: C:\SIA81\siebsrvr
Click Next.
8
Siebel User Account
Enter the username and password for the 
cross-enterprise account created earlier.
Click Next.
9
JRE Home Location
Provide a valid path to the Java Runtime 
Engine installation.
Click Next.
10
RC2 Password Encryption
Select the checkbox.
Click Next.
11
RC2 Key File and Port Number
Keep the defaults.
Click Next.
12
Authentication Type
Select Database.
Click Next.
13
Security Adapter Coniguration 
File
Copy the ile path and use a text editor to 
open the ile.
Change the value of the DSConnectString 
parameter to the name of the ODBC data 
source for the Siebel enterprise. (Hint: 
Use the Microsoft ODBC Data Source 
Administrator utility to obtain the correct 
ODBC data source name.)
Save and close the coniguration ile.
Click Next.
14
Secure Sockets Layer
Select NoSSL
Click Next.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 424 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
15
Windows User Account
Enter the fully qualiied name (hostname\
account) of a local Windows user account. 
This should be the Siebel Service Owner 
Account.
Hint: use the hostname command in a 
Windows command shell to obtain the 
correct host name (case sensitive).
Click Next.
16
Start Management Agent
Uncheck the lag.
Click Next.
17
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
18
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
19
Success
The wizard displays successful 
coniguration.
Click OK.
20
Exit the Coniguration Wizard
Click Finish to close the coniguration 
wizard.
Verifying the successful installation and 
coniguration of a Siebel Management Agent
The irst veriication step is to look for a new system service. On Microsoft Windows 
operating systems, we navigate to the Services console and verify that a new service 
named "Siebel Management Agent (port 1199)" exists. The port number may vary 
depending on the settings during the coniguration. The following screenshot shows 
the properties for the Windows system service for the Siebel Management Agent:

Chapter 14
[ 425 ]
To further verify the successful coniguration of the Siebel Management Agent, we 
should start the system service and inspect the Agent.log ile in the log directory of 
the Management Agent's installation folder. If the log ile does not report an error, 
we have successfully conigured the Siebel Management Agent.
Use the instructions in the above section to install 
and conigure the Siebel Management Agent on 
your demonstration machine.
Registering Siebel Management Agents
In order to inalize the coniguration of the Siebel Management Server infrastructure, 
administrators must register all installed Siebel Management Agents. The process of 
registering Siebel Management Agents is facilitated by two Perl scripts, which have 
to be executed to generate the coniguration iles for the Siebel Management Server.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 426 ]
The Perl scripts are located in the bin directory of the Siebel Management Server's 
installation folder. The following table lists the scripts and their purpose:
Perl script
Syntax
Description
getservers.pl
perl getservers.pl -g 
Gateway -e Enterprise 
-u Username -p 
Password -l enu
Connects to the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server speciied by -g. 
Collects the Siebel Server listing 
and writes to a ile named like 
the enterprise.
Updates the configuration.
globals.xml ile.
makeagentconfig.
pl
perl makeagentconfig.
pl Enterprise
Reads the enterprise ile 
and creates or updates the 
configuration.agents.
xml ile.
The configuration.globals.xml and configuration.agents.xml iles are 
the main coniguration iles for the Siebel Management Server. When the Siebel 
Management Server starts, it reads these iles from its pref\system folder and 
tries to establish connections to the Siebel Gateway Name servers listed in the 
configuration.globals.xml ile and to the Siebel Management Agents listed 
in the configuration.agents.xml ile.
Next we will describe the process of registering Siebel Management Agents. These 
steps must be executed on the machine that hosts the Siebel Management Server:
1. Create a backup copy of the configuration.globals.xml and 
configuration.agents.xml ile in the pref/system folder of the Siebel 
Management Server installation directory.
2. Copy the configuration.globals.xml ile from the pref/system folder 
to the bin folder of the Siebel Management Server installation directory.
3. Open a command window and navigate to the bin directory of the Siebel 
Management Server's installation folder.
4. Enter a command similar to the following:
 
perl getservers.pl -g gateway_host -e enterprise_name -u username  
 
-p password -l enu
In the above example, gateway_host should be replaced with the host 
name where the Siebel Gateway Server resides, enterprise_name should 
be replaced with the name of the Siebel enterprise to register, and the  
username and password must match a valid username and password pair.

Chapter 14
[ 427 ]
The script updates the configuration.globals.xml ile with information 
about the Siebel Gateway Name Server and writes information about all Siebel 
Servers found in the enterprise to a text ile that is named after the enterprise.
We must repeat the getservers.pl script for all Siebel enterprises we wish 
to register.
5. In the command window, enter a command similar to the following:
 
perl makeagentconfig.pl Enterprise1 Enterprise2
In the above example, two Siebel enterprises (Enterprise1 and 
Enterprise2) are registered. The makeagentconfig.pl script takes a 
list of enterprise names as the input parameter. It reads the corresponding  
iles (generated by getservers.pl) and information about Management 
Agents and Siebel Servers is written to the configuration.agents.xml ile.
6. Copy the configuration.globals.xml and configuration.agents.xml 
ile to the \pref\system folder of the Siebel Management Server installation 
directory, overwriting older versions if necessary.
7. Copy the configuration.agents.xml ile to the tomcat\webapps\DiagTool\
WEB-INF folder of the Siebel Management Server installation directory. This is 
an optional step to enable the Siebel Diagnostic Tool functionality.
8. Restart the Siebel Management Server service.
9. Check the ManagementServer.log ile in the log directory of the Siebel 
Management Server installation folder for errors.
The registration process must be repeated each time Siebel Servers are added or 
removed from an enterprise or when an entirely new enterprise has been set up.
Using the instructions above, execute the Perl 
scripts to register the Siebel Management Agent on 
your demonstration machine.
Summary
In this chapter, we learned how to install and conigure the prerequisite 
infrastructure for Siebel CRM modules such as Application Deployment Manager 
and the Siebel Diagnostic Tool.
The Siebel Management Server is a central cross-enterprise orchestration 
environment, which connects to the Siebel Management Agents that are installed  
on each Siebel Server.

Installing and Coniguring the Siebel Management Server Infrastructure
[ 428 ]
The chapter also introduced the procedure to register management agents using  
the Perl scripts provided by Oracle.
The next chapter will discuss how to use Application Deployment Manager to 
migrate coniguration changes.

Migrating Coniguration
 Changes between 
 Environments
A Siebel CRM project typically involves coniguring or customizing the CRM 
application to the customer's needs. Developers work together with system architects 
and business analysts to implement the requirements demanded by the end user 
community. During this process, changes are made in various locations such as the 
Siebel Repository, administrative data such as List of Values (LOV), template iles,  
BI Publisher reports, browser scripts, or graphic iles.
Administrators must be able to support the development team by providing reliable 
migration mechanisms to transport the coniguration changes from the development 
environment to the test and production environments.
In this chapter, we will learn how to use Application Deployment Manager from an 
administrator's point of view. The chapter is structured as follows:
• 
Overview of Application Deployment Manager functionality
• 
Setup of Application Deployment Manager
• 
Export and package coniguration changes
• 
Deploy ADM packages
• 
Other migration utilities

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 430 ]
Overview of Siebel Application  
Deployment Manager
Siebel Application Deployment Manager (ADM) is a set of tools that assists Siebel 
CRM project members with the task of migrating coniguration changes from one 
source Siebel enterprise to one or more target Siebel enterprises.
The coniguration areas that ADM operates on are the following:
• 
Administrative data (Database objects)
• 
Repository objects
• 
Files on Siebel servers and Siebel Web Server Extensions (SWSE)
In this section, we will discuss details for each of these areas.
Administrative data (Database objects)
Administrative data are entities that are created and modiied by administrators 
by means of administrative screens in the Siebel Web Client. Examples for 
administrative data are List of Values (LOVs), responsibilities and views, as well as 
positions and organizations. The following table lists the major administrative data 
objects supported by ADM as of Siebel CRM version 8.1:
Major Area
Description
ADM Data Type Name
Access Control
Access groups
AccessGroup
Divisions
Internal Division
Organizations
Organization
Positions
Position
Responsibilities, associated 
views and users
Responsibility
Assignment 
Manager
Assignment manager groups, 
including assignment 
manager rules
AssignGroup
Audit Trail
Audit Trail administrative 
data
Audit Trail Admin
BI Publisher Reports
Report template registration
BIP Report Template 
Registration
Report-view associations
BIP View Association
Communication 
Server
Communication drivers and 
proiles
ADM CommSrv CM 
Adapter Administration

Chapter 15
[ 431 ]
Major Area
Description
ADM Data Type Name
Communication 
Server
Email templates
ADM Comm Package
Document Server
Correspondence templates
Correspondence Template
Proposal template
Proposal Template
Enterprise 
Application 
Integration
EAI data map
EAI Data Map
Inbound web service
Web Service - Inbound
Field Service
Shift schedule
ADM Shift Schedule
General application 
features
List of Values (LOV)
LOV
Predeined queries
PDQ
State Model
StateModel
iHelp
iHelp item
iHelp
Personalization
Applet personalization
Personalization - Applets
View personalization
Personalization - Views
Portal Framework
Symbolic URLs
Symbolic URL
Product and Pricing 
Management
Price lists
PriceList
Product catalogs
ProductCatalog
Volume discounts
VolumeDiscount
Runtime Events
Action sets
Personalization - Actions
Events
Personalization - Events
Siebel Search
Search categories
ADM Search Category
Search connector settings and 
parameters
ADM Search Connector
SmartScript
SmartScript
SmartScript
Task UI
Access controlled task
Access Controlled Task
Worklow Policies
Worklow policy
Worklow Policy

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 432 ]
A complete list of preconigured administrative data types can be reviewed and 
new data types can be registered in the Data Type Details view of the Application 
Deployment Manager screen in the Siebel Web Client, which is shown in the 
screenshot below:
Administrators can use this view to verify whether the administrative data they 
wish to migrate is supported by a preconigured data type. New data types can be 
registered in this view as well.
Registering new data types requires the creation of integration object and content 
object deinitions in the Siebel repository using Siebel Tools, and is out of the scope 
of this book.
Repository objects
Any object deinition that is created or modiied in Siebel Tools can be migrated 
using the Application Deployment Manager functionality.
It is important to understand that this functionality is intended for mid-level releases 
and hot ixes. To migrate an entire repository, we use the Siebel Upgrade Wizard's 
"Migrate Repository" utility, which we will discuss later in this chapter.
Files on Siebel servers and Siebel Web Server 
Extensions (SWSE)
Siebel Application Deployment Manager is preconigured to support the migration 
of the following ile types between Siebel enterprises:

Chapter 15
[ 433 ]
• 
Siebel Repository Files (.srf)
• 
Siebel Web Templates (.swt)
• 
BI Publisher Report Templates and related iles (.rtf and others)
• 
All ile types residing in the public directory of the Siebel Web Server 
Extension (SWSE), including cascading stylesheets (.css), graphic iles, 
and browser scripts
The Application Deployment  
Manager Architecture
The following diagram helps us understand the building blocks of Application 
Deployment Manager and how it uses the Siebel Management Server framework  
to migrate coniguration changes from a source enterprise to one or more  
target enterprises:

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 434 ]
The source enterprise is typically the development environment where changes are 
made to Siebel repository data (R), administrative data (D), and iles (F) on the Siebel 
Server, and Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE).
Repository data such as worklow process deinitions are exported to a package 
directory using the ADM-speciic functionality available in Siebel Tools.
Administrative data objects—or "Database Objects"—such as List of Values (LOV) 
are either exported manually using the Administration Deployment Manager screen 
(not depicted in the diagram) or via the ADM Batch Processor server component. 
The ADM package directory has a subdirectory for database objects.
Files such as Siebel web templates or cascading stylesheets that have been created 
or changed are copied to the package folder structure using the regular ile copy 
mechanisms of the operating system.
The following major building blocks enable ADM functionality on the Siebel 
Management Server:
• 
A Sybase database that holds data about packages and deployment sessions
• 
The ADM registry, an XML ile, which gives details about each deployable 
data type
• 
The enterprise proile, an XML ile, which contains information about the 
target enterprise
• 
The enterprise batch ile, which wraps the command line invocations in  
easy-to-use command syntax
During the deployment process, the Siebel Management Server reads the data in the 
ADM package folders and uses the Siebel Management Agents on the Siebel Servers 
in the target enterprise to copy the data objects to their destination.
Two server components, namely ADM Object Manager and ADM Processor, act on 
the target enterprise in order to process incoming data and invoke ADM worklows, 
which write the data to the target database. Repository data and administrative data 
are processed by these server components.
Files are written to folders on the target Siebel Server by the Siebel Management 
Agent. Files that belong to the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) are pushed  
from the Siebel Server to the machine where the SWSE resides.

Chapter 15
[ 435 ]
From the architecture diagram, we can also derive the following  
important information:
• 
The migration process is split into an exporting and packaging procedure, 
during which data and iles are exported and copied to a package folder 
structure, and a deployment procedure, during which the data and iles are 
moved to the target enterprise.
• 
Exporting data from the source enterprise to the ADM package folder does 
not require a Siebel Management Agent nor does it depend on the Siebel 
Management Server.
• 
The deployment process is orchestrated by Siebel Management  
Server functionality.
Next, we will discuss the procedures to set up ADM functionality on the source 
enterprise, the Siebel Management Server, and the target enterprise.
Setting up Siebel Application  
Deployment Manager
Setting up ADM functionality involves tasks to be carried out by administrators on 
all Siebel enterprises and the Siebel Management Server. The following is a list of 
setup steps for source and target enterprises:
• 
Enable the ADM component group
• 
Conigure the enterprise proile for ADM
• 
Enable ADM support for the application object manager
• 
Activate ADM worklow processes
The following tasks have to be completed on the Siebel Management Server to  
enable ADM functionality:
• 
Verify the adm.cli ile
• 
Create shared directories
• 
Create the enterprise proile ile and deployment batch iles
The setup process should be completed by a test deployment. Next, we will  
describe each setup step in detail.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 436 ]
Enabling the ADM component group
The ADM component group must be assigned to and enabled for at least one Siebel 
Server per enterprise. This component group contains the following components:
• 
ADM Object Manager
• 
ADM Processor
• 
ADM Batch Processor
As already discussed in previous chapters, this task can be carried out in the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen in the Siebel Web Client or by using 
the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line.
The following is an example for enabling the ADM component group using the 
srvrmgr command line utility:
enable compgrp adm for server Eval_1
The above command will enable the ADM component group for the server Eval_1.
Managing ADM components in source  
and target enterprises
If the Siebel Server is part of a source enterprise, the following components can 
be set to manual start to decrease CPU and memory consumption on the Siebel 
Server machine:
• 
ADM Object Manager
• 
ADM Processor
These components are only used on target enterprises. The only component that 
should be online on a source enterprise is the ADM Batch Processor, which has the 
purpose of automating the export of administrative data from the Siebel database.
Having understood the purpose of the ADM Batch Processor, it is clear that it can 
be set to manual start on all Siebel servers in target enterprises.
The following is an example that shows how to set the ADM Batch Processor to 
manual startup mode using the Siebel Server Manager command line:
manual start comp ADMBatchProc for server Eval_2
This command sets the ADM Batch Processor component to manual startup mode 
on the Siebel Server named Eval_2.

Chapter 15
[ 437 ]
Coniguring the enterprise proile for ADM
In order to enable the integration between the Java-based Siebel Management Agent 
and the ADM Object Manager, an enterprise proile must be conigured. We can 
use the preconigured admjavasubsys enterprise proile. Commands similar to the 
following, preferably issued at the Siebel Server Manager command line from a 
script, provide the correct settings for this enterprise proile (named subsystem is the 
term used for enterprise proiles in the Siebel Server Manager command line syntax).
change param classpath=C:\SIA81\mgmtagent\lib\siebelmgr.jar;C:\SIA81\
mgmtagent\lib\admstatussvc.jar;C:\SIA81\mgmtagent\lib\Siebel.jar;C:\
SIA81\mgmtagent\lib\SiebelJI_enu.jar for named subsystem admjavasubsys
change param dll=C:\jdk1.5.0_09\jre\bin\client\jvm.dll for named 
subsystem admjavasubsys
The irst command in the above example sets the value of the classpath 
parameter of the admjavasubsys named subsystem to a semicolon-separated list 
of fully qualiied paths to Java libraries situated in the lib directory of the Siebel 
Management Agent's installation folder.
The second command sets the value of the dll parameter to a valid path to the 
jvm.dll residing in the JDK installation folder on the local machine.
After coniguring the admjavasubsys enterprise proile, we must set it as the default 
Java subsystem by setting the value of the jvmsubsys enterprise parameter to 'ADM 
Java Systems' using a command similar to the following:
change ent param jvmsubsys='ADM Java Systems'
This speciic value is documented in the Application Deployment Manager Guide  
in the Siebel bookshelf documentation library.
Enabling ADM support for the application  
object manager
Application Deployment Manager uses an existing application object manager for 
the push synchronization of iles from the Siebel Server to the machine where the 
Siebel Web Server Extension resides.
This functionality must be enabled by setting the value of the enableadmsupport 
parameter to True for at least one application object manager in the target enterprise 
using a command similar to the following:
change param enableadmsupport=True for comp sccobjmgr_enu server Eval_2

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 438 ]
In the above example, the value of the enableadmsupport parameter is set to True 
for the English Siebel Call Center object manager on the Siebel Server named Eval_2.
As usual, we could also use the graphical user interface (GUI) provided by the views 
in the Administration - Server Coniguration screen in the Siebel Web Client.
Activating ADM worklow processes
We can follow the procedure below to activate the ADM worklow processes. This 
procedure must be executed once for each enterprise:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web Client using an administrative user account.
2. Navigate to the Application Deployment Manager screen, Data Type 
Details view.
3. Click the Menu button or right-click anywhere in the list to open the menu.
4. Select Activate ADM Worklows.
5. Click OK in the conirmation dialog.
This activates all worklow processes needed for ADM functionality on source and 
target enterprises. The following screenshot shows the Data Type Details view in 
the Application Deployment Manager screen:
The Activate ADM Worklows option in the applet menu is selected.

Chapter 15
[ 439 ]
Restarting Siebel Servers
Because of the enablement of a new component group and several other changes 
at the enterprise level, we must restart all Siebel Servers that will be hosting ADM 
server components.
This concludes the ADM setup tasks on source and target enterprises. In the 
following section, we will discuss the setup steps on the Siebel Management Server.
Verifying the adm.cli ile
Under certain circumstances, a ile named adm.cli is missing in the Siebel 
Management Server's installation root directory after installation. In order to enable 
ADM functionality, we must verify that this ile exists.
If the ile does not exist, we must create a new text ile with the following content in 
the installation root directory of the Siebel Management Server:
serverUrl=service:jmx:rmi://localhost/jndi/rmi://localhost:1099/jmx/
siebel/MgmtServer
output=xml=.\\adm\\format.xsl
mbean=ADM:type=ADMCommandLineMBean
operation=invoke
We write these four lines to the ile and save it as adm.cli. The Siebel Management 
Server must be restarted after this procedure.
Creating shared directories
During the ADM deployment process, iles are stored temporarily in shared folders 
to be accessed by the Siebel Management Server and the Siebel Management Agents. 
In order to secure lawless execution of the ADM deployment process, we must 
create two shared folders. The ideal location for these folders is the machine where 
the Siebel Management Server resides. When setting up the share permissions, 
we must ensure that the system account used to operate the services for the Siebel 
Management Server and Siebel Management Agents has full read and write 
permission on the shared folders.
In order to facilitate the exporting and packaging process, it is beneicial to enable ile 
sharing on the adm\packages directory in the Siebel Management Server installation 
folder. For example, we can create a share named ADM_PACKAGES on the adm\
packages directory.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 440 ]
Creating the enterprise proile and 
deployment batch iles
In order to enable the ADM deployment processes on the Siebel Management 
Server, an administrator has to generate two iles for each target enterprise:
• 
The enterprise proile ile
• 
The deployment batch ile
Both iles are generated by a Perl script named admconfig.pl, which has to be 
executed once for each target enterprise. The script is located in the bin directory 
of the Siebel Management Server installation folder and has the following syntax:
perl admconfig.pl -e SIEBELEVAL -s 2321 -p C:\SIA81\mgmtserver\adm\
packages -r C:\SIA81\mgmtserver
The above example shows that the admconfig.pl script takes four parameters. The -e 
switch is followed by the name of the enterprise we wish to generate the ADM iles for. 
The -s switch speciies the port that the Siebel Connection Broker is listening on. The 
Siebel Connection Broker is the system server component responsible for forwarding 
all incoming requests to the appropriate server components. Its default port is 2321. 
The -p parameter deines the default package location and -r is followed by the 
installation root folder of the Siebel Management Server.
This script reads the ile generated by the getservers.pl script (which was used 
to register Siebel Management Agents during the setup of the Siebel Management 
Server infrastructure) and creates two iles in the Siebel Management Server's 
directory. For the above example enterprise, the ile names would be:
• 
entprofile_SIEBELEVAL.xml in the adm subdirectory
• 
deploy_SIEBELEVAL.bat in the bin subdirectory
The irst ile, being the enterprise proile ile for the SIEBELEVAL enterprise in XML 
format, must be modiied manually. The following table describes the changes we 
have to make to the enterprise proile ile.
As most of the modiications consist of replacing the string "CHANGE_ME" with the 
qualiied agent name, it is beneicial to copy the agent name into the clipboard. The 
agent name can be obtained from the <ServerInfo> section at the beginning of the ile.
We open the entprofile_<enterprise_name>.xml ile with a text editor of our 
choice and copy the value of the AgentName attribute in the <ServerInfo> section 
to the clipboard. The following screenshot shows the highlighted value of the 
AgentName attribute (osappeval_1199) in the <ServerInfo> section.

Chapter 15
[ 441 ]
Copying the string between the double quotes into the clipboard eases the tasks 
described in the table below.
We can now scroll through the XML ile and replace all lines that contain the string 
"CHANGE_ME" as instructed in the table:
Text to modify
Example result/Instructions
<DeployServer>CHANGE_ME
<DeployServer>osappeval_1199
Replace CHANGE_ME with the fully 
qualiied agent name.
<DestinationRoot>$SIEBEL_
ROOT$
<DestinationRoot>C:\SIA81
Replace $SIEBEL_ROOT$ with the root 
installation folder of the Siebel Server.
\\CHANGE_ME\upload
\\osappeval\ADM_UPLOAD
Replace \\CHANGE_ME\upload with a 
valid UNC path to the upload folder.
<WebServerHosts>http://
CHANGE_ME
<WebServerHosts>http://osappeval
Replace http://CHANGE_ME with a 
valid URL for the web server that hosts the 
Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE).
<ApplicationPath>/callcenter_
enu
If necessary, replace /callcenter_enu with 
the virtual directory for the application 
object manager enabled for ADM.
\\net\CHANGE_ME\shared;
\\osappeval\ADM_SHARED;
Replace \\net\CHANGE_ME\shared; 
with a valid UNC path to the shared folder 
followed by a semicolon.
<WFPolicyActSrvr>CHANGE_
ME
<WFPolicyActSrvr>osappeval_1199
Replace CHANGE_ME with the fully 
qualiied agent name.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 442 ]
The enterprise proile XML ile can also be modiied using 
Microsoft InfoPath. Scripts are provided in the adm directory 
of the Siebel Management Server installation folder to 
register the enterprise proile ile with Microsoft InfoPath.
After saving and closing the ile, we must check the validity of the enterprise proile 
XML ile by entering a command similar to the following in a command prompt at 
the root folder of the Siebel Management Server installation. Note that the Siebel 
Management Server service must be running for successful execution of the command.
bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL valent SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT
This command invokes the deploy_SIEBELEVAL.bat ile (the enterprise batch ile 
for the SIEBELEVAL enterprise) in the bin directory of the Siebel Management 
Server installation folder and passes three parameters. The irst parameter (valent) 
is one of the predeined operations that are implemented in the enterprise batch 
ile. This operation validates the enterprise proile ile syntax. The second and third 
parameters are a valid username password pair for the Siebel Management Server. 
The following screenshot shows the success message displayed as output of the 
valent operation:
Error messages indicate invalid syntax of the enterprise proile ile. To avoid having 
to enter the bin\ path, we can copy the enterprise deployment batch ile to the Siebel 
Management Server's root installation folder.
This concludes the setup procedure for Application Deployment 
Manager functionality on source and target enterprises as well as the  
Siebel Management Server.
Use the setup instructions above to enable and verify 
ADM functionality on your demonstration machine.

Chapter 15
[ 443 ]
Exporting and Packaging  
Coniguration Changes
As indicated above, ADM supports three different data types—administrative  
data, repository data, and iles—each of which is associated with separate  
exporting mechanisms.
In this section, we will discuss both the manual and the automated export 
mechanisms for all data types. We will start with creating the ADM package,  
a directory structure, which must be populated with data objects.
Creating the ADM package
The ADM package is a folder structure that is created and managed by the ADM 
Packager command line utility (admpkgr). We must use this utility to:
• 
Create the empty package structure
• 
Seal the package content with a descriptor ile
• 
Validate the package content against the descriptor ile
Next, we will discuss the procedure to create an empty package structure. Sealing 
and verifying the package is discussed after the exporting procedures.
Creating the empty package structure
As the ideal location for the ADM package is the adm\packages folder in the 
Siebel Management Server's installation directory, the following tasks are typically 
executed on the machine that hosts the Siebel Management Server. However, the 
package can also be generated on a different machine and copied to the Siebel 
Management Server at a later time.
To create an empty ADM package structure, we open a command shell and navigate 
to the root installation folder of the Siebel Management Server. This is where the 
admpkgr command line utility is situated.
We use a command similar to the following to create a new empty package structure:
admpkgr init C:\SIA81\mgmtsrvr\adm\packages\EVAL_PACKAGE

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 444 ]
The init command is followed by the full path to the root folder of the new package. 
As a result of the above example command, a new folder named EVAL_PACKAGE is 
generated in the \adm\packages folder of the Siebel Management Server installation 
directory. The following screenshot shows the folder structure generated by the 
ADM Packager:
Each package contains three main folders—database, ile, and repository. The  
ile folder has subfolders that represent a part of the folder structure of the target 
Siebel servers.
In order to generate additional language-speciic folders such as "deu" 
for German or "fra" for French, we can edit the admpkgr.bat ile using 
a text editor of our choice. In the ile, we locate and modify the line SET 
LANG_DIR="ENU". The LANG_DIR variable can hold a comma-separated 
list of three letter codes for the supported Siebel languages
Examples for language-speciic data are the localization iles (.xlf) for 
BI Publisher reports.
It is possible to remove unused folders and create new subfolders in the ile folder 
during the export and packaging process.

Chapter 15
[ 445 ]
On your demonstration machine, use the ADM 
Packager as described to create an empty package.
Exporting administrative data using the 
Application Deployment Manager screen
Administrative data such as List of Values (LOV) or responsibilities can be exported 
from the graphical user interface provided by views in the Application Deployment 
Manager screen in the Siebel Web Client.
The following procedure describes how to create an ADM deployment project and 
use it in an ADM export session. Deployment projects are deined once as a list of data 
objects and the associated ilters. They can be reused for multiple export sessions. The 
example refers to preconigured List of Values (LOV) data for the Todo Type ield in 
Siebel Activities. The process is similar for each supported ADM data type:
1. Log in to the Siebel Web Client using an administrative account.
2. Navigate to the Application Deployment Manager screen, Deployment 
Projects view.
3. Create a new (or copy an existing) deployment project.
4. Enter a name for the new deployment project.
5. Ensure that the Export to File and Session Conigurable lags are checked.
6. In the lower list applet, click New and select LOV from the Data Type Name 
dropdown list.
7. Choose Upsert as the deployment method.
8. In the Deployment Filter ield, enter [Value]='TODO_TYPE'. This ilter ensures 
that only records for the List of Values type "TODO_TYPE" are exported.
Alternatively, we can click the select button in the Deployment Filter ield 
and choose one of the existing predeined queries for the respective object. 
However, because of the fact that predeined queries reference business 
component ields and ADM operates on integration object components, ield 
name differences can lead to invalid ilters when working with predeined 
queries. Developers can assist in the task of inding the correct ield names 
for the ilter speciication.
9. Click the Validate Filter button in the upper list applet. If no message is 
displayed, the ilter is valid. If an error message appears, correct the syntax  
of the deployment ilter and validate again until no error is displayed.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 446 ]
10. Click the Enable button in the upper list applet. Once a deployment project 
is enabled, it can no longer be modiied. We would have to copy the 
deployment project record and modify and enable the copied record.
11. Navigate to the Deployment Sessions view.
12. Click the New button and select the deployment project created before from 
the dropdown list in the Project Name ield.
13. Press CTRL+S to save the record. This populates the lower list applet with 
the data objects.
14. Click the Deploy button in the upper list applet.
15. In the Export dialog box, enter either a valid UNC path or an absolute path to 
an existing folder where the export iles should be written to.
For example, to write the iles to the database folder of the EVAL_PACKAGE 
package—using the network share created on the adm\packages folder—we 
could specify a path similar to the following:
 
\\osappeval1\ADM_PACKAGES\EVAL_PACKAGE\database
In the above example, osappeval1 is the name of the server where the Siebel 
Management Server resides and ADM_PACKAGES is the name of the network 
share created on the adm\packages directory.
16. Click the Export button to start the data export.
17. Verify that the Status ield displays a value of Export Completed, which 
indicates successful export of the data.
18. Navigate to the export folder and verify the existence of three new iles. 
The ADM export process uses the Session ID as a preix for the iles and the 
data type names—for example LOV—to distinguish the iles. The following 
screenshot shows a completed ADM deployment session and the resulting 
iles in the database folder of the ADM package directory:

Chapter 15
[ 447 ]
The ile with the .ini sufix must be deleted. It does not contain any data for the 
ADM deployment. The pair of XML iles—the data ile and an accompanying 
descriptor ile—must be kept as is and must not be modiied or renamed.
This process of exporting administrative data using the graphical user interface can 
be repeated for other data types as often as needed until the set of data to deploy into 
the target enterprises is complete.
All database export iles must be either written directly to the database folder of 
the ADM package or copied there at a later point in time. The latter is a common 
scenario when project teams use version control tools to keep all modiied and new 
objects until deployment time.
Exporting administrative data using the ADM 
Batch Processor server component
As we have learned above, the export of administrative data is a manual and 
therefore time consuming and error prone task. To automate the export, we can  
use the ADM Batch Processor server component.
The ADM Batch Processor is a batch component and is part of the ADM component 
group. It can be invoked via the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line or 
using the Jobs view in the Administration - Server Management screen in the Siebel 
Web Client.
Next, we will describe how to invoke the ADM Batch Processor using the Siebel 
Server Manager command line.
Because of the number of parameters to set, it is beneicial to use an input ile that 
contains the start task command. The following is an example of a command that 
invokes the ADM Batch Processor and directs it to export List of Values (LOV) data:
start task for comp admbatchproc with admpath=\\osappeval\ADM_PACKAGES\
EVAL_PACKAGE\database,
admdatatype='LOV',
admfilter='[Value] = "TODO_TYPE"',
admeaimethod=upsert,
admprefix=LOV_TODO_TYPE
The command must be in a single line. The example above 
has been broken into separate lines for better readability.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 448 ]
When using the ADM Batch Processor, the following parameters must be set:
• 
admpath: a valid UNC or absolute path where the iles should be written to. 
It is recommended to provide the path to the database folder of the ADM 
package directory.
• 
admdatatype: the name of the ADM data type
• 
admfilter: the search speciication to ilter the data
• 
admeaimethod: the EAI method to use when data is imported in the 
target enterprise; upsert (update or insert operations are carried out 
automatically), or synchronize (update, insert, or delete operations  
are carried out automatically)
• 
admprefix: the preix to be used for the output ile names
The ADM Batch Processor writes two iles to the speciied directory, one ile  
that carries the data and the accompanying descriptor ile. For naming the iles,  
the server component uses the value of the admprefix parameter and the identiier 
number of the Siebel server task.
If we use the ADM Batch Processor server component as in the 
example above, no deployment project needs to be created in the 
Application Deployment Manager screen. However, if we wish 
to use the deinitions of a deployment project, we can do so by 
using the admproject parameter and the name of an enabled 
deployment project as its value. If we use the admproject 
parameter, the only other mandatory parameter is admpath.
Exporting repository data using Siebel Tools
In addition to migrating administrative data, Siebel Application Deployment 
Manager is capable of exporting and migrating repository object deinitions  
from one Siebel enterprise (typically, the development environment) to one or  
more target enterprises (typically, test or production environments).
As Siebel Tools is the application used by developers to create or modify repository 
objects, it provides the necessary ADM functionality to export these objects. In the 
following, we will discuss the techniques to export repository objects using the 
graphical user interface of Siebel Tools.

Chapter 15
[ 449 ]
ADM supports two scenarios for migrating repository changes:
• 
Hot-Fix
• 
Mid-Level Release
In a Hot-Fix scenario, a small number of object deinitions are typically hand-picked 
and then exported and migrated to the target enterprise. It is quite common that for 
example an error has been discovered in a business service method's script, which 
must be quickly ixed and issued to the production environment in a small timeframe.
A Mid-Level Release is considered as a certain time slice in a project, which involves 
the creation or modiication of several dozens of repository objects. A Mid-Level 
Release represents all changes made to the repository since a certain point in time.
Changes to the database schema, such as the creation of new tables or the addition 
of columns to existing tables are considered part of a major release and should not 
be migrated using ADM. The utilities that should be used for these purposes will be 
discussed in the inal section of this chapter.
Exporting repository object deinitions for Hot-Fixes
The following procedure describes how to export repository object deinitions 
for a Hot-Fix:
1. Log in to Siebel Tools, connecting to the database that contains the object 
deinitions to export.
2. Navigate to the object deinition. For example, click Business Service in the 
Object Explorer pane and then query for the Siebel Account business service 
in the list.
3. Right-click the object deinition and select Add to Hot-Fix…
4. In the Generate Hot-Fix dialog, specify a label for the Hot-Fix.
5. If you wish to add more object deinitions to the Hot-Fix, use the Object 
Explorer and the list view to select them and repeat the above steps.
6. Once all object deinitions are added to the list in the Generate Hot-Fix 
dialog, click the Export button.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 450 ]
A new subdirectory with the Hot-Fix label as its name will be generated in the ADM 
directory of the Siebel Tools installation folder. It will contain a Siebel Tools Archive 
ile (.sif), an accompanying XML descriptor ile, and a log ile. All iles except 
the log ile must be copied to the repository folder in the ADM package directory 
to complete the export process. The screenshot below shows the Generate Hot-Fix 
dialog in Siebel Tools:
The Hot-Fix has a label of EVAL—the name of the new subdirectory and currently 
contains a single object deinition of type Business Service.
Exporting repository object deinitions for  
mid-level releases
The following procedure describes how we can use Siebel Tools to create a 
Mid-Level Release. We will specify a start timestamp and then retrieve all  
object deinitions created or modiied since then.
1. Log in to Siebel Tools, connecting to the database that contains the object 
deinitions to export.
2. From the View menu, select Options.
3. In the General tab, set the Changed Date to the date and time which deines 
the begin of the Mid-Level Release.
4. Click OK.
5. From the Tools menu, select Generate Mid-Level Release…
6. In the Generate Mid-Level Release dialog, specify a label for the  
Mid-Level Release.
7. Click the Generate List button.

Chapter 15
[ 451 ]
8. Verify that the list is populated with object deinitions that have been created 
or modiied after the start date.
9. Optionally, remove object deinitions from the list by selecting them and 
pressing the Delete key.
10. Choose an export option. It is recommended to choose "One SIF per  
object" when the list of object deinitions is long to avoid the generation  
of a single large ile.
11. Click the Export button.
12. Click OK to conirm the success message.
The screenshot below shows the Generate Mid-Level Release dialog in Siebel Tools:
Similar to Hot-Fixes, a new directory with the Mid-Level Release label as its name 
is generated in the ADM folder of the Siebel Tools installation directory. Depending 
on the export options, we ind either a single or multiple Siebel Tools Archive iles 
(.sif). When we choose to export to one .sif ile per object, the utility generates 
subdirectories for each object type to avoid name conlicts. As usual, they are 
accompanied by XML descriptor iles and .log iles.
Copying the .sif and accompanying XML descriptor iles to the repository folder 
of the ADM package directory completes the export of a Mid-Level Release. 

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 452 ]
Exporting repository data using  
the consoleapp utility
The two procedures described above—exporting repository object deinitions for Hot 
Fixes and Mid-Level Releases—must be carried out manually in the Siebel Tools user 
interface. Similar to exporting administrative data automatically using a script, we 
can leverage a utility named consoleapp to automate the export of repository data to 
the ADM package.
The consoleapp—"console application"—utility is a generic interface that allows 
administrators to invoke business service methods from the command line.
The Siebel repository contains a pre-built business service named Siebel Tools 
Export Support for ADM, which supports the automated export of repository 
data to an ADM package directory.
Source: Siebel Application Deployment Manager Guide, Version 8.1
Before we launch the consoleapp command line utility, we must verify that the 
DataSource parameter in the Siebel Tools coniguration ile (tools.cfg) points 
to the data source that contains the repository object deinitions we wish to export.
We can issue a command similar to the following from the Windows command shell 
to export one or more object deinitions:
C:\siebel\8.2\Tools_1\bin\consoleapp.exe
"C:\siebel\8.2\Tools_1\bin\enu\tools.cfg" ENU SADMIN TJay357D
"Siebel Tools Export Support for ADM"
Export:Repository=Siebel Repository,
Object_1=EVAL Siebel Account,
Type_1=Business Service,
ExportFile=\\osappeval\ADM_PACKAGES\EVAL_PACKAGE\repository\EVAL_BS_1.
sif,
DescriptorFile=\\osappeval\ADM_PACKAGES\EVAL_PACKAGE\repository\EVAL_
BS_1_des.xml,
ExportCount=1,
LogFile=c:\temp\adm.log"
The above example script has been broken into separate lines for better readability. 
The syntax of a consoleapp.exe invocation is as follows:
consoleapp <application configuration file path> <language code> 
<username> <password> <Business Service name> <Method name:Param_1=Value_
1,Param_2=Value_2,…,Param_N=Value_N>

Chapter 15
[ 453 ]
In the example above, the application coniguration ile path points to the Siebel 
Tools coniguration ile (tools.cfg). We are using ENU (English - United States) as 
the language code and SADMIN as the username to log in to the console application.
The business service to be invoked is Siebel Tools Export Support for ADM. The 
method of the business service is named Export. The following parameters can be 
passed to the Export method:
Parameter Name
Description
Example Value
Repository
Name of the repository to 
export object deinitions from.
Siebel Repository
Object_N
The Object_N syntax allows 
for exporting multiple object 
deinitions at once. N is to 
be replaced by a numeric 
sequence. The parameter 
value is the exact name 
(case sensitive) of an object 
deinition in the repository.
Object_1=EVAL Siebel 
Acccount,Object_2=Account  
List Applet
Type_N
The Type_N parameter value 
is the exact type of the object 
deinition. It corresponds to 
the Object_N parameter.
Type_1=Business 
Service,Type_2=Applet
ExportFile
Full path to the export ile. 
The sufix must be .sif.
\\osappeval\ADM_PACKAGES\ 
EVAL_PACKAGE\repository\
EVAL_1.sif
DescriptorFile
Full path to the descriptor 
ile. The name must match 
the name of the export ile 
followed by "_des.xml".
\\osappeval\ADM_PACKAGES\ 
EVAL_PACKAGE\repository\
EVAL_1_des.xml
ExportCount
Number of object deinitions 
to export.
ExportCount=2
LogFile
Full path to the log ile for the 
export process.
LogFile=D:\temp\
admexport1.log
As a result of the above command, which should be part of a command shell script, 
the export ile (.sif) and accompanying descriptor XML ile are written directly to 
the repository folder of the ADM package directory.
The main beneit of using the consoleapp utility is that we have full control over 
the ile names and the output folder. In addition, the command line invocation 
technique allows us to create any type of shell script or small application to wrap  
the consoleapp call and parameter settings.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 454 ]
Copying iles to the ADM package
As indicated earlier in this chapter, Siebel Application Deployment Manager supports 
the migration of iles from one source enterprise to multiple target enterprises. We 
must copy iles such as Siebel web templates (.swt) to the appropriate subdirectory 
in the file\AppServer folder of the ADM package structure.
There is no specialized utility provided by Oracle to copy the iles. We must rely 
on the copy functionality of the operating system or other ile transport automation 
tools such as robocopy or ftp.
The following table provides an overview of the various supported ile types and  
the destination folder in the ADM package directory:
File Type
Comments
Destination Folder
Siebel Repository File 
(.srf)
The .srf ile is compiled 
using Siebel Tools once for 
each deployed language 
pack. If repository data 
is migrated, the .srf ile 
must be migrated as well. 
Deployment of .srf iles 
is discussed in more detail 
below.
file\AppServer\ 
objects\<language>
Siebel Web Templates 
(.swt)
Siebel Web Templates are 
typically modiied rather 
infrequently.
file\AppServer\ 
webtempl
BI Publisher Report 
templates (.rtf)
Created by report 
developers.
file\AppServer\ 
xmlp\templates
BI Publisher Report 
Translation iles 
(.xlf)
Contain translatable strings 
in the respective language.
file\AppServer\ 
xmlp\
xliff\<language>
Files in the PUBLIC 
directory of the Siebel 
Web Server Extension 
(SWSE)
All iles in the PUBLIC 
directory are supported for 
migration by ADM.
file\AppServer\
webmaster
Note: appropriate 
subdirectories must be 
created manually. Use 
the existing webmaster 
directory on the Siebel 
server as a guideline.

Chapter 15
[ 455 ]
About deploying Siebel Repository Files
There are several considerations about deploying the Siebel Repository File (.srf) 
using ADM.
• 
ADM cannot be used to deploy a .srf ile that already exists on the target 
server. This is because the ile is locked when the Siebel server processes  
are running.
• 
ADM is not capable to shut down and restart the Siebel Server components 
or the entire Siebel Server. This step must be done manually.
• 
If the ADM package does not contain repository objects or if these objects  
are of type "Worklow Process" or "Task", it is not necessary to deploy the 
.srf ile.
Most projects therefore abstain from using ADM to deploy Siebel Repository Files. 
Administrators can follow the procedure below to deploy a new .srf ile. The 
procedure is applicable when there are two or more Siebel Servers in the enterprise 
and a load balancing mechanism is in place. It provides a safe path with minimal 
impact on running sessions.
1. Bring all non-system server components such as application object managers 
to a paused status. This ensures that no new tasks are started for the server 
components on this Siebel server.
2. Monitor the active sessions on all non-system server components on  
the Siebel server and wait until the active session count is zero.
3. Shut down the Siebel server service.
4. Copy the new .srf ile to the correct language-speciic subdirectory in 
the Siebel Server's object folder.
5. Start the Siebel server service.
6. Verify that the Siebel Server starts up without errors.
Sealing the ADM package
Once the package is populated with all administrative data, repository data, and iles 
that are part of the release, we must use the admpkgr command line utility again to 
generate an XML descriptor ile that contains information about the package content.
It is recommended to delete all empty directories from the package structure in order 
to avoid warnings being displayed during the remaining steps.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 456 ]
A command similar to the following, issued from the Siebel Management Server's 
root directory, will generate the descriptor ile:
admpkgr generate C:\SIA81\mgmtsrvr\adm\packages\EVAL_PACKAGE
The above command will generate a package descriptor ile and an accompanying 
XML schema deinition (.xsd) ile in the package root directory.
Once the descriptor ile is generated, the package content must not be changed. If 
changes are made to the package content, we must delete the descriptor ile and the 
schema ile and repeat the above command to generate a new package descriptor.
Validating the ADM package
In order to verify that the content of an ADM package matches the package 
descriptor ile, we can use the validate command of the admpkgr command line 
utility as shown in the following example:
admpkgr validate C:\SIA81\mgmtsrvr\adm\packages\EVAL_PACKAGE
The above command validates the content of the EVAL_PACKAGE directory against the 
descriptor ile. We should see a message indicating that the package directory was 
successfully validated. If this is not the case, the package content has been modiied 
and the ADM package is not valid.
On your demonstration machine, you can use the Developer Web Client 
and Siebel Tools to create and validate an evaluation package. In the adm\
packages directory of the Siebel Management Server installation folder, 
you will also ind a sample package that you can inspect (and deploy).
Deploying ADM packages
In contrast to the somewhat heterogeneous process of exporting and packaging data 
and iles for ADM, the deployment process is driven by a single batch ile. This ile 
is generated during the ADM setup and is named deploy_EnterpriseName.bat, 
where EnterpriseName is replaced with the name of the target Siebel enterprise 
for which the ADM setup was completed. If we have more than one target Siebel 
enterprise, there will be one deployment batch ile per enterprise.
The enterprise deployment batch ile serves as a wrapper for calls to the underlying 
Java functionality and allows administrators to use a simple syntax for the complete 
deployment cycle. Below is an example of the syntax of the enterprise deployment 
batch ile.

Chapter 15
[ 457 ]
deploy_SIEBELEVAL load SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
The irst parameter passed to the deploy_SIEBELEVAL batch ile is the name of the 
command—load in the example—to be executed. The second and third parameter is 
a valid username and password combination. The fourth parameter is the name of an 
ADM package directory.
To see a complete list of possible commands and syntax examples, we can use  
the help command:
deploy_SIEBELEVAL help
The above command results in the display of the usage information for the 
deployment batch ile including all available commands. If we wish to see a  
detailed explanation of a speciic command such as load, we can simply type 
it after the help command.
deploy_SIEBELEVAL help load
The above command displays details about the load command.
The most important commands and their typical sequence for a successful and  
safe deployment are described in the following table:
Sequence
Command
Description
Mandatory?
1
load
Reads the package and writes information 
about the content of the package to the 
ADM database.
Yes
2
create
Creates a new deployment session for the 
package. Once a session is created, it must 
be completed or stopped before another 
session can be executed.
Yes
3
validate
Validates the state of the target enterprise 
by establishing connections to the 
management agents and ADM object 
managers.
No
4
backup
Reads data that matches the iles in the 
package from the target enterprise and 
writes it to a temporary backup package. 
The parameter to do an automatic backup 
is turned on by default, so this is only 
mandatory if the automatic backup is 
turned off and a manual backup is needed.
No

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 458 ]
Sequence
Command
Description
Mandatory?
4
copy
The copy command directs the Siebel 
Management Server to write—and 
subsequently overwrite—data and iles to 
the target enterprise.
Yes
5
activate
The Siebel Management Server reads 
information from the ADM registry ile and 
directs the management agents to execute 
business services that activate the data. 
Examples are the refreshing of caches or 
the synchronization of the SWSE's public 
folder.
Yes
6
restore_
session
This command, which creates a restore 
session for the given package, is only 
applicable when we wish to copy a 
backup package—created with the backup 
command—to restore the state of the target 
enterprise before the copy command.
No
7
restore_
copy
Copies the content of the backup package 
to the target enterprise.
No
8
restore_
activate
Activates the content of the backup 
package on the target enterprise.
Note: After this command, the target 
enterprise is in the same functional state it 
was before the copy command. This does 
not mean that all data imported during the 
copy is deleted. For example, a worklow 
process would stay in the repository 
but it would be inactive, hence the term 
functional state.
No
9
acknowledge
The acknowledge command should be 
issued only after thorough testing. It 
completes the session by conirming that 
everything is correct. No restore session is 
possible after this point.
Yes
10
status_
detail
There are several status commands 
available to obtain information about the 
current state of the deployment session.
No
11
report
Creates an HTML report for the package. 
The report includes performance 
measurements for every single ile in  
the package.
No

Chapter 15
[ 459 ]
Sequence
Command
Description
Mandatory?
12
delete
Cleans up data about the package and the 
deployment session in the ADM database. 
This is only necessary if we wish to use a 
package with the same name over and over 
again.
No
The following is a simple example script that gives us the general idea of how the 
deployment batch commands are used:
# load the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL load SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# create a deployment session for the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL create SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# display the contents of the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL list_detail SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# display the status details of the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL status_detail SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# migrate data to target enterprise
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL copy SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# activate data on target enterprise
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL activate SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# display the status details of the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL status_detail SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# create an html report file for the package
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL report SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
# acknowledge the session
call bin\deploy_SIEBELEVAL acknowledge SIEBMGMT SIEBMGMT EVAL_PACKAGE
The script accomplishes the following:
• 
Calls the load command to write package information to the ADM database
• 
Calls the create command to create a new session for the package
• 
Uses the list_detail and status_detail commands to output information 
about the package content and deployment status

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 460 ]
• 
Uses the copy and activate commands to copy the package content to the 
target enterprise and activate it
• 
Invokes the status_detail and report commands to obtain information 
about the session status and runtime information
• 
Calls the acknowledge command to conirm and close the session
Script iles similar to that above can be used by administrators to automate the ADM 
deployment process. As indicated in this section, the deployment process must 
include a strict testing regimen in order to ensure that the migrated coniguration 
changes do not affect the functionality or performance of the target system in a 
negative manner.
Other migration utilities
Because ADM is not designed to cover all aspects of the deployment of coniguration 
changes, we will discuss additional utilities for coniguration migration as provided 
by Oracle.
• 
Siebel Upgrade Wizard—Migrate Repository
• 
Deployment of enterprise coniguration data using the cfgmerge utility
Siebel Upgrade Wizard—Migrate Repository
As indicated during the discussion of repository migration scenarios, we can observe 
that the capability of ADM for migration of repository changes is limited to either  
a Hot-Fix or a Mid-Level Release scenario. Both scenarios share the characteristics  
of having a relatively small number of object deinitions and no database schema 
changes to be deployed.
A major release scenario, including changes of hundreds or thousands of object 
deinitions including object deinitions at the data layer such as tables, columns,  
or indexes is supported by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard.

Chapter 15
[ 461 ]
The Migrate Repository procedure is provided by the Siebel Database 
Coniguration Assistant. The coniguration assistant provides a graphical user 
interface to capture relevant parameter information and then invokes the Siebel 
Upgrade Wizard, which executes the necessary tasks. The Migrate Repository 
procedure includes the following tasks:
1. Export the complete repository from the source database to a lat ile.
2. Import the data from the lat ile to the target database as the new  
Siebel Repository.
3. Rename the old Siebel Repository in the target database.
4. Synchronize the physical schema of the target database with the  
object deinitions in the data layer of the new repository.
5. Update the schema version information in the target database.
The Migrate Repository procedure is widely known in the 
technical Siebel CRM community as "dev2prod"—development 
to production. The default name for the log ile directory created 
by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard is reminiscent of this old name.
The following table describes the procedure of invoking the Siebel Database 
Coniguration Wizard and executing the Migrate Repository procedure. 
The example is for Microsoft Windows operating systems.
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Start the Coniguration Wizard
Click the Database Server Coniguration 
shortcut in the Windows start menu.
2
Siebel Server directory
Provide the path to the Siebel Server's 
installation directory.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
3
Siebel Database Server Utilities 
directory
Provide the path to the Siebel Database 
Server Utilities installation folder.
Typically, the default can be kept.
Click Next.
4
Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise Edition.
Click Next.
5
Task selection
Select Migrate Repository.
Click Next.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 462 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
6
Action selection
Select Read source repository directly 
from the database
Click Next.
7
Target environment
Select The target environment will be 
ofline when migration starts.
Note: We must bring the target 
environment to an ofline state before 
executing the Siebel Upgrade Wizard.
Click Next.
9
Schema changes
Select There are new schema changes to 
be applied.
Note: Selecting this value ensures that the 
database schema is synchronized with the 
data layer object deinitions. It is safe to 
choose even if no schema changes have 
been made.
Click Next.
10
Select base language
Select English (American).
Click Next.
11
ODBC Data Source Name (source)
Enter SIEBELEVAL_DSN.
Note: This is the name of the System DSN 
for the source enterprise.
Click Next.
12
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password (source)
User Name: SADMIN.
Password: TJay357D.
Click Next.
13
Siebel Database Table Owner and 
Password (source)
Table Owner: SIEBEL.
Password: dQ7JXui.
Click Next.
14
Source and target repository name
Keep the defaults ("Siebel Repository").
Click Next.
15
Target Database Platform
Select Oracle Database Enterprise Edition
Click Next.
16
Unicode selection
Select UNICODE Database.
Click Next.

Chapter 15
[ 463 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
17
ODBC Data Source Name (target)
Enter the name of the System DSN for the 
target enterprise. 
Note: We might have to create system DSN 
entries for the source and target databases 
on the machine where this process 
executes.
Click Next.
18
Siebel Database User Name and 
Password (target)
User Name: SADMIN.
Password: 7uxkl0D.
Click Next.
19
Siebel Database Table Owner and 
Password (target)
Table Owner: SIEBEL.
Password: 6tOPDD3.
Click Next.
20
Index and data tablespace names 
(target)
Index Table Space Name: SIEBELDB_IDX.
(Data) Table Space Name: 
SIEBELDB_DATA
Click Next.
21
Oracle parallel indexing
Keep the default ("Does not use…").
Click Next.
22
Security group and log output 
directory
Keep the defaults.
Note the log output directory will become 
a subdirectory of the Siebel Server's LOG 
directory.
Click Next.
23
Apply coniguration changes
Select Yes apply coniguration changes 
now.
Click Next.
24
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
25
Target Enterprise Shutdown (not 
part of the wizard)
Ensure that all Siebel Servers in the target 
enterprise are shut down. On production 
enterprises, ensure that the downtime is 
either announced well in advance or the 
migration is executed when no users are 
active.
26
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
27
The Siebel Upgrade Wizard is 
displayed.
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
Wizard dialog.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 464 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
28
During the installation process, 
several command windows are 
opened
Ensure that you do not close or make 
selections in any of the command 
windows.
Wait for the Siebel Upgrade Wizard to 
complete.
29
The coniguration wizard displays 
a message "Execution successful"
Click OK to conirm successful execution 
of the coniguration wizard.
30
The coniguration wizard jumps 
to the Siebel Server directory 
selection
Click Cancel in the Siebel Coniguration 
Wizard dialog.
31
Conirm exiting the coniguration 
wizard
Click Yes.
32
Siebel Upgrade Wizard displays 
"Complete"
Click OK in the Siebel Upgrade 
 Wizard dialog.
Once the Siebel Upgrade Wizard has successfully completed all steps, we should 
use Siebel Tools—connecting to the target database—to verify that a new Siebel 
Repository exists.
Depending on the project policies, we must ensure that the necessary tests are 
completed before we start the Siebel servers in the target enterprise.
Deploying enterprise coniguration data using 
the cfgmerge utility
Siebel Application Deployment Manager is not designed to deploy changes made to 
the coniguration of enterprise parameters, servers, and components. As discussed in 
Chapter 9, these changes can be made either through the server management screens 
and views in the Siebel Web Client or through the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) 
command line utility.
We already know that the storage location of this information is the siebns.dat ile, 
which is managed by the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
Because some of the parameters refer to enterprise-speciic paths or host names such 
as the ile system path or the chart server host name, we cannot simply copy the 
siebns.dat ile from one enterprise to the other.
The cfgmerge command line utility is one possible solution to achieving a merge of 
coniguration stores.

Chapter 15
[ 465 ]
The utility compares two siebns.dat iles—target and source—and produces an input 
ile for the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line utility. This ile contains the 
necessary commands to change those parameters in the target environment that have 
been modiied in the source environment. The input ile must be reviewed, modiied if 
necessary, and then executed using the srvrmgr command line.
Deploying new component deinitions from source 
to target enterprises
The cfgmerge utility can produce input iles on the enterprise level and the 
individual server level. It can only compare parameters, component deinitions,  
and server components that are already present in both siebns.dat iles and 
have the same names in both iles.
If we wish to use the cfgmerge utility to deploy new component deinitions from  
the source system to the target system, we have to create them manually in the  
target system by simply copying and renaming an existing component deinition  
in the graphical user interface or by using a script and then running the utility.
Using the cfgmerge utility
The following list gives an example procedure of how to use the cfgmerge utility:
1. Log in to the Siebel Server Manger (srvrmgr) command line against the 
source enterprise.
2. Use the backup namesrvr command to create a backup of the current 
siebns.dat source ile.
3. Rename the backup copy to siebns_source.dat.
4. Log in to the Siebel Server Manger (srvrmgr) command line against the  
target enterprise.
5. Use the backup namesrvr command to create a backup of the current 
siebns.dat target ile.
6. Rename the backup copy to siebns_target.dat.
7. Copy both iles created in the previous steps to a temporary directory on  
a machine where a Siebel Gateway Name Server is installed.
8. On this machine, open a command shell and navigate to the bin directory 
of the Siebel Gateway Name Server installation folder.
9. Execute a command similar to the following to create the input ile at the 
enterprise level.

Migrating Coniguration Changes between Environments
[ 466 ]
 
cfgmerge -l ENU -i D:\cfgmerge\siebns_source.dat,D:\cfgmerge\ 
 
siebns_target.dat -e SIEB_DEV,SIEB_TEST -o D:\cfgmerge\DEV_TEST_ 
 
ENT.txt
The above command invokes the cfgmerge utility. The -l parameter takes a 
three letter language code. The -i switch is followed by a comma-separated 
list of the full paths to the ile representing the source siebns.dat and the 
ile representing the target siebns.dat. The -e switch is followed by a 
comma-separated list of the names of the source enterprise and the target 
enterprise. The -o parameter value speciies the path where the output ile 
should be written to.
10. Execute a command similar to the following to create the input ile at the 
server level:
 
cfgmerge -l ENU -i D:\cfgmerge\siebns_source.dat,D:\cfgmerge\ 
 
siebns_target.dat -e SIEB_DEV,SIEB_TEST -s Dev_1,Test_1 -o D:\ 
 
cfgmerge\DEV_TEST_SRV.txt
The above command is similar to the one that generates the enterprise level 
output. The difference is the -s switch, which is followed by a comma-sepa-
rated list of the names of the two Siebel servers to compare.
11. If necessary, we repeat the command for any additional Siebel servers in the 
source or target enterprise.
12. Review and modify the output iles if necessary. It is mandatory to 
thoroughly review the output iles of the cfgmerge utility in order to avoid 
unwanted changes being applied to the target enterprise coniguration.
13. Log in to the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) against the target enterprise 
and execute a command similar to the following to apply the changes:
read D:\cfgmerge\DEV_TEST_ENT.txt
read D:\cfgmerge\DEV_TEST_SRV.txt
The read command opens the speciied ile and executes all commands in that ile.
The process is completed by shutting down and restarting all services of the target 
enterprise. If end users are affected by the shutdown, we must of course ensure that 
the end user community is notiied of the downtime well in advance.

Chapter 15
[ 467 ]
Summary
The complete, lawless, and reliable deployment of coniguration changes from one 
Siebel enterprise to another is a complex endeavour that cannot be accomplished 
with a single tool.
In this chapter, we introduced the major deployment tool, namely Siebel Application 
Deployment Manager (ADM). The chapter discussed the main steps to enable ADM 
functionality on the Siebel Management Server infrastructure.
The two main processes of an ADM deployment cycle are the exporting and 
packaging process and the deployment process. The exporting and packaging 
process relies on a variety of tools depending on the type of data to be migrated.
The chapter discussed both the manual and automatic possibilities to export and 
package administrative data, repository data, and iles.
The ADM deployment process relies on a single deployment batch ile and the 
commands supported by it. A sample script has been provided in this chapter  
to demonstrate how the deployment batch ile can be used to automate the 
deployment process.
In addition to ADM, this chapter discussed two other utilities that are widely used 
for migration of coniguration information from source to target enterprises, namely 
the Migrate Repository process driven by the Siebel Upgrade Wizard, which is used 
to migrate the entire repository, and apply schema changes to the target database 
and the cfgmerge utility, which allow administrators to accomplish the comparison 
and application of changes made to the Siebel Enterprise coniguration store in the 
Siebel Gateway Name Server's siebns.dat ile.
In the next chapter, we will explore techniques to monitor Siebel Server events  
and performance.


Monitoring Siebel 
Applications
Complex, enterprise-class applications such as Siebel CRM are based on an 
interwoven architecture that combines heterogeneous hardware, different  
network protocols, and software from various vendors.
Often, thousands of end users and dozens of external systems require  
high-speed access to the system at the same time. Developers modify the 
coniguration in order to meet end user requirements, which adds additional 
complexity to the overall implementation.
As responsible Siebel administrators, we must be aware of the technical possibilities 
of monitoring the performance and usage of Siebel CRM applications across the 
network as well as provide a reliable insight in the case of slow performance. Only 
by using the tools provided by Oracle correctly, will we be able to respond to 
possible performance breaches in a proactive manner.
In this chapter, we will elaborate on the following concepts:
• 
Server Component Event Logging
• 
Siebel Application Response Measurement (SARM)
• 
Siebel Diagnostic Tool
• 
Client Side Logging
• 
Siebel Usage Collection

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 470 ]
Server component event logging
The Siebel Server and the server components it hosts are among the most frequently 
used processes in a typical Siebel CRM implementation. In the case of error 
situations or slow performance, we must be able to quickly pin-point the root cause 
of the problem. One way to do this is to direct the server processes to write more 
detailed information in their log iles.
The Siebel server infrastructure provides a logging model, which is based on event 
types. We can control the amount of information written to the log ile separately for 
each server component and for each individual event type by choosing a log level for 
each event type.
The following log levels exist for Siebel servers or individual components:
Log Level
Description
0
Fatal—Only severe errors are written to the log ile. Recommended for 
productive operation.
1
Errors—The default setting; all error messages are written to the log 
ile. Recommended for productive operation.
2
Warnings—Messages with warning characteristics are included in the 
log ile. Recommended to trace coniguration issues.
3
Informational—Messages with informational content are included in 
the log ile. Recommended for troubleshooting and debugging.
4
Details—The log ile will include detailed information about the 
process. Recommended for more detailed troubleshooting and 
debugging.
5
Diagnostic—All message output from the process will be written to the 
log ile. Only recommended when lower levels do not yield the desired 
output or when requested by Oracle's technical support team.
Source: Siebel System Monitoring and Diagnostics Guide Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/SysDiag/booktitle.
html
When setting log levels to 2 or higher, we must bear in mind that a higher log level 
negatively impacts the performance of the Siebel server. In addition, the log iles can 
quickly grow very large in size, clogging the log directories and making it hard to 
retrieve valuable information.

Chapter 16
[ 471 ]
In the Servers view of the Administration - Server Coniguration screen, we can view 
or modify event log levels for an entire Siebel Server (affecting all components on 
that server) or individual components. The following screenshot shows the Events 
list for a selected Siebel Server:
In this list, we can set the log level for each event type individually. The following 
table lists some commonly used event types. Oracle recommends a log level of 4 for 
troubleshooting and 0 or 1 for normal operation.
Event Type
Description
Component Tracing
Various informational messages about 
parameter values and more.
General Events
Information about event points is written to 
the log ile. Example: a background component 
enters its sleep interval.
Task Coniguration
All parameters for the current task will be 
written to the log ile header.
SQL Proiling
Extended summary of SQL prepare, execute, 
and fetch statements.
SQL Summary
Writes the timings for SQL statement 
preparation as well as fetch and execute 
operations to the log ile.
SQL Error
Traces all erroneous SQL statements.
SQL Parse and Execute
Writes all insert, update, and delete SQL 
statements to the log ile.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 472 ]
Event Type
Description
Event to track the low of a message
For tracking messages exchanged between the 
Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) and the 
application object manager.
Object Manager Session Operation 
and SetErrorMsg Log
For capturing user session information.
Event Context
Traces screen, view, and applet names for the 
user session.
Security Adapter Log
Writes information about the Siebel security 
adapter to the log ile.
Source: Siebel System Monitoring and Diagnostics Guide Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/SysDiag/booktitle.
html
If we wish to set the log level for one or more event types, we must execute the 
following tasks:
1. Verify that the event type and chosen log level is appropriate for the purpose.
2. Navigate to the Events view for either the server or the component level.
3. Select the Siebel server or the individual component.
4. Select the event type.
5. Set the log level to the desired value.
6. Restart the Siebel server or the individual server component.
Any modiication of log levels should be documented and the respective log  
levels—especially on production systems—should be set back to 0 or 1 when  
no longer needed in order to avoid performance problems.
The Siebel Server's log directory holds all log iles that are produced during the 
server's operation. If log levels have been increased, we will observe more and larger 
log iles depending on our settings. The following screenshot shows the Siebel Server 
log directory and an open log ile for the Call Center Object Manager component:

Chapter 16
[ 473 ]
We can observe that detailed information about the session is written to the ile, 
including SQL statements.
Once a Siebel Server is restarted, the log directory's content is moved 
to an incrementally numbered subfolder of the LOGARCHIVE directory. 
We can control the number of archive directories by setting the Log 
Archive Keep parameter at the server level. This is important to 
know as the desired log ile might reside in a subdirectory of the 
LOGARCHIVE folder rather than in the log directory, because the 
Siebel Server has been restarted.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 474 ]
Using the Siebel Server Manager command 
line to set event log levels
As an alternative to using the graphical user interface (GUI) provided by the views in 
the Administration - Server Coniguration screen, we can issue commands or scripts 
at the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line.
The following example illustrates how to set event log levels for an application  
object manager:
change evtloglvl genericlog=5 for comp sccobjmgr_enu
The above command sets the log level for the General Events event type to 5 for  
the English Siebel Call Center object manager.
Using the command line or script iles is recommended if we frequently have 
to change the log level for a larger amount of event types. Scripts can also be 
used to ensure that log levels are reset back to lower values of 0 or 1 when the 
troubleshooting process is inished.
Use your demonstration machine to set the log level for a server 
component as described in the above section and inspect the 
resulting log iles.
Siebel Application Response 
Measurement (SARM)
When an end user clicks a view tab to navigate to a new view, a chain of processes 
is invoked on different machines in order to handle the request. For example, the 
Siebel Web Server Extension must connect to the application object manager (AOM) 
on the Siebel server. The AOM will issue an SQL statement to the Siebel database 
and the Siebel Web Engine (SWE) will put the view layout and data together and 
render the view.
In order to be able to make exact measurements to determine performance 
bottlenecks quickly, Siebel engineers have included instrumentation points in  
the core program code of all Siebel software components.
This feature is commonly known as Siebel Application Response Measurement 
(SARM). The following diagram explains how SARM works:

Chapter 16
[ 475 ]
From the above diagram, we can learn the following about Siebel Application 
Response Measurement:
1. Requests from the web client are processed on the Siebel Web Server 
Extension (SWSE) on the web server machine.
2. The request is passed on to the application object manager on the Siebel 
server machine.
3. The application object manager requests data from the Siebel database.
4. The database returns the data.
5. When the Siebel code executes, a buffer in the machine's physical memory  
is illed with information about each single event.
6. Once the memory buffer is full or a timeout is reached, the buffer's content  
is lushed to iles on the hard disk. These iles have a .sarm sufix.
7. Administrators can use the sarmquery command line utility to convert the 
binary content of the .sarm iles to readable formats such as CSV (comma 
separated values) or XML. Alternatively, SARM information can be viewed 
directly at the command prompt.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 476 ]
Next, we will discuss these major administrative tasks related to Siebel Application 
Response Measurement:
• 
Enabling SARM
• 
Managing SARM iles
• 
Using sarmquery to read SARM iles
• 
Automating SARM data retrieval
Enabling SARM
The default behaviour of Siebel software is not to produce .sarm iles. In order to 
turn on the production of .sarm iles, we have to set parameters (for Siebel Servers 
and their components) or environment variables (for all other variants of Siebel 
software such as the Siebel Web Server Extension or Siebel clients).
Even when SARM is "turned off", the memory buffer is always illed 
with response measurement data. However, the buffer is overwritten 
once it is full. In the case of an exceptional abort of the program, the 
buffer is actually lushed to disk to record an image of the last operations 
(one of which might have led to the error situation). We can ind the 
traces of these lush operations as iles with an .fdr sufix (= light data 
recorder—in analogy to the voice and data recorders used in aviation). 
FDR iles can be opened with the sarmquery utility as well in order to 
retrieve information about the inal operations of the process that crashed.
Enabling SARM for Siebel servers and components
We can use the graphical user interface (GUI) provided by the views in the 
Administration - Server Coniguration screen or the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) 
command line utility to set the SARM-related parameters. It is recommended to 
enable SARM only for a speciic set of server components rather than for an entire 
Siebel server in order to keep the performance impact to a minimum.

Chapter 16
[ 477 ]
The following table describes the SARM-related parameters:
Parameter Alias
Description
Example Value
SARMLevel
If set to a value greater than 
zero, .sarm iles are written. 
A value of 1 produces less 
information than a value 
of 2. Value 3 is reserved for 
Oracle internal use.
2
SARMBufferSize
The amount of physical 
memory reserved for the 
SARM buffer (in bytes) for 
each process instance.
5000000
SARMPeriod
The interval (in minutes) 
how often the memory 
buffer is lushed to disk 
(even if not full).
1
SARMMaxFiles
The maximum number of 
.sarm iles to be produced 
by each process instance. 
Once the limit is reached, the 
oldest ile is deleted.
4
SARMFileSize
The maximum size of an 
individual .sarm ile (in 
bytes).
15000000
SARMThreshold
It is important to set this 
parameter to the number of 
milliseconds that deine the 
threshold for "long running" 
events. Because of the large 
number of events happening 
in very short time, we can 
dramatically reduce the size 
of the .sarm iles by setting 
this parameter.
100
SARMLogDirectory
It is possible to direct the 
.sarm ile output to any 
shared or local directory. 
If not set, the .sarm iles 
will be located in the 
local log subfolder of the 
Siebel software installation 
directory.
\\appsrvr\sarmdata

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 478 ]
Parameter Alias
Description
Example Value
SARMUsers
A comma-separated list of 
user account names to limit 
the amount of data in the 
.sarm iles. If left empty, 
.sarm data is collected for 
all users.
sadmin,siebmgmt,adm
The following procedure describes how we can enable SARM for an application 
object manager component:
1. Log in to the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line using a 
command similar to the following at the Siebel server's bin directory:
srvrmgr /g osappeval4 /e SIEBEL_EVAL /u SADMIN /p TJay357D /s Eval_1
The above example command will connect to the Siebel Gateway Name Server on 
the host osappeval4. The enterprise name is SIEBEL_EVAL, username is SADMIN, 
and the server to be set at the prompt is Eval_1.
2. At the srvrmgr> prompt, enter a command similar to the following:
change param sarmlevel=2,sarmperiod=1,sarmthreshold=100 for comp 
sccobjmgr_enu
The above example command enables SARM at level 2 for the English Siebel Call 
Center object manager. The memory buffer's content will be lushed once a minute; 
only events that took longer than 100 milliseconds will be written to the .sarm iles. 
These parameter changes are effective immediately, so no component or server 
restart is required.
Enabling SARM for other Siebel software units
Because of the fact that only Siebel servers and their components can read the 
parameters from the Siebel Gateway Name Server's coniguration store, we must 
use environment variables to enable SARM for other Siebel software units such as 
the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) or Siebel clients such as Siebel Tools or the 
Siebel Mobile Web Client.
The following table relates the SARM environment variables to the parameters 
discussed above. Basically, the environment variable's name can be derived by 
adding the preix "SIEBEL_" to the parameter name.

Chapter 16
[ 479 ]
Environment Variable
Related Parameter
SIEBEL_SARMLevel
SARMLevel
SIEBEL_SARMBufferSize
SARMBufferSize
SIEBEL_SARMPeriod
SARMPeriod
SIEBEL_SARMMaxFiles
SARMMaxFiles
SIEBEL_SARMFileSize
SARMFileSize
The following procedure describes how to set the SARM environment variables on 
Microsoft Windows-based operating systems:
1. Right-click the My Computer icon and select Properties.
2. In the System Properties dialog, click the Advanced tab.
3. Click the Environment Variables button.
4. In the System Variables area, click the New button.
5. Enter the correct values in the Variable Name and Variable Value ields  
and click OK.
6. Repeat the previous step for each environment variable you need to set.
7. Restart the application (for example the Siebel Developer Web Client or  
the web server).
We can verify that SARM is properly enabled by inspecting the log directory of 
the installation folder of the Siebel software unit. SARM iles should appear in this 
directory after the time speciied in the SARMPeriod parameter. The screenshot 
below shows the Siebel Server's log directory with .sarm iles:

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 480 ]
The naming convention for sarm iles is as follows:
A_<Server component name>_T<Timestamp>_P<Process Id>_N<counter>.sarm
If we used the SARMLogDirectory parameter to specify a different storage location 
for .sarm iles, we must inspect the respective directories.
Repeat the steps in the previous section on your 
demonstration machine to enable SARM for at least 
one application object manager component.
Managing SARM iles
It is imperative for Siebel administrators to understand how to create usable sets 
of .sarm iles without cluttering the server's hard drives. In environments with 
hundreds or even thousands of end users, the amount and size of .sarm iles can 
grow out of bounds quickly.
The following techniques ensure that we harvest a reasonable amount of information 
without affecting the overall system performance more than necessary.
Always set the SARMThreshold parameter to a value of 10 or higher. This avoids 
too much data being written to the .sarm iles. Because SARM is often used to trace 
long-running and therefore performance-hampering events, we can ignore the  
events that execute very fast.
Setting the SARMThreshold for example to a value of 100 reduces the amount of 
data written to the .sarm iles by an average of 90%. This can be easily veriied by 
comparing .sarm ile sizes at different settings of this parameter.
Adjust the amount of .sarm iles for a single process using the SARMMaxFiles 
parameter. After a short evaluation period, we should be able to determine the ideal 
number of iles. We should always have the amount of iles that is needed to cover 
a typical monitoring period. For example, if we monitor a work day (9:00 am to 5:00 
pm) we should set the SARMMaxFiles parameter to a number which ensures that 
.sarm iles for an individual process do not get overwritten before eight hours.
With regard to reading the .sarm iles with the sarmquery utility or using the 
Siebel Diagnostic Tool, the default folder—the log directory of the Siebel software 
unit—should be kept as the storage location. However, we can use scheduled  
scripts to copy the .sarm iles to an archive folder to avoid loss of data.

Chapter 16
[ 481 ]
Using sarmquery to read SARM iles
The sarmquery command line utility is the primary means of converting the binary 
content of the .sarm iles to readable output. We can choose between various output 
formats such as text, XML, or csv iles or we can consume the output directly at the 
command prompt.
We can locate the sarmquery executable in the bin directory of the Siebel server's 
or the Siebel Gateway Name server's installation folder. In addition, the Siebel 
Management Agent uses sarmquery to support the Siebel Diagnostic Tool, which is 
discussed later in this chapter.
When we enter sarmquery at a command prompt in the Siebel server's bin directory, 
the utility reveals the basic usage information. The following screenshot shows the 
output of the sarmquery command in a Microsoft Windows command shell:
It is recommendable to use the information provided to produce text iles that 
contain the information obtained by the -tips, -help, and -macrosyntax options.
For example, a command similar to the following will create a tips.txt ile with 
useful irst step information in the Siebel server's bin directory:
sarmquery -output verbose=tips.txt -tips

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 482 ]
The above command uses the -output option followed by the verbose key with a 
value of tips.txt and the -tips option. This command produces a text ile of the 
standard output of the -tips option. We can repeat this command to create a help.
txt and macrosyntax.txt ile by modifying the above command accordingly.
The main syntax of the sarmquery utility is as follows:
sarmquery -option key=value -input <directory or file>
The sarmquery command line utility accepts several options, which must be 
preceded by a dash ("-") and followed by a key=value pair. The -input option 
must be followed by the name of either a single .sarm ile or a directory that 
contains .sarm iles. If we use the directory option, sarmquery will scan the 
given directory and all its subdirectories recursively for .sarm iles.
The following table describes the major options and example key=value pairs  
for the sarmquery utility:
Option
Example Key=Value Pairs
Description
-input
..\log 
D:\sia82\siebsrvr\bin\log 
\\appserver\sarmdata 
sarmdata0001.sarm
The -input option must be 
followed by a relative or absolute 
directory path or the name of a 
single .sarm ile. Directories are 
always scanned recursively and 
all .sarm iles found are taken 
into consideration.
-aggregate
area 
subarea 
user 
instance 
component 
time=60
The -aggregate option is 
followed by the name of one 
of the various preconigured 
aggregate levels. It deines how 
SARM data should be grouped 
in the output. Except for the time 
aggregate, the -aggregate option 
does not require values for its 
keys.
-select
area=DBC 
subarea=DBC_EXECUTE 
starttime="2010-02-20 
09:00:00" 
user=CCHENG 
The -select option allows 
constraining the output of 
the sarmquery utility using 
preconigured keys.
-histogram
resptime=500,1000,2000 
cputime=100,200,500,1000
The -histogram option groups 
the output along the speciied 
keys and values. The value 
is a comma-separated list of 
millisecond intervals.

Chapter 16
[ 483 ]
Option
Example Key=Value Pairs
Description
-output
sarm=sarmdata.csv 
fdr=fdrdata.csv 
agg=sarmdata.xml 
verbose=tips.txt
The -output option is followed 
by one of the preconigured key 
values, which indicate what 
content to write to the output ile 
speciied as the value.
-config
file=macros.txt 
macro=myMacro
The -conig option allows to read 
a sarm macro ile and executes 
one of the macros speciied in 
the ile.
Each option or key can be abbreviated as long as the abbreviation is not ambiguous. 
For example, the following is a valid sarmquery command:
sarmquery -i ..\log -agg sub -sel area=dbc
The above example uses the -input option (abbreviated to -i), the -aggregate 
(-agg) option followed by the subarea (sub) key and the -select (-sel) option. 
The abbreviation technique might come handy while using the command line but  
we should consider using the full text when creating scripts or macro iles for the 
sake of better readability.
For a complete list of possible keys, we can consult the help ile (generated using  
the -help option) or the Performance Tuning Guide in the Siebel bookshelf.
In the following, we will explore common scenarios for sarmquery:
• 
Specify the start and end time
• 
Application performance by area and subarea
• 
Time histograms
• 
Identify slow performing objects
• 
Create SARM output iles
Specifying the start and end time
In a typical sarmquery scenario, we most probably want to analyze data from 
a speciic timeframe. In order to do so, we must use the -select option for the 
starttime and endtime keys in every sarmquery call we make.
We can use a command similar to the following to obtain a list of users who  
logged on in the speciied timeframe:
sarmquery -input ..\log -aggregate user -select starttime="09:00:00" 
-select endtime="17:00:00"

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 484 ]
The above command—issued at the bin directory of the Siebel server—will read 
all .sarm iles in the Siebel server's log directory and create an aggregate plot for 
all users who had a session between 9:00 AM and 5:00 PM. If no date is given, 
sarmquery takes the current day into consideration. If we wish to specify a date,  
we must use the same syntax as in the example below:
-select starttime="2010-05-20 09:00:00"
The example speciies 9:00 AM on the 20th of May 2010 as the start time.
The output of the above command is similar to the following:
The previous screenshot  shows the typical output of sarmquery at the command 
line. Aggregates are plotted as horizontal bar graphs with the average response time 
as the scale.
Application performance by area and subarea
When SARM collects event data, it not only collects the timestamp, the user, 
and response timings but also the area and subarea of the Siebel application 
infrastructure where the event occurred.
A full list of SARM data collection areas can be found in the Siebel Performance 
Tuning Guide in the Siebel bookshelf documentation. The following table lists the 
most prominent areas:
Area
Description
OBJMGR
Events at the object manager layer. Includes business component 
and business service execution information.
INFRA
SARM data in this area represents the communication of Siebel 
server software components between each other.
SWEPAGE
This area groups events in the Siebel Web Engine (SWE), which 
is responsible for the rendering of user interface objects such as 
applets and views.
SWE
The events in the SWE area contain information on the applet 
level such as method invocation.

Chapter 16
[ 485 ]
Area
Description
DBC
The DBC area contains events in the database connector layer. 
It records performance timings for database operations such as 
fetch, write, and execute.
EAITRANSP
Events in this area allow performance measurement for 
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) touch points with 
external systems.
THRESHOLD
This area groups all events that fall below the value (in 
milliseconds) of the SARMThreshold parameter.
WORKFLOW
Events related to the execution of Siebel worklow processes.
SCRIPT
Allows performance measurement of the execution of eScript or 
SiebelVB code.
SEC
Events related to the security management layer. Includes user 
authentication.
SARM
The timings for SARM operations.
Each area has one or more subareas. We can obtain a comma-separated value (CSV) 
ile listing all areas and subareas using the following command:
sarmquery -output map=map.csv
The above command produces a text ile in CSV format, which describes all  
available SARM areas and subareas.
Analyzing areas, subareas and instances
We use a sarmquery command similar to the following to get a horizontal bar 
chart, which helps us identify the area in which most of the process time is spent:
sarmquery -aggregate area -input ..\log

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 486 ]
The above command reads all .sarm iles from the log directory of the Siebel server 
and produces a chart similar to the screenshot below:
The above screenshot shows the output of the -aggregate area option. The chart 
lists all areas (sorted descending by the percentage of process time spent in the area) 
for which events have been recorded in the .sarm iles. In the above example, 25.35% 
of the total process time recorded by SARM is spent in events that belong to the 
INFRA area.
We can "drill down" into each area by using commands similar to the following:
sarmquery -select area=objmgr -aggregate subarea -input ..\log
The above command uses the -select option to ilter the output for the OBJMGR 
area and creates a bar chart that shows the share of process time spent for each 
subarea.
We can further "drill down" on the data. For example to see a list of business services 
that use the processing time, we use a command similar to the following:
sarmquery -select subarea=objmgr_bsvc_invoke -aggregate instance -input 
..\log
The above command uses the -aggregate instance option. The instance 
key typically provides the name of the object involved. In the case of the subarea 
objmgr_bsvc_invoke, business service names are shown in the instance ield.

Chapter 16
[ 487 ]
Time histograms
A common server monitoring scenario is the retrieval of application response data 
over time. The data contained in the .sarm iles can be interpreted in this way using 
the -aggregate time option. A command similar to the following produces a 
histogram of the application response time for a speciic day:
sarmquery -input ..\log -aggregate time=10 -select starttime="2010-02-18 
00:00:00" -select endtime="2010-02-19 00:00:00"
The above command produces a response time plot at 10-minute intervals (speciied 
by the time=10 key=value pair) over the period speciied as the timeframe between 
the starttime and endtime key values.
Identifying slow performing objects
One of the main purposes of SARM is the quick and easy identiication of 
performance bottlenecks. We have learned above that we can aggregate the  
response time information by area, subarea, and instance.
By using the correct subarea as a ilter criteria in the -select option, we can create 
response time histograms for objects such as views, scripts, or business services and 
identify slow performers.
The following example command allows us to identify slow performing views with  
a build time over ive seconds:
sarmquery -input ..\log -agg instance -select subarea=SWEPAGE_VIEW_BUILD 
-select selftime=5000
The above command produces a response time histogram for all views that required 
more than ive seconds (speciied as 5000 milliseconds in the selftime key value) to 
build (subarea=SWEPAGE_VIEW_BUILD). The following screenshot shows the output 
of the example command:
Views of the server management screens typically take a longer time to build  
because data is being fetched from the Siebel Gateway Name Server. The high 
response times for the Home Page View are resulting from the fact that it is the 
application's start view.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 488 ]
Similar commands can be issued using other areas such as SCRIPT (to identify slow 
running scripts) or OBJMGR (to identify slow performing business layer objects) or 
their respective subareas.
Creating SARM output iles
The sarmquery command line utility can be used to export the content of the .sarm 
iles to various output formats such as plain text, comma-separated values (CSV), 
or XML. Typically, these iles are loaded into third-party software such as Microsoft 
Excel to further analyze the SARM data sets. We use the -output option to create 
SARM output iles.
One of the most prominent output commands can be seen in the following example:
sarmquery -input ..\log -output sarm=sarmdata.csv#10000
The above command writes the raw SARM data to a series of CSV iles. By specifying 
the sufix #10000, after the ile name, we determine that each CSV ile will contain 
only up to 10000 rows of data.
The CSV iles can then be consumed for further analysis in spreadsheet applications 
such as Microsoft Excel or business intelligence tools such as Oracle Business 
Intelligence Enterprise Edition. The following screenshot shows a SARM .csv 
output ile opened in Microsoft Excel:
The ilter feature of Microsoft Excel allows quick creation of iltered sets of data for 
easier analysis.

Chapter 16
[ 489 ]
In contrary to the raw data output of the sarm key, we can use the agg key of the 
-output option to write aggregated information to text or XML iles. A command 
similar to the following yields an XML ile containing information aggregated at  
the area level:
sarmquery -input ..\log -aggregate area -output agg=area_agg.xml
The above command uses the agg key followed by an XML ile name and produces 
an output similar to the following screenshot.
The beneit of the XML format is that SARM data can be made available to third-
party analysis software more easily.
After enabling SARM and navigating the Siebel application on your 
demonstration machine for a while in order to collect data, you can 
start practicing using the sarmquery command line utility using the 
above section as a guide.
Automating SARM data retrieval
In order to provide the Siebel CRM project team with fresh and easily readable 
performance data, we must take the following into consideration:
• 
Ensure that .sarm iles are collected and archived according to the 
monitoring policies of our company. We can use shell scripts to copy  
.sarm iles to safe locations so they do not get overwritten by Siebel 
server processes.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 490 ]
• 
Create shell scripts, which execute the sarmquery commands that produce 
the most usable output for our project. We can use the SARM macro 
language to produce more lexible script iles.
• 
Use a scheduling facility such as the Windows task scheduler to invoke  
the scripts at a regular basis.
• 
Provide SARM output iles to third-party analysis systems for better 
visualization of the data.
Siebel Diagnostic Tool
The Siebel Diagnostic Tool is an application that relies on the Siebel Management 
Server infrastructure to retrieve SARM data from Siebel server machines in one or 
more enterprises and renders this data as charts and tabular data.
The following diagram describes the architecture behind the Siebel Diagnostic Tool:

Chapter 16
[ 491 ]
From the above diagram, we can derive the following information:
• 
Siebel Management Agents—installed on the machines hosting the  
Siebel Servers—use sarmquery to access .sarm iles generated by 
the Siebel processes
• 
Additionally, the Siebel Management Agents can access the standard  
.log iles on the Siebel Server
• 
The Diagnostic Tool connects to the Siebel Management Server
• 
The Siebel Management Server communicates with the Siebel Management 
Agents in order to fulill data requests from the Diagnostic Tool
The installation and coniguration of the Siebel Management Server infrastructure 
has been described in detail in a separate chapter of this book.
In the following procedure, we will explore the functionality of the Siebel 
Diagnostic Tool:
1. Ensure that the Siebel Management Agents and Siebel Management  
Server are started.
2. Ensure that SARM data iles are generated on the Siebel Servers.
3. Open a browser window and navigate to a URL similar to the following:
http://appserver1:8080/DiagTool
The above URL example connects to port 8080 (the default port of the Siebel 
Diagnostic Tool) on the appserver1 machine.
4. Log in using a Siebel Management user account. The user account is created 
during the coniguration of the Siebel Management Server.
5. In the Server Performance Analysis tab, use the form ields to specify a 
Siebel Enterprise, a Siebel Server Group (optional), a Siebel Server, and 
(optionally) a server component. We can also specify start and end dates to 
deine a timeframe for the analysis.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 492 ]
The following screenshot shows the Server Performance Analysis tab of the 
Siebel Diagnostic Tool:
6. Choose a result type (Server Histograms or Server Area/Sub-Areas)  
and click the Submit button.
7. Depending on the selected result type, the server histogram charts or  
the area/subarea analysis are displayed.
Server Histograms are vertical bar charts displaying the average response times and 
CPU times for the selected server components, as shown in the following screenshot:

Chapter 16
[ 493 ]
We can click on the bars in the chart to drill down into a detailed view, which 
displays a list of SARM data entries belonging to the interval group we clicked.  
We can further drill down by clicking on the SARM ID to see the instance detail.

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 494 ]
If we choose the Server Area/Subareas option for the output, the Diagnostic Tool 
renders a series of pie charts to visualize the share of each SARM area of the total 
response time, CPU time, and memory consumption. The pie charts—shown in 
the following screenshot—are displayed below a table with aggregate SARM 
information for each area and subarea:
The Diagnostic Tool has two more tabs that allow us to analyze SARM data for 
speciic users (User Performance Analysis tab) and to identify erroneous server 
component behavior (Event Log Analysis tab). The data displayed in the Event 
Log Analysis tab comes from the standard .log iles produced by the Siebel server 
components rather than the .sarm iles.
If you have the Siebel Management Server infrastructure installed on your 
demonstration machine, you can follow the descriptions in the previous 
section to explore the capabilities of the Siebel Diagnostic Tool.
Client-side logging
Because SARM data collection is limited to machines where Siebel software is 
installed, it is not possible to collect SARM performance information for Siebel  
Web Clients. To overcome this limitation, Siebel CRM supports client-side logging 
for high-interactivity applications.
This feature allows us to identify issues and possible performance bottlenecks 
occurring on the client machine. For example, a loop in a browser script could  
slow down the response time on the client machine.

Chapter 16
[ 495 ]
Enabling client-side logging for the 
application object manager
The following procedure describes how to enable Siebel client side logging for 
high-interactivity applications. We must set several parameters on the application 
object manager server component to enable client side logging.
We can use the graphical user interface (GUI) provided by the Siebel server 
management screens in the Siebel Web Client or the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) 
command line to set the  client side logging parameters for the application object 
manager as described in the table below.
Parameter
Description
Example Value
ClientSideLogging
Must be set to True to enable 
client side logging. A value 
of False turns off client side 
logging.
True
ClntTraceMode
Must be set to 1 to enable client 
side logging. A value of 0 
disables client side logging.
1
ClntLogFileSize
The maximum size of the log 
ile in megabytes. Minimum 
value is 50.
50 (default value)
ClntLogArchiveCount
The number of client log iles to 
be archived.
5 (default value)
ClntLogDirectory
A directory on the client 
machine where the log iles 
should be written to. The 
directory must be present on the 
client machine.
D:\temp\siebel_log
ClntTraceUnicode
A value of True indicates that 
the log ile will be written in 
Unicode.
True
Source: Siebel System Monitoring and Diagnostics Guide, Version 8.1
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/E14004_01/books/SysDiag/booktitle.
html

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 496 ]
The following example shows how we can set these parameters using the Siebel 
Server Manager (srvrmgr) command line utility:
change param ClientSideLogging=True,ClntTraceMode=1,ClntLogDirectory
=D:\temp\siebel_log,ClntTraceUnicode=True for comp sccobjmgr_enu server 
Eval_1
The above command sets the ClientSideLogging, ClntTraceMode, 
ClntLogDirectory, and ClntTraceUnicode parameter for the English Siebel Call 
Center object manager on the Eval_1 server thus enabling the logging of client side 
events on the local D:\temp\siebel_log directory.
Enabling client-side logging on the client 
machine
On the client machines, we have to ensure that the directory speciied in the 
ClntLogDirectory parameter exists and that the SEBLCL_TRACEMODE system 
environment variable is set to 1.
We can use scripts or the Windows Explorer to create the directory and use the 
Windows System Properties dialog to create the environment variable. It is possible 
to create additional local environment variables to override the server-side settings.
Reviewing the client log ile
When client-side logging is enabled and end users work with the Siebel Web 
Client, one or more log iles will be written to the directory speciied by the 
ClntLogDirectory parameter. We can open the log iles with a text editor of 
our choice and use the editor's search mechanisms to identify any erroneous or 
performance-hampering behavior by the Siebel high-interactivity client.
Because of the performance impact, client-side logging should only be enabled  
under certain circumstances such as testing or troubleshooting.
Siebel Usage Collection
When a web designer publishes a website, she or he is deinitely interested in the 
number of times a web page is viewed. Likewise, in Siebel CRM applications, the 
number of times a Siebel view is accessed can provide useful insight.
In order to collect that information, we can use the Siebel Usage Collection feature. 
The following procedure describes how to enable it:

Chapter 16
[ 497 ]
1. Log on to the Siebel Web Client using an administrative user account.
2. Navigate to the Administration - Runtime Events screen, Action Sets view.
3. Create a new action set named Usage Collection.
4. In the second list applet from above, click the New button to create a new 
action deinition.
5. Set the Name and Sequence ields to 1.
6. Set the Type ield to BusService.
7. In the form applet at the bottom of the view, enter Usage Tracking Service 
in the Business Service Name ield.
8. Enter EventType=Runtime Event in the Business Service Method ield.
9. Navigate to the Events view in the Administration - Runtime Events screen.
10. Create a new record and set the Sequence ield to 2.
11. Set the Object Type ield to Application.
12. In the Object Name ield, click the select button and select the name of the 
application you are using.
If you are unsure about the "technical" application name, you can look up 
the value of the ApplicationName parameter in the Siebel Developer 
Web Client's coniguration ile (.cfg).
13. In the Event ield, enter ViewActivated.
14. Set the Action Set Name ield to Usage Collection (the name of the 
action set created earlier).
15. Navigate to the Administration - Application screen, System Preferences 
view.
16. Set the system preferences for Siebel Usage Collection according to the  
table below.
System Preference
Description
Example Value
UsageTracking Enabled
Controls whether Usage 
Tracking is enabled.
TRUE
UsageTracking Log Time 
Period
Deines the interval how often 
a new ile is created. Possible 
values are Hourly, Daily, 
Weekly, or Monthly.
Daily

Monitoring Siebel Applications
[ 498 ]
System Preference
Description
Example Value
UsageTracking LogFile Dir
The directory where usage 
tracking log iles will be written 
to. Should be a shared directory 
for a multi-server installation.
\\appserver1\usage
UsageTracking LogFile 
Format
Allows specifying the output 
format of the log iles. Possible 
values are XML, CSV, or W3C.
XML
Source: Siebel Content Publishing Guide, Version 7.8
http://download.oracle.com/docs/cd/B31104_02/books/ContentPub/
booktitle.html
Restart the application object manager component.
To verify the correct setup of Siebel Usage Collection, we can log in to the  
Siebel Web Client and navigate to several views. After a few minutes, an XML  
ile should be present in the directory speciied by the UsageTracking LogFile 
Dir system preference.
The entries in the ile indicate the username, IP address of the client machine, the 
time of accessing and leaving the view, and the view name. The screenshot below 
shows a portion of the Siebel Usage Tracking log ile in XML format.

Chapter 16
[ 499 ]
Summary
In this chapter, we introduced the major techniques for eficient monitoring of Siebel 
CRM application usage and performance.
Server component log iles can be controlled in their content by setting the log levels 
for certain event types. Administrators can use the Siebel Server Manager (srvrmgr) 
command line utility or the Siebel Web Client to set the log levels.
Siebel Application Response Measurement (SARM) is the most powerful module 
when it comes to performance measuring. We learned how to enable SARM and 
how to interpret the data collected in .sarm iles using the sarmquery command 
line utility. We also introduced the Siebel Diagnostic Tool, which relies on the Siebel 
Management Server infrastructure and allows us to visualize SARM data across 
various Siebel enterprises.
In order to identify the root cause for slow performance or errors on the client 
machine, we can use client side logging for high-interactivity clients. This chapter 
provided information on how to enable this feature.
A simple but useful way to collect usage tracking information is the Siebel Usage 
Collection feature, which was also introduced in this chapter.


Sample Planning Document
In this appendix, we introduce an example of how to structure a planning document 
for the installation of Oracle's Siebel CRM server software. Depending on the scope 
of your project, the information needed might differ.
For the sake of example and simplicity, passwords in the sample 
document are written in clear text. In a real life project, we must ensure 
that no sensitive information is included in the document. Rather, we 
can use common encryption tools to secure the information or leave 
references in the planning document about where to get the information.
Database server information
The table below contains information about the relational database management 
system (RDBMS) to host the Siebel database. We record information about the 
RDBMS vendor and version as well as the machine hostname and administrative 
user account. For a typical Siebel CRM installation, we also plan the creation of two 
tablespaces.
Component/Parameter
Name/Value 
Examples
Description
Database Server Vendor
Oracle
The example values in this table 
refer to Oracle Enterprise database.
Database Server Version
11gR1
DB Server System Account/
Password
sys/T67PBhtr as 
SYSDBA
Needed to connect directly to the 
database to run the grantusr.
sql script.
Database Server hostname
dbsrvr1

Sample Planning Document
[ 502 ]
Component/Parameter
Name/Value 
Examples
Description
DB host admin user
Administrator
Needed to connect to the machine 
remotely.
DB host admin user 
password
XBXi8F9
See the note on password 
examples.
Database Server port
1521
Database Server SID
ORCL
Siebel DB index tablespace
SIEBELDB_IDX
This tablespace will hold the 
indexes of the Siebel CRM schema.
Siebel DB data tablespace
SIEBELDB_DATA
This tablespace will hold the data 
tables of the Siebel CRM schema.
Siebel File System-related information
The table lists the most important pieces of information we would need to 
successfully set up the Siebel File System in the form of a shared and secured 
directory on the network.
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
File System hostname
appsrvrfs1
File System physical path
D:\SIA811\siebile
File System UNC path
\\ appsrvrfs1\siebile
Permissions on the share should 
be limited to the system owner 
account.
File System Username
DOMAIN\siebsvc
File System Password
6thBXur
See the note on password 
examples.
File System host admin user
Administrator
Needed to connect to the 
machine remotely.
File System host admin user 
password
XBXi8F9
See the note on password 
examples.
Web server-related information
The planning document must also list information about the web server, which 
will host the Siebel Web Server Extension. Making this information accessible to  
the system administrators ensures that they can set up the web server(s) before  
we launch the Siebel installers.

Appendix A
[ 503 ]
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Web Server Vendor
Microsoft
Web Server Version
IIS 6
Web Server hostname
appsrvrweb1
Web Server host admin 
user
Administrator
Needed to connect to the 
machine remotely.
Web Server host admin 
user password
XBXi8F9
See the note on password 
examples.
Siebel Gateway Name Server installation  
and coniguration
In order to install and conigure a Siebel Enterprise, we must irst cater for the  
Siebel Gateway Name Server. The table below lists sample parameters that we  
need to know before we install the software:
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Gateway NS hostname
appsrvrgw1
Gateway NS host admin 
user
Administrator
Needed to connect to the 
machine remotely.
Gateway NS host admin 
password
XBXi8F9
See the note on password 
examples.
Gateway NS installer 
target directory
D:\SIA811
Gateway NS port
2320
The default port number (2320) 
should be kept.
Gateway NS service start
Automatic
The Siebel Gateway Name 
Server is typically set to 
automatic start.

Sample Planning Document
[ 504 ]
Siebel Enterprise Server coniguration
As we learned, the Siebel Enterprise Server is not a piece of software. However, it 
must be conigured, so we must plan naming conventions and security strategies for 
the Gateway Name Server. The table below lists the parameters and example values, 
which the person coniguring the Siebel Enterprise Server will have to provide:
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Gateway NS 
Authentication User
SADMIN
Gateway NS 
Authentication User 
Password
TJay357D
See the note on password 
examples.
Gateway Name Server 
hostname
appsrvrgw1
Gateway Name Server 
port
2320
Enterprise Name
SIEBELEVAL
Ensure that each Siebel 
Enterprise has a distinctive 
name.
Primary Siebel File 
System
\\ appsrvrfs1\siebile
Reference to the ile system 
information.
Database Platform
Oracle
DB Table Owner
SIEBEL
DB Table Owner 
Password
dQ7JXui
See the note on password 
examples.
DB Connect String
ORCL
DB User Account
SADMIN
DB User Account 
Password
TJay357D
See the note on password 
examples.
Enterprise Security 
Authentication Proile
Database
Siebel Web Server Extension logical proile 
coniguration
The installation process will include the placement of coniguration settings for one 
or more Siebel Web Server Extensions on the network. Our planning document must 
include the following information in order to ensure an uninterrupted installation 
and coniguration process:

Appendix A
[ 505 ]
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Siebel Enterprise Name
SIEBELEVAL
Logical Proile Folder
D:\SIA811\gtwysrvr\
admin\webserver
Can be a shared network 
directory.
Collect statistics
checked
Compression Type
None
Encryption Type
None
HTTP 1.1 Compliant 
Firewall
checked
Login Session Timeout
3000
Speciied in seconds.
Active Session Timeout
9000
Speciied in seconds.
HTTP Port
80
HTTPS Port
443
Fully qualiied domain 
name
ourdomain.com
High Interactivity Login 
Name
SADMIN
Anonymous user account 
for employee facing 
applications.
High Interactivity Login 
Password
TJay357D
See the note on password 
examples.
Standard Interactivity 
Login Name
GUESTCST
Anonymous user account 
for customer and partner 
facing applications.
Standard Interactivity 
Login Password
8icJIPZH
See the note on password 
examples.
Encrypt SI password
unchecked
Enterprise Security Token
TZH65ret
This password is needed 
for specialized URL 
commands.
See the note on password 
examples.
Web Server Statistics Page
monitoring.swe
The default (_stats.swe) 
should not be kept because 
of possible security 
problems.
Deploy SSL?
unchecked

Sample Planning Document
[ 506 ]
Siebel Server installation and coniguration
We need to know on which machine(s) a Siebel Server service needs to be present 
and how it should be conigured. We ensure that this information is accessible to all 
project peers by adding it to our planning document, like in the following example:
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Siebel Server hostname
appsrvrsieb1
Siebel Server host admin 
user
Administrator
Needed to connect to 
the machine remotely.
Siebel Server host admin 
password
XBXi8F9
See the note on 
password examples.
Siebel Server installer target 
directory
D:\SIA811
Gateway Name Server 
Authentication User
SADMIN
Gateway Name Server 
Authentication Password
TJay357D
See the note on 
password examples.
Gateway Name Server 
hostname
appsrvrgw1
Ensure that the Siebel 
Gateway Name Server 
is running at this 
point.
Gateway Name Server port
2320
Siebel Enterprise Name
SIEBELEVAL
Siebel Server Logical Name
SEBLSRV_1
Ensure that each 
Siebel Server has a 
meaningful logical 
name.
Siebel Server Description
Evaluation Server 1
Component Groups
Call Center, Remote, ADM, EAI
Connection Broker Port
2321
Synchronization Manager 
Port
40400
Exchange Server Sync
unchecked
Server-speciic Security 
Encryption Settings
unchecked
Server-speciic Security 
Authentication Settings
unchecked
Register external Oracle 
ODBC driver
unchecked

Appendix A
[ 507 ]
Installing the Siebel database
For each initial Siebel Enterprise installation, the tablespaces must be illed with the 
Siebel database schema and Siebel seed data. A specialized utility will be launched 
and an administrator will be expected to provide the following information:
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Siebel Server Directory
D:\SIA811\siebsrvr
Database Server (Utilities)  
Directory
D:\SIA811\dbsrvr
Action
Install Database
Install Option
Install Database
Has grantusr.sql been 
run
Yes (checked)
Unicode or non-Unicode 
database?
Unicode
ODBC DSN
SIEBELEVAL_DSN
Siebel System Account
SADMIN
Siebel System Account 
Password
TJay357D
See the note on password 
examples.
Table Owner
SIEBEL
Table Owner Password
dQ7JXui
See the note on password 
examples.
Siebel DB index tablespace
SIEBELDB_IDX
Siebel DB data tablespace
SIEBELDB_DATA
License Key
<insert license key from ile>
License keys must be 
obtained from Oracle.
Use Oracle parallel 
indexing?
No
Security Group
SSE_ROLE
Log output directory
install

Sample Planning Document
[ 508 ]
Siebel Web Server Extension installation and 
coniguration
Our planning document is almost complete. Using a table similar to the one 
below, we ensure that all necessary values can be entered upon installation and 
coniguration of the Siebel Web Server Extension:
Component/Parameter
Name/Value Examples
Description
Installation Directory
D:\SIA811\sweapp
Load Balancing
Single Siebel Server
Siebel Server host
appsrvrsieb1
Siebel Connection Broker 
Port
2321
SWSE Logical Proile 
Location
D:\SIA811\gtwysrvr\admin\
webserver
Could be a network 
share.
Example topology
The planning document could include a topology diagram similar to the following:

Appendix A
[ 509 ]
The planned installation consists of:
• 
The Siebel database residing on the dbsrvr1 host
• 
The Siebel File System residing on the appsrvrfs1 host
• 
Two Siebel Servers on host appsrvrsieb1 and appsrvrsieb2
• 
The Siebel Gateway Name Server on host appsrvrgw1
• 
The web server with the Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) on  
host appsrvrweb1
The diagram also shows the network paths between the server machines. The three 
icons for the Siebel Web Client represent the desktop PCs of the end users connecting 
to the web server machine.


Uninstalling Siebel CRM 
Software
There are several reasons why we might have to remove an existing installation of 
Siebel CRM software from server or desktop machines. One reason could be that we 
want to upgrade to a newer version of Siebel CRM and therefore have to uninstall 
the old version. Another reason might be that server machines are removed or 
dedicated to other tasks:
This appendix gives an overview of the following processes related to uninstalling 
Siebel CRM software.
• 
Uninstall Siebel CRM Server Software on Microsoft Windows
• 
Uninstall Siebel CRM Server Software on Linux or UNIX
• 
Uninstall Siebel CRM Client Software on Microsoft Windows
Uninstalling Siebel CRM server software 
on Microsoft Windows
Depending on the situation, we can uninstall a single Siebel Server instance on a 
machine or completely remove an entire Siebel Enterprise.
If we wish to uninstall a Siebel Enterprise completely, we should execute tasks in  
the sequence described below:
1. Uninstall the Siebel Database Coniguration Utilities.
2. Uninstall EAI Connectors (if present).
3. Uninstall Siebel Servers.

Uninstalling Siebel CRM Software
[ 512 ]
4. Uninstall the Siebel Management Agents (if present).
5. Uninstall the Siebel Management Server (if present).
6. Remove the Siebel Enterprise.
7. Uninstall the Siebel Gateway Name Server.
8. Uninstall third-party software such as NetCharts server or Oracle BI 
Publisher if necessary.
9. Delete the Siebel database schema if necessary.
The Siebel Gateway Name Server must be running during the complete process 
of uninstalling and it has to be uninstalled last.
The Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE) can be uninstalled independent of the 
Siebel Enterprise Server software.
To start the uninstaller on Microsoft Windows, we navigate to the Windows Control 
Panel and select Add or Remove Programs. The list contains one or more items 
for uninstalling Siebel CRM server software. Clicking the Change/Remove button 
initiates the uninstaller executable. The screenshot below shows the Add/Remove 
Programs list of Microsoft Windows:
The Siebel Enterprise Servers full uninstall item is selected. In addition, the 
uninstallers for the Siebel Management Agent, the Siebel Management Server, and 
the Siebel Web Server Extension are visible.
Alternatively, instead of using the Add or Remove Programs feature of 
Microsoft Windows, we can launch the uninstaller.exe program from 
the _uninst/ses folder of the Siebel software installation root folder.

Appendix B
[ 513 ]
The process of uninstalling Siebel CRM server software on Microsoft Windows is 
similar for most building blocks of the Siebel Enterprise server infrastructure. The 
Siebel Coniguration Wizard is launched while uninstalling Siebel Servers, the Siebel 
Web Server Extension, or removing a Siebel Enterprise.
The following table describes the process of removing a Siebel Server from a Siebel 
Enterprise and shall serve as an example for uninstalling Siebel CRM server software 
on Microsoft Windows:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Ensure that the Siebel Gateway 
Name Server is running
Use the Windows Services console to 
verify that the Siebel Gateway Name 
Server service is in a running state.
2
Stop the Siebel Server service
Use the Windows Services console or the 
command shell to stop the service for the 
Siebel Server you wish to remove.
3
Start the Uninstaller.
Click the Change/Remove button for the 
Siebel Enterprise Servers uninstaller item 
in the Add or Remove Programs list.
4
The Welcome Page is displayed.
Click Next.
5
Select products to uninstall
Select Siebel Server.
Click Next.
6
Uninstaller Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
7
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard is 
launched automatically
Continue with the next step.
8
Task selection
Select Remove Existing Coniguration.
Click Next.
9
Gateway Name Server 
Authentication
User Account Name: SADMIN
User Account Password: TJay357D
Click Next.
10
Gateway Name Server
Host Name: appsrvrgw1
Port Number: 2320
Click Next.

Uninstalling Siebel CRM Software
[ 514 ]
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
11
Siebel Enterprise Name and Siebel 
Server Name
Enterprise Name: SIEBELEVAL
Server Name: Eval_2
Click Next.
12
Conirm removal of Siebel Server 
coniguration
Select Remove Siebel Server 
Coniguration
Click Next.
13
Server Removal Options
Select Remove Siebel Server Windows 
Service.
Unselect Remove Siebel Server ODBC 
Data Source.
Click Next.
14
Conirm removal options
Review the information that the ODBC 
data source should only be removed when 
there are no other Siebel Servers installed 
on the machine.
Select Remove Selected Siebel Server.
Click Next.
15
Summary
Review the summary information.
Click Next.
16
Do you want to execute 
coniguration?
Click Yes.
17
Execution Successful.
Click OK.
18
The Siebel Coniguration Wizard 
jumps to the start page.
Select Exit Coniguration.
Click Next.
Click Yes to conirm.
19
The Uninstaller displays a success 
message.
Click Next.
20
Restart Computer options
Select Yes, restart my computer
Click Finish.
21
Computer is restarted
Wait until the machine is completely 
restarted.

Appendix B
[ 515 ]
Verifying the Siebel Server uninstaller
After the machine has been restarted—via the uninstaller option or manually—we 
can verify the following:
• 
The Windows system service for the Siebel server has been removed
• 
The siebsrvr directory is empty except for custom iles, backup iles, and  
log iles.
It is recommended that we create a backup archive of the remaining directories 
before we delete them. This ensures that we still have access to the custom iles in 
case we need them.
Uninstalling Siebel CRM server software 
on Linux or UNIX
On Linux or other UNIX-based operating systems, the process of uninstalling 
Siebel CRM server software is the same as on Microsoft Windows operating  
systems. The only difference is that the uninstaller executable must be launched  
from a command shell.
To launch the Siebel uninstaller executable on Linux or other UNIX-based operating 
systems, we open a command shell, navigate to the _uninst/ses folder of the Siebel 
server software installation root directory and enter the following command:
uninstaller
This invokes the uninstaller executable and the same graphical dialogs will guide us 
through the process of uninstalling as described in the previous section on Microsoft 
Windows.
If we wish to run the uninstaller in console mode, we must use the following 
command:
uninstaller -is:javaconsole -console
The above command invokes the Siebel uninstaller executable in console mode 
and the administrator will have to provide the selections and data entries in the 
command shell.

Uninstalling Siebel CRM Software
[ 516 ]
Uninstalling Siebel CRM client software
Siebel CRM client software such as the Siebel Mobile or Developer Web Client and 
Siebel Tools are uninstalled using the "Deinstall Products" option of the Oracle 
Universal Installer.
If the Siebel Sample Database is installed, it should be removed irst using the Siebel 
Uninstallation Manager item in the Add or Remove Programs list.
The following table describes the process of uninstalling Siebel Tools or Siebel 
Mobile or Developer Web Client using Oracle Universal Installer:
Step
Description
Tasks and Example Values
1
Launch Oracle Universal Installer
Navigate to the installation directory of 
the Siebel client software. In the oui/bin 
subdirectory, double-click the setup.exe 
program.
2
The Welcome dialog is displayed
Click the Deinstall Products button.
3
The Inventory dialog is displayed
Select the correct products to remove.
For example, select Tools1 to remove 
Siebel Tools.
Click the Remove button.
4
Conirmation
Click Yes to conirm.
5
Uninstaller progress is displayed
Wait for the uninstaller to complete.
6
Close the Inventory dialog
Verify that the selected Oracle products 
have been removed from the inventory list.
Click Close in the Inventory dialog.
7
Exit Oracle Universal Installer
Click Cancel and Yes to exit the Oracle 
Universal Installer.
After the uninstaller process is complete, we should restart the computer. We should 
then create a backup archive of the remaining installation directories before we 
inally delete them.

More Information
You are at the end of the book. Congratulations! However, you might have just 
started with a steep learning curve. In order to ease the mission of inding additional 
information about Siebel CRM, this appendix provides details on the following:
• 
Getting trained
• 
Finding information
Please note that the Internet addresses in this chapter have been thoroughly revised 
at the time of writing this book. Given the nature of the Internet, they could have 
changed in the meantime.
Getting trained
The success of a Siebel CRM project, or any standard software implementation 
project in general, is linked to the education of the professionals who undertake it. 
Complex systems like Siebel CRM will not reveal their intricate patterns to naïve 
consultants (or their managers) who believe in self study or "fast track" trainings.
The money saved on training will be spent equally on project delay. It is paramount 
for the Siebel professional to expose him or herself to high quality instructor-led 
training, which is provided, for example, by Oracle University and its training 
partners throughout the world.
The following website addresses shall serve as an entry point for your personal 
training plan:
Oracle University: http://education.oracle.com
Oracle Partner Network: http://opn.oracle.com
Oracle Technology Network: http://otn.oracle.com

More Information
[ 518 ]
Finding information
Siebel CRM has been developed under the assumption that customers will employ 
their own technicians or hire external consultants to install, conigure, and manage 
the software. Documenting the necessary steps to do so and also providing 
information about the features of Siebel CRM has evolved into what is known today 
as the Siebel Bookshelf.
The Siebel Bookshelf
Oracle has made the entire Siebel documentation available on its web servers. We 
can access the documentation library for each version from Siebel 6 and above online 
or download it from the following Internet address: http://www.oracle.com/
technology/documentation/siebel.html
As the bookshelf contains hundreds of megabytes of information in more than 100 
individual guides, we can use the online search engine of our choice to locate the 
information we need.
The following screenshot shows search results for "Siebel Installation" on Oracle 
Technology Network:

Appendix C
[ 519 ]
Before we start downloading and installing Siebel CRM, we should ensure that we 
have read and digested the information given to us by the technical writers at Oracle. 
Below is a list of recommended Bookshelf guides for the ambitious newbie:
• 
Deployment Planning Guide
• 
Developing and Deploying Siebel Business Applications
• 
Fundamentals
• 
Going Live with Siebel Business Applications
• 
Installation Guide (for your operating system)
• 
Overview: Siebel Enterprise Application Integration
• 
System Administration Guide
Oracle Forums
Not every trick, bug, or workaround can be found in the oficial Siebel Bookshelf. 
While you read these lines somebody encounters a problem or explores some 
functionality within Siebel CRM. Many Siebel professionals use the Oracle Forums  
to post questions and indings. Experienced consultants pick up the posts and 
answer them so the community has a great place to search for information outside 
the oficial documentation.
We can access the Oracle Forums here: http://forums.oracle.com
My Oracle Support
Customers, partners, and employees of Oracle have access to the Oracle support 
system, which not only allows for creating service request but also to search the 
knowledge base of resolved service requests, bulletins, and other documents.
My Oracle Support is a centralized portal for all Oracle products and can be 
accessed via the URL http://support.oracle.com.
The Internet community
Various channels exist to share indings and knowledge on the Internet. Over the 
past few years, many IT professionals decided to create their own websites, weblogs, 
or twitter channels to distribute information on Siebel CRM.
A good starting point for our research into this vast amount of information might be 
Google's blog search: http://blogsearch.google.com.

More Information
[ 520 ]
The author's blog on Siebel CRM and Oracle Business Intelligence can be found at 
http://siebel-essentials.blogspot.com.

Index
Symbols
7zip
URL  35
-aggregate option  482
-args RECORD=<path to response ile> 
command  45
-args SS_SETUP_INI=<path to response 
ile> command  45
/batchexport parameter  186
/batchimport parameter  186
/bc parameter  186
/b parameter  177, 293
/bv parameter  186
-conig option  483
/c parameter  177, 293
/ctsim parameter  178
-d, EVT parameter  63
.dll (dynamic link library)  266
/d parameter  177
/editseeddata parameter  177
-e, EVT parameter  63
/e parameter  293
-fea switch  130
-f, EVT parameter  63
-g, EVT parameter  63
/g parameter  293
-help option  483
-histogram option  482
/h parameter  293
.ini ile
creating, for unattended Siebel server  
installation  113
managing, to launch coniguration  114
-input option  482
/i parameter  293
-is:javaconsole -console argument  126
-is:javaconsole -console command  44, 45, 69
-is:log <logile path> command  45
-is:tempdir <directory> command  45
.kb (knowledge base)  107
-l, EVT parameter  63
-l parameter  466
/l parameter  177, 293
/m parameter  293
/m switch  95
-o, EVT parameter  63
-o parameter  466
/o parameter  293
-output option  482, 483
-p, EVT parameter  63
-p parameter  440
/p parameter  177, 293
-q, EVT parameter  63
/r parameter  293
.SAF (Siebel Attachment File)  107
.scm iles  127
-select option  482, 486
-select (-sel) option  483
-s, EVT parameter  63
[SIEBELX_DSN] entry  135
@ sign  87
.so (shared object)  266
/s parameter  177, 293
<swe:> tags  16
-t, EVT parameter  63
.ucf ile  144
-u, EVT parameter  63
/u parameter  177, 293
/webservice parameter  178
-w, EVT parameter  63
/z parameter  293

[ 522 ]
A
access control
data display controlling, personalization 
based  371-373
to applets and views, personalization based  
368-371
to catalogs and categories  364-366
to customer data  354, 355
to features and data  367, 368
to master data  364
to Siebel views  345, 346
access control layer  375
access controlled task  431
access group  364, 430
acknowledge command  460
Action, coniguration/parameter  507
activate command  458, 460
Active Session Timeout, component/ 
parameter  505
ADM
about  413, 430
adm.cli ile, verifying  439
ADM component group, enabling  436
administrative data (D)  434
administrative data (database objects) 
  430-432
administrative data exporting, ADM batch 
processor server component used 
  447, 448
administrative data exporting, application 
deployment manager screen used  
445-447
admjavasubsys enterprise proile  437
ADM object manager, server  
component  434
processor, server component  434
application object manager support,  
enabling  437
architecture  433, 434
building blocks  434
classpath parameter  437
components in source enterprise, managing  
436
components in target enterprise, managing  
436
coniguration areas  430
deployment batch iles, creating  440-442
dll parameter  437
empty package structure, creating  443, 444
enableadmsupport parameter  437
enterprise proile, coniguring  437
enterprise proile, creating  440-442
iles, copying to ADM package  454
iles (F)  434
iles, on Siebel servers  432
iles, on Siebel Web Server Extensions 
(SWSE)  432
jvmsubsys enterprise parameter   437
overview  430
package, creating  443
packages, deploying  456-458
package, sealing  455
package, validating  456
repository data exporting, consoleapp  
utility used  452, 453
repository data exporting, Siebel tools  
used  448, 449
repository data (R)  434
repository objects  432
setting up  435
shared directories, creating  439
Siebel Repository File (.srf), deploying  455
Siebel servers, restarting  439
source enterprise  434
worklow processes, activating  438
ADM batch processor
about  436
admdatatype parameter  448
admeaimethod parameter  448
admilter parameter  448
admpath parameter  448
admpreix parameter  448
parameters, setting  448
used, for exporting administrative data  447
adm.cli ile
verifying  439
ADM comm package  431
ADM CommSrv CM adapter administration  
430
ADM component group
ADM batch processor  436
ADM object manager  436

[ 523 ]
components in source enterprise,  
managing  436
components in target enterprise,  
managing  436
enabling  436
admdatatype parameter  448
ADM deployment processes, enabling
deployment batch ile, creating  440
enterprise proile ile, creating  440
admeaimethod parameter  448
admilter parameter  448
administrative data (database objects), 
ADM
access controlled task  431
AccessGroup  430
ADM comm package  431
ADM CommSrv CM adapter  
administration  430
ADM search category  431
ADM search connector  431
ADM shift schedule  431
AssignGroup  430
audit trail admin  430
BIP report template registration  430
BIP view association  430
correspondence template  431
EAI data map  431
exporting, ADM batch processor server 
component  447, 448
exporting, application deployment manager 
screen used  445-447
iHelp  431
internal division  430
LOV  431
organization  430
PDQ  431
personalization - actions  431
personalization - applets  431
personalization - events  431
Personalization - views  431
position  430
PriceList  431
ProductCatalog  431
proposal template  431
responsibility  430
SmartScript  431
StateModel  431
symbolic URL  431
VolumeDiscount  431
web service - inbound  431
worklow policy  431
admjavasubsys enterprise proile  437
ADM object manager, server component  
434
ADM package directory, ile types
BI Publisher Report templates (.rtf)  454
BI Publisher Report Translation iles  
(.xlf)  454
PUBLIC directory of the Siebel Web Server 
Extension (SWSE), iles  454
Siebel Repository File (.srf)  454
Siebel Web Templates (.swt)  454
ADM Packager command line utility 
(admpkgr)  443
admpath parameter  448
admpkgr command line utility  455
admpreix parameter  448
ADM processor, server component  434
ADM search category  431
ADM search connector  431
ADM shift schedule  431
AHA  377
American English (ENU)  248
AnalyticsDataSrc (epharma.cfg only)  
data source  173
Ancillary Siebel Server Software
installing  189
AnonUserName parameter  318
applets and views
access controlling, personalization based  
368-371
Application Deployment Manager. See  
ADM
application deployment manager,  
component groups  264
application deployment manager screen
used, for exporting administrative data  
445-447
Application Object Manager (AOM)
about  14, 268
ADM, enabling for support  437
ApplicationPassword parameter  322
application shortcuts, Siebel
/b parameter  177

[ 524 ]
/c parameter  177
/ctsim parameter  178
/d parameter  177
/editseeddata parameter  177
/l parameter  177
/p parameter  177
/s parameter  177
/u parameter  177
/webservice parameter  178
Application Title parameter  280
ApplicationUser parameter  322
AssignGroup  430
assignment management, component 
groups  264
audit trail admin  430
auto start command  211
auxiliary system management, component 
groups  264
B
background component  267
backup command  457
backup namesrvr command  321, 465
BaseDn parameter  322
Batch components  267
bin directory  148
BIP report template registration  430
BI Publisher 10.1.3.4.1
new outbound web service, creating 
  205, 206
BI Publisher reports
BI Publisher integration for Siebel CRM, 
verifying  216-218
BI Publisher roles, assigning to  
SiebelCRMReports folder  218
CRM, setting up  202
fonts, copying  219
preconigured reports, uploading 
  214-216
Siebel Server components, enabling 
  210, 211
BI Publisher Report templates (.rtf)  454
BI Publisher Report Translation iles (.xlf)  
454
BI Publisher Scheduler
BI Publisher host name coniguration, for 
viewing scheduled reports in Siebel 
CRM  223
coniguring  219
dataservice.wsdl ile, creating from Siebel 
inbound web service  224
follow me instructions  226
functionality, verifying  224, 225
List of Values (LOV) data creating, to  
support report scheduling  220
symbolic URL deinition, creating for  
viewing scheduled reports  221, 222
tables, creating  220
tasks  219
BI Publisher security model
setting up  213, 214
BI Publisher server
external ile references, enabling  209, 210
Siebel java libraries, copying  209
BIP view association  430
Business Service Manager  268
C
cascading stylesheets (.css)  433
cfgenv.sh script  128, 136
cfgmerge utility
used, for deploying enterprise  
coniguration data  464, 465
using  465
using, steps  465, 466
change param command  322
CLASSPATH  128
classpath parameter  212, 437
client side logging
about  494
client log ile, reviewing  496
enabling, for application object  
manager  495, 496
enabling, on client machine  496
ClientSideLogging parameter  495
ClntLogArchiveCount parameter  495
ClntLogDirectory parameter  495, 496
ClntLogFileSize parameter  495
ClntTraceMode parameter  495
ClntTraceUnicode parameter  495

[ 525 ]
Collect statistics, component/parameter  505
command line mode  36
command line tools, Siebel server  
management
background components, jobs running  
for  302
batch, jobs running for  302
component deinitions, creating  298
component deinitions, modifying  298
component groups assignment to Siebel 
server, controlling  299
enterprise coniguration, backing up  297
input iles, using  302
parameters, listing  297
parameters, modifying  297
server components, controlling  301
server components start up mode,  
setting  300
Siebel enterprise information, listing 
  295, 296
srvrmgr command line utility  293
using  292
comma-separated value (CSV)  485
communications management, component 
groups  264
component deinition
about  266
component type property  268
creating  298, 299
modifying  298, 299
run modes  267
speciication  267
component groups
about  263, 264
application deployment manager  264
assignment management  264
auxiliary system management  264
communications management  264
data quality  264
enterprise application integration  264
ield service  264
marketing object manager  264
PIM server integration management  264
search processing  264
Siebel call center  264
Siebel CME  264
Siebel eAutomotive  265
Siebel eChannel  265
Siebel eDocuments  265
Siebel inancial services  265
Siebel ISS  265
Siebel life sciences  265
Siebel loyalty  265
Siebel public sector  265
Siebel remote  265
Siebel sales  265
Siebel universal customer master  265
Siebel wireless  265
System management  265
worklow management  265
XMLP report  265
Component Groups, component/parameter  
506
components view, server management 
screen  288
component tracing, event type  471
component, types
Application Object Manager  268
Business Service Manager  268
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) 
Receivers  268
Compression Type, component/parameter  
505
coniguration areas, ADM
cadministrative data (database objects)  430
Connection Broker Port, component/ 
parameter  506
ConnectString parameter 
  173, 174, 233, 400, 401
consoleapp utility
used, for exporting repository data  452, 453
copy command  458, 460
Copy Record command  292, 324
correspondence template  431
create command  457, 459
cross-enterprise user account, Siebel  
management server  416
customer data, Siebel access control
access, controlling  354, 355
employee  355
organization  355
owner  355
position  355

[ 526 ]
record access for different companies based 
on organizations, controlling  362, 363
record access for multiple employees,  
controlling  358, 359
record access for single user or employee, 
controlling  355-358
record access for teams based on positions, 
controlling  360-362
team  355
user  355
D
database. See  Siebel database
database administrator (DBA)  310
database authentication
about  308
security adapter, associating with server 
component  309, 310
security adapter, deined as enterprise  
proiles  308, 309
user accounts, managing  310
Database Extract component  267
database extraxt, Siebel remote components  
393
Database Platform, component/parameter  
504
database schema iles
creating  394, 395
Database Server hostname, component/ 
parameter  25, 501
Database Server information
about  501
Database Server hostname, component/
parameter  501
Database Server port, component/ 
parameter  502
Database Server SID, component/ 
parameter  502
Database Server Vendor, component/ 
parameter  501
Database Server Version, component/ 
parameter  501
DB host admin user, component/ 
parameter  502
DB host admin user password, component/
parameter  502
DB Server System Account/Password,  
component/parameter  501
Siebel DB data tablespace, component/ 
parameter  502
Siebel DB index tablespace, component/
parameter  502
Database Server port, component/parameter  
25, 502
Database Server SID, component/parameter  
25, 502
Database Server (Utilities) Directory,  
coniguration/parameter  507
Database Server Vendor, component/ 
parameter  25, 501
Database Server Version, component/ 
parameter  25, 501
data display
controlling, personalization based  371-373
Data Manager (DM)  15
data quality, component groups  264
data quality connector  51
DataSourceName parameter  309
DataSource parameter  452
data sources
AnalyticsDataSrc (epharma.cfg only) data 
source  173
coniguring, for Siebel client  172, 173
GatewayDataSrc data source  172
local data source  172
sample data source  172
ServerDataSrc data source  172
DBC area  485
DB Connector DLL parameter  270
DB Connect String, component/parameter  
504
dbenv.sh script
creating  139
executing  141
modifying  139
DB host admin user, component/parameter  
25, 502
DB host admin user password, component/
parameter  25, 502
DB Security Adapter proile (DBSecAdpt)  
309
DB Server System Account/Password,  
component/parameter  25, 501

[ 527 ]
DB Table Owner, component/parameter  504
DB Table Owner Password, component/ 
parameter  504
DB User Account, component/parameter  
504
DB User Account Password, component/
parameter  504
delete command  459
Delete Parameter Override command  274
Deploy SSL, component/parameter  505
DescriptorFile parameter  453
developers
and end users, differences  390, 391
coniguration ile, settings  401
developer web client. See  Siebel developer 
web client
directory server
user accounts, creating  314
directory server authentication. See  also 
LDAP authentication
directory server authentication
IBM LDAP cient, installing  314
IBM LDAP client, installing  313
LDAP authentication, verifying  324
LDAP security adapter, coniguring 
  321-323
server components, coniguring  323
Siebel clients, coniguring for LDAP  
authentication  329, 330
Siebel Gateway Name Server for LDAP 
authentication (optional), coniguring  
326-29
Disable External Reference parameter  209
divisions
about  375
AHA  377
divisional hierarchy creating, steps  377
example company , distinguishing  377
follow me instructions  378-380
organization chart, for company  376
organizations, setting up  378-380
setting up  376, 377
DLL parameter  174, 437
DockConnString parameter  173, 400
DSChartImageFormat parameter  195
DSChartServer parameter  195
dynamic link libraries (dll)  15
E
EAI Connector
for COM Data Control  58
for Java Data Bean  58
for Microsoft BizTalk Server  57
for OLE DB  57
for Oracle  57, 58
EAI data map  431
EAI method  448
EAI Object Manager  210
EAITRANSP area  485
eapps.cfg ile, Siebel native load balancing
validating  237, 238
employee  355, 382
employee account
managing  382
new employee, manual set up  382, 383
enableadmsupport parameter  437, 438
EnableVirtualHosts parameter  237
Encryption Type, component/parameter  505
Encrypt SI password, component/parameter  
505
enterprise application integration,  
component groups  264
Enterprise Application Integration (EAI) 
Receivers  268
enterprise coniguration
backing up  297
enterprise coniguration data
deploying, cfgmerge utility used  465
new component deinitions from source to 
target enterprises, deploying  465
enterprise explorer view, server  
coniguration screen
about  277
component deinitions view  279, 280
component deinitions view, reconiguring  
281
component groups view  278, 279
parameters view  281, 282
proile coniguration view   282
synchronize view   282
system alerts view   282
Enterprise Integration Manager  
(EIM)  267, 410
Enterprise Name, component/parameter  504

[ 528 ]
enterprise parameters  269
enterprise proiles  270, 271
Enterprise Security Authentication Proile, 
component/parameter   504
Enterprise Security Token, component/ 
parameter  505
enterprise server. See  Siebel enterprise 
server
EnterpriseServer parameter  173
enterprises view, server management screen
about  286
component run states  287
component run states, controlling  287, 288
Siebel server components, run states  287
Environment Veriication Tool (EVT),  
installation on Microsoft Windows
system coniguration, checking  61-64
event context, event type  472
event type, Siebel server
component tracing  471
event context  472
Event to track the low of a message  472
general events  471
Object Manager Session Operation and 
SetErrorMsg Log  472
security adapter log  472
SQL error  471
SQL parse and execute  471
SQL proiling  471
SQL summary  471
task coniguration  471
EVT parameters
-d  63
-e  63
-f  63
-g  63
-l  63
-o  63
-p  63
-q  63
-s  63
-t  63
-u  63
-w  63
Exchange Server Sync, component/ 
parameter  506
exit command  195
ExportCount parameter  453
ExportFile parameter  453
Extract all Repository Tables parameter  398
F
ield service, component groups  264
ile system. See  Siebel ile system
File System host admin user, component/
parameter  502
File System host admin user password,  
component/parameter  502
File System hostname, component/ 
parameter  502
FileSystem parameter  174
File System Password, component/ 
parameter  502
File System physical path, component/ 
parameter  502
File System UNC path, component/ 
parameter  502
File System Username, component/ 
parameter  502
FQDN (Fully Qualiied Domain Name)  82
Fully qualiied domain name, component/
parameter  505
G
GatewayDataSrc data source  172
gateway name server. See  Siebel gateway 
name server
Gateway Name Server Authentication  
Password, component/parameter  506
Gateway Name Server Authentication User, 
component/parameter  506
Gateway Name Server hostname,  
component/parameter  504, 506
Gateway Name Server port, component/ 
parameter  504, 506
Gateway NS Authentication User,  
component/parameter  504

[ 529 ]
Gateway NS Authentication User Password, 
component/parameter  504
Gateway NS host admin password,  
component/parameter  503
Gateway NS host admin user, component/
parameter  503
Gateway NS hostname, component/ 
parameter  503
Gateway NS installer target directory,  
component/parameter  503
Gateway NS port, component/parameter  
503
Gateway NS service start, component/ 
parameter  503
general events, event type  471
generate new database, Siebel remote  
components  393
GetProileAttr()  370
getservers.pl, perl script, Siebel  
management agents  426
getservers.pl script  440
grant command  310
grantusr.sql ile  138
grantusr.sql script  84
executing  87
graphical mode (GUI)  36
graphical user interface (GUI)  111, 474
grep command  130
H
handheld synchronization  51
hardware prerequisites, Siebel CRM  
installation  26, 27
help command  294
help list session command  295
High Interactivity Login Name, component/
parameter  505
High Interactivity Login Password,  
component/parameter  505
High-Interactivity mode. See  HI mode
HI mode  19
hot-ix, ADM
about  449
repository object deinitions,  
exporting  449, 450
HTTP 1.1 Compliant Firewall, component/
parameter  505
httpd.conf ile  151
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)  268
HTTP Port, component/parameter  505
HTTPS Port, component/parameter  505
I
IBM LDAP client
downloading  312
installing, on Microsoft Windows  313, 314
iHelp  431
inbound web service. See  Siebel inbound 
web service
INFRA area  484
init command  444
Installation Directory, component/ 
parameter  508
Install Option, coniguration/parameter  507
integrated development environment (IDE)  
182
IntegratedDomainAuth parameter  338
interactive component  267
internal division  430
internet community
URL  519
J
Java Data Bean (JDB)  51
Java integrator  51
Java Runtime Environment (JRE)  163
Java Software Development Kit (SDK)  200
JMS (Java Message Service)  268
jobs view, server management screen  290, 
292
job templates view, server coniguration 
screen  284, 285
jvmsubsys enterprise parameter   437
K
key
license key  110

[ 530 ]
L
LANG argument  126
LANG=ENU argument  69
language pack installation, for Siebel  
developer web client
steps  259
verifying  260
language pack installation, for Siebel  
enterprise server software
language-speciic repository metadata, 
importing  248-251
language-speciic seed data, importing into 
Siebel database  244-247
language-speciic seed data, installing  247
language support, adding for Siebel server  
243, 244
multilingual List of Values, enabling 
  251-254
multilingual List of Values, verifying 
  257, 258
new application object manager, logging  
on to  256, 257
non-multilingual List of Values (MLOV) 
seed data, deactivating  248
Siebel enterprise, restarting  256
steps  242
tasks, executing  243
UI translation, verifying  257
verifying  255
language pack installation, for Siebel  
mobile web client
steps  259
language pack installation, for Siebel tools  
260
language pack installation, for Siebel Web 
Server Extension (SWSE)
steps  254, 255
language packs, Siebel CRM software
adding, to existing Siebel installation im-
ages  241, 242
downloading  240
installing, for Siebel developer or mobile 
web client  259, 260
installing, for Siebel enterprise server  
software  243
installing, for Siebel Web Server Extension 
(SWSE)  254, 255
list  239, 240
language-speciic repository metadata
importing  248
language-speciic seed data
importing, in Siebel database  244-247
language-speciic seed datainstalling  247
LDAP authentication
access permissions, setting for LDAP  
accounts  319
anonymous user accounts, creating  317-319
coniguring, steps  312
directory server (optional), installing  312
follow me instructions  314
for Siebel gateway name server, verifying  
329
IBM LDAP client, installing  312-314
LDAP security adapter, coniguring 
  321, 322
new user, registering  324-326
proxy account, verifying  320
server components, coniguring  323
shared credentials account, creating  315, 
316
Siebel clients, coniguring  329, 330
Siebel gateway name server (optional), 
coniguring  326-329
user accounts, creating in directory server  
314
verifying  324
LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access  
Protocol)  311, 384
LDAP security adapter, directory server 
authentication
coniguring  321-323
LDAP security adapter, Web  
Single-Sign-On (SSO)
modifying  339
LD_LIBRARY_PATH  127
license key
about  110
follow me instructions  39
obtaining  38
License Key, coniguration/parameter  507
License List link  33
list active sessions  296

[ 531 ]
list active tasks  296
list command  295, 323
list active sessions  296
list active tasks  296
list compdefs  296
list compgrps  296
list compgrps for server Server1  296
list comps for server Server1  296
list named subsystems  296
list params  296
list servers  296
list sessions  296
list tasks  296
list compdefs  296
list compgrps  296
for server Server1  296
list comps for server Server1  296
list_detail command  459
list named subsystems  296
list_ns command  130, 153
list params  296
list_server command  153
list servers command  148, 149, 296, 329
list sessions  296
list tasks  296
LIVE mode  126
ln command  156
load balancing, component/parameter  508
load command  457, 459
local database
database extract job, running for developers  
397, 398
data, extracting for  395
initializing  399
re-extracting  410
Siebel remote system preferences  396, 397
local database, initialization
client coniguration iles, settings verifying 
in  400
coniguration ile settings, for developers  
401
logging in  401-403
network connectivity, establishing for  
mobile clients  399
local database, synchronization
manual synchronization  405, 406
Siebel TrickleSync  406, 407
local data source
about  172
ConnectString parameter  173
DockConnString parameter  173
EnterpriseServer parameter  173
RequestServerName parameter  173
LogFile parameter  453
Logical Proile Folder, component/ 
parameter  505
Login Session Timeout, component/ 
parameter  505
log levels, Siebel server
0  470
1  470
2  470
3  470
4  470
5  470
Log output directory, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
log parser  88
LOV  431
M
makeagentconig.pl, perl script, Siebel  
management agents  426
marketing object manager, component 
groups  264
master data, Siebel access control
access, controlling to  364-367
competitor  364
curriculum  364
decision issues  364
entities  364
event  364
literature  364
product  364
resolution Item  364
SmartScript  364
solution  364
training course  364
Microsoft Active Directory (AD)  333, 385
Microsoft Internet Information Services 
(IIS)  333, 335
Microsoft Windows
Siebel diagnostic tool  421, 422

[ 532 ]
Siebel management server, installing 
  417-419
mid-level release, ADM
about  449
repository object deinitions,  
exporting  450, 451
migration utilities  460
mobile clients
registering, steps  391
setting up  391
mobile web client. See  Siebel mobile 
web client
MODE argument  126
MODEL_FILE argument  69
MODEL_FILE parameter  127
MSMQ (Microsoft Message Queuing)  268
multilingual List of Values (MLOV)
enabling  251-254
seed data, deactivating  248
verifying  257, 258
multiple Siebel servers
coniguration, verifying  230, 231
coniguring  229
coniguring, on same physical machine  231
follow me instructions  232
installation, planning  229
installation, verifying  230, 231
installing  227-229
installing, steps  230
My Oracle Support
URL  202, 519
N
NetCharts server. See  Visual Mining 
NetCharts server
New Responsibility ield  384
non-anonymous virtual directory, Web 
Single-Sign-On
creating, on web server  335, 336
non-multilingual List of Values (MLOV) 
seed data
deactivating  248
Notiication Handler parameter  272
O
object manager component  51
Object Manager Session Operation and 
SetErrorMsg Log, event type   472
Object_N parameter  453
OBJMGR area  484
ODBC DSN, coniguration/parameter  507
ODBC settings
verifying, odbcsql used  141
odbcsql
used, for verifying ODBC settings  141
Oracle BI Publisher
about  197
enterprise server, downloading  199
enterprise server, installing  200
enterprise server, prerequisites  200
features  197
installation, verifying  201, 202
integrating, in Siebel CRM  198
Oracle's Business Intelligence Suite  
Enterprise Edition (OBI EE)  197
Oracle BI Publisher enterprise server
downloading  199
follow me instructions  202
installation, verifying  201, 202
installing  200
prerequisites  200
Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise  
Edition (OBI EE)  189, 197
Oracle database installers
downloading, URL  30
Oracle E-Delivery website
about  32
URL  32
Oracle forums
URL  519
Oracle Partner Network
URL  517
Oracle Siebel CRM Documentation Library
URL  203
Oracle Technology Network website
URL  118, 517
Oracle Universal Installer (oui.exe)  165

[ 533 ]
Oracle University
URL  517
Oracle XML Publisher. See  Oracle BI 
Publisher
organization  355
Organization Name ield  380
organizations
setting up  378, 380
OTN license agreement  30
outbound web service. See  Siebel outbound 
web service
Override Level ield  310
owner  355
P
package
ADM package, creating  443
ADM package, iles copying to  454
empty package structure, creating  443, 444
parallel database extract, Siebel remote  
components  393
parameters
listing  297
modifying  297
password parameter  316
patches
applying, for Siebel server software  65
applying, to Siebel client software  186, 187
PATH  127
PDQ  431
perl script
getservers.pl  426
makeagentconig.pl  426
personalization - actions  431
personalization - applets  431
personalization - events  431
personalization - views  431
PIM server integration  52
PIM server integration management,  
component groups  264
planning document
about  24
information  26
sample  25
topology diagram  508, 509
Port parameter  322
position  355
position hierarchy
follow me instructions  381
managing  380, 381
multiple positions, for employee  382
PriceList  431
PrimaryEnterprise parameter  174
Primary Siebel File System, component/ 
parameter  504
ProductCatalog  431
PropagateChange parameter  326
proposal template  431
Q
query language, Siebel  369
R
RECORD mode  126
Register external Oracle ODBC driver,  
component/parameter  506
Relational database management systems 
(RDBMS)  10
remote search support  51
replication agent, Siebel remote  
components  393
report command  458, 460
repository. See  Siebel repository
repository data, ADM
exporting, consoleapp utility used  452, 453
exporting, Siebel toos used  448
repository object deinitions exporting, for 
hot-ixes  449
repository object deinitions exporting, for 
mid-level release  450, 451
repository objects, ADM  432
repository parameter  453
RequestServerName parameter  173
response ile
creating, for Siebel coniguration wizard  
113
restore_activate command  458
restore_copy command  458
restore_session command  458
RolesAttributeType parameter  328
run modes, component deinition
background component  267

[ 534 ]
batch component  267
interactive component  267
S
sales force automation (SFA) system  387
sample data source  172
SARM
about  474
application performance, by area  485, 486
application performance, by subarea 
  484, 486
data collection areas, list  484, 485
data retrieval, automating  489, 490
enabling  476
enabling, for application object manager 
component  478
enabling, for other Siebel software units  
478-480
enabling, for Siebel servers and components  
476, 477
iles, managing  480
iles reading, sarmquery used  481-483
output iles, creating  488, 489
parameters  477, 478
slow performing objects, identifying  487
time histograms  487
working  475
SARM area  485
SARMBufferSize parameter  477
SARMFileSize parameter  477
SARM iles reading, sarmquery used
about  481
application performance, by area  484, 485
application performance, by subarea  484, 
485
areas, analyzing  485, 486
instances, analyzing  485, 486
options  482, 483
SARM data retrieval, automating  489, 490
SARM output iles, creating  488, 489
slow performing objects, identifying  487
start and end time, specifying  483, 484
subareas, analyzing  485, 486
time histograms  487
SARMLevel parameter  477
SARMLogDirectory parameter   477, 480
SARMMaxFiles parameter  477, 480
SARMPeriod parameter  477
sarmquery command line utility
application performance, by area  484, 485, 
486
SARM data retrieval, automating  489, 490
SARM output iles, creating  488, 489
slow performing objects, identifying  487
start and end time, specifying  483, 484
time histograms  487
using, to read SARM iles  482, 483
SARMThreshold parameter  477, 480
SARMUsers parameter  478
Save client transactions parameter  411
Schedule Report command  224
SCRIPT area  485
SEA  34
search processing, component groups  264
SecAdptMode parameter  332
SecAdptName parameter  323, 332
SEC area  485
security adapter log, event type  472
Security Adapter Mode parameter  309
Security Adapter Name parameter  309
security adapters, database authentication
associating, with server component  309, 
310
deined, as enterprise proiles  308, 309
Security Group, coniguration/parameter  
507
selftime key value  487
server. See  Siebel server
Server component event logging
about  470
Siebel server manager command line using, 
to set event log levels  474
Siebel server manager command line, using 
to set event log levels  474
server components
controlling  301
start up mode, setting  300
server components, directory server  
authentication
coniguring  323
server coniguration screen
enterprise explorer  277

[ 535 ]
Siebel enterprise coniguration,  
backing up  276
Siebel enterprise coniguration, restoring  
277
server data sources
coniguring, for Siebel developer web client  
174
ServerDataSrc data source  172
server management screen
about  286
components view  288
enterprises view  286
jobs view  290
servers view  288
sessions view  289, 290
tasks view  289
ServerName parameter  322
servers  263
server-side synchronization for Exchange 
(SSSE)  52
Server-speciic Security Authentication  
Settings, component/parameter  506
Server-speciic Security Encryption Settings, 
component/parameter  506
servers view, server coniguration screen
about  282, 283
component start up mode, setting  283, 284
event log levels, setting  284
servers view, server management screen  288
service owner account
creating  30
follow me instructions  32
session command  295
sessions view, server management screen  
289, 290
session timeout values  81
set server command  213
SharedCredentialsDN parameter  322
SharedDBPassword parameter  322
SharedDBUsername parameter  322
shared directories
shared directoriescreating  439
show command  148, 296
SIA  34, 69
Siebel 7.0  8
Siebel 8.2
Siebel outbound web service, coniguring  
208, 209
Siebel access control
about  344
application security  344
customer data, access controlling to  354, 
355
data access control  345
feature access  344
master data, access controlling to  364-367
network security  344
Siebel views, access controlling to  345, 346
Siebel Administrator (SADMIN)  108
Siebel Application Deployment Manager. 
See  ADM
Siebel Application Response Measurement. 
See  SARM
Siebel authentication architecture  306, 307
SIEBELB_DATA tablespace  310
Siebel Bookshelf  518, 519
Siebel Call Center application  103
Siebel call center, component groups  264
Siebel charts
verifying  196
Siebel client
data sources, coniguring  172
server management screens using  275
Siebel client coniguration ile
about  170, 171
ApplicationName parameter  171
ApplicationSplashText parameter  171
RepositoryFile parameter  171
Siebel clients for LDAP authentication, 
coniguring
about  329
central authentication coniguration ile, 
creating  331, 332
client coniguration ile, modifying  332
directory server authentication for Siebel 
client, verifying  332
directory server authentication, verifying  
332
SecThickClientExtAuthent system  
preference , setting to true  330, 331
Siebel client software
and user groups  161, 162
patches, applying  186, 187
Siebel CME, component groups  264

[ 536 ]
Siebel coniguration process  403, 404
Siebel coniguration wizard
response ile, creating  113
Siebel coniguration wizard, on Linux
starting  141
steps  142, 143
Siebel Connection Broker Component  232
Siebel Connection Broker Port, component/
parameter  508
Siebel CRM
BI Publisher host name coniguration, for 
viewing scheduled reports  223
connectivity, coniguring  194
ix pack SIF iles, importing  204
Oracle BI Publisher, integrating  198
reporting facility  197
Siebel Enterprise Applications (SEA)  34
Siebel Industry Applications (SIA)  34
SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session Network 
Application Programming Interface),  
21
symbolic URL deinition creating, for  
viewing scheduled reports  221, 222
synchronization, ways  405
version, differences  202, 203
Visual Mining NetCharts Server  
installation, planning  191
Visual Mining NetCharts Server  
installation, preparing  191, 192
Visual Mining NetCharts Server  
installer, installing  191
Siebel CRM 8.1
database system vendors  10
products  10
version  10
Siebel CRM client software
uninstalling  516
Siebel CRM, information inding
about  518
internet community  519
My Oracle support  519
Oracle forums  519
Siebel Bookshelf  518, 519
Siebel CRM installation
hardware, prerequisites  26, 27
license key, obtaining  38
planning  24
planning and preparing process  24
planning document  24
planning, information  26
sample planning document  25
service owner account, creating  30
Siebel database, preparing  28, 29
Siebel deployment, sizing  27
Siebel ile system root folder, creating  32
Siebel image creator  36, 37
Siebel installation archives, downloading  
3-34
software, prerequisites  26, 27
Siebel CRM language packs. See  language 
packs, Siebel CRM
Siebel CRM server software
installing, process  41
Siebel gateway name server, installing 
  46-48
Siebel server installer  42
uninstallation on Microsoft Windows,  
verifying  515
uninstalling, on Linux  515
uninstalling, on Microsoft Windows  511
uninstalling, on UNIX  515
Siebel CRM server software coniguration, 
on Linux
Siebel enterprise, coniguring  131, 132
Siebel gateway name server, coniguring  
128
Siebel gateway name server, installing  119
Siebel server, coniguring  146, 147
SWSE, coniguring  149
SWSE logical proile, coniguring  135-138
Siebel CRM server software coniguration, 
on Microsoft Windows
administrative Siebel user accounts,  
creating  108-110
license keys, applying  110
process  68
server components, synchronizing  111
Siebel database schema, installing  83, 84
Siebel enterprise, coniguring  73
Siebel enterprise server installation,  
verifying  101, 102
Siebel ile system seed iles, copying  107
Siebel gateway name server, coniguring  70
Siebel server, coniguring  95-97

[ 537 ]
Siebel server installation, inalizing  106, 107
Siebel server software coniguration, in 
unattended mode  112
Siebel server software installation, in  
unattended mode  112
Siebel software coniguration wizard  68-70
SWSE, coniguring  98-100
SWSE logical proile, coniguring  79-82
system service owner account, setting 
  106, 107
Siebel CRM server software installation,  
on Linux
Siebel database schema, installing  138
Siebel database server utilities, installing  
123
Siebel enterprise server installation,  
verifying  152
Siebel gateway name server, installing  118
Siebel server, installing  121, 122
Siebel software coniguration wizard, using  
126
SWSE, installing  124, 125
Siebel CRM server software installation,  
on Microsoft Windows
patches, applying  65
Siebel database server, installing  53, 54
Siebel EAI Connector support iles, 
 installing  56
Siebel Environment Veriication Tool (EVT), 
system coniguration checking with  
61-64
Siebel gateway name server, installing 
  46-48
Siebel server installer  42, 43
Siebel server, installing  49-52
support iles for Siebel EAI Connectors, 
installing  57, 59
SWSE, installing  60
Siebel CRM server software uninstallation, 
on Linux  515
Siebel CRM server software uninstallation, 
on Microsoft Windows
steps  511-514
verifying  515
Siebel CRM server software uninstallation, 
on UNIX  515
Siebel CRM, setting up for BI Publisher 
reports
about  202
BI Publisher integration, verifying for Siebel 
CRM  216-218
BI Publisher roles, assigning to 
 SiebelCRMReports folder  218
BI Publisher Scheduler (optional),  
coniguring  219
BI Publisher security model, setting 
  213, 214
external ile references, enabling for BI  
Publisher  209, 210
ix pack SIF iles, importing  204
fonts, copying  219
new outbound web service, creating for BI 
Publisher 10.1.3.4.1  205, 206
preconigured reports, upgrading  214-216
Siebel CRM version, differences  202, 203
Siebel inbound web services, importing  207
Siebel java libraries, copying to BI Publisher 
server  209
Siebel outbound web service, coniguring 
for Siebel 8.2 or higher  208, 209
Siebel server components, enabling 
  210, 211
XMLP Java subsystem, parameters setting 
for  212, 213
XMLP responsibilities, creating  208
Siebel database
about  10
Action, coniguration/parameter  507
Database Server (Utilities) Directory,  
coniguration/parameter  507
Follow me instructions  30
installing  507
Install Option, coniguration/parameter  
507
language-speciic seed data, importing 
  244-247
License Key, coniguration/parameter  507
Log output directory, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
ODBC DSN, coniguration/parameter  507
preparing  28, 29
Security Group, coniguration/parameter  
507

[ 538 ]
Siebel DB data tablespace, coniguration/
parameter  507
Siebel DB index tablespace, coniguration/
parameter  507
Siebel Server Directory, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
Siebel System Account, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
Siebel System Account Password,  
coniguration/parameter  507
Table Owner, coniguration/parameter  507
Table Owner Password, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
Siebel database schema installation, on 
Linux
about  138
database coniguration, environment  
preparing for  139
dbenv.sh script, creating  139
dbenv.sh script, executing  141
dbenv.sh script, modifying  139, 140
ODBC settings verifying, odbcsql used  141
Siebel coniguration wizard, starting  141
Siebel gateway name server, restarting  144
Siebel upgrade wizard, starting  144
verifying  144
Siebel database schema installation, on 
Microsoft Windows
about  83
additional user accounts, adding  85, 86
data, verifying  94
default passwords, modifying  85
grantusr.sql ile, executing  84
grantusr.sql ile, preparing  84
grantusr.sql script, executing  87
log parser  88
Siebel database task, steps  91
Siebel log parser, using  92, 93
Siebel upgrade wizard  87, 88
Siebel upgrade wizard, restarting  94, 95
steps  89, 90, 91
tablespace names, entering  84
tables, verifying  94
verifying  92
Siebel database server utilities installation, 
on Linux
about  123
follow me instructions  124
steps  123, 124
Siebel database server utilities, installation 
on Microsoft Windows
features  54, 55
steps  53, 54
verifying  55
Siebel DB data  25
Siebel DB data tablespace, coniguration/
parameter  502, 507
Siebel DB index tablespace  25
Siebel DB index tablespace, component/ 
parameter  502
Siebel DB index tablespace, coniguration/
parameter  507
Siebel deployment
sizing  27
Siebel developer web client
about  159, 161, 162
additional data sources, setting up  175
and Siebel mobile web client, differences  
160
ConnectString parameter  174
data sources, coniguring for Siebel client  
172, 173
DLL parameter  174
FileSystem parameter  174
follow me instructions  170, 178
installation, verifying  168-170
installing  165, 166
installing, steps  166, 167
language pack installation, verifying  260
language packs, installing  259
predeploy.htm ile  168
PrimaryEnterprise parameter  174
server data sources, coniguring  174, 175
Siebel application shortcuts, creating 
  177, 178
Siebel client coniguration ile  170-172
SqlStyle parameter  174
TableOwner parameter  174
uninstalling, Oracle universal installer used  
516
Siebel development environment
architecture  404, 405
Siebel diagnostic tool  413
about  490

[ 539 ]
architecture  490, 491
Event Log Analysis tab  494
follow me instructions  494
functionality  491
Server Performance Analysis tab  492
User Performance Analysis tab  494
Siebel EAI Connector support iles,  
installation on Microsoft Windows
EAI Connector, for COM Data Control  58
EAI Connector, for Java Data Bean  58
EAI Connector, for Microsoft BizTalk 
Server  57
EAI Connector, for OLE DB  57
EAI Connector, for Oracle  57
steps  59
Siebel eAutomotive, component groups  265
Siebel eChannel, component groups  265
Siebel eDocuments, component groups  265
Siebel enterprise
information, listing  295, 296
information, reviewing  295, 296
Siebel Enterprise Application Integration 
(EAI)  20
Siebel Enterprise Applications. See  SEA
Siebel enterprise coniguration, on Linux
about  131
follow me instructions  135
ODBC Data Source, verifying  134, 135
steps  132-134
verifying  134
Siebel enterprise coniguration, on  
Microsoft Windows
about  73
additional tasks  77, 78
inalizing  106
follow me instructions  78, 102
naming conventions  76
Siebel administrator, logging as  102, 105
steps  74-76
verifying  78
Windows system services, starting  101, 102
Siebel enterprise hierarchy  272
Siebel enterprise installation, on Microsoft 
Windows
inalizing  106
Siebel Enterprise Name, component/ 
parameter  505, 506
Siebel Enterprise security token  82
Siebel Enterprise Server. See  Siebel server 
installer installation, on Microsoft 
Windows
Siebel enterprise server
about  12
InstallShield Wizard  44
Siebel enterprise server coniguration
about  504
Database Platform, component/parameter  
504
DB Connect String, component/parameter  
504
DB Table Owner, component/parameter  
504
DB Table Owner Password, component/
parameter  504
DB User Account, component/parameter  
504
DB User Account Password, component/
parameter  504
Enterprise Name, component/parameter  
504
Enterprise Security Authentication Proile, 
component/parameter   504
Gateway Name Server hostname,  
component/parameter  504
Gateway Name Server port, component/
parameter  504
Gateway NS Authentication User,  
component/parameter  504
Gateway NS Authentication User  
Password, component/parameter  504
Primary Siebel File System, component/
parameter  504
Siebel enterprise server coniguration, on 
Linux
inalizing  154
inalizing, steps  154
Siebel enterprise server coniguration on 
Linux, inalizing
non-root user ile, creating  156
services, coniguring for automatic start  
155
siebel_server ile, copying to to init.d  
folder  156
siebel_server ile, editing  155

[ 540 ]
siebel_server ile, permissions setting  
for  156
soft links, creating  156
Siebel enterprise server installation, on 
Linux
inalizing  154
inalizing, steps  154
follow me instructions  154
SADMIN, logging on as  154
services, starting  152
Siebel gateway name server, starting  152, 
153
Siebel server, starting  153
verifying  152
web server, starting  153
Siebel enterprise server installation on 
Linux, inalizing
follow me instructions  156
non-root user ile, creating  156
services, coniguring for automatic start  
155
siebel_server ile, copying to to init.d folder  
156
siebel_server ile, editing  155
siebel_server ile, permissions setting for  
156
soft links, creating  156
Siebel enterprise server software
language pack installation, verifying  255
language packs, installing  243
multilingual List of Values, verifying  257, 
258
new application object manager, logging on 
to  256, 257
restarting  256
UI translation, verifying  257
Siebel Environment Veriication Tool 
(EVT). See  Environment Veriication 
Tool (EVT), installation on Microsoft 
Windows
siebel.exe ile  160
Siebel ile system  11, 12
Siebel ile system-related information
about  502
File System host admin user, component/
parameter  502
File System host admin user password, 
component/parameter  502
File System hostname, component/ 
parameter  502
File System Password, component/ 
parameter  502
File System physical path, component/ 
parameter  502
File System UNC path, component/ 
parameter  502
File System Username, component/ 
parameter  502
Siebel ile system root folder
creating  32
follow me instructions  32
Siebel inancial services, component  
groups  265
Siebel gateway name server
about  9, 13
Gateway NS host admin password,  
component/parameter  503
Gateway NS host admin user, component/
parameter  503
Gateway NS hostname, component/ 
parameter  503
Gateway NS installer target directory,  
component/parameter  503
Gateway NS port, component/parameter  
503
Gateway NS service start, component/ 
parameter  503
Siebel gateway name server coniguration, 
on Linux
about  128
follow me instructions  131
steps  129
verifying  129-131
Siebel gateway name server coniguration, 
on Microsoft Windows
follow me instructions  73
steps  71
verifying  72, 73
Siebel gateway name server, for LDAP 
authentication
coniguring  326-329
verifying  329

[ 541 ]
Siebel gateway name server installation,  
on Linux
about  118, 119
follow me instructions  120
steps  119, 120
Siebel gateway name server installation,  
on Microsoft Windows
sabout  46
follow me instructions  48
steps  46, 47
verifying  48
Siebel gateway name server, Siebel  
database schema installation on 
Linux
restarting  144
siebenv.sh ile, executing  145
siebenv.sh ile, modifying  145
starting  145
stopping  145
verifying  146
Siebel image creator
command line mode  36
follow me instructions  38
graphical mode (GUI)  36
language packs, installing  241, 242
used, for creating Siebel installation  
image  36, 37
Siebel inbound web service
dataservice.wsdl ile, creating  224
importing  207
Siebel Industry Applications. See  SIA
Siebel installation archives
downloading  32-34
download management tool used  34
follow me instructions  36
Siebel Installation Guide for UNIX  
(Version 8.1)
URL  118
Siebel installation image
creating, Siebel image creator used  36, 37
follow me instructions  242
language packs, adding  241, 242
Siebel installer
executing, in unattended mode  115
Siebel ISS, component groups  265
Siebel load balancing
coniguration of SWSE, verifying  238, 239
follow me instructions  239
levels  232
Siebel native load balancing  234
Siebel native load balancing, SWSE  
coniguring for  234
single Siebel server  233
third-party load balancing  234
Siebel loyalty, component groups  265
Siebel management agents
about  52, 422
coniguration, verifying  424, 425
coniguring, steps  422-424
follow me instructions  427
getservers.pl, perl script  426
installation, verifying  424, 425
installers  422
installing, steps  422-424
makeagentconig.pl, perl script  426
registering  426, 427
Siebel management server
adm.cli ile, verifying  439
application deployment manager  415
architecture  414, 415
coniguration, verifying  420, 421
cross-enterprise user account  416
deployment batch iles, creating  440-442
enterprise proile, creating  440-442
follow me instructions  417
infrastructure  414
installation, verifying  420
installers, URL  415
installing on Microsoft Windows  417-419
prerequisites  415
shared directories, creating  439
Siebel diagnostic tool  415
Siebel server bin directory, adding to PATH 
environment variable  416
Siebel mobile web client
about  159, 161
and Siebel developer web client, differences  
160
language packs, installing  259
local data source, coniguring  173
uninstalling, Oracle universal installer  
used  516
Siebel native load balancing
about  234

[ 542 ]
eapps.cfg ile, validating  237, 238
load balancer coniguration ile  
(lbconig.txt), creating  234, 235
SWSE coniguration, removing  235, 236
SWSE, coniguring  234
SWSE, reconiguring  236, 237
Siebel outbound web service
coniguring, for Siebel 8.2 or higher 
  208, 209
creating, for BI Publisher 10.1.3.4.1  205, 206
Siebel Partner Portal application  20
Siebel personalization layer
about  368
access to applets and views, controlling  
368-371
data display, controlling  371-373
Siebel public sector, component groups  265
Siebel query language  369
Siebel remote
about  387, 388
architecture  388
developers and users, differences  390, 391
Siebel remote architecture, building blocks
about  389
database extract  389
generate new database  389
local database initialization  389
local database synchronization  389
transaction merger  389
transaction processor  389
transaction router  389
Siebel remote components
database extract  393
enabling  392
enabling, on Siebel server  394
generate new database  393
parallel database extract  393
replication agent  393
synchronization manager  393
transaction merger  393
transaction processor  392
transaction router  393
Siebel remote system preferences
about  396
enable mobile password expiration  396
enable mobile password syntax check  397
enable mobile web client lockout  397
enable transaction logging  397
Siebel remote users
about  407
local databases, re-extracting  410
messages, sending to mobile users  410
mobile client activity, monitoring  409
mobile user registrations, deactivating  411
transaction components on Siebel server, 
managing  407, 408
Siebel repository  38
Siebel Repository File (.srf)
about  433, 454
deploying  455
Siebel Repository File (SRF)  15
Siebel sales, component groups  265
Siebel sample database
about  162
follow me instructions  181
installation, verifying  180, 181
installing  178
installing, steps  179
Siebel tools, verifying  185
SIEBEL_SARMBufferSize, environment 
variable  479
SIEBEL_SARMFileSize, environment  
variable  479
SIEBEL_SARMLevel, environment variable  
479
SIEBEL_SARMMaxFiles, environment  
variable  479
SIEBEL_SARMPeriod, environment  
variable  479
Siebel server
about  13, 14
Application Object Manager (AOM)  14
Component Groups, coniguration/ 
parameter  506
coniguration parameters  15
Connection Broker Port, coniguration/ 
parameter  506
Data Manager (DM)  15
Exchange Server Sync, coniguration/ 
parameter  506
Gateway Name Server Authentication  
Password, coniguration/parameter  
506

[ 543 ]
Gateway Name Server Authentication User, 
coniguration/parameter  506
Gateway Name Server hostname,  
coniguration/parameter  506
Gateway Name Server port, coniguration/
parameter  506
installation and coniguration  506
language support, adding  243, 244
log levels  470
Register external Oracle ODBC driver,  
coniguration/parameter  506
restarting  439
Server-speciic Security Authentication  
Settings, coniguration/parameter  506
Server-speciic Security Encryption Settings, 
coniguration/parameter  506
Siebel Enterprise Name, coniguration/ 
parameter  506
Siebel Repository File (SRF)  15
Siebel Server Description, coniguration/
parameter  506
Siebel Server host admin password,  
coniguration/parameter  506
Siebel Server host admin user,  
coniguration/parameter  506
Siebel Server hostname, coniguration/ 
parameter  506
Siebel Server installer target directory,  
coniguration/parameter  506
Siebel Server Logical Name, coniguration/
parameter  506
Siebel Web Engine (SWE)  15
Siebel Web Templates (SWT)  16
Synchronization Manager Port,  
coniguration/parameter  506
Siebel Server components, BI Publisher 
reports
enabling  210, 211
Siebel server coniguration, on Linux
about  146
steps  146-148
verifying  148, 149
Siebel server coniguration, on Microsoft 
Windows
about  83, 95
steps  96, 97
verifying  98
Siebel Server Description, component/ 
parameter  506
Siebel Server Directory, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
siebel_server ile
copying, to init.d folder  156
editing  155
permissions, setting  156
Siebel Server host admin password,  
component/parameter  506
Siebel Server host admin user, component/
parameter  506
Siebel Server host, component/parameter  
508
Siebel Server hostname, component/ 
parameter  506
Siebel server installation and coniguration 
  506
Siebel server installation, on Linux
features  122
follow me instructions  122
steps  121, 122
verifying  122
Siebel server installation, on Microsoft  
Windows
about  49
data quality connector  51
features  50
inalizing  106
follow me instructions  52
handheld synchronization  51
Java integrator  51
object manager component  51
PIM server integration  52
remote search support  51
Siebel management agent  52
steps  49
verifying  52
Siebel server installer installation, on  
Microsoft Windows
about  42
console mode used  44-46
GUI mode used  44
Siebel Server installer target directory,  
component/parameter   506

[ 544 ]
Siebel Server Logical Name, component/
parameter  506
Siebel server management
command line tools, using  292
Siebel Server Manager command line  436
Siebel servers (additional)
coniguration, verifying  230, 231
coniguring  229
installation, planning  229
installation, verifying  230, 231
installing  227-229
installing, steps  230
multiple Siebel servers, coniguring on 
same phsical machine  231, 232
Siebel servers and components
SARM, enabling for  476-478
Siebel server software
patches, applying  65
Siebel server software coniguration, on 
Microsoft Windows
.ini ile, modifying  114
in unattended mode  112
response ile, creating for unattended  
coniguration  113
Siebel server software installation, on  
Microsoft Windows
.ini ile, creating  113
.ini ile, creating for unattended installation 
  113
.ini ile, modifying  114
installer, executing in unattended mode  
115
in unattended mode  112
patches, applying  65
Siebel software coniguration wizard, on 
Linux or UNIX
MODEL_FILE parameter  127
preparing, to run  127, 128
using  126, 127
Siebel software coniguration wizard, on 
Microsoft Windows  68-70
Siebel software units
SARM, enabling for  478-480
Siebel System Account, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
Siebel System Account Password,  
coniguration/parameter  507
Siebel System Monitoring and Diagnostics 
Guide Version 8.1
URL  470, 472
Siebel System Requirements and Supported 
Platforms document
URL  26
Siebel tools
about  162
coniguring, for Siebel sample database  185
coniguring, steps  183
installation, verifying  184
installing, steps  182, 183
language pack, installation  260
shortcuts, creating  185, 186
uninstalling  516
used, for exporting repository data  448, 449
Siebel tools export support
about  453
DescriptorFile parameter  453
ExportCount parameter  453
ExportFile parameter  453
LogFile parameter  453
Object_N parameter  453
Repository parameter  453
Type_N parameter  453
Siebel tools, shortcuts
/batchexport parameter  186
/batchimport parameter  186
/bc parameter  186
/bv parameter  186
Siebel upgrade wizard
about  87, 460
migrate repository procedure   461
migrate repository procedure, executing  
461-464
Siebel database coniguration wizard, 
invoking  461
Siebel upgrade wizard, on Linux
starting  144
Siebel usage collection
abling  496, 497
system preferences, setting  497, 498
SiebelUsernameAttributeType parameter  
322
Siebel views, Siebel access control
access, controlling  345, 346
Account List View  345

[ 545 ]
business process analysis, importance  346, 
347
New Quote command  346
read only behaviour, controlling  352
responsibilities, creating  349, 350
responsibilities, modifying  349, 350
tab layout for screens and views,  
controlling  353
user responsibilities  347-349
view access, implications  350, 351
view access on local databases, controlling  
351, 352
Siebel web architecture, building blocks
browser  19
diagrammatic representation  9
directory structure  8
relational database  8
Siebel database  10
Siebel enterprise server  12
Siebel ile system  11, 12
Siebel gateway name server  9, 13
Siebel server  13, 14
Siebel servers  9
Siebel user interface  19
Siebel web server extension (SWSE)   17, 18
Siebel Web Server Extension (SWSE)  9
web browser  9
web server  9, 16, 17
Siebel web client
about  110, 161
follow me instructions  164
prerequisites  162
Siebel web client, prerequisites
database client software, for developer  
web clients  162, 163
installing, with administrative user  
rights  163
Internet Explorer, security settings  163
Java Runtime Environment (JRE)  163
software recommendations  164
Siebel Web Engine (SWE)  15, 474
Siebel Web Server Extension. See  SWSE
Siebel Web Templates (.swt)  433, 454
Siebel Web Templates (SWT)  16
Siebel wireless, component groups  265
siebenv.sh ile
executing  145
modifying  145
siebns.dat ile  131
siebsrvr directory  122
SI mode
about  19
Siebel Partner Portal application  20
single Siebel server, Siebel load balancing 
  233
SingleSignOn parameter  339
SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session API) 
protocol  81
SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session Network 
API)  77
SISNAPI (Siebel Internet Session Network 
Application Programming Interface), 
  21
sleep 20 command  211, 213
Sleep Time parameter  267
SmartScript  431
SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol)  268
software prerequisites, Siebel CRM  
installation  26, 27
spool command  294
spool off command  294
SQL error, event type  471
SQL parse and execute, event type  471
SQL proiling, event type  471
SqlStyle parameter  174
SQL summary, event type  471
srvrmgr command  195, 324
srvrmgr command line  447
srvrmgr command line utility  394
srvrmgr executable, input parameters
/b  293
/c  293
/e  293
/g  293
/h  293
/i  293
/l  293
/m  293
/o  293
/p  293
/r  293
/s  293

[ 546 ]
/u  293
/z  293
Standard Interactivity. See  SI mode
Standard Interactivity Login Name,  
component/parameter  505
Standard Interactivity Login Password, 
component/parameter  505
start_ns script  130
start_server command  153
start up mode, server components
setting  300
StateModel  431
status_detail command  458, 459
stopapa command  153
subarea (sub) key  483
SWE area  484
SWEPAGE area  484
SWEView parameter  257
SWSE
about  9, 17, 18
additional language packs, installing  254, 
255
coniguration  508
coniguration, removing for Siebel native 
load balancing  236
coniguration, verifying  238, 239
coniguring, for Siebel native load  
balancing  234
installation  508
Installation Directory, component/ 
parameter  508
load balancing, component/parameter  508
Siebel Connection Broker Port, component/
parameter  508
Siebel Server host, component/parameter  
508
SWSE Logical Proile Location, component/
parameter  508
SWSE coniguration ile, Web  
Single-Sign-On (SSO)
modifying  337, 338
SWSE coniguration, on Linux
about  149
steps  150, 151
verifying  151, 152
web server, preparing  149
SWSE coniguration, on Microsoft Windows
about  98
follow me instructions  101
steps  99
SWSE installation, on Linux
about  124, 125
follow me instructions  126
steps  125
SWSE, installation on Microsoft Windows
follow me instructions  61
steps  60, 61
SWSE logical proile coniguration
about  504, 505
Active Session Timeout, component/ 
parameter  505
Collect statistics, component/parameter  
505
Compression Type, component/parameter  
505
Deploy SSL, component/parameter  505
Encryption Type, component/parameter  
505
Encrypt SI password, component/ 
parameter  505
Enterprise Security Token, component/ 
parameter  505
Fully qualiied domain name, component/
parameter  505
High Interactivity Login Name,  
component/parameter  505
High Interactivity Login Password,  
component/parameter  505
HTTP 1.1 Compliant Firewall, component/
parameter  505
HTTP Port, component/parameter  505
HTTPS Port, component/parameter  505
Logical Proile Folder, component/ 
parameter  505
Login Session Timeout, component/ 
parameter  505
Siebel Enterprise Name, component/ 
parameter  505
Standard Interactivity Login Name,  
component/parameter  505
Standard Interactivity Login Password, 
component/parameter  505

[ 547 ]
Web Server Statistics Page, component/
parameter  505
SWSE logical proile coniguration, on 
Linux
about  135, 136
follow me instructions  138
steps  136, 137, 138
verifying  138
SWSE logical proile coniguration, on  
Microsoft Windows
about  79
follow me instructions  83
steps  79-81
SWSE, parameters  81, 82
verifying  82, 83
SWSE Logical Proile Location, component/
parameter  508
SWSE, parameters
about  81
application-speciic statistics, collecting  81
compression type  81
contact user account  82
employee user account  82
FQDN (Fully Qualiied Domain Name)  82
session timeout values  81
Siebel Enterprise security token  82
symbolic URL  431
Synchronization Manager Port,  
component/parameter  506
synchronization manager, Siebel remote 
components  393
system alerts  272
system management, component groups  
265
T
TableOwner parameter  174
Table Owner Password, coniguration/ 
parameter  507
task coniguration, event type  471
tasks view, server management screen  289
team  355
third-party load balancing  234
THRESHOLD area  485
Tools with German (DEU)  248
transaction merger, Siebel remote  
components  393
transaction processor, Siebel remote  
components  392
transaction router, Siebel remote  
components  393
TrickleSync  406, 407
TrustToken parameter  338, 339
Type_N parameter  453
type parameter  316
U
unattended mode
.ini ile, creating  113
Siebel installer, executing  115
unset server command  213
user  355, 382
user account
about  382
anonymous user accounts, creating  317-319
creating, in authentication system  384
creating, in directory server  314
divisions  375
follow me instructions  384
in external authentication system, creating  
337
in external authentication system, verifying  
337
managing, for database authentication  310
shared credentials account, creating  315, 
316
verifying, in authentication system  384
user authentication
database authentication  305
database authentication   305
directory server authentication  311
handling  307
Web Single-Sign-On  333
Web Single-Sign-On (SSO)  305
UseRemoteConig parameter  332
user groups
and Siebel client software  161, 162
UsernameAttributeType parameter  322
user responsibilities, Siebel views
creating  349, 350
modifying  349, 350

[ 548 ]
read only behaviour of views, controlling  
352
tab layout for screens and views, control-
ling  353
view access, implications  350, 351
view access on local databases, controlling  
351, 352
UserSpec parameter  338
UserSpecSource parameter  338
V
validate command  457
VirtualHostsFile parameter  237, 238
Visual Mining NetCharts server
about  189
connectivity from Siebel CRM, coniguring  
194
ile, creating for Siebel  194
installation, planning  191, 192
installation, preparing  192
installation, verifying  193, 194
installer, installing  191
installing, on Windows  192, 193
project folder, creating for Siebel  194
Revenue by Month by Account chart in 
Siebel Sales  190
Siebel Charts setup, verifying  196
Siebel enterprise parameters, setting  195
vmoptions parameter  213
VolumeDiscount  431
W
web architecture. See  Siebel web architec-
ture, building blocks
web browser  9
web server  9, 16, 17
Web Server host admin user, component/
parameter  503
Web Server host admin user password,  
component/parameter  503
Web Server hostname, component/ 
parameter  503
web server related information
about  502
Web Server host admin user, component/
parameter  503
Web Server host admin user password, 
component/parameter  503
Web Server hostname, component/ 
parameter  503
Web Server Vendor, component/parameter  
503
Web Server Version, component/parameter  
503
Web Server Statistics Page, component/ 
parameter  505
Web Server Vendor, component/parameter  
503
Web Server Version, component/parameter  
503
web service - inbound  431
Web Single-Sign-On (SSO)
about  333
architecture low  334
authentication low  334
coniguration, verifying  339, 340
IntegratedDomainAuth parameter  338
LDAP security adapter, modifying  339
non-anonymous virtual directory, creating 
on web server  335, 336
SingleSignOn parameter  338
SWSE coniguration ile, verifying  337-339
TrustToken parameter  338
user accounts in external authentication 
system, creating  337
user accounts in external authentication 
system, verifying  337
UserSpec parameter  338
UserSpecSource parameter  338
WORKFLOW area  485
worklow management, component groups  
265
worklow policy  431
worklow processes, ADM
activating  438

[ 549 ]
X
XMLP Java subsystem
parameters, setting  212, 213
XMLP report, component groups  265
XMLP Report Server  210
XMLP responsibilities
creating  208
Z
ZLIB compression  81

Thank you for buying 
Oracle Siebel CRM 8 Installation  
and Management
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its irst book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective 
MySQL Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing 
highly focused books on speciic technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting 
and customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books 
give you the knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using 
to get the job done. Packt books are more speciic and less general than the IT books you have 
seen in the past. Our unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, 
giving you more of what you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. For 
more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
About Packt Enterprise
In 2010, Packt launched two new brands, Packt Enterprise and Packt Open Source, in order 
to continue its focus on specialization. This book is part of the Packt Enterprise brand, home 
to books published on enterprise software – software created by major vendors, including 
(but not limited to) IBM, Microsoft and Oracle, often for use in other corporations. Its titles 
will offer information relevant to a range of users of this software, including administrators, 
developers, architects, and end users.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals 
should be sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you 
would like to discuss it irst before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our 
commissioning editors will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.

Middleware Management with 
Oracle Enterprise Manager Grid 
Control 10g R5
ISBN: 978-1-847198-34-1             Paperback: 350 pages
Monitor, diagnose, and maximize the system 
performance of Oracle Fusion Middleware solutions
1. 
Manage your Oracle Fusion Middleware and 
non-Oracle middleware applications effectively 
and eficiently using Oracle Enterprise Manager 
Grid Conrol
2. 
Implement proactive monitoring to maximize 
application performance
Oracle Coherence 3.5
ISBN:  978-1-847196-12-5            Paperback: 408  pages
Create Internet-scale applications using Oracle’s  
high-performance data grid
1. 
Build scalable web sites and Enterprise 
applications using a market-leading data  
grid product 
2. 
Design and implement your domain objects 
to work most effectively with Coherence 
and apply Domain Driven Designs (DDD) to 
Coherence applications 
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles

